

VOGU E ' S
NEW




VOGUE’S
NEW BOOK
FOR
BETTER
SEWING
Prepared by
VOGUE PATTERN SERVICE
SIMON AND SCHUSTER NEW YORK
1952


All Rights Reserved
Copyright, 1 952, The Condi Most Publications Inc.
Manufactured in the United States of America
First Printing
Kathryn Broderick
Editor:
Isabel Carter
Associate Editor:
Sybil Stapleton
Art Director:
4 Orillia Hollis
Production:
Clifford Coffin
Photography:


CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION TO SEWING Pag# VI ABOUT PRESSING Pag* *
ABOUT YOUR FABRICS Page I
. / I Here we give you illustrations of
Ui /
/ / forty-four important fabrics—the
/// f r ‘ en ds and the new, man-made
and how to get the most out of it. how to press so as to achieve the
best results . . . tell you which
X7 "j fabrics require dampening, what is
I the proper heat for your iron, etc.
A brief word on what this book is i ~y Even the most professional dress-
V/ . all about. Important reading that making job needs professional
\ tell you how to use this book pressing, too. Here we show you
» f ' . .... SEWING DICTIONARY Page 7
\ v hbres —so you 11 know those best
/"I A suited for you and your patterns.
V We take the guesswork out of sew-
ing by explaining-all sewing terms
A J used in this book (and we use al-
I y most all of them!). Here you’ll find
SELECTING TOUR PATTERN Page 2
a great many helpful illustrations
Jj? Since your pattern size may differ ; methods as well as definitions.
/ yi~~~> , from your ready-to-wear size, we
show you how to measure yourself
(and also a little girl) so you can
always be sure of getting the Vogue
r \/ Pattern size that is best for you.
pirasßiu nuuuy—ami a leuious lasK. m
ADJUSTMENTS Page 14
. If yours is a “special” figure that
• / requires pattern adjustments, you’ll
» learn how to make them yourself.
Here we show you some methods
\ of altering for special figures. If
fl
-\ y° u re i ust a little under or over
i \ average height, you II learn, in the
X' beginning of each lesson, how to
adjust the pattern to fit you.
111


CONTENTS
THE SLIM CHEMISE DRESS Pag* It THE CROPPED, CUTAWAT BOLERO Pag* 54
>r \ r
y \ A wonderful starting point for fc 1 To team with wide or narrow
yc / 7 ~''x y° ur sewing career, as there’s no Zi skirts, with a slim sheath dress.
\ / rA js) waistline seam and no fitting wor- I AI I We made it in 35" black velveteen
A-Jjv ries; your belt regulates the full- I //(bolero takes 1% yards for size
I 111 A ness. We chose grey wool-like 39" I XXAy - y/ Jr W 5 lined it with crepe. On page
I V rayon. (Dress takes 3% yards for j A'/,/ / \ 62 we made it with short sleeves
\ I size 16.) Vogue Pattern No. 7231, / jVMjj in white .pique. Vogue Pattern
i | I in sizes 12 to 18 (or No. 3392, in j \ \ No. 7259, sizes 12 to 20. 50 cents.
j'' junior sizes 9 to 15). 50 cents
II Am
THE PORTRAIT-NECKLINE BLOUSE Pag* 24
.l / .
3 A Low-cut in back, too. We made it B
•/ L. . ~. ... , , the SLIM. SUPPLE SKIRT Pag. 44
y / ji in 35 black linen (blouse takes
O'—X A"yV 1% yards for size 16). Then, on
1 I,] '/-A „„ .... # v ; i , With released front pleats; a slim
y W IT- J Mkk *- -■ *--■“
/f%, / V\ .i„ - m v..., p.„„. 11 w ' ™ d ' “ ■
11 /HJ\ ’ No. 7630, sizes 12 to 18. 50 cents. small-checked. 54" woollen (skirt
IN takes about 1 yard for 28 waist).
Vogue Pattern No. 7436, 24 to 32
-—Li waist measure (or No. 3427, jun-
THE FULL. GATHERED SKIRT Pag* 34 \ ' \|l ior sizes 24 to 28 waist). 40 cents.
1
W first we made the skirt in a crisp,
/fin '/5fK I checked 35" gingham. (It takes
I JsVJ about 2% yards for 28 waist.) I THE BOW-T.ED BLOUSE P.,.72
j j fmA V Then on page 40, we made it in
/ I \ \\ . , ... . . . . v» A wonderful suit blouse, equally
I I // \ \\ 39 printed silk with an attached, \ .
1 V \ bare-backed halter. (This takes P at home with any skirt in your
1(1/ V I \\l 3% yards.) Vogue Pattern No. A* )]/ V wardrobe, with slacks, with shorts.
/if II i* -jo-re oa . on -.cn . m /x \IJ// /TV Back buttoned. We made it in 54"
vfl/TN I l 7375, 24 to 32 waist. 50 cents. X,XA? t,: x / , [ \
Vwl \l\'—U—/ A /\j [ j/ wool jersey, which takes 1% yards
Atsjji/A, \\ / for size 16. Vogue Pattern No.
‘ 7347, sizes 12 to 40. 40 cents.
THE LATE-DAT, SHEATH DRESS Pag* 44
rv
p f \ i X The perfect dress for informal
y I J - )) LITTLE GIRL'S PARTT DRESS Pag* B 0
Jjp / r/y evenings. We made it in 39" satin,
//V ) A / which takes 3 yards for size 16. .
/ jj\ j _ With everything shell love ... a
\\ \ Then, because it’s so versatile we ) (I , „ . , , .. „ ,
xdJPk , i (J full, stand-out skirt, tiny puffed
‘ \ {« '\ made it again in flannel, in linen i • 1.. . . ..
\ igT 2 Y (S f: sleeves. It is buttoned down the
\ and in COrdur ° y (Bee pages 52 M back. We made it in a crisp, 35"
\ \ \ and 53). Vogue Pattern No. 7101, | }iAh | dotted Swiss . Dress (akes 1%
\ \ \ in sizes 12 to 20 (or No. 3385, '' \'rr' /All , , . _
\ \| Ilf t / IJ yards for size 4. Vogue Pattern
V tr I ”
V in junior sizes 9to 15). 60 cents. I \ / W V| ivr


CONTENTS
THE FULL-SKIRTED DRESS
Fog* EC
THE CLASSIC SHIRTWAIST DRESS
Fog* 120
= ) A soft little dress that flatters With yoked, bloused back; clean,
/=p, your figure. With inverted pleats classic lines. We made it with
Ak I )J' // ) in front ’ side Pl eats in back. We J(jP' /Hf fT\ long sleeves in striped 39" silk
' M made il in 39 ” silk Shantung. I-A %JS) sbirting (dress takes 3% yards
fjl \\Yf ' \ Dress takes 4 yards for size 16. uV'VTu for size T ben, on page 129,
/ I ! \ I IV\ See it in striped chambray on / I / 1 \ we made it in a cotton broadcloth
/ I 1 \' I\\ page 97. Vogue Pattern No. 7422, /| / 1 \ with short sleeves. Vogue Pattern
' I'\ 1 \ sizes 12 to 20 (or No. 3425, I / 1 \ No. 7329, sizes 12 to 46. 50 cents.
) un * or sizes 11 to 17). 75 cents. J/~\ —Ti^
classic lines. We made it with
Fl\ long sleeves in striped 39" silk
shirting (dress takes 3% yards
for size 16). Then, on page 129,
we made it in a cotton broadcloth
with short sleeves. Vogue Pattern
No. 7329, sizes 12 to 46. 50 cents.
THE SLIM, BACKGROUND DRESS
' ( Destined
in your v
j\ \ 3 39" fai
UOjJ cris P sur
/fl yards for
VII V , 39 " {ort:
\ I \ | No. 7263,
Y w
7
THE EVENING DRESS OF LACE
r Waist wh:
V ( a double
«er
il
i
ir
:o
ROUND DRESS Pag* ft
Destined to be the busiest dress
V in your wardrobe. We made it in
\ a 39" faille, with long sleeves, a
I / j crisp surah scarf. It takes 3%
\\Y yards for size 16, plus 1 yard of
39" for the scarf. Vogue Pattern
J No. 7263, sizes 12 to 20. 60 cents.
SS OF LACE Pag* 108
Waist whittling, wide skirted with
a double collar. We made ,it in
lace over rustling taffeta. (For
size 14 it takes 6 yards of 35"
*j, lace, SVi yards of 39" taffeta and
, 1% yards of 35" organdie for
'Jp''' the collar.) Then because we
liked it so much, we made
I) nV\\\ * n w^*te piinc (page
Jj j|\\\\ 119). Vogue Pattern No.
/ | V\\ 7631, sizes 12 to 20 (or
J i\ \\ No. 3462, junior sizes
/ 11 1 \ 9to 15). 75 cents.
THE RAGLAN-SLEEVE COAT
,-3 With a col
// si down, a fr
I 11] ff AV\ made it in
// V// iI r 1 3V4 y
/ / i J * We lined i
/ iTi 1 lining tak<
/ I j Pattern N
M r• j I Medium, 1
lyT ; Mx I junior size
THE FITTED. GREY FLANNEL SUIT
"s
. y V can make.
'I /1 \ wool flanne
L r\ (A I (For size 1(
/Vyi T u flannel,2V *
M Then, on pi
■vZj \ w faille and ii
tlAj No. S-4240,
>AT Paq. 130
With a collar to be worn up or
down, a free-swinging back. We
made it in pale 54" fleece (coat
takes 3Vi yards for medium size).
We lined it with 39" crepe (the
lining takes 3% yards). Vogue
Pattern No. 7442, sizes Small,
Medium, Large (or No. 3431,
junior sizes 11 to 15). 75 cents.
INEL SUIT • 144
One of the
One of the wisest investments you
can make. We made it in grey
wool flannel, lined it with crepe.
(For size 16 it lakes 3% yards 54"
flannel, 2% yards 39" lining.)
Then, on page 159, we made it in
faille and in linen. Vogue Pattern
No. S-4240, in sizes 12 to 40. $l.


INTRODUCTION TO SEWING
The ability to sew seems an almost unattain-
able skill to many women who haye never
tried to learn, and as a result, they both
admire and envy the larger and better
wardrobes of those of their friends who know
how to make their own things —and do.
Actually it is not as hard to learn to sew well
as it is to cook competently—and you acquire
both talents the same way: by scrupulously fol-
lowing the directions
in a good text book,
and by practising.
Because there are
so many women who
want very much to
create their own
clothes but don’t know quite how to start, this
hook— Vogue’s New Book for Better Sew-
ing—has been prepared. It was conceived with
a two-fold purpose: to teach you to sew correctly
and therefore get better results; and to show you
how Vogue Patterns take the guesswork out of
sewing.
It goes without saying that sewing is eco-
nomical. If you want to look like a million with
a modest outlay, then sewing for yourself is the
answer. Recent figures from the New York Uni-
versity School of Retailing prove that only
12-14% of the total cost of a ready-to-wear coat,
dress or suit is fabric cost. Without the aid of a
slide rule or an adding machine, it’s easy to see
that you can make your own clothes at consider-
able saving—and when you do, they will be of
fine fabrics, distinctive, and perfectly fitted to you.
Sewing for yourself requires only two basic
ingredients: good taste and confidence. You have
the first. We have tried, in this book, to supply
you with the second . . . the know-how, from
which comes confidence.
We wanted our book to be as easy and un-
complicated as a Vogue Pattern so that a person
with no experience—as well as one with some
experience—could learn to sew correctly.
We have found from long experience that the
only real way to learn to sew is to make some-
thing. Listening to a lecture or reading page
after page on sewing could, of course, give you
the ABC’s of sewing. But we wanted to show
you the XYZ’s, too. That’s why we planned our
“learn-as-you-go” course in sewing to take you
step by step right through the complete mak-
ing of fourteen different fashions! Each step
is clearly explained,
clearly illustrated, so
there’s no need to refer
hack to what happened
on page so-and-so. Each
chapter starts with sug-
gested fabrics and a list
of what you’ll need in
the way of zippers,
snaps, etc. Each chapter
ends with final press-
ing instructions. All
the patterns shown are
available from coast to
coast;all suggested
fabrics, easy to find.
All things considered, we’d recommend that
if you are a beginner you start your Vogue-


guided sewing career, as we did, with the slim
chemise dress in the first chapter, then go on to
the very feminine blouse in the second chapter.
They were purposely put in the beginning of
the book because they are so simple to make. Then,
when you have completed these two attractive but
uncomplicated dressmaking projects, you can
progress, confident step by confident step, until
you are able to tackle the relatively involved coat
and the suit in the last two chapters with the
poise and assurance of experience.
If, however, you
have had some sewing
\ experience, you can
select the chapters in
any order that pleases
To help you keep
your mistakes at
minimum we’ve col-
oured the right sides
of fabrics in our illus-
trations a deeper tone than the wrong sides, so
you can easily distinguish one side from the other,
which makes following the step-by-step illustra-
tions almost fool-proof.
Of the fourteen fashions, one is for a little
girl; the others, for grown-ups. The fashions were
selected for variety in style, variety in sewing
skills, variety in handling fabrics. If you were to
make all thirteen fashions, you’d have a well-
balanced wardrobe, from daytime cottons to an
evening dress. But by making only a few, you’ll
learn the essentials of good dressmaking and will
be able to apply these essentials to clothes you’ll
make in the future. What’s more, in years to come
you’ll find yourself referring to this book when
starting a new dress, coat or suit. How does one
interface a collar? Press velveteen? Make a
bound buttonhole?
Speaking of buttonholes, we show you how to
make Vogue’s streamlined one-piece fabric but-
tonhole. We love it. It’s quick and easy. We also
show you how to make a “worked” buttonhole on
the little girl’s dress as this kind is the best where
the strain on the buttonholes is much greater.
We mark with tailors’ tacks for accuracy,
because both pieces of fabric are marked at
once on both sides. If,
you prefer to mark in
other ways, you can
learn how in the Sewing
Dictionary, pages 7-15.
You’ll find this
Sewing Dictionary
big help in many ways.
Naturally in our “how-
to-make’’ directions, we
use many specialized
sewing terms. To many the terms are familiar,
but if you’re a real beginner, don’t let phrases
like “straight-of-goods” or “ease-in” confuse you.
Just look them up in the Sewing Dictionary. It
also shows the “how-to” of some of the funda-
mentals of sewing. Take “basting” for instance.
Do you just carelessly take big stitches that won’t
hold your pieces together? Look it up in the
Dictionary—you’ll be surprised to find that there
are four kinds of basting stitches.
The one skill we take for granted is your
ability to use your sewing machine. If it’s a new
one, you have learned how to use it when you
bought it. If it’s an old one, get it out and practise
sewing a few seams on it before you start in on
your first dressmaking venture.
Vogue Patterns are as accurate as man and
machinery can make them. If a collar is sup-
posed to look a certain way, it looks that way.
Luck has nothing to do with it, because Vogue
has spent hours, and sometimes days, perfecting
each little detail in each pattern. So all you have
to do is to follow the pattern markings and in-
structions exactly and you will have a garment
as smart as if it came right out of the pages of
Vogue itself.
If you have any problems about sewing which
you’d like to discuss with us, please write
Kathryn Broderick, Editor
VOGUE PATTERN SERVICE
Greenwich, Connecticut


About your fabrics
matelasse
metallic cloth


About your fabrics
CHOOSING YOUR FABRIC is just as important as selecting your
pattern, since the whole success of your dressmaking venture is
dependent upon having the right fabric for the right pattern. Of
course, a fine quality fabric will always give you more lasting
pleasure.
WE SUGGEST that a beginner should first pick the pattern she
wishes to use and then rely on the back of the Vogue Pattern enve-
lope for guidance in choosing the most suitable fabric. If you hap-
pen to see a fabric that you just can’t do without, be sure to select a
pattern which is suitable for it. If you do select your fabric first,
let us caution you not to have it cut off the bolt by the clerk until
you’ve chosen your pattern. Refer to the yardage table on the back
of the pattern envelope to determine exactly how many yards you
need, which of course depends on how wide the fabric is.
EVERY VOGUE PATTERN, shows the amount of fabric you need
for a variety of different widths. If the width of the fabric you have
chosen is not listed in the yardage table on the pattern envelope,
use the yardage for the next narrowest width to it.
FOR YOUR FIRST PROJECT, it will be wise to choose a simple
weave without pile, nap, plaid, diagonal, or a “one-way” print.
(All of these textile terms are explained in your Sewing Dictionary,
pages 7-15.) When you have gained experience and want to tackle
other fabrics, be sure to use “with nap” yardage for pile fabrics
such as fleeces, velveteen and velvet, for fabrics with a sheen such
as satin, for “one-way” prints and for plaids. If velvets, plaids,
stripes or diagonals are not suitable for a particular pattern, this
fact is noted on the back of the pattern envelope.
FABRIC FIBRES FALL INTO TWO CATEGORIES, natural and
man-made. The natural fibres are wool, cotton, silk, and linen. The
man-made fibres (which increase yearly and become increasingly
good) include Rayon, Acetate Nylon, “Dacron,” “Orion,” Dynel and
Vicara, to list some of the most important. Man-made fibres can be
used singly in a fabric (all Rayon) or can be blended with natural
fibres (Rayon with wool) or with another man-made fibre (Rayon
with Nylon). You’re undoubtedly well acquainted with the natural
fibres, but since some of the test-tube miracles are new and some-
what scarce, we have listed many of them in the Sewing Dictionary,
under fibres. These man-made fibres are not substitutes for natural
fibres, as each has a special property which makes it especially suited
to its particular use. Today, almost any fabric made from natural or
man-made fibres can be crease-resistant, shrinkproof, mothproof,
mildewproof or permanent-finish. When buying fabrics, always
check for these qualities. Also ask your salesperson how to keep
fabrics looking their best . . . whether you should have them laun-
dered or dry cleaned.
ON THESE PAGES we have shown forty-four of the most widely
used fabrics. A great many of these can be in a variety of fibres. For
instance, crepe can be rayon, silk, or nylon; flannel can be wool or
rayon; taffeta, Shantung, or surah can be silk or rayon; etc. In addi-
tion, there are many blends. Never were fabrics more exciting than
today. Another reason for learning to sew for yourself!


SELECTING YOUR PATTERNS
There are three elements to be considered when
selecting your patterns: you (what you like to
look like; what you look and feel best in);
the occasion (where you intend to wear the
dress, suit or coat you’re going to make); and the fit.
First, let’s talk about you. If you’re not sure which
style does the most for you (slim skirts vs. full ones,
short-cropped jackets vs. longer ones), study yourself.
Make up your mind about your type, about what sort
of clothes go best with the type that you are.
Keep abreast of what’s new in fashion, what’s new in
fashion for you. You’ll find the news in Vogue, of
course. And happily, you’ll find translations of these
newest fashions in Vogue Patterns—new ones every two
weeks. You can see them in the large Counter Catalogues
in the pattern department of your favorite department
store, or in the little free Vogue fashion folders that you
can take home and pore over at your leisure. And, of
course, in Vogue Pattern Book you will find all the
new patterns —and that magazine also contains many
suggestions for coordinating your wardrobe.
If you wear size 44 or 46, look in the separate sec-
tion in the Vogue Pattern Counter Catalogue. There
you will find a varied choice of patterns designed with
subtle arrangements of vertical lines, panels or gores
that help to give an illusion of slimness.
Now—about the occasion.
Always select a design with
where-you’ll-wear-it held upper-
k most in mind, remembering
most in mind, remembering
that the women voted “best
dressed” always underdress
rather than overdress. Nothing
can be more embarrassing or
awkward than to arrive at
gathering and discover yourself too “dressed up.” No
matter how smart and pretty you looked in the privacy
of your bedroom, if you’re overdressed for the occasion,
you’ll wish you were back home, slipping into some-
thing more simple.
One of the best-dressed women we know measures
fashion by comfort, and it’s an excellent yardstick for
making your choice. For if you are uncomfortable,
the chances are you will never feel well dressed, no
matter what the occasion.
Fortunately, there’s a Vogue Pattern for every occa-
sion ... a pattern that expresses your personality ...
and that’s available in your size. Which brings us to the
third element of fashion ... fit. The difference between
garment that fits and one
that doesn’t fit is the differ-
ence between real chic and—
well, let’s face it —dowdiness.
One very important rea-
son for sewing for yourself
is that you can have clothes
that fit perfectly, so it’s very
necessary to start out with
the right size pattern. Drastic pattern alterations may
change the lines of your garment beyond recognition.
Your pattern size may differ from your ready-to-
wear size, so you must check your measurements with
Vogue Pattern measurements. Vogue’s Misses’ and
Women’s patterns are proportioned on Bureau of Stand-
ards’ measurements. Each design is made in fabric and
fitted on living models of these proportions. Once you’ve
settled on your correct size, you’ll take that size whether
you’re making a dress, suit or coat. Vogue Patterns
allow ample room for the coat
to go over your dress.
Here’s how you determine
your Vogue Pattern size;
There are three important
measurements that govern the
size pattern you should buy:
1. The bust. Measure around
the largest part, keeping the
tape a little higher in back.
Don’t tighten the tape. 2. The
waist. Measure at the natural
waistline, carrying the tape around the smallest part
and drawing taut. 3. The hips. Measure about 7" below
the waistline, carrying the tape straight around, fairly
taut. Do your measuring over a bra—and a girdle, if


you wear one —and be sure to stand up straight.
While you’re measuring, measure the length of your
arm from armpit to wrist and the length of center-back
from the socket-bone (you know —that’s the prominent
vertebra at the back of the neck) to the turned hem.
Also measure from the socket-bone to the waistline in
case you’re long- or short-waisted. These measurements
Won’t affect the size pattern you take but will affect
your yardage if you’re extra tall or short. You’ll find
the length of each design is given on the back of the
pattern envelope as length varies according to style.
When you have completed measuring yourself, then
compare your measurements with the measurements
given below. These measurements also appear in the
front of every Vogue Pattern Catalogue, as do measure-
ments for men and children.
The measurements you take are snug, body measure-
ments. Vogue designers have made the proper allowance
for each design in the pattern —for instance, if it is a
loose fitting blouse the extra ease has been allowed in
the pattern. It is usually best to choose the size nearest
to your bust measurement.
misses' and women's sizes. The table at the
right is for your convenience in comparing your
own measurements with those of Vogue Patterns.
If a pattern comes in Small, Medium, or Large
sizes, look at the corresponding bust measure-
ments given on the pattern envelope and order
accordingly. Buy separate skirt patterns by waist
and hip size nearest your actual measurements.
CORRESPONDING MEASUREMENTS, MISSSES' AND WOMEN'S SIZES
Exc«pt separate skirts, slacks, shorts, etc. All measurements in inches.
Size 10 12 14 14 18 20 40 42 44
Bust 28 30 32 34 34 38 40 42 44
Waist 24 25 24% 28 30 32 34 34 38 40
Hip 31 33 35 37 3? 41 43 45 47 44
Back length to natural
waistline 15% 14 14% 14% 17 17% 17% 17% IB 18%
Sleeve length 14% 14% 17 17% 18 18 17% 17% 17% 17%
CORRESPONDING MEASUREMENTS, MISSES' AND WOMEN'S SKIRTS, ETC.
Waist 22 24 24 28 30 32 34 34 38 40
Hip .31 33 35 37 3? 41 43 45 47 44
CORRESPONDING MEASUREMENTS, VOGUE JUNIOR SIZES
Excapt skirts, slacks, shorts, ate. Alt maasuramants in inchas.
Siza 4 II 13 IS 17
Bust 24% 30% 31% 33 34%
Waist 24% 25% 24% 28 24%
Hip 33% 34% 35% 37 38%
Back length, socket bone to natural waistline 15 15% 15'% 15% 14
Sleeve length 14% 14% 14% 17 17%
CORRESPONDING MEASUREMENTS, VOGUE JUNIOR SIZE SKIRTS, ETC
Waist 24 25 24% 28 24%
Hip ..1.Z.1.... 33% 34% 35% 37 38%
If you wear a Junior size (9 to 17) be sure to refer
to Vogue’s Catalogue of Junior Sizes, which shows all
the Vogue Patterns that are cut in this size range.
junior sizes. Junior in Vogue Patterns means a
size, not an age. For junior sizing is a matter of
proportion ... how one measurement relates to
another. Vogue's junior size patterns allow less
length, and give more ease in width measurements.,
Vogue's scale of junior figure measurements, de-
vised after years of research by experts, offers the
most accurate fit in junior pattern-fashions.
Vogue is the only pattern cut to this specially cal-
culated scale, shown at left and also on the inside
front covers of all Vogue Pattern Catalogues.
infants, girls. Measure chest or breast with
tape carried around fullest part. Measure hips at
fullest part below hipbone. Buy dress patterns,
coats, etc. by size number that is nearest actual
chest and hip measurements. Size number is the
approximate equivalent in years. Measure waist
at smallest part above hipbone. Buy skirt patterns,
etc. by size number nearest actual waist and hip
measurements. Measure sleeve underarm to wrist.
Measure height from socket-bone at back neck to
floor, with shoes on child. See pattern envelope
for pattern length, which varies with design.
CORRESPONDING MEASUREMENTS, INFANTS' AND GIRLS' SIZES
Siz« Number % I 2 3 4 5 4 8 10 12 14
Height 22 25 24 31 33 35 37 41 45 44 53
Hip 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 28 30 32% 35
Breest IZ„ 14 20 21 22 23 23% 24 24 28 30 32
Waist 14 14% 20 20% 21 21'/* 22 23 24 25 24
Sleeve length 4 7 8 8% 4% 10% II 12 13% 14% 14
Regulation
length 14 17 18 14 20 21% 23 27 31 34 34
Although no chapter in Vogue’s New Book for Better
Sewing is devoted to men and boys, they are not as
neglected as this might indicate. The sewing skills you
learn in this book can also be applied to making things
for the males in your family. You’ll find patterns for men
and boys in special sections of Vogue Pattern Catalogue.


"MUSTS"
IN YOUR
SEWING EQUIPMENT
As a beginner, you’ll need only the
basic tools of sewing, which
V we show at the right.
for measuring: A 12" or 18" ruler
(A), a yardstick (B), and a tape measure
(C) A long mirror and a hand mirror
(D) for a rear view.
FOR PINNING AND CUTTING: A box of
dressmakers’ pins (E) or of milliners’
pins which are longer and sharper. Good
cutting shears (F) with 5" or 6" blades
and bent handles. Use these for cutting
fabric only. It dulls them to cut paper.
For cutting paper, get an inexpensive
pair (G) and for snipping, a pair of
small, sharp-pointed scissors (H). A
large, flat, cutting surface (J) —the big-
gest table you own. And you must have
good light!
FOR MARKING AND RASTING; A thimble
(K). Always wear it when basting or sew-
ing by hand. Basting thread (L) and
two or three spools coloured thread for
tailor tacking (M). A package of Nos.
3 to 10 sewing needles and a package of
milliners’ needles (N) which are fine and
long. Work at a table (a card table is
dandy), sitting on a good upright chair
(0) so you won’t tire.
for sewing: A sewing machine (P) is
your biggest investment but it will more
than pay for itself in a short while. Have
plenty of extra machine needles (Q).
Buy an adjustable zipper foot with a slot
at each side (R). Use any piece of stiff
cardboard about 10" x 18" for a lap-
board (S) for relaxed hand sewing.
for pressing: A well-padded ironing
board (T) and sleeveboard (U). Lint-
less, unsized pressing cloths (V). A tai-
lors’ cushion for pressing darts and
curved seams (W). You can make one
yourself (see Sewing Dictionary, pages
7-15). Last but by no means least, a
good iron (X), with a heat regulator.


"EXTRAS” THAT
MAKE SEWING
MORE PLEASANT
A you become more expert, you’ll
find the sewing aids shown at
left of great help. They’re not
obligatory, but they’re nice to have.
for measuring: A tape measure that
snaps back into its own little case (A).
A transparent ruler (B), especially help-
ful for measuring parallel lines for bias
strips. A two- or three-panel mirror (C)
so you can see yourself from every angle!
FOR FINNING AND CUTTING: A magnet
to pick up spilled pins (D). A wrist pin-
cushion (E) to save time and movements.
Pinking shears (F) for finishing seams.
Buttonhole scissors (G). A light-weight
cutting board (H) that saves your table
top and folds away out of sight.
FOR MARKING AND BASTING: A spool
box to keep your coloured threads in
neat rows (J). Tailor’s chalk (K) in
white for marking dark fabrics, in col-
ours for marking light fabrics. Get the
non-waxy kind that won’t leave a greasy
mark on your fabric when you press. A
tracing wheel (L) for marking cottons
or muslin models. A gauge (M) for
marking width of hems or tucks. A hem
marker (N) of your choice—you’ll find
several kinds in the stores.
for sewing: A stiletto (0) to punch
holes for eyelets on belts. An emery pack
(P) for keeping rust off needles. A sew-
ing basket (Q) for little odds and ends.
A sewing cabinet (R) which is a luxury
you might hint for around Christmas
time. A dress form (S). There are many
dress forms on the market today—to fit
every budget.
for pressing: A steam iron (T) saves
time and energy when you sew a lot. A
needle-board (U) for pressing pile fab-
rics, such as velvet, is most helpful (see
page 6 for how to use a needle-board). A
tailors’ mitt (V) to put on your hand
helps you press hard-to-get-at details.


ABOUT PRESSING
A good dressmaker knows that pressing is just
as important as the way in which a dart or
seam is stitched. In fact, the most meticu-
lously handled dart or seam can look “home-made” if
not properly pressed. To get a really professional look,
follow the excellent rule of press as you go, starting out
in the very beginning by pressing the creases out of
your fabric before you even cut into it, and carefully
pressing after each step, as we show you in each lesson.
The time and care spent will be well worth while.
pressing is easy. On pages 4 and 5 we show you the
“musts” and the “extras” in pressing equipment that
will help you achieve skill in pressing. Keep the few
general rules in mind, then refer to the specific require-
ments for your fabric which we give you below. You
will also find helpful suggestions for each garment you
make as you follow the instructions in every lesson.
in general, work on the wrong side of fabric. Occa-
sionally this is impossible and you may have to press
such things as pocket welts on the right side (see page
138). Always be sure the surface is smooth under the
iron, as a wrinkle pressed in is very hard to get out.
Press on the straight grain of fabric whenever possible.
On bias seams, be careful not to stretch the fabric. Lift
and press, don’t push the iron along. Press seams open
(A) or closed (Al) according to instructions. Never try
to open a seam that has been edge-stitched. Press sleeve
seams or short seams over a well-padded sleeveboard
(B) Press curved seams (C), such as armhole seams,
and darts over a tailors’ cushion. Then you won’t have
a sharp angle at point of dart. Use the point of your
iron to shrink out the ease at top of a set-in sleeve (see
page 154). If you don’t get it all out on the first try,
keep at it until you do.
test a scrap op pabric. Before you press your fab-
ric, test a scrap according to the rules below. First,
be sure it will not shrink. If you did not buy pre-shrunk
wool or sanforized cotton or linen, have your tailor
shrink your fabric, or if you wish to do it yourself, see
how in the Sewing Dictionary (pages 7-15).
heat plus moisture should be used in the correct
combination for your fabric. You can use a regular iron
with dampened pressing cloth or a steam iron, which
generally eliminates the pressing cloth. Then follow the
directions for your fabric. If yours is a blend of fibres,
use the heat suitable for the more sensitive.
COTTON OR LINEN: Press when well dampened or use a steam
iron, with high heat.
WOOLLENS; Press with a damp cloth between iron and dry wool-
len, or use a steam iron. It you must press on right side, use a press
cloth even with a steam iron. Use high heat, don't press too dry. To
shrink out ease, pat with hand to hold steam in the fibres.
SILK: Press with steam iron or use a pressing cloth, dampening
cloth as you work. Use medium heat and press with a light touch.
Open seams with point of iron before using press cloth; then slide
point of iron under seams after pressing to remove seam ridges.
RAYON AND OTHER MAN-MADE FAB R I C S : Press as silk, using
a low heat. Be careful not to water-spot fabric.
NYLONrDoes not usually need pressing. If it should be necessary,
as when pressing the seams, use a low heat and do not dampen.
VELVETEEN, CORDUROY, VELVET: Press, with a Turkish towel
over Ironing board (see pages 56 and 59). Or stand an Iron on end,
cover it with a damp press cloth (D), and draw wrong side of
fabric back and forth over the steaming cloth. Brush lightly while
steaming to remove stubborn marks. Or press, with pile side down,
over a needleboard (DI). Let fabric dry thoroughly after pressing
or steaming. Handle as little as possible as fingers will mark pile.
LACE, MATELASSE, or other fabrics with surface interest: Press
on the wrong side over Turkish towel, using heat and moisture suit-
able tor fibre of which fabric Is made.
METAL FABRICS: The newest are tarnishproof. Use a moderate,
dry iron. It the test tarnishes the fabric, use a cooler iron.


Sewing, like any other skill, has a language of its
own with precise but perhaps unfamiliar mean-
ings. In order to simplify matters for you, we
have compiled this dictionary which defines the mean-
ings of the sewing terms we use.
We not only define the words but also illustrate and
describe many of the sewing steps; tell you where and
how to use them. We give you tables of needle and
thread sizes properly coordinated. We also suggest
many alternate ways of doing some of the basic steps.
If you find an unfamiliar term in one of the book’s
fourteen “learn-by-making” lessons, you can refer to
this dictionary for the explanation. For instance, if you
don’t know the correct way to straighten the ends of
your fabric, this dictionary will show you how. Just
look it up under “Straightening ends.” Supplement
what you learn in the lessons with this information,
so you’ll know all the fundamentals of good sewing.
ADJUSTMENT or alteration: Changes
to conform to individual height or
proportions. To shorten or lengthen a
pattern: See blouse, page 28; coat, page
132; dress, page 20; jacket, page 146;
sleeve, pages 56 and 146; skirt, page 66.
For adjustments to individual proportions,
see pages 16 and 17.
ALLOWANCE: Additional fabric where
needed. Vogue Pattern seam allowance is
Vi" except when seam tapers to a point.
If piecing is necessary in any section, allow
for seams when laying out pattern.
Hem allowance may vary with pattern;
check on back of pattern envelope.
Pleat allowance at center back of coat or
jacket lining is 2". Don't cut it off.
Allowance for blouse above waistline or
above cuff is made in pattern (as in a
shirtwaist dress). Do not cut it off.
No allowance is made for matching plaids,
stripes, etc., in the yardage requirements.
You must allow extra fabric to match cross
bars and balance centers on layout. (For
more Information see "Plaid.")
Allowance is made on pattern for the
proper depth of pleats, width of tucks,
and for lap where necessary.
Allowance for ease in fitting is part of
Vogue designing. At bust line, pattern
measurement exceeds figure measurement
by 2" or more according to the design.
Proper allowance for coat to go over dress
or suit is made in Vogue Patterns.
Allowance for shoulder or hip pads de-
pends on design. If design calls for
natural shoulders and you want pads, al-
low more at shoulder seams (see adjust-
ment for square shoulder, C on page 17).
ARMHOLE or armscye: Opening for arm.
When fitting, keep in mind the type of
sleeve In the pattern. Don't cut off a drop
shoulder or sew up a raglan shoulder or
the sleeve will not fit.
BACK STITCHING: Hand stitching
that looks like machine stitching.
Useful to finish off an edge-stitched seam.
Insert needle at end of last stitch, and
bring it out twice the length of a stitch in
front, making a double stitch on wrong
side. A back stitch strengthens basting.
BAR: Buttonhole-stitched or satin-stitcl>ed
reinforcement, crosswise at end of a hand-
worked buttonhole. Illustration shows
bar worked in satin stitch.
BAR TACK: Strands of thread worked
over closely, in satin stitch or stem stitch,
through the fabric to hold a soft, released
pleat in a lining.
B ASTE : To sew temporarily by hand.
BASTED FITTING: The first try-on of a
garment you are making to see if adjust-
ments should be made for appearance
and comfort. Never fit too snugly.
BASTING: Temporary joining with hand
stitches, matching notches, etc. Baste care-
fully and securely. Begin with a few over-
hand stitches, as a knot may pull through.
Fasten end of seam in the same way.
Even basting: Short running stitches alike
on both sides of fabric. Use this for seams
in a fitted bodice, an armhole, on sleeves
or wherever seams are under strain.
Long and short basting: Uneven stitches
longer on topside of work. Use when there
is little strain, as in seams of a full skirt.
Use longer stitches to mark center lines.
Reinforced basting: Long stitches with an
occasional back stitch for firmness. When
seam calls for ease, hold full side toward
you and take a back stitch at each notch.
Slip-basting: Stitches carried in and out of
a creased edge to help you match stripes.
Work right side up. Crease one side on
seamline and pin creased edge on other
seamline, matching notches. In the sketch,
thread is loosened to show thread inside
crease. When you take out pins, basted
seam is ready for stitching on wrong side.


SILTING: Stiff banding used at waistline
of dress or skirt or as a stiffening for a fab-
ric belt. Be sure it's pre-shrunk.
BELT: Double band sewn to top of skirt,
slacks, etc.; or separate band worn around
the waistline. Can be straight or shaped.
BIRTH A: Deep cape-like collar.
BIAS: Diagonal grain of fabric. True bias
is an angle of 45 degrees to selvage. If
you bring cross grain to straight grain of
fabric, the fold is true bias. Be sure to
straighten ends first (see "Straightening
ends"). You may have to pull fabric slant-
wise before you fold it, so that cross is at
exact right angle to selvage. Bias stretches
easily, so you should handle it delicately.
(See also "Bias seams" and "Bias strips".)
BIAS SEAMS: Joining one bias edge
to another. Be careful not to stretch. If you
like, stitch over soft, easy-to-tear paper.
Seams in a flared skirt may be less than
true bias, as on centre-front seam of Pat-
tern No. 7422 on page 88. Keep tension
loose so seam won’t draw as bias skirt sags.
Let skirt hang for 24 hours to allow for sag.
Trim evenly before hemming.
BIAS STRIPS: Must be true bias. Cut
the width desired, plus seam allowances.
Do not join cross grain to lengthwise grain;
This Not this
always join lengthwise grains. Cut off the
little triangles. May be used for binding or
facing (as on neckline and armhole of No.
7631, page 116). Also used for button-
loops, see No. 7422, page 94.
BINDING: Method of finishing a raw
edge with a narrow strip of bias fabric.
You can buy ready-creased bias binding,
which can be used to finish seams, such as
the armhole of the unlined bolero, see
page 63. Ribbon seam binding, silk or
rayon, may be bought by the piece. It
is usually applied flat, as on a hem, see
page 25.
BLANKET STITCH: Method of working
over a raw edge or narrow hem. Work from
left to right. Note vertical needle with
thread under it. Stitches may be closer
than in sketch. Use buttonhole twist.
BLIND-HEM: To hem with fine stitches
j .t.
so that thread is invisible on outside. Don't
tighten stitches. Note angle of needle.
BLIND-STITCH: Invisible joining used
In
when you attach a lining to a coat or
jacket. Similar to blind-hemming, but with
longer stitches on underside.
BLOUSE: To allow fabric to fall softly
over waistline seam or over a cuff; or the
upper part of a one-piece dress, not close-
ly fitted (see bodice). Also any separate
waist, worn tucked in skirt or outside.
BODICE: Closely fitted waist, separate
or attached to skirt.
BUILT-UP: Extended or added to, as a
neckline or a waistline.
BUST MEASURE; Measurement taken
around fullest part of bosom, raised a trifle
at back, with tape held easily, not taut.
BUTTONHOLE: Reinforced opening for
button. Worked buttonhole (see page 87).
One-piece fabric buttonhole (see page 38)
is usually called bound buttonhole but is
actually piped, as there is only one told of
fabric at edge. Two-piece fabric button-
hole (shown below) is similar to one-piece
but made with two creased patches. Take
several tight overhand stitches at each end
of a fabric buttonhole, on the wrong side,
to take the strain off the snipped corners.
Do this tacking before you do any pressing
on the buttonhole. Buttonhole depends on
size and thickness of button. A chunky one
needs a larger opening than a flat one.
BUTTONHOLE TWIST. Strong silk
thread with close twist, size D. Use for
worked eyelets, worked buttonholes, etc.;
for sewing on buttons, hooks and snaps.
CAP SLEEVE: Brief sleeve that just
covers shoulders. May be cut in one
with blouse or attached.
CANVAS: Interfacing fabric; cotton or
linen often interwoven with hair for resili-
ency. Be sure it's pre-shrunk, and the right
weight for your outer fabric.
CARRIERS for belt: Straps of fabric or
worked strands of twist attached at waist-
line for belt to pass through. Work like a
French tack. Make them width of belt.
CATCH STITCH: Cross-wise stitches
done from left to right on a hem or facing
that is to be covered by lining. Don't draw
stitches tight; keep invisible on outside.
CHALK: French; Absorbent powder,
used to remove oil spots. Tailors': to use
for marking. Soft and easily brushed off.
Waxy chalk or crayon should not be used.
CLIP or snip: To cut with one short stroke.
CLOSING; A fastening in a garment, in-
visible as with a concealed zipper, con-
spicuous as with buttons and buttonholes.
CREASE: A fold in fabric or paper; or to
make a told.
CROSS GRAIN: Right angle to selvage
in woven fabrics. .Also the parallel purls in
machine-knitted jersey or tricot. You may
find that a torn edge Is not a true right
angle. Don't cut it, but pull fabric on the
bias until end Is squared.


CUT-OFF LINE: Perforations on a pat-
tern that indicate where a section is to be
cut shorter or narrower. Occurs when same
pattern is used for two sleeve lengths or
two skirt lengths; or for both a facing and
an interfacing, etc.
CUTTING CHART or layout: One of a
series of diagrams on instruction sheet that
shows exact placing of pattern pieces
according to pattern size, width and type
of material, and version of design. Be sure
to pick a chart for fabric with nap. if your
material has nap, pile or one-way print.
Check whether there are cut-off lines for a
shorter skirt or sleeve, or if any section is
in contrast. If your fabric is plaid or
striped, you must rearrange pattern pieces,
if necessary, to match cross stripes and
center up-and-down stripes (see "Plaid").
DART: A fold of fabric stitched on
a tapering line to a point or points.
Darts are important in fitting. They mould
flat fabric to the curves of a figure. The
first "learn-as-you-make" dress in this book
(No. 7231. page 18) shows you how to
treat underarm and back darts. A dart on
Vogue Patterns is Indicated by two lines
of perforations converging to a point or
points, except when it takes up less than
Vi" of fabric: then a single line of small
perforations indicates the foldline.
»* — t-i
r
Right side
Note how thread marks meet on right
side of fabric. Always sew toward the point
of a dart, and keep the last few stitches
parallel to fold. See "Fastening threads"
for finishing off the stitching.
DART PLEAT: A side-pleat wider at
one end than the other. Differs from a
dart tuck as pattern has "fold lines" and
"meet lines." Occurs in linings, slacks, etc.
DART TUCK: Similar to a dart, but not
stitched to a point, allowing release as on
front of blouse No. 7630, page 26.
DRAWN-THREAD LINE: A sure way
to a perfect cross grain. See "Straighten-
ing ends".
DROPPED SHOULDER: A lengthened
shoulderline (blouse No. 7630, page 26).
EASE: Slight fullness in a seam, as at
elbow of sleeve on page 152. There is
always ease at the top of a set-in sleeve.
Hold full side toward you as you pin and
baste, with notches matched. See sketch
of reinforced basting under "Basting".
EASE-IN: To hold In a slightly longer
edge to fit a shorter one without showing
any gathers.
EDGE-STITCH or top-stitch: To stitch
close to fold of a lapped seam, a folded
or a faced edge. Keep it perfectly even.
EVEN: To straighten ends of fabric, see
"Straightening ends". To even a hem al-
lowance. see "Gauge". Even the shaped
seam lines of a pattern when you alter it.
EXTENSION: An additional section, as
the paper pinned beyond pattern to
lengthen or to give breadth.
EXTENSION FOLD: A fold of fabric
often used at a closing, as on page 94.
EYELET: Pierced opening for the prong
of a buckle closely worked in satin stitch.
FACING: A shaped section to finish an
edge, usually stitched to outside and
turned inside. Be sure to keep facing on
same grain as outer section when you
place pattern on fabric for cutting.
FASTENING THREAD at end of seam
or dart: Hand-run seam: Take one or two
stitches over the last stitch, then loop
thread under needle (see above sketches).
Machine-stitched seam: Take a few reverse
stitches on machine or leave long ends so
that you can pull one end through and tie
them together, (square knot, please, see
preceding sketch). Another method is to
rethread ends in a needle and fasten as on
the hand-run seam illustrated. Form the
habit of cutting the thread—to break it
tightens the seam. After you sew on a but-
ton. take a few fastening stitches under it.
FIBRES: Thread-like filaments of which
fabrics are woven. There are natural and
man-made fibres.
Here are some natural fibres:
Alpaca: Long, fine hair from South Amer-
ican Alpaca sheep. It is elastic, soft, lus-
trous and strong, usually black or dark
brown in colour. The term is also popularly
applied to a wiry fabric of wool and silk or
rayon, or of all rayon.
Camel's Hair: Hair obtained from cam-
els. Wool-like in texture, its natural colour
varies from light tan to brownish black. It
is lustrous and extremely soft.
Cashmere: Fabrics made of the extreme-
ly soft wool of the Indian Kashmir goats.
The fibre has a silky gloss and may be
blended with wool, cotton, silk.
Cotton: Soft fibre obtained from the cot-
ton plant. Usually the longer the fibre, the
better the quality of cotton. It may be
woven into the very sheerest or heaviest
fabrics. It can be processed to prevent
shrinkage, creasing and fading.
Linen: Strong, lustrous fabric woven from
the fibres of the flax plant. Many linens are
crease-resistant.
Mohair: Hair from the angora goat. It
is long and comparatively coarse.
Silk: The natural fibre from the cocoon of
the silkworm. It has a natural resilience
that makes it resist wrinkling. Silk from the
wild silkworm is known as tussah.
Vicuna: Soft fabric made from the wool
of the vicuna. It is used for coatings.
IVoo I: The hair from sheep, lamb and
certain other animals. The fibre is spun
or woven into two main classes of fabrics:
woollens and worsteds. Woollens are woven
from shorter fibres, usually have a fuzzy sur-
face that is soft, loose, and often bulky.
Worsted fabrics are made from long, fine
wool fibres which have been laid parallel
before spinning and are the smooth, clear
textured fabrics such as gabardine, serges
and men's suitings.
Here are some of the man-made fibres:
Acetate: Fibre, yarn, or material made
by the acetate process. It is an unusually
soft and luxurious fibre and is, perhaps,
closer to silk than any of the chemical
fibres.


Bemberg: Trade name for rayon thread,
yarn and fabrics made by the cuprammo-
nium process. It is most familiar as a sheer
dress crepe.
Dacron is another newcomer. It produces
a crisp, smooth fabric that drapes espe-
cially well, due to its light weight.
Dyne! has fire-resistant, moth-and-mildew-
proof, quick-drying, washable fibres. It is
soft and warm to the touch.
Fiberglas: Trade name for fine filament
glass woven into fabrics that resist soil,
fire, and chemicals.
Nylon: Trade name of fibre derived large-
ly from coal. Best known for its great
strength and quick drying qualities. Com-
bined with other fibres it improves the
wear and washability of the fabric.
Orion is also a new development. A fabric
of Orion may be washed or dry cleaned. It
dries rapidly, won't shrink or wrinkle. It's
lightweight, has a great resistance to dam-
age by sunlight, acid fumes and outdoor
exposure.
Rayon: Trade name for fibres derived from
cellulose. It is continually being improved
and today successfully copies the weave
and texture of almost every natural fabric.
Vi car a, produced from corn, is a strong,
wrinkle-resistant fibre now being blended
with wool, nylon, cotton and rayon.
Viscose: Rayon filament of 100% cellu-
lose which takes the same dyestuffs as cot-
ton and linen. It has good creping qualities
and considerable absorptive power.
Your fabric may blend the natural fibres
with man-made. As we told you on page 6,
test the effect of heat on a waste scrap of
your fabric. Very low heat for man-made
fibres!
FINDINGS: General term for whatever
is needed to complete a garment, beyond
fabric and pattern. When you buy your
fabric, buy everything you need—if it’s
not already in your sewing box. Match
your thread to your material. For printed
fabric, match the background colour. For
flecked or novelty weaves, match the pre-
dominant colour. If instruction sheet calls
for a taped seam, be sure to get preshrunk
tape. If snaps or hooks and eyes are need-
ed, get the smallest for light-weight
fabrics, heavier ones for sturdy weight.
Match the tape of a zipper to fabric, not
only in colour, but in weight.
FLAP: A section free on three sides,
seamed or folded on the fourth side, as
flap on the jacket pocket on page 153.
FOLD : The line on which fabric is doubled 1
or turned. On cutting charts, note where
fabric is folded crosswise, where length-
wise. Make fold on exact grain. On a
pattern with pleats, fold on line of small
perforations and bring fold to meet corre-
sponding line of large perforations.
FRAY: To come apart, as threads pulling
out from cut edge of a woven fabric.
FRENCH TACK: Strands of twist at-
tached to fabric at ends only, and worked
over with blanket stitch. Used to fasten
two loose pieces together as lining to
hem of a coat (see page 143).
FULLNESS: Extra fabric gathered or
shirred to a given space, as under the
back yoke of No. 7329, page 120.
GATHER: To draw up a hand-run
thread or the bobbin thread of a
loose machine stitching. Use two gather-
WPS
ing threads in hand work, one on the seam-
line, the other nearer the edge.
GATHERS: Fullness drawn up uniformly
on hand or machine stitched threads.
GAUGE: Measuring device to keep hem
allowance even, or to space tucks evenly.
Gauges can be bought, or may be easily
cut from cardboard. Cut the nick with one
side an exact right angle.
GORE: One of several shaped sections
of a skirt, wider at bottom than at top>
GRAIN: direction of woven threads of
fabric. Cross grain should be at exact
right angle to selvage when you place
your pattern pieces according to chart.
Pull on the bias to straighten the cross
grain, if it has been pulled or stretched.
See sketch under "Straightening ends".
HEM: The turned edge of a skirt,
sleeve, etc. Depth of hem allowed
varies with pattern. Check before you cut.
Hemline is indicated by a row of small
perforations on your pattern. For narrow
or rolled hem on a scarf, see page 107.
For a double hem see page 87. Be sure to
even hem allowance by using a gauge.
Pin and baste before you sew.
HEMMING STITCHES: Slanted hand
stitches sewing a hem to the wrong side of
fabric. Use a longer stitch on a skirt hem
than on a sleeve hem. The rule is to take
up only a thread or two on the right side
of the fabric and never to draw thread so
-I.
— l * ■>
tight that a ridge shows on the finished
work/For a dress hem, see drawing above;
notice particularly slant of the needle. The
slip-stitched hem (sketch below) -is used
when both sides of hem may show. Catch
stitch is used for a hem to be covered by
lining, see page 156. See also "Blind-hem"
and "Rolled hem".
HIPLINE: An imaginary line around the
body about 7" below normal waistline.
Draw tape when you take your
hip measurement.
IDENTIFICATION CHART or picture
diagram: Important part of a Vogue
Pattern instruction sheet. It shows all the
pattern pieces, also where ease is indi-
cated, where pleats are to be made, etc.
Identify each pattern piece for the ver-
sion you have chosen, lay others aside.
INSET: A section set into another, as
insets to lengthen a pattern, see page 20.
INSTRUCTION SHEET: The how-to-do-
it enclosed in every Vogue Pattern. It gives
cutting charts for various widths and types
of fabric according to pattern sizes and
illustrates every step in making.
INTERFACING: Fabric used to give
strength and firmness. Usually seamed be-
tween outside and facing. Be sure inter-
facing is pre-shrunk and the right weight
for your fabric. Use canvas for heavier
fabrics, muslin or taffeta for light-weight
fabrics.


INTERLINING: Layer of fabric inserted
between coat and lining, for warmth.
Usually lamb's wool. Check on back of en-
velope if pattern calls for interlining.
INVERTED PLEAT; See Pleat."
JOINING: Sewing two sections togeth-
er. Match notches and other markings.
To join bias strips, see "Bias strips."
JUMPER: Sleeveless dress to be worn
with a separate blouse or sweater. See
page 44 for a sheath dress that can double
as a jumper.
KNOT: To make: Roll end of sewing
thread around tip of first finger on
left hand. Then hold thread taut in the
right hand while you give a tiny twist with
the left thumb, which starts the knot. Roll
thread off first finger, bring knot to very
end of the thread as you draw it taut.
If your thread snarls, it may form a slip
knot. Loosen the knot with the tip of your
needle, and you'll find that the knot pulls
out easily If you pull the right thread.
Be careful not to pull it taut again.
For a knot at end of a machine-stitched
seam, see "Fastening thread."
LAP; Degree that one section extends
I over another, as on a closing. Keep
the exact lap indicated on pattern when
you pin a closure for a basted fitting.
LAPEL: Turn-back at the front of a tai-
lored coat or jacket, below the collar.
LA Y-ON-FOLD : In cutting, to lay pattern
on folded edge of fabric, indicated on
pattern by two large OO perforations
close together, 5 /b" from a straight edge.
LAYOUT: Pattern pieces arranged on
fabric ready for cutting. Instruction sheet
will show various layouts, according to
pattern size, width and nap of fabric.
LENGTH: Measurement from socket bone
at back of neck to hemline of a dress, coat,
etc. or from waistline to hemline of a skirt.
(The socket bone is the prominent verte-
bra at the base of neck.) Length may vary
with design. Always look on the back of
your envelope for the length. See "Adjust-
ment" for changing length on pattern.
LENGTHWISE GRAIN: The threads
in material running parallel to the selvage.
LINGERIE-STRAP HOLD E R S : Pieces of
ribbon sewn to shoulder seams of a dress
or blouse to hold straps in place.
LINING: A covering for the inside sur-
face of a garment or a section of a gar-
ment. Also an underbody over which a
garment, such as an evening dress, is built.
MARKING: Necessary process to
transfer symbols on pattern to your
fabric. Check on your identification chart
or picture diagram so that you won't miss
one. In all the "learn-by-making" pages we
have used tailors' tacks. Vogue Patterns
are praised by teachers because the per-
forations are easy to pass your needle
through. Here are alternate methods: To
mark with pins and chalk, Jaegin when you
place pattern on wrong side of fabric.
Put a pin into each perforation, through
V both the thicknesses of doubled fabric.
and a second pin-crosswise through each
corner perforation. Before you unpin pat-
tern, make a chalk mark at each pin, then
turn the pinned pieces over and chalk at
each pin. To mark with chalked thread,
draw a double basting thread over tailors'
chalk, light for dark fabric, dark for light
so that marks will show. Draw thread
through each pinned perforation and
through both layers of fabric, renewing
the chalk as needed. Strengthen marks
left by chalked thread. Never forget to
mark center lines with long basting stitches.
If your fabric Is lace or eyelet, you may
have to mark your notches with thread in-
stead of cutting them, to make them show.
Take a few running stitches at right angles
to the edge at each notch and carry them
just beyond seam, so that thread shows
on right side when you're joining pieces.
For firm, non-transparent material you may
use a tracing wheel. However, you may
want to use your pattern again, and the
traced lines tear easily.
HATCHING: To have fabric and thread
the same colour; to bring notches in align-
ment; to line up bars in plaid or stripe on
pattern layout (see "Plaid").
MEASUREMENTS: A system of determin-
ing body dimensions. Preliminary step to
getting right pattern size. Important meas-
urements are bustline, waistline and hip-
line. (See tables of corresponding meas-
urements on page 3.)
M ERCER I ZED: Cotton fibre treated to
give a silky lustre. Usually thread.
MITRE: Treatment at a corner of a hem
or band. Superfluous fabric is cut away,
creased, seamed or hemmed on the diag-
onal. (See page 22, for a mitred corner.)
NAP: Surface of a fabric that has been
processed so that woven threads are
covered with fine fibres going all in one di-
rection. Surface may be downy, as in


fleece or firm as in wool broadcloth. Not
to be confused with pile. Always use "with
nap" yardage and cutting chart.
NEEDLE AND THREAD SIZES: Impor-
tant item for successful sewing. Type of
fabric decides letter or number of sewing
silk or cotton, also how many stitches to
the inch. The size of thread determines the
size of the needle. Always use as fine a
needle as can be easily threaded.
For thin muslin, cambric, very fine linen,
sheer crepe, ninon, silk net. chiffon, etc.:
Sewing silk 00 or 000
Sewing cotton 100 to 150
Hand needles 8 to 10
Machine needles 9 to 14
Hand stitches per inch 14 to 16
Machine stitches per inch 15 to 18
For cotton lace, calico, flat crepe, taffeta,
crepe de Chine, sheer wool, velvet, etc.:
Sewing silk 0 or A
Sewing cotton 70 to 80
Hand needles 8 or 9
Machine needles I I to 14
Hand stitches per inch 12 to 14
Machine stitches per inch 12 to 16
For piqu6, gingham, heavy cotton, chintz,
percale, heavy silk crepe, wool jersey, light
wools, etc.:
Sewing silk A or B
Sewing cotton 50 to 70
Hand needles 5 to 8
Machine needles l6to 18
Hand stitches per inch 9 or 10
Machine stitches per inch 10 to 14
For heavy linens and cottons, thick wool
coating, double-faced wools, etc.:
Sewing silk B or C
Sewing cotton 30 to 40
Hand needles 3 to 5
Machine needles I to 19
Hand stitches per inch 7 or 8
Machine stitches per inch 6 to 10
Coloured thread is usually numbered 50
in mercerized cotton.
NEEDLES for hand sewing. Sharps ars
most often used. Crewel needles have
large eyes and are goocf for basting and
marking. Milliners' needles are extra long,
you may find them easier to work with. Dis-
card bent needles, those which have poor
points or rough eyes that break thread.
NOTCH: Small V-shaped cut-out on edge
of a pattern piece, showing that it is to
match the notch on a corresponding piece.
A notch may also show depth of a placket
or opening. Avoid cutting a deep notch
which weakens a seam.
ONE-WAY PR I NT: Afabricwith print
I all in one direction (sketch below).
Ttfty iti
it ilt
This Not This
Use "with nap" yardage and chart.
OVERCAST: To take long, loose stitches
over a raw edge of fabric to prevent ravel-
ling. On a lapped or edge-stitched seam,
overcast edges together. On a plain seam,
which Is pressed open, overcast each edge.
See illustration under "Seam finishes."
OVERHAND: To join two creased edges
with small stitches worked over both edges.
OVERSEW: To take two or three tight
stitches one over the other, as at end of
fabric buttonhole on wrong side.
P|AD:Cushionlike wadding used to hold
out some part of garment usually at
shoulder or hip. See "Shoulder pad."
PADDING STITCH: Tacking stitches
used to hold padding or interlining in
place and prevent wrinkling. Stitches
should not show on right side. Used on col-
lars and lapels (see page 154)
PATTERN SYMBOLS: See "Notch" and
"Perforations."
PERFORATIONS: Holes of various sizes
and shapes in Vogue Patterns. It would be
wise to become conversant with the mean-
ings. Large OO close together from a
straight edge indicate that this edge of
pattern is to be placed on a straight fold
of material. Never cut along this fold.
Large O O separated, indicate
straight of goods so must be placed paral-
lel to the selvages.
Large O O in rows indicate centre
front, may indicate cut-off lines.
Large O O O in rows oppo-
site small o o o in rows
indicate pleats: you crease the fabric on
the small oo and bring them over to meet
the large OO on "meet" line.
Small o o in rows indicate
seamlines, hemlines, etc.
Small oo close together on sleeve show
the point that should line up with the
shoulder seam.
Small oo close together indicate position
of waistline.
Square perforations □ indicate button-
holes, pocket position, overlays, etc. Trian-
gular perforations A may indicate slashes,
position of pockets, other design details.
Always check with the Identification chart
or picture diagram on your instruction
sheet for exact meaning of all perforations
as these sometimes may differ.
PICTURE DIAGRAM: See "Identifica-
tion chart."
PIECING: Joining necessary on narrow
fabrics or for saving yardage on layout.
Always allow for a seam on each piece.
See how we pieced the blouse facing on
the cutting chart on page 28.
PILE: Surface of a fabric having upright
ends, as in velvet, velveteen, fur fabric,
etc. It should not be confused with nap.
However, always use "with nap" yardage
and cutting chart for pile fabrics.
PINK: To cut an edge into zigzags to re-
tard ravelling. You may have pinking done
by machine or use pinking shears. Fabric
should be crisp as taffeta or firm as closely
woven flannel. See page 150 for illustra-
tion of pinking. See also "Seam finishes."
PINS: Dressmakers' pins have sharp points.
Milliners’ pins are long, good if you have
thick material. Always pin seams and darts
before you baste.
PLACKET: Opening in a skirt, dress, or
blouse for convenience in putting it on.
Placket is frequently fastened with a zip-
per. May have an extension underlay as on
the child's dress. See page 84.
PLAID: A material woven or printed in
variegated checks, as a Scotch tartan. If a
plaid is not suitable for a Vogue design, it
is stated on the back of the pattern enve-
lope. Vogue Patterns make no allowance
for matching plaid. You wiL) have to buy
extra yardage depending on the repeat of
the plaid. Usually, the larger the plaid, the
greater the extra allowance necessary. You
can expect to waste some fabric.


Crossbars should match at base of arm- stitched, unstitched or partly stitched,
hole on the garment back and front and Side pled: Single pleat which can be used
at the notches below hipline of a skirt. |
Vertical bars should ,be centered (when
Sid® pleat
I 1
in a series, all turned in one direction.
Skirt No. 7436, page 64, has released side
pleats. Inverted pled: Two side pleats fac-
pleat
ing each other edge to edge. Dress No.
7422, page 88, has released Inverted
• pleats. You have a tiny inverted pleat at
each end of a fabric buttonhole. See de-
lißliiil fail on page 38. Box pleat: Two side pleats
JBSBB BaSL igggSl turning away from each other. Skirt of suit
I /, \ y V i \ :/ /
No. S-4240, on page 144, has box pleat.
PRE-SHRUNK: Term applied to fabric
that has been processed for shrinkage and
is all ready to sew.
PRESS CLOTH or pressing cloth: Unsized
Dress cut out and ready to sew white cotton fabric with body and close
weave, used between Iron and the fabric
you have a "lay-on" fold section to place V ou are P r ®ssing.
on your layout). Not only that, you'll want PRESSING: See page 6.
the darts to balance. You won’t want
a white stripe disappearing into one dart, IS AVEL: To become unwoven. See
IV "Fray." To draw threads from fabric
||MM| b nay. iu uiaw mioau:
lljj edge, leaving a fringe effect.
Mfefis RE VERS: Extended front whn
J 5) I|V? from neck to form lapels.
REVERSIBLE: Fabric finishe
Mlm either side.
Hip. J 0 pull apart or separat
RE VERS: Extended front which rolls back
REVERSIBLE: Fabric finished for use on
RIP: To pull apart or separate by pulling
j h ; $ No i th ; s out or cutting the stitches. Cut stitches
. carefully. Do not stretch fabric,
and a red stripe disappearing into its , , j u
r rr 3 ROLLED HEM: Narrow hem made by
opposite. The only way is to keep re- ... . . , . . u .
\ r rolling the material between thumb and
arranging your pattern pieces. It may help
you to cut the other sleeve and the other
half of a blouse in paper, to help you line
up the bars. Be sure to keep pieces all in
one direction if your plaid has an uneven
arrangement of colour.
PLEAT: Fold in fabric, marked on pattern
by a line of small o's indicating where
to fold, and a line of large O's, the
"meet" line to which you bring the folded
edge. There are many variations of pleats, forefinger, sewing it as you roll. Machine
any of which can be pressed or unpressed. stitch a bias edge before rolling it.
SAG: Degree to which material will
stretch in a dress, skirt, etc. Especially
true of a circular skirt or one with bias
seams. This is the reason for hanging a
skirt twenty-four hours before you turn
hem. Some fabrics sag more than others.
SATIN STITCH: Small embroidery
stitches worked close to each other through
fabric and over threads which serve as
padding.
SE AM :To sew together; or the line formed
by sewing pieces together.
SEAM BINDING: Name used for a nar-
row firm ribbon that is used flat to finish
a hem or to tape a waistline, etc.
SEAM FINISHES: Methods of keeping
fabric from ravelling. Overcasting: Note
position of needle in sketch above. Take
deeper stitches If fabric ravels badly.
Pinking: Labor-saving way to finish firm
Pinked
fabrics. Pink both edges at the same time.
Turned and stitched: Turn under one edge
of seam allowance and stitch close to fold
rn m
Turned and stitched Bound
as in sketch at left above. Bound: Each
edge finished with binding, as in sketch at
right above. Trim seam to even width be-
fore you do any finishing.
SEAM LINE: Line on which to stitch. Re-
member we told you it's 5 />" from edge of
pattern, except for tapered seams, and is
marked with small o's, except a center-
front seam which has large O's.
SELVAGE: Narrow woven border on
lengthwise edges of fabric.
SHOULDER PAD: Device to build up or
broaden a shoulder. Fashion rules here. If
Vogue says "natural shoulders," you may
want to omit pads altogether. Usually a
small pad helps to give a natural contour,
from neck to form lapels.
either side.


especially for sloping shoulders or for very
narrow ones. Look at the ready-made pads
at notion counter or in a dressmakers' sup-
ply shop. New types are constantly being
added. You may like detachable ones with
snap-on tapes. If you make your pads,
check on back of your envelope for amount
of sheet wadding, crinoline, etc., required
for a pair of pads. Directions for making
a pad from a circle of fabric are some-
times given on instruction sheet of a de-
sign with set-in sleeves.
To make pad above: Cut an 8" circle of
thin fabric; crease in half on bias. Open.
Build up cotton wadding on one side of
crease so it is •/j" thick at center of crease,
graduating to nothing at curve. Tack lay-
ers together with long stitches. Fold again,
covering wadding and bind edges with
novelty bias. In attaching pad, center it on
shoulder and extend *A M beyond armhole
seam. Try on to test before you sew it.
The pad illustrated above is also some-
times included in a Vogue Pattern of a
kimono-sleeved dress, blouse or coat. This
one is cut oval for a narrower and longer
pad. Make it the same as the first pad.
but turn In and stitch the edges instead of
binding them. It is cupped to fit your
shoulder by three tapered darts on the
underside. These darts are pinned and slip-
stitched in place after the pad is finished.
SHRINK: To contract fibres of a fabric angle to selvage. Before you lay any pieces
with heat and moisture. Many fabrics to- of pattern on material, straighten the cross
day are pre-shrunk and colour fast. Check edge by tearing, if fabric tears easily. Snip
whether your fabric is pre-shrunk. Your the selvage first. If the fabric is not easily
tailor can shrink woollens. To do it your- torn, snip the selvage, draw cross thread
self, begin a day ahead. First, snip sel- /
vages. Wet a sheet and place on flat sur- f T I^-
face. Lay cloth face down over sheet, roll M BBaSy_ f W
together and leave overnight. Next day, S V V?OC>; t
press dry on wrong side, working with wm ' / f \
grain of fabric. To shrink cotton and linen, 0 JT II
soak in cold water for several hours, then f , H
hang over a line to drip until dry. To shrink M
out ease, use' tip of iron, working away 'V|
from seam. Then press seam open or H
closed as required, snipping as necessary.
SIZING: A finish given to fabrics for
. .1 i• rr .i gently and cut on the line of the drawn
strength, stiffness or smoothness. 1 , . .
...... T . ... • i .I thread, a little at a time. If cross thread is
SLASH: lo cut with single stroke; or a
. ..I . r i • r i . not at an exact right angle, pull on the
cut within fabric area, as tor a pocket. *
SLIP-BASTE: See "Basting."
SLIP-STITCHs An invisible method of
joining. Run needle first into one creased |
edge then into the other creased edge.
SNIP or clip: To cut with one short stroke.
STEAM: To expose fabric to action of
moisture and heat.
STEM STITCH: An even satin stitch. Salvage
STIFFENING: That which is used to
stiffen, as crinoline or horsehair. bias until it is at a right angle. This applies
STILETTO: A small pointed instrument to woven fabrics. For jersey mark end with
for piercing fabric for eyelet holes. An ice chalk and a ruler, or a square, and cut
pick makes an excellent substitute. along the chalk line.
STRAIGHT OF GOODS: The lengthwise
or crosswise thread of fabric; straight VACK: A method of fastening two
grain. (See "Grain".) Two large OO per- | pieces of fabric together. See "Bar
forations, spaced on pattern, indicate tack", also "French tack". Tailors': Tern-
straight of goods; they must be parallel porary stitches to mark the position of
to the selvage. Measure with ruler from darts, etc., illustrated in each lesson.
Salvage TAILORS’ CUSHION, pad or "ham":
i I j “ J Oval, well-stuffed pad to use when you
; | pf press curved seams and darts. To make one,
selvage to perforations when placing pat- J
tern on fabric. Be especially careful if
piece is to be bias. An under collar will
not roll properly if pattern is off grain.
STRAIGHTENING ENDS: Preparing cut two ovals of unsized drill or heavy
material so the cross grain is an exact right muslin, about \2" long, I 0" wide. Stitch.


around, except for a small opening so that
you can turn it right side out. Stuff with
wadding, then overhand opening.
TAPER: To make gradually smaller toward
one end, as a dart.
TENSION: State of being stretched or
pulled. Device orT sewing machine for regu-
lating pull of needle and bobbin threads.
Threads should be locked in thickness of
PißßeSfflt
Correct tension
Tight bobbin thread
|BBSSagSSf
Tight upper thread
fabric for perfect stitch. Enlarged illustra-
tions show cross section of threads inter-
locking through the fabric.
THIMBLE: Important sewing aid, too
often forgotten by amateurs. Acquire the
knack of pushing from the side, not the
end, of finger. You can see the correct
position in the sketch. Be sure your thimble
fits comfortably.
THREAD; Sewing silk, sewing cotton, mer-
cerized cotton, nylon thread, basting
thread, etc. See tables under Needle for
coordinated needle and thread sizes. Or,
to put sewing silk or cotton through the
eye of a needle for hand sewing. To
thread a machine, follow the diagrams in
the booklet that comes with your machine.
THREAD LOOP; Sometimes used as
an eye to engage a hook (see illustration
on page 24).
TIE THREAD ENDS: See "Fastening
thread."
TRACE; To transfer pattern or fitting
marks t» fabric with chalk, pins, tracing
wheel or line of basting.
TRIM: To cut a seam allowance or hem
to make it narrower, or to remove ravel-
lings. Never trim too close to the seam.
TUCK: A fold made in fabric for decora-
tion or in paper pattern for shortening.
UNDERFOLD: Crease on wrong side
of fabric under a pleat. Sometimes
a seam forms this underfold. Do not press
it open.
UNDERLAP: That part of a closing or a
vent that extends under the other part.
UNDERLAY: Fabric placed under a slot
seam: or paper pinned under a section of
pattern for additional length or breadth.
UNSIZED; Fabric that is free from siz-
ing. It is most important to have your
pressing cloths unsized.
VELVET; A pile fabric. Remember to
use "with nap" yardage and layout.
Handle carefully so as not to mark the sur-
face. Lay the pattern so that the nap runs
upward, tor a dark, rich effect. Use needles
Instead of pins; baste with silk instead of
with cotton.
VELVETEEN; Sturdier than velvet, usually
with a cotton back. Always use "with nap"
yardage and layout. See velveteen bolero
on page 54.
VENT: Opening at lower back or side of
a jacket or coat, or at side, front or back
of a skirt above the lower edge.
WADDING: Wool or cotton batting
needed to make your own shoulder
pads. Buy it at the lining counter.
WAISTBAND: A band that fits around
the waist, attached to the top of skirts,
slacks, etc.
WAIST MEASURE; Size around the
smallest part of figure, with tape fairly
tight. Buy separate skirts, etc., by waist size.
WASHABLE; Fabric that is colour fast
and shrinkproof.
WEAVE: Arrangement of strands or yarns
in woven fabrics. Plain weave has single
threads once-over, once-under; basket-
weave, several threads woven under and
over. Twills and diagonals are loomed in a
series of tiny steps. Herringbones are op-
posed diagonals. Satlh weave has several
strands on the glossy surface, and calls for
"with nap" yardage and cutting chart, as
well as the utmost care not to snag the
surface strands. Ribbed weaves may have
lengthwise or crosswise ribs—sometimes
"filler" strands. Watch out for ravelling.
Crepe weaves have a tighter twist on the
warp threads than on the cross.
WELT: A strip of fabric inserted in a slash
for a pocket, to strengthen it and to con-
ceal the opening, as on coat No. 7442, il-
lustrated on page 130.
WHIP:To sew two creased edges of fab-
ric together with light overhand stitches,
or to overhand a rolled edge.
WIDTH: Measurement across fabric.
The same kind of fabric may be found in
varying widths in stores. If you choose a
width for which there is no cutting chart,
use the one for the next narrowest meas-
urement. Also measurement around the
hemline of a skirt or dress. Skirt width of
each garment is given on back of your pat-
tern envelope.
WITH NAP: Designation on cutting chart
that Indicates that all pattern pieces must
be in same direction. "With nap" chart
must be used tor fabrics with nap, pile or
one-way print.
YARDAGE: Amount of fabric needed
for a Vogue design, according to
width and type of material, size and ver-
sion of pattern. Read tables and notes on
back of your pattern envelope.
YOKE: A band or shaped piece cut to fit
shoulders or hips, to which the rest of the
garment is sewn. Dress No. 7329 on page
120 has a shoulder yoke.
ZIPPER FOOT: Attachment for your
sewing machine that keeps the
stitching close to the metal of zipper or
slide fastener. Adjustable zipper foot can
stitch either to the right or to the left of
the metal (see illustration on page 4).
ZIPPERS or slide fasteners; Devices for a
smooth closure, with interlocking teeth in
metal or plastic. Note whether design calls
for a zipper closed at one end only as on
skirt. This is usually 7" long and has an
extra firm lock at the top. Nock zippers
are also open at one end and come in
various lengths. Side placket zippers for a
dress are closed at both ends and come
in several lengths. Completely separable,
zippers are generally used on a snowsuit
or a jacket. Match the zipper tape to your
fabric in weight as well as colour.


Adjustments
It’s so very simple to adjust Vogue Patterns for
your own special requirements. You just add a
little here, subtract a little there. Perhaps just in-
serting shoulders pads will do the trick. You can make
or buy quite a variety. For more about shoulder pads
see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15.
Of course the pattern you bought is the right size.
We told you how to determine your size on pages 2
and 3. Remember? A try-on of the pinned-together
pattern will tell you what—if any —adjustments are
needed. If you prefer to check the pattern measure-
ments with a well-fitting dress or suit, instead of try-
ing it on, remember your Vogue Pattern allows for
ease around the body at the bustline.
Make all necessary adjustments in the pattern
before the fabric is cut. After all, you can take in a
seam, or cut of! at the hem, in your basted fitting, but
you can’t add anywhere once you have cut out your
fabric. On these pages, we show you how to make
adjustments for the figure variations most often en-
countered ... narrow shoulders, wide shoulders, large
bust, little bust, etc.
The shaded sections, in these illustrations, indi-
cate where tissue paper is inserted in a pattern or
added to an edge to increase size; the dotted lines
indicate new cutting lines inside the pattern.
Have large sheets of tissue paper on hand. If you
have major adjustments to make, trace and cut a new
pattern in the tissue and make the changes on that,
keeping your original Vogue Pattern intact to check
the shape of armholes and length of side seams. You
may like to test your adjustments by making a model
in cheap muslin—just to make sure. This may seem
like a lot of work but should be of great help in using
other Vogue Patterns, especially if you know your left
and right sides do not balance. The test of your adjust-
ments is in the center seams, back and front, or the
center marking lines which you make when there are
no center seams. If a center hangs slantwise on your
muslin model, add more to one hip than the other.
E. Long, thin neck? Add at
neckline, back and front. Mark
new seamline. Reduce collar at
K. Big shoulder blades? Add width
at back armhole ; take up larger dart on
shoulder to rectify; add at waistline
/ ■ P. Large abdomen? Add [••••• ’\
/• at top of skirt front, also A
f If at center front all the f
/ way to the hemline
T P I'
•Q‘ O *
o o
r
■ I Q. Big derriere? Add
• at top of skirt back, r *
r 3 increase width of
skirt gradually ’
• • • • 1 * t : • • * * a
down to hemline
A. Square shoulders? Add at
shoulder and again at armhole, so
sleeve will fit. Don’t change neckline
* /.
1 1/ -I
: JJrl F
> '' ’
F. Thickish neck? Snip with points
of scissors to enlarge, back and front.
Try on. Add to collar at center back
Rounded back? Cut across
pattern where curve is most
pronounced; separate dartwise.
Take up larger dart at waistline


B. Square shoulders
in kimono sleeves?
Add at shoulder
seamline, tapering
toward the sleeves
and neck
Add at shoulder and
upper part of armhole.
Don’t change neckline
G. Large bust? In patterns
with diagonal darts, sepa-
rate on line of dart, insert
tissue; dart will be deeper
H. Little bust? Take
a horizontal tuck across
the pattern; add at
waistline on
tapered line
M. Thickness under arm?
Add at front underarm
and waistline, also at
sleeve seam. Take deeper.
longer underarm dart
N. Large arm? Cut and
separate pattern; pin in
insert; add at seams.
Enlarge armhole to fit
ft. Big hips? Add width at •
side seams, tapering in at
the waistline, outward toward *
hemline to minimize hips
o u
O
S. Large waistline?
Add width from hipline
R upward on skirt;
add to side
seams of bodice


The si
i m ch e m i
The chemise dress is a wonderful starting point for your sewing
career. There is no waistline seam .. . you just cinch it in with a
belt. We made it in wool-like rayon. It would afso be smart in linen
or silk Shantung. Vogue Pattern No. 7231. “Easy-to-Make.” Sizes
12 to 18 (30 to 36). Price, 50 cents. Also cut in junior size. No. 3392.
Sizes 9to 15 ( 29 1 /) to 33). The dress should take about 9 hours to make
See the back of the pattern envelope for the yardage requirements.


'■
V* ,
AN "EASY-TO-M AKE"
CHEMISE DRESS
You need seven things besides your sewing equipment
(see pages 4 and 5 for Equipment). These are: I. Your
fabric, 2. Matching seam binding, 3. Two spools of matching
silk or mercerized cotton thread (one for machine sewing,
one for hand sewing), 4. A spool of matching buttonhole
twist, 5. Contrasting thread for basting and tailor tacking
(any you have on hand will do), 6. A hook (we make a loop
instead of using the eye), 7. Shoulder pads, if you intend to
wear them, or the makings (see the Instruction Sheet en-
closed with your pattern for making shoulder pads). You
need only the five pieces of pattern shown here: Back, front,
cuff, facing and collar. For this first lesson, instead of mak-
ing a belt, use a leather belt. Note that you only have half a
pattern —the right half. The left half of dress comes into be-
ing in the cutting.
: CQLLAR *:
First, study the pattern pieces and the Picture Diagram
on the Instruction Sheet, familiarizing yourself with what
the notches and perforations mean. Some pattern pieces have
large OO’s near an edge indicating that this edge is to be
placed on a fold of the fabric. Straight-of-Goods large 0-0
perforations within the pattern must be placed parallel to
selvages. The V-notches indicate points that you have to
match. The small o perforations %" from the edges are —
yes, you’re right!—for seamlines. These markings have the
same function on all Vogue Patterns, so it’s well to learn
them at the start so later, knowing them, you can whiz through
the preliminaries.
FQnhn
About fabrics. We chose a 39" grey rayon that looks like
i wool because it’s wearable four seasons of the year
(wonderful in the summer —did you know?), because it’s
easy to work with, not too heavy or stiff for a nice cinched-in
waist, yet heavy enough to hang well. There are many fabrics
listed on your pattern envelope, but if you use a 39" fabric,
you can follow the cutting instructions we give in this lesson.


THE CHEMISE DRESS
Chcck pattern length. You have, of course,
bought the size corresponding most closely
to your measurements (see pages 2 and 3). But
try on pattern before cutting into the fabric. First
pin in front dart (see “dart” in Sewing Dictionary,
pages 7-15). Pin front and back together at shoul-
der and at side below dart; slip on (A). If you
use shoulder pads, pin one to your right lingerie
strap. Put on a belt, allowing as much blouse above
the belt as you want. This type of dress is easy to
adjust because it fits loosely and has no seam at
waist. Is it too long? Pin in a tuck above belt, or
for a slight difference, cut off at bottom, but—
remember to allow 3" extra for hem (A 1). Too
short? Add length by pinning a piece of tissue
paper to lower edge and by cutting pattern apart
above belt and inserting tissue underlay (A 2). Un-
pin pattern and smooth it out. For fitting prob-
lems at neck or shoulders, see pages 16 and 17.
Pinning, cutting. Press out wrinkles in fabric. Straighten
raw edges, fold fabric lengthwise, right side inside; pin
selvages and ends together. (Not sure about straightening edges?
selvages? See Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15.) First, on your back
pattern piece notice the two notches and seamline small o’s at cen-
ter back. These are used on 54" fabric when we seam centers to
save yardage. So, fold the back seam allowance to the outside.
Pin it— don’t cut it off—you may want to make the dress again in
wool. Now look at Cutting Chart ( B). The long piece in the upper
left-hand corner is the belt (which we are not using I. Lay all pat-
tern pieces on fabric as on chart, working from left to right. Note
half the collar is shown on chart in solid lines, the other half in
broken lines. Solid-line collar is the pattern, broken-line the left
half. Now let’s pin. First pin pattern pieces to fabric along fold
(C) or on Straight-of-Goods 0-o’s, which are parallel to selvage,
then the balance, smoothing tissues as you go. Don’t lift fabric
when pinning. Pin on all pieces before you cut anything. Outline
the collar pattern (solid line) with pins, then flip it over, and pin
to fabric. Cut carefully along pattern edge, keeping fabric as flat
as possible, using the middle of the blades of shears, sliding them
along as you cut (D). Cut around collar pattern and the part out-
lined by pins (be sure not to cut through center back of collar).
Don’t unpin any pattern pieces. Snip all notches with scissors
tips (E). Careful! Don’t snip too deeply.


Markins. First run a basting thread
down the back and front center folds
of dress and facing as guide lines (A).
Now to tailor tack. We show you each
piece of your dress already cut out (B
through F). Get out three spools of different
colour cotton thread: one for seams and
hems; the second, for darts; the third, for
[~Ts. which means the end of the center-front
neck slash. You’ll find it helpful to use dif-
ferent colours for various markings. Tailor
tack all perforations except “Straight-of-
Goods” and “Lay-on-Fold” 00’s, as these
have served their purpose.
And now —here’s how to tailor tack.
With a doubled thread, take two loopy
stitches through each perforation (B).
When perforations are close together, you
can keep thread continuous (C). But you
must cut the thread between perforations
(C) before you can remove pattern. When
all perforations are marked, unpin pattern
(D) ; unfold the two layers of fabric gently
(F) and snip the stitches through the cen-
ter (F). Voild! You have little tufts of col-
oured threads on each layer of fabric to
show you which perforation to match
which! The collar and collar facings (E)
need special mention. First remove pattern
and lay aside one collar. Fold the other col-
lar at center, right sides together, re-pin
pattern to it. Run marking thread at center
back and tailor tack (El). Remove pattern
and do the same with the other collar (E 2).
Basting your dress. First the two
darts at the back of the neck. Crease
on the small o line of tailors’ tacks. Pin
Vs" in from crease at the neckline, tapering
to nothing at the lowest tailor tack (G).
Baste toward the point, removing pins.
Notice that the front underarm darts are
marked with two rows of tailors’ tacks con-
verging to a point. Crease between the dart
marks, ending at the innermost single
mark. Pin together at tailors’ tacks and
baste as pinned (H). Baste the front to the
back at shoulders and top of sleeves,
matching V’s (J). And make sure the right
sides of the fabric are together on the inside!


THE CHEMISE DRESS
Facing it. Get your little bodice facing.
Turn raw edges to the wrong side except
at neckline and baste. Mitre corners as you
come to them—fold and snip off corner, but
not too close (A), turn uijder and baste
snipped edges (Al). Stitch on machine close
to the edge (A 2). Remove bastings and
press carefully, making sure you don’t
stretch or pull the facing out of shape (B).
One of the first rules of successful dress-
making is “press as you go,” so keep your
ironing board up. Read about pressing on
page 6 to be sure you are using the cor-
rect procedure for your fabric. Pin the
facing to the front of your dress, right
sides of fabric together (C), matching
center front guide lines, tailors’ tacks and
neckline V’s. Baste your center front guide
lines together from the neck down to a point
in line with the □ tailors’ tacks. Then stitch
downward, starting }4" from center front
at neckline and tapering to the center front
opposite the □ tailors’ tacks, which indi-
cate the depth of the bodice opening (D).
Stop your machine at this point, lift the foot
and pivot the material; stitch up on other
side of guide line from the point, widening
to 14" from the guide line at the neck (D).
Remove the bastings, but don’t pull out
your guide lines below the stitching. Cut
the two layers of fabric midway between
stitching to within a thread or two of the
point (E).
More basting. These are long seams
and hand work, so why not turn on
the radio ... get a Coke or cup of tea ...
and enjoy yourself while basting. All set?
Pin and baste the back to the front at
underarm and side seams, matching notches
(F). Keep your front underarm darts
turned down as you baste.
In a minute, we’ll try it on, for the basted
fitting.


Your iasteo fitt in a. Wear the height
of heels you intend to wear with your
dress and put on a girdle, if you wear one.
If you’re going to wear shoulder pads,
pin them to the shoulders for the fitting.
Slip the dress on right side out (A), with
the facing on the outside, not turned in.
Fasten the neck opening with a safety pin,
so edges touch. Cinch it in with a belt,
just as you intend to wear it. If you like,
pin up the hem for the general effect.
Nice, isn’t it?
Do bust darts point to the fullest part of
bust? If not, rip and re-haste; try on
again. Do center front and back basting
thread lines hang straight? Side seams?
They must. If the neckline seems too snug,
enlarge it a bit by snipping with scissor
tips. But remember, it’ll be %" deeper
all around when the seam allowance is
taken up in joining collar.
STITCHING ON THE MACHINE. Stitch
front darts, after ripping basted side
seams enough to allow you to do so. Stitch
toward the point and keep the last few
stitches parallel to the fold (B). Allow
enough thread for a knot at point of each
dart (see “fastening thread” in Sewing
Dictionary, pages 7-15). Or, take a few
reverse stitches if your machine sews back-
ward. Stitch back darts in the same way.
Then press darts over a tailors’ cushion
(see Sewing Equipment, pages 4 and 5),
pressing back darts toward center (C),
front darts downward.
Re-haste ripped side seams and stitch,
from the sleeve downward toward the hem,
keeping front darts turned downward (D).
Snip the seam at the underarm curve (E)
so it will lie flat when pressed open. Stitch
shoulder seams, stitching from the neck-
line toward the sleeve opening.
Remove all bastings and press the seams
open, pressing the shoulder and sleeve
seams over a sleeveboard (F, G), the side
seams over a regular ironing board (H).
When you pink seams, you pink them
before pressing. But we’re going to over-
cast these later, so we press them open
now. (See “seam finishings” in Sewing
Dictionary, pages 7-15.)


THE CHEMISE DRESS
The collar. Pin and baste collar and
collar facing together except at the neck,
keeping right sides of fabric inside and
matching tailors’ tacks (A). Stitch on ma-
chine (B). Remove bastings; trim seam,
and turn right-side out (Bl). Baste around
the collar, to keep the edges from scooting
over when you press it (C). Press, remov-
ing bastings as you go, so they will not leave
an impression.
Pin collar to neckline (with seam at end
of collar exactly in line with slash seam)
and pin collar facing to dress facing, right
sides together. Match notches, center back
and shoulder markings. Keep seams open at
slash and in collar as you baste (D). Stitch
on machine (E), beginning at one facing
edge and stitching in one continuous line
to other facing edge, being careful to keep
ends of collar aligned with slash seams.
Turn dress inside out, remove bastings
and trim seams to about 1 unless fabric
ravels too much. Snip curved neck seam of
dress so edges will lie flat. Press front seam
open (F), back seam upward. Turn dress
facing to wrong side (G) and baste along
slash and around collar (Gl). Turn in,
pin and hem collar facing over back neck
seam inside. Hem facing along shoulder
(H). Press it again (J), removing bastings
as you press.
Hook and loop. If you’d rather wear
your collar open, skip the following.
Snip the seam stitching at right edge of
opening, where collar meets dress neck (K),
so you can open the seam just enough to
insert a hook. Slip in the hook with bill over
facing and end even with front edge (L).
Get under the facings and sew hook to the
seam on the inside of the dress (LI). Then
slip-stifch (L 2) ripped seam. (See Sewing
Dictionary, pages 7-15, for slip-stitch.)
Make a thread loop opposite this hook.
First make two loose stitches with your twist
doubled, to fit the hook snugly. Work over
threads with a close blanket stitch. We give
you a nice, enlarged picture of this (M),
so you can see how to do it. Yes, that little
arrow does mean to put your needle through
eye first. Keep loop small (Ml), so the
opening meets when hooked (N).


The cuffs. Pin and baste seams, match-
ing V’s. In handling these pieces, which
are cut on the bias (see Sewing Dictionary,
pages 7-15), be careful not to stretch the
fabric. Stitch seams (A). Remove bastings
and press seams open over a sleeveboard
(B). Turn cuffs right side out and fold on
fold-line marked by tailors’ tacks. Baste raw
edges together (C). Pin and baste cuff over
sleeve right sides up, matching notches and
tailors’ tacks (D). The cuff was designed
slightly larger than the sleeve, to give it a
nice roll, so you have to “ease in” (see Sew-
ing Dictionary, pages 7-15) the extra full-
ness as you baste. Stitch (E). Press seam
toward sleeve over a sleeveboard (F). Cut
two strips of your ribbon seam binding, long
enough to cover seam plus seam allowance.
Pin, baste and hem flat to cuff (G); turn in
and hem ends (G 1). Then baste and blind-
hem binding to sleeve (Gl). Turn dress
right side out and roll cuff on tailor-tacked
line (H).
How to hem it. (This takes a friend!)
Wear the height of heels you expect
to wear with your dress. Fasten the neck.
Cinch it in with a belt so that it blouses as
you want it to. Stand erect with your weight
on both feet. Make sure center lines and side
seams hang straight. Have your friend mark
the hemline with pins, measuring upward
from the floor (J). Turn hem, pin and baste
close to fold (K) so it will be easier to
handle the raw edge. Even up the raw edge,
if necessary. Pin seam binding to raw edge,
baste, and stitch on the machine (L). Hem
the binding to dress, taking care not to
tighten stitches (M).
Finishing touches. Take out all bast-
ing threads. Now overcast seams if you
didn’t pink them (see Sewing Dictionary,
pages 7-15). Press dress on wrong side (N).
Don’t press the roll-line of cuff.
Now—put your dress on (as if anyone
could stop you!) and show it to the family.
Aren’t they proud of you? And aren’t you
proud of yourself?


The feminin
portrait-neckline
Under the sun or under the stars, the portrait-neckline blouse has a way
of making you look your prettiest and most feminine. We made it in
black linen ... you could make it in practically any fabric ... velveteen,
pique, eyelet embroidery, wool jersey. Then combine it with both long and
short skirts ... cinch in the waist with a handsome belt. You can make the
blouse in about 5 hours. Vogue Pattern No. 7630. “Easy-to-Make.” Sizes 12
to 18 (30 to 36). Price, 50 cents. See pattern envelope for the yardages.


PORTRAIT-NECKLINE BLOUSE
EASY AND FLATTERING
wou need five things besides a pioneering spirit and your
■ sewing equipment (see pages 4 and 5 for Sewing Equip-
ment). These five are: 1. Your linen, 2. Two spools of
matching mercerized thread (one for your machine, one for
hand sewing), 3. Bright, contrasting thread for basting and
marking (any you have will do), 4. A 9" zipper with one
open end for your side placket, 5. Shoulder pads, or the
makings for them, if you’re going to wear them. Please see
the Instruction Sheet enclosed with your pattern for how to
make shoulder pads. They must be especially narrow if you
buy them. You need all five pieces of the pattern, as shown
here, if you elect to make your own pads.
Study your pattern pieces and the Identification Chart
on your Instruction Sheet (which shows the pattern
pieces in miniature), so you’ll be sure what the various per-
forations mean. The large 00’s near center back and center
front mean that these edges are to be placed on a fold of
the fabric. The small o’s within the pattern are for darts and
dart tucks (see “darts” in Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15);
the ones %" from the edges are for your seamlines. The
small oo’s, close to the centers on back and front and parallel
to the hem, indicate the waistline. And the V’s and VV’s are
to be matched. Of course, you realize that you only have
one half your pattern —the right half. The left half will mate-
rialize in the cutting.
FRONT
M bout fabrics. We chose a 35" black linen because it’s
easy to work with and will be perfect with one of the
skirts which you will learn to make in later lessons. If, for
some reason, you don’t like linen, make it in a 35" cotton
broadcloth or butcher rayon. There are also many other
fabrics suggested on the back of the pattern envelope.
V J
/


THE PORTRAIT-NECKLINE BLOUSE
Check pattern length, even though
you have bought your right size (see
pages 2 and 3). Pin in the darts and tucks
on the pattern, bringing small o’s together
and tapering to point at single o on darts.
Pin the shoulder and side seams. If you’re
going to wear shoulder pads, pin one to
your right lingerie strap. Slip the pattern on
(A). Are the oo waistline perforations
where your waistline is? If they are below,
pin in a tuck across the pattern above waist-
line (Al). If above, cut pattern straight
across above waistline and add needed
length by pinning in an inset of paper (A 2).
Unpin the pattern; smooth it out. Even up
the shaped seamlines.
P LACING. PINNING, CUTTING. First,
press out center crease and any wrinkles
in the linen. Even up the raw edges by draw-
ing a thread near the edge and cutting along
the drawn-thread line. Fold the linen length-
wise, with the side you didn’t press inside
(we will consider this the right side as linen
is the same on both sides). Place it on a flat
surface and pin edges and selvages together.
Lay back and front patterns on the linen
as shown on Cutting Chart (B), with the
front flipped over. Your facings will be
seamed at centers to save fabric, instead of
cut on fold, as the large OO’s indicate. See
the dotted lines beyond the ends of facing
patterns? This means you must allow %"
extra for joining the pieces together. Pin
front and back along the fold first (C),
then other areas. Lift the fabric as little as
possible. Pin the facings at centers first,
so centers are parallel to selvages. Now—
cut, following the Vogue Pattern edge accu-
rately. Use the middle of the blades of your
shears, sliding them along as you cut (D).
Don’t lift the fabric when cutting. Save
scraps of the linen. Leave the pattern pinned
to the linen for marking, which we will
show you how to do on the next page. First,
we snip all the notches (E), being careful
not to cut too deeply. Then run a basting
thread down the center front and center
back (F), as a guide line for fitting.


Marking. At the right you see all four
pieces of your blouse cut out, with
the pattern pieces attached (A through D).
Now to mark all perforations except the
large OO’s which mean “lay-on-fold” and
are of no further use. There are other ways
of marking (see Sewing Dictionary, pages
7-15) but we use tailors’ tacks because the
thread marks show on both sides of the fab-
ric—you’ll see what a big help this is when
you start putting the pieces together. Here’s
how: With a soft, clinging, doubled cotton
thread, take two loopy stitches through each
perforation (A). When the perforations
are close together, you can make your tacks
with one continuous thread (B), but you
must snip the thread between perforations
before you can remove the pattern. On the
facings, make tailors’ tacks at center edge
of pattern in line with the small o’s nearest
the edge, to mark piecing seamlines. Unpin
the pattern (C); unfold the upper layer of
fabric and snip the threads through the
center (D). See!—there are little tufts of
thread to show you which perforation goes
with which!
Basting it. First, do your back darts on
the wrong side. Bring together the two
lines of small o tailors’ tacks and pin op-
posite tacks together; taper to nothing at
the single small o mark where the two lines
converge (E). Baste toward this dart point.
Then pin and baste your front underarm
darts in the same way (F). The dart tucks
below the waistline in front are made the
same way with this exception. They do not
taper to a point (G).
Pin and baste the front and back together
at the shoulders, matching V’s and making
sure you have the right sides of the front
and back together. Nothing can make one
feel more stupid than to discover that one
has basted something up with one half the
right side, the other half, the wrong!
Then pin and baste the side seams to-
gether (H), matching V’s, keeping under-
arm darts turned down. Leave the left side
open below the V for your zipper placket.


THE PORTRAIT-NECKLINE BLOUSE
Basted fitting. If you’re going to wear
shoulder pads, pin them to the shoul-
der seams. Then slip your blouse on, right-
side out (A). Pin the left-side opening. See
that center marking lines are at your cen-
ter back and center front. Do the underarm
darts point to the fullest part of the bust?
Are hipline darts and dart tucks released
at your waistline? Do they fit your hips
snugly enough? If not, rip and re-haste;
try on again. If you think the blouse too
loose, take deeper side seams. But be care-
ful not to get it too tight across the bust.
Stitching it. Stitch the back darts first,
stitching toward the dart points; keep
the last few stitches parallel to the fold (B).
Tie the thread ends so they won’t rip
(see “fastening thread” in Sewing Diction-
ary, pages 7-15). Stitch your underarm
darts (C), after ripping side seams enough
to allow you to do so. Press darts over a
tailors’ cushion (see Equipment, pages 4
and 5), pressing the back darts toward the
center and the underarm darts downward
(Cl). Then stitch the dart tucks (D) and
press them toward the center front (Dl).
Re-haste side seams where you ripped them.
Stitch side and shoulder seams (E), stitch-
ing from the armhole downward and keep-
ing your underarm darts turned down.
Remove bastings. Press seams open (El),
pressing your shoulder seams over a sleeve-
board (see Equipment, pages 4 and 5).
Hemming the sleeves. Turn under a
1 /4" hem. To do this, turn in on the
seamline first and press the crease. Then
turn in raw edge from the crease, snip-
ping the turn-in as you need to so it will lie
flat; also trim it a bit. Pin and baste it (F).
Hem it by hand, catching up only a thread
or two of the outside at each stitch, and
keeping the thread loose, so your stitches
will not show on the outside when you are
finished (Fl and F 2).


Facing it. Pin and baste the two pieces
of the back facing together at center
back, matching the tailors’ tacks that you
improvised for the seamline (A). Stitch on
the machine (Al). Remove the bastings,
trim the seam (B) and press the seam open
(Bl). Seam the front facing in the same
way. Then join the back facing to the front
facing at the shoulders, in the same man-
ner, matching V’s (C).
Pin this circle of facing to the neckline
over the outside of your blouse, right sides
of facing and blouse together (D), match-
ing V’s, center fronts and backs, also shoul-
der seams. Baste, carefully keeping the neck
curve true and even each side of the center
front and center back. Be careful you don’t
stretch the neck. Stitch on the machine (Dl).
Trim the seam (E) and snip it slightly
(El) so the seam will curve nicely, with-
out puckering, when the facing is turned
inside. Turn the facing in (F). Baste all
around the neckline to keep the facing in
place (G). Work the seam slightly to the
wrong side as you baste so seam will be sure
not to show when you wear it. Now, turn
under YY' along the raw edge of the fac-
ing. Pin, baste and stitch it near the fold
on the machine (H).
Remove bastings. Press the edge (J).
Then press the facing to the blouse (K). Re-
move your bastings and press again to
remove any impressions the bastings may
have left on the linen. This is a safe pro-
cedure on washables but not recommended
for other fabrics. On other fabrics it is safer
to remove the bastings little by little just
ahead of the pressing. Or press lightly with-
out dampness over the bastings, remove
them immediately and press again with
moisture. Tack the facing to the blouse at
the shoulder seams (L).
There!—isn’t facing easy —when you
know how?


THE PORTRAIT-NECKLINE BLOUSE
Hemming your blouse. Turn under a V 4” hem
at the bottom of your blouse, as you did on
your sleeves (page 30); pin and baste it (A). Then
stitch this hem on the machine (B). Press the hem
(C). There’s just one more step —putting in the
zipper—and we’re through!
Your zipper. First, get out the scraps of linen
which you have saved. Cut a straight strip of
linen IV2" wide and about 10" long (D) as a facing
for the front edge of the left side opening. Pin,
baste and stitch this strip to the front edge of the
opening, right sides together, %" from edge along
the tailors’ tacks (E). Trim the seam; turn the facing
inside and press it (F). Baste y%' from edge. Turn
in lower end of facing, pin and slipstitch to hem (G).
Now, turn under the back edge of the placket Vs" out-
side of the seamline and baste. Press, being careful
you don’t stretch it. Pin this edge over the zipper
tape as near the metal as possible, keeping the zipper
closed and the pull-tab at the hemline, turning the
tape end back so it won’t hang down. Baste and stitch
with zipper-foot attachment (G). Pin the front edge
over to meet the back seamline, turning under this
end of tape too. Baste and stitch it to the tape Vk”
from edge and across the top (H). Hem the turned
up ends of the tape to the blouse hem (J). Remove
bastings and press (K). See how neat it looks (L) !
Finishing touches. Remove all bastings. Over-
cast the seams (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-
15, for “overcast”). Give it a final pressing on the
wrong side (M), being careful not to let the facing
scoot over to the right side. Now, turn it right side
out. Isn’t it handsome? And think of all the money
you saved! And so easy too! Why not make another
one in a different fabric?


TWO NEW VIEWS OF YOU
IT* s the same blouse, No. 7630 —but whoever would guess that
just one pattern could produce (with your help) such change-
of-mood blouses. It’s all in the fabrics, of course ... one, a wide-
eyed eyelet; the other, a worldly-wise jersey. Here, we give you
only the cutting instructions, for the pinning, marking and sew-
ing procedure is the same as on Pages 26-31.
In eyelet embroidered C ott o n with matching lawn for facings.
Fold eyelet lengthwise (cutting chart above). Place back and
front pattern pieces on fabric, center back and center front on fold,
the front reversed as right side of pattern is given and eyelet may
have an up and down design. Pin and cut. Fold lawn according to
small cutting chart, with selvages meeting at center. Pin and cut
facings. Note: The •}>«" extra allowance for piecing facing (which
you did on linen blouse) is not necessary for this cutting layout.
In 5 4** wool jersey. Cut one folded edge
of tubular jersey. Starting at right edge
(selvage on cutting chart at left), place pat-
tern pieces on unfolded, smooth fabric, to
see if they fit. Remove all pieces. Turn edge
nearest you over the fabric, right sides to-
gether on the inside, making a fold only as
wide as the widest part of the back. Pin
blouse back, center back on fabric fold. Cut.
Fold other side of fabric in same way, to
width of widest part of front. Pin blouse
front, center front on fold, and cut. Open up
material again. Pin and cut one half of front
facing, allowing %" extra fabric at cen-
ter for piecing. Unpin pattern; turn pattern
upside-down; pin and cut other half of front
facing, again allowing %" seam. Pin both
sets of facing to pattern for tailor tacking,
right sides of fabric together. Fold over re-
maining material and cut back facing (no
piecing this time).


The full, g
hered skirt
A gathered skirt is just about the most useful skirt you could have...
it’s becoming ... it mixes with all your blouses and sweaters ... A beginner
should make it in about 4 hours. As you get more experienced, it will take even
less time. We show the skirt in checked gingham (with blouse No. 7630) which
will teach you how to match checks. Yqu will also learn to put in a zipper, attach
a waistband, and make a fabric buttonhole. Vogue “Easy-to-Make” Pattern
No. 7375, with an optional halter-top, in sizes 24 to 32 waist. Price, 50
cents. The yardage requirements are on the back of the pattern envelope.


YOU CAN MAKE
THIS SKIRT EASILY
lAf h at tou need. You need six things besides your sewing
* * equipment (see Pages 4 and 5 for Sewing Equipment) :
1. Your fabric (read the last paragraph on this page about the
yardage necessary when making something in checks), 2. A
package of ribbon seam binding, 3. Two spools of matching
mercerized cotton thread (one for your machine, one for hand
sewing), 4. A bright, contrasting thread for'basting, 5. A 7"
skirt zipper, 6. A %" or 1" button.
Y° UR pattern pieces. You need just three pieces of the
■ pattern to make the skirt. (We learn to make the skirt with
attached halter on Page 40.) These three pieces are: The skirt
front, the skirt back, and the belt—all nice, straight, easy-to-cut,
easy-to-make-and-match, non-baffling pieces. Study the pattern
pieces and Picture Diagram on the Instruction Sheet enclosed
with your pattern. Familiarize yourself with the meaning of
each notch and perforation.
Jfc bout fabric AND yardage. We suggest a 35" checked
gingham (see next page for cutting chart) because it’s
always welcome in warm weather (and refreshing around the
house on cooler days), because it’s easy to work with, and be-
cause it’s not too expensive for your first lesson in matching
checks. Allow about (4 yard extra for the matching of checks.
If you don’t fancy yourself in checks, how about making it in
a solid-coloured linen, cotton satin, Shantung, crepe or wool
jersey—-or a gay calico print?
Figure out how much fabric you need from the yardage
tables on the back of your pattern envelope. If you’re extra tall,
you’ll need about % yard extra in a solid colour, about yard
extra in a large check such as the one illustrated. If you get a
39" or 45" fabric, refer to the Instruction Sheet enclosed with
your pattern for the placing of pattern on fabric. If you fall in
love with a fabric with nap, follow the correct cutting chart.


THE FULL SKIRT
Check pattern length. You have, of course,
bought the size corresponding most closely to your
length and waist measurements (pages 2 and 3). But
make sure it’s going to fit before going whack-whack into
the fabric. Pin up hem of skirt front, folding along the
perforations 3" from edge. Hold this piece up to you to
check length (A). Or, if you prefer, lay the pattern on
a skirt that is the right length. Remember that a full
skirt should be shorter than a slim one. If pattern is
too long, trim front and back pattern pieces equally at
hem edge (Al). If it’s too short, add length necessary
by pinning on a strip of paper (A 2). Check belt size,
remembering it must lap over for buttoning. Add or
subtract as necessary. Smooth out pattern.
Placing, pinning, cutting. First, press fabric;
fold lengthwise at center of a line of checks with
right sides of fabric together on the inside; pin selvages
and ends together, again matching checks, so there
will be no slipping.
Place skirt-front pattern on lengthwise fold of fabric
(see cutting chart at right). Place belt pattern along sel-
vages. Pin belt and skirt-front pattern to fabric, through
both thicknesses on fold and along the edges, so match-
ing checks are together (B). Don’t lift the fabric when
pinning. Work toward edges, smoothing pattern with
your hands. Cut belt and skirt front, keeping fabric as
flat as possible. Use the middle of the blades of your
shears, sliding them along as you cut (C). Follow the
Vogue pattern edge accurately. Snip the notches with the
tip of your scissors (D), being careful to avoid too-deep
notches. Don’t unpin pattern yet. Unfold rest of fabric;
re-fold for a crosswise fold (see cutting chart at right
above). Make fold in middle of a space so that crossbars
of check meet at selvages. Pin skirt back to fabric, so
that the side notches are on a check the same colour as
the notches on front of skirt. Cut skirt back through
two thicknesses. Cut along crosswise fold. Snip the
notches. Don’t unpin pattern.
Mark center line; Mark center-front fold of skirt
with a basting thread as a guide line (E). On the
next page, you will learn how to tailor tack all your
perforations.


Marking. It is good practice to tailor tack all perfora-
tions (See “Marking” in Sewing Dictionary, pages
7 to 15, for other methods) except “lay on fold.” Here’s
how; Use a soft, clinging cotton thread, doubled. Take
one or two loose stitches through each perforation (A).
If the perforations are not close together, you should cut
the thread at each perforation leaving ends. If you
tacked from perforation to perforation with a continuous
thread (as you do when the perforations are close to-
gether) you must cut the loops of your thread between
perforations before you can remove the pattern (B). Use
a different colour of thread for each type of perforation.
For instance, use red for triangles, green for squares,
blue for large O’s, yellow for small o’s (which indicate
the seamlines). The reason for this is that the triangles,
squares, and large O’s are very important. They mean
buttonholes, buttons, slashes, etc. and they should really
stand out from the seamline markings.
Unpin and remove pattern (B, C and D) unfolding
the fabric gently and clip tailors’ tacks through the cen-
ter (D). See?—there are little tufts of coloured thread
to show you which perforation to match with which!
But don’t be surprised if they don’t look as perfect
as those in the illustrations —just as long as they hold.
Note: A first rule of sewing is to match tailors’ tacks. But
in sewing, like in everything else, there’s the exception
to the rule. The exception is when working with checks
or plaids. Then, matching checks (or plaids) is more im-
portant than matching tailors’ tacks. If you were careful
about placing your pattern on your fabric, with notches
on identical positions of checks, your tailors’ tacks should
match almost perfectly, if not perfectly.
Basting seams together. First, pin (always pin
before basting) the two back sections of the skirt,
matching notches and checks (E). Leave center back
open above notch (your zipper goes in there). Then
pin and baste front section to back (F), matching
notches and checks. Make sure the right sides of the
fabric are together on the inside. This may seem like a
very elementary precaution, but many beginner-sewers,
in a rush to see some progress, slap two pieces of fabric
together, baste and stitch away like mad, only to dis-
cover —to their dismay—that it’s wrong-side-to. Don’t
you be a wrong-side-toer. It’s a waste of time —and effort.


THE FULL SKIRT
Stitching seams. First, look at your basted seams from
the right side to make sure checks match accurately. Then
stitch seams on machine, leaving center-back seam open above
the notch (A). Now baste these open edges together (B).
Remove all bastings except the marking thread at center fold,
which is your guide line, and at center back above notch. Pink
seams and press open or, if you prefer to overcast them, press
seams open for overcasting later (C). See seam finishings in
Sewing Dictionary pages 7 to 15.
Attaching the zipper. You have already basted the back
i opening from notch upward, following the %" seam al-
lowance and have pressed seam open. Now pin the zipper bn,
keeping it closed. Keep the basted seam directly over the cen-
ter of the metal (D) .The pull-tab should be at the %" seamline
at the top of the skirt. Baste Yi" on either side of center seam
and across bottom. Stitch on machine with zipper foot attach-
ment (E). Remove bastings and open zipper. Easy, wasn’t it?
Buttonhole. If you have a new sewing machine, you un-
doubtedly have the attachment (and instructions) for
making a machine-worked buttonhole, which will do just as
nicely as a fabric one. Or you can have your buttonhole made
by a professional very reasonably. In either case, they would
be made after skirt is finished. However, making your own
gives you a wonderful sense of accomplishment. If you’ve
never tackled one before, we suggest you practice on a scrap
of fabric before making it on your belt. You start by marking
the cutting line on the belt (the other piece is your facing,
put it to one side) with small basting stitches from the □ tai-
lors’ tack away from the end. (The length of the cutting line
is the diameter of your button.) Cut an oblong of gingham
11//'I 1 //' long and 1" wide for your buttonhole binding. It should
be a true bias, if in checks; lengthwise if in a solid colour.
Pin and baste binding over cutting line, right sides of fabric
together (F). Outline the cutting line with a little box of
stitches by machine, Yh" each side of mark (G). Cut along
cutting line, beginning at the center and cutting toward each
end. Within Ya" of each end, stop and slash into each corner
(H). Pull binding through opening to the wrong side (J).
Tack ends (K), and press wrong side. Now look at right side
(L>. We finish it later.
KAAKING belt. First, try on the belt for size, pinning cen-
■ * ■ ter-back seams together, remembering the gathers will
make it . tighter. Mark for button, if original tailors’ tack is
not right. Pin and baste (M) upper edge of belt to upper
edge of facing, right sides together, across ends of belt and
facing, and across lower edges to center back (your zipper).
Stitch as basted. Turn ire\t right-side out (N) and press (0).


Joining belt to skirt. Now, gather the skirt. With a
1-o-n-g doubled thread or a heavy thread (a 16 or 20),
hand-run one line of stitches on the %" seam allowance and
another line 1 /&" above (A). Leave thread ends dangling.
Turn under lower-edge seam allowance on belt. Press light-
ly. Pin belt over skirt, matching centers and notches. Pin
these points first. See angle of pins at right (B). Draw up
skirt gathers to fit the belt. Wind long threads around pins
to hold gathers secure. Place more pins in between to keep
gathers even. Work from zipper toward center front. Baste
with small stitches to prevent gathers from slipping (C).
Be sure not to catch-in facing.
Basted fitting. Slip into the skirt carefully. Pin the belt
over at back opening as it will be when button is
attached. Pin up the hem, if you like, to get the general effect.
Does the center-front basting-thread line hang straight? Seam
lines? They should. Are the gathers equally distributed?
If not, rip belt bastings, adjust gathers, and re-haste.
Stitching belt to ski rt . Stitch basted belt to skirt (D).
Remove bastings. Turn under lower-edge seam allow-
ance of belt facing; pin over machine-stitched seam. Slip-
stitch (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15) to skirt (E),
being careful not to let stitches show on outside. Press belt
(F), making sure belt corners are square. Slash belt facing
under buttonhole and turn in raw edges. Then hem to but-
tonhole binding, tapering to points of buttonhole (G).
Attach button on A tailor-tacked perforation (H).
How to hem it. Wear the height of heels you expect
to wear with your skirt. Stand erect with your weight
on both feet. Make sure center lines and side seams hang
straight. Ask a friend to mark the hemline with pins,
measuring upward from the floor (J). Turn hem, pin and
baste close to fold (K) so it will be easy to handle the raw
edge. Even up raw edge, if necessary. Pin seam binding to
raw edge, baste and stitch on machine (L). Blind hem (see
Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15) the binding to skirt (M),
taking care not to tighten your stitches.
Pressing, finishing touches. Remove all bastings. If
you didn’t pink seams, overcast them. Press skirt on
wrong side. Now, turn skirt to right side and—quick!—
freshen your make-up, slip into a sweater or blouse—then,
your skirt—and show the world what you made—and at
such a saving!


THE HALTER DRESS
qattern no. 737 s gives two very wear-
* ables—this time, a backless halter
dress, an indispensable in any warm-
weather wardrobe. Vogue chose a 39" silk
with a two-way print because it’s soft
enough for pleasant fullness, opaque
enough so you’re decent without a bra, and
because a pretty print is so much a part
of the resort scene. If you prefer a cotton,
a printed pique or broadcloth would be
very effective. Check the yardage needed
for your size and the width of your fabric
on the back of your pattern envelope. If
you choose a one-way print, look for “with
nap” yardage requirements. It should take
you about 6 hours to make this halter dress.
Check pattern size of halter. First,
pin in darts along %" seam allowance
(the great V slashes are your darts) and
hold the pattern up to you (A) or lay the
pattern on the top of a dress that fits you.
Remember, the pattern must go around
to the center back of your neck with a %"
seam allowance. If you’re short-waisted,
take a horizontal tuck across the pattern
above the waistline (Al). If you’re long-
waisted, add the needed length by cutting
and separating pattern and pinning in an
inset of paper (A 2). Unpin darts, smooth
pattern. Check skirt length (see page 36).
qlace pattern on fabric (having
•first pressed fabric) with right side of
fabric up. See cutting chart at right. Notice
that chart is for fabric without nap. The
halter and skirt front are cut on unfolded
fabric (dotted lines indicate left side of
pattern); belt and skirt back on fabric
folded crosswise. It will probably be easier
for you to first cut your skirt front. Then
cut one half of the halter, remove the pat-
tern and turn it over. Cut the other half
of the halter. Remove the pattern and place
the two pieces of fabric together with the
right side inside. Now pin on the pattern
again so you can mark the two pieces to-
gether. Then fold fabric crosswise and cut
skirt back and belt. Please refer to page
36 for pinning and cutting instructions.


■■■ a I lor tack all perforations on halter.
® Here’s how; Use a soft, clinging cotton
thread, doubled. Take one or two loose
stitches through each perforation (A).
The dart perforations are close together so
you can make your tacks with one con-
tinuous thread. Snip threads between per-
forations (B). Unpin pattern. Raise the
upper layer of fabric and clip the threads
through the center, leaving tufts on each
side (C). Please see page 37 for marking
belt and skirt.
wour darts and sea m s. Pin and baste
■ cut-out darts on one piece of halter. Pin
on small o seamline %" from the edge,
matching notches and tapering to a point at
the single small o at the end. Stitch on
machine, stitching toward dart point and
keeping the last few stitches parallel to fold
(D). Make darts on other piece of halter
in the same manner. Remove bastings: trim
seams: press dart-seams open (E). Pin and
baste and stitch the two halter sections to-
gether at center back (which is the center
back of neck since there is no back in this
dress), matching notches and dart seams
(F). Remove bastings, trim seam, press
back-of-neck seam open (G).
Halter edges. Notice that one edge of
your halter is tailor tacked % r/ from
edge. This is the back edge of your halter.
Turn under, pin and baste a narrow hem
(about y 3" wide) along this back edge.
Stitch on machine (H). The other edge
which is marked 11//’I 1 //’ from edge is, obvi-
ously, the front of your halter (you don’t
have to be a Sherlock Holmes to make this
deduction!) Turn under y±" on this front
edge, baste, and stitch on machine (J).
Remove bastings from front and back
edges. Turn front edge inside for a 1" hem,
creasing along tailor-tacked foldline; run
long basting stitches along entire length
(K). Press hems (L).


THE HALTER DRESS
Gathering the halter. (This is hand
work and a good time to grab a Coke,
sit back and listen to the radio for a min-
ute.) Run a line of fine gathering stitches
down the center back of neck along the
seamline and a line of stitches Vs” on
either side (A). Draw stitches up to 2" and
fasten (B). Lap right front of halter over
the left front at waistline, matching large
center o’s. Baste together (C). Run a gath-
ering thread at waistline between V-V
along seamline and nearer edge (D).
JOINING HALTER, BELT. SKIRT. Please
see page 38 for bound buttonholes and
checking belt size. After your buttonhole
is made, baste belt facing to top of belt
(right sides of fabric together on the in-
side) from small oo’s to ends, down the
ends and across lower edge to center-back
small o. Stitch on machine (E). Remove
bastings; trim; turn right-side out (F)
and press ends (G). Make your skirt,
following the instructions on pages 37 and
38 up to “Joining Belt to Skirt.” Then fol-
low these instructions.
Turn under the seam allowance at the
top of the belt between the seams; baste.
Then pin the belt over the halter, working
on the outside, keeping the belt facing free.
Match and pin in this order: First the cen-
ter front, then the sides to the small oo’s
and finally the notches. After you’ve pinned
these points draw up your gathers to fit the
belt and wind threads over a pin to hold the
gathers in place. This works out best if
you always pull away from the center front
when you draw up the gathers (H). Baste,
adjusting gathers (J). Turn under seam
allowance on bottom of belt and pin over
skirt (outside only) matching centers and
notches, adjusting gathers. Baste (K).


*%asted fitting. Slip into dress and pin
belt at back. Is the back edge of the
halter taut without cutting into your back?
Is the front fullness just so? It should be.
If halter is too loose, rip bastings, trim
waistline edge of halter, re-gather and
baste to belt. If you have followed our in-
structions faithfully (as we know you
have) your halter will fit you perfectly—
not too taut; not too loose. Does center
marking thread in skirt hang straight?
Seam lines? Fine! Are all gathers equally
distributed? If not, adjust them.
Stitch basted belt to halter along edge
of belt (A). Be careful not to stitch into
belt facing. Then stitch basted belt to skirt
along edge of belt without stitching into
facing (B). Turn under seam allowance
on both edges of belt facing and pin in
place (C). Slip-stitch over halter and skirt
seams (D). Finish buttonhole as on page
39. Press belt and sew on button.
Finishing touches. Hem skirt, and fin-
ish seams following instructions on
page 39. Remove all bastings, and press on
wrong side without crushing gathers. You
did it! Isn’t it wonderful? And think of all
the money you saved! Why not plan to
make it in another print, another fabric?


The late
day, short sheath
res
fHE perfect dress for informal evenings is the slim, supple sheath,
" photographed here in satin with a fur stole. Change the accessories .. .
and it’ll have another smart look. You’ll learn to handle fabric with nap.
When completed, you’ll know how to fit a bodice and face a square neckline.
It should take about 10 hours to make. Vogue “Easy-to-Make” Pattern No.
7101, sizes 12 to 20 (30 to 38); also cut in Junior sizes, No. 3385, sizes 9
to 15 (29 1 /4 to 33). Price, 60 cents. Yardages are on the pattern envelope.


THIS SHEATH DRESS
IS EASY TO MAKE
You need eight items besides your sewing equipment. (See
pages 4 and 5 for Sewing Equipment.) These are: 1. Your
fabric (more about fabric in the last paragraph on this page),
2. Two spools of matching silk or mercerized cotton thread f one
for your machine, one for hand sewing), 3. A spool of match-
ing buttonhole twist for making belt eyelets, 4. A contrasting
thread for basting, 5. A 12" dress placket zipper, 6. 1% yards
of 1" belting for belt interfacing, 7. A buckle, 8. A package of
matching ribbon seam binding. You need all seven pieces of
the pattern, as shown here.
Study the tissue pattern pieces and the Picture Diagram
on the Instruction Sheet enclosed with your pattern to
acquaint yourself with what the pieces are, what the various
notches and perforations mean. The edges marked with large
OO’s indicate that this is the edge to be placed on the fold of
the fabric. Notches indicate points to be matched. Small o per-
forations inside the pattern indicate dart seamlines. And the
small o perforations %" from the edges are your seamlines.
You realize, of course, that your pattern is only half a dress—
the right half. The whole comes into being in the cutting.
(We’re sorry if we sound pedantic, but one young thing wrote
us, wailing that only half the pattern was in the envelope and
please, would we airmail her the other half!)
About fabrics. We suggest a 39" rayon or silk satin (per-
haps in navy blue or charcoal grey) because satin, when
used sparingly as in this sheath, has an “after-five” look. If,
however, you’re shy about satin, make it in a faille crepe or—
wonderful idea!—a grey flannel. And if after-five clothes don’t
fit into your scheme of life, make it a sun sheath of linen, pique
or Shantung. For all the fabric possibilities, consult the back
of your pattern envelope.


THE SHEATH DRESS
Check length. You’ve bought the right
size (see pages 2 and 3). Check length
before cutting. Here’s how. Pin in all darts
on pattern. Pin together at shoulders and
waistline. Then hold pattern up against you
(A) or check against a similar style dress
that is the right length. If pattern is too
long, shorten at one or all of these points:
above waistline, below hipline, at hem. To
shorten at waistline and hipline, take a hori-
zontal tuck across the pattern. To shorten
at hem, trim evenly at bottom (Al). If pat-
tern is too short, make adjustments at same
points by cutting pattern and pinning in an
inset of paper (A 2). Unpin shoulders, waist-
line and darts, smooth out pattern.
Pinning, cutting. First, press fabric; straighten ends by pull-
ing a thread and cutting along line. Then fold fabric lengthwise,
satin side inside; pin selvages and ends together. Place skirt front,
skirt back and belt on folded fabric as shown on cutting chart. Pin
skirt pieces (B), starting at fold, through double thickness. Don’t lift
fabric when pinning. Pin belt to one layer only. Then cut (C), keep-
ing fabric flat. Use the middle of the blades of your shears, sliding
them along as you cut, following pattern. Snip tiny notches with the
tip of your scissors (D). Don’t unpin tissues. Unfold balance of fab-
ric. Spread out, satin side up. Place bodice front, back and facings
on fabric for position. (See cutting chart. Left half of pattern pieces
are shown by dotted lines.) Remove pattern pieces. Fold fabric
lengthwise by turning the selvage nearest you over the fabric, satin
sides on the inside. Make fold the width of bodice back from center-
line to underarm. Be sure fold-line is parallel with selvage. Pin back
to folded fabric, center-line along fold-line, and cut (don’t unpin).
Then pin left-back facing and right-front facing to satin side of re-
maining unfolded fabric, allowing %" additional fabric for joining
at center front and center back. (We “piece” facings to save fabric.)
Cut facings, and unpin tissues. Fold balance of fabric lengthwise,
bringing selvage farthest from you over towar<l you, satin side on
the inside. Fold to width of bodice front from center front to under-
arm at dart point. Pin center-line on fold-line. Pin and cut bodice
front (don’t unpin pattern). Now reverse facing pieces, pin and cut
as shown on cutting chart, allowing %" additional fabric at centers;
unpin. To make marking easier, pin all facing pieces (right sides
together) to pattern.


How to mark. At your right, you see
all your pattern pieces, cut out and
ready for tailor tacking ... your bodice
front and back, your bodice facings, your
belt, your skirt front and back. Notice that
the fabric extends beyond the pattern at
center front and center back on your fac-
ings (D) and (E). That’s as it should be, as
seam allowance is needed to join your fac-
ings at center front and center back. First,
mark center front and center back of skirt
and bodice with a basting thread as a guide
line (A). Now, let’s tailor tack. With a soft,
clinging cotton thread, doubled, take two
loose stitches through each perforation (B).
When perforations are close together, you
can make your tailor tacks with a continu-
ous thread (C). Snip thread between tailor
tacks. Use a different colour of thread for
each type of perforation. Unpin pattern
(D), (E), (F), unfolding the fabric gently
and clipping the tailors’ tacks through the
center (G). There!—you have tiny tufts of
coloured thread to show you which perfora-
tion to match with which. So your tailors’
tacks don’t look quite so neat and handsome
as these? Don’t worry. These are an artist’s
conception of how tailors’ tacks should look.
Had we photographed them, ours would
probably have been droopier than yours!
Mow to baste darts. Crease fold of
darts on bodice back (H), matching
tailors’ tacks. Pin and baste, tapering to
nothing at dart point. Baste toward point.
Crease, pin and baste underarm darts on
bodice front (J) and waistline darts on
bodice front (K). Baste bodice front and
back together at side seams, matching
notches and tailors’ tacks (L). Keep under-
arm darts turned down as you baste. Leave
the left side open below the notch for your
zipper placket.


THE SHEATH DRESS
SKIRT DARTS AND SEAMS. On skirt
front, crease, pin and baste the two
darts on each side, matching tailors’ tacks
(A). Baste toward dart points. Keep the
last few stitches almost parallel to the fold.
Then, on skirt back, baste the two darts
on each side in the same way (B). Any
minute, now, it’s going to look like a
dress—believe it or not!
Baste skirt back and skirt front to-
gether, matching notches and tailors’ tacks
along seamlines (C). Leave seam open
on left side from notch upward for your
zipper placket. So you’ll know exactly
how it’s going to look when finished (in
the not-too-distant future) —why not turn
up hem, pin or baste it with long stitches
for your basted fitting.
Baste skirt to bodice. Turn under
the %" seam allowance at top of skirt.
Press lightly. Pin it over bodice, right
sides out, matching center marking lines,
side seams and notches. Pin these points
first. Then place more pins in between so
they are about 1" apart. Baste with fairly
fine stitches (D). Keep skirt and bodice
darts turned toward center back and front.
Baste shoulder seams together on seamline
%" from edge, matching notches. Now
you are ready for your basted fitting.


hasted fitting. Slip into your basted
” dress carefully. It should be right
side out. Turn in seam allowance at side
opening and pin together. Put on a belt
or tie a tape measure around your waist.
Looks pretty good, doesn’t it? Don’t
worry if the neckline seems a little higher
than you'd expected. Remember, it will be
9s” deeper when your facing is attached.
How about your underarm darts? Do they
point to the fullest part of bust? If not,
rip and re-baste them; try on again. Do
center front and center back marking
thread lines hang straight? Side seams?
They must. Are hips and waistline snug
enough? If not, re-baste, taking in at side
seams; try on again.
Stitch on machine. First, stitch un-
derarm, bodice and skirt darts, after
ripping basted side and waistline seams
enough to allow you to do so. Stitch to-
ward the points and keep the last few
stitches parallel to folds (A). Remove
bastings. Press darts over tailors’ cushion,
pressing toward dart points. Press under-
arm darts downward toward waistline.
Press skirt and bodice darts toward center
front and back (B). Re-baste and stitch
bodice side seams, after ripping basted
waistline seam at sides; then stitch skirt
side seams (C). Remove bastings. Press
side seams open (D) over regular ironing
board. Re-baste waistline seam. Stitch at
edge (E). Press waistline seam down,
edges together (F).


THE SHEATH DRESS
Facing it. In order to make this very
easy, very simple, we go through every
tiny step with you. First, pin, baste and
stitch your two front facings together
along the center seamlines, satin sides to-
gether on the inside (A). Join back facings
in same way. Pin, baste and stitch back
facing to front facing at underarms, match-
ing notches (B). Remove bastings, trim
and press these seams open (C).
Rip shoulder bastings on dress. Pin
and baste front and back facings to the
outside of front and back of bodice, satin
sides together, along neckline and armhole
seam lines, matching notches. Stop 11/}"I 1 /}"
from shoulder on each seam. Stitch as
basted (D) and trim seams. Snip seams
at armhole curve (E) and cut to within a
few threads at the four neckline corners.
Turn facing to inside (F) and baste
edges together at neckline and armhole to
keep the finished seam exactly on the edge.
This is the way your facing will look on
the inside (G).
Baste and stitch shoulder seams of
bodice only (H). Press these seams open
with the point of your iron (J).
Now, baste and stitch shoulder seams
of facing (K). Press these seams open with
tip of iron (L). Not much room to work
in, is there? Turn in seam allowances
which are open at neck and armhole (M).
Pin carefully and slip-stitch (See Sewing
Dictionary, pages 7-15) according to en-
larged detail (Ml).
Turn in and edge-stitch free edges of
facing (N), snipping corners to small o’s.
Tack at seams on wrong side.
Press facing away from edges (0) so
there’s no danger of the facing creeping
over and showing on the outside, remov-
ing bastings just before you press an edge
so they will not mark the satin. It wasn’t
hard at all, was it? And just think what
you did!


ZirPER placket. Cut a straight strip of
satin 1 Y>" wide by 14" long for placket
facing. Pin, baste and stitch facing to
front edge of placket, satin sides together,
•is" from edge (A). Trim seam, turn fac-
ing inside and baste V 2" from edge (B).
Turn under back edge of placket y%' out-
side of seamline. Press lightly. Pin over
zipper tape as near metal as possible, keep-
ing zipper closed and pull-tab at top of
placket. Baste and stitch with zipper foot
attachment (C). Pin front edge over to
meet seamline on back. Pin, baste and
stitch to tape y<£’ from edge and across
ends (D). Remove bastings.
Belt. Have a belt made or make your
own. Pin belting to wrong side of belt
between tailor-tacked fold-lines. Pin from
fabric side. Trim to fit point perforations
(E). Turn in %" on long edges and pin.
Then fold fabric over belting, pin so edges
meet. Trim, turn in and pin at point.
Slip-stitch (F). Stitch edges of belt (G).
Press. Pierce near square end for tongue
of buckle. Adjust buckle, turn end inside
and hem (H). Pierce and work eyelets
(J). (See Sewing Dictionary pages 7-15.)
Hem. Slip into dress and wear shoes
with the height of heels you expect
to wear with your dress. Wear your belt.
Stand erect with weight on both feet.
Make sure center lines and side seams
hang straight. Ask someone to mark the
hemline with pins, measuring upward
from the floor (K). Turn hem, pin and
baste close to fold (L) so it will be easier
to handle raw edge. Even up raw edge if
necessary. Pin seam binding to raw edge
and stitch on machine (M). Blind hem
binding to dress (N). (See Sewing
Dictionary, pages 7-15.)
Finishing touches. Remove all bast-
ing threads. Overcast seams (see Sew-
ing Dictionary, pages 7-15). Press lightly
on wrong side. Isn’t it wonderful? We
hope you have a special date soon —so
you can surprise everyone by announc-
ing, “Why thank you! I made it myself!”


MAKE IT MANY TIMES
In many fabrics. Wisely, Chinese women repeat a style in a gamut of fab-
rics. Why shouldn’t you, once you find a fashion that’s becoming? The idea
offers a double economy: A saving in money and a saving in time, for having
once made it, you can whiz through the variation. On these pages we show
the sheath, No. 7101, in three fabrics ... in flannel, in linen, and in corduroy.
We show you only how to cut them, for the putting-together is exactly the
same as on Pages 44-51. Be sure flannel has been shrunk before you cut.
In 54" flannel. Place all pattern pieces on right
side of unfolded, pressed fabric, according to
the cutting chart above, to make sure they’ll fit. Do
they? Then remove all pieces. Pin and cut belt
first. Then turn selvage edge nearest you over the
fabric, right sides together on the inside, making
a fold only as wide as the widest part of your
skirt front. Pin center front on fold. Cut skirt
front. Now fold other side of fabric to width of
widest part of skirt back. Pin center back on fold.
Cut skirt back. Pin and cut bodice back and bodice
front in same way (you did it on Page 46), first
cutting bodice back, then front, then bodice fac-
ings. Note: The facings can be cut on a fold this
time and so do not need the extra %" fabric allow-
ance at centers.


| n 35" linen, pique, or a cotton with body (a
■ denim or sailcloth, perhaps). Fold fabric
lengthwise (see cutting chart below), pin and cut
skirt front, skirt back, and belt, following instruc-
tions on Page 46. Unfold balance of fabric; place
bodice front, bodice back, and facings on the
fabric to see if they fit. Although the cutting pro-
cedure for these pieces is the same as that on
Page 46, the arrangement of pattern pieces is not.
That’s because each Vogue cutting layout is care-
fully planned to save you fabric. Follow cutting
instructions on Page 46, please, remembering to
allow %" extra fabric for piecing center front
and center back of bodice facings.
In 35" corduroy —for a cool-weather country
dinner dress —or to be coupled as a jumper,
with your cashmeres and shirts. Please follow
cutting chart below (35" linen). Handling cordu-
roy is the same as the other fabrics, but be careful
when you press. When working with corduroy,
press on wrong side with a steam iron over
Turkish towelling. (You will find more about
pressing on Page 6.)


ropped, cutaway bolero
One of the most versatile of the versatile separates
is the bolero. We made it in black velveteen. Teamed
with a wide or narrow skirt, it adds up to a smart suit. In
the evening, it transforms a bare sheath into a covered-up
jacket-dress. It should take about 7 hours to complete.
After you have made it, you will add lining a jacket to the
edge and setting-in a sleeve to your sewing talents. Vogue
Pattern No. 7259 in sizes 12 to 20 (30 to 38). Price, 50
cents. Yardage requirements are on the pattern envelope.


YOU LEARN A LOT
MAKING A LITTLE BOLERO
wou need only four things besides your sewing equipment
* (pages 4 and 5) and a desire to dress better for less. These
four are: 1. Your fabric, 2. Your lining fabric, 3. Two spools
of matching mercerized cotton thread (one for hand sewing,
one for machine sewing), 4. Bright, contrasting threads for
basting and tailor tacking (any in your sewing box will do).
You need only the top three pieces of pattern shown at left for
this version of the bolero. The other pattern pieces shown be-
low are used in making another version, which you learn on
Pages 62, 63. To avoid all confusion, keep out only the pieces
marked “Front A and B,” “Back,” and “Sleeve.” Put the others
back in your pattern envelope. Keep out your Instruction Sheet.
Study these three pieces of pattern and the Picture Dia-
gram on your Instruction Sheet. Notice where you trim the
front for this version (View B). Familiarize yourself with what
the perforations and notches mean. 0-0 perforations indicate
that the pattern must be placed on the straight of goods. (Not
sure about “Straight of goods?”—see Sewing Dictionary,
pages 7-15). Notches indicate points to be matched. And the
small perforations %" from the edges are the seamlines.
You know, of course, that your pattern is only half a bolero
(the right half) and that in cutting, you produce the left half.
• bout fabrics. We suggest a 35" black velveteen, lined with
black crepe, because it lends texture interest to any skirt
you may combine with it... the black-and-white checked wool
we suggesrin the next lesson ... or a mat finish wool or rayon.
If black isn’t your best colour, think twice about charcoal grey
or navy—both very good in velveteen. But whatever colour you
decide on, first make sure there’s a complementing wool for
your skirt. And if, for some reason, you’re anti-velveteen, con-
sider all the other effective fabrics, as listed on the back of
your pattern envelope.


THE BOLERO
CUT OFF PART OF BOLERO FRONT pattern (A)
which is not necessary for making this view. (See
Picture Diagram on pattern chart —this line of oo
perforations is marked “cut off for B”. I With a pen-
cil, trace oo cutting line, for a smooth, accurate curve.
(View B seamline perforations are %" inside this
cut-off line. I
Try on pattern. Check fit by trying on over a
blouse. Even though you’ve bought the size pat-
tern corresponding most closely to your measure-
ments (pages 2 and 3), make sure it’s the right length
before cutting into your fabric. If you’re going to use
shoulder pads in your bolero, pin a pad to right
shoulder of your blouse before trying on pattern.
{Note: If you want to make your own shoulder pads,
please see Instruction Sheet enclosed with pattern. I
Pin in darts on back and front pattern pieces, then
pin together at shoulder and side seams without the
sleeve ( B). Slip on carefully. If bolero is too long (re-
member —there’s a %" seam allowance), shorten by
taking a horizontal tuck on back and front above
lower edge (811. If it’s too short, lengthen by cutting
and pinning in an inset of paper at this point (B 2).
Trim front curve to retain lines of pattern. Measure
arm length I this takes a friend I with elbow bent (Cl.
Compare arm length with pattern length (D). If pat-
tern is too long, shorten with tucks above and below
elbow perforations (El. If pattern is too short, cut
pattern and pin in paper inserts for needed length
(Ell at same points. Unpin bolero front and back;
unpin darts; smooth out. If necessary, press your vel-
veteen with a steam iron. Always cover ironing board
with another piece of pile fabric face up, or with a
piece of heavy, laundered, Turkish towelling. (See
page 6 for other ways to press.) Fold fabric length-
wise, with nap inside; pin selvages and ends to-
gether, after straightening ends of fabric by drawing
a thread and cutting along drawn-thread line.
Placing pieces. Your back and sleeves are cut
first on the doubled fabric; your front sections
cut later, after the fabric has been unfolded. In this
way, you cut your left and right back sections and
left and right sleeves in one cutting; you cut your
left and right fronts separately (left front is indicated
by dotted lines on cutting layout). Place pattern
pieces on doubled fabric to make sure they fit. (See
cutting chart at right.) Remove front section.


Pinning and cutting. Pin back and sleeve to
double fabric. Don’t lift fabric when pinning (A).
Fold under the little unwanted corners above elbow
on sleeve pattern. Do not cut them off the pattern as
you will need them for the short sleeve version which
you will make later. Cut back and sleeves, keeping
fabric as flat as possible and use the middle of the
blades of your shears, sliding them along as you
cut ( B). Snip tiny notches with end of scissors (C).
Do not unpin the pattern pieces. Unfold balance of
fabric; pin pattern of front, wrong side up, to right
(velveteen) side of fabric; cut. Then unpin pattern,
reverse it and cut the right half of front as shown on
cutting chart on opposite page. Again unpin tissue.
Tailor tacking. Pin fronts, right sides together,
and re-pin tissue to the two layers of fabric.
Tailor tack all perforations for seamlines and darts
on back, front and sleeves, and hemline on sleeves.
You don’t have to mark straight of goods or the
cut-off line on sleeves. Here’s the way you do it.
With a soft, clinging thread, doubled, take two loose
stitches through each perforation (D), (E), (F).
Use a different colour thread for each type of per-
foration. Unpin pattern, unfold fabric gently, clip-
ping tailors’ tacks through center (G). What do you
have? Little tufts of colored threads on each layer
of fabric to show you which perforations to match
with which! They don’t look as perfect as those in the
sketches? Don’t worry as long as they don’t fall out.
Pinning, cutting the ll nl ng . Press lining fab-
ric if necessary and even off the ends; fold length-
wise, with right sides together on the inside. There
is no good way to tell the right from the wrong side
on a crepe; as this is just the lining, don’t worry
about it. Pin selvages and ends together, after
straightening ends of fabric by drawing a thread and
cutting along line (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-
15). Pin and cut back and sleeve of lining as you did
velveteen back and sleeve. Then unfold fabric; pin
and cut lining fronts as you did velveteen fronts.


THE BOLERO
Basting darts and seams. This is the way to
baste darts. Crease fold of dart, matching tailors’
tacks. Then pin and baste along tailor-tacked line,
tapering to nothing at dart point, always working
toward dart point.
First, baste shoulder darts on both back pieces
(A); then waistline darts on back (B). Baste center-
back seam along seamline from edge,, matching
tailors’ tacks and VVV (C).
You’re done with the back, now for the front.
Baste the two underarm darts on each front of the
bolero (D). Baste front to back at shoulder and side
seams, matching notches and keeping underarm darts
turned down as you baste (E).
Next, your sleeves. Baste the two elbow darts on
each sleeve (F). Baste seams on sleeves along seam-
line (G), keeping elbow darts turned down toward
wrist as you baste, being careful to match notches
at elbow and upper arm.
Now put the sleeve into the armhole. Hold the
sleeve toward you. Match V and VV, also underarm
seams. Match small oo to shoulder (H). Pin these
points first. The sleeve is too full for the armhole so it
must be held in or “eased in” to fit it. Match the small
o’s between points already pinned and pin these too.
Add more pins as necessary to control the fullness.
Never start at the underarm and pin around. Baste
very closely so there will be no puckers from the
fullness when it is finally stitched. The armhole
should have a nice, clean curve when viewed from
the right side. And the sleeve should hang straight.
hasted fitting. If you’re going to use shoulder
” pads, pin them to shoulder and armhole seams
before trying on your bolero. Put on a blouse; then
slip into basted bolero, right-side out. Wear a slim
skirt and turn under sleeve hems to get the general
effect. Is bolero short enough? Remember, there's a
%" seam allowance. Do underarm darts point to
fullest part of bust? If not, rip and re-baste; try on
again. Do center-back seam and side seams hang in
a plumbline? They must.


STITCH AND PRESS DARTS AND SEAMS. Rip the
seams enough to allow you to stitch shoulder,
underarm, waistline and elbow darts. Stitch toward
the points and keep the last few stitches parallel to
folds (A). Remove bastings. Press darts over tailors’
cushion (see page 6 for more about pressing), cov-
ered with a piece of velveteen, pile side up, or Turkish
towelling. Press shoulder and waistline darts to-
ward center back; underarm and elbow darts down-
ward (B). Re-baste ripped seams. Stitch shoulder,
center back (C), side and sleeve seams. Press shoul-
der, center back (D) and side seams open, using a
regulation ironing board and your velveteen or
towelling. Press sleeve seams open on sleeveboard
(E). Stitch armhole seam (F), starting at underarm
and keeping sleeve uppermost so you can watch and
control the fullness. Trim seam (G), not closer than
and snip carefully at underarm if it seems too
tight. Press armhole seam over cushion, press-
ing toward sleeve and shrinking out the ease (H).
Finishing the sleeve. If you’re going to use
shoulder pads, slip on bolero; slip pads under
bolero, adjust and pin from the outside. Then tack
pads to shoulder and armhole seams (J). Slip on
bolero again to check your sleeve length. Turn
sleeve hems up and catch-stitch (see Sewing Dic-
tionary for catch-stitch, pages 7-15) raw edge (K),
press sleeve hems over well-padded sleeveboard
(L). Don’t forget your velveteen or towelling
which should also cover the hem as a press cloth.
Half-way-mark pressing. Press thoroughly,
removing all bastings as you go (M), so bast-
ing threads don’t mark your velveteen. Hang on a
well-padded hanger carefully, making sure no creases
or lines will form while bolero is “drying out.” And
now —we make the lining while the bolero dries out.


THE BOLERO
Making your lining. If you had to make any
adjustments on your bolero in your basted fit-
ting, make the same on your lining. Then baste and
stitch all darts (A) as you did on your bolero, first
making shoulder and waistline darts, then front un-
derarm darts, then elbow darts. Remove bastings and
press darts (B) in same directions as bolero darts.
(Page 59, if you’ve forgotten.) Of course you don’t
need to cover your tailors’ cushion or ironing board
with towelling because your lining is crepe. Baste
and stitch seams (C) in this order: first, center back,
then shoulder and side seams, then sleeve seams. Re-
move all bastings and press lining thoroughly, press-
ing seams open (D) and (E), using sleeveboard for
sleeves and sleeve seams. Do not join sleeves to lining.
Putting in the li nin g . Is your bolero thorough-
ly dry? Then turn sleeves wrong-side out to get
them out of your way. (You put in the sleeve linings
in a minute or so.) Pin lining to bolero (right sides
of velveteen and crepe together on the inside), begin-
ning at center back at neck and lower edge. Then pin
at notches, darts, side, center back and shoulder
seams. Pin between these points, being careful not to
stretch the curved edges (F). Now you can baste.
Stitch on machine (G). Remove bastings and trim
seams to about *4" (H).


Turn lining to inside by pulling the entire bolero
through one armhole (A), pulling nearest sleeve
through first. (Aren’t you glad you’re not wearing
it?) Watch out not to stretch your lining armhole,
and treat the velveteen pile carefully. Baste edges
together all around bolero (B) so lining can’t scoot
over to the outside. Also baste lining to armhole.
Lining the sleeves. With bolero turned wrong-
-1 side out, slip your sleeve linings over your
sleeves, wrong sides together, with seams on the in-
side. Match seams, notches at armholes and tailors’
tacks at shoulder (C). Turn under seam allowance
on sleeve lining and pin over raw armhole seam,
placing pins at angle shown (D) and adjusting ease.
Blind-stitch sleeve lining over armhole lining seam
(E). (See Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15, for blind-
stitch.) Turn under lining at wrist, pin and baste
over hem. Turn bolero right side out and slip on to
make sure lining does not draw. If it draws, un-
baste at wrist and allow a little more lining. When
satisfactory, blind-stitch lining to sleeve hem (F).
Final pressing. Steam press entire bolero, press-
ing from edges inward, so lining won’t creep over,
and removing your edge bastings a few at a time
before you press, so thread will not mark the
velveteen (G). Press sleeve over sleeveboard (H).
Now—even though you’re dying to wear it right
this minute!—hang it on a well-padded hanger to dry
out. In the next lesson you learn to make a slim skirt
especially designed to go with this bolero. But in
the meantime, why not wear it with skirts you already
have—or with a simple, high-necked dress? It’s
much too nice to let hang in your wardrobe, waiting.


Y ou NEED F,VE pattern PIECES; The
" back and sleeve used in making your
velveteen bolero, plus back facing A, C, D,
facing C, and front C. Try on pattern,
making necessary adjustments as you did
on Page 56. Cut off sleeve pattern along
large O’s for short sleeves (A).
Press pique, and even up edges by draw-
ing a thread. Fold fabric crosswise, with
right sides together on the inside (the wales
or ribs of pique are more distinct on the
right side); pin-edges and selvages together.
Place and pin pattern pieces as illustrated
at right (B), allowing %" extra fabric for
piecing back facings at center back. Cut out
pieces and snip all notches as you did on
Page 57. (All pieces will be cut on the
double.) Tailor tack at all perforations (D,
E, F, G) as you did on Page 57.
Cut off facing C on large O’s; then, with
pattern turned upside-down, place on folded
muslin (C); pin and cut interfacing. Tailor
tack interfacing (H).
Basting darts, seams. Pin and baste
waistline and shoulder darts on back as
you did on Page 58. Then make shoulder
dart on front (J) and underarm dart (K).
Snip front shoulder corner nearly to A tai-
lor tack. Pin and baste center-back seam and
shoulder seams, matching tailors’ tacks
and notches. Pin and baste center back of
collar (which is really an extension of front
lapel) matching VV’s. Pin and baste lapel
to back-of-neck seam, matching tailors’
tacks, centers and notches. Handle snipped
corners carefully. Pin and baste side seams
(L). Baste sleeve seams (M). Pin and baste
sleeves into armholes for your basted fitting.
IT AGAIN IN PIQUE
MAKE
This time. No. 7259 in crisp white pique ... with short sleeves
and long lapels. In addition to your pique and threads, you
need % yard of pre-shrunk muslin for interfacing, and a card of
ready-creased bias binding to match.


■lasted fitting. If you’re going to put
shoulder pads in your bolero, pin them
in for the fitting. Slip bolero on, right-
side out, over a dress or blouse. Turn the
collar up to see how shoulder and neck
seams fit. OK? Remember—if you alter
shoulders, alter center-back seam on collar
to conform. Length OK? Then let’s finish it!
Jewing it up. Rip basted seams at neck
** and center-back lapel. Then stitch and
press all darts as you did on Page 59, open-
ing seams when necessary, then re-basting.
Pin and baste muslin interfacing to wrong
side of bolero at front, center back, neck
and shoulders (A). Trim off •%" on inner
edge of interfacing. Also trim off even with
front at neck edge. Re-haste all seams.
Stitch sleeve and collar seams; also center
back, side, shoulder, armhole and neck.
Press all seams open except neck and arm-
hole seams. Press neck seam upward; press
armhole seams together. Then, for a neat,
custom-made inside look, turn under and
stitch all raw edges of seams (B) except
your armhole seams, which you finish with
bias binding (B-l). Turn up sleeve hem and
blind-stitch it to sleeve (C).
Pin, baste and stitch front facings to back
facings at sides (D), having first joined
the little back facings at center back. Press
seams open (D-l). Pin and baste facings
to bolero, right sides of pique together on the
inside, matching seams and notches. Stitch
on machine (E). Trim seam. Turn facing
(F), and baste edges together. Press lightly.
Clip facing to A mark. Then blind-hem col-
lar over back-neck seam (F). Turn over
raw edges of facings and edge-stitch (G).
r inal touches. Pin and blind-stitch fac-
*ing edges to bolero (H). Press bolero
thoroughly. Then tack lapels (J and J-l) to
bolero front at □ marks with French
tacks (see “French Tacks” in Sewing Dic-
tionary, Pages 7-15). If using shoulder
pads, attach them. There—wasn’t it easy—
and isn’t it wonderful?


The
slim, sup
pie
k i rt
Boxy, fitted, or fu11... all your separate tops will combine
with this slim skirt. Team it with your odd jackets to make a
smart suit. Cinch it in with a wide leather belt and wear it with
blouses and sweaters. We made it in checked wool—you can make
it in any firm fabric. Linen or pique for warm weather ... wool
tweed, flannel, or suede-surface woollen for cool weather ... slipper
satin, silk rep, or velveteen for evening. The skirt has soft pleats in
the front that make it easy to wear; a slim, flat back. It should take
about 6 hours to make. Vogue Skirt Pattern No. 7436. “Easy-to-
Make.” Designed in sizes 24 to 32 waist measure. (Also cut in Jun-
ior sizes, No. 3427 in sizes 24 to 28 waist measure.) Price, 40 cents.
See the back of the pattern envelope for the yardage requirements.


A SLIM SKI RT—F U L L OF
SEWING POINTERS
Y° u need seven things besides your Sewing Equipment
■ (see pages 4 and 5 for Sewing Equipment). These seven
are: 1. Your checked, wool fabric, 2. A 7" skirt zipper, 3. A
button, 4. Two spools of matching mercerized cotton or silk
thread (one for your machine, one for hand sewing), 5. A
spool of buttonhole twist, 6. Several spools of different colour
thread for basting and tailor tacking, 7. A package of matching
ribbon seam binding. There are only two pattern pieces (your
skirt and your belt) and you need both of them.
QTUDY THESE pattern pieces and the Picture Diagram
enclosed with your pattern, so you’ll know what the various
perforations mean. It’s easy to see—with the arrows from
the “pleat” small o’s to the “meet” large o’s—how to make
your front pleats. Notice that there is a hip dart on each side
and a dart each side of center back. The □ perforation on
the skirt indicates the back vent point.
Mam
our fabric. We suggest a 54" woollen (most woollens
" are 54") in a small check to go with the bolero you have
already made and the jersey blouse you will make in the next
lesson. Naturally, if you don’t like checks, an unpatterned
woollen—with or without nap—will do.
| s fabric shrunk? Many woollens today are preshrunk.
® When buying yours, ask if it is. If not, your tailor can
shrink it for you. Or you can do it yourself. Here’s how. On
the day before you plan to use it, snip the selvages; wet a sheet
and place on a flat surface. Lay your woollen face down over
the sheet; roll them together and leave overnight. The next
day, press dry, pressing on the wrong side of your fabric. Press
with the grain (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15) of fabric.
Press lightly, patting with hand to hold steam in the fibres.


THE SUM SKIRT
Check pattern length. You have, of
course, bought the size corresponding
most closely to your waist and hip measure-
ments (pages 2 and 3). However, make sure
it’s going to fit before touching scissors to
fabric. Smooth out skirt pattern. Pin in pleats
and darts. Don’t forget there is a 3" hem allow-
ance. Hold this piece up to you (A) or, if you
prefer, lay the pattern on a skirt that is the
right length. Remember that a slim skirt like
this should be longer than a full one. If pattern
is too long, shorten it by pinning a crosswise
tuck below the hipline. (Al). If too short,
lengthen at the same place by cutting pattern
and pinning in a tissue underlay of the proper
width (A 2). Check belt size, remembering it
must lap over for buttoning. Add to it or sub-
tract as necessary. Unpin; smooth pattern.
PLACING. PINNING AND CUTTING. First,
turn under the %" seam allowance on
center front of skirt pattern because you’ll cut
your skirt on a fold, cutting the entire skirt in
one piece. (Hooray!—fewer seams!) Then,
press out any wrinkles in your fabric. Even up
raw edges by trimming along a line of checks.
Place your fabric on table, rug, or what-
ever you cut on, with right side of fabric up.
Look at your cutting chart (B). Then fold
fabric, right side on the inside, making a fold
only as wide as skirt pattern at hemline, crease
must be at the center of a line of checks. Pin
matching checks at ends of fabric. Pin skirt
pattern to folded fabric, with center-front seam-
line on the fold. Pin belt on remaining single
layer of fabric (B). Don’t lift the fabric when
pinning (C). Work from the fold toward the
edges, smoothing pattern with your hands as
you pin. Keep fabric flat when cutting and
use the middle of the blades of your shears
(D), sliding them along as you cut. Snip your
notches with the tip of your scissors (E),
avoiding too-deep cuts. Keep your pattern
pinned to your fabric so you can mark all the
perforations. Cut a lengthwise strip of your
fabric IVz" wide and 8" long for the placket
facing. There—did you ever see anything easier
to cut out?
Mark the center-front fold of skirt with
a basting thread (F), and you’re ready to
start tailor tacking.


Marking. Tailor tack all perforations
on skirt and belt. Use a soft, clinging
cotton thread, doubled. Take two loose
stitches through each perforation (A) ; on
the perforations which are close together,
you can make your tacks with one continu-
ous thread (B). Use one colour of thread for
your small o pleat perforations, another col-
our for the large o’s; a different colour for
your hip, back darts and seamlines; still an-
other for your □ vent mark; your button
and buttonhole marks. Snip any threads be-
tween perforations to release pattern (B).
Unpin pattern, unfolding the fabric gently,
and clip tailors’ tacks through the center (C).
Note: A cardinal rule in sewing is to match
tailors’ tacks. However, when working with
checks, you match checks rather than tailors’
tacks, if there must be a choice between the
two. Since you have only one seamline—the
one in back —there should be no trouble
matching checks.
Baste carefully. All darts are im-
portant for a good fit because, like
seams, they help shape the fabric to fit your
curves. The hip darts in this particular skirt
are very important and may have to be
altered when you have your basted fitting.
Why? Well, if you’re practically hipless
(lucky you!), you’ll have to carry your hip
darts down farther. If you’re inclined toward
a tummy, your hip darts will have to be
made skimpier. However, for the time being,
baste the hip and back darts as marked . . .
you can pin any alterations during your
basted fitting, which will come later.
The way to make a perfect dart is to
crease a fold with your fingers on the wrong
side of fabric, matching the tailors’ tacks.
Then pin and baste on the marks (always
pin before basting), tapering to nothing at
dart point. Baste toward the point of the
dart (D).
Baste back seam from V downward (your
zipper goes in from V upward) to □ mark
(E); then across the top of the extension
to small o —no farther!


THE SLIM SKIRT
Back and vent. The artist has drawn
the checks much larger than the actual
fabric, so that you can see the details more
clearly. We will stitch seam and put in
zipper before your basted fitting as adjust-
ments can be made on darts and pleats.
Stitch basted back seam and across vent
extension to corner mark (A). Press back
seam open (B), snipping left side at corner
to □ mark. Crease right side of vent on
fold-line below Q] (B). Pin, baste and
stitch ribbon seam binding to left side
of vent extension (C). Turn under seam
allowance on left back of vent extension
(D); press. The raw edge of right back
will be finished later. Catch-stitch top of
vent to skirt (D). (See Sewing Dictionary,
pages 7-15.) Press vent (E).
Pinning IN PLEATS. Work on your iron-
ing board when pinning in pleats. It’s
easier. Work with your skirt turned right-
side out. Your tailors’ tacks (F) show you
the points to be matched. Bring the small o
pleat marks over to the large 0 meet
marks. Keep the three pleats on the right
side facing toward the right hip, the three
on the left, facing toward the left hip.
Crease pleats with fingers; pin (G) and
baste (H) near creases in a straight line.
Baste across top of pleats to keep them in
place (J).
Your placket. Remember the iy 2 " by
8" strip you cut? That’s the facing for
your zipper placket. Got it? Then pin,
baste, and stitch it to the right edge of the
back opening, right sides of fabric together
-on the inside (K). Trim seam. Turn the
facing to the inside (L). Press it (M).
Baste it y 2" from edge (N) . Now we go to
the left edge of the back opening. Turn
under this left edge outside of the
seamline and pin it over the zipper tape as
near to the metal as possible, keeping the
zipper closed, with top of pull-tab be-
low seamline at top of skirt. Baste and
stitch with single-foot attachment (N),
being careful not to stretch skirt. Now, go
back to the right edge. Pin faced right edge
to meet seamline on left. Baste and stitch
y/' from edge and across lower end (0).


Your belt. Fold belt along foldline, right
side of fabric on the inside. Pin, baste
and stitch ends and continue to center back
small o marks—no farther. Trim seam and
snip corners. Then turn to right side (B),
working out corners with a pin, so they are
nice and square. Press (C). Turn under
seam allowance on one side of the belt and
pin over seamline of skirt, working on right
sides of fabric, matching centers, V-VV-
small o’s. Baste belt to skirt (D) —for your
basted fittings.
Basted fitting. Slip into skirt, right-side
out (E). Pin belt over as it will be when
button is attached. Pin up hem, if you like,
for a general effect. Wear the height of heels
you expect to wear with your skirt. Wear a
girdle, if you intend to wear one with this
skirt. Stand erect, with your weight equally
divided on both feet. Does the center-front
basting line hang straight? Back seamline?
Are hip darts smooth? If too snug, alter
darts, making them narrower. If not snug
enough, make them deeper. Make sure alter-
ations are the same on both sides.
Stitching it up. First, stitch hip and
back darts, after ripping belt bastings
enough to allow you to do so. Stitch toward
dart points and keep the last few stitches
parallel to fold (F). Tie threads (see Sewing
Dictionary, pages 7-15). Remove bastings.
Press darts over tailors’ cushion (see pages
4 and 5), pressing toward dart points. Press
hip darts toward back; press back darts
toward hip (G). Stitch belt to skirt, being
careful not to stitch through inside part
of belt (H). Remove pleat bastings at
waistline and belt bastings. Turn under
seam allowance on inside of belt, then pin
and hem by hand over inside seam (J).
Press the belt from wrong side. You’re
almost through—isn’t it wonderful?


THE SLIM SKIRT
Button, buttonhole. The next step is
handwork, so why not get the ball game
or symphony, or your favorite soap opera
on the radio? This time, we’re going to
make a handworked buttonhole using but-
tonhole twist. First, determine length of
buttonhole to be cut. (The length of your
buttonhole is the diameter of your button.)
Cut the slit with buttonhole scissors (see
Sewing Equipment, pages 4 and 5) from □
buttonhole mark away from the end. First
overcast the slit (AI); then work button-
hole stitch, shown here in magnified detail
(A 1 and A 2). Notice the position in which
you hold the work (A), and the position of
the needle in relation to the thread (AI).
Keep each purl exactly on the edge of the
slit, and the depth of the stitches even. Work
stitches fan-wise at end (A 2), where there
will be strain. Work bar at other end.
Mark position of button through fin-
ished buttonhole, with proper lap, with cen-
ter of button at outer end of buttonhole.
Begin on right side of fabric. Sew over pin
(B) so you can keep stitches loose enough
to form shank. Remove pin and wind thread
around stitches (Bl) under button. Fasten
off on wrong side. You can see how the fin-
ished belt looks (C).
Hemming it. This requires a friend. Ask
her (or him, if your husband’s the nice,
cooperative type) to mark the hemline with
pins, measuring upward from the floor (D),
opening vent to mark the left side (Dl).
Turn hem, pin, and baste close to the fold-
ed edge so it will be easier to handle the raw
edge (E). If necessary, even up the raw edge.
Pin and baste seam binding to raw edge,
stitch on machine (F). Remove bastings.
Pin hem to skirt, with pins in position
shown here (G). Hem the binding to skirt
iH), taking care not to tighten stitches.


Finishing the vent. Lift left vent (to
which you’ve already attached ribbon
seam binding) so you can press right vent
hem (A). Press lightly, on the wrong side, of
course. Then pin, baste, and stitch ribbon
seam binding to the edge of the right vent
hem (B). Remove bastings. Pin the seam
binding of the vent hem to skirt (C), over-
lapping the hem at the lower edge. Blind-
hem (C). Look up blind-hem in the Sewing
Dictionary (pages 7-15) if you are not sure
how to do it. Slip-stitch (you can find out
how to do this too, in the Sewing Diction-
ary) the left end of hem (D). It’s the side
that laps under. The vent is now complete
on both sides. Easy—wasn’t it? We’ve
shown each step in detail so you’ll know
exactly what to do.
Finishing touches. Overcast (see “Over-
cast” in Sewing Dictionary, Pages 7-
15) both sides of the center-back seam.
Give the skirt a final pressing on wrong side,
pressing vent toward the right back (E).
In pressing the pleats, run point of iron up
between the folds (F), but don’t press the
pleats flat, for they’re to be soft and released.
Now—let your skirt dry thoroughly.
Then slip into a blouse, your brand new
skirt and your velveteen bolero. Did you
ever think (before you took up sewing with
Vogue Patterns) that you could turn out a
costume like this?


Bow-tied,
p-sleeve blou
The short-sleeve blouse that has soft neckline in-
terest is a wonderful suit blouse ... you can also
wear it with any skirt in your wardrobe. We made it in
wool jersey (which will teach you how to handle knitted
fabric). You can make it in practically any fabric you
wish ... make it in black velveteen or pastel slipper satin
for evening ... make it in linen, pique, or chambray for
warm weather in chalk-white, black, or a bright, vibrant
colour. For cool weather you can also make the blouse
in sheer wool or challis. The blouse buttons all the way
down the back (it also has a Peter Pan collar version).
It should take a beginner about 9 hours to make. Vogue
blouse Pattern No. 7347. “Easy-to-Make.” Designed in
sizes 12 to 20 (30 to 38), 40. Price, 40 cents. The yard-
age requirements are on the back of the pattern envelope.


VOGUE'S LITTLE BLOUSE
TAKES LITTLE EXPERIENCE
You need, in addition to your Sewing Equipment (seepages
4 and 5 for Sewing Equipment), these seven things:
1. Your length of jersey, 2. Two spools of matching silk thread
(one for your machine, one for hand sewing), 3. One spool of
matching buttonhole twist, 4. Bright, contrasting thread for
basting and tailor tacking (any you have in your sewing box
will do), 5. Five buttons, about in diameter, 6. A card of
No. 00 snap fasteners, 7. Shoulder pads (if you’re going to
wear them) or the makings for them (see back of pattern en-
velope). You need all the pattern pieces for this view except
the collar. They are: Front, back, back facings, band, tie.
First, study the pattern pieces and their markings, check-
ing with the Picture Diagram enclosed with your pattern.
A few minutes spent studying your pattern now can save a lot
of time later, for you won’t have to stop and wonder, “Now
should this go this way or ... ?”
Notice in particular the edges marked “Straight of Goods.”
These edges must be placed on a lengthwise rib of the jersey.
Then the center front of your blouse (and the neckband too)
has a large 00. See it? That means this edge must be placed
on a lengthwise fold of the jersey. The small oo’s on the back
and front are where your waistline is—we hope. (If not, we
show you how to alter it on the next page.) The n’s march-
ing down the center back are for buttonholes and buttons. The
A’s on the blouse front are where you slash the darts. The V’s
and VV’s are to be matched. And the little o’s %" from the
edges are, of course, your seamlines.
Aiout fabrics. We suggest a 54" wool jersey because it’s
so wearable. But if you can’t wear wool, select any of the
fabrics listed on the back of the pattern envelope and follow
instructions on the Cutting Chart enclosed with your pattern
for the width of fabric you have bought. All putting-together
steps are the same for all fabric widths.


THE BOW-TIED BLOUSE
Check pattern length. Of course, you bought the
size pattern corresponding most closely to your
measurements (see pages 2 and 3), but check the size
before cutting out your blouse. Pin in the front dart on
the small o perforations; pin back and front together at
the shoulder. If you’re going to wear shoulder pads, pin
one to your right-shoulder lingerie strap. (If you want to
make your own pads, see Instruction Sheet with pattern.)
Slip on the pattern (A). If small waistline oo’s are below
your waistline, shorten by pinning a tuck across the pat-
tern above waistline (Al). If oo’s are above your waist-
line, lengthen by cutting the pattern and pinning in an
insert of paper (A 2). Unpin pattern; smooth it out.
Pinning, cutting. Since jersey is knit as a tube, cut
on one fold to open up material; press out the other
fold and any wrinkles, working on the wrong side. Jersey
has no selvage but we’ll call the edges that you’ve just
cut our “selvages” for ease in laying out the pattern. Place
jersey right side up on cutting area. Keep it flat and
smooth. If ends are uneven, mark a straight line with
chalk and yardstick; cut on chalk line.
Study cutting chart (B) to see how pieces go. Re-
member, only the right half of the pattern is given, the
other half is shown by dotted lines. Lift “selvage” nearest
you; fold it over, with right side on the inside, making
a fold only as wide as widest part of blouse front. Fold
should be on a single rib of the jersey. Keep fold parallel
to top “selvage.” Place pattern front on this folded fabric
with large 00 edge on fold. Pin here first, then other
edges. Don’t lift fabric when you pin (C). Cut, using
middle of your shears (D). Don’t unpin pattern. Open
balance of material; smooth it out. Place wrong side of
back pattern piece on single thickness of jersey above the
hole left by your blouse front. T 'in and cut. (This will be
left half of the back.) Unpin pattern. Surprised? Then
place pattern right side up on single thickness of jersey;
pin and cut. (This is right half of back. Catching on?)
Unpin pattern; then pin the two backs together, right
sides of jersey together on the inside, and pin pattern to
them, so you can cut notches and mark.
Cut back facings in same way, cutting first one and
then the other; unpinning the pattern, pinning the fac-
ings together and pinning the pattern to them. Cut tie
on single thickness of material. Then make a crosswise
fold on the remaining jersey, keeping the weave even,
right side of fabric on the inside. Pin pattern for neck-
band on this double fabric; cut. Save your scraps as later
you need to cut buttonhole binding. Snip all notches with
tips of scissors, being careful not to cut deeply (E).
Run a basting thread along center front of blouse (F)
and neckband. Now you are ready to start marking.


Marking. You can see at the right all your pieces
carefully cut out (A through F). If you had to
shorten or lengthen the pattern, you’ll have to respace
your button and buttonhole □ markings. Keep the top
and bottom ones as they are and divide distance between
into five even spaces, marking the middle three with pins,
keeping them in same vertical line with your Q’s (B).
It will be a good idea to mark your Q’s for buttons
and buttonholes in one colour; your Q’s at front neck
and neckband in another; and the A’s for your front
dart slashes in a nice, bright, contrasting colour for you
have to cut on these A marks. If you altered pattern above
waistline, you may have to shift lowest A so slash will
still be centered between small o dart perforations. Seam-
lines and darts can be done in the same colour. Here’s how
to make tailors’ tacks: Take two loopy stitches through
each perforation (B). When perforations are close to-
gether, as on darts, you can keep your thread continuous.
Cut the continuous thread between perforations (C) to
remove pattern. Notice that on the tie you only have to
make your tacks through a single layer (D). Unpin pat-
tern (E), unfold the two layers of fabric gently, clipping
the tailors’ tacks through the center (F). The threads
may look perilously loose to you but they’ll stay.
Buttonholes. Run a vertical line of basting stitches
through your buttonhole tailors’-tacks (G) on the
right back. Now run a second line, parallel to the first
and %" away (the diameter of your button) toward the
side. These lines mark the ends of the buttonholes (G).
Run a line of fine stitches from each tailors’ tack to the
other vertical line (G). These little lines will be the centers
of buttonholes. Now you can remove these tailors’ tacks.
Cut a strip of jersey for binding about 2" wide and 2"
longer than necessary to fit over buttonhole markings.
(Cut strip so the long measurement is crosswise.) Place
strip over buttonhole marks, right sides together, so it
extends 1" at each end. Pin (H). Baste on crosswise but-
tonhole markings. Set your machine for 15 stitches per
inch. Stitch on wrong side of blouse (so you can see the
end markings) Vs” on each side of marking line and
across ends (J). Sew slowly, counting the stitches across
ends, so your buttonholes will be even. Remove bastings
and markings. Cut the binding strip midway between
buttonholes (K). To cut buttonholes (L), start at center;
cut midway between stitching. Stop *4" from ends and
clip to within a few threads of stitching at corners (L).
Work binding through slash which you just made (M);
press all seams away from opening (N). Work binding
into small, even welts (see pages 7-15, Sewing Diction-
ary) which meet at center of opening (0). Press. Sew
ends to hold welts securely (N). '


THE BOW-TIED BLOUSE
Basting the darts. First,pin and baste
the back darts above and below waist-
line. matching tailors’ tacks. See how they
are wider at the waistline (this is for fitting)
and should taper off uniformly to the top
and bottom (A, B).
Then slash (slash is just a sewing term
for a careful cutting within your garment)
the front, midway between the dart markings
along A tailors’ tacks, cutting from the side
edge toward the point of dart (C); stop
cutting at the innermost A mark. (Note: If
you have lengthened or shortened your
blouse considerably through this dart, it
might be well not to slash it now in case you
must shift it at the basted fitting. If you
don’t slash now, baste along the seamlines
and slash after the basted fitting.) Pin and
baste the slashed dart edges, matching tai-
lors’ tacks, and stretching the lower edge
of the jersey to match the upper edge (D).
This stretch is automatically adjusted for
you —placed in just the proper spot as you
match the small o tailors’ tacks of the dart.
No guesswork on a perforated Vogue Pat-
tern! Baste toward the point of your darts.
Baste evenly and firmly.
Basting the seams. Pin and baste your
shoulder seams, right sides together,
matching V’s (E). Whenever possible, work
from the neck to the armhole. Then pin and
baste underarm side seams, matching tailors’
tacks and V’s. Baste seams working on a flat
surface, so one piece of fabric won’t stretch
more than the other, and follow your seam-
line tailors’ tacks, which are from the
edge. Keep your slashed dart turned down-
ward as you baste (F).


Basted fitting. If you’re going to wear
shoulder pads, pin them to your lingerie
straps. Slip into blouse (A). Pin the back
opening over as it will be when buttons are
attached. Do front darts point to fullest part
of bust? They should. Do back darts curve
where you curve? If not, re-baste; try on
again. Are shoulder seams smooth? They
should be. Do the tailors’ tacks at neck seem
to be about right? Snip the neck seam a bit,
if you like, to release the strain—but not
between Q marks on front, as this is to be
hemmed.
Stitching darts, seams. Stitch slashed
darts, after ripping side seam basting
enough to allow you to do so. Stitch toward
the point (B) and keep the last few stitches
parallel to the fold. Tie threads (see pages
7-15 in Sewing Dictionary). Stitch back
darts in same way. Press darts (C) over
tailors’ cushion (see pages 4 and 5), press-
ing back darts toward center, slashed darts
downward. Stitch shoulder and underarm
side seams (D); press open (E). If you
want to pink seams, pink and then press
open. Snip underarm seams at curve.
Hem sleeve. Turn in sleeve on tailor-
tacked hemline (F). Turn in %"} pin
and hem to blouse by hand, catching up
only a thread or two of the outside at each
stitch (FI). Do not draw up your thread
tight as you hem. Keep it loose so stitches
will be invisible on the outside.
Neckband. Fold neckband on tailor-
tacked foldline, right sides together.
Pin, baste and stitch ends (G). Don’t forget,
if you enlarged the neck at the fitting, you
must take smaller seams at the ends of the
neckband. Now, trim seams and snip cor-
ners so it will be easier to turn neatly (H).
Turn to right side, using a pin to pull out
the corners neatly (H). Press (J).


THE BOW-TIED BLOUSE
Back facings. Turn over seam allow-
ances on unnotched, long edges of fac-
ings. Pin, baste and stitch (A). Pin and baste
facings to backs, matching VV’s, right sides
of fabric together on the inside. Start at lower
edge, continue up back and then across
neck to center-back small o mark. Stitch (B).
Snip with the tips of your scissors to small o
at end of seam at neck (C). Trim the seam
and remove bastings. Turn the facing to the
inside (D) and press it carefully (E).
Neckband. Baste the raw edge of the fac-
ing to the neckline. With your scissors,
clip seam allowance on front neck to your
□ tailors’ tacks (F). Hem by hand the little
edge between □ tailors’ tacks (G). Pin and
baste one edge of neckband to neck, match-
ing center back-V-[l]’s-small oo at shoulder.
Right sides of fabric are together on the in-
side. Do not catch in the little hemmed edge
at neck front. Try on just to make sure the
neckband fits comfortably. Stitch on machine
(H). Remove bastings. Trim and snip the
seam and press it toward the band (J). Turn
in seam allowance on other edge of band;
pin and hem to neckline by hand (K) making
sure your stitches don’t show on the right
side. Slipstitch (see Sewing Dictionary,
pages 7-15) band edges between □ tailors’
tacks. There will be an opening between the
little hemmed edge and the band for the tie
to slip through. Press again.


Your tii. Fold tie, with right sides to-
gether on the inside. Pin, baste, and
stitch, leaving a small opening at the center
so you can turn it (A). Trim and snip the
seams. Turn it (B) and slip-stitch the open-
ing (C) by taking a stitch first on one side,
then on the other side, of the turned in
edges. Slide needle along as you sew. Do
not remove it at each stitch. Press carefully
(D), making sure seam is straight and cor-
ners square, pulling them out carefully with
a pin.
Finishing touches. Turn under, pin,
baste and stitch W hem on lower edge
of blouse (E). Now finish your buttonholes.
Slash the facing under buttonholes this way.
First pin the two layers together near the
buttonhole, so there will be no slipping.
Make the initial cut from the outside of
blouse at the center of buttonhole opening.
Turn over and finish cutting from wrong
side. Turn in edges and hem against bind-
ing (F). This hemming will hold the little
welts evenly in place. Watch them as you
work. Sew buttons to □ tailors’ tacks on
left back (G). Sew button over pin to keep
thread loose. Remove pin and wind thread
under button to form a shank.
Sew a snap at waistline and also below,
if you wish (H). The socket piece goes on
the left back; sew it through both layers.
On the right back, keep the snap close to the
edge and watch out that your stitches don’t
show through.
Final pressing. Remove all bastings and
tailors’ tacks. Press on wrong side (J).
Slip the tie through the opening between
neckband and front (K). Tie it in a bow
knot over the neckband, crushing up the
band (Kl). Then—if there’s no one home to
show it to, slip it on a hanger—stand back
and admire it—and yourself. Isn’t it won-
derful what you and your little sewing
machine can do?


Starched party dress for a
I i t 11
girl
ml party dress for a little girl with everything she will 10ve...
a full skirt, tiny puffed sleeves ... crisp, starched dotted
Swiss that will stand out. We made it in white dotted Swiss
sprinkled with red dots. In plaid or checked gingham it goes to
school... in silk taffeta it goes to Sunday school. Your first dress
should take about 15 hours to make ... after that it will take even
less time and you will probably want to make several. Vogue
Pattern No. 2588. “Easy-to-Make.” Sizes 2 to 10. Price, 35
cents. The yardage requirements are on the pattern envelope.


Wr •/** .
|r i *
I•i • •
ft A • *
♦ • •
•** * I
. ♦ • •
. • • •
♦ « »
SO EASY ... SHE COULD
ALMOST MAKE IT HERSELF!
You need just six things besides a little girl and your sew-
ing equipment (see pages 4 and 5 for Sewing Equipment).
These six are: 1. Your dotted Swiss, 2. Two spools of match-
ing cotton thread (one for your machine, one for hand sew-
ing), 3. Contrasting thread for basting and tailor tacking,
4. A spool of heavier matching thread for making button-
holes, 5. Five buttons, about Y/' in diameter, 6. Four
No. 00 snaps. You need seven pattern pieces for this
dress. These are: skirt front, skirt back, bodice front, bodice
back, collar, sleeve, sleeveband. Tuck the bertha pieces back in
the envelope, in case you want to make the other styles later.
Study these pattern pieces, along with the Picture Dia-
gram enclosed with your pattern, acquainting yourself
with what the various perforations mean. Notice that both the
skirt front and skirt back, as well as the bodice front, have
large OO’s near the edge. This means that these edges are to
be placed on the fold of the fabric so you can cut the skirt
front, skirt back, and bodice front in one piece each. Notice
that the edge of the bodice back is to be placed on the straight
of goods. Now look at the 0-0 marks on collar and sleeves.
See them? These 0-o’s indicate how the collar and sleeves
are to be placed on the straight of goods. (If not sure
about “Straight of Goods,” see Sewing Dictionary, Pages 7-
15.) The □ mark on skirt back indicates the depth you will
cut for back placket. The Q’s on bodice back are the button
and buttonhole marks. Small o’s indicate darts and
seam allowances. And notches are, of course, to be matched.
About fabrics. We suggest a 35" dotted Swiss because it
makes a perfect party dress for a little girl and because
it’s so easy to work with. However, any 35" or 39" fabric
will work up nicely. For all the fabrics Vogue suggests,
please see the back of your pattern envelope.


LITTLE GIRL'S DRESS
Check pattern size. Pin shoulder seams
of bodice front and back together and
slip it on her (A). The seamline at lower edge
is her waistline. Is it? If bodice is too long,
shorten by pinning a tuck across the pattern
above waistline (Al). If it’s too short, cut
pattern at same places and pin in tissue un-
derlay (A 2). Measure upper arm to make
sure sleeveband pattern is large enough. Add
at ends if necessary. Pin bodice over skirt
in front, holding in skirt fullness with little
pleats. The skirt’s full, so your only worry
is about the length. If it’s too long, just plan
to make a good, deep, double hem, so you
can let it out as she shoots up. If it’s too
short, pin on a piece of tissue at the bottom.
PLACING. PINNING PATTERN. Unpinpat-
tern, smooth it out. Press out any
wrinkles in your fabric; even up ends by
trimming on a drawn-thread line (see Sew-
ing Dictionary, pages 7-15). Fold fab-
ric lengthwise, right side inside. Pin ends
and selvages together. Place fabric on cut-
ting table. Place pattern pieces on folded
fabric, following cutting chart (B). Pin
along folds first, then other areas. Don’t lift
material when you pin (C). When placing
collar and sleeve patterns on the fabric,
measure from selvage to each straight-of-
goods large 0. Pin these points first, then
the edges.
CUTTING AND MARKING CENTERS. Cut
out all the pieces indicated on the cut-
ting chart by solid lines. Keep fabric flat
when cutting and use middle of the blades
of your shears (D). Cut the collar twice (for
facings). Unpin pattern from collar you
just cut so you can use it again. Pin it to
fabric (see cutting chart (B), collar out-
lined with broken lines), measuring from
fold to each large 0. Pin and cut. Leave
pattern pinned to these last two collars.
Snip all V and VV notches with the tips of
your scissors (E) so your notches are very
tiny. Save all your scraps for a while as
you’ll need some small pieces later.
Run a basting line along center front and
center back of skirt and along center front
of bodice (F)._


Marking. Notice that we show every
piece of the dress already cut out,
with the pattern piece still attached. The
first collars that you cut are shown with-
out the pattern (A). When you have marked
the second collars (A 1), remove the pattern
and mark the first collar. All the different
steps in tailor tacking are illustrated here.
It’ll be a good idea to use one colour for
your seamlines and darts, then a bright, con-
trasting colour for your button and but-
tonhole marks and still another colour for
your [2 perforation near the center back
of skirt, which indicates the end of your
placket slash.
Note: If you had to shorten or lengthen
the bodice pattern, you’ll have to re-space
your button and buttonhole □ markings at
center back—or else they’ll be out of whack.
Keep the top and bottom ones as they are
and divide distance between into five even
spaces, placing pins as markers for the
middle three. Tailor tack at these pin mark-
ings in the same vertical line with the Q’s
on the pattern (B).
We’ll tailor tack all perforations except
the ones which mark the lace line on the
skirt. (No point in doing those since we
aren’t using lace!) We can also skip the
large 0-0 perforations which mean straight-
of-goods and lay-on-fold (C). Here’s how:
Take two loopy stitches through each per-
foration (B). When perforations are close
together, as on band (D) and top of sleeve
(E), keep your thread continuous, if you
like; then cut the continuous thread between
tacks to remove pattern (E).
Unpin pattern, unfold the layers of fab-
ric gently (F), clipping the tailors’ tacks
through the center (G). Easy, isn’t it?
Don’t worry if your tailors’ tacks look a
little wobbly and not quite so precise as
those drawn here. They’ll do the job for
which they were meant—showing you which
perforation to match with which, so there
are fewer mistakes (everyone makes at least
one small mistake in sewing!).
Now settle down comfortably for some
nice, relaxed basting—which we do on the
next page.


LITTLE GIRL'S DRESS
Basting. Pin and baste (always pin be-
fore basting) the waistline darts on
bodice back (A, Al), basting toward the
dart point. Then pin and baste the waistline
darts on bodice front (B). Then pin and
baste the shoulder seams, matching V’s, and
the side seams, matching V’s (C). Always
match the small o marks at the seamlines.
Pin and baste on them.
Since the skirt is full and needs no fitting,
we’ll just pin, baste, and stitch the side
seams (D), matching V’s, of course. Then
remove bastings; press seams open (E)
and overcast them (F). (See “Overcast” in
Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15.)
Leave your ironing board up. One of the
first rules of successful sewing is “Press as
you go.”
Center-back placket. Slash along cen-
ter back basting thread line of skirt
down to □ □ tailors’ tacks (G). This is
for a placket in the skirt. Now we use some
of those scraps you saved after cutting out
the dress! Cut a lengthwise strip of mate-
rial 2" wide and twice as long as this slash
(Gl). This is for your slash facing. Pin
and baste this long facing strip continu-
ously to the slash, taking up a seam
except at the point of the slash, where
the seam will taper to practically nothing.
Stitch on machine (H). Remove basting;
turn strip out but not over and press seams
toward it (J). Turn under and pin the raw
edge. Pin it to stitching on the inside (K).
Hem it (K) and then press it. Now, on the
right back turn the finished strip to the
inside along the seam and baste the top
(Kl). Press again.


Gather skirt and join to bodice.
Run a line of gathering stitches (using
a 1-o-n-g doubled or stout thread) along
the seamline at top of skirt. Run another
line of stitches above the seamline (A).
Leave threads dangling at one end. Have
good stout knots at both ends.
Turn under the seam allowance on lower
edge of bodice. Press lightly. Pin over skirt
gathers, matching centers, V’s and VV’s
(B). Pin these points first, placing your pins
at same angle as shown at right. Draw up
skirt gathers to fit the bodice. Wind long
threads around pin to secure gathers (B).
Work from back opening toward center
front on each side and place pins as you
adjust the gathers evenly. Baste edge firmly
to keep gathers from slipping.
The sleeves. Pin, baste and stitch sleeve
seams (C) and sleeveband seams (Cl),
matching V’s. (You have already checked to
see that the band fits, remember?) Remove
bastings: press seams open (D, Dl). Over-
cast sleeve seams. Gather bottom of sleeve
between Q and large 0 marks (E).
Turn under seam allowance on one edge
of sleeveband; pin over sleeve edge on the
right side, matching seams-[]-V-large 0,
and adjusting gathers as you go. Baste (F).
Turn inside out and stitch on machine, on
the outside (FI). Remove bastings. Trim
seam and press it. Fold band on tailors’
tacks along center, turn in edge on seamline
tailors’ tacks and pin over the seam inside.
Hem (G). Gather top of sleeve between V
and VV along seamline (H). Pin sleeve into
armhole, matching underarm seams-VV-V-
-small oo at shoulder. Hold sleeve toward
you as you pin these points first. Draw up
gathers and wind around a pin. Adjust
gathers evenly. Put in more pins so they
are %" apart. Baste closely in a nice even
line along the armhole (J).


LITTLE GIRL'S DRESS
Basted fitting. Corral one young lady;
ask her to please stand still for two-
and-a-half minutes; and slip the dress on
her, right-side out. Pin the back together
as it will be when buttons are on (A). Pin
the hem up, if you like. Is waistline OK?
Do armholes look even? If not, rip bast-
ings, adjust, and pin. Doir’t worry if the
neck seems a little high. It’ll be %" lower
when the collar’s attached.
Stitching darts, seams. Stitch bodice
darts as basted, after ripping waistline
bastings enough to allow you to do so. Stitch
toward dart points and keep the last few
stitches parallel to the fold (B). Tie ends of
thread (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15).
Remove bastings; press darts on tailors’
cushion (see Equipment, pages 4 and 5),
pressing toward dart points and pressing
darts toward centers (BI). Stitch bodice
side seams (C). Remove bastings; press
seams open (Cl). Re-baste bodice and
skirt; stitch (D); press seams upward
(Dl). Stitch armhole seams (E). Press
seams toward bodice across top (El).
The collar. Pin and baste collar facings
to collars except at neck. (Right sides of
fabric are together on the inside!) Stitch on
machine (F). Trim the seam. Turn collars
right-side out (FI). Press (F 2). Baste the
faced collars to the outside of the dress at
the neck, matching centers-V and shoul-
ders (G).
Now we go to the back opening. Turn
and stitch edge of each facing, which is the
part of the bodice back and extends from
foldline to edge (H). Turn facings outside
on foldline and baste over collars (J). Again
we use a scrap of material! Cut a strip of
bias (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15)
and baste it to the remainder of the neck
as a facing (J). Stitch. Trim seam. Turn
facings to inside and press toward bodice.
Turn under the raw edge of bias and hem
to bodice on the inside (K) so it is about
Vi' wide finished.


Buttonholes, buttons, snaps. First,
turn in the bodice back facing and hem
it over waistline seam (A). Slip-stitch edges
together beyond center back on right back
( A). Here we work the buttonholes by hand
which Vogue considers much the better
way, but you can work them by machine,
if you have an attachment. Cut buttonholes
through the two layers on right side of
back, at □ tailors’ tacks. Use buttonhole
scissors (see pages 4 and 5, Equipment)
and cut from Q’s away from edge. (The
length of your buttonhole is the diameter of
your buttons.) Work buttonholes (B, Bl)
with buttonhole stitch, a magnified sketch
of which we show here. Keep each purl ex-
actly on edge of slit (Bl) and the depth of
the stitches even. Notice fan at end wh'ere
the strain will be. Work bar at other end
(B 2).
Sew buttons at □ tailors’ tacks on left
side of bodice back. Sew a tiny snap under
the collar, another at the waistline, and a
couple on the opening below (D and Dl).
Hemming it. Catch her again; make her
stand still while you mark the hem.
Measure upward from the floor and mark
the hemline with pins. Take off the dress.
Turn her loose; turn the hem; pin and baste
close to fold (F) so it will be easy to handle
the raw edge. If necessary, even up the raw
edge. Turn under edge %" and stitch on
machine (G); then pin hem edge to skirt
(H). Hem by hand, taking care not to
tighten your stitches (H). For the double
hem we mentioned on page 82, just turn in
until the raw edge touches the turn of the
hem. Don’t stitch the turned edge. Pin and
hem in the usual way.
finishing touches. Remove all bastings
■ and press thoroughly on the wrong side
(J), pressing the little puffed sleeves over
a sleeveboard. Run the point of the iron up
into the gathers being careful not to crease
them (K). There!—doesn’t it look like the
dress of a fairy princess—and who made
it? You— a mere mortal without a magic
wand—armed only with a Vogue Pattern
and common sense!


The figure-flat
tering, full-skirted dre
The soft little dress that does nice things to your figure ... slips easily
under a coat when the weather is cool, is composed and crisp on warm
days. The dress has soft, curving kimono sleeves ... a softly pleated skirt...
tiny buttons that lead up to a demure Peter Pan collar. We made it in pale,
creamy-beige Shantung. Make it, too, in linen, pique, or silk taffeta. It should
take about 30 hours to make. Vogue Dress No. 7422. Sizes 12 to 20 (30 to
38); also cut in Junior sizes, No. 3425, sizes 9to 17 (30% to 34%). Price,
75 cents. The yardage requirements are on the back of the pattern envelope.


FULL-SKIRTED DRESS-
FULL OF SEWING KNOW-HOW
You need, in addition to your sewing equipment (see
Sewing Equipment, Pages 4 and 5), nine items: 1. Your
length of silk Shantung, 2. IVs yards of Ibelting,
3. Matching ribbon seam binding, 4. Two spools of matching
silk thread and two spools of twist, 5. Spools of coloured
thread for basting and tailor tacking, 6. A buckle, 7. Hooks
and eyes, 8. Twenty-four self-covered %" buttons (have them
made at your sewing-machine place or at a button maker’s
from left-over pieces of your fabric, 9. Shoulder pads, if you
intend to wear them—or, if you prefer to make them, the
wadding and fabric for them. (See back of pattern envelope
and sewing instructions enclosed with your pattern for mak-
ing pads.) You need all the pattern pieces, as shown here.
£|RST, STUDY these pattern pieces and the Picture Diagram
r enclosed with your pattern —especially the Picture Dia-
gram —so you’ll know what the perforations mean and how
to lay out the pattern on the fabric. Notice all the edges, as well
as the large 0-o’s, which are to be placed on the straight of
goods. (Not sure about “Straight of Goods”? See Sewing
Dictionary, Pages 7-15.) The little perforations %" from
the edges are for seamlines; those within the pattern are for
darts, hemlines, pleats. A couple of minutes spent studying
the Picture Diagram will save you many minutes later, when
you’re putting together your dress.
About fabrics. We suggest a 39-inch silk Shantung be-
cause it has enough body to drape—without clinging—-
on a bias bodice like this. Many other fabrics—taffeta, faille,
surah, or velveteen—work up equally well. Our only caution:
Make sure your fabric is stiff enough so it doesn’t cling to
you and so it doesn’t stretch too much on the bias (although
all fabrics stretch somewhat).


THE FULL-SKIRTED DRESS
Check pattern size. Pin in bodice darts, pin shoul-
der and side seams together (not the underarm
of sleeve, though, because the tissue might rip!). Going
to wear shoulder pads? Then pin one to your right
lingerie strap. Slip pattern on (A). If waistline of pat-
tern drops below yours, shorten by pinning in a tuck
above waistline (Al). If too short, cut pattern at same
place, pin in a tissue underlay (A 2). If sleeves are too
short or long, add or subtract in the same way. Now,
pin in pleats and side seams of skirt and pin tissue to
bodice, matching waistline perforations. Add or sub-
tract below the hip and at hem (Al, A 2).
Placing and pinning. Press out any wrinkles in
fabric; evfcn ends by trimming along a drawn-thread
line (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15). Fold fabric
crosswise, right side inside. Pin selvages and ends to-
gether. Place pattern pieces on fabric as shown on cut-
ting chart (B), starting at left. Pin at straight of goods
first. If this isn’t on the edge of the fabric, measure
from selvage to each straight-of-goods large 0 to be
sure they are equidistant from the edge. Then pin other
edges. One tricky note: The collar. First place collar
pattern, indicated by dotted lines, on fabric. Outline
this piece with pins. Then flip over and pin it to the
fabric (solid-line side of collar on cutting chart).
Before you cut, mark spaces between pattern pieces
with chalk lines I" apart (C) for bias strips for
buttonloops. You must do it while the fabric is folded,
to get a true bias. Lines parallel to sleeve facing will be
true bias. You’ll need about 1% yards of bias. If these
strips aren’t enough, use space between bodice back
and skirts. An easy way to mark this is to take a double-
page newspaper sheet (yesterday's —so he won’t say
“Where’s the sports section?), fold paper so right side
meets the bottom exactly (D), making a point at lower
right corner. Crease the diagonal line. What do you
have? A true bias! Place bottom edge of newspaper
along the lower selvage, so the diagonal edge meets cor-
ner of bodice back. Draw a chalk line on diagonal edge
touching corner (D). Slide paper to left and draw lines
1" apart. Pin to hold the two layers together.
Cut out dress, using middle of the blades of your
shears (E). You have to cut the cuffs twice, once is for
facing, indicated by dotted lines on the chart. When you
cut the collar, follow pins on one side. Fold each collar
double to mark it. Open material to cut belt and ex-
tension. See next page for cutting bias strips. With pat-
tern pieces still pinned to fabric, snip all notches with
tip of scissors so as to keep them small (F).


Cutting bias strips. After dress is cut
out, cut the double layer of bias strips
which are completely marked (A). Unfold
the fabric on the remaining chalk-lined sec-
tions (B and C), and continue bias chalk
marks—with the aid of a ruler or yardstick.
Cut carefully along these chalk marks. Be
sure to save the remaining scraps for your
covered buttons.
Marking. You can see here every piece
of your dress (D through N), with
the pattern piece attached, excepting, of
course, the collar (E) and facing (El) and
also the cuffs (H), which you cut a second
time for the facings (HI).
It’ll be a good idea to use different col-
our threads for the various perforations on
the pattern. For instance, on the skirt, use
yellow thread for your “meet” perforations
and orange thread for your “pleat” perfora-
tions, so you’ll instantly know that these go
together. Other darts and seam allowances
can be marked in one colour. But use a
different colour for marking A on bodice
front as you must cut to this mark, so it
should stand out like a light. You don’t need
to mark the straight-of-goods perforations.
Here’s how to tailor tack: With a soft,
clinging thread, take two loopy stitches
through each and every perforation (D).
They’re all important. One reason Vogue
Patterns are perforated is because it’s so
easy to make your tailors’ tacks through the
holes.
When the perforations are close to-
gether, as in darts, you can keep your thread
continuous. You must cut this continuous
thread between perforations (K) before you
can remove the pattern. Unpin pattern (M
and N), unfold the layers of fabric care-
fully, clipping the tailors’ tacks through the
center (N). On extension (G) and belt (L),
which were cut single, all you have to do
is lift the pattern.
Don’t be disappointed if your tailors’
tacks don’t look as pretty and pert as ours
here. After all, ours are an artist’s concep-
tion of what tailors’ tacks should look like.
We know that they usually look a little
droopy—as yours probably do. But they
will work perfectly well in any event.


THE FULL-SKIRTED DRESS
Basting— for the basted fitting.
This is nice relaxed work, so why not
get your favorite radio program on while
you do it?
First, pin and baste (always pin before
basting) the darts on the bodice back (A),
basting toward the dart point. Then pin
and baste your center-back seam (B),
matching notches and tailors’ tacks and be-
ing careful not to stretch one edge more
than the other, since these are bias edges.
Turn to the bodice front. Slash (see
Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15) front dart
upward from point of cut-out part to your
A tailors’ tack (C). Pin and baste these
edges together, matching tailors’ tacks
and s-t-r-e-t-c-h-i-n-g the edge nearer cen-
ter front to fit the other edge (D). Now,
pin and baste underarm dart (E), match-
ing perforations and basting toward the
dart point.
Next!—the seams. Pin and baste shoul-
der seams, matching V’s. Then pin and baste
side seams, matching V’s, and keeping un-
derarm darts turned downward as you baste
(E). Always baste through the tailors’ tacks
which should also be matched.
And now —your skirt! Pin and baste
center-back seam (F), matching VV’s, and
being careful not to stretch the bias. Then
pin and baste the bias center-front seam
(G), leaving it open above the large 00.
Now pin and baste the straight side seams.
Make your pleats. This is the way to do
it. Crease on your small oo tailors’ tacks
and bring them over to meet the large 00
tailors’ tacks. Baste near the tailors’ tacks
and across the top at waistline (J, K). This
basting is just temporary (for assembling
the dress) because these are released pleats,
when your dress is finished—and it won’t
be too long.
Now —turn under the seam allowance
on the waistline edge of your bodice and
pin over the skirt, matching centers-sides-
V-VV (L). Pin these points first (as a pro-
fessional would do!), then pin in between
them. Baste, being careful (we cant stress
this too much) not to stretch the bias.


Basted fitting. Slip into your dress
(right-side out I carefully I A). Wear
the height of heels you intend to wear with
it, and (if you intend to wear them) pin
in shoulder pads and wear a girdle. Turn in
the right side of the front opening and pin
it over to meet large o's on left side—so
you’ll know how it will fit when buttons and
loops are on. Pin up hem, if you like. Does
bodice sag? It shouldn't. If so, alter at waist-
line now. Do front darts point to fullest part
of bust? If not, rip bastings, adjust, and
rehaste. Do center front, center back, and
side seams hang straight? They must. Your
neckline may seem a little high, but that’s
because your collar isn't attached. However,
if it’s really choking you. snip the seam a bit.
Stitching seams, darts. First, stitch
the bodice darts, after ripping side and
waistline bastings enough to allow you to do
so (B). Stitch toward points with last few
stitches parallel to fold. Tie thread ends. Re-
move bastings; press (C) over tailors’ cush-
ion (see pages 4 and 5), pressing underarm
darts downward, back darts and slashed
front darts toward the centers (C).
Stitch bodice seams (D), after opening
basted waistline seam enough to allow you
to do so. Press seams open for overcasting
later. (See in Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-
15.) If you want to pink (also in Sewing
Dictionary) your seams, pink them before
pressing. Press side seams on big ironing
board (E) ; sleeve seams on a sleeveboard
(El). Snip curve at underarm for a smooth
fit (D). Stitch skirt seams, working from
lower edge up to waistline. Press them open.
Rebaste waistline; stitch on machine (F);
press seam upward (G).
Your collar. Pin, baste and stitch col-
lar facing to collar (right sides to-
gether), except at neckline (H). Trim seam.
Turn collar right side out (J) ; and baste
the stitched edges together so the facing
won’t scoot over to the outside. Press (K).
Pin collar and facing to neckline of dress,
on the outside, matching centers, notches
and small oo tailors’ tack at shoulder (L).
Baste. Let’s leave the collar for now, we’ll
finish it up later.


THE FULL-SKIRTED DRESS
Buttonloops. Draw threads on ends of
bias strips, on lengthwise grain of fabric
to even them up and trim (A). Pin, baste
and stitch strips together at squared ends
(Al). Press seams open (B). Don’t make
too long strips. Fold bias strip lengthwise
through center, right sides together, and pin
it. Stitch about % 6 " from fold. Let your
bias stretch as you stitch. Use a loose tension
and about 9 stitches to the inch (C). Trim
edge % e " from the stitching. Now thread
a darning needle with two threads of twist,
about 20" long. Knot them, doubled to make
them good and strong (which gives you
four threads about 10" long). Take 2 or
3 tight stitches just below the stitching at
one end of the bias loop (D). Then push
the needle backwards through the tube (D),
drawing the bias through with the thread
(E). Isn’t it easy, when you know how?
Each loop should be about 2(4” long but
test it first, with your button. Pin and baste
17 loops to outside of the right-front open-
ing of your bodice, evenly spaced, with the
raw edges together (F). Leave a •%" space
above the waistline for your belt. Then pin
and baste 7 loops on the skirt, leaving a
%" space below the waistline (F).
Bodice facings. Remember that straight
piece you cut called “Extension”? Find
it. Fold it on the foldline (see Picture Dia-
gram on pattern instruction sheet), right
side inside, and stitch the ends (G). Trim
and snip corners. Turn to right side (H) and
press (J). Pin and baste it to the outside
of your left-front opening, raw edges to-
gether, matching tailors’ tacks and notches
(K). Now—where are your facings? Got
’em? OK. Turn over the seam allowance
and stitch, except at neck and VV edge (L).
Pin and baste these facings (one to the left
side of the opening, one to the right side),
right sides of the fabric together, matching
notches and tailors’ tacks. Catch in the loops
on the right side (M) and the extension on
the left (N) continuing across neck over
collar. Pin and baste a little strip of bias
to the back of the neck as a facing (0).
Slip on your dress just to make sure the
front opening is going to be OK before you
go whirr-whirr on your sewing machine.


CLOSING STEPS ON THE OPENING. First
step: stitch facings as they are basted
(if they were OK), stitching up the left
side, around the collar and down the right
side (A). Trim seams; turn the facings in-
side, as they will be when dress is finished
( B); and press (C), taking care not to press
too heavily over loop ends, or they will leave
a mark on the outside. Then turn in and
blind hem the bias facing to back of neck
(D) so it is about l />" wide (see “Blind
Hem” in Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15).
Tack facings along shoulder (D) and to
waistline (E). Sit back and overcast (see
Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15) all seams
(E). Did you ever think that you would be
able to make self loops and a smooth open-
ing like this? And now, we do the cuffs.
The cuffs. Get your cuffs and cuff fac-
ings. Pin, baste and stitch (F) facings
to cuffs, except at notched edges, keeping
right sides of fabric together on the inside.
Remove bastings; trim seams; turn (G).
Baste stitched edges together, to keep facing
in its own backyard. Press (H). Slipstitch
ends of cuff together (J) from lower edge to
second small o tailors’ tack (see “Slipstitch”
in Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15). Baste cuff
to outside of sleeve, matching notches, small
oo tailors’ tacks at underarm, easing cuff
as you baste (K). Now—find your sleeve
facings. Stitch ends of sleeve facings to-
gether, matching V’s (L) and press open
(LI). Turn in and stitch edge without
notches (M). Baste the facing to the sleeve,
matching VV and underarm seams, small
oo tailors’ tacks at upper seam. Stitch (N).
Trim seam. Turn facing inside and press
(0). Hem by hand to sleeve (P).


THE FULL.SKIRTED DRESS
Buttons, hook and eye. Sew on but-
tons, making sure that they line up
with your loops (A and Al). Sew hook and
eye at waistline, the hook to buttonloop side,
the eye to button side. If you’re not quite
sure how, study the drawing at the right
(B), which explains just where stitches go
much more clearly than words can.
Your belt. Pin belting to wrong side of
belt between tailor-tacked foldlines. Pin
from fabric side, not belting side, or you’ll
bury your pins (C). Trim end of belting
to fit point perforations (C). Turn in %"
on long edges and pin. Then fold fabric over
belting and pin so edges meet (D). Trim;
turn in and pin at point. Slipstitch (see
Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15) as pinned.
Stitch edges of belt (E). Press on wrong
side (F). Pierce with stiletto or ice pick
near square end for tongue of buckle. Ad-
just buckle; turn end inside and hem (G).
Pierce eyelets in the same way. Work with
buttonhole twist (H), keeping stitches tight
and close together, holding hole open.
Hemming it. Slip into dress; wear the
height of heels you expect to wear
with this dress. Wear your belt. Stand erect
with weight on both feet. Make sure center
lines and side seams hang straight. Near
your center seams the skirt may “dip” a bit,
since it is bias. Ask someone to mark the
hemline with pins, measuring upward from
the floor (J). Turn hem, pin and baste close
to the fold (K) so it will be easier to handle
the raw edge. Trim the raw edge so it is
even. Pin seam binding to raw edge; baste;
and stitch (L). Blind hem (see pages 7-15,
Sewing Dictionary) binding to dress (M),
taking care not to tighten stitches.
Finishing touches. Remove all bast-
ings. Then give it that last pressing—
especially the hem (N) —on the wrong side,
pressing the sleeves over a sleeveboard (see
pages 4 and 5, Equipment), turning cuffs
hack over the sleeves. Tack in shoulder pads
if you’re using them. Isn’t it wonderful?
And now that you know how—you can
make it again—in another fabric. We show
you how on the opposite page.


vhis time, No. 7422 in a crisp striped chambray. You’ll need
* the same things you needed for your Shantung dress (page
89) but in addition, white pique for your collar and cuffs.
will also need the same pattern pieces. Perhaps you can find
braid cord to use for your loops instead of making them,
preliminaries. Adjust the pattern as you did for your
■ Shantung dress (page 90). Lay out pattern pieces as shown
below (A). One warning: When you fold your fabric, match
stripes and pin to keep them from slipping. The notches on the
front and back shoulders should be placed at exactly the same
position on a stripe so the stripes will match. On the straight
side seams, place pattern so that two similar stripes do not come
together in sewing. Mark and cut bias stripe (pages 90 and 91),
if you are not using braid cord. Pin and cut your pique collars
and cuffs according to chart (B).
Selvages
13
Selvages
35 FABRIC Without Nap Siies 12 and 14
Matching stripes. The illustration at the
left (C) shows you just how the stripes
should look on the four main pieces when they
are cut out. The instructions for putting the dress
together are the same as on pages 90 through
96, except on the bias seams. Since this is a striped
fabric, match stripes rather than tailors’ tacks.
ijow you do it. Turn the seam allowance to
* * the wrong side on one bias edge and pin it
over the right side of the other, matching stripes.
Slip-haste—see how to do it in the enlarged sketch
(D). Turn and stitch seam on the inside in the
usual way but stitching upward so as not to
stretch the bias (E). Press (F).
All other sewing procedures are the same as
those for your Shantung—but they won’t look
the same, being in two such different fabrics! So
you’ll have two lovely dresses, both of which you
made yourself.


The slim, background d
This will be the busiest dress in your wardrobe. It’s the
dress you can wear all day... any day. The dress has a
V-neckline with a shawl collar that can be worn turned up or
down. Wear it with a crisp surah scarf as we have done...
or, add smart jewellery... wide or slim belts. We made it in
navy faille... it would also be smart in wool flannel, tweed,
or linen. A beginner should take about 24 hours. Vogue dress
and scarf pattern No. 7263. Sizes 12 to 20 (30 to 38). Price,
60 cents. Yardages are on the back of the pattern envelope.


AND SEWING TRICKS
You need a “baker’s dozen” things on hand, besides your
Sewing Equipment. (See Sewing Equipment, pages 4 and
5.) These thirteen are: 1. Your length of dress fabric, 2. Fab-
ric for your scarf, 3. Muslin for interfacing, 4. A 12" dress
placket zipper, 5. Two spools of matching silk thread for dress
and one for scarf, 6. A spool of matching buttonhole twist,
7. Bright, contrasting thread for basting and tailor tacking,
8. IYg yards of 1" belting, 9. A belt buckle, 10. Matching
ribbon seam binding, 11. A dozen self-covered buttons 1/4"
in diameter (you can have them made for next to nothing
from your scraps of fabric), 12. Two large novelty buttons,
13. Shoulder pads, if you intend to wear them, or the wadding
and fabric for them, if you want to make them. (See instruc-
tions on sheet enclosed with your pattern.)
You need eight pattern pieces: Skirt back, skirt front,
bodice back, bodice front, facing, sleeve, belt and scarf. Tuck
the cuff, pocket, and band back in the envelope—you’ll
probably want them for another version someday.
Study the pattern pieces and the Picture Diagram on
your Instruction Sheet, so you’ll know what’s supposed
to happen—where. Notice edges and large O-O’s which go on
the straight of goods. (If you’re not quite sure about “Straight
of Goods,” see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15.) You’ll see
that the narrow collar is really an extension of the bodice
front and facing. Wondering what the □ marks on the bod-
ice front are? They’re for your link-button buttonholes.
Small o perforations are for darts and seamlines, which are
always %" from the edge of the pattern.
ja 6 out fabrics. We chose a 39" faille and a polka dot
surah for the scarf. Any small print—or a contrasting
taffeta—would do just as nicely for the scarf. For other fab-
ric suggestions see the back of your pattern envelope.


THE BACKGROUND DRESS
Check pattern size. Of course you bought
the right size pattern (see pages 2 and 3).
Now check the length. Pin in darts on bodice
and skirt tissues. Pin shoulder and side seams
together; pin bodice to skirt. Do not pin in
sleeves. If you’re going to wear shoulder pads,
pin one to your right lingerie strap. Slip on
tissue (A). Waistline too long? Shorten by pin-
ning in a tuck (Al). Too short? Cut pattern,
pin in a tissue underlay (A 2). Skirt too short?—
too long? Add or subtract in same way (Al, A 2).
Measure your arm, elbow bent (B). Compare
with sleeve length (Bl). Alter pattern above or
below elbow the same way (82, B 3). Even up
shaped seamlines, when altering.
Placing, pinning, cuTTInG . Smooth out pattern; turn under and
pin the little unwanted corners on each side of sleeve as they are
only used for the short length. Press out any wrinkles and creases in
your fabrics. Straighten fabric ends by cutting along a drawn-thread
line (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15). Place fabric, right-side up,
on your cutting surface. You’ll notice that you cut all pieces sepa-
rately except the bodice back. The solid- line pieces (C) are your right-
side pieces; the broken- line pieces, the left-side pieces. To cut your
left-side pieces, turn the pattern over, so the names are spelled back-
wards. You pin and cut the right side first; then unpin pattern, flip it
over, and cut the left side. Unpin pattern again; pin the left and right
fabric pieces together (with right sides inside); pin pattern to the
two pieces for marking. This applies to the skirt pieces, bodice front,
sleeves and facings. Your belt (C) and scarf (Cl) are cut only once,
so leave the patterns pinned to them. Interfacings are both cut at
once on doubled fabric (C 2). Use facing pattern after you have cut
and marked facings. Make sure straight of goods O-O’s are on a single
thread of the fabric. Pin there first, then edges (D). Cut, using middle
of blades of your shears (E). After you’ve cut the skirt sections and
facings (C), fold the fabric (right sides together) the width of the
widest part of the bodice back; place center back on fold; pin and
cut. Leave pattern pinned. Cut a straight strip of fabric I*//' wide
and 14" long for placket facing. Snip notches with scissors tips (F).


Marking. Before you start to tailor
tack, run a basting-thread line along
center of bodice back (A). Now, tailor tack
all pieces except the scarf (B), which needs
none, and all perforations except the stitch-
ing line near □ on skirt front (see Picture
Diagram on instruction sheet of pattern).
These marks are for pockets, which we don’t
make in this version. Also, there’s no need
to tailor tack Straight of Goods marks
within the pattern. (But you do have to
mark the center front of bodice—though it
is indicated as Straight of Goods.)
Get out four different coloured threads—
soft, clinging, cotton ones. One colour will
be for the I I’s near the edge of your
bodice front, which are for your button-
holes. The second colour will be for your
A’s, which indicate points to which you
must snip. The third colour will be for your
small oo “pleat” and large 00 “meet” per-
forations on your sleeve. It will be easy to
bring the small oo’s over to meet the large
00’s. The fourth colour will be for your
darts and seamlines. All set?
Take two loopy stitches through each per-
foration on bodice back (C), facings and
interfacings (D, Dl), bodice front (E),
sleeve (F), skirt front (G), skirt back (J),
and belt (K). After you tailor tack fac-
ings (D), remove pattern, pin it to inter-
facings and mark them (Dl). There will
be no markings on placket facing (H) and
scarf (B).
When perforations are close together you
can keep your thread continuous (F). You
must cut this continuous thread between
perforations (E and F) before you can
remove pattern. Unpin pattern, unfold the
layers of fabric carefully, snipping the
tailors’ tacks through the center (J).
Don’t worry—or wonder what went
wrong —if your tailors’ tacks are not so fat
and sassy as ours shown here. Nothing went
wrong. Ours are an artist’s idea of what
tailors’ tacks should look like. Yours look
exactly as tailors’ tacks should—wispy little
threads here and there that become very im-
portant when you’re matching perforations.


THE BACKGROUND DRESS
Basting the bodice. For the next half
hour or so, we’ll be doing hand sewing,
which may take more concentration than you
think. So turn on the radio but keep it soft
and pleasant. Pin and baste back darts at
waistline (A) and at shoulder. Pin the dart
marks together at waist. But at shoulder you
crease on the marks and baste V 4” from them
at top, then taper to point (A). Baste toward
dart point.
Cut front of bodice carefully between dart
tailors’ tacks to A mark (B). Pin and baste
this dart, matching V’s and tailors’ tacks and
stretching the lower edge to equal the upper
edge (C). Pin and baste center-front seam
below the top large 0 tack, matching notches
and tailors’ tacks (D). Now, with the tip of
your scissors, snip to the A tailors’ tack at
the shoulder on the front of your bodice (E).
Pin and baste shoulder seams, right sides
of fabric together, matching V’s (E). The
reason we keep warning: “Right sides of fab-
ric together” is because so many people (par-
ticularly neophytes) will hurriedly slap the
fabrics together, neatly baste them and then—
later —discover to their dismay that one side’s
hind-side to. Pin and baste collar (which is
an extension of your bodice front) at back of
neck, matching V’s (F). Turn collar down
over back, right sides together. Pin and baste
collar to neckline of bodice at back (G). Pin
and baste underarm seams (H), leaving the
left side open below V for your placket.
Now the skirt. Pin and baste the darts
on the skirt back the same way you did
the waistline darts on the bodice back (J).
Pin and baste back seam on your tailors’
tacks, matching VVV (K). Pin and baste
front darts below the waistline the same way
you did the skirt back darts so the point
ends at large 0 mark (L). Pin and baste
front seam, matching VV (M).


More basting. Now, pin and bastd the
side seams of the skirt, matching tai-
lors’ tacks (A) but leaving the left side open
above the V for your zipper.
Pin the bodice to the skirt, matching the
centers, the side seams, and all of the notches,
pinning at these points first, then adding
more pins. Baste. Keep all of the darts turned
toward the centers ( 81.
Finally the sleeves. Pin and baste elbow
pleats (C) by bringing small oo tailors’
tacks over to meet large 00 tailors’ tacks.
These pleats are never stitched—-the bastings
are for assembling purposes. Pin and baste
sleeve seams, matching V’s (D). Pin and
baste sleeve into armhole (E), matching
VV-V-small oo tailors’ tacks. Hold the sleeve
toward you as you baste and distribute the
fullness evenly at the top of the sleeve so it
will be invisible when the dress is all finished.
Basted fitting. Wear the height of heels
you expect to wear with your dress —and
a girdle, if you wear one. If you’re going
to use shoulder pads, pin them in. Slip into
dress, right-side out, pin the side placket
closed (F). Put on a belt. Stand erect. Do
center and side seams hang straight? Do
front darts point to fullest part of bust? If
not, rip basting, adjust, and pin correctly.
Is the waistline where your waistline is? Does
it fit snugly enough? Are back of bodice and
armholes roomy enough to allow you to
“move around” in? Check the length of the
sleeves. OK? Remember, they’ll be held by
a buttoned pleat. Sleeves too tight ?—too
full? Make any adjustments necessary; try
on again.


THE BACKGROUND DRESS
Stitching darts, seams. After rip-
ping basted seams enough to allow you
to do so, stitch all the darts on bodice and
skirt. Stitch toward dart points and keep
the last few stitches parallel to the fold
(A). Tie thread ends. Remove bastings;
press darts over a tailor’s cushion (see
Equipment, pages 4 and 5), pressing the
slashed darts downward , the other darts
toward centers (B). Re-haste ripped seams.
Stitch bodice front and side seams, also
the skirt seams (C), leaving the opening
at left side for your placket. Remove bast-
ings; press seams open (D), for over-
casting later. Or if you prefer to pink the
edges (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15,
for seam finishes), do it before pressing
the seams open.
Muslin interfacing. You’ll have to
rip out bastings at the neckline seam
at back of neck, on the little collar seam at
back, and part of shoulder seams so you
can attach the muslin interfacing. Pin,
baste, and stitch your interfacing at center
front between large O’s, matching V’s (E).
Snip seam to inner end of this stitching
(F). Press open (G). Trim off on
edges below shoulder on interfacing. Then
pin and baste all edges of interfacing to
wrong side of bodice. Snip the interfacing
to A tailors’ tack (H). Bodice front must
also be snipped to large 0 at top of center-
front seam (H).
Stitching again. Re-baste shoulder
and center-back collar seams; stitch
them (J). Remove bastings and press them
all open (K) over your sleeveboard (see
Equipment, pages 4 and 5). Then re-
baste and stitch the neckline seam (L).
Trim this seam and press it upward toward
collar (M). Stitch bodice to skirt (N),
making sure skirt darts are turned toward
center seams. Remove bastings; press
waistline seam downward (0).
Stitch sleeve seams (P). (You may have
to rip armhole bastings a little.) Remove
bastings; press seams open on sleeve-
board (Q) for overcasting later (or pink
them before you press). Re-baste armhole
seams.


STITCH AND PRESS ARMHOLES. Stitch
armholes, with sleeves up so you can
control the easing (A). Trim (or pink, if
that is your method of finishing) seam to
also snip it a bit if it seems tight.
Press seam over end of sleeveboard, turn-
ing both edges toward sleeve (B).
mutton holes. Mark cutting line with
” fine stitches from □ to □ tailors’
tacks. (Your cutting line is the diameter
of your button. Be sure to get two big ones
because these slits are also used to carry
a scarf when you don’t wear the buttons!)
Cut an oblong of fabric as binding to cover
marked area (about iy 2 " by 2"). Baste
this piece over cutting line, right sides of
fabric together (C). Stitch Vs" on each
side of marking line and across ends (D).
Count stitches across ends for uniform
size. Cut between stitching, cutting from
centers toward ends. Within V 4" of each
end, stop and snip into each corner (E).
Pull binding through opening to wrong
side (F, G). Press seams away from open-
ing (G). Work binding into even folds
(H and J) and tack at ends (G). Press.
Facing the collar. Pin, baste, and
then stitch facings at center back (which
is the back of the collar), matching V’s
(K). Then, on the front, pin, baste, and
stitch between the large 0 tailors’ tacks
same as you did the interfacing on the
opposite page. Snip seam to the inner large
0. Remove bastings; press seams open.
Pin, baste, and stitch facing to bodice,
right sides together, matching large 0-V-
-center back (L). Trim the interfacing % 6 "
from stitching, dress neck edge to Vs">
facing to V 4" (M). This will keep edge
from being too thick. Turn facing to
inside (N) and baste edges of collar to-
gether, so they won’t scoot over onto the
other side (0). Snip facing to A tailors’
tacks on shoulders. Turn in seam allow-
ance on facing between these A’s and
blind-hem over neck seam (P). Turn un-
der and stitch remaining edges of facing
(Q). Tack at shoulders and center front
(R). Press, removing bastings as you go,
so they won’t leave a mark on the fabric.


THE BACKGROUND DRESS
Finishing the sleeves. Slip on your dress again
(looks wonderful, doesn’t it?); pin in your shoul-
der pads (if any). How’s the sleeve length? If you
intend to wear your sleeves pushed up, turn under
seam allowance, hand-hem edge for more “give” (A)
omitting buttons and loops. If not, check the wrist
pleat. Will it be tight enough when buttoned? Pin,
baste, and stitch ribbon seam binding over lower
edge of sleeve and then hem the binding to sleeve.
Crease sleeve on tailor-tacked small o pleatline and
stitch close to the edge (B). On this edge, work six
evenly-spaced thread loops (C, Cl and D) with but-
tonhole twist. Start with two base threads for each
button loop; try a button to test size. Then work over
the threads (Cl). Yes, you really push the needle
through backwards! Baste a double layer of seam
binding to the inside under the large o’s as a re-
inforcement to sew the buttons through (E). Sew
buttons to large 0 line opposite loops (F and FI).
Press sleeves on wrong side over sleeveboard (G).
Your placket. Find that long, narrow strip you
cut for your placket facing. Got it? Then pin,
baste, and stitch this facing strip to the front edge
of the side opening (right sides together), stitching
on the seamline marks (H). Trim; turn facing in-
side; press (J); and baste from edge (K). Turn
under back edge of placket outside of seamline.
Press lightly. Pin over zipper as near metal teeth
as possible, keeping zipper closed and pull-tab at top
of opening. Baste and stitch with zipper-foot attach-
ment (L). Pin front edge over to meet seamline on
back. Pin, baste, and stitch to tape from edge
and across ends (M). Remove bastings.
Buttonholes, link buttons. We’re at the collar
facing again. Slash facing under the button-
holes, starting the cut from the outside (N). Turn
to inside and finish cutting each way to ends of
buttonhole opening (Nl). Turn in slashed edges (0)
and hem against the binding. Now, let’s make link
buttons. Fasten the two buttons with four strands of
buttorthole twist (P) the length you need for your
link. Then blanket-stitch over them (P and PI).
Same operation you used for thread loops on sleeves.
Slip link buttons into buttonholes (Q).


Your scarf. First, stitch all around the
four sides about *4" from the edges
(A), letting the fabric stretch as it will—
and it will, being bias. Then roll this edge
between your fingers (you’ll have to moisten
your fingers now and then) and hem as you
roll (B and C), keeping the outside stitches
tiny. Keep thread tight.
Your belt. Pin belting to wrong side of
belt between tailor-tacked foldlines and
trim end to fit point marks (D). Turn in
%" on long edges and pin. Then fold fabric
over belting and pin so edges meet. Trim;
turn in and pin at point. Slipstitch (E).
(See Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15.) Stitch
edges of belt (F). Press (FI). Pierce near
square end for tongue of buckle, using
stiletto or icepick. Adjust buckle, turn end
inside and hem (G). Pierce eyelets, work
with buttonhole twist (H). (See Sewing
Dictionary, pages 7-15.)
Hemming it. Wear the height of heels
you intend to wear —and your belt.
Ask a friend to mark the hemline with pins,
measuring upward from the floor (J). (If
you are alone, turn up the hem on the marks
before you try it on.) Turn hem, pin and
baste close to the fold (K) so it will be
easier to handle the raw edge. If necessary,
trim the raw edge to even it. Pin seam bind-
ing to raw edge, baste, and stitch on machine
(L). Blind-hem (see Sewing Dictionary,
pages 7-15) binding to dress, taking care
not to tighten stitches (M).
finishing touches. Remove all basting
■threads; overcast seams (see “Overcast-
ing,” Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15) ; and
press on the wrong side (N).
Now—slip it on—and try a few scarf
tricks—pulling scarf through buttonholes—
winding it this way and that (0). Make
another scarf in a fabric of a different char-
acter —so you’ll have a dress with two
personalities! Here’s a dress you’ll wear
everywhere—for a long, long time to come.


Drifting I
for even in
ci n g
Champagne lace over a rustle of taffeta ... one of the prettiest dresses you
could wear to a dance. In white, it would be charming for a wedding or
graduation. The tiny bodice has a wide neckline underscored by a double organdie
collar. A wide, drifting skirt whittles in your waist, whirls gracefully as you
dance. It should take about 20 hours to make. Vogue Pattern No. 7631. “Easy-to-
Make.” Sizes 12 to 20 (30 to 38). Price, 60 cents. Also in Junior sizes, No. 3462.
9 to 15 (29t0 33). See the pattern envelope for the yardage requirements.


LACE EVENING DRESS
IT'S EASIER THAN YOU THINK
You need, besides your Sewing Equipment (see Sewing
Equipment on pages 4 and 5) these eight things: 1. Your
fabrics (taffeta, lace and organdie), 2. Two spools of
matching silk thread for lace and taffeta, 3. One spool match-
ing cotton thread for organdie, 4. One spool matching but-
tonhole twist, 5. Spools of bright-coloured thread for bast-
ing and tailor tacking, 6. A 12" dress placket zipper, 7. A
yard of V 2” grosgrain ribbon for inner belting, and 8. Two
hooks and eyes. You need all five pieces of the pattern as
shown here: skirt, bodice front, bodice back, upper collar,
lower collar. You know, of course, that your pattern is half
your dress (right half) and that the left half comes into
being when you cut the fabric.
Study the picture DIAGRAM on the Instruction Sheet
enclosed with your pattern and these pattern pieces—
even though they are very simple. A few minutes spent
“boning up” on what’s to come can save you hours later on.
Notice the big OO’s near edges of bodices and collars. See
them? They mean “lay that edge of pattern on a fold of
fabric for cutting.” Notice, too, the “Straight of goods”
0-0 on the skirt, which must be placed parallel to selvage.
The D’s on the skirt are for center front, center back, right
side and also for your left side placket. Why just one skirt
pattern? Because you cut all four sections alike!
Aiout fabrics. We chose taffeta and lace—with organ-
die for the collar—because it’s fresh and pretty. If you
already own a lace dress, why not make it in plain taffeta,
in moire, stiff satin, or a brocade? On page 119, we show
you how to make this same design in stand-out pique.


TKE EVENING DRESS
Now—you have four times your skirt length left over. Make a cross-
wise fold twice the skirt length (B). Pin the selvages together. Pin
skirt pattern to fabric, making sure the straight of goods 0-0 is the
same distance from both selvages. Cut this set of skirt sections; snip your
notches; then unpin pattern and pin the two sections of skirt together for
tailor tacking in a minute. Pin and cut second set of skirt sections. Snip
all notches on bodice and skirt with the tips of your scissors (E).


Marking the taffeta. Run a bast-
ing thread along the center-back
and center-front folds of your bodice as
a guide line (A).
Now to tailor tack. Get three different
coloured cotton threads out for your tai-
lor tacking. The first colour will be for
your seamlines and bodice darts; the sec-
ond for the £]’s on your skirt; the third
for the large o’s on the lower edge of
your bodice and the top of your skirt,
which must match.
Here’s how to do it: Take two loopy
stitches through all perforations (B) ex-
cept the Straight of Goods and lay on
O-O’s, which have served their purpose.
When perforations are close together, as
on darts, you can keep your thread con-
tinuous (C), but you must cut this con-
tinuous thread between the perforations
before you can remove the pattern (C).
After all the tailors’ tacks are made unpin
the pattern, unfold the layers of fabric
gently and snip each tailors’ tack through
the center (E).
Since you can only tailor tack two
layers of fabric at once, you’ll have to
tailor tack one set of skirt sections (DI;
then remove the pattern; re-pin it to the
bther set of skirt sections and tailor tack
them (E).
Tailor tack on a table and be careful in
handling the tissue. Don’t tear it, because
you will need it when you cut your lace
pieces and have to tailor tack them, too.
Don’t worry if your tailors’ tacks look
a little limp. They’ll do the joh for which
they were intended—telling you which
perforation to match with which.
All through? Then fold your tailor-
tacked taffeta pieces and put them to one
side while we cut out the lace pieces and
organdie collars.


THE EVENING DRESS


Cutting has strips of lace. This requires tai-
lors’ chalk and a ruler or yardstick. First, make
sure one raw edge is straight. Here’s how; rule and
chalk this end; trim on chalk line. To find the true
bias, fold this crosswise edge over to the selvage (A).
Cut along fold. Then rule off and cut (B) about 1%
yards of bias strips. You will use these
later for facing the armholes. (We show you
how to join them on page 116.) Also cut a straight
strip 1 y%’ wide by 13" long for placket facing (B).
PINNING. CUTTING THE ORGANDIE COLLAR.
Fold your organdie lengthwise. The solid-line col-
lars (the outsides of your collars) are cut first. Snip
your notches, then remove the patterns but pin each
collar together as it was cut. Pin patterns to or-
gandie again and cut the broken-line ones (the fac-
ings). Then draw a bias line on the large scraps of
the organdie (D). Cut about a yard of
bias strips in the same way you cut your lace strips
(E). These strips are to finish your neckline seam.
Marking tour collar. First run basting
thread lines along center folds of all your
collar pieces. Since you can only tailor tack two
layers of fabric at a time (even though it’s sheer
organdie!) tailor tack one set of big collars (F);
unpin the pattern and pin it to the other set and tailor
tack those (G). Do the same on the little upper col-
lars (H and J). Refer to page 111 for tailor tacking.


THE EVENING DRESS
Basting your taffeta bodice. Pin
and baste the neck darts on bodice
back (A) this way: Crease on small o
marks and baste %" from crease at top
mark tapering to nothing at other end. On
the neckline, underarm, and waistline
darts of bodice front (B and C), and
waistline darts on bodice back you pin the
small o marks together and baste toward
the dart points. Then pin and baste shoul-
der seams, matching V’s (D), pin and
baste side seams (D), leaving the left side
open below the V for your placket.
Your taffeta skirt seams. Pin and
baste the four sections of your skirt to-
gether (E), matching V’s, right sides of
fabric together as you pin. (If you have
a machine that gaily sews over pins, skip
the basting.) Then stitch on the machine
(El)—for you don’t have to fit this skirt,
since it’s full!
Pink your seams (use your pinking
shears, see Equipment, pages 4 and 5), two
layers of fabric at once—and press them
open (F).
Slash (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-
15) along one —and only one! —line of □
tailors’ tacks (G). It doesn’t matter which
section of skirt you slash—they’re all
alike. This slash will be your placket
opening which will eventually land up on
your left side. The other three Q lines
of tailors’ tacks will show you which is
center front, center back, and right side.


Your lace skirt. Make your lace skirt
exactly the way you made your taffeta
skirt. You don’t have to finish lace seams —
isn’t that nice? Press the seams open. You
press lace carefully on wrong side as you
would any sheer fabric. If it is thick lace
with a heavy pattern, press it over a
Turkish towel. Slash one section along □
line of tailors’ tacks for your placket
opening. •
Pin the lace skirt over the taffeta one
(A) (wrong side of the lace to right side
of the taffeta so the right sides of both
will be on the outside), beginning at the
placket slashes. Baste slashes together. Pin
all around the top edge, matching seams
and tailors’ tacks. Now, with heavy thread
or buttonhole twist, run a line of gather-
ing stitches along the seamline at the top
of the skirt, through both the lace and
taffeta holding them together. Then run
another line Vs" nearer the edge (B).
Now pin the skirt to the taffeta bodice,
right sides together (C). Match the Q
marks to the centers and right side seam
and pin. At the left side opening the
slashed edge of the skirt does not meet
the raw edge of the bodice—it comes %"
inside of it (C). We allow only 1 /4" taper-
ing to nothing at the point, for a seam
on the slashed edges of the skirt. Draw up
your gathers, working from both ends.
Wind the threads over a pin at each edge
of opening to hold the gathers in place
(D). Work slowly—don’t yank at the
thread —it may break —and then you’d
have it all to do over again! Now, pin the
skirt seams to the large o’s on the bodice.
Put in more pins, adjusting the gathers
evenly. Baste carefully (E).


THE EVENING DRESS
Basted fitting. Wear the height of heels
you intend to go dancing in. Slip into
your dress, right-side out (A). Pin the side
opening. Are □ tailors’ tacks at centers in
line with your bodice basting threads?
Gathers distributed evenly? How’s the bod-
ice? It should fit quite snugly, because it
must support two collars. Do bustline darts
do you justice? If not, pin one correctly.
Rip and re-baste. Always make identical
changes on both sides. Try on again.
Stitching the bodices. Rip waistline
bastings, pin skirt on a hanger and hang
it where it won’t be crushed while you con-
centrate on the bodice. If you made altera-
tions on your taffeta bodice, make the same
changes on your lace. Stitch darts on taffeta
bodice, opening side seams enough to allow
you to do so. Stitch toward the dart points
and keep the last few stitches parallel to
the fold (B). Tie thread ends (Bl). Press
darts (C), pressing underarm darts down-
ward, others toward centers. Re-baste any
ripped seams; stitch shoulder and side seams
(D). Pink and press taffeta seams open (E).
Make lace bodice exactly as you made taf-
feta. Lace seams don’t require finishing.
JOINING THE LACE booice to the taffeta.
Pin and baste the lace bodice over the
taffeta at all edges, with the wrong side of
lace over the right side of taffeta. Snip
left underarm seam of lace crosswise to
release seam at lop of opening (F).
Now—we join all those little strips of lace
bias for armhole facings. Seam the selvages
or edges on the wrong side, keeping the
seams parallel—all running the same way
(G). Trim the seams and snip off the little
triangles at either side; press open (H).
Pin and baste bias to armholes, beginning
at the underarm, right sides of lace together.
Join ends of bias at underarm on lengthwise
grain (J). Stitch to armhole on machine
(K). Trim and snip seam; turn bias inside
and baste edge (L). Press (M). Turn in raw
edge of bias so it’s about y 2" wide. Blind-
hem (N) the bias lace to taffeta (see Sewing
Dictionary, pages 7-15, for “blind-hem”).


Your organdie collars. Pin, baste
and stitch (except at the neck) the
facings to both the big and little collars,
with right sides of organdie together on
the inside (A). Remove bastings; trim
seams; and snip corners (B) for neater
points. Turn collars to right side (C),
work out the corners with a pin, and press
(D), pressing toward the raw edges of the
neck. Make both collars this way. It
doesn’t matter which one you make first
but it does matter which one you attach
to the bodice first. The first one is your
big lower collar. Pin and baste it to the
bodice neckline, working from the out-
side, and pinning it on as it will be when
you’re waltzing in it. Match centers and
notches, small oo marks at shoulders (E).
Then pin and baste the little upper collar
over the lower collar, matching the same
points.
First, join your organdie bias strips as
you did the lace strips. Then —pin and
baste your organdie bias strip to the neck-
line, right side down, over the collars' (F),
sewing through this facing, four layers of
organdie collar, lace and taffeta. Start and
end at the center front. Stitch on machine.
Trim the seam and snip it at center front
to within a few threads of the stitching.
Turn your bodice wrong-side out (G)
and press the organdie bias inside. Blind-
hem so the bias facing is about wide.
Turn in the ends at front. Overhand the
center-front point of lace, taffeta and
■organdie for neatness and security.
JOINING THE BODICE AND SKIRT. Re-
baste the bodice to the skirt, matching
center and side marks, also large 0 marks
(H). Distribute the gathers evenly. Try
it on again, just to make sure it’s right.
OK? Then stitch on machine (J). Sew
slowly, making sure you don’t catch in
any of the skirt folds. Press lightly on
the wrong side, pressing the waistline
seam downward with the tip of the iron
so you won’t flatten the gathers (K).
Tack raw edge of the seam to the taffeta
skirt (L). This will hold out the gathers.


THE EVENING DRESS
Your zipper placket. Remember the
strip of lace you cut for your placket
facing? Pin, baste and stitch this to the
front edge of the side opening along the
%" seamline on the bodice, right sides
together, tapering it to nothing at the end
of the skirt slash (A). Trim the seam. Turn
facing inside and press (B). Baste V 2”
from edge (C). Turn under back edge of
opening %" outside of seamline on bodice
back, tapering to nothing at end of slash
on skirt. Pin over zipper, as near metal as
possible, keeping zipper closed and the
pull-tab at top of opening. Baste and stitch
with zipper-foot (see pages 4 and 5) (D).
Pin front edge over to meet seamline on the
back, concealing the zipper. Baste and
stitch y%' from edge and across ends
(E and F).
Inner belling to cinch your waist and
hold up your skirt. Cut ribbon 1" longer
than your waistline measurement (G).
Turn under on ends. Sew on hook
and eye (G). Cover ends of hook and eye
neatly with a piece of taffeta (H). Pin
center of inside belt to waistline seam
across front; and to small 00 waistline
marks in back, leaving both ends free
about IV2” eac h side of zipper (J). Sew
by hand with a running stitch, catching in
lace invisibly (J).
Memming it. Try on your dress, wear-
ing the height of heels you’ll wear
with it. Wonderful—isn’t it? Now check
the length. Finished, lace should just about
touch the floor (K), taffeta 14" shorter.
Even up the edge, if necessary (K). Now
turn under lower edge of lace and stitch
it twice (L). Finish taffeta (M) the same.
Press both hems (N). Easy, wasn’t it?
Finishing touches. Remove all bast-
ings. Do your final bit of pressing
which should be very little since you’ve
pressed religiously after every stitching.
In pressing the gathers, run point of your
iron up between the folds (0), to keep
them loose. Always press on wrong side
and on one layer of skirt at a time. Press
organdie collars on wrong side, too.
There—it’s done! What a hit you’ll make!


EVENING DRESS IN
WHITE PIQUE
We chose pique for No. 7631, because it’s inexpen-
sive, washable, and heavy enough for a full-blown
skirt such as this. We chose white because it makes the
most of your summer tan. However, a pastel colour —or
black—would be just as nice.
The entire dress (collars, too) is of pique, so you’ll
need just your pique—and the same things needed on
page 109, substituting cotton thread for silk. You’ll also
need a card of ready-cut bias lawn facing to finish your
neck and armholes. You’ll need the same pattern pieces.
The putting-together is exactly the same as your taffeta-
and-lace except that you now have only one layer ... and
you don’t need to cut all those little bias strips! The cutting
is a little different, as you’ll see on the Cutting Chart below.
Cutting your pique dress. Be sure
the pique is shrunk. Cut the ends on
a drawn-thread line to even them. Fold
your pique lengthwise, right side on the
inside. You can easily tell the right side of
pique because it has a distinct, clear weave,
waffle, wale, etc., while the back is hazy.
Fold fabric lengthwise. Pin bodice and
collar center backs and center fronts on
fold and cut. Fold remaining fabric cross-
wise and cut skirt sections. Whip it up,
following instructions on pages 110-118,
pinking your seams. Isn’t pique fun to
sew on? And isn’t it fun to turn out a
dream dress like this in such a short time—
and for so little money!


The classic, tailored shirtwaist dre
The shirtwaist dress —its crisp, clean lines are timeless and flattering to
practically every figure. We made it in red-and-white striped silk shirt-
ing. When you have finished the dress (it should take about 26 hours), you
will know how to do simple tailoring and how to work with striped fabric.
Vogue Pattern Number 7329. “Easy-to-Make.” Cut in sizes 12 to 20 (30 to 38),
40 to 46. Price, 50 cents. Yardages are on the back of pattern envelope.


A WARDROBE ESSENTIAL
THAT WILL ADD TO YOUR SKILL
You need, in addition to your sewing equipment (see
Sewing Equipment, pages 4 and 5), these nine things:
1. Your striped silk, 2. Two spools of matching silk thread
(one for your machine, one for hand sewing), 3. A spool of
matching buttonhole twist, 4. Bright-coloured thread for bast-
ing and tailor tacking, 5. Six novelty buttons, 6. A 12" dress
placket zipper, 7. Matching ribbon seam binding, 8. Shoulder
pads, if you wear them, or the makings for them (please see
Instruction Sheet enclosed with your pattern for “how to”),
9. A leather belt. If you’d rather make your own belt, you
can see how on page 129. You need all the pattern pieces ex-
cept the short sleeve (shown at lower right) and the belt
which you’ll need later for the short-sleeved version, which
we do on page 129.
Fiest. study the Picture Diagram on the Instruction Sheet
enclosed with your pattern, and the 12 pattern pieces you’ll
be working with, so you’ll know which pieces eventually go to-
gether and what the various perforations mean. Notice in par-
ticular the pieces marked with Straight of Goods O-O’s. These
pieces must be placed on the fabric so that the large O-O’s are
parallel to the selvage. The [J’s at center front of blouse are
for buttons and buttonholes. The A on skirt front indicates
the depth your front pleat is stitched. Large OO’s near the
edge mean “Lay on Fold.” The small oo’s %" from all the
edges are your seamlines. It’s really very simple, isn’t it?
About fabrics. We chose a 39" striped silk because it’s
perfect for this type of dress. If you don’t like yourself
in stripes, choose a solid-coloured silk—or rayon. Just make
sure it’s a fabric you’ll love for years, for this is a dress you’ll
wear for years. And please choose a 39" fabric without nap,
so you can follow these cutting instructions.


THE SHIRTWAIST DRESS
Check pattern length. You have already chosen
the right size (see pages 2 and 3). Turn under
yoke pattern on seamline at lower edge and pin over
blouse-back pattern, matching V’s, pleating in blouse
fullness. Pin yoke to blouse front in same way. Pin
sides. Do not pin in sleeves. Slip on blouse (A).
Too long? Pin in a tuck above the waistline (Al). Too
short? Cut pattern above waistline and pin in a tissue
underlay (A 2). When blouse length is right, pin the
pleated skirt front to it to check skirt length. Add or
subtract at hemline or below hipline in same way (Al
and A 2), making same changes on all the skirt pieces.
Measure your arm, elbow bent (B). Compare with
sleeve length (Bl), including cuff to fold line. Note
sleeve is bloused a bit. Add or subtract above or below
elbow (B 2 and B 3). Be sure cuff pattern fits around
your wrist. Unpin pattern pieces.
Pinning, cutting. Smooth out pattern pieces. Even up pattern
edges after altering. Straighten ends of fabric by cutting along a
drawn-thread line. Press out any wrinkles in the silk on the wrong
side with a medium-hot iron. Fold fabric lengthwise, right side inside,
making sure your fold is on the center of a stripe. Pin together
selvages and raw edges of fabric. Now, pin pattern in this sequence
(C). First, the side back of skirt, then front, then facing, cuff, side
front and back; then blouse front and sleeve. When pinning pieces,
pin at the “Straight of Goods” 0-0 points (or edges) first, then other
areas. Do not lift fabric when you put in pins (D). Cut these pieces,
using centers of the blades of your shears (E), leaving the patterns
pinned to the fabric for tailor tacking. Unfold the fabric and cut your
pocket. As you are not making the belt, you can ignore this piece.
Now—we do something tricky, so read before cutting, please. Pin
your yoke and collar to the right side of the unfolded fabric as shown
above (C). The solid lines indicate the right halves, which you pin
first and outline with pins; the broken lines, the left halves, to which
are pinned the flipped over patterns. After pinning, outlining, and
flipping over and pinning the yoke and collar patterns, fold the fab-
ric, right sides together on the inside, burying the collar and yoke
patterns inside, and pin the blouse back to the folded fabric, so edge
near large 00 is on fold. Pattern must not overlap collar or yoke.
Cut blouse back; unfold your fabric and cut the yoke and collar.
Unpin yoke and collar, fold fabric right side inside and repin for
marking. Snip all notches with your scissors tips, being careful not
to cut too deeply (F). Save scraps of fabric to use later.


Marking. First, run a basting thread
down center front and center back of
your skirt, blouse back, collar and yoke, as
guide lines in putting them together (A).
At right you see all of the pieces of your
dress (B through N) with patterns pinned
at different stages of marking. If you had
to shorten or lengthen the blouse, you’ll
have to respace the button and buttonhole
□ markings. Keep the top and bottom ones
and divide space between into three equal
spaces, marking the middle two with pins,
in the same vertical line. Later you will tailor
tack at pins. Get three different coloured
cotton threads from your sewing basket—-
any colours, just so long as they contrast
with your fabric. The first colour will be
for seamlines and darts; the second colour,
for the □’s on the blouse, which indicate
buttons and buttonholes; the third colour,
for the A’s and Q’s, which indicate impor-
tant points to be matched or snipped.
Get your pet program on the radio—and
a cup of tea or a Coke, if you like—for tailor
tacking is nice, relaxing work. All set?
Here’s how to tailor tack. Take two loopy
stitches through all perforations (B) ex-
cept the Straight-of-Goods or Lay-on-Fold
large O-O’s, which have served their pur-
pose. Tailor tack the blouse front (B), fac-
ing (C), pocket (D), collar (E), yoke (F),
blouse back (G), sleeves (H), cuffs (J),
skirt back (K), skirt side back (L), skirt
side front (M), and skirt front (N).
When perforations are close together,
you can keep your thread continuous. But
you must cut the thread between perfora-
tions to release the pattern (C). Unpin pat-
tern, unfold the two layers of fabric gently,
and snip the tailors’ tacks through the cen-
ter (N).
Isn’t it wonderful?—there are little wispy
tufts of thread to show you what goes where.
Some people ask, “Why tailor tack? It takes
so much time.” Our answer: Tailor tacking
takes only a few minutes and it saves time
and temper later, helps you avoid possible
mistakes, for having tailor tacked all your
perforations, you can sail through the
putting-together, sure of which goes where.


THE SHIRTWAIST DRESS
Basting the blouse. We start with the
blouse back. Run a line of small gather-
ing stitches along the seamline at the top be-
tween small oo marks and V on the left and
right sides. Then run another line of stitches
%" above each of these (A). Always gather
away from centers so when you draw up the
threads both sides will have the same look.
Now, your yoke. Turn under seam allow-
ance on the yoke on a single stripe and pin
over the back (working from the outside),
matching V-small oo and center-back basting
threads. Adjust the gathers; fasten gather-
ing threads over a pin. Then pin and baste
this seamline (B).
And now —your blouse fronts. Turn under
front seam allowance on yoke, pin and baste
to blouse fronts in the same way, matching
V’s (C).
Next —underarm seams. Pin and baste
underarm seams, matching □ marks and V’s,
leaving the left side open below the V for
your zipper placket (D).
Your sleeves. Pin and baste the seamline
below—and only below—the Q tailors’ tacks,
matching notches (E). (In a minute, you’ll
see why we didn’t baste the upper part of the
sleeve.) Now, pin the sleeve into the armhole,
"matching large O-VV-small 00-V and A.
Hold the sleeve toward you as you pin at these
marks first. Then pin in between, adjusting
the ease as you pin. Baste this line (F). Why
do you have the points on the blouse? A good
question. They are a trick to give you more
freedom of arm movement than an ordinary
armhole. They are joined to the sleeve above
the □ mark, which you didn't baste! So pin
and baste the points to the sleeve seamlines
now, matching □’s, snipping to A and large
0 marks on each side of point (F).
Pleat blouse front at waistline by bringing
small oo tailors’ tacks over to meet large OO’s.
If possible, keep these pleats on a line of the
stripe. Pin and baste (G). These pleats are
never stitched, but keep them basted until
dress is about finished. Now, run gathering
threads along the waist seamline of the blouse
back, between V-V (H).
Run a basting thread around the neckline
to keep it from stretching while you work (J).


Basting thi skirt. We start with the
skirt front. Fin and baste your nar-
rower side fronts to the big front, matching
VV’s and making sure the right sides of the
fabric are together (A). Now we make an
inverted pleat! It’s easy. Crease along one
line of large O-A-small o tailors’ tacks. This
crease should be on a single stripe. Bring
this line over to meet the center-front
basting-thread line. Pin and baste on the
outside , between the top and the A, close to
the fold and across the top at the waistline
(B). Now crease the other line on an iden-
tical stripe; pin and baste in the same way.
Get your three sections of skirt back. Pin
and baste the side backs to the middle back,
matching VVV’s and stripes (C). Then pin
and baste the front and back together at
the side seams, matching stripes and notches
and leaving the left side open above the V
for your zipper placket (D).
Now baste the skirt to the blouse. First,
lap the right front of the blouse over the
left at the waistline, matching large 0 marks.
Pin and baste it there (E). Now pin the
skirt and blouse together (F), matching cen-
ter bastings, sides, VV-V. Draw up gathers
in the back of the blouse to fit the skirt.
Then baste together for your fitting.
Basted fitting. Wear the height of heels
you intend to wear with your dress—
and a girdle, if you expect to wear one. Slip
into your dress (G). If you’re going to wear
shoulder pads, pin them in. Pin up the hem,
if you like. Lap and pin the blouse as it will
be when buttoned, the side opening as it
will be when zipped. Don’t worry if the neck-
line looks a bit high. The front will roll
outward when the collar is attached. Your
sleeves are supposed to be loose and the arm-
holes are designed for free action. Sleeves
should be long-ish, as they’ll be gathered
into a cuff. Try pocket, to make sure stitch-
ing line is where you want it. Put on a belt
so you can see how it holds the blousing.


THE SHIRTWAIST DRESS
STITCHING the house. Rip waistline bast-
ings, so you can face the blouse. Lay skirt
aside for the time being. Edge-stitch yoke to
front and back blouse (A) after ripping arm-
hole bastings enough to allow you to do so. (If
not sure about “Edge-stitch,” see Sewing Dic-
tionary, pages 7-15.) Press seams together
(Al). If you’re pinking the seams, pink be-
fore pressing. Stitch blouse and sleeves at un-
derarms, opening armhole bastings if you need
to (B). Press seams open (Bl). Then re-haste
armhole and stitch (C). Press all of the arm-
hole seam toward sleeve, shrinking out ease
(see Pressing, page 6) as you press (Cl).
Buttonholes. Run a vertical line of bast-
ing stitches through your buttonhole tai-
lors’ tacks on right front. Then run a second
parallel line %" away (the diameter of your
button) toward the side (D). Run a line of
fine stitches from each tailors’ tack to the other
vertical line, for your buttonholes (D). Re-
move tailors’ tacks. Cut four pieces of silk 1%"
lengthwise by 11/)”I 1 /)” crosswise, so center stripe
is the same on each, to fit over buttonhole
marks. Pin identical stripes on pieces over but-
tonhole marks, right sides together, with Yi"
extension at each end (E). Baste. Set your
machine for 15 stitches per inch. Stitch on
blouse side so you can see end markings. Stitch
a scant Ys" on each side of marking line and
across ends (F), counting stitches at ends so
buttonholes will be even. Remove bastings and
markings. To cut buttonholes (G), start at cen-
ter, cut midway between stitching. Stop Y\'
from ends and snip to within a few threads of
stitching at corners (G). Work binding through
slash which you Just made (H); press all seams
away from opening (J). Work binding into
tiny, even inverted pleats at ends inside (J)
and sew securely so even folds meet at center
of opening (H and K). Press.
Making the pocket. Turn in the top of
the pocket on the seamline and stitch it
(L). Then turn along hemline (the second row
of tailors’ tacks), turning to the outside (M).
Stitch sides (M). Trim seams and snip off cor-
ners. Turn hem to inside (N) and press (0).
Turn under and pin seam allowance on remain-
ing edges and press (0). Pin pocket on left
front. Baste and stitch edge (P).


The collar, facings. If you altered your
neckline, measure collar to make sure it
fits; take smaller or larger seams on ends.
Fold collar, right side inside; pin, baste and
stitch ends (A). Trim seam. Snip off corners.
Turn it to the right side (Al) and press
(A 2). Turn under facings along seamlines at
shoulders and sides. Pin, baste and stitch (B).
Remove bastings. Pin, baste and stitch facings
to blouse fronts (C), matching V’s, with right
sides of fabric together. Pin and baste one edge
of the collar to the facing, the other edge to
the neck, matching notches, tacks, centers,
small go’s at yoke seam and top of facing (D).
Snip the neck for a smooth curve. Stitch con-
tinuously (D). Remove bastings; press seam
open in front, upward in back (E). Turn fac-
ing inside (F). Baste edges (G). Press, re-
moving bastings as you go (Gl). Then turn in
and hem the raw edge of the collar over back
neck seam (H). Hem the facing along the
front seam of yoke (H).
Stitching the skirt. Stitch all skirt seams
(J). Press seams open (Jl). Then edge-
stitch your inverted pleat (K) down to the A
mark, crosswise a few stitches to the other fold,
sewing slowly for nice, neat square corners,
and then sew hack up. Re-baste the blouse to
the skirt; try it on again, for reassurance, if
you like. Then stitch waistline (L).
Your zipper placket. Now get out the
scraps you saved. Cut a strip 11//'I 1 //' wide
by 13" lengthwise for a placket facing. Pin,
baste and stitch this strip to the front edge of
the opening (M). Remove bastings; trim the
seam. Turn the facing inside and press it
(Ml); then baste from the edge (N).
Turn under the back edge of the opening
outside of the seamline and pin it over your
zipper tape as near the metal teeth as possible.
Keep the zipper closed, the pull-tab at the top
of the opening. Baste and stitch with single-foot
attachment (0) (see Equipment, pages 4 and
5). Then pin the front edge over to meet the
seamline on back. Pin, baste and stitch to the
zipper tape Vfc" from edge and across the ends.


THE SHIRTWAIST DRESS
Your sleeves. We now use some more
scraps! Cut two strips 11//'I 1 //' wide and 8"
long (A) for finishing your sleeve slashes
which we do right now! Cut sleeve upward
from lower edge on large 0 line (Al). Pin,
baste and stitch one edge of strip to slashed
edges. Take up Yl" seam on slashed edge,
tapering to nothing at point; take up Yl"
seam on strip (B). Press seam toward strip
(BI). Turn in edge of strip, pin and hem
to inside, so strip is about Yi" wide (B 2).
Turn in finished strip on upper edge of
opening and press. Gather bottom of sleeve
through turned in piece (C). Now, make a
buttonhole at Q mark on each cuff, follow-
ing instructions on page 126. Fold cuff on
foldline and stitch ends (D). Trim seams
and snip off corners (D 1). Turn cuff to right
side (Dl); press. Turn in edge of cuff
and pin over outside of sleeve, matching
V-small oo at seam, and adjusting gathers.
Baste; then stitch (E). Turn in and hem
edge over seam (El).
Buttons, euttonholes. Slash facing
under buttonholes on blouse and cuffs.
Turn in edges and hem against binding (F).
Sew buttons to Q marks on left front and
to A marks on cuffs (G, Gl, H).
Hemming it. Wear the height heels you’ll
wear with your dress. Slip it on; but-
ton it up; zip it up; wear your belt. Ask
a friend to mark the hemline with pins,
measuring from the floor (J). If you are
alone, open pleats, turn up and pin hem be-
fore you try it on. Remove the dress. Turn
hem, pin and baste close to the edge (K).
Trim the raw edge to even it. Pin seam
binding to edge; baste; stitch (L). Pin and
hem binding to dress keeping stitches small,
loose, invisible (M).
Finishing touches. Remove all bast-
ings. Overcast seams (see Sewing Dic-
tionary, pages 7-15) if you did not pink
them. Baste the inverted pleat for pressing
(N). Give it a final pressing (N) on the
wrong side with a medium-hot steam iron.
Now—turn it right-side out. Doesn’t it look
like a million dollars?


MAKE IT AGAIN
I N COTTON
Short-sleeved, no. tjiv makes a dress for golf—or marketing.
We chose a 35" cotton broadcloth because it’s cool, tubbable, and
tailors well. You need the same things you needed for making your
long-sleeved silk (see page 121) plus a covered buckle, 1% yards of 1"
belting, and a spool of matching heavy thread. You need the same
pattern pieces, substituting the short-sleeved pattern for the long-
sleeved one and using the belt.
Preliminaries. Straighten the raw edges by cutting along a drawn-
thread line. Press out any wrinkles. Spread your fabric out un-
folded, right side up, and pin pattern pieces on, following the Cutting
Chart (A). Remember, the pieces outlined with broken lines are for
your left side and the solid-line pieces are the right. Tailor tack all
perforations as you did on page 123. All putting-together procedure
is the same as on the silk. Why not stitch collar, fronts and pocket *4"
from edges for a tailored touch?
Your short sleeves. Pin, baste and
stitch sleeve from □ to bottom (B).
Press seam open (C). Attach to armhole as
you did the long sleeve on page 124. To
finish sleeve edge, turn under and stitch
lower edge ,(D). Then turn under on fold-
line; turn outside on roll-line and pin (E).
Blind-stitch hem to sleeve (F).
Your belt. Pin belting to wrong side of
belt between foldlines. Trim end to fit
the point marks (G). Then fold fabric over
belting and pin so edges meet. Trim; turn
in and pin at point. Slipstitch as pinned
(H). Stitch edges of belt (J) and press
(Jl). Pierce near square end with stiletto
or ice pick for tongue of buckle. Adjust
buckle, turn end inside and hem (K). Pierce
eyelets. Work with buttonhole twist (L).


Raglan-sleeve coat in creamy fleece
Town-or-COUntry ... four seasons a year ... the pale fleece coat is the won-
derful coat that can be worn over everything. It has a collar that can be
worn up or down (it is also cut in hip-length). You will learn to put in raglan
sleeves and to work with napped woollen fabric. The coat should take about
35 hours to make. Vogue Coat Pattern No. 7442. Sizes; Small (28-30), Medium
(32-34), Large (36-38). Price, 75 cents. Also cut in Junior sizes. No 3431,
sizes 11 to 15 (30% to 33). Yardages are on back of pattern envelope.


BIG COAT
takes little tailoring skill
wou need, besides your Sewing Equipment (see pages 4
■ and 5 for Sewing Equipment), these nine things: 1. Your
woollen fabric, 2. Your crepe for lining, 3. Your interfacing,
4. Four novelty buttons, 5. Three spools of matching silk
thread, 6. One spool of matching buttonhole twist, 7. Spools
of various coloured cotton thread for basting and tailor tack-
ing (any in your sewing basket will do), 8. Matching ribbon
seam binding, 9. Shoulder pads or the makings for them, if
you intend to wear them. See how to make them on the In-
struction Sheet enclosed with your pattern, please. You need
all fifteen pattern pieces, as shown here.
First, study the Picture Diagram enclosed with your pat-
tern, along with the pattern pieces, to see what’s what.
Eleven of the pattern pieces are for your woollen or outside
coat. The sleeve back and front are used again in cutting
your lining; the front facing and. cuffs are used again in
cutting your interfacing. Then there are three pieces used
only for the lining: coat back, front, and pocket; and one
piece used for interfacing only; a collar. Notice the pieces
marked with Straight of Goods O-O’s, which must be placed
parallel to the selvage. Also notice the large 00 centered near
an edge of the collar. It means this edge must be laid on a
fold of fabric for cutting. Forget about the lines that indicate
where you cut off for the short length—until the time when
you want to make the short coat.
About fabrics. We chose a 54" fleece because it’s bulky
enough for a casual coat like this. If your choice is
fleece, keep nap running down, not up. (“Nap” means the
direction of the fleecy fibres.) You may prefer tweed.
’ >'<#
" >V .
LINING FROW


THE RAGLAN-SLEEVE COAT
a drawn-thread line. Nap must run down, so mark top end with a
big pin before you fold your fabric lengthwise, right side inside,
and pin edges and selvages together. Now fold over the little ex-
tensions on the patterns for coat back and front (which are for the
vent hems on the short coat) to get a straight cutting line. Pin these
extensions; don't cut them off because you’ll need them for the short
version which you’ll make when you see how easy it is to make a coat.
Pin pattern pieces to the fabric, following Cutting Chart (B).
Don’t lift the fabric when pinning (C). Pin at edges or perfora-
tions marked “Straight of Goods” first, then other areas. Notice
that you have to cut one set of cuffs, then remove the pattern (after
snipping notches) and cut another set for your cuff facings.
First, cut all pieces which are cut on the doubled fabric. Keep fabric
flat when cutting and use the middle of the blades of your shears,
sliding them along as you cut (D). Save scraps for buttonholes.
Keep patterns pinned to fabric for marking. Unfold remaining fab-
ric and cut your pocket facings, cutting one, then flipping the pat-
tern over to cut the second. Pin pieces together, right sides inside,
and pin pattern on for marking. Cut all notches with tips of scissors,
being careful not to cut too deeply (E). Mark center back of collar
along foldline with a basting thread (F, FI).


Marking your woollen. We’ll tailor
tack all perforations except the large
o’s which indicate where the pattern is to be
cut off for the short version and the small o’s
for the hems of the short version which are,
quite obviously, of no interest to us right now.
Also, we’ll forget about the large 0-o’s which
mean “Straight of Goods,” for those perfora-
tions have served their purpose. Unpin ex-
tensions at sides of front and back so you can
get at the perforations (A and B).
Get three different coloured cotton threads
from your sewing basket—any colours, just
so they contrast with your woollen. One col-
our will be for your darts and seamlines.
The second colour will be for the A’s for
your pocket slash marks. The third colour
will be for the Q’s on your coat front, which
indicate buttons and buttonholes. If you had
to shorten or lengthen your coat pattern,
you’ll have to re-space your button and
buttonhole □’s. Keep the top and bottom
ones as they are and divide the distance be-
tween into three equal spaces, placing pins
as markers for the middle two. Tailor tack
at these pin markings in the same vertica'
line with your other Q’s.
To tailor tack, take two loose stitches
through each perforation on coat front (A),
coat back (B|, facing (C), collar and under
collar (D, E), pocket facing (F), welt (G),
sleeve back (H), cuffs and cuff facings (J,
J 1), sleeve front (L), and sleeve facing (K).
When perforations are close together, you
can keep the thread continuous but you must
cut the thread between perforations (B) be-
fore you can remove the pattern.
On the cuffs (J, Jl), you’ll have to tailor
tack one set of cuffs (for you can only tailor
tack two layers of fabric at a time); remove
the pattern, pin it to the second set, and tailor
tack that set.
When all pieces are tailor tacked, unpin
pattern (C), unfold the two layers of fabric
gently, cutting the tailors’ tacks through the
center (L).
Run a basting thread line along center
front tailors’ tacks on both fronts of coat
(M) as a guide line for fitting.


THE RAGLAN-SLEEVE COAT
Pin, cut and mark lining. Press out
any wrinkles in your lining fabric;
straighten the raw edges, if they are not
torn, by cutting along a drawn-thread line.
Make a crosswise fold with right side of
fabric on the inside. Pin selvages and ends
together. Now fold over and pin the top of
your sleeve front pattern on small o line
(A and D) (also see Picture Diagram on
chart enclosed with pattern). Place patterns
of lining front, lining back, sleeve back and
front, and pocket lining on your material
exactly as shown on cutting chart (A).
Notice that the pocket lining is cut twice —-
see broken-line pocket on cutting layout
(A). Pin patterns at Straight of Goods
0-o’s or edges first, then pin other edges.
Cut all pieces; snip notches with the tip of
your scissors.
Tailor tack all your lining pieces ... your
lining back (B), lining front (C), sleeve
front (D), sleeve back (E), and pockets
(F and FI), as you did the outside of your
coat. (Look back to page 133 for how to
do it.)
PIN. CUT AND MARK INTERFACING.
Press out any wrinkles in your interfac-
ing; straighten raw edges by trimming along
a drawn-thread line. Place pattern for collar
interfacing (not used before), front facings
and cuffs (used in cutting your woollen) on
the interfacing fabric as shown on cutting
chart (G). This unfolded fabric has no
right or wrong side. You first cut the fac-
ing at the upper left corner (indicated with
solid lines); then remove the pattern, flip
it over to cut the other one (indicated with
broken lines). The cuff interfacings are cut
in the same way. You cut only one collar
interfacing, which is bias, so be sure to place
it so the large 0-0 Straight of Goods per-
forations are parallel to the selvages.
Place your two cuff interfacings together
and pin the pattern to them. Do the same
with the front interfacings. Now you can
snip all the notches on the two layers at once
and then tailor tack them (H, J, K). Now
that all the markings are in, your sewing
should go like a breeze!


Basting your woollen. Now we start
the exciting job of putting the pieces
together! First pin and then baste the center-
back seam, matching VVV’s and all of the
tailors’ tacks (A), making sure the right
sides of your fabric are together. (You
wouldn’t want to spend the time and energy
then discover half was right side, half was
wrong side, would you?) Then make the
front darts below the neckline by meeting
the tailors’ tacks on the two lines and pin-
ning them together. The two lines converge
at the single tack which is the point of the
dart. The fold of the dart is on the wrong
side of your coat. Baste the dart as it is
pinned (B), basting toward the dart points.
Pin and baste side seams, matching V’s and
tailors’ tacks (C).
Now—get your sleeve sections. Pin and
baste the sleeve backs to the sleeve fronts,
right sides together, both at the top and at
the underarm, matching V’s (D). Pin the
raglan sleeves to the front and back open-
ing from neck to the underarm seam on the
coat, right sides together, matching VV-V
and underarm seams. Snip the inward curves
of the sleeve seam if it seems to need releas-
ing. Hold the sleeve toward you as you pin
and baste (E).
Now —get your under collar. This is the
collar in two pieces that will have to be
joined at center back —not the one cut on
the fold. Pin and baste these two under-
collar pieces together along the seamline
at center back matching VV’s (F). Then pin
it to the coat neck (G), right sides of fabric
together, matching large O-V-center back,
small oo at shoulder seam, which is the top
seam of your sleeve. You pin from the collar
side, but baste it from the coat side. Snip the
coat seam at neck curves to release the edge.


THE RAGLAN-SLEE VE COAT
Basted fitting. This is for general ef-
fect only, for the coat will be less loose
when the lining is put in. Slip on coat (A)
over the suit or dress you wore when trying
on your pattern; pin in shoulder pads, if
you are using them. Turn up hem and pin
it, if you like. Lap right front over left and
pin it, as it will be when buttoned. Are width
and length of sleeves OK? If not, rip and re-
baste. Are pocket A tailors’ tacks in the
right place? Do center-back seamline and
side seamlines hang straight? Aren’t you
happy about the way it looks? Then remove
pads, rip off basted undercollar. If you
made any alterations, be sure you make
them on both the left and right sides, and
then make the same changes on your lining.
STITCH AND PRESS THE WOOLLEN. First
stitch the center-back seam (B). We
don’t have to finish the seams, since the coat
will be lined. Then stitch front darts (C)
stitching toward dart points and keeping the
last few stitches parallel to the fold. Tie
threads, if your machine does not stitch
backwards. Stitch the side seams, after rip-
ping armhole bastings enough to allow you
to do so (D). Then stitch sleeve seams (D).
Now press the darts toward front opening
(E) over a tailors’ cushion (see Equipment,
pages 4 and 5, for all the necessities for
pressing). Press the center back and side
seams open over a well-padded ironing
board. Use a steam iron or a dampened press
cloth and work from wrong side. Do not
press dry—leave some moisture in the fab-
ric. Pat it with your hand to hold the mois-
ture. Run the point of the iron under the
edges of seams so the impression will not
show. Press the sleeve seams open over a
sleeveboard (F). Re-baste armhole and
stitch (G). Prfess raglan armhole seam open
(H) except at underarm, which you press
gently toward the sleeve, snipping seam if
you need to, so it will lie flat.


Attaching the interfacing. Pin the
long front interfacings (A) to the in-
side of the fronts at opening, neck and
shoulder; baste.
Now, we attach the undercollar. It’s very
simple to do, and to make it even more sim-
ple we have illustrated every single step.
First, stitch the undercollar at center back
(B); remove bastings and press the seam
open (C). Now, pin the collar interfacing
to the wrong side of the undercollar (D)
and fasten with padding stitches (E). We
show here a very magnified sketch of the
padding stitches so you can see how to make
them (El). The padding stitches hold the
two layers (interfacing and undercollar)
together and give body to the collar. You
work from the interfacing side and use
thread to match the coat fabric. The stitches
are almost invisible on the outside.
Re-baste the undercollar to the neck of
the coat (F) and try on again. If it’s OK,
baste doubled ribbon seam binding or one
layer of strong tape Yt" wide to the back of
the neck between small oo tacks (G) as a
stay to keep the neck from stretching.
Stitch undercollar to coat (H). Trim all
the interfacings Ye" from the stitching at
the neck seam to keep the neck from being
too thick. Snip the curved neck seam so it
will lie flat (J) and press it open in front,
upward in back (K). There! Aren’t you be-
ginning to feel like a professional tailor?


THE RAGLAN-SLEEVE COAT
Making the pockets. Once again,
we show a lot of drawings, so you’ll
see, step by step, just how the pocket comes
into being. First, run a line of basting
stitches through the A tailors’ tacks (A).
Remove the two center tacks. Do not cut
along this line yet. Now, get your little fleece
welts. Got them? Fold along the foldlines,
right sides together, and stitch the ends (B).
Trim the seams so one edge is wider than
the other, and snip the corners. Turn to the
right side (Bl), work out the corners with
a pin, and press (B 2). Pin a welt to each
coat front just below the A line (C), right
sides of fabric together, with the raw edges
of your welt just touching the A line. Turn
welt upward just to check that the nap will
run down to match the nap of the coat. Then
turn it down and baste it. Now, get your
pocket facings (there are two) and your
pockets of lining fabric (there are four).
Pin, baste, and stitch a lining piece to each
side of a facing piece (D), matching V’s.
Press seams toward the lining fabric (E).
Pin pocket facings, right sides down over
coat fronts and welts, matching A lines,
with the wider part of the facing toward
the top of your coat (F). Baste on A
line. Set your machine for 15 stitches per
inch and stitch on each side of the
line, sewing through coat, welt and facing
below the basting, through just the coat and
facing above the basting, and across the
ends (G). Starting at center of one side, sew
slowly and count your stitches across the
ends so your pockets will be uniform. Cut
midway between stitching, starting at the
center. Stop V 4" from ends and snip to cor-
ners (H). Work facing and pocket through
to the inside (J). When it is all inside, press
it downward (K); make sure the welt is
turned upward as you will be pressing that
too. Pin, baste and stitch the pocket and
facing edges together (L), matching VV’s
and seams. Pin ends of welts to coat front
(M), completely concealing the ends of the
opening. Slip-stitch (see Sewing Dictionary,
pages 7-15). Press welts again (N) using a
dampened press cloth.


Buttonholes. Run a line of small stitches
from each buttonhole tailors’ tack (on right
front of coat) toward the side, sewing through
woollen and interfacing (A). Lines should be as
long as the diameter of your buttons; run a length-
wise basting line to define inner end of each, so
they will be uniform. Remove tailors’ tacks. Cut
an oblong of woollen l 1 longer than line and
1%" wide to fit over each marking. Baste pieces
over buttonhole markings, right sides of fabric
together (B); mark ends with thread lines also,
so you can see where to stop your stitching.
Keep machine set at 15 stitches per inch. Stitch
Yx" each side of marks and across ends. Sew
slowly, counting the stitches across ends (C), so
your buttonholes will be even. Remove bastings
and markings. To cut the buttonholes (D), start
at center; cut midway between stitching. Stop *4"
from ends and snip to within a few threads of
stitching at corners (D). Work binding through
slash (E). Press seams away from opening (F).
Work binding into tiny, even inverted pleats at
ends on the inside, forming small even welts (G
and H) which meet at center of opening outside.
Sew pleats securely at ends of opening to hold
welts (F). Press.
SHOULDER PADS, COLLAR. PACINO. Pin in
your shoulder pads again. Try on coat to be
sure pads are well placed. With heavy thread sew
center of pad to shoulder seam (J).
Pin, baste and stitch the collar (the one-
piece outside one) to the front facing between
large 0 and small oo tailors’ tacks, matching large
o’s and VV’s (K). Snip the facing (Kl) and
press the seam open (K 2). Pin, baste and stitch
collar and facing to undercollar and coat fronts
(L), right sides of fabric together, matching VV-
large O-VVV and center backs. Trim this seam
in staggered widths (M), trimming the interfac-
ing almost to the seam, the coat a little less;
and the facing even less. This makes a nice, flat
edge when you turn the facing inside (N). Baste
all around the edges so one side won’t scoot over
to the other side when you press (0). Press, using
a press cloth under your iron to keep from getting
shine on right side of fabric. Press from the edge
toward the inside (P), removing your basting
threads as you press, so they won’t leave marks
on your woollen. Pin the inner edges of the facings
and collar flat to the inside of the coat now so you
can try it on again, as we do on the next page!


THE RAGLAN-SLEEVE COAT
Hemming your coat. Slip your coat on
over the bulkiest —and longest—thing
you intend to wear it over. Stand erect, with
your weight equally balanced. See that the
collar and upper parts of facings are pinned
just right so they do not draw. Pin the front
over as it will be when buttoned. The sleeves
may look a little like Dopey’s did in “Snow
White,” but they won’t in a few minutes.
Now ask a friend to measure your hem,
measuring upward from the floor, and mark
the hemline with pins (A). Remove the
coat; turn up along the pins, opening out
the facing and turning up hem on facing
too. The facing should be slightly shorter
than the coat so it will not hang below it.
Pin and baste near the fold (BI so the raw
edge will be easier to handle. Even up the
raw edge, if necessary. Pin, baste and stitch
ribbon seam binding to the raw edge of the
hem (C), sewing it to the facing hem too.
Press. Pin and then hem the binding to
the woollen (D), easing the hem as you sew
and taking care not to tighten your stitches.
Collar, facing again. Sew the collar
flat over the back neck seam (E). Then
sew the facing along the shoulder (F). Pin
the rest of the facing to the inside of the
front (G). Be sure facing does not hang be-
low coat! Catch-stitch the side of the facing
to the coat (GI). (See “Catch-stitch” in
Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15.) Since
fleece is bulky, whip raw edges of the facing
to coat hem (H). If your fabric is not bulky,
follow the instruction sheet with your pat-
tern. Press hem and facing (J), using a
press cloth. Measure, pin and baste %"
from edges all around the collar and down
the front, continuing across the bottom to
where the facings end. Work with the right
side of the fabric up. To save time in
measuring make a little gauge of oblong
cardboard, with a right-angle notch cut %"
from the end. Stitch (K). It is better to
stitch with the nap rather than against it.
Don’t forget to stop at the neck and turn
the coat over so you stitch the outside part
of the collar. And check your bobbin before
you start, so you don’t run out right in the
middle of a long line!


Your cuffs. First, pin, baste and stitch
cuffs (A), matching V’s. Then pin, baste
and stitch cuff interfacings (Al) and cuff
facings (A 2). Trim interfacing seams to
w. Press the seams open over a sleeve-
board (B, 81, B 2). Baste interfacings to
the wrong sides of cuffs (C). Turn cuffs
so interfacings are inside (Cl). Pin and
baste cuff facings to tops of cuffs (the un-
notched edges) with right side of cuff and
facing together (D). Stitch on the machine
(Dl). Trim the seam (E), trimming the
interfacing to almost nothing, the cuff wider,
and the facing still wider. Turn to right side,
burying your interfacing (El). Press on
facing side over a sleeveboard and using a
press cloth under the iron (E 2). Get out
your gauge again. Measure and pin tops of
cuffs %" from the edge, starting and ending
at the seam. Baste and stitch from outside
(F). Baste cuffs to right side of sleeves,
matching V’s and underarm sleeve seams
(FI), easing the cuff. Now—remember
those narrow sleeve facings you cut? WeTe
ready for them. Seam them (G), matching
V’s, and press the seams open (Gl). Pin
and baste the sleeve facings to the sleeves
over the cuffs (H), matching V’s and seams.
Work from the outside of the sleeve in pin-
ning and basting, but stitch from the inside.
Trim the seams as you did the fronts, turn
sleeve inside out, and turn the facing flat
against the inside of sleeve (HI). Press
(H 2). Catch-stitch the raw edge to the sleeve
(J). Press again (K).
Press your coat. Give your wool coat
the final pressing before lining it. Use a
damp press cloth or a steam iron, if you
own one. Press on the wrong side (L),
pressing sleeves, if you need to, over a
sleeveboard. Now, hang it up to dry out
thoroughly, while you whip up the lining.
In less time than you think, you’ll have a
brand new, grand new coat to wear!


THE RAGLAN-SLEEVE COAT
Your lining. Make a released pleat (see
Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15) on
lining front below the shoulder by bring-
ing small o line to meet large 0 line. Pin,
baste and stitch (A), keeping your pleat
on the inside. Press the fold toward the
front (B). Then join all the other seams as
you did on your coat except your sleeves.
The top small o tailors’ tack on your lining
sleeve front edge meets the small oo tack on
sleeve back. When seams are stitched, re-
move bastings and press lining thoroughly,
pressing seams open (C) except at center
back. Here the seam forms the underfold of a
pleat. So, take the coat off the ironing board
and put it back so the edges are together,
as they were stitched. Then press. They need
no finishing, since they’ll be hidden.
Attaching the lining. Turn your coat
i wrong-side out and drape on a form,
if you have one, or hang it on a hanger.
Slip the lining over the coat, and pin the
seams together (D). Sew side seams to-
gether, stopping about four inches above
lower edge (E). Turn in and pin lining (E)
against the front facing. Hem by hand (F).
Lay a soft pleat at center back of the lining
this way: Crease on small o tailors’ tacks
on one side of back seam and bring the
crease to meet same line on the other side
of seam (G). Pin. Hold this pleat with bar
tacks at neck and waistline (Gl). We show
bar tacks greatly magnified here (G 2, G 3).
Use buttonhole twist and take two *4" long
stitches, one over the other, crosswise
through the three layers of lining as a base
for the bar. Then work over these threads
through the lining with close, firm stitches.
Turn in the seam allowance on the lining,
pin and hem it over back neck seam and
facing (H).


Hemming the lining. Now put your
coat, wrong-side out, on the hanger or
dress form again. Get your pins—and your-
self —down on the floor where you can reach
the hem —hemming a lining is done mostly
by the “touch system.” You want your lining
to be %" shorter than your coat. Reach up
under, turn and pin the edge of the lining
free of the coat (A). When pinned, remove
from form or hanger, turn coat right side
out and try it on to see that lining does not
show. Baste fold of hem (B). Then turn in
the edge of the hem; pin and baste it (C).
Hem it by hand (D). Remove bastings and
press lining hem. With buttonhole twist
French tack the lining to the coat at seams
(E). To do this take stitches at the top of
the hem first on the coat, then on the lining
until you have three threads about %" long
holding them together. The exaggerated de-
tail (El) shows how to blanket-stitch over
these threads, using needle, eye first. Turn
in and pin sleeve lining to sleeve facing (F),
allowing ample length to prevent drawing.
Hem. Press bottom of sleeve lining lightly
over sleeveboard (G).
Buttonholes, buttons. Put in some
pins close to buttonholes, holding the
facing and outside together (H). Cut fac-
ing under buttonholes. Start on right side
(H) at center of buttonhole, turn over and
finish cutting on wrong side (HI). Do not
cut beyond ends of opening. Turn in edges
and hem (J) against binding. Then sew
buttons to the □ tailors’ tacks on the left
front of the coat. Sew on button over pin
so you can keep stitches loose enough to
form a shank (K and Kl).
Finishing touches. Remove all over-
looked bastings and stray tailors’ tacks,
Steam press it, using a steam iron or a dry
iron with a pressing cloth. For a really pro-
fessional look, send it to your tailor’s for a
final pressing. Won’t he be surprised when
you tell him that you made it—and for only
a fraction of what it would have cost ready-
made!


The fitted, grey flann
A good, classic suit is one of the wisest investments
you can make ... it can well be the most important part
of your season-in, season-out wardrobe. With it you can wear
everything from a tailored sweater and crochet string hat
and gloves to an organdie jabot, velvet hat, and white kid
gloves. We made the suit in Oxford-grey flannel... it would
also be smart in navy serge or tweed. Vogue Pattern No.
S-4240. Sizes 12 to 20 (30 to 38), 40. Price, $l. See
the back of the pattern envelope for yardage requirements.


A SMART SUIT
TO GIVE SEWING ASSURANCE
You need nine things besides your Sewing Equipment
(see Sewing Equipment, pages 4 and 5). These nine are:
1. Your fabrics: flannel, crepe for lining, interfacing, 2. A 7"
skirt zipper, 3. Four bone buttons, 4. Three spools of match-
ing silk thread, 5. Contrasting cotton thread for basting and
tailor tacking, 6. A spool of matching buttonhole twist, 7. Two
hooks and eyes, 8. Matching seam binding, 9. Shoulder pads,
if you wear them, or the makings (see pattern envelope).
* m. The pattern pieces. You need all twenty-one pattern
® I'TV .-o R pieces as shown here. Let’s look at the Identification Chart
on the sheet enclosed with your pattern, to see what’s what,
before we go any further. Of the twenty-one pieces, six-
H * H| teen are used in cutting the flannel: Jacket —back, side back,
underarm section, side front, front, and facing; collar and
under collar; under sleeve and upper sleeve; pocket and
pocket facing; skirt—back, side back, front and belt. Five of
these sixteen pieces are used in cutting the lining, too: Jacket
side back and underarm section; under and upper sleeve; and
the pocket. Then there are three pieces used only in cutting the
-q lining: Skirt lining, jacket lining-front and lining-back.
There are two pieces used in cutting the interfacing; Collar
interfacing and front interfacing.
Study the Identification Chart, noticing in particular the
large 0-o’s marked “Straight of Goods” and the large 00’s
• • • near a straight edge which mean to place that edge on a fold
‘ of fabric. The Q’s on jacket front are for buttons and button-
holes; the small o perforations for darts and seamlines. Small
o pleat perforations will meet large o’s opposite.
■
op.* a bout fabrics. We chose a 54" wool flannel b
p, * |B » bout fabrics. We chose a 54" wool flannel because it’s
timeless, timely, and tailors beautifully. If you prefer a
tweed, broadcloth, or alpaca—fine!—but if you choose a 54"
fabric you can follow the Cutting Chart on the next page.


hick pattern LENGTH. Of course, you’ve bought the size corre-
spending most closely to your measurements (pages 2 and 3).
Nevertheless, check the lengths of jacket, sleeve and skirt patterns be-
fore cutting the fabric. Try the pattern on. First, pin the five jacket
pieces together (but not the sleeves!) very carefully and slip on over a
blouse or sweater, with a shoulder pad pinned to your right shoulder
(A). The oo on the jacket back and the bottom Q on the front are
where your waistline should be. Are they? If pattern is too long-waisted
for you, pin in a tuck across the pattern just above the waistline (Al).
If it’s too short, cut the pattern and pin in a tissue underlay (A 2).
Ask a friend to measure your arm from the shoulder to wrist (B),
elbow bent. Then compare with upper sleeve pattern (Bl). Add or
subtract above or below elbow in the same way as for the jacket (82,
B 3), making the same adjustments on both sleeve pieces.
Pin in pleats and side seam on skirt pattern and hold it up to you
(C). If you like, pin up the hem. Add or subtract in the same way just
below the hipline and at lower edge (Cl, C 2).
Unpin and smooth out the tissues. Even up any shaped seamlines
after altering. For adjustments other than length see pages 16 and 17.
qlacing, pinning, cutting. Is your flannel pre-shrunk? If not,
■shrink it (see Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15) or send it to your
tailor for shrinking. Press out center crease and any wrinkles. Then
straighten ends by cutting along a drawn-thread line. Fold the flannel
lengthwise, right side of fabric inside; pin selvages and ends together.
Place your fabric on table or floor for cutting. Pin pattern pieces to
your flannel as shown on the Cutting Chart below (D). Make sure
Straight-of-Goods O-O’s are parallel to selvages. Pin at 0-o’s first, then
other areas. Be careful to place straight edges marked “Lay on Fold”
exactly on the fold of fabric. Pin all along this edge first, then pin the
balance. Lift the fabric as little as possible when pinning (E).
Cut with the middle of the blades of your shears, sliding them along
(P)- Don’t lift fabric. Cut skirt belt and pocket facings last as you
have to open up the fabric to cut them. Cut the pocket facing marked
with a solid line first, then flip pattern over and cut the second,
marked with dotted line. Pin pocket facings together, right sides in-
side; repin pattern for marking. Save your scraps of flannel to use later,
for your skirt placket and the buttonholes on your jacket.


Marking the flannel. First, snip all
notches (A), being careful not to
snip too deeply. Then run a basting thread
down the center back of skirt, jacket (B),
collar and the center front of the skirt as
If you had to shorten or lengthen your
jacket, you’ll have to re-space your button
and buttonhole markings. Keeping top and
bottom ones, divide the distance between
into three even spaces, marking each of the
middle two with a pin, in same vertical line
with the n’s. Tailor tack at these pins; also
at all perforations except the Straight-of-
Goods and Lay-on-Fold large o’s, which
have served their role, and the small oo’s
on pocket marked on the Identification
Chart “Cut lining to this line.” When all
the marking is finished and pieces separat-
ed, run a basting thread line along center
front tailors’ tacks on each jacket front.


PIN, CUT. AND MARK THE LINING. Press
out any wrinkles in your lining fabric,
and straighten the raw edges by cutting
along a drawn-thread line as close to each
end as possible. Then fold lining length-
wise, right side inside and pin selvages and
ends together. Place and pin the pattern
pieces on fabric as shown on the Cutting
Chart at right (A). See how the top of the
pocket pattern is folded under on the small
oo line (A and G). All pieces, except the
skirt lining, are cut on the doubled fabric.
There are no fancy tricks, no flipping over
of the patterns. Just cut the jacket lining
carefully, as you did the flannel. Then open
up the fabric, pin on and cut the skirt lin-
ing. Now tailor tack all perforations (except
the Straight-of-Goods and Lay-on-Fold
large O-O’s) as you did on page 147. At
right you see all of the lining pieces cut
out and tailor tacked (B through G).
PIN, CUT, AND MARK INTERFACING. As
always, press out wrinkles on interfac-
ing, straighten ends and fold lengthwise;
pin ends and selvages together. If it seems
warped, as interfacing sometimes does, wet
it and iron it straight, so it will fold evenly.
Pin and cut front interfacings on doubled
fabric. (H)‘, unfold the fabric and pin on
the collar interfacing, making sure Straight-
of-Goods large 0-o’s are parallel to selvage.
This will make the collar interfacing true
bias at center back, which is correct. Tailor
tack interfacing,(J) . Run a basting thread
line at center back of the collar interfacing
(K)as a guide line for assembling purposes.


Basting the skirt. Pin and baste the
side backs to the back, matching VV’s
(A) and making sure right sides of fabric
are together. Then machine-stitch these
seams (Al). Press seams together, the way
they were stitched, as this is the underfold
of a pleat. To pleat the back, crease skirt
back on small o pleat lines and bring these
creases over to meet the large 0 lines on
side backs. Pin the pleat so tailors’ tacks
meet neatly (B). Baste each pleat flat near
the fold from the waistline of the skirt down
to the A mark (B), also across the top (Bl).
(We never stitch this pleat; the skirt lin-
ing, which you will put in after your fit-
ting, will hold it just this way.) Now pin
and baste sides of back to skirt front, leav-
ing the left side open above the V for your
zipper (C). Slip skirt front over a lapboard
(see Equipment, pages 4 and 5) or over the
end of your ironing board and make pleats
by creasing on small o-o’s and bringing
them over to meet the large 0-o’s. Baste
(D).
Check the belt size. OK? Then fold the
belt on the foldline, keeping the right side
inside; stitch ends, continuing stitching
along back lower edge to small oo (E).
Snip the corners (El); trim the seam;
turn belt right side out, working out cor-
ners with a large pin so they are square
(E 2). Press belt carefully on wrong side
(E 3). Then turn under seam allowance on
belt; pin it over waistline of skirt on outside,
matching centers and notches, small oo
marks at side seams. Baste (F). The other
edge of the belt is left loose for the time be-
ing. Pin up the hem, if you like. Now is the
time for you to try on the skirt to see how it
fits. So turn to the next page where we do it.


Basted fitting of skirt. Wear the
height of heels you’ll wear with your
suit and also a girdle, if you wear one. Lap
and pin your side opening and belt as they’ll
be when finished (A). Is the skirt snug
enough through the waist and hips? Is it
comfortable when sitting? How does it look
from the rear? Do center basting threads
and side seams hang straight? Make smaller
or larger seams —as the case may be—and
try it on again. Now, rip off the belt and
put it aside for awhile.
Stitching the skirt. First, we stitch the
side seams (B). You should pink these
seams (C), if that is to be your method of
finishing, before you press them open (see
Sewing Dictionary, pages 7-15, for seam
finishes). Don't pink the edges at the side
opening! Now—we attach the skirt lining,
which not only holds your back pleats but
also holds your fabric taut so the rear
doesn’t get that well-known “sat out” look.
Hem one end of the lining. Then turn the
side edges in and press. Pin to the stitching
of the pleat under fold seams (the side back
seams you pressed together, remember?),
matching notches. Hem securely by hand
along the stitching. Then finish seams below
skirt lining.
Skirt zipper. From the scraps you saved,
cut a strip of flannel 11/}"I 1 /}" wide cross-
wise and about 8" lengthwise for your
placket facing. Pin this strip to the front
edge of the opening, right sides together.
Baste and stitch (F). Trim the seam, turn the
facing inside (G) and press (H). Baste
from edge (J). Then turn under the back
edge of the opening %" outside of the seam-
line and pin it over the zipper tape as near the
metal teeth as possible, keeping the zipper
closed, the top of pull-tab below the
seamline at the top of the skirt. Baste and
stitch (J), being careful not to stretch the
skirt. Pin faced front edge to meet the seam-
line on back. Baste and stitch from edge
and across the end (K). Remove bastings.


Attaching the belt. Re-pin and re-
baste the belt over the outside of the
skirt as you had it for your fitting. Try it
on again, if you like. Turn the skirt inside
out and stitch on the machine (A). Remove
bastings and press, pressing the seam up-
ward toward the belt (B). Then turn under
seam allowance on other edge of belt, pin
and hem over the inside seam (C). Press
again (D). Always press as you go. It’s a
cardinal rule in successful sewing. Then sew
two hooks to the front edge of the belt, two
eyes to the back (E). If you sew your hooks
and eyes on professionally—as shown
here—they’ll stay sewed-on much longer.
Hemming the skirt. Wear the shoes
you wore for your basted fitting and
get into your girdle again, if you took it off
(who wouldn’t?). Then ask a friend to
mark the hemline with pins, measuring up-
ward from the floor (F). Turn hem; pin and
baste close to the fold (G) so it will be easier
to handle the raw edge. Measure the width
of the hem with a gauge (see Sewing Dic-
tionary, pages 7-15) and trim off so it is
even. Pin, haste and stitch seam binding to
the raw edge (H). Press. Then pin and
hem the binding to the skirt (J), catch-
ing up only a thread or two of the flannel
at each stitch and taking care not to tighten
your stitches. This will keep the stitches
invisible on the right side.
Pressing the skirt. Steam press with
a steam iron or a dampened press cloth
(see Equipment, pages 4 and 5), removing
any bastings (K). When pressing the soft
pleats, just run the point of your iron up
between the pleats, being careful not to press
in these pleats. But you should give the back
pleats a good pressing, pinning them in
place on the board before you press, so
lower edges are right. Then hang it on a
skirt hanger carefully so it won’t ripple or
“dip” in drying out. There—we’re half done.


Basting the jacket. Pin and baste side
backs to the back, matching VVV’s
(A). Then pin and baste the darts on the
side fronts, matching tailors’ tacks and start-
ing and ending the darts at nothing on the
single small o’s which mark the top and bot-
tom of the dart (B). Pin and baste these
darted pieces to the underarm sections (C),
matching V’s. Snip the side fronts to the
corner small o’s (Cl). Pin and baste side
fronts to fronts below the snipped corners,
matching V-V and tailors’ tacks (D);
notice how the lower edges of these two sec-
tions do not meet (E). There’s nothing
wrong, it’s because the front will be faced,
the sides and back hemmed. Then pin and
baste these same sections together crosswise
from the snipped corners to the neck, match-
ing VV (D).
Now—we put it together. Pin and baste
the underarm sections to the side backs,
matching VV and tailors’ tacks (E); pin
and baste the shoulders together, matching
V’s (F).
Get your two undercollar pieces. Got
them ? Then pin and baste them together at
center back, matching V’s (G). Pin under-
collar to the neck, right sides of fabric to-
gether, matching A-V-center back, small oo
tailors’ tacks at the shoulder. You pin from
the collar side, but baste on the wrong side
of the j acket, so you can see where to snip the
curved neck seam if it should draw (Gl).
Pin and baste upper and under sleeve sec-
tions together, right sides inside, matching
V’s, easing the upper section at the elbow
and stretching it at the inner side between
notches (H). Pin sleeves into the armholes,
matching notches and tailors’ tacks, small
oo tacks at shoulders. Also match small 000
tacks on under sleeves with small 000 marks
on jacket underarm sections (HI). Pin at
these points first, then in between them, ad-
justing the ease so it will be invisible when
finished. Hold the sleeves toward you when
pinning and basting for you must see how
to handle the ease so there will be no little
pleats or folds. Pin in the shoulder pads (J).
Now the jacket is ready for you to try on
for a fitting. You may turn up the hems
during the fitting if you like for the effect,
but leave them down to start.


Basted fitting of jacket. Slip the
jacket on (A), wearing your skirt and
a blouse or sweater. Pin center fronts to-
gether. If the jacket “ripples” across the
back, thin out the pads. Are the shoulders
just the right length? And does it fit up
snugly at the neck? Does it curve smoothly
at the waistline, curve where you curve at
the bust? If not, adjust the seams and darts
and try on again. Check the armholes and
the width of the sleeves, to make sure you
can move freely. It will be tighter when
lined! Make any alterations on both sides
of the jacket and try it on again. Turn up
the hems and pin them for the effect.
STITCHING THE jacket. First, remove
the basted undercollar and lay it aside
for now. Stitch the darts on side fronts (B),
starting from nothing at top and tapering
to nothing at bottom. Keep the first and last
few stitches parallel to fold. Tie off threads.
Press darts toward front (C). Then stitch
side fronts to underarm sections below the
armholes (D). Press seams open (E).
Now —your pockets. Pin, baste and stitch
your woollen pocket facings to the linings,
taking up %" seams (F). Press the seams
toward the lining (FI). Then pin and baste
the pocket facings to the pockets between
A’s, matching V’s. Pin and baste the lining
to the bottom of the pocket. Stitch where you
basted (G). Snip to A’s (G); trim the
seams; turn (Gl), and baste edges. Press
lower edge from lining side, top from pocket
side (G 2), as the top will turn outward
showing the facing. Rip the basted front
seams and back underarm seams below A’s
(H). Pin and baste lower edges of pockets
along hemlines on side fronts and underarm
sections. Baste along seamlines up to A
tailors’ tacks on each. No, the pocket is not
supposed to lie flat! Stitch the lower edges
only (H). The sides are stitched in when
stitching the seams. Then re-haste ripped
seams. Now—stitch all jacket seams (HI)
except your armholes and sleeves, opening
the shoulders enough to allow you to do so.
Re-haste and stitch shoulder seams. Press
all seams open (H 2), snipping seams at
waistline so they will lie flat.


INTERFACING AND UNDERCOLLAR. Pin
and baste the interfacing to the wrong
side of each front at neckline, front edge,
shoulder and armhole, matching tailors’
tacks (A). Fasten the interfacing to the
lapels and below the neck with padding
stitches (B, BI) for body and permanent
shape. As you work, roll the lapels outward
as they will be when finished so there will
be no drawing. In rolling, the upper layer
takes up slightly more fabric than the
under one. Use thread to match flannel and
catch in only a thread or two of it at a
stitch. Long stitch is on interfacing.
Stitch undercollar (C) and press the
seam open (Cl). Pin collar interfacing to
the wrong side of the undercollar (D);
baste at the roll-line and neckline only.
Stitch on the roll-line (D) and then run
rows of stitching below, *4" apart (DI).
Press. Fasten interfacing to the undercollar
beyond the roll-line with padding stitches
(E), rolling the undercollar as it will be
when worn (El), so it will hold the proper
shape. Press. Pin undercollar to the neck,
right sides together, matching tailors’ tacks-
V-center back-small oo tacks at the shoulder
seams (F). You may pin from the collar
side, but baste on the jacket side so you
can follow the neck curve. Snip neck of
jacket to release edge at curves. Then baste
*4" tape to neck between shoulders as a
stay. Stitch as basted (G). Press seam open
in front, upward in back (H).
The sleeves. Stitch sleeve seams (J)
and press open (JI) over a sleeveboard,
shrinking out (see Sewing Dictionary, pages
7-15) the ease at elbow. Re-baste sleeves to
armholes, if you opened the seams, holding
sleeves toward you as you work (K). Then
stitch on the machine (L). Trim seams to
about %" (M) and press over the end of a
sleeveboard (N), pressing the two edges
(three at interfacing) toward sleeve and
shrinking out fullness over end of board or
over a tailors’ cushion using a steam iron or
dampened press cloth with a dry iron. Press-
ing must be carefully done so the fullness
does not get pressed into pleats instead of
disappearing as it should. Use tip of iron.


Buttonholes. Run a vertical line of basting
stitches through your buttonhole tailors’
tacks, then a second line (A) parallel to the first
and 1" away (or the diameter of your buttons)
toward the side. Run a line of fine basting stitches
from each tailors’ tack to the other vertical line
marking centers of buttonholes.
Cut a strip of flannel for buttonhole bindings,
1" wider than buttonholes and 2" longer than
necessary to fit over buttonhole markings. (Cut
strip so the long measurement is cut on crosswise
weave of fabric.) Place strip over buttonhole
marks, right sides together, so ends extend I"
above and below top and bottom markings. Pin
and baste on crosswise and vertical buttonhole
markings (Al). Set your machine for 15 stitches
per inch. With binding up, stitch Ys" each side
of crosswise marks and across ends (B), starting
at center of one side. Sew slowly, counting the
number of stitches across ends so buttonholes will
be even. Remove bastings and markings; cut the
strip midway between buttonholes (Bl). Then
cut buttonholes, starting at center and cutting
midway between the stitching (C). Stop from
ends and snip to within a few threads of stitching
at corners. Work binding through slashes (D);
press all seams away from opening (E). Work
binding into small even welts (D and F), form-
ing tiny inverted pleats at ends on wTong side,
and sew ends securely (E).
COLLAR. FACING. First, adjust your pads and
tack them to the shoulder and armhole seams
(G). Find your collar and your front facings.
Pin, baste and stitch the collar to the front facings
between A and small oo marks, matching VV’s
(H) and snipping the facing (J) to A mark and
at the neck curve to release edge. These seams are
pressed open (K). Now, pin the collar and facing
to the jacket fronts and under collar, right sides
together, matching centers, notches and tailors’
tacks. Baste, then stitch on the machine (L). Trim
the seam (M), trimming the interfacing very
closely, almost to the seam; then the j acket a little
less close; and the facing a more normal
This method of trimming will give you a nice, flat
edge when the facing is turned inside, which we
do right now (N). Then baste all around the
edges (0), so facing will stay put while you’re
pressing. Baste so seam does not show on right
side. Press (P), removing bastings as you pro-
ceed, so they won’t leave marks on the flannel.


Finish facings and hems. First, after
you have finished pressing, turn your
collar and lapels to the outside, as they will
be worn. From the inside, pin the raw edges
of collar and facings flat to back neck seam,
shoulders and interfacing (A). This rolling
over takes up more material than you think
(like the sections of an onion, each one of
which is successively larger). So if you were
to pin it in a flat position, as on a table,
instead of rolling it over to the outside, it
would not fit properly. Now slip your jacket
on. (Doesn’t it look nice?) Lap and pin it
as it will be when the buttons are sewed on.
Turn the sleeves under along the tailor-
tacked hemline. Length OK? If they’re too
long, take a deeper hem; if too short, a
shallower one. Pin the sleeve hems. Then
turn up the hem of the jacket along the
tailor-tacked hemline, continuing from end
of facing seam; pin this hem. Take off the
jacket. Press the hems to flatten them and
shrink out the ease. Then catch-stitch raw
edges flat to inside (B, Bl). We show an
enlarged detail of how to catch-stitch (B 2).
Sew the collar and facings by hand to the
inside now, as they are pinned (C and D).
Finish pinning the facing (E) to the in-
side of the fronts. Some of this will just fit
over the side-front seam. Sew flat by hand as
it is pinned. Snip the facing at the top of
the hem; turn it in below the snip and slip-
stitch it to the hem (El, E 2).
Pressing. Press the sleeve hems over a
sleeveboard, pressing upward toward the
sleeves (F and FI). Give your jacket a final
pressing before you go on to the lining.
If you don’t have a steam iron, use a damp
pressing cloth under your iron and press on
the wrong side. Don’t push the iron and
don’t bear down on it. Pat the fabric with
your hand to hold the steam in the fibres.
And don’t press the fabric dry or your fab-
ric will shine.


Your lining. If you made any altera-
tions on the flannel in the basted fitting,
make the same on your lining. Then pin,
baste and stitch the released pleats on front
at shoulder (A) and waistline (C) by meet-
ing the small o tailor-tacked lines with the
large 0 lines and stitching them together
on the wrong side. Press the folds toward
the front edge (B and D). Stitch all the
jacket-lining seams —except the shoulders—
matching notches (E). Press seams open
(E) and press the lining thoroughly. Stitch
the sleeve lining seams and press open over
a sleeveboard (F).
.. ttaching the lining. Drape your
§\ jacket on a form or hang it on a hanger,
wrong-side out. Slip lining over it so wrong
sides are together. Pin seams together (G).
Baste lining to the flannel at the armholes,
starting 1" below shoulders at back (H).
Sew the lining to the flannel at the side-
front seams, working from underneath (J).
Turn in the front edge of the lining and
pin it against the front facing (J). Baste
the front lining over the shoulder seams
(J). Hem lining to facing (K). Turn in the
back lining shoulder and pin it over the
front (K); hem. Lay a soft pleat at the cen-
ter back by bringing the small o pleat marks
on one side over to meet the same line on
the other (L). Make bar-tacks through pleat
to hold it in place at neck, at the waistline
and lower edge (LI). Use buttonhole twist
and take two or three crosswise stitches *4"
long through the layers (L 2). These stitches
form a base which you work over closely
through the fabric the way you do a stem
stitch in embroidery (L 3). Then turn in the
lining along the seamline at the neck, snip-
ping as necessary, pin and hem along the
sewing on the collar (M). Adjust and pin
the lining at the lower edge (N), allowing
ample length so the lining won’t draw. Slip
the jacket on to make sure the lining isn’t
too long and doesn’t pull up the hem. Then
hem it against the flannel (Nl).


Lning continued. Now, slip your sleeve
linings over your sleeves, pinning seams
together (A). Turn in seam allowance at
top, pin and hem over the armhole seams
(B). Then turn under the bottom of the lin-
ing and pin to the sleeve hems, allowing
ample length (C). Slip the jacket on again
to make sure it’s right. Then hem it against
the flannel hem (D).
Buttonholes, buttons. First,pin your
jacket and facing together close to the
buttonholes. Cut the facing under the but-
tonholes one at a time. Start to cut on out-
side at center of buttonhole (E). Turn to
inside and finish cutting, so you can see that
the cut does not go beyond the sewing at
each end of the binding (El). Turn in
the edges and hem them by hand against the
buttonhole binding (F), starting at center
of one side.
Only one—oops!—sorry —two more steps
and we’re through. First, your buttons.
Sew your buttons to the □ tailors’ tacks on
the left front (G), sewing over a pin to keep
the thread loose. Sew your buttons on
securely (Gl), winding thread around loose
stitches under button to form shank. Try
on again, just to make sure everything is
perfect before the last step, which is ...
Final pressing. Unless you’re an expert
presser, it would be wise to take your suit
to a professional (your cleaner or tailor)
for it deserves the best.
Did you ever dream—when first you
learned to follow a pattern, cut, and tailor
tack (back in the days when you first tackled
your chemise dress) —that you’d ever be
able to make a suit like this?
You did it! And now —you’re on your
own. But if ever you need help, please don’t
hesitate to call on us.


MAKE THE SUIT AGAIN
AND AGAIN


