

VOICE PRODUCTION
Entered at Stationer s Hall.]
[Copyright.
(DELSARTE’S METHOD),
BY
REV. J. EDGAR FOSTER, M.A.
(CANTAB.),
Graduate in Elocution and Oratory of the University of Kansas
City (by Special Diploma).
(Disciple of the famous Orator, Francois Delsarte.)
SECOND EDITION.
Price: Two Shillings and Sixpence
and Sixpence.
3/6
Sole Agent for the sale of the Rev. Edgar Foster’s Works:
Alfred Watson, Washington R. 5.0., co. Durham.




VOICE PRODUCTION
Entered at Stationer's Hall. ]
[ Copyright.
(DELSARTE’S METHOD),
BY
REV. J. EDGAR FOSTER, M.A.
(CANTAB.),
Graduate in Elocution and Oratory of the University of Kansas
City (by Special Diploma).
(Disciple of the famous Orator, Francis Delsarte.)
SECOND EDITION.
Price: Two Shillings and Sixpence.
Sole Agent for the sale of the Rev. Edgar Foster’s Works:
Alfred Watson, Washington R. 5.0., co. Durham.




Voice Production.
(DELSARTE'S METHOD.)
The bad qualities of the voice are impurity, rough-
ness, hoarseness, harshness, wheezing, hollowness,
flatness, shrillness, and the nasal tang.
Impurity is due to the causes by which noises are
mixed with the tone of the voice. These causes are
very numerous : an obstruction of the vocal chords
by excessive or unhealthy secretions, or when the
improper action of the diaphragm and breathing
muscles forces too much breath over these chords ;
inflammation and swelling of the chords from the
affection of colds, or sore throat; obstruction of the
resonant cavities and breathing tubes ; an imperfect
control over the organs of articulation.
Flatness arises from a want of elasticity in the
vocal cavities, caused by excess, fatigue, or exhaustion,
whether physical or mental.
Hollowness is due to the feebleness of the breath-
ing organs, In such cases, the breathing apparatus


fails to expel a sufficient volume of air to be vocalized
by the chordal vibrations into solid sound. It is due,
further, to the imperfect action and co-operation of
the other vocal organs. Shrillness is caused by too
high pitch. When the voice is exerted on too high
a pitch, its capacity is strained, and it becomes shrill.
The resonance is thrown almost wholly into the arch
of the roof of the mouth.
Trembling is due to a want of control over the
breathing organs. This quality may be voluntarily
produced, for purposes of expression, by alternately
checking and expelling the breath.
The nasal tang is produced by obstruction of the
front nasal cavities. Any cause which obstructs in
front the free passage of the breath through the
nostrils, will render the voice nasal.
A proper management of the voice, is the very
soul of good speaking ; and therefore no method
should be left untried which tends to increase its
strength, sweetness, and harmony. Few voices are
too weak for public speaking, when managed with
due address ; for audibility depends more on a proper
pitch of voice, and distinctness of articulation, than
on boisterous and sonorous loudness. It should fill,
without overcharging the place of exhibition; for when
the departing and commencing sounds encounter each
other, they produce discord, instead of distinctness
and melody. In all discourses of any considerable


length, speakers should avoid a vociferous beginning,
and rather pitch below than above the common level
of the voice ; for the attention of their audience is
then so much awake, that their softest accents are
perfectly audible ; and they are thereby enabled to
diversify their delivery with every requisite variety of
tone. Through the whole discourse it must.be kept
within due bounds,—be frequently recalled, when
rising too high, from the extremities of an auditory,
and directed to persons pretty near the speaker : this
will generally have a good effect, at the different
divisions and subdivisions of the subject.
The bad qualities of the voice will be corrected,
and its good qualities—purity, resonance, flexibility,
soundness, and melody—developed by an observance
of the following rules.
ATTITUDE.
Stand easily erect, the chest a little forward, the
body slightly drawn in, and the weight of the body
on the balls or fore part of the feet, the heels resting
lightly on the, ground. Extend the lower jaw as
much as possible. Let the corners of the lower lip
press against the lower teeth, with a finger’s breadth
between the upper and lower teeth.
BREATHING.
I place a wine-glass, a goblet, and a sponge on
the table, before a class of my pupils ; holding up the


sponge, I ask the class to tell me something about it;
little children may say it comes out of the water, we
clean things with. This may sometimes exhaust the
ideas of a class of children on the subject. Igo on
and tell them how and where the sponge grew, and
how and when growing all its pores were filled with
water, and that, when taken from its home on the
rocks, deep down in the sea, it grew harsh and dry,
and its pores closed, as they could see. Then I hand
the sponge round from one to another ; they observe
its hard shrunken appearance : I ask one of them to
put it in the wine-glass, which I fill with water. Their
eyes are quick to notice that the water soon disappears
and the sponge expands, and appears to need more
space. Some one will suggest, Put it into the goblet.
This being done the sponge slowly grows to its full
size. We then talk upon the necessity of plenty of
space and water in order that the sponge shall develop
to its natural shape.
I take a pair of bellows, my pupils handle it, and
observe its working. I explain to them that it is
used to force a current of air, and that it consists of
a nozzle, an air chamber, and two handles. They
observe the separated handles, and that opening them
fills the air chamber, and that bringing the handles
together, forces the air through and from the nozzle ;
also, that it is only necessary to open the chamber,
and the air rushes in without their assistance, and


remains there while the handles are held apart, but
that if the hand is removed from one handle, the air
will slowly escape.
I explain as simply as possible the structure and
functions of the lungs. I ask them what they re-
semble, they answer invariably, The sponge ; pointing
to two pictures, the one with a constricted waist, the
other with a natural one, I ask to what we may
compare these two bodies, they answer, To the wine-
glass and goblet; I ask them if they wish to breathe
freely which figure they must resemble, The goblet,
they say.
I foHow this by impressing on them the importance
of giving the lungs sufficient room to expand, and the
necessity for air to keep open the lung cells as water
is necessary to keep open the cells of the sponge.
Upon this subject I dwell long with my pupils, for
this is a matter which will determine not only the
possibility of their advance in my study, but ultimately
the preservation and development of the race to which
we belong. The unconstricted natural form, enabling
them to give expression through the organs of speech
to their thoughts, while at the same time preserving
and developing their strength and powers, the other
ending their lives prematurely, as the thin stem of the
wine-glass snaps in our hands.
“Breathing, according to its form of production,
is : (i) Costal or combined ; (2) diaphragmatic ; (3)


costo-diaphragmatic. Breathing is a triple act based
upon three phenomena: Inspiration, suspension, expi-
ration. From the successive predominance of each of
these three phenomena, or from their equal balance,
result eighty-one respiratory acts, which may be
reduced to three terms : The breathing is normal ,
spasmodic , or sibilant.
There are three questions to be considered in
regard to breathing :
1. How should it, the breath, be produced to gain
the greatest development for the voice ?
2. What place should it occupy in speech ?
3. What aspect does it assume under the influence
of the passions ?
In other words, three characters may be attributed
to respiration : Vocal, logical, pathetic or passional.
VOCAL RESPIRATION.
The lungs constantly contain a quantity of air,
which is the source of life, and with which we cannot
dispense without inconvenience to health and to the
voice. The quantity of air requisite for the renewing
of the blood, and which is called the breath of life,
amounts to a third of what the lungs are capable of
receiving. In order to sing, therefore, it must be
increased by two-thirds, and it is this borrowed breath
only which should be given out in singing. When the


lungs are thus filled with air, the sound is produced
by the escapement. From this it receives greater
force, and its production, far from being a fatigue,
becomes a relief.
Inspiration should always be followed by a suspen-
sive silence ; otherwise the lungs, agitated by the act
of inspiration, perform the expiration badly.
LOGICAL RESPIRATION.
Logical respiration constitutes the respiration itself.
Suspension expresses reticence, disquietude. Inspi-
ration is an element of dissimulation, concentration,
pain. Hence we have normal, oppressive, spasmodic,
superior, sibilant, rattling, intermittent, crackling, and
hiccoughing respiration.
Expiration is an element of trust, expansion, confi-
dence and tenderness. If the expression contains both
pain and love, the inspiration and expiration will both
be noisy ; but the one or the other will predominate
according as pain predominates over love, or vice versa.
PASSIONAL RESPIRATION.
The source of passional respiration lies in the
agitation of the heart. The effect of respiration is
most powerful, for the slighter and more imperceptible
the phenomena are, the more effect they have upon
the auditors.” *
* Delsarte.


EXERCISES.
Stand as directed above ; place the fingers on the
abdominal muscles and the thumbs on the costal
muscles ; take a full breath, making the abdominal
muscles start first, and move outward ; then let the
muscles sink as the breath comes out. Make these
muscles move in and out as much as you can, and
keep the shoulders perfectly still.
Exercise. —Repeat several times forcibly :—Ah,
bah, kah, dah, fay, gay, hay, re, ye, ke, le, me, ne.
The richness and volume of sound depend upon
the quantity of air in the lungs, and its compression
there. To compress the air, fully inflate the lungs,
keep the diaphragm down, and closing the glottis,
contract the expiratory muscles.
Exercise I. —Begin by retaining the air for only
an instant, and gradually and cautiously increase the
time of retention. Fill the lungs, retain the air, and
then give a rapid emission.
Exercise ll. —Fill the lungs, retain the air, and
then exhale as slowly as possible.
N.B.—ln all the following exercises, and when
engaged in reading aloud, speaking, or singing, after
every inspiration, compress the air for an instant.
BODY MOVEMENTS.
The muscles of the waist are the front or abdomi-
nal, the side or costal, the back or dorsal muscles.


These muscles are very important in speech ; and
upon the strength and elasticity of these, and the inner
muscles acting in connection with them, depend the
force and strength of your voice. Three very simple
movements are here given, which will give some
measure of strength and elasticity to these muscles.
1. Body bend forward and back. From standing
position bend forward, keeping the back straight, and
bending only at the hip-joints ; touch the floor with
your hands, if you can ; then assume upright position,
and bend back as far as you can.
2. Bend right and left. From standing position,
bend to right side as far as possible, bending only at
the waist, and stretching at the costal muscles ; then
assume upright position, and bend to the left in same
manner.
3. Turn right and left. From standing position
turn the body on the waist, keeping the hips still, and
twisting the waist-muscles, first to the right and then
to the left.
NECK MOVEMENTS.
The neck movements are necessary, because many
of the disagreeable qualities of the voice are due to
inelasticity of the muscles of the neck. The move-
ments are in the same directions as for the body.
1. Bend forward and back.
2. Bend right and left.


3. Turn right and left.
It is not necessary to describe them at length :
but, in bending right and left, be careful to keep the
head from bending slightly backward or forward at
the same time ; and, in the turning of the head, keep
it erect.
THE LIPS.
Open the mouth in every direction as far as you
can. Smile with the lips tightly closed, and then
quickly protrude the lips. Repeat rapidly until tired.
This exercise is intended to correct the fault that
many persons have of speaking with stiff lips and
closed mouth. The practice is simple, and absurd in
appearance ; but you will appreciate the value and
need of it, for a perfect enunciation, when you observe
how seldom the mouth is sufficiently opened.
THE LABIALS.
Bas in buttercup. Pas in pansy. M as in Mag-
nolia. Was in witch hazel. Vas in violet. Fas
in fuchsia. Separate the labials from the words, and
then blend them in again with as much power as you
can command.
THE TONGUE.
Keep the lower jaw and lips immovable while the
tongue is exercising.


1. Draw the tongue back as far as possible.
2. Extend it out of the mouth to its extreme
length.
3. Draw it back very quickly.
4. Flatten it; then with the tip touch the inner
side of the lower front teeth, and then push it out to
its full length, keeping the tip in the same position.
5. Draw back rapidly, flatten the root, then raise
the tip perpendicularly and very slowly toward the
roof of the mouth, and then resume the original
position.
6. Describe a circle with it, and then touch both
cheeks rapidly several times. Any similar exercise
will do, the effort being to make the tongue supple.
Suggestions.
It will be well to brush the tongue with pure
white Castile soap and water, now and then, after
the exercise, which should be taken morning and
night until every physical movement of this great
speech-maker is mastered.
Be careful not to go through the exercises more
than twice at the first practice, for the tongue is
very sensitive of any violent use and may give you
discomfort.
Remember that the only way to realize any benefit
from these instructions is to obey them.


CHEST EXPANSION.
N.B. In all the following exercises, and when
engaged in reading aloud, speaking, or singing, after
every inspiration, compress the air for an instant.
Assume what is called “ the military position.”
Heels slightly apart, feet well out, hands hanging
down and open to the front ; chest slightly inclined
forward ; abdomen drawn in ; head erect; eyes look-
ing directly forward ; the weight of the body resting
more on the fore part of the feet than upon the heels ;
the jaw, lower lip, and teeth, as above.
1. Take a full deep inspiration. Retain air as
long as possible, and then let the breath go out
steadily and slowly. At the same time beat the chest,
abdomen, and back with the hands, gently in front,
but smartly on the sides and back. Keep up this
movement during six respirations.
2. Hold the arms full length, in front, then throw
them backward with force, and strike the back of the
hands together. Repeat forty times, counting aloud
at each backward movement.
3. From the same commencing position, strike
the elbows together behind. Repeat forty times.
4. Place the arms in front, easily hanging, and
then throw forcibly downwards, the hands being
closed meanwhile.


5. From the same position, bring the arms for-
cibly to the breast. Repeat forty times, counting
aloud.
6. From the same position, throw the arms out
laterally. Repeat forty times. Count with the out-
ward motion.
7. Place the arms as in “hands to breast,” then
throw arms upward as far as possible, without raising
the heels from the floor.
8. Make all these arm movements in rapid
succession.
Exercise for the Vocal Chords.
1. Take a deep breath, and exhale with the
whispered sound of “ah.” Prolong this expiration
for several seconds.
2. Fill the lungs as before and prolong the
whispered “ ah,” with a free opening of the vocal
chords —the same position of the organs as in sound-
ing the lowest note of the musical scale. Then
change the position of the organs to that employed
in the production of the highest notes, graduating
the exercise through several varying tones. Let the
expiration be moderate.
3. Fill the lungs and give expulsive action to
the muscles, the breath escaping through the larynx
and not through the nose, as in uttering the whispered
syllable “who.”


4. Inspire as above, making a complete occlusion
of the vocal chords, and then let the breath be forced
out with an explosive effort as in pronouncing “ hah ”
three times with a vigorous expulsion of the full
breath.
5. Draw in the breath, and expire it audibly, as
in the prolonged sound of the letter k.
6. Inhale and exhale rapidly, as in panting.
N.B. —Practice the last two exercises moderately
to avoid injury.
To Develope the Throat for Speaking
or Singing.
Depress the larynx (the pomum Adami) as far as
you can by contracting the muscles. If you cannot
accomplish this exercise by muscular effort, adopt
the following plan. Put out your tongue as far as
you are able, and then draw it in quickly and down-
ward. Practice before a mirror. Perform this
exercise for five minutes twice a day.
To Impart Brilliancy to the Voice.
Inhale a full breath, and retain for a second, then
give it out in a forceful and abrupt manner, with open
mouth, direct from the throat. Do not move the body.
The explosive is used in vehement language and in
powerful description. It usually manifests itself in
the bursting of the voice on a single word.


Exercises.
1. Men, at some time, are masters of their fates.
2. “ Halt! ”—the dust-brown rank stood fast;
“ Fire ! ”—out blazed the rifle blast.
3. Again to the battle , Achaians !
Our hearts bid the tyrants defiance !
Our land, the first garden of liberty’s tree,
It has been, and shall yet be, the land of the free !
For the cross of our faith is replanted ,
The pale, dying crescent is daunted ,
And we march that the footprints of Mahomet’s
slaves
May be washed out in blood from our forefathers’
graves.
4. Fire ! Fire ! ! was raging above and below.
5. Quick ! Quick ! brave spirits, to his rescue fly ;
Up ! Up ! by heavens ! This hero must not die !
6. Strike —till the last armed foe expires,
Strike —for your altars and your fires,
Strike—for the green graves of your sires,
God — and your native land !
THE FORMATION OF THE ELEMENTARY
SOUNDS.
An accurate knowledge of the way in which the
elementary sounds are formed, is very important to
those who would speak with ease and elegance.


Articulate sounds are divided into vowels and
consonants. The true vowels are open sounds as they
are called, and are generated in the larynx. They are
merely uninterrupted vocal tones, variously modified
in their outward passage, by alterations in the shape
of the parts of the oral cavity through which they
u
pass ; thus in uttering the pure vowel sounds, a, a, e,
o, u, pronounced respectively as in the words far, fate,
ell, old, and in French words containing the u , one
and the same sound produced by the vibrations of the
vocal chords, is converted into five different sounds,
by changes in the position of the tongue, and by the
gradual prolongation of the cavity of the mouth, by
means of the lips ; the most natural of these vowel
sounds, or the most easily uttered, is the broad a. In
the same manner the diphthong sounds, i, ei, eu , and
the sounds of y and w , at the beginning of words are
vocal tones, modified by further changes in the shape
and form of the mouth. Consonants, or shut sounds,
are entirely formed in the parts above the larynx, and
are so named, because most, if not all of them, can be
sounded only consonantly, that is, with another sound
or vowel. They require for their production, a shut-
ting or valve-like action to take place, either between
the lips, as in pronouncing the letters b, p , and m, or
between the upper teeth and lower lip, as in the case
of/ and v ; or between the tongue and the palate, as
d , g hard, c hard, k , y, t, r, /, and n, or between the


tongue and the teeth, as in the production of hissing
sounds, such as c soft, or s and .sr. The compound
articulate sounds, as j or g soft, ch soft, ch guttural,
ph , sh, th , ng, and x, are produced by modifications, or
combinations of some of the other pure consonant
sounds. The aspirate his produced by an increased
expiratory effort, made with the mouth open, before a
vowel or other sound.
Those consonants which are produced by, or
connected with, a sudden stoppage of the breath at
a certain point, the opening leading from the pharynx
to the nose being quite closed, and all the respired
air passing through the mouth, are called explosive
consonants. They are of two kinds : the simple ex-
plosive consonants, b , d , and g hard ; and the aspirate
explosives, p, t, k \ these, when uttered, are unaccom-
panied by a vocal sound, that is, they are attended
with an intonation of the voice. Those consonants
which can be produced without a complete stoppage
of the breath, previous to their utterance, are called
continuous ; some of these sounds are developed by
the passage of the air, with a degree of friction
through the mouth ; in this way the consonants v, f,
s , and z, are produced by expiration through the nose
only, as ng , m ) and n. In uttering the letters / and r }
the air escapes through the nose and mouth ; in pro-
nouncing the first of these, the air escapes at the sides
of the tongue ; in pronouncing the sound, the tongue


undergoes a vibratory movement. All the continuous
consonants can be pronounced with a vocal sound,
except the aspirate h ; and some of them can be
pronounced either with or without vocal intonation.
Consonants have also been named according to the
seat of their production : thus p is called a labial , t a
palatal , n a nasal , and the Gaelic ch a guttural con-
sonant ; but this classification is exceedingly artificial
and incorrect : for the greater number of articulate
sounds are the result of the conjoined action of the
mouth, lips, palate, and upper part of the air-passage.
THE TIME WHEN TO PRACTISE
THE VOICE.
The best time for practising the voice, is between
ten and twelve in the morning, and from five to eight
o’clock in the afternoon. To commence too early in
the morning is injudicious ; the secretion of mucus
being more abundant about that time, the voice is
thereby affected. It will, moreover, be found that
the high notes are then not so easily produced. The
duration of the lessons is also of some consequence.
Children should never be kept at the lessons longer
than half an hour, nor adults longer than one hour
and a quarter.
In studying the following exercises, let the head
be erect, the chest out, the shoulders drawn back,
and the stomach drawn in. Protrude the lower jaw


as far as you possibly can. Press the sides of the
lips against the lower jaw, and, opening the mouth
without disarranging them, take a deep inspiration.
Hold the air a second, with the abdomen raised, then
pronounce the sounds, allowing the abdomen to
fall back. In singing or speaking, as soon as the
sound has left the lips repeat the above moyements
simultaneously.
ARTICULATION.
Articulation is a clear, forcible, and pleasing
utterance of every audible letter of which a word is
composed. It is of equal importance in the art of
speaking, with the just sounding of simple notes in
the science of music. The principal causes of indis-
tinct articulation are, a habit of passing too slightly
over unaccented syllables, and words of difficult
pronunciation ; which seems to proceed from care-
lessness, a conscious inability to sound them properly,
or a desire to conceal the ignorance of their just
pronunciation, by absurdly supposing it possible—to
obliterate one error by the substitution of a greater ;
an inattention to pausing, which often obliges a
speaker to separate parts of a sentence which should
be joined, and to join such as should be separated ;
the mistaking of one word for another, which, by
obscuring the sense, deranges the ideas, and occasions
hesitation and stumbling ; a keeping of the teeth too


close, which confines the voice, and renders a due
degree of force impracticable ; a falling too low at
the ends of sentences, which, by making the hearer
lose the last words, breaks the connection, and leaves
either a feeble or unfavourable impression on his
mind ; and a delivering with too much rapidity,
which obliges the speaker sometimes to drop words
altogether, sometimes to confound sentences with one
another, and sometimes to stumble so excessively, as
to render it almost impossible to understand him.
Persons chargeable with any or all of these defects,
ought to appropriate a certain portion of their time
to reading pretty loud, and much slower than would
be proper in a public assembly ; to articulate the
smallest particle distinctly, and go over words of
difficult pronunciation so deliberately, as to make
the sound of every syllable perfectly perceptible ; to
gain a thorough knowledge of the piece, and make its
phraseology familiar to them, before they venture to
read it aloud, either with a design to improve their
utterance by their own ears, to entertain their friends,
or to receive the criticisms of judicious hearers ; to
open their mouth pretty wide, that the voice may
vent itself freely, and that they may be able to raise
and lower, swell and soften it at pleasure ; in short,
to guard against a feeble ineffectual utterance on the
one hand, and excessive vociferation on the other.
And thus shall they be able to proceed with due


deliberation, to make pauses of proper length, to
pronounce the most difficult words without hesitation,
and to inspire a sufficient quantity of breath to give
force and effect to the longest discourse.
In order, however, to become an effective singer,
the possession of a good ear and a fine voice, though
essential requisites, is not sufficient; as the art of
regulating the voice, and of managing its powers can
be acquired only by making it a particular study, and
by long and close application.
The old Italian masters almost concentrated their
attention in teaching a perfect delivery of the voice,
which consisted, in adapting, as nearly as possible, the
respiratory motions to the emissions of the voice, so as
to bring out its natural power without much effort.
Pachierotti, a famous maestro , said to his pupils :
“ Deliver well your voice, respire properly, articulate
distinctly, and your singing will be perfect.”
The vocal cords should meet together at the very
instant the air strikes them ; they are not pressed
together too tightly ; there is no undue escape of air
and no obstacle to be overcome, and the consequence
is that the tone is struck clear and decisive. This is
the true and proper action, and being continued, the
result is a clear, perfect, and pleasing tone.
The expiratory effort ceases while the glottis opens
at the same time. This is the true method of closing
a tone, and should be followed by all those who wish


to keep their vocal organs in good condition, and
produce a clear and natural tone. In practising the
following exercise let the student be careful to open
and close the tone according to the above. Use the
long vowels, a (as in arm) ; a (as in ale) ; e (as in Eve) ;
o (as in old) ; a (as in all).
ELEMENTARY SOUNDS.
In the following exercises, use the sound, not the
names of the letters which represents the sound, and
practise separately the sounds represented by the italic
letters below. You will do well, and improve, if you
try the best you can in your own way.
Vowels.
e as in meet. e as in m^t.
a ~ ~ m#y. a ~ ~ at.
ai ~ ~ air. a ~ ~ Cub#.
e „ „ her. u „ „ up.
a ~ ~ ah. oo ~ ~ foot.
a „ „ awe. i „ „ pie.
o „ „ oh. oi „ „ oil.
o ~ ~ ore. ou ~ ~ out.
oo ~ ~ woo. u „ ~ you.
i ~ ~ it.
To read the following extract by the vowel-sounds
will be found excellent practice.
“ By the term Liberty, I understand a freedom
from all responsibility, except what morality, virtue,


and religion impose. That is the only liberty which
is consonant with the true interests of man—the only
liberty that renders his association with his fellows
permanent and happy—the only liberty that places
him in a peaceful, honourable, and prosperous com-
munity—the only liberty that makes him the son of
a land that he would inhabit till his death, and the
subject of a state that he would defend with his
property and his blood.”
CONSONANTS OR ARTICULATIONS.
P as in /ay. j as in jew.
wh „•„ why l „ „ /ay.
f „ „ /ie. r „ „
th „ „ //an. -er „ „ zeal,
t „ „ /ie. zh ~ „ a^ure.
ch „ „ chew. y „ „ ye.
s j) >j see. g » )j
sh „ „ shoe. m „ „ may.
k „ „ key. n „ „ aigh.
b „ „ bay. ng „ „ sing,
w „ „ way. li „ „ he , hay ,
„ „ zue. /zo, is a whispered
th „ „ //£en. vowel.
d ~ ~ afie.
Practise these sounds of vowels and articulations
until you can make them forcibly and easily, with
elastic movement of jaw, tongue, and lips ; and


remember that force depends on the strength and good
control of the muscles below the lungs. Then unite
them by placing articulations before vowels, giving
most force to the vowel, but make both clear and
distinct. Then use articulations both before and after
the vowel, still giving the vowel the most force, but
making the articulation that begins and ends equally
distinct and clear.
Exercise I. Take a word, and emphasize equally
each syllable. Drawl it 11 el-o, cu-tion.” Practise
other words in the same way.
Exercise II Name the letters of the alphabet,
with varying degrees of force, movement, and pitch.
Exercise 111. Take a sentence, and whisper it to
persons at a little distance.
Exercise IV. Frequently practise on difficult
combinations of elements. Repeat the following
lines rapidly. Peter Prangle, the prickly pear picker,
picked three pecks of prickly prankly pears from the
prickly pear trees on the pleasant prairies ; or, Theo-
philus Thistleton thoroughly thrashed three thin
tinkers travelling through Totten ; since Theophilus
Thistleton thoroughly thrashed three thin tinkers
travelling through Totten, tremblingly, travelling
tinkers tread through Totten.
TO DARKEN THE VOICE.
The voice has two sides : its dark and its bright.
The bright side has clear, brilliant, happy tones. The


dark side delineates solemnity, gloom, sadness. It is
full of soul—emotion.
The bright side is unemotional, light, superficial.
The dark side is rich in feeling, and resonant; it
has great power over others.
To acquire the dark tones make a distinction
between a happy and a gloomy tone.
Repeat the following phrases in a slightly elevated
pitch.
“ I am so happy.”
To be said with the utmost cheerfulness and
animation.
. “ I am so sad.”
To be said with the utmost gloom—almost a
moan.
Exercise.
Carry the bright side into the upper and lower
pitches of the voice, and the dark side into the upper
and lower pitches. The low pitch means seriousness
on its bright side ; and on its dark side it adds the
greatest solemnity to seriousness. Practise on the
long vowels.
PURITY OF TONE.
Purity and richness of tone depend upon the
economy of breath, the free vibration of the vocal
cords, and the healthfulness and freedom of the


resonant cavities. We should speak with the expen-
diture of as little unvocalized breath as possible.
Frequently the resonant cavities become clogged by
disease or diminished by disuse : any practice that
will clear and enlarge these cavities will give clearness
of reflection. A pure quality of voice is not only
agreeable to the ear of the listener, but it enables
the speaker to be heard in a large room without much
expenditure of power.
In our endeavours to develop the Pure Timbre,
we should practise incessantly.
Exercise I. Sing the syllable sea to the tones of
the diatonic scale, soft and mellow, then crescendo
and loud.
Rule.
Locate the focus of sound properly. The air
should rebound from immediately above the front
upper teeth, where it must be concentrated as much
as possible, rebounding thence to form in the mouth
continuous vibrations. A faithful observance of the
rules as to breathing and compression will accomplish
this object. At the same time, the tone should be
projected to a distant point, as if directed to an
individual across the street.
Exercise II Utter the sounds, long a , long e ,
ah, awe , long o, and 00, first in gentle tones, then
loudly in turn.


There are two great causes of indistinctness of
utterance. Your words do not carry to a large audi-
ence because you do not propel them with sufficient
force ; or, if they are sent forcibly enough, a faulty
articulation will render them indistinct. Cut out the
sounds clearly ; give each one time that it may not
destroy its neighbour ; vitalize fully, and your listeners
will not complain of being unable to understand* you.
SWEETNESS OF VOICE.
There are some persons whose organs are so formed
by nature that they have a secret power of moving
our affections, even when we are not able to adapt
any determinate idea to the sounds that proceed from
them ; and we are often more affected by the com-
plaints of a person, who delivers them in a language
wholly unknown to us, than we should have been by
any thing he would have been able to say to us, if he
had spoken in a language with which we were both
acquainted, but with less persuasive tones. Indeed
the charms of a sweet voice atone for many disad-
vantages : we frequently find the testimonies of our
ears carrying us beyond those of our other senses :
this is especially the case with respect to ladies, and
many a woman who appears indifferent to us, when
only seen, charms us almost to adoration, when we
hear her speak :—Her tones


“ Come o’er the ear like the sweet south,
That breathes upon a bank of violets —
Stealing and giving odour.”
In the following exercise the mind should be firmly
fixed on the thought which is being spoken aloud.
The subjoined quotations will suffice for practice.
Repeat each hundreds of times. When any timbre is
established in the voice it is there to stay.
First Quotation. Pure and Bright.
“ One by one, in the infinite meadows of heaven,
blossomed the lovely stars, the forget-me-nots of the
angels.”
Second Quotation. Pure, with Varying
Shades of Bright and Dark.
“ How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank !
Here will we sit and let the sound of music
Creep in our ears ; soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony.
Sit, Jessica : look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlaid with patins of bright gold ;
There’s not the smallest orb which thou beholdest
But in his motion, like an angel sings,
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubims ;
Such harmony is in immortal souls ;
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear.”


THE OROTUND.
This voice is used to give expression to sentiments
of grandeur and sublimity. Some persons are filled
with inborn feelings of grandeur. Some cultivate it
by a life consistent with such feelings. The timbre of
the voice pourtrays such moods perfectly.
The orotund voice is formed in those parts of the
mouth posterior to the palate, bounded below in the
root of the tongue, above by the commencement of
the palate, behind by the most posterior part of the
throat, and on the sides by the angles of the jaws.
The tongue in the meantime is hollowed and drawn
back, and the mouth is opened in such a manner as
to favour the enlargement of the cavity described as
much as possible. In order to acquire this voice, the
student should speak further back in throat, with the
throat expanded.
Exercise.
Voice, toil, star, boy, far, arm, tone, orb, foil, our,
arch, stern, coin, turn, spoil, park, globe, all, fame,
thou, may, oil, style, wide, toy, saw, loud, car, call,
fall, cloud, moist, mail, march, now.
Utter each word several times in succession.
Make a distinct pause, and take breath between each
utterance. Utter upon a low pitch at first, but after
a while practise upon all pitches of the voice, from


the lowest to the highest. Begin the exercise with a
moderate degree of power, gradually increasing the
loudness.
In the following exercises, what parts should be
read with the fullest orotund ? what with the slightest ?
How do the other parts compare with these two
extremes ?
1. “ And after these things I heard a great voice
of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia ; salvation,
and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our
God. And again they said, Alleluia. And I heard
as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty
thunderings, saying, Alleluia; for the Lord God
omnipotent reigneth.”
2, O for a lodge in some vast wilderness,
Some boundless contiguity of shade,
Where rumour of oppression and deceit,
Of unsuccessful or successful war,
Might never reach me more !
3. Still stands the forest primeval, but far away
from its shadow,
Side by side, in their nameless graves, the lovers
are sleeping.
Under the humble walls of the little Catholic
church-yard,
In the heart of the city, they lie unknown and
unnoticed.


Daily the tides of life go ebbing and flowing beside
them ;
Thousands of throbbing hearts, where theirs are at
rest, and for ever ;
Thousands of aching brains, where theirs no longer
are busy ;
Thousands of toiling hands, where theirs, have
ceased from their labours ;
Thousands of weary feet, where theirs have com-
pleted their journey !
4. Let no man dare, when lam dead, to charge
me with dishonour. Let no man attaint my memory
by believing that I could have engaged in any cause
but that of my country’s liberty and independence, or
that I could have become the pliant minion of power
in the oppression and the miseries of my country men.
I would not have submitted to a foreign oppressor,
for the same reason that I would resist the domestic
tyrant. In the dignity of freedom I would have fought
upon the threshold of my country, and its enemies
should enter only by passing over my lifeless corpse.
And am I who have lived but for my country —who
have subjected myself to the dangers of the jealous
and watchful oppressor, and now to the bondage of
the grave, only to give my countrymen their rights,
and my country her independence —am I to be loaded
with calumny, and not suffered to resent it ? No ;
God forbid !


Mountains ! who was your builder ? Who laid
your awful foundations in the central fires, and piled
your rocks and snow-capped summits among the
clouds ? Who placed you in the gardens of the
world, like noble altars, on which to offer the sacri-
ficial gifts of many nations ? Who reared your rocky
walls in the barren desert, like towering pyramids,
like monumental mounds, like giants’ graves, like
dismantled piles of royal ruins, telling a mournful
tale of glory, once bright, but now fled for ever, as flee
the dreams of a midsummer’s night ? Who gave you a
home in the islands of the sea—those emeralds that
gleam among the waves —those stars of ocean that
mock the beauty of the stars of night ?
Mountains ! I know who built you. It was God !
His name is written on your foreheads. He laid your
corner-stones on that glorious morning when the
orchestra of heaven sounded the anthem of creation.
He clothed your high, imperial forms in royal robes.
He gave you a snowy garment, and wove you a cloudy
veil of crimson and gold. He crowned you with a
diadem of icy jewels ; pearls from the arctic seas ;
gems from the frosty pole. Mountains! Ye are
glorious. You stretch your granite arms toward the
vales of the undiscovered ; ye have a longing for
immortality.
But, mountains ! ye long in vain. I called you
glorious, and truly ye are ; but your glory is like that


of the starry heavens ; it shall pass away at the
trumpet-blast of the Angel of the Most High. And
yet ye are worthy of a high and eloquent eulogium.
Ye were the lovers of the daughters of the gods ; ye
are the lovers of the daughters of liberty and religion
now ; and in your old and feeble age the children of
the skies shall honour your bald heads. The clouds
of heaven—those shadows of Olympian power, those
spectral phantoms of dead Titans kiss your summits,
as guardian angels kiss the brow of infant nobleness.
On your sacred rocks I see the footprints of the
Creator; I see the blazing fires of Sinai, and hear its
awful voice ; I see the tears of Calvary, and listen to
its mighty groans.
Mountains ! ye are proud and haughty things. Ye
hurl defiance at the storm, the lightning, and the
wind; ye look down with deep disdain upon the
thunder-cloud ; ye scorn the devastating tempest; ye
despise the works of puny man ; ye shake your rock-
ribbed sides with giant laughter, when the great
earthquake passes by. Ye stand as giant sentinels,
and seem to say to the boisterous billows: “Thus
far shalt thou come, and here shall thy proud waves
be stayed ! ”
Mountains ! ye are growing old. Your ribs of
granite are getting weak and rotten ; your muscles
are losing their fatness ; your hoarse voices are heard
only at distant intervals ; your volcanic heart throbs


feebly; and your lava-blood is thickening, as the
winters of many ages gather their chilling snows
around your venerable forms. The brazen sunlight
laughs in your old and wrinkled faces ; the pitying
moonlight nestles in your hoary locks; and the
silvery starlight rests upon you like the halo of inspi-
ration that crowned the heads of dying patriarchs
and prophets. Mountains ! ye must die. Old Father
Time, that sexton of earth, has dug you a deep, dark
tomb ; and in silence ye shall sleep after sea and
shore shall have been pressed by the feet of the
apocalyptic angel, through the long watches of an
eternal night.
ECONOMY OF BREATH.
Exercises in Inspiration for Quick
Supply of Breath.
1. Inhale inaudibly through the mouth as quickly
as possible ; exhale gently.
2. Take the breath as quickly as possible through
the nostrils with mouth closed. Do this several times
in succession.
3. Take breath as quickly as possible through the
nostrils with the mouth open, but let no breath enter
through the mouth.
4. Count from one to ten, inhaling after each
count only breath enough for the utterance of the
next count.


5. Count by threes, fives, tens, fifteens, and twen-
ties, inhaling after each group. The first three groups
of this exercise are especially recommended, because
the intervals for breath-taking are about as they occur
in ordinary speaking.
Exercises in Expiration for Economical
Expenditure of Breath.
1. Inhale to the full capacity of the lungs and
count in a whisper as far as possible in one breath.
2. Inhale and read aloud in one breath as much
as possible of the following sentence :
“ There is one thing, and one thing only, which
defies all mutation, —that which existed before the
world, and will survive the fabric of the world itself:
I mean justice, —that justice which, emanating from
the Divinity, has a place in the breast of every one
of us, given us for our guide with regard to ourselves
and with regard to others, and which will stand after
this globe is burned to ashes, our advocate or accuser
before the great Judge.” — Burke.
It must be understood that the last two exercises
are only for the economical expenditure of breath.
The habit of taking short, quick, inaudible inspirations
at frequent rhetorical intervals should be cultivated,
as the lungs should be supplied in this way rather
than by less frequent and more copious indraughts of
air,


Speak every word in the subjoined exercise, before
a lighted candle, until you can utter every sound in
every one of the words without causing the flame of
the candle to waver.
Exercise.
Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it
to you, trippingly on the tongue : but if you mouth it,
as many of your players do, I had as lief the town-
crier had spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
too much —your hand thus : but use all gently : for
in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say) the
whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a
temperance, that may give it smoothness. O, it
offends me to the soul, to see a robustious periwig-
pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to
split the ears of the groundlings ; who, for the most
part, are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb
shows and noise: I could have such a fellow whipped
for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod : pray
you, avoid it.
Be not too tame neither, but let your own dis-
cretion be your tutor : suit the action to the word,
the word to the action ; with this special observance,
that you o’erstep not the modesty of nature ; for
anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,
whose end, both at the first, and now, was, and is, to
hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to nature ; to show


virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the
very age and body of the time, his form and pressure.
Now this, overdone, or come tardy off, though it
makes the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judi-
cious grieve ; the censure of the which one, must, in
your allowance, o’er-weigh a whole theatre of others.
O, there be players, that I have seen play, and heard
others praise, and that highly, nor to speak it profanely,
that, neither having the accent of Christian, pagan,
nor man, have so strutted, and bellowed, that I have
thought some of Nature’s journeymen had made them,
and not made them well, they imitated humanity so
abominably.
RANGE OF VOICE.
Compass refers to scale and strength. By scale is
meant the power of ascending or descending from the
natural key to a very shrill, or to a very grave tone,
and is scientifically known by the term octaves. To
a singer this is of paramount advantage ; but to an
orator, strength and sweetness are more important.
A man with a weak voice, uttering sublime ideas,
clothed in appropriate language, much resembles a
person sounding an alarum with a tin whistle. It is
absolutely necessary to the complete success of an
orator, that he possess a voice capable at once to
command the attention—to impress a sort of reverence
on his audience, and to excite the greatest emotions


in their hearts ; that it be such as can give all the
strength and vigour to the vehemence of the passions ;
and where an affecting sentiment is to be delivered —
that it have all the eloquent energy which is necessary
to strike—to seize upon—to penetrate the very hearts
of an audience. It is not enough on these occasions
that it raise our passions ; it must transport and ravish
us : it is not enough that it impress, it must subdue
and work us entirely to the speaker’s purpose : it is
not enough that it touch the heart, it must pierce it
to the utmost depth.
A speaker may always know how his voice fills
the room by the return of it to his own ear. By
the degree of exertion he requires to make for being
distinctly heard, he may judge of its power. He
may form a tolerably accurate idea of the effects
he produces by the attention or listlessness of his
audience.
To be heard clearly, one must avoid speaking in
too loud or too low a tone. It is a good rule, in
fixing the degree of loudness, to look at the remotest
hearers, and to speak so as to be heard by them.
A common fault, however, is speaking too loudly,
especially in rooms where an echo prevails. There
are, no doubt, some rooms totally unfit for the pur-
poses of elocution, where the echo is so strong that
the speaker must give up all hope of speaking effect-
ively, and must set himself to the task of merely


uttering the words audibly. In such a case, the tone
must be low, firm, and clear, and the articulation very
deliberate. Under such circumstances an indifferent
speaker is often heard better than a good one. Surely
it is a matter for regret so little attention has been
given to acoustics, that some of our finest churches
and halls are rendered useless for the purposes of
effective speaking.
The degree of echo in a room is useful just in so
far as it strengthens, enriches, and beautifies the tones
of a speaker; while for the singer the echo may be
very much stronger. A very slight echo is sufficient
for speech, and beyond that degree it is highly
obstructive, and every effort should be made to deaden
it. The introduction of cushions, curtains, cloth-lined
doors, and matting, is found in many cases sufficient,
but in others internal alterations must be made.
It is required in the voice, not only that it be
flexible and strong, but also that it be sweet. Nature
alone can bestow these in perfection, but experience
has proved that much can be done by art. Example
and practice are the only method by which this can
be done. We find that our tones glide instinctively
into imitation of those that we admire ; and by the
practice of reading or speaking aloud, there are a very
few voices which may not acquire sufficient strength
for any oratorical purpose.
“ The tones in every singing voice can be divided


into three parts : the lower, medium, and higher.
Thus we would say of a performer, he or she used the
lower or higher tones, or whatever the case may be.
This applies to every kind of voice.
The soprano voice ranges generally from the
middle C, first added line below on the treble clef,
upwards to A, first added line above the staff. Con-
tralto voices range generally from G, below middle C
in the treble clef, up to F, the upper line of the clef.
The tenor voice ranges from C, second place of the
F clef, to D, second space above of this clef.
The first perception of the human voice impera-
tively demands, —i. That the voice be tried and its
compass measured in order to ascertain to what species
it belongs. Its name must be known with absolute
certainty. It would be shameful in a musician not to
know the name of the instrument he uses. 2. That
the ear be trained in order to distinguish the pitch
upon which one speaks.
We should be able to name a sound and to sound
a name. The Orientals could sing eight degrees of
tone between C and D. There may be a whole scale,
a whole air between these two tones. It would be
unpardonable not to know how to distinguish or at
least to sound a semitone.”*
Musicians and physiologists give the preference to the
baritone in males, and the mezzo-soprano in females,
* Delsarte.


because they are the most expressive, serviceable, and
permanent. The baritone is the normal male voice ;
and mezzo-soprano is just between soprano and con-
tralto, and corresponds to the baritone in males. In
training the voice, it has been customary to train it
on the bass notes, with the idea that this made the
voice stronger. The voice for speaking should not
be trained in this way exclusively. Many voices
have been ruined by such practice. Some men have
been grinding and scraping on the low notes till their
delivery has become so bass, drony, and drowsy in its
sound that it puts the listener to sleep. A gentleman
when asked why he did not go to church, said the
preacher s voice (which was an extremely bass one)
was so much like that of a monster humble-bee, that
it always put him to sleep. The voice should be
cultivated so as to have the greatest compass and
flexibility ; hence the training should be on both high
and low notes. Where the voice is too low, high
notes are to be practised, and when shrill, low notes.
It is not sufficient for speaking to practise the voice
in singing,—there are many good singers who are
poor speakers ; it must be practised in speaking also,
to insure success. A singer may have a pleasant
voice in speaking, but a pleasant voice is not suffi-
cient to insure success ; energy, power, warmth, and
versatility are needed. In speaking, the pitch is
concrete, while in music it is discrete. Singers in


speaking are very liable to have semitones in their
speech, which makes the speech melancholy and wail-
ing in part of the sentence ; besides, there is a certain
sameness of inflection, and recurrence of sound, which
render the delivery monotonous. The singer must
practise his voice in speech also if he would have
success ; but he will find this practice all the easier
from the fact that his voice is less likely to be impure.
Speech and song-voice, though originally produced
in the same manner, chiefly differ in this respect: that
in speaking, the voice does not rest long enough on
any note ; and as the vibrations, therefore, reach the
ear at unequal intervals, the mind is unable to appre-
ciate them as a musical note ; while in singing, the
voice rests sufficiently long on any musical note, for
the ear to be struck by vibrations which succeeded
each other at distinct intervals.
Speaking also differs from singing, that in the
latter the transitions from one note to another are
more frequent, and require the co-operation of all
the vocal and respiratory muscles ; hence, singing
cannot be so long continued without fatigue as speak-
ing, during which the larynx is less moved, and a
great part of the work is performed by the articulating
organs.
“ The register is a distinct modification of the sound ;
a modification which is produced in the larynx itself,
and does not belong to the mouth. Now, we may say


of registers that they are to the larynx what emissions
are to the mouth. Thus registers form a physiognomy
which the sound assumes in the larynx, and emissions
form the physiognomy which that same sound takes
on in the mouth.” *
In its mechanism, pitch is dependent on the
following: #
1. Length of the vocal cords.
2. Size of the vocal cords.
3. Tension of the vocal cords.
4. Elasticity of the vocal cords.
5. Space between the vocal cords.
6. Position of the larynx.
7. Flexibility of the larynx.
8. Degree of expiratory power.
Other things being equal, the pitch is lower in
proportion as the vocal cords are longer and larger.
Enlarging the space between the vocal cords, or
depressing the larynx, or diminishing the expiratory
power, tends to lower the pitch. The greater the
elasticity of the vocal cords, and the more flexible the
larynx, the greater is the compass of the voice.
The middle key is generally used in common con-
versation and description, in moral reflection or calm']
reasoning.
The upper register. A wrinkling of the forehead
does not aid the voice in its upward flight. The
* Delsarte.


tendency to rise upon the toes should be restrained,
as this does not conduce to highness of pitch. Shrug-
ging, contorting, or elevating the shoulders may be
omitted, as such action is as ungainly as it is unneces-
sary. Last but not least: Do not congest the throat.
There is no pitch in the entire vocal range that can
not be reached without damage to the vocal apparatus.
Gaiety, vivacity, hilarity, joyousness, spirituality—
whatever exalts or exhilarates —employs tones in the
upper register. To these upper keys belong the shout
of victory, the cry of alarm, the shriek of fear, and the
wail of despair.
The average compass of the speaking voice, not
including the Falsetto which has a scale as well as a
quality of its own, is something less than two octaves,
—say about thirteen or fourteen notes. For conveni-
ence this compass is divided into five parts, called
Degrees : the middle, the low, the very low, the high,
and the very high. The following diagram is designed
to show the several degrees of pitch, and the range on
the musical scale of the average voice :
: D :
: C : Very High.
: B :
: A : High.
: G :


: F :
: E : Middle.
: D :
: C :
: B :
: A : Low.
: G :
: F : Very low.
1. The Middle Degree, as shown in the diagram,
includes four notes of the compass, let us say C, D,
E, and Fof the musical scale. It is employed so
much more frequently than any other degree that it
may be said to be the rule, the basis, the starting
point of delivery.
2. The Low Degree ranges about two tones lower
than the Middle ; for the average voice it includes B
and A of the musical scale.
3. The Very Low Degree has a range of about
two notes, G and F, below the low.
4. The High Degree comprises about three tones
of the scale, G, A, and B. The wider the range
in the degrees is accounted for in the fact that our
ordinary speaking pitch is a little below the middle of
the compass.
5. The Very High ranges about two notes, C and
D, higher than the High Degree.


The voice ranges easily from one part of the
compass to another, each Degree being associated
and blended with those next to it. The Higher
Degrees are intimately associated, as are also the
Lower; and the Middle is usually accompanied with
some notes of both the High and the Low Degrees.
We find, for example, that in nature, and con-
sequently in proper expression, the sentiment of
reverence requires Low Degree of Pitch. But while
that is the average Pitch for this sentiment as a style
of thought, it may also range through the Middle and
Very Low. The exact position is dependent upon
the sentiment, whether it be that of joy or sorrow.
When not moved by any unusual emotion we express
our normal thoughts, calm reasoning, didactic and
ordinary argumentative discourse in the middle part
of the compass ; but the moment the feeling of solem-
nity, adoration, or awe takes hold of the mind the
voice seeks a lower range for expression. In all
nature, subdued emotions, deeply serious or gloomy
thoughts find expression in the lower part of the
compass ; but on the other hand, when joy, delight,
alarm or dejiance move us, they find expression in
the higher ranges of Pitch.
The Degree of Pitch used will vary somewhat
with the size of the audience. It is the natural
tendency to elevate the pitch in order that the voice
may reach a greater distance. This is sometimes


necessary for the greatest ease, but much care should
be exercised not to allow the voice to reach a pitch
so high as to degenerate into a screech.
THE DEGREES AND THEIR
MEANINGS.
i
Very High . . Great excitement.
High . . Excitement.
Middle . . Tranquillity.
Low * . Seriousness.
Very Low . . Great seriousness.
Incessant practice in the following exercise will
accomplish more in cultivating a wide and extended
range than would seem possible.
Rule.
Arrange the Pitches so that their range, from the
very highest to the very lowest degrees, may be a
little greater than the ability of the voice to produce,
and then work to produce them perfectly.
Exercise.
9. Extremely high “ I repeat it, sir, let it come,
let it come.”
8. Very high . “ Three millions of people
armed in the holy cause of
liberty.”


7. High . . “ The sounding aisles of the
dim woods rang.”
6. Rather high . “ With music I come from my
balmy home.”
5. Middle . “A vision of beauty appeared
on the clouds.”
4. Rather low . “ Friends, Romans, country-
men ! ”
3. Low . . “ And this is in the night, most
glorious night.”
2. Very low . “Roll on, thou deep and dark
blue ocean, roll ! ”
1. Extremely low “ Eternity ! Thou pleasing,
dreadful thought ! ”
1. Commence always at the Middle Pitch, run
down to No. 1 ; then commence at No. 5, and run
up to No. 9 ; then commence at 5, and give the
degrees in the following order : 5,4, 3,2, 1, 1,2, 3,
4,5, 6,7, 8, 9 ; then commence at 5, and pursue the
following order : 5,6, 7,8, 9,9, 8,7, 6,5, 4,3, 2, 1.
2. Preserve a monotony of pitch while giving the
quotation that belongs to the degree which is being
produced ; that is, if the degree be No. 5, the quota-
tion would be, “A vision of beauty appeared on the
clouds,” and every word of this line must be on the
Middle pitch. So if the degree is No. 3, and the
quotation, “And this is in the night, most glorious


night,” every word of this line must be in a No. 3
pitch.
3. Using the No. 5 as a starting pitch, make
each succeeding low degree distinctly lower than its
predecessor; thus a 4 must be clearly lower than a 5,
a 3 lower than a 4, and so on. It will be hard to do
this at first; but for both speaking and singing, this
exercise is unparalleled in its effect, for the purpose
sought.
4. Using the No. 5 as the starting pitch, make
each succeeding high degree distinctly higher than its
predecessor, after the manner described for the low
degrees of rule 3.
Exercises.
The Low Key.
1. Tis midnight’s holy hour, and silence now
Is brooding, like a gentle spirit, o’er
The still and pulseless world. Hark ! on the
winds
The bells’ deep tones are swelling; ’tis the knell
Of the departed year.
2. The king stood still
Till the last echo died ; then, throwing off
The sackcloth from his brow, and laying back
The pall from the still features of his child,
He bowed his head upon him, and broke forth
In the resistless eloquence of woe.


Give the next exercise first in a whisper, then in a
low tone.
3. Softly woo away her breath,
Gentle death !
Let her leave thee with no strife,
Tender, mournful, murmuring life !
She hath seen her happy day ;
She hath had her bud and blossom ;
Now she pales and sinks away,
Earth, into thy gentle bosom !
The Middle Key.
1. Our lives are songs ; God writes the words
And we set them to music at pleasure,
And the song grows glad, or sweet, or sad,
As we choose to fashion the measure ;
We must write the music, whatever the song,
Whatever its rhyme or metre,
And if it is glad, we may make it sad,
Or, if sweet, we may make it sweeter.
2. The mountains look on Marathon,
And Marathon looks on the sea ;
And musing there an hour alone,
I thought that Greece might still be free ;
For, standing on the Persian’s grave,
I could not deem myself a slave.


3. Hold fast to the dear old Sabbath,
To the day of peaceful rest;
Look back to the days of childhood
That its tranquil glories blest ;
Hold fast to its quiet pleasures,
All its sweet traditions save,
For the sake of the weary living, '
And the memories of the grave,
Hold fast to the dear old Sabbath
That is neared, like a verdant isle
On the week’s dull sea of toiling,
With a thankful, happy smile.
One day give the great Creator,
Be thy creed whate’er it may ;
For the sake of human freedom
Keep the dear old Sabbath day.
The High Key.
i. The great bell swung as ne’er before,
It seemed it would never cease ;
And every word its ardour flung
From off its jubilant iron tongue
Was, “War ! war ! war ! ”
2. If I may trust the flattering eye of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand :
My bosom’s lord sits lightly in his throne ;
And all this day an unaccustomed spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.


3. Strike —till the last armed foe expires ;
Strike —for your altars and your fires ;
Strike —for the green graves of your sires,
God, and your native land !
Read the following exercise in a low whisper,
then loud whisper, then low tone and increase to
very high key.
Go ring the bells and fire the guns,
And fling your starry banners out;
Shout Freedom till your lisping ones
Give back their cradle shout.
“ The Aim in training should be to develop and
strengthen the registers, as it makes the compass and
quality of the tones much more sweet, pliant and
agreeable if they are struck by the mechanism of
the vocal organs which is peculiar to the register
in which the tone belongs ; while if a tone in one
register is struck by a mechanism which belongs to
another register, the tone will always be faulty, while
the strain on the vocal organs will be injurious, and
the compass will not be so great. All singers and
speakers should be careful to strike the high and low
tones of their voices by the proper mechanism, and
the tones will be rich, pleasing, and harmonious,
besides being easy of production. Some singers sing
their high notes with the mechanism of the upper
register, when they should use the mechanism of the


small register. The consequence is, that the tone
has not that rich, ringing clearness which it ought to
have, and is characterized by shrillness and falsetto
quality. The acquirement of register is easily obtain-
ed by singing such exercises as follows :
00, oh, ah, ae, ah, oh, 00.
“ These tones should be sung softly, and each note
struck clearly and distinctly. A full inspiration should
be taken at the beginning, and after each note a slight
inspiration. Do not inhale more air than is consumed
in uttering the tone, else the lungs will be over-
crowded. The short inspirations are simply for the
purpose of giving the vocal organs a chance to re-
arrange themselves and the muscles to open and close,
thus making it more easy to assume the mechanism for
different registers. An easy pitch should be chosen
for the exercise, and the slight inspiration after every
tone not omitted, as it is essential to the exercise.
The pitch at which it is started should be raised easily
by semitones, as the pupil acquires more skill. The
aim should not be to force the registers but to change
the mechanism, if necessary, a tone or two below its
proper place, so as to make it easier for the singer.
This exercise may be varied by taking different


syllables and words, and by singing softly, slowly,
and quickly.”
SHADING.
“ Light and shade are not, as has been asserted,
subject to the arbitration or inspiration of the moment.
They are ruled by laws ; for in art there is not a single
phenomenon which is not subject to absolute mathe-
matical laws. knowledge of these laws is important,
the art of shading forming the basis of style.
The opinion which makes the ascending phrase
progressive is false six times out of seven. It is only
correct in the following cases :
1. If an ascending phrase encounters no repeated
and no dissonant note it is progressive, and the cul-
minating note is the most intense. It has one degree
of intensity.
2. If we find a note repeated in the ascending
phrase, that note, even it be the lowest of all, must be
made more important that the highest note, and will
have two degrees of intensity. In this case, the higher
the voice rises the softer it must become ; for there
cannot be more than one culminating point in a
musical phrase any more than in a logical or mimetic
phrase. All sounds must, therefore, diminish in pro-
portion to their distance from this centre of expression,
from this repeated note. The reason of the intensity
of a repeated note lies in the fact that we repeat only
that thing which we desire, and this intensity gives it
a greater value.


3. If the repeated note be at the same time the
culminating note, it will require a new degree of
intensity. It will have three degrees of intensity.
4. We may possibly find a dissonant note in the
ascending phrase, with a repeated culminating note.
(This note would, then, be more than an indication ;
it would receive an adjective form from the accident,
assuming in the musical phrase the value that an
adjective would have in a logical phrase.) Its inten-
sity, therefore, would be greater than that of the
highest repeated note* and it would have four degrees
of intensity.
5. If the dissonant note is also the highest note,
it acquires from that position a fifth degree of intensity.
6. It may happen that the dissonant note appear-
ing in a rising phrase is repeated ; by reason of this
repetition it would receive a sixth degree of intensity.
7. Finally, if the dissonant note is at the same
time culminating and repeated, it has seven degrees of
intensity.
PATHETIC EFFECTS.
Pathetic effects are nine in number, the principal
of which are as follows : The veiled tone ; the flat or
compressed tone ; the smothered tone ; the ragged
tone ; the vibrant tone. The last is the most powerful.
Vibration or tremolo, bad when produced involun-
tarily by the singer, becomes a brilliant quality when


it is voluntary and used at an opportune time. Every
break must be preceded by a vibration, which prepares
the way for it.
Prolations are laryngeal articulations. Great care
must be taken not to substitute pectoral articulations
for them.
The chest is a passive agent ; it should furnish
nothing but the breath. The mouth and the larynx
alone are entitled to act.
TEARING OF THE VOICE.
Exuberance of the contained brings on destruction
of that which contains it. Tearing of the voice, there-
fore, should only be associated with an excessive
extension of the sound whose intensity, as we have
demonstrated, is in inverse ratio to the dramatic
proportion.”*
* Delsarte’s own words.
THE VOICE IN PUBLIC SPEAKING.
At the commencement of a speech, or of an address,
especial care should be taken that the voice be at a
proper pitch, that is, that it be neither too high nor
too low, and also that the natural key of the voice be
never, at any time, exceeded. A person will readily
ascertain from experience that he can raise his voice
from a low to a higher key much more easily than he


can bring it down from a high to a lower key. It
should, therefore, be a rule with speakers to commence
rather in a low than in a high tone, as they can raise
it gradually as they proceed ; they will thus, indepen-
dently of having a better command of the voice, be
reserving their strength for the body and conclusion
of the address. Should the voice become too high,
which it will always be inclined to do, it should be
brought down, by lowering the tone at the end of a
sentence, and commencing a fresh one on the note
with which the former sentence was concluded. Al-
though the voice should not be raised too high, the
contrary extreme should be avoided : it should not
be suffered to drop too low. Neither should an
address be given in a dull monotonous tone. The
voice must be made to suit the subject, and in
impassioned reading or speaking, it must be in
accordance with the nature of the passion delineated.
If the reader of this treatise has neither time nor
inclination to study voice-production, the following
exercise if it be perseveringly practised will make
him master of the difficult art of lowering his voice
from a high to a lower key, at pleasure.
EXERCISE FOR LOWERING THE VOICE.
To gain a habit of lowering the voice at pleasure,
it will be necessary to select and reiterate the reading


of sentences, the latter of which would admit of being
begun on the same low key with which the former
concluded. This may often be exemplified by
CONCESSIONS AND SIMILES.
1. Our sight is the most perfect and pleasing of
all our senses. It fills the mind with the largest
variety of ideas, converses with its objects at the
greatest distance, and continues the longest in action,
without being tired, or satiated with its proper enjoy-
ment. The sense of feeling, indeed, can give us a
notion of extension, shape, and all other ideas that
enter at the eye, except colours : but at the same
time it is very much straitened and confined in its
operations, to the number, bulk, and distance of its
particular objects.
2. I shall consider those pleasures of the imagina-
tion, which arise from the actual view of outward
objects; and these, I think, all proceed from the sight
of what is great, uncommon, or beautiful. There may,
indeed, be something so terrible or offensive, that the
horror or loathsomeness of the object may overbear
the pleasure which results from its greatness, novelty,
or beauty ; but still there will be such a mixture of
delight, in the very disgust it gives us, as any of these
qualifications are most conspicuous and prevailing.


3. Thrice happy he ! who on the sunless side
Of a romantic mountain, forest crown d,
Beneath the whole reflected shade reclines :
Or in the gelid caverns, woodbine wrought,
And fresh bedew’d with ever-spouting streams,
Sits coolly : while all the worl,d without,
Unsatisfied and sick, tosses in noon.
Emblem instructive of the virtuous man,
Who keeps his tempered mind serene and pure,
And every passion aptly harmonis d
Amid a jarring world with vice inflam d.
Oh, world, thy turns are slipp’ry ! friends now
* fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seem to bear one heart,
Whose hours, whose bed, whose meal and
exercise
Are still together, who twine (as ’twere) in love
Inseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity.—So fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke
their sleep,
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg shall grow dear
friends,
And interjoin their issues.
FORCE.
As to the force or loudness of the voice, it is
recommended that every speaker should endeavour to


fill with his voice the room in which he speaks ; and
this he may readily discover by the reverberation of
the sound to his own ear. But at the same time he
should be careful to avoid a loud vociferous voice,
which will be equally as unpleasant to the ears of the
audience, as it will be exhausting to himself. It may
be observed, that the force of the voice should not be
confounded with the elevation or depression of tone.
A person may speak in a very low key, with a very
loud voice ; and on the contrary, he may speak in a
very high key with a very soft voice. A low toned
bell struck violently will produce a loud sound in a low
key ; whereas a high toned bell struck slightly will
produce a soft sound in a high key.
The exercises I have given under the heads of
Purity and Sweetness of Voice will be found of the
greatest utility to the orator who would make himself
heard in large halls, but for the assistance of those who
have no disposition to pursue a regular course of
instruction in voice-training, I introduce the following
directions. Public speakers will find them invaluable.
“ Penetrating power may be increased by giving
the matter distinct attention, in vocal exercises, and
sometimes in speaking. The effort should be to pro-
ject the voice, to make it reach farther, without elevat-
ing the pitch or increasing the quantity of sound. By
calling a friend on an opposite hill, or by fixing the
eye on a distant person in a large audience, and


endeavouring to make him hear, we naturally develop
this power ; but great care must be taken not to sub-
stitute an alteration of pitch or tone. It is found by
physical experiments of different kinds, that pure
tones, those not mixed with irregular noises, tones full,
clear, steady, are heard at a greater distance than
others ; and this is even a more important reason for
cultivating purity of tone than its effect in the way of
melody.”
It is impossible to lay down any specific rules for
the rate of utterance, as that must depend entirely on
the nature of the subject; for while on the one hand
a drawling, languid manner should be avoided, too
great a rapidity, a fault very prevalent, is equally as
improper and more usual. A speaker will, however,
generally err less in being too slow, than in being too
rapid.
“ In all vocal training, moderation should be the
rule ; the organs ought never to be strained, for by so
doing the voice may be irreparably injured. The aim
should be to strengthen and develop the conver-
sational voice till it can be heard distinctly in any
large hall. Such practice will prevent the voice from
becoming unnatural or strained, and it will adapt
itself to the size of any hall, increasing the volume of
voice according to the size of the building in which it
is used. Breathing exercises should be taken every
day to develop the chest and increase the capacity of


the lungs, as plenty of air is indispensable to good
speaking. The breath should be sparingly used, none
allowed to escape unvocalized, except where it may
be necessary for effect in imitating some passion.
After breathing exercises have been taken, the air is
to be forced from the lungs in gentle, easy flow of
sound, the aim being to make that sound pure and
sweet. Persons with weak throats or chests, and
weak or effeminate voices will find these exercises of
great benefit. They should practise on the medium
notes first, striving to make the tone broad, full, and
deep ; as they gain power of voice on these notes,
they can take others, higher or lower, also striving to
make them round and full, they will soon be surprised
at the improvement in their voices. There are many
speakers with weak voices, who, if they would follow
some such exercise as the above faithfully every day,
would soon have strong voices.
Light gymnastic exercise, which improves the
bodily health will improve the voice, but violent and
unnatural exercise should be avoided. Walking is
one of the very best exercises both for preserving the
health, and keeping the voice in good condition ; it
exercises all the organs and sets the blood circulating,
as it is perfectly natural, it cannot produce harm. In
exercising the voice, attention should be paid to the
tone, the method of utterance, and the opening and
closing of the sound. There should be perfect har-
mony in all the movements of the vocal organs.”


THE INFLECTIONS OF THE VOICE.
Inflection is a variation in pitch, occurring upon
single words or phrases and recognized as distinctive
slides, or as circumflexes. Inflection is thus distin-
guished from melody, which belongs to sentences and
paragraphs, and also from the slight vanishing, slide of
concrete tone, which pervades all speech. Inflection
is an intentional variation of tone designed to call
particular attention to the relation of the element
upon which it occurs. It has, indeed, an intimate
connection with melody, and has very much to do
with the variety of intonation so essential to agreeable
speech.
The various movements of the voice, in song and
speech, may be explained in the following manner :
When the bow is drawn across an open string of
the violin, or any of its species, a sound is produced
of a uniform pitch from beginning to end. This
sound is a pure note of music, and so far as pitch is
concerned, is identical with a note of song. When
the bow is drawn across the same string, while the
centre of the string is pressed down with the finger, a
sound is produced similar to that of the open string,
but an octave higher. The intermediate notes of the
diatonic scale may be produced by pressing down the
string at the proper places, and drawing the bow
across it.


When a string of the violin is pressed down by
the finger, and, at the same time, the finger is made to
slide upon it towards the bridge of the instrument
during the drawing of the bow, a sound is produced
which gradually increases in acuteness from beginning
to end. When the finger is made to slide in the
opposite direction during the drawing of the bow, a
sound is produced which gradually increases in
gravity during its prolongation. When the finger is
made to slide towards the bridge, and thence back
again, during the drawing of the bow, a simple cir-
cumflex note is produced. When the finger is made
to slide towards the bridge, thence back again, and
thence again towards the bridge, during the drawing
of the bow, a compound circumflex note is produced.
Other varieties of the slide might be given, but
these are sufficient to answer the purpose of explana-
tion,
The slide is a grace of much simplicity and
beauty, evidently drawn from nature. It expresses
the most tender and affectionate emotions : we hear it
in those little gusts of passion which mothers use in
caressing their infants; it is one of the most endear-
ing tones in the language of nature.
The portamento , or carriage of the voice, as the
Italians term it, is an easy mode of sliding from one
tone to another. Hence second-rate singers find it a
convenient method of encountering those notes which


lie at remote and awkward distances. In some voices
it is so fixed, by habit, that two bars can not be sung
without it. When so used it destroys every pretence
to good singing, by interposing an effect of the most
sickening kind ; when used with discretion, it adds
much to the force of expression ; and in Madame
Caradori it was a grace both tender and agreeable.
The violinist Paganini, the wonder of the world,
played an entire cantabile upon one string, sliding
through the intervals with a single finger —the effect
of which was so plaintive and desolate, as to move his
audience to tears. Velluti, the first singing-master of
his age, used this grace with incomparable beauty ; in
his voice it imparted a tenderness not to be described.
The sliding notes above described are analagous
to drawling notes of speech. Speech, to be natural,
requires each syllable to be uttered with a certain
degree of force. This force is always in proportion
to the length of the syllable. A syllable is drawled
when it is pronounced with inadequate force, in other
words, with force less than that which constitutes the
minimum degree of natural speech.
“Man reveals his life,” says Delsarte, “through
more than four millions of inflections ere he can
speak or gesticulate.”
“ Sound, we have said, is the language of man in
the sensitive state. We call inflections the modifica-
tions which affect the voice in rendering the emotions


of the senses. The tones of the voice must vary with
the sensations, each of which should have its note.
Of what use to man would be a phonetic apparatus
always rendering the same sound ? Delivery is a sort
of music whose excellence consists in a variety of
tones which rise or fall according to the things they
have to express. Beautiful but uniform voices
resemble fine bells whose tone is sweet and clear, full
and agreeable, but which are, after all, bells signify-
ing nothing, devoid of harmony and consequently
without variety. To employ always the same action
and the same tone of voice, is like giving the same
remedy for all diseases. ‘Ennui was born one day
from monotony,’ says the fable.
Man has received from God the privilege of
revealing the inmost affections of his being through
the thousand inflections of his voice. Man’s least
impressions are conveyed by signs which reveal har-
mony, and which are not the products of chance. A
sovereign wisdom governs these signs.
With the infant in its cradle the signs of sensi-
bility are broken cries. Their acuteness, their
ascending form, indicate the weakness, and physical
sorrow of man. When the child recognises the
tender care of its mother, its voice becomes less
shrill and broken ; its tones have a less acute range,
and are more poised and even. The larynx which is
very impressionable and the thermometer of the


sensitive life, becomes modified, and produces sounds
and inflections in perfect unison with the sentiments
they convey.
“ All this, which man expresses in an imitative
fashion, is numbered, weighed, and measured, and
forms an admirable harmony. This language through
the larynx is universal, and common to all Sensitive
beings. It is universal with animals as with man.
Animals give the identical sounds in similar positions.
The infant, delighted at being mounted on a
table, and calling his mother to admire him, rises to
the fourth note of the scale. If his delight becomes
more lively, to the sixth ; if the mother is less pleased
than he would have her, he ascends to the third
minor to express his displeasure. Quietude is ex-
pressed by the fourth note.
Every situation has its interval, its corresponding
inflection, its corresponding note : this is a mathe-
matical language.
Why this magnificent concert God has arranged
in our midst if it has no auditors ? If God had made
us only intelligent beings, He would have given us
speech alone, and without inflections. Let us further
illustrate the role of inflection.
A father receives a picture from his daughter.
He expresses his gratitude by a falling inflection :
‘Ah well ! the dear child.’ The picture comes from
a stranger whom he does not know as a painter; he


will say, ‘Well now! why does he send me this?’
raising his voice.
If he does not know from whom the picture
comes, his voice will neither rise nor fall; he will say,
‘Well! well! well ! ’
Let us suppose that his daughter is the painter.
She has executed a masterpiece. Astonished at the
charm of this work, and at the same time grateful, his
voice will have both inflections.
If surprise predominates over love, the rising
inflection will predominate. If love and surprise are
equal, he will simply say, ‘ Well now ! ’ ”*
Higher and lower ranges of inflection express
different degrees of emotion and passion. This is a
general principle, and one of the greatest importance.
For if we utter the exclamation, Ah ! expressing a
slight degree of surprise, it naturally takes a slight
rising inflection, running through the interval of the
second or third of the musical scale ; a greater degree
of surprise will express itself by an upward slide on
the word, of a fourth or fifth ; and for a very strong
expression of this feeling, the rising inflection will
traverse a whole octave. In like manner, the word,
No, expressing a mild dissent, will commence on the
middle pitch of the voice, and take a slight falling
inflection ; when pronounced so as to express a
stronger dissent, it will commence on a higher pitch,
* Delsarte.


and end in a longer downward slide ; and when it
expresses a very strong or passionate dissent, the
downward slide will run through a whole octave.
Thus, no, no, NO.
Exercise.
The pupil had better practise the long falling
slide, commencing at the No. 9, or highest pitch, and
pronounce the word “ No ” quickly in a long descend-
ing slide reaching down to the No. 1, or lowest pitch.
The glide is said to be long when it moves through
many degrees of pitch ; short when it moves through
one, two, or three degrees of pitch only ; slow when
it moves slowly in any range of pitch, either long or
short; fast when it moves rapidly in any range of
pitch, either long or short.
Pronounce the word “ No ” in a long, slow glide,
descending. This will be performed if the word
commence at the No. 9 pitch and falls through all the
degrees of pitch slowly and smoothly to the No. 1.
Pronounce the word “No” in a long, fast slide,
descending. This action if made properly will give
the word a very decided refusal, as though a person
in great petulance exclaimed “ No.” The faster the
descent the better, provided it passes through all the
degrees of pitch.
Pronounce the word “No ” in a short, slow slide,
descending. Commence at No. 2 pitch, and slowly


descend to No. 1. Make the glide expressive by
colouring it with a feeling of semi-disgust as the
denial is pronounced.
Pronounce the word “ No” in a short, fast glide,
descending. This may be performed in the way last
described, excepting that the time is very fast. To
give proper expression the voice must be coloured by
a feeling of firm, resolute refusal.
Exercise.
This is the same kind of exercise as the preceding,
excepting that the glide is rising, and the highest note
is used. A rising glide may be made by commenc-
ing at the No. 1 pitch and moving upward smoothly
to the No. 9.
Pronounce the personal pronoun “I” in a long,
slow slide, ascending.
Pronounce “ I” in a long, fast slide, ascending.
Pronounce “ I” in a short, slow slide, ascending.
Pronounce “ I” in a short, fast slide, ascending.
Pronounce “ I ” in the highest pitch of the voice,
with a rising glide. This will force the pitch still
higher.
All the foregoing should be made expressive, by
imagining surprise, or by asking a question ending in
“ I,” as “ Is it I ? ” or simply “ I ? ”


Exercise.
The following vocal gymnastic exercise should be
practised at least thirty minutes daily.
Commence at No. 5, using the vowel “a, ’ letting
the voice go upward to No. 9. Commencing at No.
5, let the voice go downward on the vowel u a ” in
the same manner. Now strike a high conversational
pitch at No. 9, and descend to No. 1, using the vowel
“a” as before. The remainder of the vowels, e, i, o,
u, should each be used in the same manner.
Now go over them in like manner, exaggerating
the pitch somewhat, and continue the exaggeration
through several times, until the voice is expanded to
its furthest possible compass.
FLEXIBILITY.
Flexibility of voice consists in the power of being
able to transfer it with perfect ease —in due quantity
and quality—from one key—from one passion or
feeling to another. Pre-eminence in this, is chiefly
the result of practice and good instruction, combined
with good taste.
There is a feature of vocal exercise too often
overlooked by both teacher and student which we
may term Mento-Vocal Culture ; this consists in
giving each exercise under the mental condition
implied by the sounds and words used. The exercises


prescribed under this division are made up of the
elements of vocal expression. The brain controls
the vital functions of all the muscles of the body ;
then we should think the thought and feel the
emotion embodied in the passage selected for vocal
exercise ; at the same time using a controlling will-
power in the right use of the muscles involved, and
correct voice-production will soon become habitual.
This habit, once gained, is easily retained by practice,
and with practice one may acquire a capital of vocal
vitality the interest of which will be sufficient for any
speech he may be called upon to make. A speaker
who produces tones wrongly, or fails to replenish his
vocal powers, draws upon his stock of vitality each
time he speaks, and his ultimate breaking down is
only a question of time. It is a principle of political
economy no less true of vocal economy, that it is
better to make capital produce one’s living than to
consume capital for the necessaries or luxuries of life.
Exercises for Flexibility.
In order to attain flexibility and variety of tone,
as a physical exercise, I give the following. I follow
Worcester as a standard :
a as in ale i as in in
a ~ arm o ~ old
a ~ all o ~ on
a ~ at o ~ or


e as in eel o as in move
e ~ end u ~ use
e ~ fern u ~ up
i ~ zsh u ~ full
Ba ba ba ba da da da da
be be de de
bi bi di di
bo bo do do
bu bu du du
I give the tones expressive of the various emotions
on the vowel element, and I drill on the consonants
before and after the vowel sounds for distinct articu-
lation. No emotion can be expressed by a consonant,
at at at at ak ak ak ak
et et ek ek
it it ik ik
ot ot ok ok
ut ut uk uk
In this drill I use only the long and short sound of
the vowels. This practice does for the speaking voice
what the scales do for the singing voice, and must be
continued through life if we wish to retain beautiful
voices to old age. The sounds of the vowels having
been practised both separately and in short words, I
group these words into sentences and give the same
variety of tone in the practice. I introduce the
emphatic pause into these sentences and phrases, as it
is necessary to train the ear to estimate its value.


The eagle—has seen—it.
Up—from—the South.
On—his back.
Every—inch a king.
That—old man.
The bells, bells, bells,
Tolling, tolling, tolling.
You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless
things.
Oh mighty Caesar ! dost thou lie so low !
I am thy father’s spirit.
Adieu, adieu, adieu ! remember me.
SENSIBILITY.
The meaning of this term is very extensive. It
includes not only the natural turn of mind, but also
that pliantness of disposition, by means of which the
different passions are easily made to succeed one
another in the soul. The heart that enjoys this in a
proper degree, is like soft wax which, under the hands
of a judicious artist, is capable of being in the same
minute, a Medea or a Sappho ; an easy ductility in the
wax is not more necessary to fit it for the purposes of
the modeller, than is this sensibility in the heart of a
good reader, by means of which the delivery receives
whatever modification the speaker or reader pleases,
and that in an easy and unconstrained succession.
The person who does not himself feel the emotions he


is to express, will give but a lifeless and insipid repre-
sentation of them. All the art in the world can
never supply the want of this faculty. If a person is
wholly destitute of it, all the advantages of nature,
all the accomplishments he may have acquired by
study, are of little avail; he will never make a first-
rate orator —he will never make others feel .what he
does not feel himself, and will be as different from the
thing he wishes to represent as a mask from a face.
There are many occasions on which a plain
manner of speaking has great charms, both in the
pulpit and at the bar ; but there are many others in
which all the pomp and dignity which the speaker is
able to bestow on the words are scarcely sufficient.
He can sometimes by mere vehemence, sometimes by
true dignity, artfully hide defects, and give a seeming
meaning to what has in itself scarcely any.
The reader who is able to distinguish the different
passions,—to conceal in his reading what actually is,
or seems to be faulty in his author, —to hide real
blemishes, and palliate exceptionable passages, —in
short, to add a new lustre to the beauties of his
author, by well applied energy, or judicious ease and
simplicity, has attained the highest excellence that the
science of elocution can bestow. But without the
faculty of sensibility this excellence is unattainable.
It is impossible for a person of a dull, heavy, or
sluggish soul to speak well. The true orator is a man


of keen and deep sensibility ; he is all alive, even to
his finger nails. It is this which gives him that
charming animation or vivacity, which enables him
always to command the attention and sympathy of
his audience, and which is almost irresistible. It is
this which inspires the tones, inflections, articulation,
emphasis and gesture, so that it seems to be the feel-
ing itself which speaks, rather than the man. It
flashes in the eye, it plays upon the countenance, so
that the features seem to talk as expressively as the
lips. It pours itself into the audience by the myster-
ious channels of sympathy, and kindles in their hearts
all the passions which glow in the speaker’s own
bosom.
But the indispensable necessity of feeling may be
still further evinced. For how, it may be asked, is it
conceivable that a man who does not love justice, and
abhor crime, should speak in defence of the one, or
in condemnation of the other, without such feigning
as must betray itself, and mock his attempts at power
in delivery ? Is it possible that anyone should give
such true and effective and powerful expression to
the love of the truth, the right, the beautiful, and the
good, as to excite these emotions in the hearts of
others, when he does not feel them himself? How
can a man so speak as to kindle up in others the love
of God, and of their neighbours, when he himself
loves neither his neighbour nor his God? All this


evidently involves a problem which no art can, or
ought even to attempt to solve. For no feigning can
ever produce the effect of unfeigned emotion ; and
without feeling true art is impossible.
“To speak the truth,” says Fenelon, “orators are
like poets, who write elegies or other passionate
verses ; they must feel the passion they describe, else
they can never paint it well. The greatest art
imaginable can never speak like true passion, and
undisguised nature ; so that you will always be but an
imperfect orator, if you be not thoroughly moved
with those sentiments that you paint, and would
infuse into others. Nor do I say this from a pious
motive. I speak now as an orator.”
When the voice is deficient in any particular
quality, or unfit for some particular kinds of speaking,
it should be often exercised in those keys to which it
is worst adapted. When a speaker finds it difficult,
for example, to articulate clearly, and render himself
audible in a low key, he may practise such exercises
as Ossians Address to the Sun , with a low, but
strong and solemn bass voice, till he has made himself
master of that pitch. The voice may then be pre-
pared for other departments of speaking, by pro-
nouncing bold or passionate speeches, like the
following example of Vanoc , (in the tragedy of The
Briton ,) with loudness and energy, without suffering
it to rise above the middle key. Jupiter's Address to


the Inferior Deities , is very well calculated for
strengthening the voice in the highest key. But
when it begins to grow thin, or approaches to a
squeak, when elevated very high, it will be proper to
pitch it a little lower, and then to speak with all the
vehemence the voice will admit of without receiving
injury. I shall now annex the exercises referred to.
The first, is to be delivered low and loud ; the second,
with energy on the middle key ; and the third, with
vehemence, in a very high tone.
1. O thou that rollest above, round as the shield
of my fathers ! Whence are thy beams, O sun ! Thy
everlasting light ! Thou comest forth in thy awful
beauty ; the stars hide themselves in the sky ; the
moon, cold and pale, sinks in the western wave. But
thou thyself movest alone : who can be a companion
to thy course ? The oaks of the mountains fall : the
mountains themselves decay with years : the ocean
shrinks and grows again : the moon herself is lost in
the heavens : but thou art for ever the same, rejoicing
in the brightness of thy course. When the world is
dark with tempests, when thunder rolls, and lightning
flies, thou lookest in thy beauty from the clouds, and
laughest at the storm. But to Ossian thou lookest in
vain ; for he beholds thy beams no more, whether thy
yellow hair flows on the eastern clouds, or thou
tumblest at the gates of the west. But thou art,
perhaps, like me, for a season ; thy years will have an


end. Thou shalt sleep in thy clouds, careless of the
voice of the morning. Exult then, O sun ! in the
strength of thy youth. Age is dark and unlovely : it
is like the glimmering light of the moon, when it
shines through broken clouds, and the mist is on the
hills ; when the blast of the north is on the plain, and
the traveller shrinks in the midst of his journ'ey.
2. To moderate !
What would you moderate ? —my indignation ?
The just resentment of a virtuous mind ?
To mediate for the queen —you undertook ?
Wherein concern’d it you ? but as you love
To exercise your insolence ! Are you
To arbitrate my wrongs ? Must I ask leave ?
Must I be taught to govern my own household ?
Am I then void of reason and of justice ?
When in my family offences rise,
Shall strangers, saucy intermeddlers, say,
Thus far, and thus you are allowed to punish ?
When I submit to such indignities,
When I am tam’d to that degree of slav’ry, —
Make me a citizen, a senator of Rome,
To watch, to live upon the smile of Claudius :
To give my wife and children to his pleasures,
To sell my country, with my voice for bread.
3. Aurora, now, fair daughter of the dawn,
Sprinkled with rosy light the dewy lawn ;


When Jove conven’d the senate of the skies,
Where high Olympus’ cloudy tops arise,
The sire of gods his awful silence broke ;
The heavens attentive trembled as he spoke,
“ Celestial states ! immortal gods ! give ear :
Hear our decree, and rev’rence what you hear ;
The fix’d decree, which not all heaven can move :
Thou fate fulfil it, and ye powers ! approve —
What god shall enter yon forbidden field ?
Who yields assistance, or but wills to yield ?
Back to the skies with shame he shall be driv’n,
Gash’d with dishonest wounds, the scorn of heav’n :
Or from our sacred hill with fury thrown,
Deep in the dark Tartarean gulf to groan ;
With burning chains fix’d to the brazen floors,
And lock’d by hell’s inexorable doors ;
As far beneath the infernal centre hurl’d,
As from that centre to the ethereal world.
Let each, submissive, dread these dire abodes,
Nor tempt the vengeance of the god of gods.
League all your forces, then, ye pow’rs above ;
Your strength unite against the might of Jove.
Let down your golden everlasting chain,
Whose strong embrace holds heaven, and earth, and
main.
Strive all of mortal and immortal birth,
To drag by this the thund’rer down to earth, —
Ye strive in vain. If I but stretch this hand,


I heave the gods, the ocean, and the land,
I fix the chain to great Olympus’ height,
And the vast world hangs trembling in my sight,
For such I reign unbounded and above :
And such are men and gods compared to Jove.
The voice may be rendered soft as well as strong,
in the different keys, by gradually diminishing its
force, till it acquires that sweetness and liquidity
which we wish it to possess.
Soft high key.
Ah ! Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heap’d like mine, and that thy skill be more,
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich music’s tongue
Unfold the imagin’d happiness that both
Receive in either by this encounter.
Soft middle key.
Respect and admiration still possess me,
Checking the love and fondness of a son ;
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my sire surpass the rest of men,
As thou excellest all of womankind ?
Soft low key.
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank !
Here will we sit, and let the sound of music
Creep in our ears : soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony.


After having improved the voice in the different
qualities of high and low, loud and soft, it may be
exercised in the different degrees of slowness and
celerity, sprightliness and solemnity.
Slow and solemn.
Night, sable goddess ! from her ebon throne
In rayless majesty, now stretches forth
Her leaden sceptre o’er a slumb’ring world.
Silence, how dead ! and darkness, how profound !
Nor eye, nor list’ning ear an object finds.
Creation sleeps. ’Tis as the general pulse
Of life stood still, and nature made a pause,
An awful pause, prophetic of her end.
Swift and sprightly.
In the barn the tenant cock,
Close to partlet, perch’d on high,
Briskly crows (the shepherd’s clock,)
Jocund that the morning’s nigh.
Swiftly from the morning’s brow,
Shadows nursed by night retire ;
And the peeping sunbeam now
Paints with gold the village spire.
Sweet, O sweet, the warbling throng,
On the white emblossom’d spray,
Nature’s universal song
Echoes to the rising day.


The first of the following exercises is intended to
facilitate the acquisition of variety ; and the last, to
assist in recovering the voice, when raised into ranting
noise.
Bless me, a packet! “ ’Tis a stranger sues ;
A virgin tragedy, an orphan muse.”
If I dislike it, —“Furies, death, and rage.”
If I approve —“ Commend it to the stage.”
There, thank my stars ! my whole commission ends :
The players and I are luckily no friends.
Fir’d that the house reject him, —“ ’Sdeath ! I’ll
print it,
And shame the fools, —your int’rest, sir, with Lintot,”
“ Lintot (dull rogue !) will think your price too
much.”
“ Not if you, sir, revise and retouch it.”
All my demurs but double his attacks ;
At last he whispers,—“ Do, and we go snacks.”
Glad of a quarrel, straight I clap the door, —
“ Sir, let me see you and your works no more.
Ah me ! most credulous fool,
Egregrious murderer, thief, any thing
That’s due to all the villains past, in being,
To come —Oh ! give me cord, or knife, or poison,
Some upright justicer ! Thou king, send out
For torturers ingenious ; it is I
That all th’ abhorred things of th’ earth amend,
By being worse than they. lam Posthumus,


That killed thy daughter ; villain-like I lie,
That caus’d a lesser villain than myself,
A sacrilegious thief to do’t. The temple
Of virtue was she, yea, and she herself —
Spit and throw stones, cast mire upon me, set
The dogs o’ th’ street to bait me : every villain
Be called Posthumus, Leonatus, and
Be villainy less than ’twas. Oh ! Imogen,
My queen, my life, my wife ! Oh ! Imogen !
Imogen ! Imogen !
THE BELL TONE.
The bell tone is one of the qualities which I
must insist on in this book. The use of this quality
is to acquire perfect resonance ; and it has often been
claimed that when the voice has reached perfection
in resonance the tone thereby becomes a bell sound.
It requires a clear, open, and enlarged nasal chamber,
a well-raised soft palate, a firm but smooth lining to
the throat, and finally a tone that is projected forward
in the mouth, even to the front teeth ; and the word
“ bell ” itself is the best word to use in making the
tone. For a while the pupil had better use that pitch
of the voice which, in his or her opinion, seems to
most readily produce brilliancy and clearness of tone.
In all probability this will be either the sixth, seventh,
or eighth pitch. When the practice of this, the most
favourable pitch, has been continued until the pupil


feels sure that the bell tone may be produced ; the
pitch that is next in favour should then be used, and
so on, until perfection has been acquired in the entire
range of the voice. Of course the highest pitch in
the bell tone would resemble the smaller and finer
qualities of that species of musical instruments, while
the lowest pitch would represent the larger of heavier
bells. Bell tones may be produced on both the bright
and dark sides of the voice ; the latter depicting, in
the low register, the muffled bells, or any distant bell,
for distance suffuses and darkens the tone even of
the brightest bells. Every possible kind of imitation
of bells may be developed by constant practice for a
few months ; and although the aim is not to learn to
imitate bells, the results always are an enriching of
the human voice.
This special exercise has reference to the vibrating
bell tones, which, of course, can not be performed
until bell tones themselves have been acquired. The
best way to produce a vibrating bell tone is to start a
head intonation before opening the mouth. Take a
full breath, open the mouth with the lips closed and
with an artistic open throat, make a bright tone
resound in the nasal cavity, and instantly open out
the sound in a brilliant, clear, resonant tone on the
word “bell,” prolonging the “1” sound of the word
as long as the resonant character may be maintained,
gradually thinning the tone as the sound dies away.


This is an imitation of the ordinary movement of
sound as it proceeds from any bell which has been
struck a single blow. The pupil must be careful not
to cause the sound to die away too soon after the
word “ bell ” has been pronounced, but to gradually
diminish the tone. The final step is to combine with
this finishing tone a slight vibratory action of the
voice. The pupil who can execute this sound
correctly (and every person who reads this descrip-
tion ought to be able to catch the idea,) will find it
producing gradually but surely an enriching influence
over the entire voice. All the degrees of pitch
should come in for their share of the bell tones ; but
let no person be discouraged if it should require a
year or two to master this exercise.
MELODY.
The melody of speech is founded on sense ; that
of song, generally on sound. Words containing
opposite sentiments may be sung to the same air,
with effects equally good, if the force and time be
properly varied. Thus, if the two songs, “ March to
the Battle Field,” and “ Oft in the Stilly Night,” be
sung to the same air—the former with great force,
and in quick time—the latter with diminished force,
and in slow time, there will be as much difference of
expression between them, as there is between that of
joy and sorrow. But speech is not so accommodating.


Here every sentence must not only have its appro-
priate time, but the tune must be properly pitched.
The melody of song is graduated on a scale
whose degrees are as definite as those of the scale of
Gunter. But the melody of speech is not formed
with such mathematical exactness—it has no scale of
determinate degrees ; for, if an exact notation of the
melody of speech should be given, it is doubtful
whether it would be of much practical importance to
the generality of mankind, as none but a Paganini
would be able to read it.
For practical purposes, however, it is not essential
to present every syllable in speech under its proper
note, as is done in song : it is only necessary to give
a notation of the relative pitch of the emphatic
syllables. Such a notation may be read by those
who have no knowledge of music whatever, and,
consequently, does not require the aid of a Paganini.
Besides, if the relative pitch of the heavy, or emphatic
syllables, and their inflections, are given, the light, or
unemphatic syllables will naturally take their proper
degrees of elevation.
TRUENESS IN SINGING*
By a most reasonable deduction derived from his
admirable principles, Delsarte reckoned three modes
of degrees of correct singing :
* Notes of a Lecture by Delsarte, taken by his pupil, A. Giraudet, of
the National Academy of Music, Paris.


1. Absolute trueness.
2. Temperate trueness.
3. Passional trueness.
Absolute trueness is that adopted by theorists,
who divide the gamut into five notes and two semi-
tones ; the note into nine commas, or shades of tone ;
the chromatic semi-tone into five, and the diatonic
semi-tone into four.
Thus from C to C# they count five shades of tone ;
whereas from Cto Db they count but four. Likewise
from D to Db they count five shades of tone, and
from D to C% but four.
The difference of a comma between the D flat
and the C sharp, seemingly a very slight difference,
is, nevertheless, most important in singing, as we
shall see later on. But performers to simplify our
musical system, have divided this comma into two,
making synonymous notes of D flat and C sharp ;
that is to say, notes having the same sound. The
note is, therefore, practically divided into two semi-
tones of four commas and a half. This is what is
known as moderation or temperate trueness.
Temperate trueness is defective from many points
of view. This is the universal opinion, but we are
forced to accept this method by the absolute im-
possibility of any improvement, especially with the
key-board instruments now in vogue ; and it must be
accepted until some new invention shall revolutionise


the piano by modulating its tones, a transformation
which would give that instrument not only the musical
design, but also the colour and warmth which it now
lacks.
Let us pass to passional trueness, leaving science
to enter the domain of art. “Passional trueness,”
said Delsarte, “consists in giving each semi-tone
three, four, five, six, or even seven commas, according
to its tendency.” As we see, the precept is daring,
and an inattentive scholar would only have to forget
the last words of the definition to make people say
that the great master of lyric art taught his pupils to
sing false.
Every rule has its reason and its consequences.
St. Augustine, who knew the Beautiful, of which art
is only the expression, and who could explain it well,
has given us a brief but admirable definition of
music : “ Music is a succession of sounds each calling
forth the other.” Simple yet profound words ! The
sounds call each other forth, desire and mutually
attract each other, and in every age this attraction
has been so clearly evident, that the seventh note in
the scale, when it meets the others, each of which has
its particular name relating to its particular function,
tonic, dominant, &c., is simply called the sensitive
note, from its tendency to pass into the atonic.
Passional trueness is based upon this tendency of
the notes to pass into those which succeed them, and


upon this reciprocal attraction of sounds. Thus,
notes which have a tendency toward the acute or
shrill, may be raised two commas or more above
temperate trueness. Notes which have a tendency
toward the grave may be lowered in the same
proportion.
Delsarte, in his definition, speaks only of the
semi-tone; but it does not follow that the other
intervals are not equally subject to the same law.
Their attraction may not be shewn by the same
effects.
The master added, in speaking of trueness in
singing: “ The triad is the breathing-place of the
tonality ; the notes composing it should be absolutely
true. They are the singer’s invariable and necessary
law. They characterize repose. Their office is that
of attraction, and they can only be attracted mutually,
with the exception of the tonic, which is the centre of
attraction not only for various notes, but for the
phrase and the entire composition.”
Delsarte was very severe in regard to those who
sang false ; but to sing true was not, in his thinking,
a good quality. He said, on this point, that no one
would compliment an architect because he had built a
house in accordance with geometrical rules. Whence
he concluded that the trueness is the least of good
qualities, and the lack of it the greatest of vices, and
he added in regard to style : “The most important


quality is expression, and the lack of expression is
the least of vices.”
Let us add that the application of passional true-
ness depends upon a thousand conditions of rhythm
and harmony, to analyze which would lead us much
too far. The artist must make use of it according to
his aptitudes and his tendencies, for he must p'reserve
his individuality. He must learn by observation and
the study of his own faculties to apply theoretical
rules founded upon natural laws.
Practical trueness, while it allows us to depart
from legitimate trueness, has strong analogies with
the tempo rubato. The tempo rubato , which Delsarte
employed in a remarkable and striking way in
dramatic passages, actually permits the musician, in
certain cases and in the desired proportion, to change
the value of the notes while respecting the principle
of time, which is invariable. But the application of
these rules is subject to the emotional intensity ; it is
therefore, impossible to determine theoretically and
absolutely its various bearings.
EXERCISES FOR BUILDING AND
STRENGTHENING THE VOICE.
Exercise I. Take several words and intone them
sufficiently to make them audible, and by intensity of
will and imagination seem to shout and gesticulate, as


if by the sea or in the depths of the forest. Pace
the room with vehement gesture, and the eyes full of
fire and expression.
Exercise 11. Employ some time every day in
declaiming impassioned passages, and the endeavour
to convey them with appropriate tones will give
power and flexibility to the voice, and render the
appropriate expression of every passion at your
command.
All intensity of effect is produced by a profound
inspiration and expulsion. The stroke should be
produced by explosion. Make a full inspiration,
keep the diaphragm down, condense the air in the
lungs by closing the glottis and contracting the
muscles of expiration, then utter the element with
a sudden and forcible emission of the breath. The
initial consonant of a word should receive the same
forcible utterance.
“ Delsarte directed that the notes should be swelled
on a single note, E flat (of the medium) ; he claimed
that by strengthening this intermediary note the
ascending and descending scales were sympathetically
strengthened. He thus avoided, as he said, breaking
the high treble notes by exercises which would render
the cords too severely tense, convinced moreover, that
at a given moment a burst of enthusiasm and will-
power would take the place of assiduous practice.
He also taught that this special exercise of the


medium would prevent the separation of the registers,
that phylloxera of the vocal organs, which wrecks so
many singers, and causes them so many sorrows. This
was the way to gain that mixed voice, the ideal help
up to the scholars as being the most impressive and
the most exquisite ; that which at the same time
ravished the ear and charmed the heart. '
This master considered the chest-voice as more
particularly physical; and the head-voice, it must be
confessed,' is too much like the voice of a bird, to
awaken sentiment and sympathy.
Delsarte himself possessed this mixed voice ; in
him, it seemed to start from the heart, and brought
tears to eyes which had never known them. The
power of that tone —allied to the perfection of shad-
ing, diction, and lyric declamation —caused every
listening soul to vibrate with latent emotion which
might never have been waked to life save by that
appeal.
I return to the practice of swelled notes upon the
note E flat. This note certainly acquired broad and
powerful tones about which there was nothing forced,
and which were most agreeable. This development
was communicated to the neighbouring notes.”*
Exercise I. Swell and diminish on a single note,
E flat (of the medium).
* Angelique Amaud.


Exercise 11. When this note has acquired broad
and powerful tones, the development is to be com-
municated to the neighbouring notes.
Take the five organic vowel-sounds : A (ah), O
(oh), E (eh), U (oo), I (ee).
Exercise 111. Sing them on notes nearest to the
middle voice, varying the degree of intensity. Sustain
the sound as long as you can.
Exercise IV. Inflect the voice upon these vowel-
sounds. Begin at the interval of a third, and increase
the interval until you can carry the voice through a
whole octave.
Exercise V. Prefix the articulation of each of the
consonants to each of the organic vowel-sounds.
Retain the organ in its position for a second or two
after the articulation shall have been given. Fix your
whole mind on making a clear enunciation of the
vowel-sounds. Begin with a.
Exercise VI. Do the same with o, e , u, i.
Exercise VII. Speak the vowel-sounds with a
consonant before and after them.
Exercise VIII. Reverse the process, and let the
vowels precede the consonant.
Exercise IX. Associate the vowel-sounds with
the aspirate. First vocalize the vowels alone, and
then sound them with the aspirate.


The simplest way to ascertain the correct sounds
of the different consonants, is to take a word com-
mencing with a single consonant, and to stop speaking
before you come to the vowel.
Exercise X. Practise A and O (ah and oh) upon
a steady intonation, with the mouth widely opened
and held firm by the introduction of the points of the
first three fingers, and there retained during the mould-
ing of these vowel-sounds. Hold the jaws firmly apart
with two fingers for E and U (eh and oo), and insert
one finger for I (ee).
Exercise XI. Practise the laryngeal sound B
forcibly many times every day for the purpose of
enlarging the chamber of the larynx.
Exercise XII. Practise the organic vowels in a
stage-whisper j then practise B on different tones of
the scale.
Exercise XIII. Practise the vowel-sounds pre-
ceded by consonants on the chromatic scale.
Always open the mouth by protruding the lower jaw.
PRESERVATION OF THE VOICE.
The rules for ensuring the durability and best
working condition are few, simple, and mainly nega-
tive.


1. Be temperate in all things —and this means,
avoid gluttony and dissipation, and be moderate in all
sensuous indulgences.
2. Do not make violent vocal efforts soon after a
full meal ; nor exert the voice at its highest pitch long
at a time. Never use the voice except very moderately
when affected with hoarseness.
3. Nuts, old cheese, butter, sugar, salted meats,
acid liquors, ice-creams, very cold drinks, and very
hot drinks are specially injurious to the voice.
The End.
MARTEN, STEAM PRINTER, SUDBURY, SUFFOLK.




SUDBURY, SUFFOLK:
PRINTED BY B. R. MARTEN, BOOKSELLER, STATIONER, ETC.,
17, MARKET HILL.
1899.
