

Reprinted from “The Sunday Times.' Sunday. July 2. 1944 J
Decentralisation of Industry Will
Benefit Western Australia
AN EXTRA QUESTION
Dr. Evatt Answers “The Sunday Times”
Importance of Gold Mining
Rehabilitation Emphasised
As a Loyal
Western
Dr. Evatt emphasised that the decentralisation of industry In the
past has been retarded by the monopolistic, powerful business
interests of the Eastern States and these should be compelled to
release their grip on Industry,
Effective Safeguards for W.A. Positively Assured
ANXIOUS to clarify the contemplated safeguards for Western Australia
If the Referendum Is carried, “The Sunday Times” addressed 14 vital
questions affecting this State to Dr. Evatt. In furnishing these replies
Dr. Evatt made it clear that the points covered were not concessions hut
merely a recognition hy the Curtin Government of the rights of this part
of Australia to participate fairly la the post-war reconstruction plans.
Eereunder we repeat the questions, and to each we give Dr, Evatt’s
answers.
The goldmining industry is vital to Western Australia, and,
we believe, to the Commonwealtu. We know what
successive Commonwealth Governments have done for
Queensland sugar. What do you propose to do tor Western
Australia's gold ?
O In the control of overseas exchange and overseas investment
w * and the regulation of the raising of monea, will aV States
be trealed alike? In other words, will due provision be
made to prevent the fat corporations who are already well
established in business becoming fatter?
★ The importance ol the gold mining industry to Western Australia
and to Australia is fully recognised by the Commonwealth Gov-
ernment. The problems associated with the industry were surveyed
during my visit to Perth with the State Cabinet which is adminis-
tering a grant of £ 100.000 provided by the Commonwealth to the
State tor the maintenance of the mines in Western Australia. The
provision of equipment to replace that which it was necessary to
take from mines for direct war purposes when Australia was so
gravely threatened received special attention.
IWill Western Australia share fairly in developmental and
• reconstruction work necessary for the rehabilitation of our
soldiers?
Yes. Australia cannot be prosperous if we have wealthy corpora-
tions on one side and struggling small business enterprises on the
other.
Australian
You Should
Vote-
Yes. All those who belong to the services are entitled to the
gratitude of the nation, and State boundaries will not Interfere with
the Commonwealth expressing its gratitude in tangible terms, and
of course this emphatically Includes the women who have played such
Q Will the Government include Western Australia in every
modern scheme for air transport, giving special considera-
tion to the disadvantages of distance which we suffer?
Here again the answer is yes. Obviously the more distant States
must be the chief beneficiaries in modern air transport.
1 Q Does the proposition to make uniform the railway gauges
1 of Australia include provision of direct railway travel on
the standard gauge from Fremantle to Sydney?
Yes. I hope that during the post-war reconstruction period we shall
be able to travel on the one train for the entire journey on one of
the most modern railways in the world from Sydney to Fremantle
and Fremantle to Sydney.
1 1 Will consideration of national works give the Western
• 1 • Australian Government the right to take an equal share
in selecting the works that are particularly suitable to this
State?
noble part.
W.A.-MADE EQUIPMENT
2 Will the nationalising of the employment problem mean
• that unemployment figures in this State shall not be allowed
to soar higher than those of other States?
Steps have already been taken to ensure the return of that
equipment or suitable other equipment immediately the war position
admits of this action being taken. The local manufacture of equip-
ment will be vigorously pushed forward at the earliest possible
moment.
The answer is yes. That is one of the chief objects of the Common-
wealth in desiring to care for employment and unemployment. We
don’t wish to see any citizen suffer whether he or she belongs to any
particular State and an uneven spread of prosperity would cause an
undesirable exodus to the more prosperous States.
In addition, that equipment which cannot be made locally and
which it is necessary to obtain from overseas is already being sought
both in America and the United Kingdom sc that it may be obtained
therefrom in the minimum period of time. Equipment which can
be manufactured in W.A will be obtained to the greatest possible
extent. There is another factor, and that is that certain equipment
already held by the Defence Services or or order for them may be
released if the war situation permits and thus enable such equip-
ment to be supplied promptly The Commonwealth is fully alive to
the whole problem and will do its utmost to assist the Industry to
return to its former state of prosperity.
3 In the organised marketing of our commodities will Western
• Australia’s products receive equal treatment, and will
favoritism of any one State be definitely disallowed?
Yes. Organised marketing is desirable to protect the primary pro-
ducers as a whole, not the primary producers of any particular State.
The answer is yes. We have already initiated consultations with
the States in regard to co-operation in all post-war public works.
1 J Has the Government any plans for consideration of the
1 “• special problems of country hospitals?
Yes. Country hospitals have been a problem for many years and
our schemes of social service aim at special consideration for the
country people. Obviously we cannot ask people to go out and
develop this country unless we provide proper hospitalisation.
| 3 Will this include a special and sympathetic consideration of
’ the many difficulties of the outback families in sparsely
populated communities such as ours?
I can say yes to this also. It is related closely to the previous
question because we must have more farms outback and more
population outback if we are going to make Australia progressive
and safe.
1 A Does the Commonwealth recognise that Western Australia
•”• has the greatest aboriginal problem of any State, and will
this State, therefore, figure in the forefront of any schemes
for the betterment of the aboriginal population?
Definitely yes. We have a responsibility to both aboriginals and half
castes, many of whom are today doing their part in many ways in
the war effort.
YES
4 In the matter of a uniform company law, will Western
• Australia have equal facilities for raising capital with the
bigger States in the post-war period ?
1 can say yes to this, too. When we have a uniform company law
we will have uniform regulations and activities and uniform oppor-
ADVISORY MINING PANEL
tunlties.
5 Does this mean that big Eastern States groups will be
• prevented from exploiting this and other smaller States?
Yes, Prevention of exploitation of the smaller States must be an
essential part of the new post-war reconstruction.
In addition to the foregoing and having in mind the importance
of the gold mining Industry, I have already advised the Premier of
Western Australia that the Minister for post War Reconstruction is
taking steps to set up a mining industry Advisory Panel to furnish
recommendations to the Government regarding the industry and the
application of war-time scientific discoveries tc mining development.
In view of the important part Western Australia plays in this
Industry, it has been decided that a Western Australian representative
will be appointed to the Panel.
Because
5 In controlling profiteering and prices, will the Government
• ensure that the disadvantages of distance will not mean
that Western Australia will have to pay unfairly high
prices for commodities?
The Referendum Bill means Full
Employment, Child Endowment,
Rural Prosperity and Economic
In saying yes, 1 want to add that every citizen of Australia must
be protected from profiteering in all its clever and carefully camou-
flaged forms.
The foregoing, I think, amply demonstrates that the Common-
wealth is fully alive to the importance and problems of this vital
national industry and will do its utmost to assist in all possible
directions.
7 In the production and distribution of goods, will due
• recognition be given to our peculiar position as a State of
chiefly primary industries?
Tour job—your home—your security and the happiness of your
family depends on your vote on August 19. VOTE “YES” FOR
AUSTRALIA.
Security for YOU !
Yes. The primary producing States will be carefully safeguarded
and related as closely as possible to the desire to supplement them
with secondary Industries.
Authorised by T. G. Davies, Labor Campaign Director. Trades Hall, Perth
■'Worker" Print, Stirling St., Perth (40-Hour Week)
DON’T BE LED BY THE “NOES”—VOTE “YES” FOR AUSTRALIA
Menzies —
Fadden —
Dunstan
Playford
and all the other leaders of
Anti-Labor Parties in Australia
SWITCHED ON THE
REFERENDUM
After Big Business
Cracked the Whip
In November, 1942, they represented their parties at the
Canberra Convention, which drew up the 14 additional
Commonwealth Powers necessary for post-war recon-
struction, and the re-employment of servicemen and
other Australians. The Bill was adopted unanimously.
But in 1944 they are condemning
the very Bill which they sup-
ported in 1942
Ask them Why ?
See If Then Give The
Real Reason ?
THIS IS IT-
In January-March, 1943
The Associated Chambers of Manufac-
tures (Canberra)
The South Australian Stock Exchange
The Chamber of Automotive Industries
The Victorian Employers ’ Federation
The Victorian Chamber of Commerce
The iV.S.TF. Graziers * Association
And other BIG BUSINESS interests
declared themselves against addi-
tional COMMONWEALTH Powers
for Post-War Reconstruction.
When the Combines cracked the whip
MENZIES, FADDEN
and the rest jumped into line
This is what the “Yes-No” men thought
before Big Business got to work on
them:
MR. DUNSTAN: My opinions, with some compromises, are embodied
In the Bill ... In the circumstances I am prepared to support
EVERY CLAUSE of It.— (Official record of 1942 Convention,
p. 163),
MR. FADDEN: I think the Bill can be accepted as a MONUMENT
OF CO-OPERATION, and as evidence of unselfishness and com-
promise on the part of everyone, particularly those representing
the States.— (Official record, p. 181).
MR. PLAYFORD: I, personally, am quite WILLING TO ACCEPT
Mr. Cosgrove’s amendment. (The amendment provided for the
transfer to the Commonwealth of the 14 post-war reconstruction
powers by State Parliaments). — (Official record, p. 139).
MR. MENZIES as far back as November 22, 1938, In a speech In the
Federal Parliament urging constitutional reform, argued that the
Commonwealth should have complete power over trade and com-
merce, companies, Industry, transport, fishing, agriculture, and
unemployment Insurance.
That is what they believed before Big
Business Cracked the Whip—How can you
believe them now?
The issue is : Big Business v. THE PEOPLE
Vote “YES” on August 19
Thus ; E YES
On August 19 Vote “YES” for Australia
3 YES
1] NO
DON’T BE LED BY THE “NOES”
■VOTE “YES” FOR AUSTRALIA
H NO
Authorised by T. G. Davies, Labor Campaign Director. Trades Hall, Perth
’’Worker” Print (40-Hour Week), 40-42-44-48 Stirling Street, Perth
