

(-"teTH Pr m
2?31
VOYAGE
THE FOELOEH HOPE,
NOTES ON WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
INTRODUCTOET.
The following narrative, from the pen of Mr.
J. P. Stow, will amply repay perusal, constitu*
ting (as it does) a simple and truthful report of
one of the most daring and perilous boat
voyages ever undertaken; and comprising also
a considerable amount of information relative to
a part of the Australian coast-line hitherto but
imperfectly known; Mr. J. P. Stow was not a
member of either of the Government Expedi-
tions to Adam Bay, but went out on his own
resources to inspect the country, and also as
agent for a number of purchasers of land in the
Northern Territory. Whilst thus engaged he
likewise officiated as Special Correspondent of
the South Australian Advertiser and Chronicle,
in the columns of which papers have appeared
the fullest reports that have yet been made
public with reference to the affairs of the infant
settlement. It is not the purpose of this brief
introduction to canvass the merits of Mr. Stow’s
present report, but rather to introduce to the
public both the narrative and its author, leaving
the reader to draw his own conclusions. It is,
however, necessary to state that the following
pages are a sequel to other letters written by
Mr. Stow to the journals above named, in which
he details what in his judgment constitute
the principal causes of failure of the Northern
Territory Expedition. That Mr. Stow is
perfectly sincere in his representations is demon-
>. strated by the fact of his having undertaken so
desperate a voyage as that of the “ Forlorn,
Hope especially considering that (apart from
the failure of the attempted settlement) he had
every reason for remaining in the new
country, and no reason whatever for returning
before accomplishing the object of his mission.
But, as already stated, the purpose of these
sentences is not to vindicate Mr. Stow’s opinions,
nor to pronounce judgment upon the policy of
the Government Resident at Adam Bay. To do
justice to this subject would require a volume.
It is, however, certain that the extraordinary
interest taken in the daring voyage of Mr. Stow
and his companions more than justifies the re-
publication of that gentleman’s report to the
Advertiser and Chronicle. The story of the
voyage is simply told ; nothing is inserted for
mere effect; no adventitious aids are brought
to bear upon the subject, but on the contrary it
is surprising how so remarkable a voyage could
be described with so little egotism and in such
few words. That Mr. Stow might easily have
made much more of the incidents of his romantic
journey, every one will perceive, and it is to be
hoped that his moderation as the historian of an
adventure in which he was a principal actor
will not detract from the interest which the
public would have felt in the perusal of the
story had it been written in more vivid terms.


VOYAGE OF THE FORLORN HOPE.
My last letter closed on the sth of May, and I fear its
contents were anything but cheering to those Interested In
the Northern Territory. I am able now to give you news to
the morning of the 7th of May, and accounts of the pro-
ceedings of the party, of whom I was one, that sailed from
Adam Cay in the Forlorn Hope. On the departure of the
Bengal, about 50 persons were left in the settlement. Of
these, four or live professed to admire the policy of the
Government Resident; a few more expressed a determina-
tion to remain In the Northern Territory as long as they could
get their excellent pay, and about 40 were intending to leave
by the first opportunity. It was well known that the time
elapsing before tne next advices from Adelaide would be
wasted, and up to the last moment of our leaving the set-
tlement the Resident’s folly, obstinacy, and disobedience of
instructions were as conspicuous as ever. The universal
depression occasioned by the disappointed hopes and dreary
prospects of the settlers and members of the expedition was
relieved by the excitement of the two days on which the
Forlorn Hope left the Cliffs and the Narrows. The mala
object of most of the members of the crew of this little
craft was, of course, to return to Adelaide; but several, In-
cluding your correspondent, wished to visit different parts
of the coast of our own Territory. After this was effected,
we were to proceed to Camden Harbor, and if a vessel was
there bound for the Swan, Melbourne, or Adelaide, to sail
by her ; if not, to continue coasting till we fell in with a
vessel, or reached Fremantle, when the voyage of our boat
was to end. We thought we should And numerous places
-pf'ibelter about thp coast and among the islands, and found,
to our cost, how little we knew of the character of both
It was supposed by most people that we should
arrive in Adelaide before the passengers by the
Bengal, and had our object been simply to return
we should have met the July mall at the Sound, but our
examination of the coast occupied some time, to the
loss of fair winds. A few, and among them sailors, prog-
nosticated a fatal Issue to our voyage ; but the unutter-
able disgust with which we contemplated the prospect of
months of forced i laotivity, determined ns to venture. We
Eurohased the boat on the 4th from the Bengal, and brought
er on shore. She was 23j feet in length, 6 feet across the
beam, and two feet deep. She had two masts and sprit-
sails, to which we added a jib. On the 6th we had wash-
boards added to her, and a little decking and tarpaulin on
the bows and stern, thus guarding as far as possible
against shipping water, and at the game time making
lockers for our provisions. On the 6th, after the departure
of the Bengal we got our luggage and provisions on board.
We had 200 lbs of bread and biscuit, some cheese, 20 6-Ib
tins of beef, a few medical comforts, some cakes, about 7o
gallons of water, and some ffrewood. We carried as little
luggage as possible, and a chest with photographic appara-
tus belonging to Messrs. Hamilton and Hake.
In the course of the afternoon all preparations were com
pleted, and the people of Adam Bay collected to bid us fare-
kvell. We met in the Government bakehouse, when various
foasts were proposed, including “A Safe and Successful
Trip,” “Our next Meeting.” “The Great Work of Explo-
ration” was received and responded to with considerable
merriment. About 18 officers and men were accompanying
their comrades for some distance in the Bengal—every one
remaining in camp, except the Resident and two or three
others, accompanied us to the shore. We walked along the
cliffs to the landing-place of the Bengal. Here was the
boat close in shore, and tide nearly at the full. We pro-
ceeded to unfurl our flag, every one showing the most
breathless interest in the ceremony. No one knew what
standard we intended to hoist - whether it would be
the red rag of rebellion, or “ the flag that braved
a thousand years”—whether it would exhibit simply
the name of our vessel, or an anathema upon
the government of Palmerston. When it was unfolded, and
the freemen of Alexandra read the motto, now become his-
torical “ Finis coronal opus," their feelings found vent in a
wild and instantaneous burst of applause. Cheer after
cheer rent the air, resounded from rock and wood, was borne
upon the breeze, and echoed along the shore. When, from
pure exhaustion, the display of enthusiasm had a little
abated, a few enquiring minds sought for an explanation of
the motto. Various replies were given to enquiries, the most
common being of a very general kind, as “ Oh, something
about Finniss."' One gentleman of whose attainments as a
Latinist I had previously been unaware, informed those
assembled that the English of the sentence was “Finniss
oorroborees to his opponents ” More toasts, expressed in
nervous English,were then proposed and drank, and we took
a hearty farewell of our friends. The boat, with all canvas
set and colors flying, sailed slowly away, amidst vociferous
cheering; the free translator, exhausted by his emotions,
sunk upon the sand, and feebly waving his hand, cried
“ Hooray,” while a jolly tar rushed along the beach scream-
ing nautical advice, wnioh he accompanied with the wildest
gesticulations and the most extravagant contortions of limb
and feature. Gently we moved away; the cheering sub-
sided ; the hats were replaced upon their respective oraniums;
the Cliffltes, including the jolly tar and the free translator,
wended their way up the banks, and we steered for the
mouth of the river, feeling that we had taken leave of Escape
Cliffs and our fellow-sufferers. It became dark before we had
proceeded far up the Adelaide, and the tide was against us.
We were obliged to pull up under the banks, and land about
three-quarters of a mile from the camp of the survey
parties engaged in laying out South Palmerston. We were
expected, but it being nearly 10 p.m., all hands had gone to
their rest, and our first cooey not being answered, those of
our party who possessed pleasing voices treated them to imi-
tations of the melodies of many animals, wild and domestic,
besides various unearthly yells and cries, till at last they were
,'made aware that somebody was coming, and responded In
’an appropriate manner. By the time we reached the camp
all were aroused, and we spent several hours discussing the
affairs of the settlement. Those remaining looked forward
with loathing to the months that must pass away before they
could be relieved from the reign of Idiocy. Some would
gladly have joined us had we room lor them. Nearly all at this
camp Intended leaving by October at latest, should oppor-
tunity offer. At 10 a.m. on the 7th we went on board, and I
may as well give here the passenger-list: -J. P. Stow,
Arthur Hamilton, and Wm. MoMinn (Surveyors), John
White and James Davis (seamen), and Chas. Hake, and
Francis Edwards, men of the survey parties. Messrs.
Hamilton and McMinn were to determine our course, and
John White, an experienced boatman, who had been in the
pilot service in Victoria, and was well-known at Port
Adelaide, was to have the management of the boat. Francis
Davis was also an able seaman. We had maps from Mel-
bourne, tracings from the charts of the Captain of the Bengal,
two sextants, and several pocket compasses. We took
leave of our fellow-victims on the banks of the Adelaide,
and on pushing off were encouraged on our way by
great and continued cheering, while parting volleys were
fired from carbines and revolvers. Some of the camp,
including G. MoMinn, C. Hulls. W. Stow, and others,
accompanied us for some distance in a dingy. They hoisted
a blanket for a sail, but not being able to steer very close to
the wind, we took them in tow, and sailed down the river
against the tide, through the mouth, and for some miles
towards Point Charles, across the Bay, leaving the Beatrice
and the Cliffs far to the right. Soon we approached the open
sea, and It was necessary for the dingy to return. What a
parting that was on the waters of Adam Bay between
friends' and brothers 1 -some embarked on an adventure full
of novelty, and not destitute of peril; others doomed to
months of weariness and monotony. After the shaking of
hands, the interchange of good wishes, and the hoisting of
the blanket-sail, the two crews, with their mud-soiled gar-
ments, long beards, and faces flushed with emotion, cheering
and waving their hats, formed a scene that must be forever
photographed upon the memory. How. as the boats
Increased the distance between them, those British hurrahs
sounded across the water I—and as a last form of farewell,
revolvers were fired, and we felt that we had commenced
our voyage, and left Adam Bay wi’h its horrors and absur-
dities, its bitter recollections and pleasant reminiscences, its
strifes and friendships, behind us.
We passed the Vernon Islands early in the afternoon,
taking the inner channel, and going over shoals. Good
winds most of the day. After sundown weather looked
threatening, and we had a stiff breeze; but about seven


p.m. the weather cleared, and the wind abated. We had
pleasant breezes most of the night. How beautiful when
the moon rose, and spread its silvery light upon the calm
water. We became deliciously sentimental. The ever-
lasting ocean could never really become monotonous i one
could never tire of gazing upon its broad expanse and
watching It in its various moods. Waking and sleeping, In
dreams and reverie, the first night passed away.
At daylight on the Bth saw the mainland, and during the
day sailed over a reef marked on our chart, and passed the
entrance of Port Paterson, coast low and dreary. Native
fires all along the coast. At about 8 p.m. were stopped
by freefs, and turned to the west, when we were again
stopped and anchored. At 1 a.m. on the 9th, at low water,
found ourselves surrounded by reefs, and were thankful for
our escape from shipwreck. At high water the reefs were
all out of sight, and we sailed pleasantly enough for three
or four hours, when the wind shifted, and we went to sea-
ward till the sea became so rough that we tacked to the
east and ran In shore, anchoring about 11 a.m., two miles
from a sandy beach, free from breakers. Heavy rain and
wind. Remained at anchor till the morning of the 10th.
We had a rough sea and high wind with a good deal of
rain. We were saturated with rain and spray, and some of
our bread was Injured. An unconfortable night, but all slept
a good deal—some soundly. At 7.30 steered for the main-
land. At 3.30 Cape Blaze bore S.W., distant about eight
miles, and a fine range of hills -I should say 40 miles distant
8. E. half E. Sailing very near the coast. Plenty of fish,
and among them kangaroo fish, so called from the fact that
they leap along the surface of the water on their tails. Heard
snipe and plover on shore; sandflies visited us from the
land. At 5 p.m. sighted the peak of Peron Island. The sea
became rough, and not knowing the passage into Anson
Bay, where we Intended to call, we made for the shore, and
anchored at 10 p.m., about two miles from the land, in six
fa horns water. During the night the wind was cold and
violent, with a rough sea. Our anchor being light, we
drifted eight or ten miles to the N.W. At sunrise, on the
lith, we were out of sight of Peron Island, but we soon
sighted it. The peak of the island first becomes visible,
appearing like a solitary rock, but soon the rest of tire
Island shows itself, and afterwards the smaller island.
Winds light and variable, sometimes dying away altogether.
-There being a dead calm, anchored about 8 p.m. Numerous
fires on the island and along the coast. Heard natives
oooeying and wild dogs howling.
12th. Weighed anchor at midnight, and commenced
tacking through the inner channel into Anson Bay. At
it a.m., there being a strong tide against us. and the
wind dying away, we anchored in three and a half
fathoms. Cliff Head in sight S.E. by E., and
land just visible to the east. During the afternoon we
drifted slowly in with the tide, having scarcely a breath of
wind to assist us. Range of hills, bearing E.N.E. from the
south end of the smaller Peron Island, and a round hill
bearing E.S.B. The wind ceasing, and a strong tide setting
against us, we anchored at 8 p.m. in six fathoms.
13th.—Weighed anchor at sundown ; foul wind, but tide
In our favor. Anchored about four miles south-west from
Cliff Head. Deep water near shore; six fathoms one-third
of a mile distant, and three fathoms close to the beach. The
bottom was a kind of quicksand, with barnacles underneath.
Banded with firearms, food, &0., and enjoyed a good feed
and a pot of tea -the first we bad been able to indulge In
since leaving Adam Bay. There were a few mangroves
about, and a few acoaclas, like those in Victoria. Some
of the party, including myself, started for a walk in-
land. We went about five miles westward. Saw a red
wallaby, and shot a pheasant and some plover. Swamps,
salt and fresh, close to the beach. Followed a salt swamp
some distance ; then finding it difficult walking, turned into
the forest. The soil was much like that at Adam Bay, but
with less ironstone pebbles. A great deal was a light sand,
of a yellow and sometimes a darker color. The grass not so
tall as at Escape Cliffs, but as worthless and very rank.
Much of it broad in the leaf, with saw edges. The timber a
good deal like that at Adam Bay, but of a more useful
character, There were forests of paper-bark trees and box ;
stringybark, bastard gum, and a kind of ironbark abounded.
The trees were of small circumference, few exceeding two
feet. Some ran 30 or 40 feet without branches. The best
specimens were stringybark and bastard-gum. The timber
was generally sound, judging from lie appearance, the
absence of dead branches, and the small quantity
of hollow logs on the ground. So far as we
walked we could see no change in the cha-
racter of the country. We saw a great many honey-
suckles. Anthills of great size were plentiful, varying In
height from 10 feet to upwards of 20 feet. We noticed one
17 feet, and another 22 feet in height. Bome were upwards
ot2o feet in circumference. They were of different styles
of architecture—all corrugated, the ridges sometimes conical
at both ends; some ended in a peak like a church spire, and
some were castellated. Returning we went N. to an opening
in the timber, and found ourselves at the head of a large
fresh swamp running towards the sea. It was drying up-
moist to the feet, but without surface water. On the north
isde paperbaik, and many sorts of trees on the south side.
Ilad there been any of those fine gum-trees Mr. Earl
speaks of as likely to form an article of export from Anson
Bay, we should have found it on this swamp, but large gums
will not grow in such a soil as that at Anson Bay. It is
true we only landed on one side ot Cliff Head, but all the
coast was low and presented the same appearance. Turned
from the swamp into the timber to the left, found the grass
dreadfully rank and tangled, and fatiguing to walk through.
Beached the beach some time after dark. Our boat had been
moved according to arrangement to Cliff Head, and we were
glad to make the fire and refresh ourselves with the bush-
man’s beverage and stimulant—tea, not despising the
grosser viands of tinned beef and bread. Night, beautifully
calm, but cold. I was glad of two blankets, and could have
borne a third.
14th.—Breakfasted on grilled pheasant and plover—good
eating, the former delicious. Between our camp and the
point of the Cliffs a creek—deep at high water—joins the
sea, and runs S.W. parallel with the beach. Some of us
followed it for about three miles to the head, crossed dry-
foot, and found abundance of fresh water in swamps. Fol-
lowed the mangrove creek back for some distance, then
turned Inland to a large plain two or three miles square.
Shot some teal, snipe, and plover In fresh swamps. Paper-
bark all round the plain. Returned to coast, crossing the
creek at low water. Fresh water close to it in swamps.
Walked about two miles along Cliff Head. Found the cliff
at its highest point about 100 feet, though it appears much
lower viewed from the Bay. It is composed of red sandstone,
very much disintegrated, conglomerate ironstone, and red
earth above all. The ground does not slope inland. Near
the edge the trees were small, young box, and gum, and
stunted palms. One hundred yards back the timber wa*
large, and much of it straight-stemmed ; all beyond a dense
forest. All along the base of Cliff Head is a smooth sandy
beach, with scarcely a sign of rook, but at high water the
sea touches the cliffs. We had a very fine view of Peron
Island and the day -a fine open harbor. The air is clear
and bracing. There is no doubt this is a healthy spot. We
have seen no Sign of high land, except the range mentioned
on the 12th; that is visible from most parts of the Bay, and
some hills bearing 8. by E. that we suppose to be the Bar-
thelemy. There are cliffs about six miles from Cliff Head to
the 8. W., and more nearer to Cape Ford. All the land about
Anson Bay is low and worthless. There is no lime or
building stone, and, as far as we could see, no permanent
surface water. There were numbers of natives about, !as we
could tell by their fires, tracks, &0., but none showed them-
selves. Probably they had heard of the killing of one of
their color at Chambers Bay, and the report of our guns
prevented them from coming near us. Their wurleys were
of the rudest kind, and we saw no canoes or raits. We
found some large worn-out baskets. Emu and dingo tracks
plentiful. Took in water, and prepared to start in the
evening, but the tide did not reach the boat, which had been
brought ashore for the purpose of making a few additions
and alterations.
16th.— At dawn, out mangrove levers and rollers, and after
a little labor launched the boat We had lost no time, as not
a breath of air stirrred through the night. As we started, a
fine S.E. breeze set In and carried us past Cape Ford by 11
a.m., and so ended our visit to Anson Bay. A little beyond
Cape Ford the coast looks like that at Wallaroo, short
sloping beach, then grass flats, behind that small bushy
timber. After this is passed, we approach Cape Dom-
bey; this Is generally sandy soil, with occasionally cliffs.
We noticed fires along the coast.
16th.—Light winds most of last night. Shortly after day-
light saw the Barthelemy Hills. Calms and light winds
all day till about 4.30 p.m. Steered for what looked like an
opening In the bight, between Cape Dombey and Cape Hay.
On approaching, found this appearance of an opening which
we hoped would prove to be a river, was occasioned by a
break in the line of bushes that along the coast. This
spoils left blank in the Admiral;, > charts. There are red
cliffs to the 5.8. E., the Barthelemy Hills bear N.E. by E,
high land in the distance, N.E. and E. half N. About dark,
we anchored in one and a half fathoms at the sandy beach.
There was a large mangrove creek close to us on our right.
Just before dark, saw large flights of cockatoos. During the
night heard birds and the bowl of the dingo on shore.
M osquitos troublesome the early part of the night, but they
died or became torpid as the cold increased.
17th.—At sunrise noticed other mangrove creeks in the
distance on each side ot us. Landed, walking through soft
mud, and afterwards got the boat on hard sand.
Numerous tracks of natives and dingoes on the beach.
At breakfast a dingo made its appearance, and we thought
of shooting it, till it was suggested that it belonged to the
natives. It made cautious approaches, now and then lying
down, and watching us. It had a cord round its neck. It
took no notice of the report of firearms. At last it sniffed
food, and its advance became very rapid till we threw it
some meat. Altei fasting this it eat out of a plate and then
from our hands, end finally showed its gratitude and the
delicacy of its habits by cleaning all our dishes and cooking
utensils, and remained at our fire all day. At about 8 a.m.
Mr. McMinn, White, Davis, and 1 started for the south
point ol tLe range .south of the Barthclemye. We .steered


east.*cd at-starting crossed and rounded a number of salt
creeks, about which were numerous tracks of natives. We
saw fishing weirs across the creeks, with small openings,
and near them mattings or nets with which, we suppose,
the natives closed them as they wished. After getting
clear of the creeks and mangroves we came to a hard
plain, with grass and rushes ; the grass wiry, but better than
we had seen on the coast before. Much of the plain had been
burnt. Before us was the range trending from S. to N., or
N.W., the Barthelemy Hills to the north of the end of the
range, and other hills beyond in the same direction. We
had a beautiful south-east breeze ; the day was mild, and
altogether like a May day in South Australia. We walked
on briskly, elated with the idea of soon being on high hills,
and having a view of good country. About two miles from
the sea we came to a fresh swamp, and walking through it
soon came to another, and then found the swamps ton-
tinuous. We walked two miles through water, and then
turned northward to some distant timber, hoping to find
there dry land that would lead to the Barthelemy Hills, whence
we hoped we could travel along the range and return by
a different route. When we reached the first clump
of timber we found it a mere Island in the midst of the
swamp. Oneof the party dropped Into a hole up to his
shoulders in mud and water, and was rapidly disappearing
when he was pulled out. After this we found the water In-
variably deeper when we came to timber, which was prin-
cipally paperback We waded through rushes and reeds or
small bamboo? till our party began to separate. We then
went for a considerable distance through tall flags, several
feet over our heads, till the water reached to our waists, and
•deepened so rapidly that in a few steps we should have been
reduced to the necessity of swimming, so we reluctantly re-
turned, seeing water in every direction. Logs were floating
about, and leeches abounded. I have no doubt we were on
the edges of a lake, and that the water we walked through
contracted as the dry season advanced. We had a view of at
least 100 square miles of swamp. By degrees our party re-
united; we had all been severely bitten by a kind of wasp,
and our clothes were torn and hung about us in shreds. »On
our return we shot a number of small plover and a swamp
bird nearly as large as a turkey. There was a large kind of
pigeon here, but it was very shy. Roaming in search
of game we saw many camping-grounds of natives,
and on the beach tracks that had been made
during the day. I wished to try and reach Barthe-
lemy Hills by a different route on the morrow; but
the party would not agree to this, so at 9 p.m. we got the
boat off and set sail. The sea on this coast is very phos-/
phorescent—at Cape Dombey peculiarly so. As the wave
spread along the shore it appeared like a sheet of blue flame.
Each man standing in the water was surrounded by a halo
of light; and when the boat moved she left in her wake a
pathway of pale fire, shooting out myriads of blue sparks.
Wind gentle till midnight, when it freshened up from
the S.E.
18th.— At daylight out of sight of land, going across
Cambridge Gulf, with a high sea. Rough all day.
19th.— About two hours before daylight saw land. Passed
Cape Bernier, and sailed along the coast. About Cape
Londonderry it is a fine bold coast—high cliffs and some-
times ranges of hills coming to the water’s edge, with
mountainous country in the background. All on land
looked dry, and had that desolate appearance Australian
■coast generally wears in the summer season. Passed Cape
Bougainville, and in the evening, as the navigation looked
dangerous from the number of islands and breakers, we tried
to find shelter under an island about 12 miles from the Cape,
but got on a reef with less than three feet of water on it.
As we were endeavoring to get clear of this danger a heavy
breaker came rolling on. The boat answered her helm beauti-
fully, went head on. and rode buoyantly over the surf. We
then headreached N.E., keeping a watch. After standing
out for some miles the water suddenly became smooth,
and we struck on rock. Soon after we saw breakers
all around and land at no great distance. Bump, bump,
grind, grind, went our poor boat on the rocks ; we tried
hard to get her off, but she continued to catch on the reef.
Our situation was now < ritical. We were a dozen miles
from the mainland, with no chance of escape in case of
shipwreck, which seemed inevitable, for the soft wood of
which our little vessel was made could not long stand such
severe usage. We believed our voyage of life was about to
end with that of the Forlorn Hope, and it seemed that the
motto on our flag would have a mournful significance- At
last we got clear, and sailed back towards the island we had
left in the evening, and anchored in two fathoms.
20th— A heavy sea broke our rudder this morning, and
we anchored and repaired it. Sailed in various directions,
trying to avoid the numerous reefs and shoals, till at last we
resolved to go eastward till we got outside them, and then
still work round all these dangers—making a detour of 80 or
90 miles. The wind being against us, we ran down to the
eastern side of Vansittart Bay, and found safe anchorage
off a sandspit, at five fathoms, about half a mile from the
land.
2lst.—Got under sail at daylight; but as everything
foretold rough weather we sought shelter, and anchored
in four fathoms at Troughton Island, a quarter of
a mile from the shore. We had a fine view
from here. To the west, the Cape—a round hill
with a spit of land running out; to the south, the shores
of Vansittart Bay, Troughton Island, curving round and
partly obstructing the view; and behind all, in the distance, ' *
on the mainland, high ranges, and an immense quantity of
smoke ascending from them. The island opposite to us had
about 30 feet elevation, and the ground sloped away on
either side. Some of the reefs about the shore presented the
appearance of artificial walls, steep, and regular. Landed '
and walked about the island. Near the shore, sandhills and
grassy flats ; inland, open forest. All the timber was stunted,
including ironbark, paperback, bastard gum, palms, and
different kinds of tropical trees. Crossed a large hollow
with better grass than I had seen in North Australia, and
found the ground rose inland. Found large blocks of 7
freestone. Soil sandy—in places covered thickly with iron-
stone. Found a native well hardly dry, old camping places,
with bones and shells of fish and turtle, wurleys of the
shape of beehives, with semiconioal entrances, and spears.
Some of the spears were simply wooden, others partly
wood, partly bamboo. One had a simple point, another
a chisel pom 1 ; of quartz ; others had knobs of wood of th e
shape of a tooth, fastened on to them, which fitted in r o
them as in a socket, and was fixed with glue or gum.
There were cockatoos and pigeons on the island.
22nd.—Started at daylight with a gentle breeze, smooth
sea, and balmy weather, steering north till towards evening,
when we ran west about IS miles.
83rd.—After a fine night’s run we struck at 3 a.m. on a
reef. Got the boat off, and anchored till daylight in seven
and a half fathoms water. At dawn were close to three
remarkable rooks. All the forenoon among shoals and
reefs. Tacked in all directions, and at length, to simplify
matters, sailed over a shoal. Rowed a great deal. Plenty
of turtles and fish about. Heavy dews at night. Quanti-
ties of porpoises. General course, S.W.
24th.—Passed islands marked on the charts as south of
Casini Islands. Passing Islands all day. Course, S.W.
by W.
25th.—Still passing islands, principally on our left-
Course, S.W. J W.
26th.—To the west we saw a large reef, with sandspit
jutting out, and prominent rocks sticking up. Passed be-
tween the reef and the islands. Sailed by a large break-
water of rocks, smooth and regular islets formed of
boulders of rock of many shapes, columnar, square, smooth,
and fretted. The base and walls of some islets
were of dark rook, surmounted by piles of what s
appeared to be a white freestone. There seemed
on this part of our course an unbroken con-
tinuity of islands, till at last we saw lofty ranges on the
mainland beyond, and Mount Trafalgar. Still islands
islands, islands. After leaving Cape Bougainville we passed V
at least 600, of every shape, size, and appearance. Some are *
several miles in extent; others are mere detached rocks;
some have stunted vegetation; others look quite bare;
some look like detached portions of hilly ranges; soma ,
conical; some round or oval, and flat topped; some slope to \
the water’s edge ; some are bold and cliffy; some smooth ;
some diversified with sandhills; some are rugged and
uneven, with large rocks piled together in a wild and fan-
tastic manner; some exhibit a sandy beach ; others are
guarded by barriers of reefs. Infinitely varied as these
islands are—wild and picturesque, grand sometimes almost
to sublimity—there is about them all an air of dreariness
and gloom. No sign of life appears on their surface; scarcely —-
even a sea bird hovers on their shores. They seem aban-
doned by Nature to complete and everlasting desolation.
The barrenness and silence were more depressing to us
from the circumstances of our position. We had thought to
find shelter among so many isles, safe anchorages,
when the storms rose and the sea raged, but the
islands were more inhospitable than the wide ocean.
There was deep fathomless water up to their shores, ex-
cept where we were on treacherous reefs. Whatever wind
blew we were compelled to drift, and were often forced out
of our way by furious currents and eddies. It was a relief
from weariness, anxiety, and danger, when we escaped from
this Archipelago. We tried to get into Camden Harbor
through Rogers’s Straits, but failed, being puzzled by
islands, and baffled by breakers and eddies.
27th.—At 3 a.m. we steered for an opening among the
Islands to the 8. W., and got among more currents, eddies,
and reefs, the sea boiling like a cauldron. Got bottom at
two and a-half fathoms on a reef, and pushing over worked
out to sea. About 1 p.m. were between Augustus and By am
Martin Islands, and sailed for several hours, when the wind
died away and we drifted back some miles. At 6.30 took to
the oars, and the tide running in our favor made good pro-
gress till midnight, when the tide changing and a smart
breeze springing up in our favor, we managed barely to hold
our own till dawn. We had passed Byam Martin Island,
and were steering E S.E for the entrance to Camden Harbor*
or as that part of it is called on the charts, Brecknock
Harbor.
28tb. —Foul winds. Kept tacking till we were obliged to
seek for anchorage, and found it at an island south of
4
VOYAGE OF THE FORLORN HOPE.


Augustus Island. The summit of the Island was
grassy, and a number of diminutive palms were
growing. The rocks were a kind of slate. Saw
two kites, and regarded them with ravenous eyes, for our
provisions were nearly exhausted, being reduced to tea,
sugar, and a packet of maizena. In the evening we sailed
to another island, and anchored under a ridge of dark rook,
in eight fathoms, with soft bottom. We had had little rest
for four days and nights—what with watching and rowing—
and it was a delightlul relief to find ourselves in a harbor
of refuge where wecoufd sleep in security.
39th. Felt at daylight considerably uncomfortable. Our
provisions were out; we had been trying to catch fish, bnt
although there were shoals they would not bite. There was no
appearance of game on shore, and no sign of a settlement.
The appearance and the bearings of the coast, islands, and
channels were so utterly different from the description on
any chart, that we had the greatest difficulty in deter-
mining which way to steer for the harbor, and some of our
party became thoroughly sceptical as to Its existence. At
last we rowed through a narrow and tortuous passage
between islands, and soon, to our great relief, we saw a boat
In the distance. On coming alongside we found a Surveyor
(Mr. Cowle) and party. They had a remarkably dull and
despondent look that rather surprised us, expecting to meet
every one looking happy in so thriving a settlement as
we supposed Camden Harbor to be. We soon
heard the worst news. The sheep were nearly all
dead, and the whole settlement was a failure. After
exchanging information respecting our rival settlements, we
endeavored to proceed up the Bay, while Mr. Cowle pursued
the important duty of surveying the harbor. The tide was
flowing, but, coming from Rogers’s Straits, was against us,
and we had to wait at anchor and go in with the ebb. As
we sailed up the harbor, we saw the wreck of the ship
Calliance that had struck on a reef outside, and afterwards
aunkatthe landing-place about half-a-mlle distant. To the left
on a red cliff, with range in the background, was the
Government camp. On landing, the Government Resident,
Mr. Sholl, received us kindly and cordially. Messrs.
Hamilton, McMinn, and your correspondent became his
guests, while every attention was paid to the wants of our
comrades. We remained five days at this unfortunate
settlement, and gained ample information respecting its his-
tory, and the character of the land in its vicinity. The
harbor is most beautiful. It stretches to the west for eight
miles to where it is entered by three channels coming through
reefs and islands. It is bounded on the south by the high
rugged hills ofihe mainland; the loftiest eminence being
Mount Lookover; on all sides are bights and inlets, while
high roundtopped Islands complete the picture. The rise
and fall of tide Is 37$ feet, and at low water islands
and forests of mangroves are made visible that
were out of sight a few hours before. The
country was wild and rugged. Dark and Irregularly
shaped hills that seemed to be composed of masses of loose
rocks. Stones everywhere; but upon every spot of soft
ground, and among the rocks, there was a luxuriant growth
of rank grass. Some of it was kangaroo grass, but in
quality utterly different to that of the southern colonies.
Far away were bold mountains and ranges, and leading to
them a succession of hill and valley, but all of the same
stony character. The trees were scarce and stunted, the
most remarkable being the baobab, or gouty stemmed tree.
The specimens of this tree I saw were about 8 or 10 feet in
the stem, large at the base, bulging out in the middle, and
contracting at the top of the trunk; then throwing out
short gnarled branches, disproportionately small in circum-
ference. The bark was very white, and the wood paleoolored.
One of these trees was 26 feet in girth. There are a number
of species of Indigenous fruits and vegetables. I gathered
several pods of beans a mile or so from the camp.
They are about the size of our most common culinary
species, and are eaten by both blacks and whites. I also
saw melons about the size of a large walnut, and very fair
eating. Water is readily obtained by sinking at shallow
depths, and there are plenty of permanent springs and
streams at no great distance. The most common rooks are
sandstone, ironstone, basalt, and quartz. I saw quartz
reefs to the south of the Government camp. I found a piece
of lead on the surface, and saw specimens of copper from
Augustus Island. The air during our stay was remarkably
clear, and in the morning quite bracing. We visited the
settlers, who were encamped about two miles from the
Government camp. They were all ruined, and In-
tending to leave by the first opportunity. They
gave dreadful accounts of the weather at the time of
their arrival. There had been several deaths from sun-
stroke ; in one case a man was picked up dead in the bush ;
In another a settler returned, after spending a day on shore,
to the vessel by which he had arrived, and expire 1 in a few
minutes. It must be remembered that in these cases ot'coup
de solid the pa'ties had not landed many days, and pro-
bably did not take the precautions necessary to guard them-
selves from the effects of a vertical sun. The effect of the
heat upon the sheep probably exceeded anything of the kind
ever before witnessed. Their feet seemed burned with
wa king on the stones. All night they were in agony;
their panting almost amounted to roaring. The ex-
traordinary heat was probably Increased to a great extent
by the refraction from the rooks. At this time there was
little grass, but when It did grow, and even after It had
arrived at maturity, it was worthless. The few sheep that
were left fed on it greedily till their stomachs were enor-
mously distended, but they still fell off in condition. I saw
the flocks at grass, and never upon the worst run, after the
worst drought In South Australia, have I seen such
wretched objects. They did not weigh more than 18 pounds,
and the sight of one killed and dressed I shall not readily
forget. The Government sheep; however, had not lost con-
dition to any great extent, so that there was probably some-
thing in the management; but the fact that they had not
improved was sufficient to condemn the country. The
settlers’ horses had to be fed with corn and bran, although
they did no work, and the grass was abundant. The Go-
vernment horses were low in condition. They had done
some exploring, but certainly in South Australia horses
would do three times the work and look In fair order. A
more unfit spot for stock of any description could not be
found anywhere. There is probably good country inland,
but too far off, and the route too impracticable for it to be
connected with Camden Harbor, One settler found and
took on lease a small piece of country with good grass and
useful timber, eight miles from the camp, but such spots
were very rare. The settlers have been blamed for not look-
ing for good country, but they were given to understand
that they would find land fit for sheep and agriculture at
Camden Harbor ; and it is not probable that mem with one
or two hundred sheep would go to a new country to look
for territory. They expected that was ready for them.
The whole scheme for settling Camden Harbor was rash
and ill-considered. How far the Association were to blame,.
I would not venture to say v but it Is lair to suppose they
knew nothing of the character of the country they induced so
many poor men to try and settle to their ruin, Ihe
victims blame principally Dr. Martin, who visited
that part of the coast, and published a journal more valuable
as a scientific work than as a guide to squatters and other
settlers, for having given such inaccurate accounts of the
country. Having read Dr. Martin’s work I come to the
conclusion that his description of the land was, in the main,
correct. He describes it as dreadfully stony, and as having
high, rank grass ; but, then, he concludes by giving an
opinion that sheep would thrive there. I went over the site
that had been selected for the principal town of the district.
It was very dry, and would have the advantage of a rocky
foundation. It was elevated, but did not occuppy a com-
manding position, the prospect being obscured by the neigh-
boring hills. At some parts of the proposed town of Elliot
there was a view of the inlets and bights of the harbor.
Wild turkeys were roaming about. The Government Resi-
dent had not commenced the survey, as he expected the
settlement would be entirely abandoned.
Mr. Sholl gave me much valuable information respecting
the country he had explored about the Glenelg and between
that river and Camden Harbor. The country was moun-
tainous, with loose rocks and stones almost everywhere. The-
difficulties of travelling were immense- The horses were
continually losing shoes, and if not reshod, they were lame
almost instantly. There were many high ranges, and Mr..
Shell's party did not succeed in finding an outlet into more
practicable country. The country was well watered with
rivulets and larger streams. Not much good land was seen
except on Hampton Downs and along tbe banks of the
streams. Mr. Sholl stated that he found Grey’s description,
of the land wonderfully correct. Some few weeks
before our arrival tbe settlement had been visited
by Malays. There were about 300—in seven proas and 30
canoes. They were a wretched looking lot, and had for
firearms but a few old rusty flint muskets and two or three
small rusty cannon. The natives drove them away from
the watering-places, and killed one of their number. These
are the formidable pirates against whose attacks it was sup-
posed the party at Adam Bay might have to maintain a
desperate defence. At Port Essington the Malays were
afraid of the natives, who were remarkably harmless. In
Jukes’s work there is a full description of the character and
habits of the aborigines, and of the Malaya that visited
that part of the coast. Notwithstanding all this, grave
doubts were suggested as to whether, if the Forlorn Hope
fell in with the numerous flotilla that had visited Camden
Harbor, some insult might not be offered to our flag. Before
we left the settlement we supplied ourselves with
provisions sufficient to take us to Nicol Bay. The
Government Resident allowed his mechanics to make
us a heavier anchor than the one we possessed, and a
binnacle for our lamp. We purchased a ship’s compass of
a settler, and Mr. McMinn took tracings of the coast as far
Fremantle, from the Admiralty charts.
On the 3rd June we took leave of our host, from whom we
had received every assistance in preparing for the continua-
tion of our voyage, and every attention to our comfort that
courtesy and kind feeling could suggest. From all the good
people at Camden Harbor we received nothing but kindness,
and we shall always have pleasant recollections of that
settlement. We took with us Her Majesty’s mail
and a multitude of messages to people in Perth. On
leaving the landing at the camp we sailed over
to the wreck of the Calliance. Here several of
the Victorian settlers who had purchased the wreck
VOYAGE OF THE FOELOEK HOPE.


VOYAGE OF THE FORLORN HOPE.
had their tents erected on the shore, and were busy
in preparing to burn the hull as the only way to get the
copper from her. We purchased a cable, and soon after
sailing an enormous column of smoke arose from the wreck,
The Callianee was on fire as if in honor of our departure.
Had that vessel been at Adam Bay a cutter would certainly
have been made from her for the majority of the party to
escape by.
■4th.—We did not get out of the harbor till 4 am. Course,
W.B.W. Wind 8 , and light all day. Weather looking
threatening In the evening. Little wind through the night.
sth.-No land In sight this morning. Plenty of fish
about, Including barracoota. At noon, lat. 15 ° 40’ 24”,
Macleay Islands in sight, bearing 8. by W. Cloudy in the
afternoon, with drops of rain. Beautiful sunset. During
the night violent puffs of wind, and we lowered the main-
sail and jib; Smart shower of rain.
6th.—Hoisted all sail at about 6 a.m., and the wind soon
left us with a heavy swell on the sea. Brue Eock on our
right at daylight. Fish and turtles about, and sea-birds
sailing over our heads. Course, W.B.W. Got Into shallow
wteter at 7 a,m.—two and a-half, two, and three fathoms;
we supposed we were on the edge of a reef. Cafferelli
Island bearing E.S.E. At 7-30, water shallowed to two
and a quarter fathoms, and we stood S.E. till the water
deepened. Bottom coral or rook. Continually getting into
shallow water till a little after 9 a.m., when we got clear.
Wind variable all day and 8. in the night. •
7th -Had drifted qorthward; latitude 16° 1’ 55" at noon.
Strong breeze all night and sea rising.
Bth.—About 4 a.m. the Ironwork of our rudder broke;
lowered sails, and put out a steer oar ; sea high and rough.
Latitude at noon, 16° 38’55” ; still drifting. Sea moderated
after noon, and we mended the rudder and baled out the
boat. Some of the party unwell, two having cramps,
another billious, another with dysentry, and a fourth very
sick, but eat very well. Wind variable, and high at night.
9th.—The sea getting worse till after daylight ; a dread-
ful cross sea that our sailing master, White, said was
enough to swamp all the boats that ever were made At
sunrise the sight was terribly grand—the long swell, the
mountain wave, the deep hollow, the white foam —as far as
we could see. the scene was one of wild disorder. When
upon the crest of a mighty sea, we saw ourselves about to
descend Into a deep hollow like the extinct crater of a vol-
cano. Down we went, high seas ft aming all around us. The
bowsprit just kissed the water, and the Forlorn Hope
rose like a duck upon the next wave. The storm
did not increase after sunrise, and at 10 am. showed
signs of moderating, and before noon we had all canvas set.
Latitude 17 ° 14’ 35’; wind, S.E. by 8. Porpoises following
us, and shoals of fish about. Yellow snakes with black
spots floating on the surface; jellyfish abundant. In the
afternoon the wind rose till it increased to a gale. The sky
had a hard, cold, appearance. The waves awfully high,
and we shipped some heavy seas; one in particular sunk the
boat low, and we had to bail for our lives. We passed an
awful night, expecting every minute to be our last. Half-
drowned and bitterly cold; constantly bailing; laying to
with a leg of mutton sail.
10th.—At daylight the scene was frightful, and we longed
for a ship to deliver us from our peril; but we knew that
we were out of the track of all vessels. Snakes floating on
the billows. About midday the storm showed signs of
moderating, and we hoped to make sail again, but as evening
came on the wind rose to a gale, and we found we had to
pass another night of suffering and peril. One of the party
was seized with shivering fits. We had no medicine, but
administered rum, and essence of ginger ; rubbed his feet
and covered him up in his bed; blankets, clothing, and
everything saturated with water. Night clear, and the cold
biting.
nth.—Sunday. We had passed through a night of
tempest, danger, and pain; the storm worse than ever,
the waves not higher, but we had cross seas, with
the billows breaking over the boat and dashing
her round. The invalid suffered very much, and
poor fellow —we were unable to cook, or do
anything for him but give him the rum and
ginger. As the morning wore on the tempest still
raged. There was an awful feature in the storm that
morning. The waves were high and steep, and as two of
us sat watching the horrible scene, we saw an immense
sea approaching almost perpendicular, and a tew feet at the
summit quite so, and of a bright green color and capped
with foam. “We shall never get over that,” both ex-
claimed ; but there is no craning at those fences, and on we
went. As we expected, the top of the sea broke over the
boat, nearly upsetting her, and dashed her down the steep
descent, and the mass of water surging under dropped
us down on the other side. •• Bail, quick 1” was
the cry, and we prepared for the next sea. We had three
of these walls of water, with their green tops and crests of
foam ; and it seemed a miracle how we escaped from such
danger. Each time the boat was dashed down in the same
way, and a quantity of water thrown into her. At noon
we were once more deluded with the hope of the gale les-
sening, and we changed our leg of mutton sail into a double-
reefed foresail. We took latitude 17 ° 36’ 33” In the
evening the sea and wind increased, and we were obliged
to take in canvas. The waves broke against us from three
different directions. We were now so exhausted that in
the danger we could sleep, and even the man at the helm
kept continually dropping off and waking with a start.
We were cramped and tortured with rheumatic pains,
caused by being so long wet and remaining In the same
posture. During the night we out down the mainmast
and let it float away ; we could not unfasten it and take
It down without moving about and probably upsetting the
boat.
12th.—Morning broke upon ns still battling with the.
Storm. Awful as the danger was, there was a fierce and
almost pleasing excitement in seeing the gallant way in
which the Forlorn Hope rode over the mountain billows, or
recovered herself after being dashed against by cross seas.
During the day the storm abated. A few boatswain birds
came round us. We ran all night under a close-ieefed
foresail.
13th.—Our situation still looked more hopeful, we could
see over a greater expanse of wild sea and white surf. The
breeze was strong, but we were getting under the influence
of the land, and with a south-east wind the sea moderated
fast as we approached the shore. We began to feel that our
worst danger was over, and to feel proportionately thankful.
No men, probably, were ever In greater peril for so long a
time. Fortunately we had moonlight—the sky, night and
day, wearing a hard glaring appearance, with scarcely ever
a sign of cloud.
14th.—About 10 a.m. saw smoke in the direction of land,
and at 11.15 saw land itself. Latitude at noon, 19° 45’ 54”.
The coast low and Darren looking. Along the shore white
sandhills with little vegetation. Endeavored to laud in the
evening to dry our clothes, but there were heavy rollers on
that rendered it dangerous, so we stood out, and anchored in
four fathoms.
15th.—Sailed at daylight W.B.W. Coast still low; can
often see smoke when no land is visible Warm night.
16th.—Course W.3.W. Wind still S.E., occasionally
varying; for a time. Weather cloudy, with cold wind and
drizzling rain,
17th.—A breeze sprang up, and we sailed till midnight,
when we lay to for fear of passing Turtle Island, where we
intended to try for turtles and eggs. Soon alter daylight
sighted the island, and having a good breeze, and all sail
set, rapidly overhauled it. We found it guarded by much
worse reefs than wo had expected. Large rooks warned us
off; tremendous breakers sent up volumes of water bursting
into spray that looked at a distance like clouds of smoke.
There was, of course, some way of getting to the island with
an oared boat, but it would not have done to risk the Forlorn
Hope; so all our visions of turtle soup and pelican’s eggs
were, dispelled. The smaller Turtle Island was too far out
of our course. Point Larry was vissible in the morning.
Afterwards saw nothing of the mainland, but smoke was
visible all day.
18th.—Breeze E. to E.;by 8. till noon. Passed over the
Qeographe Shoals, where were hundreds of turtle. Passed
Cape Thonin. Our meat all finished. Jellyfish floating
about. Wind variable during the afternoon. Since trying
to anchor on the 14th we heard day and night the sound of
heavy rollers on the beach. Latitude at noon, 20° 19’ is”.
19th.—Sighted Cape Lambert, which we reached about 1
p.m.. and entered Niool Bay, sailing between the mainland
and Bezout Island. The coast bolder than any we had been
accustomed to for some days. The hills appeared to have a
good deal of ironstone about them. The rooks at the shore
wereVough and strange looking—some washed into arche#
and concaves, others into the most rugged and fantastic
forms, with multitudes of excrescences like stalactites.
Patches of sandy beach appeared, and in places reefs jutted
out from the shore. At 5 p.m. we were hugging the land on
the south side of the bay. We sailed principally by solid
rook of the color for some distance of copper ores. We
almost fancied we could see the green and yellow carbonates.
The land at fhe other side of the bay plainly visible. Plenty
of turtles. Jelljflsh of a peculiar shape, like mushrooms,
with a horsetail attached. They were of different colors.
Snakes following us. At about 4.30 heard a oooey, and saw
natives on the summit of a rise. They motioned
to us to come to them, and we steered towards the
beach, but could not land ou account of* rocks and the
swell. Tried to communicate with the natives, but we were
unintelligible to each other. We were obliged to turn away,
and when we did so they all gave a tremendons groan.
There were about twenty men, women, and children. On
our moving up the bay one ran along the top of a hill to
watch our movements. About sundown we fancied we
could see tents, and just after dark saw a light, when we
cast anchor. Fired two barrels of a revolver, and were
answered by three distinct signal lights, when we fired
another barrel in reply, and rested satisfied we had found the
settlers. Latitude at neon, 20°32’ 6”. During the night
we began to doubt whether the settlement was not a native
one.
20th.—At daylight all doubt as to whether we had found
civilized beings was removed, for we heard a oooey, and im


mediately afterwards saw a native inviting us ashore. As,
however, the shore was some distance from us, and we hud
a fair wind, we pushed on, thinking the settlers must be
higher up the Bay. as we had seen no sign of a landing-
place. We passed islands, rooky points, and long stretches
of low shore fringed with mangroves. About noon steered
for a sandhill; sailing for the last mile or two over three
feet of water. Took the boat up to a rooky edge, and some
of us landed, while others pushed her out, and anchored in
muddy bottom. Latitude, 20® 17’ is”. The boat was soon
high and dry, when all came ashore, and we distended our-
selves with porridge and scones. In the afternoon several
of us started to walk across a plain to a range of rooky hills
to the south, about two miles distant. Found wiry grass,
a little saltbush, a great deal of spinifex, and
a few bushes. Crossed a dry watercourse with
pebbly bottom. The ground was very dry and
hard, and the grass had been burnt. Saw white men’s
tracks, very old. Reached the hills, and, and on arriving at
the tops followed them west for a mile to a point, from which
there was a line view of the bay and surrounding country.
We had noticed that the bay was bounded on the west by a
reef, but we saw water beyond that. When I looked from
the hill the tide had recoded, and left a dry swamp trending
round to (the south as far as the eye could reach. The
country everywhere looked desolate and barren. In all
directions, except seaward, we saw hills similar to that we
were upon. No sign of timber, except a few stunted trees.
Far to the south, higher ranges appeared ; they looked blue
and wooded, and probably were in better country. Smoke
rose in different places from their summits. The hills we
were on were composed very much of ironstone.
1 here was quartz about them and on the plain. Numbers of
sandhills dotted the plain to the east and south. Saw a
rock wallaby and numerous traces of others. Followed the
hills eastward, and descended till we cut the creek we
had crossed lower down. Stunted gum, with bark of a re-
markable whiteness, grew in the bed. Followed the creek
down about two miles till we came to a little water, of which
we drank heavily. Limestone all along the creek. .Re-
turned to the boat. The sandhill by which we" were anchored
was a camping- place of the natives. There were many old fire-
places, fish and turtle bones, and breakwinds of bushes. We
found two curious fishing arrangements that we were quite
unable to comprehend. They were constructed In this
fashionA log about four feet In length and eight Inches in
diameter, having at each end a log about one and a half feet
long, pegged on diagonally. A notch was out round each
short piece,land a cord attached, and running from one end of
the machine to the other. One of these contrivances was
carefully covered up with grass; the other lay on the beach.
We supposed these things were floated with fishhooks
attached to them; but why the division into three pieces ? We
could not understand how they bored the holes for pegging.
The limited time at our disposal compelled us to leave these
questions unsolved. When next we visit Niool Bay we
may Investigate them more fully. Latitude at noon
20° 47’ is.” This part of the Bay goes farther inland than
appears upon the charts.
2lst—At daylight three of ns went to the spot where we
found water in the creek, hoping to find more by sinking,
but were disappointed. Alter sinking two and a half feet,
we came to decomposed slate. There was shale about, and
«of talc. Saw a native burying-ground almost in the
the creek. Started a quail, and saw emu and dingo
tracts. Returned to the boat, and started for the opposite
side of the Bay. About Sor H miles from shore water 5
fathoms. Anehored at 4 p.m., two miles from land, the
wind having died away.
22nd -Sailed at 2 am., and rounded point after point of
the mainland, and an Island running north ol it, till a little
before 8 a m., close to the north point of the Island, we saw
a small sandy bight, and determined to land, and get a view
from the hills. On nearing the shore we saw a native, who
ran along the beach, and then along the rocks, making great
gesticulations. We spoke to him, and made signs that wo
were going to land, when he ran to meet us, and three or
four other men made their appearance, with four boys. Two
of the men had spears, and shook them at us ; but as we
approached nearer, they laid them ont he beach. Not knowing
how many might be in the background, we loaded all the
firearms, and running the boat ashore, two of us landed,
one haying a revolver in his belt. The rest of the party
stopped for sometime in the boat. Eight natives met us, and
were friendly enough. An old man kept in the distance,and did
not come to us during the day. lie was probably behind
tne times, and the slave of antiquated prejudices against
foreigners. With this anticosmopolitan was a remarkably
fine dingo, large, broadohested, and in good condition. We
found the natives knew nothing of the settlement, but they
, u seen white people. They used of their own accord about
eight or ten English words. Including water, baccy, sugar,
by-and-bye, and thank you. They begged for food, but
that was too scarce with us at that time. We gave them
knives and tobacco. They offered us fish ready cooke !, but.
we were afraid they would expect us to pay for the meal
with Interest, or it would have been welcome. They
appeared to have some notions of the habits of business
men, for it was not till evening that they offered to
Introduce us to'thelr families—an Invitation the necessity of
proceeding on our Journey prevented us from accepting.
They showed us water in the rooks nearly at the summit
of the hills, about three quarters of a mile from the boat.
We took in a full snpply iu six journeys. The natives
showed us some oftheir drawings on the rooks. There were
sketches of fishes, turtles, lizards, and different kinds of
birds, including emus. One native made a sketch of a
turtle on the sand. If the performance would not have
satisfied a critical eye, It had at any rate the merit of b lug
dashed off with a free hand. One of our party then
drew the outline of a horse, which sorely puzzled them.
One of the men stood more than six feet, and most of them
were above the medium height. All were badly shaped and
skinny. Most of them had that peculiarity mentioned by
Stokes respecting the Dampier's Land of having
their eyes nearly closed, the result of continually keeping
them almost shut to exclude the flies; so that to look at any
one in the face they throw their heads back, and elevate
their chins. Their friendliness almost amounted to affection,
and they were obedient to our requests. Their spears were
unbarbed. They had short pointed sticks from one to two
feet in length, that they informed us were used for stabbing
turtles. We shot a beautiful crested dove here. Rock
oysters were abundant. We found an oyster of a remarkable
kind, of the size of an ordinary oyster of this coast,
but with a thinner smoother shell. The fish was
yellow, and in places a very bright yellow; and
there was a tuft of bristles passing quite under
the fish, and overlapping the upper edge. One of the na-
tives told us they were excellent cooked, but in a raw state
were objectionable. There were wallabies in the rooks. The
hills were composed of piles of loose rocks. There was Iron-
stone and talc, and In places limestone. Scarcely any
timber; but In hollows, through which a dry watercourse
ran, there were stunted gum trees. There were a few man-
groves near the shore. All along the Island were a succession
of stony hills. In the evening we prepared to start, and not
having been able to find any signs of a settlement, were
determined to make for Champion Bay. We had about 60
lbs. of flour, 22 lbs. rice of the worst quality, and two or
three pounds of oatmeal and malzana. We determined, after
finishing the two latter articles, to put ourselves on three
pints of flour and rice per diem for the whole of us. Having
taken In wood and water, we went on board, and lay at
anchor for the night.
23rd.—At daylight weighed anchor, and ronnding a point
Steered W.S. W. for what appeared an opening ahead of us.
After four or five miles got into shallow water—one and
a-half to two fathoms. Passed several low, square, rooky
Islets, and a grassy island. Tried an opening to the north
abreast of us. On reaching It found It very narrow—not
above 20 yards wide. The current was very strong—at
least eight miles an hour. Sometimes there were three
fathoms of water, and then rooks three feet from the surface.
Wo lowered sail on approaching, but the current was so
powerful the only course was to go through the channel.
We backed water with the oars, and shoved the boat off the
rocks as she rushed through like a racehorse. We then
found that Instead of being In the open sea we were sur-
rounded on all sides by Islands and reefs, except to
the east, the direction from which we came. We
turned In that direction, and the wind being
against us pulled till nearly midday, when we were
past the last night’s anchorage, and had a full view
of our old landing-plaoe. Cooked oatmeal and flour. We
lit the fire in a campoven, and boiled In a bucket. We
boiled everything to make It go further. About 1.30 took to
the oars again, and continued pulling till after 4 p.m., when
the wind enabled us to sail. At sunset there was a strong
current against us, and we anchored between Legendre and
Delambre Islands la 11 fathoms water. Both islands are
rocky but grassy on their surface. The passage between
Legendre and Haay Islands appeared impracticable ou
account of breakers AN. W. breeze during the night made
us anxious; we could not help thinking of the much-dreaded
N.W. Cape, and feared the most dangerous wind had set in.
24th.—At daylight found to our joy that the wind had
shifted to the 8.E., and that we had probably taken leave
of Niool Bay with Its dreary and desolate looking scenery.
Steered N. by W. about four miles, N.W. seven miles,
W.N. W. ten miles, then W. At 11.30 Delambre Island out
of sight. At 330 steered W.S.W., the farther point of
Legendre Island bearing S. jW. Wind died away In the
evening. Light and variable winds through the night.
25th.-Glorious sunrise over clouds reflecting from their
edges the most varied and brilliant hues. Light fleecy
clouds in all parts of the sky. Interspersed with others of a
darker color. Turtle about Latitude at noon, 20° 27’. Rooky
Point, Enderby Island, bearing 8. by E,; wind, E.N.E. At
sunset cloud banks and dark soud all round. Winds light
and variable all night.
26th.—Variable winds all the forenoon and ceasing
altogether after midday till evening. Latitude at noon,
20° 36’ 30” ; dark scud floating about at dusk; variable
winds all night; drops of rain. The dews were not so heavy
after reaching Niool Bay.
27th.—At daylight, saw rooky isles to »h* S. E. Porpoises
and makes about the boat. Latitude at noon, 20 3 40’ 23 ’.


Light and variable winds all day and night. Stormy
petrels flying round. Night cold with heavy dew.
28th.—At daylight, saw on our left the north-east Island
of five trending to the south-west. Immense shoals of fish
rising and playing on the surface of the water, and making
a noise like a tempest. Latitude at noon, 20 ° 58’. Went to
the island we sighted at daylight, and landed. Plenty of
driftwood and large bushes. Took in firewood. The island
had a ridge of sandhills running round it. and a plain in
the middle, with spinifex and other worthless vegetation
growing on it. There were curlews on shore, but very shy.
We shot four seabirds in the water, but the strong current
took them away before we had a chance to get them. Abun-
dance of turtle close to the beach; if we could have
stopped at night, we could have supplied ourselves,
but a fair breeze springing up between 3 and 4 p.m.,
we set sail with three flshhawk’s eggs and some firewood, as
the reward of six miles rowing and a loss of eight miles
on our course. We had islands on our right; the five on
our left are called Rocky Isles, but they have merely a few
rocks round their base, and grass or vegetation or some
kind on their summits. The whole coast about here is
studded with islands. Wind lulled at 7 and died away.
29th.—Just after midnight a fine breeze came from the
5.8., and we had a splendid run all night. During the
forenoon it shifted till it stopped at N.E. Course, S.W.
At II a.m. passed a sandy island, B.E. by 8. Immediately
afterwards saw bottom, and sounded from one and a half
to four fathoms, and then passed into deep water. Abun-
dance of turtle. Breakers to the south-east. A reef ex-
tends fully three miles north-east from the island, which Is
seven or eight miles, according to the chart, from the
Kossilly Island of the French. Latitude at noon, 21®
19’ 28” Breeze freshened till our jurymast, made of an oar,
cracked, and had to be stayed. At 1 p.m. Thouvenard
Island on our port bow. During the afternoon passed a
line of low sandy islands, keeping them to the east. About
10 p.m saw a sandy island, unnamed. Shortened sail, so as
to round the Cape in the morning. Pleasant night. Wind
at midnight from S.E.
30th.—Cold towards morning. At daylight sighted
Muiron Island, and passed between the Island and
Cape, within two miles of the former. The island,
or rather islands—for there are two—low, grassy,
without timber, and with shelving shores. Approaching the
Cape the land looks bold, but is still higher along the
Bxraonth Gulf. On the gulf shore hills looked wooded,
and smoke was visible. Turned west about 8 a.m , and took
In the mainsail. At noon we had well rounded the Cape.
Lat. 21 o 49’ 52” We had a beautiful run round. There
were sandhills along the shore, both on the gulf and ocean
sides, as far as we could see. Heavy breakers on the shore.
Fine night. Passed Point Cloates at 11.30 pm. Nearly
drifted on a reef. All night heard the roar of the breakers.
July I.—At daylight could see the spray rising up like
mist-clouds. Latitude at noon, 23® 8’ 18”. We had been
running within from five to eight miles from the shore, and
the coast from the North-west Cape to this point
was as wretched-looking as any part of the continent,
barren, desolate, treeless, and of a dingy brown color. I
knew it was the season when in those latitudes Australian
landscape would have a withered appearance, but here were
large patches without any vegetation whatever. About that
line of coast, there is no element of the sublime to redeem ,
Us horrible barrenness. A long range of 600 feet elevation ;
no ruggedness, no beetling crag, no steep mountain or dark
ravine, no chasm or overhanging precipice. The hills are
smoothsided with a dull uniformity of height,and appear to be
elevated only to render more conspicuous their sterility and
monotonous hldeousness. Twenty-five miles from the Cape
the hills looked a little more Irregular, but there was the
same absence of forest, the same appearauce of desolation.
2nd. —At daylight, could indistinctly see the coast through
the haze and mist—to the north were perpendicular cliffs ;
to the south lower land, trending away in a kind of bight,
and then coming out in the form of bold cliffs of reddish-
white color. Passed Cape Cuvier, and Cape Cuvier of the
French. The view was Indistinct up to this point, but the
land appeared desolate—partly cliffs, partly steep slopes,
with sandhills here and there. Latitude at neon, 24® 22’.
The wind wasN.W. in the afternoon, and we steered for
Shark’s Bay, and ran under the shelter of the Bernier and
Dorre Islands, the former of which we sighted between 3
and 4 p.m. Cold afternoon, and calm night.
3rd.—At daylight, had passed Bernier Island, and had
Dorre Island on our right—distant about 10 miles. Shores
steep and cliffy, some of the cliffs being extremely white.
There appeared to be scrub or stunted timber about the
island. We found soundings at 6,5, 4, and 3| fathoms and
then anchored, there being a calm. After leaving Nicol Bay
the most common wind had been 5.8., or from that to
E. 5.8.; but the wind went all round the compass
nearly every day, and often stood a long while at
N.E. We were perpetually in fear of its setting in
from the N.W., and no colonial Saxbys—no mariners
ever watched the signs of the weather more earnestly than
we did. Before anchoring we had great success with the
gun, having shot seven shags. We also caught three fish of
a peculiar species, weighing about 13 or 14 lbs. each, some-
thing like a cod, particularly about the head. They had no
scales, and the skin had a shiny appearance, with black
spots. They distended their stomachs with wind, and then
let them collapse. We did not like the look of the creatures,
but the flesh appeared wholesome, and we determined to run
all risk and feed on them. Just after anchoring we caught
a schnapper, and looking into the water saw shoals, and
pulled up 28 in less than that number of minutes. We
desisted from motives of humanity, for we had as many as
we could use, or we might have filled the boat in a short
time. We now threw away our spotted friends. We dis-
covered afterwards that they were called blow-fish, and
were deadly poison. In the afternoon commenced boiling
the schnapper. We were ravenous, and while the boiling
was in progress every one clustered round the fire and grilled
and toasted for himself. We had two boilings, and alto-
gether we eat nine large schnapper weighing at least 50 lbs.,
when we felt satisfied. Wind set in SB. dead against us if
outside the bay, so we remained at anchor.
4th,—After sailing a few miles along the island we
anchored for the rest of the day and all night. We gorged
on schnapper, of which we caught 14 more, when sharks
drove them from the ground. Schnapper, blowflsh, and
shags, all fed on crabs, as we found on opening them. Lati-
tude at noon, 25 o 7’, Cold weather j we were glad to wear
our top-coats.
Bth.—After a beautiful night, a glorious sunrise, and a
warm balmy day. Wind being E„ we sailed at early dawn,
going along within two miles of the island. The shores
were low cliffs of rook, partly loose and partly solid ; inland
grassy with bushes. The nearer we were to the island
the more bare of timber it appeared. Still feeding on
schnapper. Water smooth, but we felt a swell as
we approached the channel between the island and
Dampier's Reef, At 10.30, the wind dying away, we
anchored in seven and a half fathoms water. The anchor-
ages in this bay are sandy, often with great quantities of
weed. From the point of the Island a reef runs out about
two miles. Land abreast of us showed hills, with sloping
summits very bare of bushes or grass. Ahead, at the point
of the island, the ground was much higher. Starting, after
a short time we saw Dirk Hartog Island about 1 p.m. Saw
a large whale. Turning the point of the island the sight of
the breakers was grand. Some rose in columns to a great
height; others broke in high bodies of water, and foamed
over the rocks. The whole of the west half of the point
seemed enveloped in spray and mist. We listened to the
tremendous roaring, and felt thankful we had not tried the
passage in the night-time. At sunset the wind ceased, and
we rowed till 9 p.m., when a light S.E. breeze started, and
during the night we got through the channel and put the
boat on her course, S.S.E.
6th.—ln the morning the sea was rather rough, with a
long swell on. Dirk Hartog’s Island had a mist over It all
the forenoon. It is high land, appearing like ranges of
hills, dark and gloomy. Occasionally we could see the steep
cliffs overhanging the sea. About mid-day we were off the
false entrance between the island and the mainland.
Latitude at noon 26® 9’ 45”. The coast on the mainland
is low, sandhills near the points, then low yellowish cliffs,
their summits showing dry grass but perfectly bare of tim-
ber. Snakes followed us, and albatrosses sailed round the
boat. Finished our schnapper, those uncooked having be-
come uneatable. The shags shot on the 3rd we cut up and
stewed with rice. The preparation of this dish was quite
sufficient for your correspondent; the flesh was red and
rank; I shall never forget the odour; for several days all
creation seem flavored with shag. One of the party was ill,
but the remaining five devoured the whole of the delightful
preparation, two-thirds of a bucketful at a meal, and pro-
nounced it delicious—infinitely to be preferred to the ins ipid
schnapper. It was a pure matter of taste. During the
night weather alternately cloudy and fine ; light winds most
of the night.
7th.—Towards daylight the breeze freshened. About an
hour before dawn took in the mainsail. Wind N. 8., getting
stronger during the forenoon, and the sea very rough. We
bad got out 30 miles from land, and the sea being on our
broadside we received a good wetting. About 10 a.m. the
weather moderated, and soon after the sun came out, and
the sky lost its wintry appearance ; even the wind was
warm. Latitude at noon, 27 ® 18’. In the afternoon wind
N. W., and weather threatening. All longing to reach
Champion Bay before a burster came on. We pulled in
towards the coast, and ran within seven or eight miles of it.
Land high, but the atmosphere was so hazy we could see
little of it. Sometimes we saw cliffs, and timber in places.
We saw smoke onshore, the first since leaving Exmouth
Gulf. Plenty of albatrosses and a few cape pigeons.
In the latter part of the afternoon the land became
more distinct, and we could see the green foliage of trees.
Passed Gantheaume Bay about 7.30. Although before
moonrlse could make it out distinctly. We had a splendid
run during the night, hugging the shore, with a smart
breeze and a high sea in our favor. After passing Gan-
theaume Bay the limestone hills were very conspicuous, and
had a strange effect by the light of tbs clouded moon. They
were lofty and white, with dark summits. Noticed Shoal
8
VOYAGE OE THE EORLOEN HOPE.


Point. Passed, without observing them. Port Gregory and
the mouth of the Hutt River. Daring the night the wind
shifted once or twice, and on one occasion the jurymast
cracked, and nearly went over the side. Just afterwards an
oar that was being used for a boom broke In hah, striking
the watch on the head, knocking him into the bottom of
the boat, and occasioning a flow of the circulating fluid from
the nasal organ.
Bth —Morning broke unpromisingly, with a mist so dense
that we could not see the land at the distance of a quarter of
% mile. We feared that in the fog we should pass Champion
bay without seeing it, but at last we recognised in what
looked like a cloud-bank the high land, and, after a heavy
shower of rain had to a great extent cleared away the mist,
we were refreshed by a delightful view of lofty and pic-
turesque ranges. We were prepared, from all we had heard
of Western Australia, to And a barren coast; but we saw
that whether this part of the coast were fertile or otherwise,
it presented a bold and varied scenery. There were hill and
valley, peak and bluff, long ranges, flat topped hills, trees
scattered over the upper portions of the elevations, and
heather upon the mountain side. The effect of this view
upon us, after the dreariness and desolation of the coast wa
had left behind, was enchanting. Then the mist came over
us again, obscuring all the view, and leaving only
the dull outline of the coast. Once more it par-
tially cleared, and we saw In the distance Mount Fairfax
end the Pinnacle, with other hills of strange shapes. Hug-
ging the shore we passed over a shoal marked on the
chart, with five fathoms of water on it, and a rough sea.
Shortly after this we perceived a green spot in the scrub,
then discovered a hut, and found that the verdant patch
was a cultivation paddock. How welcome was this first
sign of civilization after 1.600 miles jof wild ocean and
desert shore. The coast after this took a sweep, and we
struck for a distant point of land with a reef stretching out
from it. In vain endeavoring to reconcile our course with
the chart, we suddenly saw houses, then flagstaff's, ship-
ping, and a jetty. At last our toils, privations, and perils
were over We turned our boat for the jetty, and disre-
garding the buoys to our left, sailed over the end of the reef,
on'the south-west side of the (bay, with soundings at from
three and three-quarters to five fathoms, till we got regular
bottom at six fathoms, which lasted till we nearly
reached the shore, when it shoaled suddenly. Our
arrival created great excitement. It was at first thought
that ours was a whaleboat from Port Gregory; but the
course we steered, and the fact of our taking soundings,
proved us to be strangers. Nearly all the population were
on the beach to meet us, of course thinking we were part of
a wrecked crew, and 50 willing bands helped to drag our
boat on shore. Our story was soon told, and we were loaded
with expressions of kindly welcome and offers of assistance
and although undoubtedly we presented a suspicious appear-
ance the authorities did not trouble us with enquiries
till we had been warmed-by the fire and comforted with the
good cheer of mine host Baston, whose excellent hotel we
can recommend to travellers as one where they will meet
with excellent accommodation and the most studied
attention to their comfort. After satisfying the claims
of hunger we proceeded, according to our several
tastes, to give ourselves the appearance of civilized
beings. Before the metamorphosis was completed in my
case, I was waited upon by a functionary, who enquired if I
was the ringleader of the party. 1 looked steadily at him,
as if for an explanation, when he modified the expression
by lopping off the first syllable, and dwelt upon the extreme
importance of can ion and vigilance in a convict colony. I
satisfied him, however, by showing my clearance from
Camden Harbor, and still further eassured bis mind by
allowing him to see Her Majesty’s mail for Fremantle.
The day continued rainy and cold, and rendered doubly
grateful the warmth and shelter we had found after ouf
weary voyage. In the evening several of us visited the
Mechanics Institute, and buried ourselves for hours among
the colonial, but, of course, more particularly the Adelaide
journals. Those who in our own beautiful city have been
accustomed to their morning and evening paper, will
hardly appreciate the zest with which we devoured several
months' news, with all their topics of interest, including
the rise and fall of Ministries, the accidents by flood
and field, the catastrophe that had befallen Fanter’s party,
the deaths of great men in the old country, and the moment
tons news from America. We returned very late to our
inn, and felt thankful that the voyage of the Forlorn Hope
had ceased. Our crew was disbanded. ,A better lot never
pulled together. Under Providence wa were all much
indebted for our lives to the skill and .judgment of John
White, and to his coolness in times of the greatest possible
danger; and we felt thankful we had the assistance of
another British tar, James Davis. To my friends, Messrs.
Hamilton and Me Minn, who took observations and laid
down our course, we owned the exactness with which we
ascertained our position, and pursued our way To their
assistance I owe much in preparing this journal, and to
their labors is to be attributed the accuracy that must consti-
tute its chief value. Those who were neither seamen nor
navigators did their duty as Englishmen, and the recollec-
tions of the perils we have faced, and the hardships we have
endured together, will form a tiethattime can only strengthen.
9
VOYAGE OF THE FORLORN HOPE.


NOTES ON WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
ipent a week at Champion Bay. and I will give the
result of my observations without reference to dates The
day after our arrival wa* Sunday, and the town was re-
markably quiet. There Is a small church used during the
week as a schoolroom, but Geraldton Is at present without
a clergyman, the Incumbent having lately left. The church
service is usually performed by the Resident Magistrate,
but he being absent, there was no public worship on the
Sunday we were at Geraldton. The bell tolled, and the
convicts were marched to the church, but returned unedifled
and unprayed for. I walked about the township, across
grassy flats, and over sandhills, with their vegetation of
bashes, including small teatree, sarsaparilla, the hibiscus,
and many other shrubs. Among hills of white sand are
wells of the purest water. From the highest sandhills
I had a flue view of the country. Eastward were the
Pinnacle, and Mount Fairfax—two remarkable looking hills
forming landmarks for mariners at a great distance,
from the bay. In the distance were dark ranges, and
leading to them large plains and tracts of tableland, appa-
rently scrubby,- but really comprising blocks of good pastoral
ana agricultural soil. Some holdings were pointed out to
me, but they were distant and far apart. Turning from
this view the harbor next strikes the eye, the reef on the
south side extending and curving round so as to afford
complete shelter for vessels. No accident has everhappened
to a ship in this harbor. During our stay a schooner was
building near the Jetty, and the launching had commenced
when we left. The Sea Wave, by which we sailed for
Fremantle, arrived with timber. There were a number of
boats anchored about the bay or drawn up on the beach.
The town of Geraldton consists of about 60 houses, nearly all
of them built of stone. Some are extensive and substantial
buildings, the principal one being Mr. Crowther’s stores,
opposite the jetty. In Adelaide we have hardly any
merchant’s buildings more extensive than these. There
Is a large store more to the eastward, and two or three
smaller ones about the town. There are two inns—the
Geraldton Hotel, kept by Mr. Baston, where your corres-
pondent and others of the boat party took up their quarters,
and Mr. Ridley's Inn, at which the rest of the crew of the
Forlorn Hope found accommodation, and where they
enjoyed all the comfort they could in more advanced town-
ships. West of the jetty is the Court-House—a long low
building, built after the true Australian pattern } and oppo-
site is the church, a small erection, of which the style of
architecture is extremely simple and unpretending. Still
further west is the house of the Resident Magistrate, a
capacious one-storied dwelling, with several acres of lawn
attached, and surrounded by, a stone wall. Other private
residences complete this part of the town. At the back,
on a high hill, is the flagstaff, from the summit
of which at night-time a lantern gives a feeble light. A
quarter of a mile eastward of the Geraldton Hotel and the
bulsiness part of the township are the convict buildings and
the residence of the Assistant-Superintendent. All around
are sandhills. The climate is wonderfully healthy ; the air
pure and bracing. The juveuile population look plump
and strong, though few of them are ruddy. Diphtheria had
visited the district, and had been fatal in some instances.
The natives looked strong and muscular, and their clean-
built frames, open Intelligent countenances, and large full
eyes, were a treat to us after seeing the skinny, illshaped,
blear-eyed specimens of humanity at Nicol Bay. They are
a lively joyous race. We saw the greatest number on
Sunday, and their notions of Sabbath observance seemed
rather Parisian than English. All seemed to be in a happy
mood, laughing, singing, and even dancing. One sat on
the summit of one of the highest hills chanting
his corroboree, and beating time with sticks. At a distance
were two going through some peculiar terpsichorean per-
formances. Others met us as they were indulging la
melodies of a somewhat monotonous character. Of one
vocalist we begged a translation of the ditty he had been
Garbling; but alter hesitating some time, ho expressed it
as his opinion that it was impossible for the aborigines and
Europeans to make themselves mutually intelligible in
poetry. This did not satisfy me, remembering the charming
translations of Sir George Grey. Some of the blacks
make efficient constables, and during our stay at Geraldton
they captured several of their countrymen on a
charge of cattle stealing. I was in Court for a few minutes
while this charge was under Investigation, and was
struck with the perfect acquaintance with the English
language displayed by the native interpreter. The Magis-
trate did not, in conversing with him, use any other
fihraseology than one would in talking to an English
aborer. 1 visited the penal establishment with the Resi-
dent Magistrate, from whom I received a great deal of kind-
ness, and much valuable information. The felons and their
keepers are accommodated in a collection of substantial
stone buildings. We first saw the local prison, with lofty
cells for holding three prisoners each, and dark cells for
solitary confinement. Here I was shown irons of different
weights for refractory prisoners. None were suffering this*
penalty during ray visit. We next examined the gaol for
Imperial convicts, an extensive, lofty building, ven-
tilated by a large square opening at each
end, guarded by iron bars. The bedsteads or bunks
were in two tiers, and the building formed only one
apartment, in which all the prisoners slept—an arrangement
so universally condemned in the other colonies during the
reign of conviotisra. The hospital was roomy and comfort-
able. Ten or a dozen miserable looking men were in it for
various complaints ; the most common being debility. The
kitchen, stores, and stables were kept in perfect order. The
officers’ quarters were si acious and comfortable. In every
department perfect neatness and cleanliness met the eye. A
stone wall ran round the whole of the public buildings, and
outside, but close to this, was a quarry, where some prisoners
were working. Other parties were employed on the road
bet ween the Bay and the mines. Apart from the establish-
ment were the house and garden of Mr. Snowden, the
Assistant Superintendent. On the 12th I started for the
mines with several settlers. Our road lay northward, and
paralFl with the shore for some 10 or 12 miles ; and we
travelled over deep sand, and through scrub full of flowers
of many varieties, and of every shape and hue. The banksia
tree was very beautiful—it resembles our honeysuckle, and
even the blossom is of the same shape, cylindrical, but of
most brilliant colours, varying from scarlet, or more
commonly crimson, to purple. Some kinds are of a palish
pink, with longtitudinal stripes of crimson. Thousands of
birds filled the air with their music. Like all the winged
musicians of Australia, their songs were brief and the notes
few, but this was to a great extent compensated for
by the Immense number of the performers, and the
variety of their melodies. We crossed the Chapman
five or six miles from the bay ; it had very little fresh
water In it. About nine miles from Champion Bay
the country begins to improve, and after going
over a couple of miles of good grass country we came
t© Mr. Drummond’s, one of the earliest settlers in that part
of the colony. To him the district owes much for his
management of the natives in the infancy of the settle-
ment. When they were hostile and treacherous he acquired
so wonderful an ascendancy over their minds by his fear-
less bearing and perfect acquaintance with their customs,
habits, and character, that he was at all times able single-
handed to make any capture he wished, till at last the abori-
gines became reconciled, or submitted to European ascen-
dancy and occupation of the land. We did not see the stock
on this run, but the homestead was extensive and looked
like that of a prosperous settler, Mr. Drummond culti-
vates a vineyard of some acres, and we tasted a sound
full-bodied wine, made from the Shiraz, that when
mature, will be excellent. After leaving this station
we visited a young vineyard several miles further
north, in a sandy hill, where the prospect of
having healthy vines, or a large yield of grapes, ap-
peared to me very small We next saw a copper mine of Mr.
Drummond’s, from which we took a flue specimen of black
ore. There were a few men working at this mine, and it
looked very promising. We crossed the Bowes River by an
excellent bridge. The water was low, and the river, like
most in that part of the colony, was simply a chain of
ponds. We went through a number of creeks during the
day, and in the evening stopped at Hoskins’s Hotel, cen-
trally situated in the mining district. The following morn-
ing, under the guidance of Dr. Elliot, I visited the Wheal
Fortune Mine, where we met Captain Penberthy, who was
succeeding in turning out some very fine ore. The crushing
machine was at work. The water was not so troublesome as
at many of our mines, and the facilities for drainage admirable.
This is the leading mine of the district,and is being worked
by an English Company. Some of the ore is of high
quality, exceeding 40 per cent., and has realized £35 per
ton at Swansea. At the Yanganoka we obtained ||speoi-
ramsof grey and peacock ore, and observed the operations
that were being carried on with every prospect of success.
The Gwala to the south-east of the Wheal Fortune was
turning out good black ore; and this, with visiting two or
three abandoned shafts, completed our Inspection of the
mines in this part of the district. Judging from what I saw,
I believe that the country to the north and north-east of
Champion Bay would prove rich in paying mines were there
capital found to work them ; but there are really no capi-
talists in Western Australia. Two or three thousand is
generally about all that can be raised to work a mine,
and often far less ; then if there is not sufficient
ore raised to carry on the expenses, the mine is necessarily
abandoned. I doubt if so much money has been spent on
all the mines in the district I visited as the New Cornwall
Association have expended in their operations. Copper is
the principal mineral in that part of Western Australia, but
there are quantities of lead in some of the shafts. Malleable


copper has lately been discovered on the surface over a con-
siderable piece of country near the Irwin, and the discoverer
has taken out a lease of several hundred acres Nearly all
the mining country I passed over was excellently grassed,
some of it suitable for wheat. There was a good deal of the
poison plant, but principally on patches of stony ground,
and about the higher hills. The sheep had to be tended close
to keep them from it. The sheep are large and long-woolled,
but scarcely a flock can be found wholly free from scab. The
squatters resort a good deal to local dressings, and a flock
I saw were daubed and spotted about as If with the idea of
m checking to some extent the progress of the disease,
Instead of curing it. The settlers almost universally
see the necessity for a Scab Act. The country I travelled
over was the high land 1 had seen from the boat,
and It did not appear so wild and picturesque as when
viewed from the sea. After leaving the plain, we
ascended by a succession of slopes till we reached
a considerable elevation, and then steep bluffs rose
up apparently from 100 to 250 feet above us. The
timber is small-ln and about the bed* of creeks, stunted
gum—elsewhere, the timber consisted principally of different
species of wattle. There are teatrees, and another wood that
we should describe as a species of teatree, but what is here
called ironbark. Among the shrubs and plants were
hibiscus, sarsaparilla, and the Sturt pea. The grass is
similar to that in our hilly country, and the runs appear to
be understocked. The rooks are principally granite and
Ironstone. To the south of Geraldton, about 12 miles dis-
tant, are the Grenough Flats, running along the river of that
name, where about 30,000 acres of rich agricultural land are
under cultivation. I regret that I had not time to visit that
part of the country. The Champion Bay district is con-
sidered the pick of Western Australia. It was spoken of in
high terras by Sir George Grey, but his reports were con-
tradicted. For the last seven or eight years we have reo ived
repeated testimony to the accuracy of his descriptions of the
land he explored, and the settlement of Champion Bay has
afforded, perhaps, the most remarkable Insfanoe of his
truthfulness and sound judgment having been recognised
- after years of misrepresentation. 1 looked in at the Court-
House at Gwala, where justice was administered in a
manner that left suitors no reason to complain of the law’s
delays. Between 50 and 60 cases, civil and criminal, were
disposed of between 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. The lock-up was
small, and scarcely equal to the requirements of the district.
In the evening I went with nearly all the Magis-
tracy of the district to the station of Mr.
Burgess, a J.P. and leading settler, whose home-
stead Is prettily situated on the Bowes River.
There was abundance of water; the country undulated and
well-grassed ; large patches of wattles wer e sprinkled over
the slopes, and at a short distance were ranges of hills. The
bouse was large and roomy ; all the buildings, including
barn, stable, huts, &0., wore well-built, and well arranged ;
large cultivation paddocks stretched away indifferent direc-
tions. A flour mill worked by six horses was in operation.
In the stables I was shown a thoroughbred horse, powerful,
short In the barrel, and with splendid legs under him. Some
good mares were about the yards. The whole establishment
looked very much like the home-station of one of our pros-
Jierous squatters. Here we stayed for a night, and taking
eave of our kind host on the morning of the 14th, returned
to Geraldton by a somewhat different route, travelling
nearer to the sea, keeping the White Peak on
our left, and passing close to the hut and paddock
that gladdened our eyes on the morning we concluded our
weary boat voyage. At a spring on the road we met Mr.
Yon Bihra, the only settler on the Murchison, who is a
successful breeder of horses for the Indian market. He had
with him a supply of ales and spirits, of which he
hospitably Invited us to partake. Having, during the
morning, had the principles of the Permissive Liquor Law,
expounded to us at great length by an amiable enthusiast
we availed ourselves of its provisions. Reaching the Bay late
in the afternoon we found that the Sea Bird, a timber barge,
was to sail in the evening for Fremantle. Five of the
Forlorn Hope crew collected, leaving behind Messrs.
Hamilton and Hake, who intended following for some time,
the avocation of photographists, and went on board about
10 p.m. There being no wind we lay at anchor
all night, tacking slowly out of the bay next morning,
and so left Champion Bay with its pleasant
recollections, and the friendships we had formed
during our short sojourn. The settlers were frank, hos-
pitable, genial, abounding in all those virtues that find
their highest! development in young or struggling settle-
ments ■
On the 16th, we passed low coast, and In the evening, ran
into a small bay, just past the mouth of the Irwin, where
we were sheltered behind formidable reefs and breakers.
There was a landmark erected on a hill at this bay. I
gained much information at Geraldton and on this vessel
respecting the coast we had passed In our boat. The
skipper, Mr. Cooper, had commanded the Flying Foam,
that carried the exploring party under Dr. Martin, to the
Glenelg and other places, and knew almost every foot of the
coast. We learnt that there were no settlers within
forty or fifty miles of Nicol Bay, the settlement
being at Tien Tsiu Harbor, near Depuch Island,
There was a passage between Dirk Hartog’s Island and the
main land - a fact we were unaware of. It being marked on
the chart as False Entrance. On the main land at Shark’*
Bay wo should have found a party colfeotlng guano; and
there was a squatter’s station being formed some distance
Inland. I found also that the natives on that coast were
exceedingly cunning and dangeroous. At Nicol Bay on one
occasion, thinking the whites were unarmed, they endea-
vored *o make them lead the way down a rooky descent,
Intending probably to throw stones after them. The sight
of a brace of pistols, however, had a happy effect, and,
adopting the better part of valor, they preceded their white
visitors down the hill. At Exmoutb Gulf they attacked a
party, Including Mr. Cooper and some settlers,
Wounding the former, and it was necessary to
fire on them repeatedly with effect before they
fled. We had a long passage to Fremantle, and
did not sight Rottenest Island till 1.20 p in. on the 20th.
It looked low and scrubby as we approached, but I under-
stand that on the side nearest the mainland It is prettier
looking and more fertile. There is a Governor’s residence
here, but as we passed in the dark we did not see it. After
tacking about all night, we anchored at dawn close to the
Fremantle iJetty. There were about 14 small craft, prin-
cipally cutters, hear the shore. Farther out were a barque
and a brig. A vast number of boats of every size and
shape, and every variety of rig, were anchored or hauled up
on the beach. Launching the Forlorn Hope, we pulled to
the jetty, lauded, and according to a request that the pro-
per authority afterwards assured us was made
under a misapprehension—it being supposed we
were a shipwrecked ore W—proceeded to to give
some account of ourselves at the Police Office. We then
went to mine Host Hicks’s, a large well-furnished
hotel, where we rested before surveying the town. Fre-
mantle is compact, with good ;subs'lantial building* with-
out much pretension to architectural beauty. The people
seem dreadfully addicted to stucco. One can see at a glance
that the best buildings belong to the Government, and are
the result of Imperial expenditure. The town is painfully
quiet, and there appears less bustle than In Wallaroo or
Gawler. We met here a number of friends of Adelaide
people, who welcomed us heartily, and eagerly proffered
more kindness than we could have availed ourselves
of in far more time than that occupied by our stay la
Fremantle and Penh. Perth Jis distant from Fre-
mantle 12 miles, and a steamer runs to and from
each place twice ;a) day. A mailoart also travels to each
town, morning and afternoon. We took the second steamer,
and enjoyed the trip up the river very much. There were
scrubby hills occasionally, but large timber appeared about
the flats, gullies, and hillsides. Here and there were pretty
clearings and neat cottages. In one place, on a spot
excavated trora the hillside, and close to the water’s edge,
were several buildings forming a small convict depot. About
halfway from Fremantle the Swan takes a sudden turn
to the right, and from this point we had a full view of
the blue hills of the Darling Range. There is rather too
much uniformity of height and general apnearance about
this range, but it Is still a pleasing feature In the land-
scape. After the bend in the river, the scenery gene-
rally improves,, and we pass green paddocks, houses lying
back In the wood, or adorning the clearings; picturesque
hills and rocky banks, till we reach Perth, a well planned,
clean little town, admirably situated on rising ground on the
bank of the river. Here before landing, I met and wa*
cordially welcomed by a well-known South Australian
(Mr. George Leake), now Solicitor-General and Police
Magistrate. Being introduced to a Post-Office official in the
street I handed to him the mail from Camden Harbor. It
contained duplicates of despatches that had been sent by a
vessel that had not arrived at Fremantle at the time of
my departure for the Sound. Our arrival necessarily
created great excitement in Perth ; the continued bad
news form Camden Harbor, and the scarcely less dis-
astrous intelligence from Adam Bay, together with
the details of our extraordinary and almost miraculous
escape from that place of horrors, would neces-
sarily from absorbing topics of conversation. Adam
Bay and the Forlorn Hope filled the public] journals
and were in the mouths ot everybody. I had the honor of
waiting on the Governor, who received me kindly, and took
the most lively interest in the prospects of our new country.
The most important work of the Government and people of
Western Australia now is the settlement of their own
northern territory. In this they are now likely to be suc-
cessful. The country at Roebuck Bay, though flat, leads
away over a vast extent of good pasture into higher land.
The sheep and other stock there are looking well. At Tien
Tsin there Is good pasture land, but it appears very limited
In extent. I met Mr. Maitland Brown, the great explorer of
that colony, from whom and from Mr. Kenneth Brown I
obtained a lund of information respecting the West Aug-
traiian coast, and the country going back from it.
Rambling about Perth, and enjoying the hospitality of
its citizens, would have occupied a much longer time than
I had at my disposal. The town looks so still that one
wonders how the inhabitants employ themselves. I seldom
noticed a vehicle in the street, and only once saw any one on
horseback, and he was a mailman. There are some tolerablv
11
NOTES ON WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


large buildings, but none that attracted much attention except
GovernnaentHouse—a lofty building faced with brick and
With stone dressings. Having begged professional informa-
tion, I am able to describe it as being ornamented with
towers in the domestic Tudor style, the angle turrets being
Elizabethan. The Government offices were a modest Imita-
tion of our old three-sided block of erections in Victoria-
square. There are one or two neat looking churches and
chapels. The great difficulty in building at Perth is
that there is no good stone within a reasonable
distance. There is nothing striking about the places
Of business. Ladies will be distressed to hear that
there is no draper’s shop either at Perth or Fremantle;
nothing but those arrangements called general stores,
where currants are sold at one counter and crinoline at the
other. I went to the Police Court, where Justice was
administered with promptitude. There were no people
present but witnesses, convicts, prisoners, and police. No
morbid curiosity draws an audience to that temple of
Justice ; no feeling of levity induces idle people to consider
It a legitimate place of entertainment. The offences were
few, and for the most part trifling. All the offenders were con-
victs ; one was remanded on a charge of having the clothes
of some fellow-sinner in his possession ; two or three were
fined for being drunk; and another was sentenced to three
months’ imprisonment as a rogue and a vagabond. The charge
sheet for the preceding three months had been very light, the
most serious case being that of a man who was sentenced to
10 years’ imprisonment for forgery. This genius was pos-
sessed of considerable energy and determination, and soon
afterwards escaped, and was discovered with burglars’ tools
In his possession, when he was sentenced to an additional
three months’ imprisonment, and 100 lashes. He was next
found with a knife or dagger, with which he entertained the
pious intention of removing the Police Magistrate from the
scene of his earthly toils and anxieties, and was accordingly
rewarded with yet another three years’ accommodation
at Government expense, and another 100 lashes. I
had heard a good deal of the innocence of the convict
population, but the appearance and expression of
countenance of those I saw at Court did not prepossess
me in their favor, I had scarcely leisure to decide upoa
their merits on phrenological principles, but Lavater would
certainly have dealt with them in the most summary
manner. Before leaving Perth I returned to Fremantle and
visited the great gaol of the colony, over which Mr. Lefroy,
the Superintendent of Convicts, kindly showed me. It is a
capacious and lofty building, capable of bolding 1,200 pri-
soners ; but there are seldom 400 in it at once. It is four-
storied, or has four tiers of cells, Into some of which I en-
tered Each prisoner had a separate apartment; and there
were dark cells for the refractory and those sentenced
to solitary confinement. I went into the kitchen; dinner-time
was approaching, and the allowance of food was ample.
There was excellent soup, good and wholesome bread, and
an abundant supply of butchers’ meat. Such is a part of
the tre itment for serious offences. The convicts are never
flogged for laziness, and the amount of work they perform
in all parts of the colony is absolutely insignificant in pro-
portion to their numbers. I saw the prisoners drawn up in
ranks,to be searched for forbidden articles ; this performance
is gone through four times a day in winter, and oftener in
summer. They were ranged with military precision and
exactness; and looking along one of the lines, I bud the
gratification of viewing all their faces at a glance. Having
heard so much of the Swan River convicts, I observed
this interesting band with some attention. Most of them
were dressed in clothes of the plainest material, ornamented
in various places with the everlasting broad arrow. Some, as
a reward of personal merit, were distinguished from their
comrades by particolored garments, and were also adorned
with chains and amulets of the very brightest steel. These
decorations were fastened about their ancles and held up
with one hand, and however ornamental, were, to
say the least, somewhat cumbrous. To assert that
these favored individuals bore their honors meekly
would be to fall short of the truth ; some appeared subdued
and overpowered by the weight of the distinctions bestowed
upon them. But there were others who hardly seemed
grateful for what they probably felt they had so fully
earned ; they rather reminded one of meritorious individuals
In other departments of the State, who have received too
tardy a recognition of their services, and whe at last win
E referment that was as well deserved, and might as fitly
ave been granted long years before.
I had heard much of convict harmlessness, and without at
present giving a decided opinion on the subject, I will say
that all these gentlemen had the peculiar expression of
countenance observable in all who, in the interests of their
country, have suffered an abridgement of their personal
liberty—an expression seldom lost, even after years of
freedom and prosperity. To complete my acquaintance with
the “ domestic institution,” I visited the Hospital. I un-
derstood that indigestion and the disorders arising there-
from were the most common complaints. Confinement pro-
duced in men of active habit of mind a derangement of the
digestive organs In one bed was a warder, who had been
stabbed, of course in a fit of playfulness, by an inoffensive
creature with the Government brand.
After an extensive and careful survey of the favorite
Institution of Western Australia I took my departure, ancS
cultivated an acquaintance with the free population of
Fremantle; and although if may be considered great pre-
judice on my part, I thought their society more desirable
than that of the people who' had arrived at Imperial ex-
pense, and on Western Australian invitation.
The day after my arrival at Perth I drove with some
friends to Guildford, about 12 miles distant. Just outside
the city we crossed the Swan over a well-con-
structed bridge. Like all Australian rivers, the
Swan is liable to tremendous floods, and at times
rises much over its apparent and usual limits. Leaving
the river, we travelled over an excellent road, in some place* *
planked, through forests of mahogany and red gum, and
great numbers of saplings. There were vast quantities of
the most beautiful wild flowers, among them blue creeper*
particularly attracted our notice. The banksia was not in
bloom in this part of the country. There were mauy hand-
some trees of which I forget the names. A tree called the
ironbark was very much like our teatree. A prevailing
feature in this part of the country was the black-
boy, a plant something like our grasstree, and
what is in that colony called the ground blackboy,-
having the root and blade of the true blackboy, but not the
black gnarled stem. Almost all the land bearing this is-
considered by the colonists to be worthless, but yet if it is
cleared the grass grows, and patches of it have been culti-
vated with success. The expense of eradicating this weed
should not prevent the cultivation of the land, for it would
not cost more to clear an acre of that ground than an acre
of the wattle country about parts of the Onkaparinga. We
saw paddocks growing good crops, and land adjacent,
of exactly similar quality, is lying waste. Some of
the soil was cold and hungry-looking. Some farmers had
drained their ground. Along the fiats of the Swan and the
Okagee Creek was a great deal of land of the very best
quality. As we travelled along, the landscape was lovely •,
we had frequent views of the river; there were hill and dale,
fine stately timber, long reaches of water, and trees with
dense foliage overhanging the banks ; long flatB,Btretehes of
undulating parklike scenery, and in the distance the blue
range of the Darling. We found Guildford a pretty town-
ship, with a number of cottages and buildings ot a
more pretentious kind, and a neat little church. Here
we called on Dr. Waylen, whose grounds are-
on the river. The Doctor had an excellent vine-
yard, kept in admirable order. The soil was a red clay.
We visited the cellars, and tasted a wine that was called
Fontainebleau, but appeared to be a Burgundy, fullbodied,
and of excellent flavor; and a light fruity wine that pro-
mised well. After leaving Guildford we drove three or four
miles to the estate of Mr. Brockman, at Herne Hill, where
we found a hospitable shelter for the night. The following
morning we walked over part of the grounds, including an
extensive garden, with a plantation of strong healthy vines.
Citrons and lemons were flourishing, bananas were
thriving; and the orange grew well, but, as in South
Australia, required irrigation. There was farming
ground of the best description—extensive river flats,
one a mile in length. The rising ground on the opposite
side of the river looked very beautiful. Returning,
we gathered immense quantities of wild flowers. About the
river were large flocks ot ducks, and crossing the road were
numbers of a kind of crane that, I understand, has only ap-
peared of late years. The time passed swiftly away at Perth
and Fremantle till the 26th, when we started at about
1 p.m. by the mailcart for the Sound. A number of our kind
riends saw us off. I have not thought it desirable to frame
this journal alter the model of “Sunny Memories,” but will
content myself with gratefully acknowledging that I expe-
rienced in Perth and Fremantle as much kindness as could
by any possibility have been compressed into the space of
time elapsing between the periods of my arrival and depar-
ture. All the members ot the boat party who bad come to
Fremantle started by the same conveyance, which was a
common spring-cart drawn by three horses in a line. An
immense quantity of luggage was piled up and crammed into
the vehicle, rendering it difficult for us to wedge ourselves
in. A trooper accompanied us as guard, and was relieved
at certain stages. The road from Perth to the Sound runs
about S.S.E. We crossed at the Swan, and after a mile or
two got into a mahogany country, the soil very worthless-
sandy or gravelly. We reached, after 18 miles driving
and walking, a small and very rustic looking public-bouse
a little after dark, where we imbibed a villainous mixture
called “best stout,” evidently some abomination com-
pounded in the colony. Two miles beyond this inn we came
to an eating-house, where ample and satisfactory prepara-
tions had been made for our arrival. After lying down for
an hour we rose and pursued our way, walking a great part
of the distance. We passed through grand forests of ma-
hogany and dwarf gum. The former has a bark very much
like the stringybark, and, like that tree, is most commonly
found on poor stony soils. We crossed over a number of
creeks and small streams. A great quantity of rain fell
during the night.
Our method of travelling was to stop four or five
times during the 24 hours from an hour and a half to two
hours at each baiting place for the purpose of eating and
sleeping, and resting the horses. We stayed at settlers’
NOTES ON WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


touts, at police stations, eatlnghouses, convicts’ depots, and
aometimes camped in the bush. We found our own refresh-
ments, except at one or two eatinghouses.
27th.—Heavy rain till after midday. Travelled through
forests of mahogany and gnarled gum. The country all hilly
and worthless, even for pasture. There was abundance of
granite. We passed many creeks land swamps. Noticed a
number of convicts professing to be at work on the road.
Evening set in with a young moon and a bright starlight.
The enjoyment of travelling among dark hills those along the
valleys full of underwood, and through grand and gloomy
forests, was somewhat alloyed by the feeling of excessive
cold. We found it necessary to walk most of the way to
keep our feet from freezing.
28th.—This morning our beards were covered with ice or
frost, quite hard, and as white as snow. I dare say, to an
observer, our appearance would have been picturesque ; but
■coming fresh from the tropics, our sensations were not of
the most pleasing kind. Started a number of kangaroos.
During the forenoon, about 90 miles from Perth, the country
changed, and we travelled through good grazing and
agricultural land, broken occasionally by patches of sand.
Ten miles farther, we came to the Williams—a nice stream,
with cultivation paddocks along it. We stopped at a farm-
house to rest and change horses for the first time, and I
inspected the crops. I was told that they had excellent
yields of wheat at this farm, exceeding 25 bushels per acre.
Leaving the Williams, we passed through good and bad
country alternately, much of it being excellent wheat land,
and a great deal more well adapted for pasture. A short
distance south of the Arthur were a few small farmhouses,
at one of which we stopped. Here I understood the crops
of wheat were abundant. We crossed the Beauford River
and Plains at night, and could see by the moonlight that we
were in grassy country. During the night we changed
horses again, at a place called Kojunup. We took the
precaution of taking off our boots and wrapping our feet in
blankets; and so, with baiting twice, passed through the
night pretty well. Ice on the puddles.
29th.—Saw good country to-day. Banksias and wattles
abounded, and there were forests of red gum. The red gum
toad a very different appearance from that of South Australia,
having a very rough and dark-colored bark. Like all large
straigbt-stemmed gums, it is a certain sign of good land.
Hundreds of kangaroo, crossed the road during the day.
Changed horses for the last time. Frost and ice at night.
30th.—Breakfasted at a convicts’ fire. Most of the gang
were young men. They had no guard over them, and could,
of course, work or play as they liked ; but the presence of an
overseer would not make much difference in that respect.
Here 1 witnessed an incident that made more impression on
my mind than all the chains and broad arrows I had seen.
We were some distance from the road, eating, or warming
ourselves by the fire, when a man passing quietly along was
hailed with the enquiry “Who are you?” The reply was
that he was looking for some one from whom he expected
work. “Come and let me have a look at you,” said the
trooper. The traveller obeyed, was questioned, and allowed
to pass on. Western Australians would think this a trifle, but
it would give strangers the uncomfortable feeling of be ng in
•an open-air gaol. We got into worthless country ea:ijr in
the morning. During the forenoon saw the bills about the
Sound. Passed between Mount Barker on our right and
some picturesque hills on our left. About midday stopped
at a stream or chain of ponds, where we enjoyed a slight
sleep. We were all dreadfully knocked up with incessant
travelling and want of repose. The impressions I had
formed of the country we had passed over were that for
the first 90 miles from Perth the land was worth-
less. Then we came Into good country, and for
about 125 miles three-fifths or two-thirds of the
land was useful—gome for agricultural, and more for
pastoral purposes. Most of the good land I saw was lying
waste; the last 40 miles before reaching Albany was quite
worthless I gathered on the journey specimens of
three different species of the poison plant, which
I believe can now be seen in the Museum. They
were called respectively the box, the heartleaf,
and the common poison. All were about equally
poisonous. I learnt that the effect upon sheep is sudden
and peculiar. They start running at their utmost speed, and
after going for some distance stop for a short time, and
then again rush away till they drop dead. It is said
that the kangaroo tribe eat the plant with impunity, but
that if a dog eats the entrails of a rat or wallaby that has
led on the poison the effect is fatal, and shown in the same
manner as in the case of the sheep, by the poisoned dog
running till it drops dead. How far these statements are
■correct I cannot say; but there is no doubt of the deadly
effect of the shrub upon sheep and cattle. Horses seldom
eat it, and all stock prefer the young leaves. It grows most
plentifully on the bad and scrubby country. In good land
It is found principally in small patches of atony ground and
inferior soil. About seven miles from the Sound we came
to a good macadamized road that lasted for five miles, when
we got into sand. Soon we saw the outskirts of the
town. The horses had bolted on the macacdamized road,
and upon entering Albany, irritated by the injudicious ap-
plication of the whip, they repeated the performance.
There was no room for a straight run, and a smash seemed
inevitable, when the driver asked a passenger to take the
reins of the shaft horse, and he pulling at the leaders, that
were harnessed abreast, the team were brought up. We
next struck a gate, and immediately afterwards jamming a
wheel against the corner of a building, confidence in the
guidance of our coachman was so far shaken that we left
the cart, and walked up a narrow lane to Strickland’s Hotel,
where we fed, and then slept for 14 hours.
We stayed aft the Sound for a week, and I may as well
summarise my observations upon Albany and its vicinity.
I walked several times to the summit of Mount Clarence,
and enjoyed a magnificent view of the Bay, the shipping,
the islands, and the surrounding country. To the north
the laud is undulating, with a prominent elevation
here and there. Surrounding this lower land are high dark
ranges, with peaked; conical, and irregular looking bills.
On the way to the summit of Mount Clarence is the rock oh
which, Eyre stood and overlooked the Sound when he had com-
pleted thatawful journey along the coast. From this rock the
black Wyliecooeyed to his countrymen before they rushed up
in transports of joy at findingone whom they bad long looked
upon as lost. Poor Wylie has been dead ten years. The
natives talk about him freely, but I could find none who
remembered Byre. A mile or two from Mount Clarence is
the residence of Mr. Edward Spencer, situated prettily
among the hills, in a forest of red gnarled gum, with scrub
and towers all around. Here were gardens, drained and
cultivated, and looking very well. Beyond this is French-
man’s Bay. with a nice beach running round it. Scrub
surrounds the Sound and this Bay, and abounds in wild
flowers, including the banksias. There were two vessels in the
harbor, with coals—the barque Beatrice and the ship Rock-
light, that has obtained a disagreeable notoriety from the
mutiny and consequent shooting of one of the sailors. The
Rocklight was a magnificent vessel of upwards of
1.700 tons burden. I walked over the coal depot.
The ground was floored with slag, and the coal was kept in
stacks by walls of the same material. I visited the native
school, some distance back from the town. Mr. and Mrs.
Camfield manage this humane institution, and gave Mr.
McMinn and myself much interesting information respect-
ing the children at this establishment, and the natives in
general. Half the pupils were laid up with influenza, and
we saw no less than 20 black, half-caste, and quadroon
juveniles, with one or two European children, whose parents
had deserted them. A married half-caste woman was
assisting in the instruction of the scholars. We heard a
class of boys, apparently from 9 to 12 years of age, read.
They went through the exercise with great deliberation.
Some of them spelt some long words correctly, and a black
girl, of about 15 years of age, read from the New Testament
with great fluency. The specimens of their handwriting
were remark .bly good. Leaving the school we walked to
some wurleys, where we mentioned the institution to the
natives. One of them, in reply to an observation, pointed
to a half-caste woman who had evidently relapsed into
aboriginal habits, and said “yes, that’s a schoolwoman.”
The Government Resident, Sir Alexander Campbell, showed
me the convict depot; it was arranged on the same prin-
ciples as the other provincial depots. A number of prisoners
were at work about the town, mending other people’s ways,
if not their own. The Gaol occupies a commanding position
on the hill, overlooking the bay and most of the town, as
though the citizens were rather proud of the institution. It
does not, however, give one the idea of a prison, but looks
rather like a country residence. Albany contains from 3»0
to 400 inhabitants. It is straggling, but the houses look
neat and most of them are very white. Strickland’s
Hotel is about the most conspicuous building. There are
two other hotels, and a number of stores and shops, some of
them of considerable dimensions. About 11 p.m., on the
2nd instant, the Rangatira arrived with the mails for
England. Mr. McMinn and I went on board, and were
welcomed as though we had risen from the dead. We heard
then of the arrival of the Bengal passengers in Melbourne,
and the consequent anxiety respecting the fate of the
Forlorn Hope. An hour or two passed swiftly away
among friends met under such circumstances. Adelaide
news, Adam Bay, the Forlorn Hope, and hot whisky were
discussed with great earnestness, and at last we stepped into
the boat and returned to the shore. On the 4th the
Sa'sette arrived, and sailed with the mails and Adelaide pas-
sengers. On Sunday, the 6th inst., as we returned from
church, the gun fired, announcing the arrival of the English
mail, and in little more than an hour, we were on the
Rangatira, steaming for Adelaide. On our arrival at Albany,
Mr. McMinn and I had been kindly received by the Resi-
dent, and at our urgent request he provided us with creden-
tials for Adelaide, of which the purport was that we were
not convicted felons. We afterwards discovered what it
was to have visited Western Australia; we were not allowed
to land at Glenelg, and at the Port we were obliged to
deliver our letters of introduction to a policeman bef ore
leaving the steamer. After two days of sea sickness and
Bleep, I awoke to the responsibilities of my position, and
recollected promises repeated many times, to treat Western
Australian affairs in a spirit of justice and candour. The
great question associated inseparably with Western Aus-
tralia is of course that of convlofism. As the eastern colo-
nies have already secured the abolition, within a short and
13
NOTES ON WESTERN AUSTRALIA,


stated period, of transportation to this continent. It
may seem superfluous to discuss the question any fur-
ther, but as our western neighbors assert that
the final decision of tha Home Government In-
volves a triumph of might over right; that what the
more powerful colonies failed to win by arguments they
extorted by threats : and that an unworthy advantage has
been taken of the weak and defenceless position of Western
Australia, we are put in some degree upon our defence, and
it cannot be altogether useless or superfluous to e ideavor to
show to our friends that the course we have pursued on
this matter is founded on reason and justice.
To treat their complaints with utter silence now we have
obtained what we have struggled for, might seem dis-
respectful and give some color to their assertions that they
have failed in a mere trial of strength. We must re-
member, too, that our neighbors have been tried by long
years of adversity, and have all that sensitiveness peculiar to
small communities. It is not immaterial to this case to re-
memi er the circumstances under which transportation to
Western Australia commenced. In New South Wales the
system had been discontinued, and every attempt to resume
it met with the moat strenuous opposition. In Port Philip
the people were goaded almost to Insurrection by the
avowal on the part of the Home Government of
their intention to ship convicts to that colony, and
at a monster meeting a venerable colonist made a vow that
the first convict who landed on those shores should walk
over his dead body. In South Australia the proposition to
import Parkhurst boys and Pentonviliians excited the
greatest Indignation, and at public meetings inflammatory
speeches were made, and memorials, embodying the most
earnest and determined protests, were forwarded to the
Imperial Government. Van Diemen’s Land was the last
colony to which Britain shipped her felonry, but they, after
years spent in vain efforts at reform and improvement,
were convinced of the rottenness and unutterable horrors
of the system, and were determined to free their beautiful
island from the degradation of being used as England’s
cesspool. When once they took this position their efforts
were marked by an enthusiasm, a unanimity, and a deter-
mination that excited the admiration and sympathy of the
other Australian colonies. It was Indisputable that trans-
portation to one Australian colony meant transportation to
all, and the League was formed to obtain from the British
Government the complete abolition of transportation. What
years of petition and argument had failed in securing wag
now wrung from Downing-street by the bold and deter-
mined front and united action of these colonies. It
was decided that transportation to Australia was
finally to cease, and we were to be delivered
from the stigma that hung about Australians, in
whatever part of the world they travelled. Just at this
juncture the smallest colony in the group stepped in—
marred the completeness of our triumph, and prevented the
perfect freedom of Australia from the foulest blot that ever
disfigured the escutcheon of a young community.
The arguments advanced by our Western Australian neigh-
bours in favor of transportation are separable into two
•lasses, those purporting to show that convictism is harm-
less, and even beneficial to the penal colony itself, and
those used to prove that the system cannot injure neigh-
boring colonies.
It will be impossible to be exhaustive upon this subject
In the limits within which I intend to confine these notes,
but I hope I shall at least be able to show that the resis-
tance of the eastern colonies to the continuance of transpor-
tation to any part of the Austi alien continent, was not un-
reasonable, and perhaps I may be able to suggest grave
doubts as to whether the benefits Swan River has derived
from the expenditure connected with convictism, are not
more than counterbalanced by the indirect evils resulting
from the system.
The argument that the colony has benefited by the expen-
diture of Imperial funds, is of itself calculated to Injure the
colony, for it is an admission that the oolong is so poor,
and so destitute of internal resources, that the settlers
are willing to forfeit their self-respect, and bear the stigma
attaching to a penal settlement for the sake of the expendi-
ture of English money. It is asserted that employers
would not be able to obtain labor were it not for oon-
vlctism. Novy, has it not occurred to those who argue In
tills way thattfree labor may have been driven away by
the presence of convicts? This Is most certainly the case.
It is not disputed that every ship that leaves Western
Australian ports takes away settlers to other colonies, and
on conversing with these emigrants, their principal com-
plaint is that they were obliged to compete in the labor
market with felons, under the various titles of prisoners,
ticket-of-leave, or conditional pardon men. Then, if so
many leave because ot convictism, how many are deterred
from settling in that colony by the existence of that in-
stitution.
Many people may get hardened to the system ; employers
of labor may find it convenient; but honest laborers and
intelligent mechanics will always have an insuperable
objection to enter into competition with people with
cropped hair and broad arrows. All the remaining
arguments In favor of convictism, as it concerns
the colony, are principally of a negative kind. It is urged
that property and life are not unsafe ; that serious offences
are few in proportion to; the population.S’Now there Is a
great deal ot truth in these statements, but it is desirable to
consider whether there are not peculiar features in the
condition of Western Australia to account for these appa-
rently singular facts, and whether these features are likely
to be permanent. Convicts do not commit highway robbery,
because few people carry much money about them, and
fewer have much to carry. They do not eomrait burglary
because the spoil they would gain would not repay the risk
of severe punishment. But a great reason why they do not
plunder is that il they took anything but money they would
baldly know what to do with it in a small and poor popu-
lation. They do not commit many assaults of an atrocious
kind, because, scattered over a vast extent of country, their
instincts find gratification among the native camps. The
reason that operates most powerfully In preventing serious
crime on the part of the convicts is the certainty of detection.
In a small and scattered community concealment is neces-
sarily difficult. Every one travelling about is a subject of ob-
servation. Then the natives track any one fleeing from
justice with almost unerring accuracy. The population
being so sparse, footprints are not very liable to be ob-
literated. Even in Berth natives may sometimes be seen
tracking white offenders. It is almost impossible, too, for
criminals to escape from the colony ; there is at present no
practicable overland track, and the capture of runaway
felons is simply a matter ot time. Now, our Swan River
friends will not argue that the state of things that renders
it easy to control their prisoners will always continue.
They will not surely reason on the assumption that their
colony will always be very poor, very thinly populated, and
completely Isolated from the other colonies. It is worth
pointing out that the prisoners have little provocation to
steal. Their treatment is kind. If not judicious; they have
abundance of food, and do as little work as possible. If a
settler finds one useless he oan return him on the hands of
the Government, when he will again have a good allowance
of food, and can work as little as he likes. There are many
prisoners in gangs about the country without supervision,
and those who are provided with an overseer
are not expected to distress themselves by anything ap-
proaching to severe exertion. For men treated in this way
to plunder would be Indeed wanton gratuitous depravity.
Yet, notwithstanding all this kind treatment, some do break
out into violations of the law. There were two bushrangers
loose and plundering the settlers during the time I was in
Western Australia, and occasionally one is suspended.
Small offences are innumerable.
But let us examine now the evils of transportation—evils
that must be felt by Western Australia as surely as by
other colonies that tried the system and were compelled to
abandon it. There is the reputation—the very name of a
convict colony that inflicts so much injury. The stigma
attaches itself to every member of the community. It is bul
a few years since Australians of all the colonies were looked
upon in other countries with suspicion, and were made dis-
agreeably conscious of the fact. In the minds of the people
in England and America every Australian was associated
with Botany Bay. He was treated as though there was a
taint of the prison about him, and if he was regarded with
any interest it appeared to be a curiosity to sea
whether the marks of the gyves and fetters were
at all fresh. How persons from Swan River
are regarded when they appear without credentials
I need not say. Transportation prevents the settlement of
a country. While some leave in disgust, few or none come
to take their places. It does not signify whether their no-
tions of convictism are correct or exaggerated ; it is an un-
doubted fact that they operate to prevent people from emi-
grating to a penal colony. I do not mean to infer that
convictism is the only reason why settlers do not go to
Western Australia, but undoubtedly it prevents, and will
prevent, many from settling there who would otherwise do
so. But the evil effects of the system upon the population
who remain cannot be otherwise than injurious. Even In
Western Australia, persons well acquainted by position and
experience with the working of the system, state It as their
conviction that the daily and hourly familiarity with crime
cannot fail to blunt the moral perceptions,’ and have a
hardening effect upon the best constituted minds. From
tile moment you land in that colony villainy of some kind
or another is thrust upon your notice. You jostle against
murderers; garotters wish you good evening; Boots was a
burglar, and probably the hostler was transported for
burning a hayrick. Walking along the streets
you meet hardened felons, with all their character
depicted in their countenances, doubtless longing for
some fairer field for the exercise of their talents. In the
shops you find men of a different class ; perhaps some whose
manual dexterity admirably fits them lor the duties of a
retail business. Behind the counters and in offices you see
smooth-tongued and smiling villainy; here are men whose
offences were of a literary character, who indulged in state-
ments respecting matters of tact not strictly consistent
with sober truth, or who were banished for annoying men
ot commercial minds with extravagant works of fiction.
Granting that the “ noblest study of mankind is man,”
these are phases of humanity of which one may see too
much. The died of this association with felonry upon the
14
NOTES ON WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


■minds of the young must be deplorable. I once knew a
gentleman who invariably and firmly insisted upon the
absolute necessity of never employing any but pretty nurse-
maids in a family, for be maintained that children always
caught the expression of those who were most constantly
with them. I believe this was carrying a sound principle
to a dangerous extreme; but surely no father could
think without horror of bringing his children into a com-
munity where of every dozen faces they would be familiar
with, eight would be those of ruffians or sneaks. The idea
of really effecting a reformation In the character of the
prisoners I believe to be a delusion. To reform a convict you
must hold out the hope of his being able to recover to some
extent his position in society. Now, I think Western Aus-
tralia is the last place where he will be able to do this. I
think there is a broader, deeper gulf between the convict and
the free population in that colony than in former penal
settlements, and the chances of a prisoner accumulating pro-
perty must be infinitely smaller.
Now we will look at the question as It affects other
colonies. Our neighbors say, first, that their convicts
cannot get to us in any numbers; and, secondly, that if
they did they would not do much h*rm, on account of their
inoffensive character. Now we have perfect proof that
many Swan River convicts have found their way to these
colonies and been convicted of serious crimes, and punished
at our expense. Chief Justice Cooper, Mr. R. F.
Newland, Police Magistrate at Port Adelaide, and
Mr. R. R. Torrens all deposed to these facts. It
is ridiculous to sneer at such evidence as this. But the
fact is we are not without Western Australian men in our
police, who know the innocents of Swan River when they
stray amongst us ; and, without doubt, the same assertion
is true of Victoria. It is said that convicts can easily be ex-
cluded by such precautions as we have adopted being ad-
hered to; but when thousands of men are longing to leave
one colony for an adjoining one, many will find soma method
of accomplishing their object. I have heard it spoken of as
a pleasant joke, that the favorite plan of escape now is to
ship for India, and then come from there to Adelaide or
Melbourne, when, of course, unless they are accidentally re-
cognised as felons, they can land without any questions being
asked. But a danger that appears in the distance is that
communication by land with Swan River is likely in the
■courseof a short time to be regular and easy. The discovery
of fresh tracts of good country, the establishment of new
settlements, and ttie opening up of new routes across
The Continent, will connect Western Australia with
the other colonies; and the convicts will be able
to spread themselves over Australia without any
difficulty. I consider it certain that, as a rule, convicts
wish to leave the scene of their punishment and degrada-
tion. This would hold especially true of Western Australia,
situated near far more prosperous colonies, where felons
might in large populations pursue their evil courses with
less chance of detection; or, if really wishing to reform
thfir lives, might earn their livelihood honestly without
feeling that every eye watched them, and that every one was
acquainted with their history. The great majority of the
convicts in Western Australia wish to leave it, and will do
«o on any and every opportunity that offers, and few of them
will go anywhere but to the other Australian colonies.
Transportation to one colony is transportation to all.
It has been urged that the convicts are singularly harm-
less and innocent, and this has been asserted so pertina-
ciously and earnestly, that one would imagine transporta-
tion to be quite a purifying process ; that in passing through
the furnace of penal discipline, the character is thoroughly
purged of all the grosser elements. The fact that now, men
are only transported for serious offences, or on account of
repeated convictions for crime, might seem to militate
against this view of the subject; but probably Western
Australians adopt the belief entertained in certain schools
of theology, that the greater the sinner the greater the
saint. Akin to this is a proverb current among world-
lings, that young men of the most irregular habits infallibly
become the most exemplary domestic characters. As, how-
ever, we have neither known these propositions to be demon-
strated, nor been favored with a sufficient number of
examples in their support, we must decline at present to
act upon them. There are sufficient reasons why convicts
should not be so harmless in these colonies as in Western
Australia. The temptations to crime are greater—the
■chances of detection fewer. Another reason why Swan
River innocents might be troublesome is, that If they
honored us with their presence they would have to work.
We do not support ablebodied men, whether free or bond,
in Idleness. We hare not yet abolished the good old rule
that makes t e exercise of eating contingent upon exercise
of a severer kind. As we are somewhat stringent in this
particular, ur pleasantness and misunderstanding might
ensue with men who had been trained in an easier
school
I think now I have dealt with this subject sufficiently to
show that we have not struggled for the abolition of trans-
portation without some show of reason. Discussion on the
question, except as a matter of history, is now useless. We
can only look forward to the time when the last convict
shin shall arrive at Fremantle, and we shall no longer b«
made the receptacle for the dregs of England's gaols. It is
to be hoped that before then our sister colony will recognise
in her mines and timbers ; in her pastoral lands, now lying
idle ; in her new territory, and in the industry and intelli-
gence of her free population, better sources of national
wealth than in the expenditure of British money on a few
thousand lazy and incorrigible felons.
I will now give my impression as to the resources and
prospects of Western Australia—impressions formed after a
very superficial and partial view of the country, but not
without serious consideration. I travelled some miles over
what I have heard described as the c aek district of ttie
colony—the Champion Bay neighborhood. 1 have seen
something of the vicinity of Berth, and in going to the
Sound have passed over what Swan River colonists consider
their worst ground. I believe that the character of the
country has been much misunderstood; that good land is
not so scarce as people have imagined, and that the long-
continued poverty and depression of Western Australia
arises mainly from artificial causes. I have already described
the land I have seen, and even where It has been commonly
supposed to be worthless, there is a quantity of useful soil.
I am sure that some I saw on the Mound-road would, if
within 70 or 80 miles of Adelaide, be worth £5 or £6 per acre.
Most of this is lying waste. In the country on either side
of the overland route the land is much better, and the good
soil more plentiful. There are many men who, beginuing
with nothing, have acquired competence by tarmlug
in the colony. The good land is scattered and
in patches more than in this colony, but still
there is a great deal of it. The country is well
watered ; although there are no large rivers, except In the
new territory, the streams and springs are very much dis-
tributed. The agricultural and pastoral interests of Wes-
tern Australia are capable of an enormous expansion.
The soil and climate are admirably adapted for vinegrowing,
and the yield is enormous. Almost all fruits flourish. The
mines next claim attention. Any South Australian tra-
velling in the mining district will notice mine after mine
that has been abandoned when showing good copper, and
promising to yield a quantity of ore, for want of the funds
necessary for the operations that must in almost all cases
precede returns, instead of following them. The extent of
mineral country seems almost illimitable, and fresh dis-
coveries are continually being made. The staple for which
Western Australia is moat celebrated is her timber, of which
the supply is, practically, exhaustless. Even the forests
that one passes through on the track between Perth and
the Sound would excite the admiration of people from the
eastern colonies; but the colonists think nothing of thesa
trees. They are not comparable in size or quality to those
in the forests about Banbury and Vassc, and in other parts
of the colony. The most valuable wood is the mahogany—
hard, tough, durable, of a pleasing color, and capable of
receiving an excellent polish. Probably the blue gum
does not surpass it as a timber for shipbuilding.
The York gum is a magnificent tree, and the red gum
grows to a great height and circumference. Compared with
these giants of the forest, other specimens of timber ap-
pear small, but are of aj useful ykind. Such; a character
has Western Australian wood acquired, that I understand
orders to an immense extent might be obtained from India,
but there Is neither the capital nor energy to carryout such
contracts. The sandalwood trade has been rattier dull of
late. Whether the devotees who purchase it have become less
pious, whether another incense equa-ly pleasing to the divi-
nities has been discovered, or whether it is simply an ordi-
nary case of a glutted market, I am unable to say, but the
trade is depressed. However, I saw large quantities of
the wood, stripped of its bark, and stacked in yards, or being
carted to the seaports. Naturally the enquiry will be, if the
colony of Western Australia has such resources, how is it
that it has been In so depressed a state, and achieved so
trifling an araountof progress during 36 years of settlement?
The first grand blunder in colonising Swan River was, as
every one knows, the land system—the practice of granting
large blocks of land to parties without capital, and
ofien without the knowledge and energy to enable
them to make a profitable use of what they
gained so easily. Many thousand acres of good land, even
near the capital, are lying as waste now as when they were
granted. Large estates are fenced in, but no use is made of
the land except to graze cattle upon it.
Another disadvantage from which Western Australia has
suffered has been her complete isolation from the other
colonies. She has had no overland mobs of cattle and sheep
when settling her country; aud no market for her own
superfluous stock. She has gained little or no advantage
from the diggings in Victoria, having had almost as little
communication with that colony as with any foreign
country. People who left the Swan for the diggings seldom
returned. Convictism of late years has helped to deter
people from looking to Western Australia as a place to
settle in. There are other disadvantages of a kind not so
easy to contend with. Every Australian colony commences
with cattle and sheep as a starting point—no branch of
industry grows and matures so rapidly as the pastoral
interest; and If a new territory on this continent were un-
snited for stock, its early progress would be comparatively
slow. Now, the poisoa plant has been the ruin of many
squatters in Western Australia; the whole colouy seems
15
NOTES ON WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


more or lees Infected with this plant. All these evils have
brought others in their train. People have become de-
pressed by long years of adversity and disappointment.
They have lost heart and energy; and operations in agri-
culture or squatting, that would suggest themselves at once
to people from more active settlements, they look upon as
hopeless struggles with nature. Many leave in disgust,
and with most of those who remain there is a per-
petual longing to go to other colonies, of whose
prosperity and lively bustling life they have heard
so much. There is also the want of new blood; people
leave Swan River, but none take their places. The inhabi-
tants have much the same ideas and habits as they had 30
years ago, only differing probably in a diminution of energy
and determination. Now, I think most or all of the disad-
vantages I have enumerated will before very long cease to
exist. The isolation from other colonies will not last long.
Beyond doubt there will be land communication between
the northern territories of Western and South Australia,
and fresh overland routes will, in all probability, be dis-
covered. Convictism will die out. The poison plant will
not be found so formidable as has been supposed. Growing
in the good country only in p itches, it can be eradicated
probably as cheaply as the Scotch thistle that has infested
this colony. In the early days of Swan River and South
Australia, with sheep at from 2s. to 4s per head, this
operation would not have paid; but now that stock are
valuable, runs scarce, and rents high, squatters will find it
profitable to take land at the cheap rate at which it is
leased in Western Australia, even with the expense of
eradicating patches of poison plant. At any rate, some of
our most experienced sheepfarmers have thought so, and
have taken up blocks of country, and others are sure to
follow. It is not to be questioned that, as a pastoral and
agricultural country. Western Australia is inferior to the
other colonies, and as land was abundant, and runs easily
obtained here, people would not go to Swan River; but now
that the price of agricultural land is very high, and a
piece of new country for a run almost impossible to
obtain, persons will turn their attention to a country
where land for pastoral or agricultural purposes is so easily
and cheaply obtainable. In Western Australia yon can
lease runs at 2s. per 100 acres, and purchase good land at
IDs. per acre in the settled districts ; and in the north and
east districts enjoy runs without rent for four years, and
at a nominal rent for the next eight years, and purchase at
fs. 6d. per acre. The regulations for leasing or purchasing
mineral lands are also extremely liberal. The new territory
on the north-western coast promises to be a success, not-
withstanding the failure at Camden Harbor. When a few
people from these colonies do go to Western Australia,
carrying with them energy, enterprise, intelligence, and
experience, the progress of that hitherto unfortunate colony
will commence; and the sooner the better, even for us; for
it must be in every way more advantageous to have pros-
perous than poor neighbors.
The continued adversity of the colony has been attributed
to political causes, and petitions have been presented pray-
ing for an elective Parliament. That Western Australia
suffers some of the evils of irresponsible Government is
beyond doubt, but whether the people are ripe for the oppo-
site system is a question upon which I do not feel prepared
to express an opinion. One thing is certain—the movement
In favor of a new constitution has been without enthusiasm,
or even earnestness ; there has been nothing like a spon-
taneous expression of public feeling in its favor; it has had
Its origin in the activity of a few individuals. It may fairly
be concluded that if people are indifferent about obtaining
the privileges of self-government, they will be equally care-
less in the exercise of its duties.
A few general observations must now complete these notes.
Western Australia appears remarkably healthy. Although
the temperature is sometimes very high, our neighbors are
not much afflicted with our hot winds. That the climate is
on the whole, temperate, is sufficiently proved by the bloom-
ing complexions one frequently sees in Perth and Fremantle.
Whites born in the colony are commonly tall, and in general
appearance are more like the natives of Adelaide than those
of either Sydney or Tasmania. There appears to be about
the people an absence of energy and inventiveness. These
qualities were, perhaps, drawn rather largely upon some
twenty or thirty years ago. Long years of disappoint-
ment have Induced in many a feeling of resignation
to duiness and slow progression. They seem to
bear patiently evils they suppose they have no
power to remedy. There are many who are exceptions
to this rule, and who chafe at the restraints that circum-
stances impose on their energies, and the talents they are
conscious of possessing. The colonists are hospitable and
warm-hearted ; strangers invariably find a welcome. South
Australians would fancy themselves among Adelaide people,
for the settlers have so many connexions and friends here
that their sympathies are more with us than with any
other colony. What Is called par excellence society has a
thoroughbred character, attributable to the poverty of the
colony having been unfavorable to the growth of what are
irreverently called mushrooms. The people complain of
the sneering tone in which the press of other colonies speak
of Western Australia and her public characters. The un-
pleasant bearing of the other colonies toward Swan River
has, without doubt, been provoked by convictism, and will
disappear with the cause that produced it. We cannot
think slightingly of a colony with whose early history a Grey
was identified, that has given Australia a Gregory, and
sacrificed a Ranter to the cause of geographical discovery.
PRINTED BY W* HAY, AT THE ADVERTISER AND CHRONICLE OFFICES, GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE*
NOTES ON WESTEEN AUSTEALIA.
