

ll. —Reize door der weinig hekenden Zuidelyken Molukschen
Archipel, door Lieut. D. H. Kolff, Jun. Amsterdam. 1828.
Voyage through the Southern , or little known part of the Archipe-
lago of the Moluccas, .Communicated by G. W. Earl, Esq.,
M.R.A.S.
[The little information we possess of tins chain of islands, extending
from the eastern point of Timor 500 miles towards New Guinea, only
slightly mentioned by Valentyn nearly two centuries ago, and character-
ized by Horshurg “ as very imperfectly known,” and the importance
they derive from their position within one day’s sail of the northern
coast of Australia, induces us to offer an analysis of a work very
little known, we believe, in this country, and the author of which has
actually visited all the islands he describes. —En.]
The following voyage, which was performed in the Dutch colo-
nial brig Dourga, was undertaken by the Netherlands Government
for the purpose of obtaining information respecting the natural
productions and commerce of the islands lying between J imor
and the south-west coast of New Guinea, and of the condition of
their inhabitants. The Dutch East India Company formerly had
small settlements and spice-plantations on many of these islands;
but towards the close of the last century they had been aban-
doned, and since then scarcely any intercourse had existed between
their inhabitants and the Dutch,
May 26, 1825, the Dourga left Amboyna, and on the 2nd
June arrived at the Portuguese settlement of Dilli, on the north-
west coast of Timor. Although this is their chief settlement in
the Eastern Seas, it is nothing more than a miserable slave-sta-
tion. The garrison is small and ill paid, and the government
officers obtain the greater portion of their income by monopolizing
the trade. Sandal-wood, bees’ wax, cattle, and sheep, can be
obtained here; but the chief export consists of slaves, who have
been kidnapped in the interior. A large ship from Macao was
in the roads, but not a single native trader. The soil is fertile,
but agriculture is totally neglected.
June 6, the brig left Dilli and stood over to the south coast
of Wetta. Kissa, Lettee, Moa, Damma, Lakor, and Luan, the
principal islands of the group, and lying north and north-east of
Timor, were subsequently visited. These islands are hilly, well
wooded, and possess a fertile soil. At the north-east extremities
of Moa and Damma are two high peaked mountains, and at the
foot of that on the latter island some hot-springs were found. The
natives are tall and well made. Their complexion is light-brown,
and their features bear much resemblance to those of Europeans,
their foreheads being high, and their noses pointed. Polygamy
is unknown. The clothing of those who cannot obtain European
or Indian cotton cloth (the value oi which is great, owing to the


limited nature of the trade), wear pieces of prepared bark, fast-
ened round their waists. The Dutch formerly had small esta-
blishments on all these islands, but they were abandoned more
than half a century ago. The flags and staffs of office with which
the chiefs had been furnished by the company were still preserved.
The crew of the Dourga were everywhere received with open
arms by the natives. 1 his favourable reception was chiefly owing
to the meritorious exertions of M, le Bruin, a Protestant mis-
sionary, who has resided some years at Timor Coepang, and who
is in the habit of frequently visiting the adjacent islands. On the
island Kissa the greater portion of the inhabitants were Christians,
and many others were to be found among the natives of the
remainder of the group. Many of these had been born Christians,
for the labours of the early missionaries had been very successful
here. On one of the islands, which had not been visited by an
European for a period of fifty years, many of the natives still re-
tained their religion, and had small churches, in which native
preachers officiated. The principal village on Kissa (the entire
population of which were Christians) contained a large and well-
built church ’ and all the youths, from ten years of age upwards,
could read and write Malay in the Roman character, a native
Amboynese schoolmaster and some assistants having resided
among them some years. Many couples were united, and some
hundreds of natives were baptized by M. Kam, a clergyman who
accompanied the expedition.
The productions of these islands are sandal-wood, bees’-wax,
pearls, tortoise-shell, trepang, edible birds’ nests, Indian corn,
rice, and vegetables, with abundance of live stock—namely, buffa-
loes, sheep, goats, hogs, and fowls. As the use of money is
scarcely known, these are only to be obtained by barter, in ex-
change for cotton cloths, brass wire, iron, chopping knives, and
coarse cutlery. The first-mentioned article is most in demand,
and M. Kolff suggests that an European merchant might carry on
an advantageous trade here. The value of an ox is from Bs. 4 d.
to 10s.; of a sheep from 3s. 4 d. to ss. Bees’-wax can be obtained
in abundance at Roma, at the rate of 2 1. 7s. per cwt. The trade
with the islands is carried on solely by natives, those of Macassar,
Amboyna, and the Arm islands being the chief purchasers; and
Chinese brigs from Java occasionally visit Kissa. Although the
natives are considered to be more industrious than the Amboy-
nese, agriculture is not much pursued. Small plantations of In-
dian corn, tobacco, betel, and culinary vegetables, were met with
near the villages. Wild nutmeg trees were abundant.
July 19. Ihe brig left this interesting group and returned to
Banda. Two English seamen, who had been cast away in a brig
on the coast of New Guinea, and after having been sold and resold


as slaves among the neighbouring islands, had been purchased and
brought to Banda by the humane chief of Kissa, were received
on board as seamen.
July 28. —The brig again left Banda, and on the 4th of the
following month arrived at Babba, an island about midway be-
tween Banda and the north coast of Australia. Many years pre-
viously the Dutch had a settlement here, and the wands of office
possessed at that time by the chiefs had been handed down to
their descendants. The natives were at first shy and inclined to
be hostile, but were soon brought into friendly communication
with their visitors. The island is thinly populated, the shores
only being inhabited. The natives resemble in most respects the
pagan natives of the group last visited, but are far more barbarous,
owing to their commerce being very limited. Their hair, which
is naturally jet black, is rendered of a reddish flaxen colour by
rubbing it constantly with lime. Cultivation is little attended to,
and the people derive the cocoa nuts, fruit, vegetables, and Indian
corn, which they consume, from the adjacent island Wetang.
Fishing and hunting arc their chief occupations. Numbers of
fine fish are to be obtained near the shore, and the interior
abounds with wild cattle, hogs, and goats. An English brig,
manned with ten Europeans, had arrived at Babba some time
previous to the visit of the Dourga, and while one half of the
small crew were on shore obtaining water, the brig was taken,
plundered, and burnt, and the entire crew massacred.
August 15.—They left Babba, and continued their voyage to
the Arm islands, where they arrived on the 27th. The Arm
group consists of a number of moderately-sized islands, divided
from each other by narrow straits. The land is moderately ele-
vated, and many parts are covered with limestone rocks. An ex-
tensive coral reef lies before the east side of the group, and
prevents a near approach by vessels of burden: on and about these
reefs trepang and pearl oysters abound. The principal islands
are Wamma, Wokam, Mykor, and Wadjia, all on the western
part of the group; the three first are inhabited entirely by native
Christians, the last by Mohammedans. Throughout the remainder
of the group the majority of the natives are Pagans, but Chris-
tians and Mohammedans are mixed among them. The natives are
Arafuras; their complexion is black, their hair long but strongly
curled, and their stature about the middle size. They possess many
of the characteristics both of the negro and of the brown races,
and are probably a mixture : they live in villages containing about
twenty small thatched houses, and great harmony prevails among
them generally. Their food consists of sago, rice, maize, pump-
kins, yams, fish, and pork. The Customs of the Christian natives
assimilate with those of Amboyna, and of the Mohammedans with
VOL. vii. • 2 c


the Ceramesc. Most of the former read and write Malay in the
Roman character, and a number of young Amboynese Christian
teachers, who have no other reward for their exertions than the
gratification of doing good, are busily employed in instructing the
rising generation and converting the Pagans. The natives of all
sects are much addicted to the use of spirituous liquors, which are
brought from Java in Chinese brigs.
Many anecdotes are given by M. Kolff illustrative of the ami-
able disposition of the Arafuras, and of the harmony which pre-
vails in their communities. Their Orang Tuas, or elders of
villages, are elected by the inhabitants, and are generally chosen
from among those who are possessed of most wealth. They arc
fond of collecting brass trays and elephants’ teeth, with which they
adorn the interior of their houses, and an individual takes his
station in society according to the number of these he may possess.
Both these articles, which are the produce of foreign countries,
are very expensive. The elephants’ teeth are chiefly brought
from Singapore by the Bugis, and the fact of the natives being
enabled to purchase articles of such value speaks favourably for
the commercial importance of the islands. These goods are
apparently used as a circulating medium. On the occasion of the
election of an Orang Tua, at which a Dutch gentleman was
present, the youngest and unsuccessful candidate, though sorrowful
on account of his defeat, expressed his satisfaction at possessing a
sufficiency of this sort of wealth to enable him, whether Orang
Tua or not, to assist any of his poorer fellow-villagers, should
they fall into difficulties.
The trade of these islands is very extensive. The pearl banks are
among the largest and most productive in the world; and trepang,
so much sought for by the Chinese, is abundant, though not near
so much so as on the north coast of Australia. This, indeed, is
proved by the Bugis resorting to the latter place in such numbers
to obtain it. The trade with the Arrus is carried on by several
brigs from Sourabaya, in Java, by about thirty Bugis prahus, from
Macassar, of the burthen of twenty-five to sixty tons, and by a
multitude of small vessels which collect the produce of all the
neighbouring islands. At the time of the arrival of the Dourga,
the people of Banda and Amboyna had very little trade with the
Arrus, as the Bugis could sell the British and Indian cotton
cloths, iron, chopping-knives, &c., which they obtained from Sin-
gapore via Macassar, at a much cheaper rate than they could
be supplied by the others.*
The productions of the Arrus, the articles given in exchange
* This state of affairs has been subsequently materially altered by the prohibition
of the importation of British goods from Singapore, at the Dutch settlement of
Macassar.


for them by foreigners, and the trade generally, resembles that of
the group of islands north-east of Timor, but is far more extensive.
From M, Kolff’s description this is evidently one of the finest
fields, both for the merchant and the missionary, which can be
found in any part of the world.
Among the animals to be met with here is the PilandoJc, or
Arm rabbit, apparently a species of the kangaroo. It is larger
than the common rabbit; head like that of a weazel, colour grey,
fore feet very short, and each foot has three toes provided with
strong nails. These annuals generally sit upright on their hind
legs, and do not run very fast. The natives tame them with
facility, and allow them to run about their houses, from which
they seldom wander. The flavour of their flesh is agreeable.
Sept. 8. —The brig left the Arms, and on the following day
arrived at Vordate, the northernmost of the Timor Laut group.
It is visible at a distance of more than twenty-four miles: it is
alternately hilly and level, and thus may easily be distinguished
from the neighbouring islands, which possess a more generally
level appearance. The following day they anchored near Larrat,
opposite to a picturesque-looking village, situated on a hill
near the sea, A number of trading prahus, built on the island,
were hauled up on the beach, and covered with thatched sheds.
The Dutch were well received by the natives: they are fairer
than the generality of the natives of these parts, and their features
bear a greater resemblance to those of Europeans than any of the
natives of the Archipelago that M. Kolff had met with : they are
Pagans. The commerce is similar to that of the neighbouring
islands, and is considerable. The year previous to the visit of
M. Kolff, an English brig, which had arrived on the south-east
part of the island to obtain provisions, Avas captured by the natives,
and the crew murdered, with the exception of two youths, who
were saved by the women. One half of the crew were on shore
at the time of the attack, and the two youths who were saved
were with them. Some unsuccessful efforts were made by M.
Kolff to obtain them. They were on the opposite side of the
island.* The natives supposed the English to be the Orang
Gunung, or inland and barbarous inhabitants of the country in
which the Dutch occupied the sea-coast. This is by no means
wonderful, when it is considered that the “meteor flag of Britain”
* This brig was probably the British colonial vessel Lady Nelson, which left
the settlement on Melville Island to obtain provisions, and was never heard of
afterwards. Many other instances have doubtless occurred, in which our country-
men have been victims to our ignorance respecting these islands and their inha-
bitants. From a number of remarks scattered through this volume, there is every
reason to believe that the British interests in this part of the world have by no means
been placed on a better footing by the voyage of the Dourga,


never waved among these islands, except from the peak of some
half-manned and, perhaps, distressed merchant vessel.
Sept. 30.—The Dourga left Timor Laut, and on the Bth of
the following month arrived at Amboyna.
April 5, 1826. —The Dourga again left Banda on a voyage
to New Guinea. The Arm Islands and Timor Laut were again
visited, and the south-west coast of New Guinea was traced,
but at too great a distance for it to be well examined. A more
accurate survey of the coast was subsequently effected by the
corvette Triton. M. Kolff gives the geographical positions of a
few of the places visited during the last voyage ; but these are not
much to be depended upon, for the Triton, onboard which vessel
were several chronometers and some good observers, found Ins
positions incorrect.
Hl. Voyage autour du monde sur la Corvette le Seniavine,
en 1826-29. Par Frederic Lutke, Capitaine de Vaisseau de
la Marine. Imp. Russe. St. Petershurg , 1835.
During the course of the last fifteen years not less than fifteen
Russian ships of war have circumnavigated the globe ; out of
which voyages the narratives of four only have hitherto been made
public—namely, that of the Vostok (Orient), Captain Bellings-
hausen, in 1819-21 ; the Ladoga, Captain A. Lazareff, in 1822-
24; the Predpriatie (Enterprise), Captain Kotzebue, in 1823-26 ;
and the voyage of which the following pages contain a brief
analysis.
Sept. 1, 1826, the corvettes Seniavine, Captain Lutke, and
Moller, Captain Stanioukovitch, of the Russian navy, left Cron-
stadt. After touching at Teneriffe and Rio de Janeiro, rounding
Cape Horn (in lat. 6l° S.), and calling at Conception and Val-
paraiso, the Seniavine crossed the Equator, going to the north-
ward in 122° W. of Greenwich, and made no land till, on the 23rd
June, 1827, she sighted Mount Edgecumbe, an extinct volcano
rising 2800 feet above the sea, which marks the northern entrance
into the Gulf of Sitkha, in the parallel of 57°, on the northern
coast of America, and on the following day anchored off the settle-
ment of Novo-Arkhangelsk, the residence of the Governor of the
Russian colonies, whose jurisdiction extends over the Aleutian
and Kurile islands, the population of which, in 1826, consisted of
5000 islanders and 3700 Americans ; since the year 1792, the
population had very materially decreased. This settlement con-
tains about 800 persons, 400 of which are natives of the Aleutian
