

p tETH )
r^<t/ <^^*3u6tJOCiy-
(fair*, *~+
, VA IV.
S(O


42 Leslie’s Elements of Geometry, fyc. Aug.
1
than usually tedious and ungrateful. The Professor’s bookfitfs
greatly disappointed us: for, t lough our opinion of his,
was bymo means so exalted as tl at of many of our contenfporarjfes,
yet we cbvdidently expected, that in a work of which the topics
(though are so multifarious, he would nave found one,
at least, adapteoto his abilities, and have treated it with elegance
and perspicuity. is not the caseXMr. Leslie appears to
have read much, thougnSfjttle, z jnd instated still less. In an ele-
mentary work where many sblneet&me introduced into a single vo-
lume, we do not imagine that ew
but we certainly think that then
selected, and exhibited with sim
which, the performance before
contains not a little TTiat is uselei
error, and absurdity, than any bo
If such a geometer, as this pert'
jy one of them is to be exhausted;
particulars should be
diciramd perspicuity. Instead of
us wants much that is important,
s, and more with pedantry,
)k of geomerkj we have ever seen,
irrnance compeß&us to think Mr.
really * an honour to hii country,’ the descCTujants of Sim-
tewart must have miserably degenerated, ancNsmotland,
be its distinction, can boast
is to mathematical knowledge.
Aiit. 111. Voyage de Decouvekcs aux Terres Australes, execute
par ordre de sa Majestc L’fEmpereur et Roi, sur les Corvettes
Le Geographe, Le Naturaliste, et la Goelette Le Casuarina ,
pendant les Annees 180 Q, 1801, 1802, 1803, et 1804, public
par D'ecret Imperial , et R'edige par M. F. Peron, Natu-
rahste. See. &c. 4to v Tome premier, aveo* Atlas. A Paris.
1807- *
A FEW months before the retirement of Mr. Pitt, that is,
in J une, 1800, *M. Otto, the resident commissary* for French
prisoners of war, ’addressed an application to the Lords of the
Admiralty, to obtain the necessary passports for two armed ves-
sels, he Gcogrc/phe and Le Naturaliste, which the
ment had appointed for a voyage of discovery round the world,
‘ pour mettre le Capitaine Baudm a I’abri de toute
tile, et lui procurer une reception favorable dans les etablissemens
Britanniques ou il pourra etre oblige de relacher m omen tan cincht/
In consequence of this application, the Minister, without further
inquiry into the tenor of Captain Baudin’s instructions, or thei»
particular


particular object of his mission, obtained his Majesty’s com-
mands that the French vessels ‘ should be permitted to put into
any of his Majesty’s ports, in case of stress of weather, or to
procure assistance, if necessary, to enable them to prosecute their
voyage.’
The perusal of M. Peron’s book has convinced us that M. Otto’s
application was grounded on false pretences, and that the passport
was fradulently obtained 5 that there never was any intention to
send these vessels on a voyage of discovery round the world , as
stated by M. Otto, but that the sole object of it was to ascertain
the real state of New Holland; to discover what our colonists were
doing, and what was left for the French to do, on this great conti-
nent, in the event of a peace; to find some port in the neighbour-
hood of our settlements, which should be to them what Pondicherry
was to Hindostan ; to rear the standard of Buonaparte, then First
Consul, on the first convenient spot; and, finally, that the only
circumnavigation intended in this voyage d’espionage, was that of
Australia.
If any doubt could be entered that such was the sole inten-
tion of the French government, the heads of Captain Baudin’s
instructions, as stated by M. Peron, and indeed the whole proceed-
ings of the voyage, are amply sufficient to set this point at rest.
By these instructions, they were directed to touch, in the first in-
stance, at the Isle of France ; thence to proceed to the southern
extremity of Van Uieman’s land, visit Dentrecasteaux’s channel,
examine the eastern coast, enter the strait of Bass, through that
of Banks, complete the discovery of Hunter’s islands, examine the
south-west coast ofNew Holland, penetrate behind the islands ofSt.
Peter and St. Francis, and visit that part of the continent concealed
by those islands, where a strait was supposed to exist by which a
communication was opened with the great gulph of Carpentaria.
This being accomplished, they were to direct their course to cape
Lenweu, examine the unknown parts of the coast to the northward,
visit the coasts of the land of Edels and Endracht, make a parti-
cular survey of the island of Rottenest and Shark’s bay, terminating
their first campaign at the N.W. cape of New Holland.
From Timor, or Amboyna, (at one of which places they w ere to
winter,) they were directed to proceed through Endeavour strait, to
the eastern point of the great gulph of Carpentaria, to examine the
whole circuit of its coast to the land of Arnheim, terminating the
second campaign at the same north-west cape at which their first
was completed; from hence they were to cross the Indian ocean
to the Isle of France, and make the best of their way to Europe.
So much for this voyage of discovery round the world, of which
M. Peron


M. Peron has been employed to write the history. The perusal of
his book has certainly afforded us considerable pleasure, although in
the course of our examination ofitwe shall feel ourselves called upon
to reprobate, in the strongest manner, the mean and illiberal con-
duct into which he must have been betrayed by superior influence.
Of M. Peron, as a man of general science, we are disposed to think
highly; but we repeat, that in the publication of the work before us,
we do not and cannot consider him as a free agent. It is brought
forward, in the first place, under the immediate sanction of Buona-
parte, in consequence of a report of the Imperial institute, which
states,
‘ That more than one hundred thousand specimens of animals, great
and small, compose the zoological collection, and that the number of
new species, according to the report of the professors of the Museum,
amounts to above two thousand five hundred,—When it is recol-
lected,’ continues the reporter, ‘ that the second voyage of Cook, the
most brilliant in this respect which has ever been made to this day, did
not furnish more than two hundred and fifty new species, and that the
combined voyages of Carteret, Wallis, Furheaux, Meares, and Vancou-
ver, have not all together produced so great a number; when it is
observed that the case is the same with regard to all the French expe-
ditions, it will follow, that MM. Peron and Lesueur alone have disco-
vered more new animals than ail the natural historians who have
travelled in these latter times.’
As a reward for this great exertion, the Institute accordingly
resolves,
1. ‘ That the class should testify, in an authentic manner, how much
it is satisfied with the zeal shewn by M. Peron to fulfil the functions
with which he was charged.
2. ‘ That it should declare to government that he is deserving of
those rewards usually granted to naturalists who travel’; and that the
works preparing by him must contribute to the progress of natural
science.’
The reward, we are told in a note, was an order of Buonaparte,
for his works to be published at the expense of government.
Before we proceed to the examination of M. Peron’s book, we
shall extract one part of the report of the Institute, which, from the
importance it attaches to the nascent colony in New South Wales,
tends to corroborate what we have stated in regard to the real ob-
ject of the voyage.
‘ In the midst of the regions which he has traversed, M. Peron has
everywhere encountered the rivals of his country; in every place they
have formed establishments which excite the greatest interest, of which
we have hitherto in Europe received but imperfect and invariably false
information. JM. Peron has applied himself particularly to compre-
hend,


hend, in detail, this vast system of colonization in Australia, which is
exhibited at the same time on a great continent, and over an immense
ocean. You will be enabled to observe, by that part only of his memoir
on the seal fishery, how far his researches on this subject are of import-
ance, and with what sagacity the author of it has been able to dcvelope
them. His labours, in this respect, appear worthy, in every point of
view, of the attention of the philosopher and the statesman. Never
perhaps did a subject of greater interest or curiosity offer itself to their
contemplation. Never perhaps was a more striking example afforded
of the omnipotence of laws and institutions on the character of indivi-
duals and nations. To transform the most formidable robbers, and the
most abandoned thieves of England, into honest and peaceable citizens,
and into industrious planters; to operate the same revolution among
the vilest prostitutes ; to compel them, by infallible means, to become
virtuous wives, and exemplary mothers ; to bring under subordination
and controul a nascent population; to preserve it by assiduous care
from the contagious example of its parents ; and thus to lay the ground-
work of a race more virtuous than that which at present exists —such
is the affecting picture that the new English colonies present. But the
statesman, in the very constitution of this new empire, and in the detail
of its organization, too surely discovers the real views of the founder,
and the formidable germ of those revolutions which must of necessity b®
produced.’ Page 12.
This ‘Voyage Historique’ commences with observing that the
efforts which England has made in scientific discoveries have been
peculiarly distinguished in these latter times ; and that in this glo-
rious struggle among nations for promoting science, France alone
has been aide to dispute with advantage her superiority and her
triumphs : that, notwithstanding this, the numbers of enlightened
Eli glishmen, placed on the immense theatre of a fifth part of the
globe, might, perhaps, decide the opinion of Europe in favour of
their country; that the national honour of France therefore called
for an expedition of discovery to the South Seas, and that the
Institute felt it a duty to propose the measure to government.
‘ The war at this period appeared to have redoubled its fury; the
political existence of France was menaced ; its territory was invaded—
but Buonaparte was now First Consul. He received with eagerness the
proposition of the Institute, which for many years before had to boast of
his name in the list of its members. And at the very time when the
army of reserve was put in motion to cross the Alps, he issued his
orders to hasten the execution of this grand enterprize. In an instant,
three and twenty persons, nominated by him, on the presentation of
the Institute, were destined for making scientific researches, Never
was a display so considerable given to this department of a voyage of
discovery ; never were means "so amply prepared for securing success!
Astronomers, geographers, mineralogists, botanists, zoologists, draftsmen,
gardeners,


gardeners, all presented themselves in double, triple, and even quin-
tuple numbers.’—Page 4.
Fortunate, however, as it turned out, was it for those who were
rejected. Of the twenty-three persons selected for conducting the
scientific department, three only returned to their country.
The two ships appointed for this expedition left Havre on the
,19th October, 1800, and anchored on the 2d November in the bay
of Santa Cruz, in Teneriffe. We shall not attempt to follow M.
Peron through his long dissertations on the Canary islands, nor
dispute with him respecting the gallant conduct of his countrymen
on the appearance of Lord Nelson before Santa Cruz. We shall
barely observe that he must be mistaken in supposing that the
English had any view of making a conquest of the Canaries, for the
purpose of ‘ freeing themselves from the heavy tribute which they
pay annually to France, Spain, and Portugal, for the wines and
brandies of those three powers.’ We are confident that no such
consideration entered the brain of him who conceived this ill-fated
and hopeless expedition, and could almost wish that the motive for
sending Lord Nelson on such a service had really been as harmless
as that which he has stated. The island of Teneriffe would in fact
be an useless conquest. As a colony of England, we should pur-
chase its wines at twice their present rate. The Cape of Good
Hope also, according to M. Peron, was taken possession of solely
for its supply of wines. Now it unfortunately happens that, ex-
cepting a little Constantia for the ladies, not a single pipe of Cape
wine is consumed in this capital in the course of a year; and the
reason is obvious—it is worse than the worst wines of Teneriffe,
and dearer than the best: but M. Peron is not a political econo-
mist; he is, it seems, merely 1 a savant.’
The passage to the Isle of France afforded the opportunity of
making a number of observations on the temperature, moisture,
and weight of the air; on the winds, &c. which are detailed at con-
siderable length, and from which is deduced this general result—
‘ That all the grand phenomena of nature undergo the most import-
ant modifications, in proportion as one approaches the equator; that
the pressure of the air, and the intensity of the magnetic quality are
diminished; the barometer descends; the thermometer rises; the
hygrometer stands at the point of saturation ; the winds become weaker,
and more constant; the movement of every kind of instrument is more
regular, and the variations less.’
Much of this is altogether vague and inconclusive. That the
elasticity of the air is diminished at and near the equator; that the
mercury in the barometer stands generally at a lower, and in the ther-
mometer at a higher point than in other parts of the ocean; that
the atmosphere is more loaded with moisture, arc indeed facts so
well


IS 10. Peron —Voyage aux Terres Austraks. 47
well ascertained, as not to admit of a doubt; but so far from the
winds being more faint and steady, there is not perhaps a spot on
the ocean so subject to violent squalls and variable weather, as
that belt on the Atlantic which is comprehended between the
limits of the north-east trade wind on one side, and the south-east
on the other.
Few countries, we are persuaded, can be more delightful than
the Isle of France. Though sometimes visited by tremendous
hurricanes, the climate is in general friendly both to the animal
and vegetable part of the creation. The catalogue of trees, shrubs,
fruits, &c. which M. P6ron contemplated growing on one spot,
includes the most remarkable in the tropical regions of the globe.
We suspect, how r ever, that some of them have been set down by
him at random. The Mangustan, for instance, erroneously said
to be ‘ originate de la Chine/ has never yet been met with be-
yond the 12th degree of latitude, and is supposed to be confined
to the peninsula of Malacca, Sumatra, Java, and the neighbouring
islands; indeed we are perfectly certain, from its delicate habits,
that it could not exist on the Isle of France.
On the 25th April, 1801, the two ships quitted the island, and
steering a course for New Holland, made cape Leu wen, the south-
west point of that great continent, on the 27th May. At the
moment of their departure, the whole of the two ships’ companies
were put on short allowance, being reduced to halt a pound of
fresh bread to each man par decade ; and, instead of wine, to a ra-
tion of three-sixteenths of a bottle of execrable rum distilled at the
Isle of France. ‘ Triste prelude/ says M. Peron, ‘et principal©
source des malheurs qui devoient nous accabler dans la suite!’
From cape Leuwen, M. Baudin, the commandant, thought pro-'
per ta deviate from his instructions, and, instead of proceeding to
the southern extremity of Van Diemau’s land, to skirt the western
coast of New Holland, from the land of Leuwen to that of
Endracht. To the northernmost point of the latter, w'hich is in
fact the N. W. cape of New Holland, he gave the name of Murat,
and to the group of islands which lie before it, that of Rivoli;
notwithstanding that both of them bad been long laid down, in our
best charts, under the names of N. W. Cape and Rosemary islands.
In the same manner new names are bestowed on headlands and
islands along this coast, named more than a century ago. The ex-
amination of Leuwen’s land occupied them from the 25th April to
the 19th June, and of Endracht’s land from the latter period to the
12th July; and to this delay, and to the deviation of Captain Bau-
din from his instructions, together with the short allowance of bad
provisions, M. Peron attributes all their succeeding misfortunes.
The whole of the western coast of New Holland is described


as a low, barren, dreary, and sandy shore, affording little interest-
ing either in the animal, mineral, or vegetable creation. The few
natives who were seen, are described as horribly ugly and repul-
sive ; a set of human beings thrust to the extreme verge of stupi-
dity and misery, and whose only covering consisted of a bit of kan-
garoo skin thrown carelessly over the shoulders ; every other part
of the body being entirely naked.
Having reached the N. W. cape of New Holland, Captain Bau-
dln determined to examine the coast which trends to the N. E. and
which was discovered in 1616 by a Dutch navigator of the name
of DeWitt, after whom it is called. It was again visited byDampier
in 1699, and by three Dutch vessels in 1705; and chiefly from the
observations of the last-mentioned visitors, it has been laid down,
perhaps not very accurately, in the ordinary charts of this country.
The French, however, have thought fit, as usual, to assign new names
to every group of islands, and to every promontory of this northern
coast of New Holland. Thus we have the bay of Berthoud, the
Archipelago of Champagny, the Archipelago of Forrestier, and the
Archipelago of Buonaparte, the last of which is situated in lat. 13°
15' S. and 123° 30' E. of Paris. From this point Captain Bau-
din stood for Timor, where he arrived on the 18th August, 1801.
It is impossible to conceive any thing more dreary and miserable
than the aspect of these innumerable islands, interspersed along the
whole coast of De Witt’s land. They present themselves, says
M. Peron, ‘ avec le de la sterilite la plus hideuse.’
* In the midst of these numerous islands, nothing occurs that is pleas-
ing to the imagination. The soil is naked ; the burning sky shews itself
always clear and divested of clouds; the sea is scarcely agitated, ex-
cept by nocturnal squalls. Man seems to have abandoned these
ungrateful shores; no where is any vestige of his dwelling, or any
trace of his presence to be distinguished. The navigator, shuddering
at this hideous solitude, beset with dangers—unceasingly starting up,
becomes confounded, and turns his back upon the ill-fated shore; —
and when he reflects that these inhospitable islands border as it were
upon those of the grand Archipelag© of Asia, on which nature delights
to pour its treasures, he feels a difficulty to conceive how a sterility so
invincible can possibly be continued by the side of a fertility so abun-
dant. In vain will he seek in the ordinary laws of nature the real prin-
ciple of so extraordinary an opposition/—Page 13S.
We are told that on entering the bay of Coupang, on the island
of Timor, they experienced considerable difficulty on the part of
the Malay chiefs, who, not having as yet any knowledge of
Frenchmen, and confounding tlfem with their inveterate enemies, the
English, objected to their approach towards the town. A superan-
nuated French pilot, w ho had served the Dutch at this place for twelve
years,


years, in the capacity of gunner, let them into the secret of this ani-
mosity. He told them that, some years ago, the English, after
conquering Timor, drove the inhabitants, by their violence and
rapine, to take up arms; that fort Concord, to which they
retired, was taken by assault, when 70 or 80 Englishmen were cut
in pieces and eaten by the ferocious Malays; and that the most
implacable hatred had subsisted ever since against the English, and
against every object which recalled the memory of those invaders,
p. 143.
That a doating old French pilot should have dreamt this ridiculous
story, and told it for the amusement of his countrymen, docs not in
the least surprise us ; but that a work published by the authority of
the government, on the recommendation of the Institute, should
gravely record such an idle fable, appears, we confess, somew hat asto-
nishing. We ought to know, however, that nothing is too absurd
for the belief of a modern Frenchman, when seasoned with a little
calumny against our countrymen. Tire Malay nation is spread
over thousands of islands, which covet ten times as many thou-
sands of square leagues, on the great Indian and Pacific oceans,
and exceeds perhaps in its numbers even those of la grande nation.
They worship one God, and acknowledge Mahomet as his pro-
phet ; they have a regular language written in the Arabic charac-
ter; they are every where lodged in comfortable dwellings, and
clothed with decent garments; they have communication with every
part of the eastern world; yet we are to be told in the nineteenth
century, on the authority of a drivelling Frenchman, that the Malays
are cannibals, and that the whole nation bears an implacable hatred
against the English!
The Naturahste, which had parted from the Geographe on thfc
coast of Leuwen’s land, joined the latter in Coupang bay. Cap-
tain Hamelin had examined the river of Black Swans, which was
discovered by Vlaming in l6y? ; and on the coast of Endracht,
among other subjects l of natural history, met w ith the pearl oyster
iu considerable quantity. M. P6ron casts many severe reflection#
on the mismanagement of Captain Baudin. The dysentery and
scurvy, which prevailed in the Geographe, he attributes entirely to
his negligence of those precautions which were so well known,
and so universally in use; even the parting of the ships, he ascribes
to the false calculations of the commandant.
The two ships left Timor on the 13th November, made cape
Leuwen the beginning of .January 1802, and proceeded to the
southern extremity of Van Dieman’s land. Here their operations
were mostly confined to the coves and harbours of the great bay of
Storms, and the channel of Dentrecasteaux. Nothing can be more
VOL. iv. no.vii. D beautiful


beautiful than the surrounding scenery and accompaniments of this
channel, of which M. Peron gives a very animated description.
* Crowded on the surface of the soil are seen on every side those
beautiful mimosas, those superb metrosideros, those correas, unknown
till of late to our country, but now become the pride of our shrub-
beries. From the banks of the ocean to the summits of the highest
mountains may be observed the mighty eucalyptus, those giant trees of
Australian forests, many of which measure from 162 to 180 feet in
height, and from 25 to 30, and even 3b feet in circumference. Banksia
of different kinds, the protea, the embothium, the leplosperma, form
an enchanting belt round the skirts of the forests. Here the casuarina
exhibits its beautiful form; there, the elegant exocarpus throws into a
hundred different places its negligent branches. Every where spring
tip the most delightful thickets of melaleuca, thesiura, conchyum, evo-
dia, all equally interesting either from their graceful shape, the lovely
verdure of their foliage, the singularity of their corollas, or the figure of
their seed-vessels/ —Page 233.
After the examination of Dentrecasteaux’s channel, they pro-
ceeded round the southern point of the island Maria, and anchored
in Oyster bay. The natives, unlike those on the shores just men-
tioned, were savage and ferocious.— ‘ Those actions,’ M. Peron
observes, ‘ which are to us so delightful and so natural, the bestow-
ing of kisses and affectionate caresses, are utterly unknown to these
gross and brutal islanders.’—The discovery, however, of human
bones which had evidently been in the fire, and apparently depo-
sited within a monument erected for their reception, gives rise to
many speculations on the origin of the custom of burning the dead,
some of which are not strictly compatible with the character of the
savage and ferocious people he had just described, p. £7O.
N othing particular occurred in skirting the eastern coast of Van
Dieman’s land, except parting a second time from the Natura-
liste, which M. Peron attributes, as before, to the stupidity of
M. Baudin: he considers the circumstances of a long and violent
gale of wind, and the navigation along a dangerous coast, as trifling
in the scale of their misfortunes.
‘ All those dangers, however, were nothing in comparison of the
dreadful scurvy which carried death and destruction into our ranks;
already several of our people had been thrown into the sea; already
more than half the ship’s company were incapable of any duty; two
only of our helmsmen could take their turn at the wheel. The pro-
gress of this disease was frightful. Three-fourths of a bottle of putrid
water composed our daily allowance; for more than a year we had not
known the taste of wine, nor had a single drop of brandy passed our
lips. In the place of these liquors, so indispensable to the European na-
vigator, above all, on voyages such as ours, were substituted three-six-
teenths of a bottle of wretched rum, prepared at the Isle of France, and
which


which none but the black slaves of that colony are in the habit of using.
The biscuit was holed like a sieve by the larvae of insects. All our salt
provisions were rotten in the strictest sense of the word; and so insupport-
able were both the smell and taste, that the most famished of the crew
frequently chose rather to suffer all the agonies of hunger, than to eat
them: oftentimes, indeed, in the presence of the commandant, would
they throw their allowance into the sea.’ p. 331.
Entering Bass’ Strait from the eastward, the Geographe stood
directly towards Cape Wilson, on the southern coast of New Hol-
land. From this Cape, or promontory, we are told, to Cape Leu-
wen on the west, an extent of coast equal to 900 leagues, the inter-
jacent country is, in future, to be called Terre Napoleon: and, ac-
cordingly as they proceed, we have Cape Richelieu, Bay Talley-
rand, Cape Suffrein, Cape Marengo, Cape Dessaix, Cape Volney,
Cape Buffon, Bay Rivoli, Cape Jaffa, the peninsula Fleurieu, and,
within it, a deep gulph running 100 miles into the interior, ‘ to
which, in honour of our august empress,’ says M. Perou, ‘ we gave
the name of J osephine’s Gulph.’ # After these, come the island De-
eres; the peninsulaCambaceres, Cape Berthier, and the great Gulph
of Buonaparte, which runs 200 miles inland. Next follow' Port
Champagny, and the archipelago of J erome. All those islands, scat-
tered along the coast of Terre N apoleon, amounting to more than 1 GO,
present the same dreary picture as those of the archipelago of Buo-
naparte on the northern coast of this continent; they are low,
arid, and sterile, producing neither tree nor shrub; a few sombre
lichens only are found encrusting the parched surface. Not a hu-
man being is known to exist on them. On this inhospitable
coast tremendous storms prevail, mostly from the S. W. quarter.
The Geographe was nearly wrecked in the Gulph of Buonaparte,
and the weather was so violent as to oblige them to return to the
eastward before they had completed their operations, and seek for
refreshments at Port Jackson.
Before we proceed, we feel oprselves called upon to L unfold a
tale,’ respecting this Land of Napoleon, which will leave him, at
once, without a shadow of the claim to winch his flatterers would
entitle him. In July, 1801, the Investigator sloop of war, com-
manded by Captain Flinders, sailed from England under orders to
complete the nautical survey of the coasts of New Holland. In
December, he made Cape Leuwen, and, stretching along the laud
of Nuyts, with the coast close on board, by the 17th of March,
1802, he had verified all that Vancouver and Dcntrecasteaux
accomplished; and, in addition, completed the discovery of the
deep gulph or inlet within the islands of St. Peter and St. Francis,
* Jluonaparte has since changed if for Louisa s Gulph. .
<2 which


which, as we said before, was conjectured to communicate with the
Gulph of Carpentaria. Now it appears that, on this very day,
the Geographe, for the first time, entered the eastern mouth of
Bass’ Strait, near Fumeaux’s islands, and two days afterwards came
opposite to Western Harbour, on the southern coast; ‘ where/
says M. Peron, ‘ finish the labours of the English navigator,
and where our long discoveries of the Land of Napoleon
begin.’ It is true that, on the 19th of March, M. Peron could
not know what had been effected by Captain Flinders to the west-
ward of Western Harbour; but he knew it before he published his
book; he knew it, in fact, a few days after the Geographe first
made this coast; for, ‘on the 9th of April, 1812/ says Captain
Flinders, ‘in lat. 33° 42' S. long. 139° Iff E. we encountered M.
Baudin in the Geographe, who was prosecuting his examination of
the same coast in the opposite direction/ Every information was
unreservedly communicated to Captain Baudin; he was told that
‘ the whole of the south coast of Australia, with the exception of
ten or fifteen leagues to the west of Cape Otway, had undergone
an investigation, which was generally made at five or six miles dis-
tance from the shore, and frequently nearer.’ But M. Peron says
that Captain Flinders was very reserved on the subject of his ope-
rations; that, however, they learned from some of his people how
much they had suffered by contrary winds, which had driven him
from the coast, and prevented his penetrating, as he had intended,
behind the islands of St. Peter and St. Francis, &c. Now we will
venture not only to assert, that all this is a direct falsehood, (for we
have seen both the journal and charts of Captain Flinders, which are
fortunately arrived safe in this country,) but also to pledge ourselves
that no such observations are to be found either in Captain Baudin’s
Journal, or in the log book of the Geographe. We know not much
of Captain Baudin’s character, but we cannot think so ill of him
as to suppose that he would lend his authority, in so wanton and
unjustifiable a manner,‘to pluck the laurels from a brother’s
brow.’ Let us hear what Captain Flinders has observed on this
occasion.
‘ On the 7th of December, 1801, I made Cape Leuwen, the south
westernmost point of New Holland, and commenced the survey of the
south coast. The examination of the French admiral, Dentrecasteaux,
upon this coast, made in 1/92, extended from Cape Leuwen as far as
the longitude 132° east of Greenwich; and I found the chart of M.
Beautems Beaupre, his geographical engineer, so .accurate, that the ad-
vantage to geography, resulting from my survey, will not consist in cor-
recting what he has laid down, but in confirming, and adding to, the in-
formation before obtained.' ( Captain Flinders’ MS, Journal.)
Agaiu,


1810.
Again,
‘ It is known that the French admiral, Dentrecasteaux, did-not pur-
sue the coast of Nuyt’s Land so far as Nuyls himself had done; the
isles of St. Peter and St. Francis, which terminated the Dutch disco-
very, were not seen by him, or any islands which could have been mis-
taken tor them. The French then have no claim to original discovery to
the westward of these islands, although Dentrecasteaux, and his geogra-
pher Beaupre, deserve much praise for their accurate delineation of
those parts. It is most probable, that Nuyts did not see the main coast
so far to the East as the islands which he named; be that as it may, it
is certain that the Investigators discovery will commence where that of
the Dutch ends, and it will terminate where she met with Le Geographe.
The western boundary of this space cannot be placed to the eastward of
335° east of Greenwich, and the place of meeting Captain Baudin was
in 139° 10' east. Within these limits are comprehended, Ist, The whole
of that great projecting Cape, of which Cape Catastrophe (so called
from the loss of a boat with the master and nine men) is the south en-
trance, with the bays and neighbouring islands; 2dly, The great inlet
(No. 12.) up to its head; 3dly, The inlet, (No. 14.); and, 4thly, The
large kangaroo island. To all these, I apprehend, the Investigator has
an undisputed claim to affix names; and to her, and the British Admi-
ralty only, can this right belong, so far as relates to European, nations.
From the before mentioned longitude of 139° 10' to Cape Northum-
berland, which I place in 140 J 50' the claim of original discovery, so far
as lam acquainted, is vested in Captain Baudin and the French nation ;
nor shall I presume to call the headlands contained in this space by
other names than such as shall be assigned to them in the French
chart.’ ( Captain Flinders ’ MS. Journal.)
Thus, then, the nine hundred leagues of coast, comprehended
under the name of Terre Napo/ewi, and including all the discove-
ries of Nuyts, Vancouver, Dentrecasteaux, Flinders, Bass and
Grant, are reduced to Jess than .50 leagues of real discovery, or
one-eighteenth part of that which M. Peron and the Imperial
Institute have, in so barefaced and unjust a manner, ascribed to
M. Baudin. We have little doubt that Terre Napoleon will make
a figure in the future charts published on the Continent; but we are
convinced that Messrs. Arrowsmith and Faden will feel too sensibly
what is due to their countryman, to defraud him of his well-earned
reputation, by adopting the name of an usurper. Indeed, in
coupling this transaction with the remaining part of Captain Flin-
ders’ history, a strong suspicion arises that the whole has been the
effect of a premeditated design to snatch the merit of the discovery
from its rightful possessor, for the purpose of settingup a claim, at
some future day, to this part of New Holland. The circumstance
of Captain Flinders’ unjust detention, as a prisoner, on the Isle of
France, was an admirable incident to favour this design. Having
® 3 Inst
P£ron —Voyage mix Terres Aust rates.


54 Per on— Voyage aux Torres Austrates. Arc*
lost his ship on a reef of coral-rock, he was proceeding to Europe
in a small schooner: he called at the Isle of France to refit his
vessel, and refresh his crew. On some unfounded pretext, the ship
was seized, his books and papers taken possession of, and himself
made a close prisoner; fortunately, however, he found means of
forwarding to Europe copies of his charts, journals, and other
papers. Six years have now elapsed since he was first detained on
that island, and although the French government have sent out an
order for his release, in triplicate or quadruplicate, at the particular
intercession of Sir Joseph Banks, and these orders are known to
have been received at the Isle of France, still Captain Flinders is
detained there. We have, therefore, no hesitation in saying, that
unless counter ones had gone out at the same time, the governor,
De Caen, w ould not have dared to disobey the order for his re-
lease, Captain Flinders very justly and pathetically observes,
‘ The complete examination of Australia had been my darling pro-
ject for years; and never was man overjoyed beyond what I was, on
receiving the commission to undertake it. Two French ships had sailed
nine months before me upon the same project, but, by assiduity and fa-
vourable circumstances, I had anticipated them in the most interesting
parts. In the midst of my ardour, and after overcoming no trifling im-
pediments, I saw myself arrested, imprisoned—the produce of all my
risks and toils, from which I had promised myself advancement, and
the approbation of my country, violently taken from me; and the
pleasing ideas, which the being on return to a beloved family, after a
long absence, naturally excite in the human heart, I saw blasted by the
same violent hand ; not from any crime committed, but from the suspicion
of an intention only. Had the general’s (De Caen) character,’ he con-
tinues, ‘ been that of a man of information on literary subjects, I might
have suspected that one of his objects, in prolonging my detention, was
to give time for the previous publication of the voyage of M. Boudin, to
f repossess the world that it was to the French nation only the complete dis-
covery and examination of the south coast of Australia was due * MS.
He thinks, however, that in De Caen’s estimation, voyages un-
dertaken for the promotion of science, were held too low to justify
such a suspicion. It may be so; but we are fully persuaded that he
has hit upon the real cause of his long and unjust detention. The
work is now published, the claims of the French promulgated, and
Captain Flinders, we doubt not, will be released. The Western
Harbour , though discovered by Bass, and laid down by him
from an eye-sketch made in an open boat, as mentioned in a note
on a published chart, is evidently the spot fixed upon, at a general
peace, for the establishment of the Australian Pondicherry. This
harbour, says M. Peron, is most incorrectly laid down, the penin-
sula being an island to which we gave the name of 4 Isle des
Francois.’ The water was found to be sufficient for every purpose
of


of navigation, the soil fertile, vegetation active, and the surrounding
country abundant in wood. ‘ln short/ says M. Peron, 1 Le Port
Western is one of the finest that could possibly be found, com-
bining all the advantages which may one day make it a valuable
settlement.’
Having completed their operations as far as the boisterous state
of the weather would permit, the winter setting in, and the men
much debilitated by sickness, Captain Baudin determined to run
for Port Jackson, by again circumnavigating Van Diemau’s land.
In this passage they experienced dreadful and continued gales of
wind, in consequence of which, and of bad provisions, the number
of their sick increased daily. The first fifteen days of June
brought with them bad weather without any intermission; not
more than four men were able to keep the deck, and the ship was
almost abandoned to her fate. On arriving before Port Jackson,
the crew was reduced to so feeble a state as to be utterly unable
to work the ship into the harbour, which being observed by the
governor, a small vessel was sent out to their assistance. Here
they found the Investigator, and learned that the Naturaliste, from
w hich they had parted on the eastern coast of Van Dieman, had
already called for refreshments at Port Jackson, and sailed for
Europe, Meeting, how 7 ever, with a severe gale of wind to the
southward of Van Dieman’s land, she found it expedient to
and joined Le Geographe a few days afterwards.
The recovery of the sick, from the moment they found them-
selves on shore, is described as most rapid. The contempt of the
commandant for all those precautions, indispensable to the health
of men on long voyages; his disregard of the pointed orders of
government on this subject; the unnecessary privations imposed
by him on the sick and the crew at large, repeatedly call forth the
severe animadversions of M. Peron. How far his conduct was
deserving of the unqualified reprehension it here meets with, w r e
pretend not to determine: but we are of opinion that a little more
delicacy might have been observed towards the memory of an
officer who fought bravely for his country at Trafalgar, where his
ship, the Fougeux, w ent down after the action, and Captain Bau-
din, with every soul on board, perished.
The favourable reception which the officers and naturalists of
the two ships met from the government of Port Jackson, far ex-
ceeded their expectations.
* The English received Captain Harnelin (of the Naturaliste) from the
first moment, with that great and polite generosity which the perfection
of European civilization only can produce. The most distinguished
houses in the colony were open to our companions; and during their
whole stay there, they experienced that delicate and kind hospitality,
x» -i which


which confers equal honour on him who practises it, and on him who
is the object of it. All the resources of the colony were placed at the
disposition ot the French captain.’—page 36'j. ‘ln one word,’ says
M. Peron, ‘ the conduct of the English government with regard to us
was so marked by magnificence and generosity, that we should be want-
ing in every principle of honour and justice, were we not to record in
this work the expression of our gratitude.’
The same kind attention appears to have been paid to them by
the inhabitants; all, continues M. Peron, seemed to feel the im-
portant truth, ‘ la cause des sciences est la cause des peuples.’
It gives us pain to observe, after reading these and similar pas-
sages, that the gratitude of Captain Hamelin scarcely survived the
period of its record by M. Peron. This officer is at present com-
modore of a squadron of frigates in the East Indies. Last year
they attacked and completely destroyed the small and defenceless
settlement of Tappanooly, on the coast of Sumatra. Forgetful of
that delicate and kind hospitality with which he was received at
Port Jackson, Captain Hamelin not only permitted, but assisted in
the pillage of private property: he even stood by and saw the
wardrobes of the ladies plundered, and was base and malicious
enough to order his people to tear in pieces, in presence of the
owners, several articles of dress which were not worth carrying
away. He then compelled the whole of the civilians to embark for
the Isle of France, leaving orders that every house in the settlement
should be set on fire. When on ship-board, he called the English
ladies upon deck, and with savage exultation, pointed out to them
the glorious blaze which their houses exhibited. This is that very
Captain Hamelin, at whose disposition, even in the midst of war,
i all the resources of the English colony were placed!’
We have been induced to notice this infamous conduct in an
officer of the old school, as it tends to prove, among a thousand
other instances now before us, how totally the national character of
France is altered and depraved by the military despotism which has
sprung out of the revolution. Her age of chivalry is, indeed, gone
-—we fear for ever; and its place is supplied by a systematic fero-
ciousness, a rancorous mpde of warfare wholly destitute of that
urbanity of manners, that generosity of sentiment, which once served
to soften the rigours of contention, and stripped it of half its terrors.
The leading principle in the modem school of military France, is to
renounce humanity altogether; to mortify, to insult, and trample in
the dust a vanquished foe, not so much for the gratification of per-
sonal hatred, as for the unworthy purpose of ministring to the dark
and stormy passions of the most malignant and revengeful of tyrants.
A very detailed, and, we doubt not, very accurate, view is given of
the town of Sydney, accompanied with a neat plan, and followed by


1810. Peron —Voyage aux Terres Australes. 57
an animated description of the magnificent harbourof Port Jackson.
We suspect, however, that the account of the bustling trade, and
flourishing state of the colony, is a little exaggerated.
‘ A group of objects, not less interesting, forced themselves on our
attention. In the harbour were re-assembled a multitude of vessels,
recently arrived from different countries of the globe, the greater part
of them destined for new and hazardous voyages. These, fitted out
on the banks of the Thames and the Shannon, were proceeding to the
whale fishery on the wintry coast of New Zealand ; those intended for
China, after landing their cargoes for the use of the colony, were pre-
paring to sail towards the mouth of the Yellow river. Some laden
with coal were about to proceed to the Cape of Good Hope and to
India. Several smaller craft were preparing for a coasting voyage to
Bass’ strait; other vessels, of a stronger construction, manned by more
adventurous sailors, and provided with arms, were fitting out lor the
western coast of America, stored with merchandize of various kinds:
these vessels were intended to establish, by force of arms, a contraband
commerce with the inhabitants of Peru, extremely advantageous to
both parties. Here an enterprize was preparing for the N. W. coast of
America, to carry on a lucrative commerce in furs ; there they were
hastening an expedition of armed vessels for the Navigator, friendly,
and Society Islands, to import cargoes of salt provisions.’ —P. 375.
The account of the convicts is equally favourable, but we fear
equally exaggerated. Robbers and highwaymen are here converted
into good husbands and indulgent fathers, and the most abandoned
thieves and prostitutes into intelligent and industrious mothers. At
Paramatta several of the officers and the corps des savans took up
their abode in the house of one Larra, a French Jew, who, from a
convicted felon, was now become a freeman and a citizen, and
married to a once abandoned, now reformed J ewess. Both of them
being inclined to industrious habits, they soon raised a small capi-
tal ; they cultivated land ; they entered into commercial specula-
tions; and, in short, M. Lana was now considered as one of the
richest and most respectable inhabitants of the colony. Three
French convicts served him as domestics, all sensible of their former
misconduct, and fully determined to lead in future virtuous and
honest lives. Far different, however, were the feelings of another
Frenchman, of the name of Morand, a jeweller and clock-maker in
the town of Sydney, who had been transported for forging Bank notes,
or, as he was pleased to state it, ‘d’avoir voulu s associer a la Banque
d’Angleterre sans mise de fonds.’ The levity with which this wretch
related his own villanies, and the delight he seemed to experience at
the recollection of the perpetration of crimes disgraceful to human
nature, are certainly peculiar to Frenchmen of the very worst de-
scription. We shall give his history in his own words :
‘The war/said Morand, ‘had jest broken out between Great Bri-
tain


tain and France; the forces of the two nations were already engaged;
when it occurred to me that our rival might be more easily destroyed
by financial operations than by force of arms. I resolved therefore tn
bon patriate , to undertake his destruction, and to effect it in the very
heart of London.—Had I succeeded (he exclaimed with eagerness)
France would have erected altars to my name!—Scarcely had I set foot
in England, when I commenced my operations, which succeeded be-'
yond my utmost hopes. Assisted by an Irishman, not less expert than
myself, I soon succeeded in counterfeiting Bank of England notes to
such a degree of perfection, that it became very difficult even for our-
selves to distinguish those issued from our press, from those that were
real. The moment of my triumph arrived; all my dispositions were
made for deluging England with the product of our manufactory. No-
thing was wanting but some little information concerning the mode of
marking the numbers, when my partner, whom I had hitherto regarded
as a gentleman, was induced to rob our depot, and carry off some of the
notes which wanted a few trifling though indispensable formalities. He
was immediately taken up: and as he had not scrupled to commit a
breach of honour, he did not hesitate, under his present situation, to
conduct himself like a poltroon—he discovered the whole secret. I
was arrested, and Great Britain was saved from the destruction prepared
for her.
‘ However evident the proofs of our project might be made to appear,
I did not on that account despair (thanks to the nature of the criminal
laws of England !) to escape being hanged. But the pusillanimity and
terror of my companion were such as to leave no doubt of our com-
mon ruin, if I should be reduced to the necessity of being confronted
at the bar with him. In order therefore to ward off my own fate,
which could not retard his, I was resolved to make him the instru-
ment of his own destruction. Besides, as he was the cause of all our
disasters, it was perfectly just that he should suffer for it. In a pathetic
harangue, therefore, I endeavoured to prove to him that our death
being inevitable, we had nothing left to occupy our thoughts but the
best means of escaping the gallows; and that it would be better to act
like men of honour, than to expire under the hands of the hangman.—
The Irishman was moved, but not quite resolved. 1 then observed,
that if his own infamy did not affect him, he ought to spare his children
the calamity of hearing themselves stigmatized; and that if he could
not leave them a fortune, he might at least, by a generous self-devotion,
snatch them from shame and disgrace.
‘ These last reflections kindled in the breast of the Irishman a spark
of noble courage. We procured some corrosive sublimate. I pre-
tended to swallow part of it—he actually swallowed it, and died. Thus
disembarrassed, I avoided the gallows which was ready for us both. I
escaped it however to be transported into this colony, where 1 am con-
demned to pass the rest of my days. The time of my slavery is expired.
I carry on to advantage my former occupations of a jeweller and
clock-maker. The two wretches who work for me, and who would
hang themselves for the sake of a watch, enable me to triple my profits.
1»


In a few years I shall be one of the richest proprietors in the settlement,
and 1 should already be one of the happiest, were I not unceasingly tor-
mented at the regret of having failed so miserably in an honourable pro-
ject, and in seeing myself looked upon as a vile miscreant, even by
you, my countrymen, who are not able to comprehend the noble prin-
ciples of my conduct/ P. 411.
Want of room will not permit us to follow M. P6ron through his
various observations on many important subjects relating to our
settlements in New South Wales, nor to refute his speculations re-
specting the intentions of the British government in this quarter of
the globe. His descriptions are animated, but, as we before ob-
served, generally exaggerated. There are two subjects, however,
with which he concludes this first volume of his work, and which,
being new, we feel ourselves called upon to notice. The first is an
account of some experiments made by him with a new instrument,
invented by Regnier, which he calls a dynamometer, for the purpose
of ascertaining the comparative strength which individuals are ca-
pable of exerting. If it be meant, by such an instrument, to mea-
sure the quantity of strength that one man can exert, by pulling, more
than another, we presume it will not answer the purpose for which
it was invented. The idea seems to have been thrown out by
M. Coulomb, in a memoir presented to the Institute, which had for
its object the ascertaining ‘ the quantity of daily action which men
are able to furnish by individual labour, according to the different
mode in which they employ their strength.’ This problem M. Pe-
ron has by no means solved. A great many circumstances, besides
those of climate, food, and stature, must be taken into consideration.
There is moreover a knack acquired by long habit in calling forth
muscular power to its utmost exertion, which often enables a weak
man to supply a greater quantity of labour than a stronger man is
capable of. A Chinese porter, for instance, who feeds on rice, the
least nutritive probably of all grain, will carry a greater load than an
English sailor who lives on good beef, biscuit, and rum; but the
same sailor will haul a rope, or drag a weight, with double the force
of a Chinese porter. W e cannot follow him through forty pages of
dissertation on this subject, but must content ourselves with giving
his conclusions from five series of experiments, though we attach
little Importance to them. Having found the inhabitants ot Van
Dicman’s Land capable of a manual force equal to - 50,6
Those of New Holland - - - - 51,8
Those of Timor - 58,7
Frenchmen ----- 6y,2
Englishmen - - - - - 71,4
he deduces the following general result:—
‘ That the developement of physical strength is not always in a
direct ratio to the want of civilization, nor a necessary consequence
. ' of
.. ,


of the savage state.’ (p. 4.57.) ‘ What then shall we think,’ conti-
nues he, 'of those eloquent declamations against the perfection of
social order, deduced from the extraordinary physical powers of
u the man of nature!” ’ And he concludes by congratulating him-
self on being the first to oppose, by direct experiment, an opinion
too commonly admitted, that the physical degeneracy of man pro-
ceeds from the perfection of civilization.
The second subject is a memoir on a new genus of Molusca,
Which is named Pyrosoma, and which is the only animal in the
book that is scientifically described.
‘ Pyrosoma. Corpus gelatinosum rigidiusculum, liberum , tuberculis
hsperatum, subconicum, extremitate ampliore apertum , vacuum aperfurce mar-
gine intus tuberculis cincto.
1 Pyrosoma Atlanticum. lEquatorio-atlanticum, gregarie — pelage-vagvm ,
tividissimb phosphofescens, colorihus eximiis tunc effulgcns ; 10, 12, 14, if),
(3y to 6' inches) centimetros cequans.’
The discovery of this new genus is introduced in a manner suffi-
ciently interesting to induce us to close the present article with it.
‘ On the evening of the 14th of December, we experienced a violent
tropical squall. The horizon was loaded with heavy clouds, and the
darkness was intense. The wind blew furiously, and the run of the ship
was most rapid. We discovered, at a little distance a-head, a broad belt
of phosphoric light spread upon the waves. This appearance had
something in it romantic and imposing, and a general attention was fixed
on it. We presently reached it, and found that the brilliancy was
caused by an innumerable quantity of animals which, lifted by the
waves, floated at different depths, appearing under a variety of shapes.
The pieces that were more deeply immersed, presented the idea of
masses of burning matter, or of enormous red hot balls, whilst those
on the surface perfectly resembled large cylinders of iron heated to
whiteness/ p. 4SS.
These were collective bodies of the Pyrosoma above described.
The atlas is of quarto size; it contains not a single chart, nor any
sketch or plan of a coast, island, bay, or harbour, though frequent
references are made to such in the margin of the printed volume.
It has, however, five or six plates, consisting of views of land,
which can be of no use either to science or navigation, and which
look like so many strips of coloured riband. The portraits and
landscapes, relating to Van Dieman’s Land, New Holland, and Ti-
mor, and the coloured engravings of animals, especially those
which belong to the class of Moluscas and Zoophytes, are credita-
ble to the talents of the artists; some of them, indeed, are executed
in a manner peculiarly neat, and beautifully coloured.
s - Art.
60
Au©.
Peron— Voyage, aux Torres Australes.




V V
1508
00500384
