



A. H. SPENCER
NEW & SECONDHAND BOOKSELLER
a PUBLISHER
86 Bourke St., Melbourne
(The ‘Hill of Content’) Aust.
Tel. Cent. 8856




Voyage of H.M.S.V. Torch.
LIEUT, W. CHIMMO, R.N.


Voyage of H.M.S.V. Torch.
LIEUT. W. CHIMMO, R.N.
(Reprinted from the Nautical Magazine , 1857. J
At midnight of the 24th of June, 1856, we received our pilot and
hade adieu to Newcastle, celebrated in Europe as well as Australia,
as a port without other attractions than those of coals !
Our vessel, the Torch , was very deep, having on board 130 tons of
this article, being 62 in excess of what she usually carried; but so
important was it to us, that we crammed her almost dangerously, her
sponson booms being level with the water’s surface hut fine weather
and a smooth sea favoured us.
On the morning of the 26th our voyage was threatened with an
abrupt conclusion by the coals near the steam-chest taking fire ; but
timely measures happily prevented any serious disaster.
Favoured by fine weather, we continued our northerly course, pass-
ing empty whalers and other vessels, hut at the same time regret-
ting that instructions from his Excellency the Governor-General
stated that we were not justified in expending any time in hydro-
graphical or geographical inquiries other than those which may come
in the way in navigating seas so little known. But an opportunity
offered without detaining* ’the vessel in her progress to Torres Straits,
which enabled us to add another to former proofs of the non-exist-
ence of Gardner’s 9 fathom shoal off the Great Sand Island, in lat,
25° 25' S., and long. 154° E. And after leaving Cape Moretou
(where a lighthouse has so long been promised and not yet com
menced) we continued our voyage.
* B


On the morning of the 28th, we had onr first fair wind, fresh from
S.W. The glorious sun rose from a bed of clouds, (light cirrus,) en-
riching them with a golden hue. In the West the land clear and
distinct, and in the South an occasional flash of lightning lighted up
a few dark clouds, promising wind from that quarter. Our lair wind
being established, steam was no longer required, and the Torch was
soon under all her canvas as a brig; but had soon to reduce it to a
sudden violent South-Easter, with rain, that settled down in a mode-
rate S.W. gale.
We hauled up for Breaksea Spit, much disappointed at not having
daylight and moderate weather to get a cast of the lead on Gardners
Bank, although, from our position at noon next day it was evident
that we had passed directly over the middle of it as placed on the
chart. If this bank had been there the agitation of the sea would
have plainly shown it.
On the evening of the 29th we hauled into Harvey Bay, and here
we considered ourselves to have fairly entered the Barrier Reef. On
the morning of the 30th, we found ourselves in the middle of the hay,
with a light South wind and a cloudless sky, and soon after passed
the entrance of Port Curtis. Towards night it fell a calm, and there-
fore we let go an anchor, in 15 fathoms; glad at this prospect of a
rest after three nights of toil between Mount Warning and Lady
Elliott Island.
The prospect of Port Curtis, as we lay at anchor off it, recalled to
my mind recollections of former days. A few months only had
passed since I had had occasion to visit Gladstone to pay the last sad
duties to the remains of poor Spurling, one of the unfortunate per-
sons who was murdered at the Percy Islands by the natives. I well
remembered the reception I had met with even as a stranger, and I
would now gladly have renewed an acquaintance with the Govern-
ment Resident and his amiable lady in their unfrequented, isolated,
and arid land; hut our voyage admitted of no delay, and our motto
was u onward.”
At daylight an the Ist of July the anchor was at the hows, and
we shaped our course for Cape Capricorn, with a very light air,
which enabled us only to reach Keppel Bay, where we anchored in
the evening under Hummocky Island, the Southern of the Keppel
Group, probably the only vessel (and certainly the first steamer) that
has anchored in this bay since the indefatigable Flinders, in the In-
vestigator, in 1799; and which we gladly left the next day.
But the winds failing us, and having lost three days by it, we
determined on again adopting steam; shortened all sail accordingly.
Passing the First Lump during the night, as well as Peaked Island,
we found ourselves, after making a due North course, at daylight
with a small nameless sandy islet close alongside, which proved to he
the sand islet on the inner elbow of Swain Reefs, with the group of
Percy Isles to the West.
It was on islet No. 2 of this group that only a few months since
the unfortunate geologist, Mr. Strange, and his three companions, in


the employment of Government, were brutally murdered by the na-
tives, while collecting- g-eolog-ical and botanical specimens, and it had
fallen to my lot, in this same vessel, the Torch , to ascertain their fate.
Three of their bodies had been thrown into the deep sea; the fourth,
that of poor Spurling-, I had found lying speared in a mangrove swamp.
At about five in the evening we passed close round the North side
of No. 4 islet, having the low reef of rocks to the N.E. about one
and a half miles. The passage clear, deep 33 fathoms, and without
an apparent dang-er, steering for Double Island for an anchorage
during darkness. It appeared to me somewhat remarkable that the
different approaches to the safe and tranquil passage of the Inner
Route should have undergone so little examination, and the several
entrances to this route appear to have received but little attention,
while the North from Rocking-ham Bay to Cape York has undergone
so minute a survey.
At ten we anchored near Double Island in 20 fathoms, and found
we had been set considerably to the Southward since leaving our last
anchorage; during the night we found the flood setting S. 33° W.,
two miles per hour nearly, and the ebb to the N. 30° E., one mile
per hour.
Favoured by a brisk S.E. trade, on the oth we passed within one
mile of the West side of Bailey Island, the position of which is cor-
rect with regard to the other islands surrounding it, but it may be
safely erased from its new position, and allowed to occupy its former
one on the chart.
We anchored off it for the night in 11 fathoms, soft green mud,
with the passage through the islands bearing South. This enabled
me also to add the North feature of the island, which completes it on
the chart. Its height is about 700 feet; the two are disconnected by
a narrow stream of water, and they are, as well as the rest of the
group, most picturesque islands; green grassy slopes from the peak,
some to the sandy beaches, others terminating in abrupt perpendicular
cliffs; the valleys thickly studded with pine trees, present altogether
a most pleasing appearance. No natives have as yet been seen among
these islands.
At four on the morning of the Oth, we started with a smart breeze
from S.E., passing Pentecost Island of the Cumberland Group,—a
mass of almost perpendicular rock, of 1140 feet elevation. Then to
Pine Island passage, through which we passed at 2h. p.m. having- a
cluster of small islands to the Eastward. It is here that many irreg-
ularities in islands and coast line are perceptible on the chart, and also
the necessity for a coast survey, if ever this should be made a thorough-
fare for the mariner. In one place are two islands one mile and three
quarters off a cluster of islands, when in reality they were scarcely
half a mile. Three rocks, N.b.W. of these, two about 30 feet high
and one about a quarter of a mile from it, about 10 feet high; the
latter is not marked at all. A rock, dry at high water, off the South
end of Island, is not noticed.
This new channel, which I am indebted to Captain Watson, the


owner of the vessel, for allowing 1 me to direct our course through in
order to find its advantages or disadvantages to the inner route,
should he named after that gentleman. It has an average depth
from 20 to 35 fathoms, coral and soft mud, and without a single ap-
parent danger in it; and by taking it much sea was avoided, inde-
pendent of the novelty and credit of having passed through an un-
known and really a good channel.
OIF middle island, (Gloucester Bay,) on shaping a course for Cape
Upstart, we found the compasses so sluggish that it was only by con-
stantly worrying them that they could be induced to move at all.
However, at daylight, we were off Cape Upstart, near which a light
was seen, and also a few natives (four or five) near Cape Bowling-
green 5 but they showed no inclination to communicate, although fires
were observed along the coast, and particularly about Cape Cleaveland,
Before reaching the Palm Islands, Chilcotts 5 feet rocks were seen
to break, every now and then, as it were, flashing through the dark-
ness of the night; and hereabouts the indraught was very great, oc-
casioned by the rush of water through the several openings in the
reefs, distant from fifteen to twenty miles; by day it is clearly seen,
but by night it is more dangerous, as no estimated allowance can be
made for it.
It was fortunate that the rocks off Cape Sandwich did not arrest
our progress, for here the natives, a few years since, made a most un-
provoked attack on a fishing party belonging to H.M.S. Fly, and
shortly afterwards they attempted to cut off a vessel obtaining water.
But we saw no natives or fires about this bay.
Passing Rockingham Bay reminded us of the unfortunate and ill-
fated expedition under command of Mr. Kennedy, who fell under the
spears of the natives, in the presence of his faithful follower, just as
he was about completing his arduous task. Of that expedition, which
consisted of thirteen, only three returned alive.
We were now becoming at home with the coast, with the beauti-
ful charts of Capt, Blackwood in our hand. There was no difficulty
now in recognizing every part of the shore as we passed it, and felt
assured that there are no more dangers than those which we saw, —
no small relief of mind after passing by nearly 1200 miles of unser-
veyed and comparatively unknown coast, from Port Stevens to Rock-
ingham Bay, comprising fourteen degrees of latitude and eight de-
grees of longitude, without including the groups of Palm Islands,
the Northumberland, the Cumberland, the Percy, and the Keppel
Isles, A portion of this coast, from Port Stevens to Moreton Bay,
contains three rivers navigable for steamers: —the Mac Leay, the
Clarence, and the Manning. These steamers leave Sydney weekly
with passengers and cargo.
Neither of these rivers, the Mac Leay, the Clarence, or the Man-
ning, are noted on the charts. Into Broad Sound it is said that the
great Burdekin River flows; and if time and circumstances had per-
mitted I would have examined this latter when passing through the
Northumberland Isles.


Utt the North Barnard Isles the wind failed us, and we anchored
under the lee of the outer one. The whole island is micaceous, con-
taining- quantities of lead ore and veins of quartz, and the beach a mass
of dead corralines in all shapes and forms. We saw no natives to
interrupt us in our run on shore.
During- a calm here we had a visit from a native in a bark canoe,
paddled with two pieces of stave about a foot long; he had nothing
whatever in his canoe, but he wished us very much to anchor near
his beach. He was very friendly, and made Ids canoe fast alongside
at once with a piece of spun yarn, and did not leave us until a sudden
and fresh breeze sprung up from the Northward, which, however,
soon again died away. We gave the poor fellow some biscuit and
fishhooks, and parted on good terms with him. The only words of
English he made use of, and pretty frequently too, were—“ Go away
fellowbut I do not think he knew the meaning of them.
The day turned out most unusually rainy and gloomy, a dismal
contrast to the fine clear weather we had been enjoying. The wind
was both variable in direction as well as force, sometimes from North
fresh, then off the land with rain, while albicore and bonettas were
jumping around us in numbers.
The sea in the afternoon was covered with medusae and what sail-
ore call “ sea-sawdust ” in streams and bands lying N.W. and S.E.
of which specimens were preserved.
The night continued dark with rain, the wind light and very vari-
able, as we heard the reef plainly breaking- outside of us, and the ship
was gradually drifting towards it. So that we were obliged to an-
chor at llh. p.m. in 17 fathoms, and found the current setting North
about one mile per hour.
The Frankland Isles were passed the next day, woody, rocky, islets,
having sand spits, like all the islands within the reefs, on their North
extreme, covered with dead coral, and affording anchorage during- the
S.E. trades. ' °
Fitzroy Island was passed soon afterwards, a larger island than
either of the former, about four or five miles in circumference, densely
wooded, and nearly 900 feet in elevation. The anchorage here ap-
pears secure, formed as it is by a deep crescent-shaped sand and dead
coral beach, facing- N.W. This island appears to be of granite form-
ation, and is attractive from having fresh water on it. On a sandy
beach on the mainland abreast of this island many natives were seen
jumping about. The low green bushy island on the inner edge of the
Barrier Reef was plainly seen about four or five miles distant to the
Northward.
Continuing our course, in the evening we passed close to the posi-
tion assigned to the Satellite Rock; but could not discern any incli-
nation to break. A rock in that position, which would stop a vessel
of the Satellite's draught of water, should have shown itself in the
sea that was then running. A patch of discoloured water in its vi-
cinity, perhaps was veiling a danger, or perhaps only discoloured by
washings from the reefs close by.


Capt. Stokes says, in vol. i. p. 342 of his Discoveries in Australia ,
that he searched for a shoal in hit. 16° 24|' S., Low Islands N.N.W.
four miles, on which H.M.S. Imogene struck. This must be the same
I was for an hour so anxiously looking- for, or from being- called Satel-
lite Rock on the Fly's chart, have two vessels run into the same danger ?
We passed on the West side of the Low Islands, (Trinity Bay,) off
which a coral reef extends a good half mile, and which at night would
be dangerous to vessels passing, particularly as it is the lee side and
does not break. From this island we stood North for the night, (al-
lowing for indraught and leeway,) thirty-three miles, no danger being
visible, and anxious to take every advantage of the strong S.E. wind
blowing. At 11.15 p.m. anchored for the night, as we were nearing the
dangers off Hope Isles. The weather was also thick and rainy, and
in the morning it was desirable to have a look to the doubtful exist-
ence of a shoal in Weary Bay. The next morning we could see no-
thing of the shoal on which a merchant ship struck, and we therefore
resumed our course.
On passing Rocky Island, in lat, 15° 36J' S., the ship passed be-
tween two patches of discoloured water, which looked very suspicious
indeed, and had it not been blowing a gale, we might have examined
them, —especially as two others appear in the chart to the N.E.
Passing Endeavour River in the forenoon, and knowing from ex-
perience the difficulties of the navigation, those which our great circum-
navigator experienced were brought forcibly before us. It was here
he had brought his ship in a sinking state to repair after “ grinding ”
on the reefs for twenty-three hours; and here he effected his object
sufficiently to proceed with her to Batavia. Others have followed his
example, and shipwrecked crews have fled here for refuge. We
therefore fired a gun on passing, and showed our colours to attract
the attention of any unfortunate persons who might be there; but
not even a native appeared. Soon after passing it we found ourselves
in discoloured water, with the pyramidical mount of 1,500 feet, near
the river’s entrance, named Mount Cook, (worthy monument of the
man if it be the only one,) bearing N.W.b.N. (mag.) five or six miles
distant; and Turtle Reef due East; the ship passed through a patch
of discoloured water, the heavy sea that was running almost break-
ing on it, and this prevented a cast of the lead being taken. It was
a relief to find the vessel was again in blue water.
After leaving Cape Bedford we steered a course for Three Islands,
arranging it so that the course would take us directly over the Victor
Shoal. On passing this spot there was a heavy sea running, caused
by the opening in the reefs to the S.E.; but notwithstanding an anx-
ious look out for it, no sign whatever appeared of a shoal, and had
there been one it must certainly have shown itself. Capt. Stokes and
other surveying officers have examined this supposed danger with a
similar result.
We passed within two cables’ length of Three Isles, and on leaving
Cape Flattery I kept close to the danger marked doubtful in lat. 14°
49' 30" S., and long. 145° 22' 40" E., with no more satisfactory re


suits than those of the Victor Shoal; then we stood for Lizard Is-
land to the N.E., when a sudden gale from the S.E. compelled us to
let go an anchor, in 8 fathoms mud, and make everything snug for
the night, which promised to he most boisterous. During the day
we made upwards of one hundred miles, which was more than an
average of nine knots an hour.
Reflecting on the trials and vicissitudes which Capt. Cook endured
in the course of his voyages, particularly near the Endeavour River,
which we had so recently passed, I could not but feel an inward sa-
tisfaction that it has been my good fortune to have been connected
with vessels which have followed that inimitable explorer in all his
voyages; tracing him in the Arctic Regions, in the Antartic Seas, in
the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, round Australia, and through the
Polynesian Isles, and finally to the rock in Karakoa Bay (Sand-
wich Isles) where he met his untimely end. Often have I marvelled
at what he effected with the small means at his command :—a quad-
rant, a pocket-watch, and a dull unseaworthy vessel! That all his
work should approach so near the truth, does infinite credit to his
name. He is long- Gnce gone from us and, alas, forgotten! ! ! How
prone we are too soon to forget the dead! The living are “ all in
all,” the dead unnoticed ! We see no monument to remind us of so
wonderful a man as Cook (except perhaps one in some secluded place
in England). Nature has supplied many, in mountains and rivers,
islands and capes, to which his name has been gladly affixed; but
where is there an artificial one ? the work of man’s hand ! Not in
Australia!
It blew very hard during the night; but the vessel rode it out
easily. The sea had risen so much that while at anchor, although
head to wind, and current in the same direction, several seas topped
over the after part of the paddle-boxes to the quarter-deck, washing-
all before them.
From our anchorage we steered the next morning for the narrow
entrance between the reefs, which is barely one and a half miles wide,
with a strong favourable current. Here Noble Island affords a good
entrance mark.
A little before noon we suddenly found but a few feet water under
the port paddle-box,—a supposed porpoise turned out to be a rock!
not a boat’s length off the ship; the vessel touched the ground, go-
ing nine knots, but happily without injury; and thus passed one of
our most narrow escapes.
Rounding Cape Melville, the foot of a ragged mass of loose granite
blocks, we hauled up West for Flinders Group. It was near Cape
Melville that the natives on two occasions behaved so treacherously
to visitors, and attacked the boat’s crew of the Bramble while water-
ing. This must warn future voyagers, should they have occasion to
call near this dreary and inhospitable spot.
After passing- Cape Melville we steered for Castle Hill of Flinders
Group; and here large native fires were observed on the elevated
hills South of that group, made to attract our attention, and allure


us into their treacherous nets. We passed close (within half a mile)
of North Flinders Point. In two or three of the sandy inlets two
canoes (hollowed from a tree), having- outrig-g-ers, were seen hauled
up on the beach; and here and there a group of three or four natives,
men, women, and children, were planted; but evidently timid; for
on our rounding each point so closely as we did, our appearance was
rather sudden among them, and they darted away behind a tree,
where they remained until we had passed. Possibly they have some
recollections of their former treacherous proceeding thirteen years
before.
The next day, Heaths Rocks awash, were passed close, and most
ugly dangers they are, not breaking in smooth water at half tide;
but a brown discoloured water points out their vicinity. The in-
draught from the ocean swell through the openings in the reefs, in-
duced us to pass on the lee side of them. The openings here alluded
to are the second and third three mile openings and some smaller
ones.
Taking a correct departure from No. 7 sand islet, (swarming with
pelicans and other birds of various species, and having a pole of drift
wood, about twenty feet high erected on it,) we steered a direct
course N.N.W. for the South end of Night Island, which would carry
us (as there was sufficient daylight) over Chilcotts Rock awash, the
position of which is noted doubtful on the charts. It will be seen
that a line drawn from No. 7 sand to the South extreme of Night
Island passes over the eastern edge of the rocks; but no sign of the
rocks could be seen. The chart informs us they are rocks awash,
possibly at low water; and as the sea was smooth and the tide three
quarters flood, they may exist.
These doubtful positions of dangers have one good effect, they
keep Captains and masters on the alert, and perhaps if we had a few
more dotted about the charts we should have more vigilance and less
loss of life and property. We anchored for the night about eight
miles North of Night Island, with three dangers before us, waiting
for daylight before we can attempt to pass them.
Next day we passed the Sheward Isles, small insignificant sand
islets, with a few bushes on them, and from these stood for Cape
Weymouth.
Cape Direction was passed at 9h. a.m. It was here, and not at
Cape Melville, that Bailey, one of the Fly's men, lost his life by a
spear from a native. When the spear was withdrawn the barb re-
mained in the wound, which in a few days caused his death. Here
several large snakes were seen during the day lively enough on the
surface of the water, and diving at once on seeing the vessel, not
giving us time to observe their species.
Restoration Island, the first land seen by Bligh after his unparal-
leled voyage in the Bounty's launch, 1780, was now before us. As
the Torch passed it we could not but gaze on it with feelings of
sympathy, connected as it is with a sailor’s sufferings and misfor-
tunes. It was on this spot, nearly seventy-six years since, that this


officer first saw land after a voyage in the Bounty's launch, which
stands unrivalled in the history of navigation.
It was called Restoration Island by him from having seen it on the
anniversary of King Charles’s restoration to the throne. We gazed
at every rock and bush as we g’lided swiftly by, as they reminded us
of the perils and vicissitudes which he had endured.
Middle Reef, in Weymouth Bay, is a long dangerous reef nearly
two miles in length, and having only one mangrove tree on its South
sandy point; a smaller shrub is, however, growing near it. From
this we had a long run for the Piper Isles of nearly twenty miles,
with a strong favourable current.
The weather had now changed to thick and dirty, with occasional
showers. We had passed the break in the reef where Bligh entered
in the Bounty’s launch, which is also near where Capt. Cook entered
a few years previously. At 4h. p.m. we entered the narrow channel
of the Piper Isles, and steered direct for Young Island, to note if it
had advanced since Capt. King’s visit in 1820, when he describes it
as “ A small rocky shoal on which were two small trees. This parti-
cular is recorded as it may be interesting at some future time to watch
the progress of this islet, which is now in an infant state; it was
named on this occasion Young Island.” Its appearance in 1839
(nineteen years afterwards) is described in Stoke’s Voyage of the
Beagle as u An elevated reef, with one small mangrove growing on
the highest part.” On the 15th of July, 1866, (thirty-six years
afterwards,) we had a fair inspection of this same islet, passing less
than a quarter of a mile from it. It is young still, but boasts of no
green leaf or blade of grass of any description. Nothing remains but
a small sandy patch, with dead coral, surrounded by a fringe reef
about a mile across, having two large stones a little more elevated
than the sand on the North side. Not even a bird was seen on it.
Therefore this island, in a period of thirty-six years, had not pro-
gressed in elevation or verdure; but, on the contrary, retrograded.
Forbes Island, which we passed, is noted for being a depot for all
sorts of stores collected from wrecks about the Barrier Reefs, deposited
there by persons who make a living by them.
On taking bearings for our anchorage, they placed us exactly on a
spot where the top of the thumb may have been placed without
touching a sounding, and in which space we found 15, 14, 16, and
14 fathoms, and then let go the anchor for the night, which was
thick, misty, and squally. Here we found a weather set of the cur-
rent caused by being deflected by the land about the Home Islands,
part of the body of the water rushing to the Northward and a lesser
part to the Southward. The vessel was a little uneasy at her anchor,
caused by the above circumstance ; but it moderated towards mid-
night.
At daylight we continued our voyage, with the pleasing prospect
of a fine day before us to conclude our Inner Route navigation after
the thick and rainy weather we have had. A fresh wind from S.E.
was grateful, asTt assisted us in weathering Sir E, Home’s Isles, and
c


we then bore away under all sail for the Bird Isles, two groups of
small sandy isles, covered with trees, having a deep passage between
them. We soon passed the remains of the wreck of the Sir A. Camp-
bell, on the North extreme of Cockburn Reef. How this ship could have
been lost there it is difficult to imagine. She might as well have been lost
on the Sow and Pigs, in Sydney Harbour! reefs equally well-
known !
At noon to day we had an increase of the thermometer in the
sun’s rays, which showed 105°, exceeding by 10° what we had be-
fore experienced.
The appearance of the land was now different to that we had hi-
therto seen. Instead of dark granitic mountains we had white sand
hills before us, which reflected a bright glossy light from the sun,
assuming with mirage every fantastic shape, and reflecting their
strange and irregular figures in the sea below; some patches on the
hills resembled large houses or country seats, and frequently had the
appearance of cities in tropical regions.
As the evening of the 16th closed on us, the night being fine, we
stood on, although in intricate waters, in hopes of anchoring at Booby
Island the next day, so as to have made the passage within the time
allowed by Capt. Blackwood’s Sailing Directions!
Having passed Turtle Island, however, darkness obliged us to an-
chor near it until daylight, when we were again off, the
opening to Kenedy River.; and also within a prudent distance of the
coast about Albany Island and Cape York.
The increased traffic through Torres Straits has directed attention
to this island as a depot for steam communication, as well as a refuge
for the shipwrecked mariner. I have not seen any spot (from a dis-
tance) better adapted than this, open as it is to a brisk S.E. trade
wind for half the year. It would prove beneficial to the natives, and
a home for the shipwrecked sailor might be established there, who
now proceeds to Booby Island, where, if his patience is exhausted he
makes a desperate effort to reach Coepang. Stores of various sorts
for shipping would find many a purchaser; scarcely a vessel comes
through the Barrier without loss of anchor or anchors, from the
strength of tides.
Cape York is not so attractive in appearance as Albany, and is ob-
jectionable from being surrounded by shoal water bays. It is parti-
cularly barren in appearance, but is attractive from the number of ant
hills, of red clay, about ten feet high, which are scattered about it,
and may be seen a considerable distance. On first seeing them on
Albany Island in a cluster, they appeared an encampment, very much
resembling our ordnance tents, but more peaked, like a sugar-loaf.
Fresh water is abundant in Evans Bay, two miles from Albany; the
Fly filled between 70 and 80 tons there.
After rounding Cape York, the Prince of Wales Channel was taken
in preference to Endeavour Strait that we might observe the spot
where the Phoenix steamer was wrecked, as well as the cause of that
accident. Besides, intending to call at Booby Island to ascertain if


there was airy notice of the North Australian Expedition, this route
was twelve miles nearer. Passing between Straits Rock and the rock
awash off it, towards Wednesday Island, we found a very strong in-
draught.
At noon, with a fine commanding breeze and a clear sky, we entered
the much dreaded, channel, the water quite smooth, but the current
rushing madly by at the rate of about five knots per hour, particularly
off Hammond Island Rock, where the Torch was scarcely manage-
able. On hauling up for the Ipili Reef of rocks above water, there
lay, on a sunken two fathom rock, the remains of the Phoenix , one
paddle-wheel and a portion of her engine above water, a miserable
picture to the voyager.
This ill-fated steamer, belonging to Capt.. Towns of Sydney, left
that place about a year ago in charge of Capt. Chilcott, an experi-
enced and clever navigator, bound to Point de Galle and Singapore,,
for sale, loaded with coals; and in passing the Straits ran on a sunken
rock, which made her a total wreck. Her crew escaped to Booby
Island, from whence they reached Batavia and Singapore. The ves-
sel is now lying; with her paddle-wheel above water and part of her
cranks, as well as one cylinder or air pump cover. All her wood
work is entirely gone, either destroyed by natives or washed adrift
by the strong tides; and there she remains, a beacon to the mariner!
Her unfortunate commander has departed this life, I shall therefore
forbear making any remark that may refiect on him. These that I
am about to make may I trust be of service to those who follow in the
successful wake of the Torch.
The Phoenix went on shore during daylight on a reef of rocks above
water at high tide, —the Ipili Reef, —how did she get there ?
After entering the Prince of Wales Channel nothing is in the way
of a ship until rounding Hammond Rock, which may be done at the
distance of a quarter of a mile, as the tide rushing through here very
rapidly, (five knots per hour,) requires great care in keeping the ves-
sel in hand ready for any manoeuvre; if she once takes charge no an-
chors will hold her, and destruction is certain. From this rock a
vessel should keep on the course pointed out, viz., S.W.b.W. until
Round Island bears S.E., then haul boldly up for the dry rocks of the
Ipili Reef, always in sight, and pass, them at half a mile distance*
When the highest part of Goode Island bears S.E., steer for Booby
Island W.b.S., Avhen you are clear of all dangers.
To show the necessity and advantage of the captain of a ship un-
der any circumstances keeping his eyes about him, if I had. allowed
the Sailing Directions for Torres Straits,, (1853,) * page 14, to
have been my guide, the Torch would soon have been alongside the
Phoenix in the same predicament; but all this has since been cor-
rected, and the foregoing are sufficient instructions..
We passed within a cable’s length of our less fortunate friend.
She was the first steamer that attempted to sail through,—and was
* An old edition, but now corrected.


lost. Tlie Torch was the next, and although inefficient, (?) was suc-
cessful.
At noon, when the Ilipi Rocks bore East, and the West end
of Goode Island South, we bore up for Booby Island, and hoisted
our colours, rejoicing at our anxious twenty-two days of intricate
navigation being concluded. During this Inner Route Passage we
had passed close by or over eleven dangers, the existence and posi-
tions of which are marked doubtful. We also expunged one island
Bailey Island—and discovered a rock 10 feet above water, as well as
a new and shorter route through the Percy Isles.
With light hearts at feeling ourselves once more in clear water,
free from dangers, we thought ot nothing hut our good fortune until
we were close by Booby Island, and here anchored late in the after-
noon, having made our passage in twenty-two days from Newcastle.
Capt. Blackwood states in his Directory, that “ a fair passage by the
Inner Route from Sydney to Booby Island is from twenty-live to
thirty days;” the Outer Route nineteen days. We have therefore
reduced it by three days; and this too with a paddle-wheel steamer
under sail.
The first thing - was to land and see if any notice had been left con-
nected with the North Australian Expedition. There was none.
The Post Office was visited, and a preserved potato tin, with the
bottom out, found with notices to the following effect;—
Three vols. Chambers' Miscellany, left by Capt. Black of the brig
Gallant, of Calcutta, May 25th, 1856, from Geelong to Singapore.
Also this day the Gallant and Arratoon Apcar, I. Francis, Com-
mander, called en route to Singapore, having left Melbourne 2nd of
May. Entered Torres Straits by Bligh’s Entrance. Saw the wreck
of the Phoenix; and for the use of any unfortunate mariners who
may pass this way, I have left, —one bag of bread, a few onions,
three boxes matches, a few yams, some paper and pencil, oil, coals,
and salt, one box cheroots (250), a little sugar, three bottles rum, a
cake of Windsor soap !
Left by the ship William Prowse, one newspaper, Southern Cross.
William Prowse, of Liverpool, Wm. Williams, Master, sailed from
New Zealand sth of May; sighted Norfolk Island; entered the
Barrier on the 9th; boarded the Challenger, of Melbourne, bound to
Singapore, twenty-four days out, with loss of anchor and 45 fathoms
of chain, while riding under the Middle Banks, Torres Straits; no
other vessel seen. All well on board.
Barque India, of Hobartown, left 3rd of June; 23rd anchored un-
der Cockburn Reef, two anchors down, lost one; visited natives in
Blackwood Bay, a queer lot, baccy and rum in demand; twenty-six
days out. All well.
Barque Antoinette, of Rotterdam, Sydney to Batavia; left stores
of various sorts in the Cave. Had squally weather off Middle Bank;
twenty-four days out. . , , ,
Royal Saxon , of Sydney; left 15th of June; anchored at Looby
Island 28th of June;' left two letters for transmission.


Barque Alverton, Melbourne to Bataviaj Booby Island August
23rd. All well.
Bri % Forelaw, Geelong- to Batavia; 23rd of August, 1855.
Marie Gabriel, Sydney to Samarang; 9th of September, 1855.
Ship Gloriana came through Bligh’s Entrance, September 25th,
1865; saw the wreck of a steamer; mentions a letter having been
left, so suppose it has been forwarded.
r Marie Ceesar, Sydney to Timor and Manilla, 7th of October, 1855.
This ship saw six wrecks on the Detached Reefs, two of recent loss;
7th of October, saw a brig on the reefs, N.N.E. from Raines Island.
W hen Raines Island bore North from the ship, four more wrecks
were seen from the fore top-gallant-yard. Two boats with white men
had gone to the Westward just before.
Wishington Irving, Durant, Commander, from Sydney 7th of May,
1856. Landed government provisions.
Acaster, barque, seventeen days out.
Sky-rocket, schooner, Melbourne to Ceylon, twenty-eight days out.
Robert and Betsey, brigantine, Melbourne to Colombo, Bth of May,
1866, twenty-eight days out.
Alexander, brig, from Nelson, twenty-one days out.
Nora, schooner, and Chieftain, through Bligh’s Entrance, sixteen
days out. All well.
. Blair, barque, Sydney to Calcutta, twenty-one days out. All well.
27th of June, 1856.
It will be seen that all these vessels have come the Outer Route,
and have passages as follows 23, 23, 24, 26, 24, 13, 17, 28, 28,
21, 16, and 21 days. Five of these have been more rapid than the
Torch, (22 days,) and seven have not been so expeditious. Two ves-
sels have lost anchors and cables. One vessel, the Marie Ceesar, has
seen eleven wrecks on the Outer Barrier, one inside.
This I think is convincing proof of the superiority of the Inner
Route, and the necessity of having a “Shipwrecked Sailors’ Home”
on the northern shores of Australia. Those two boats with white
men, spoken of by the Marie Ceesar, have never been heard of since,
now ten months.
Booby Island , Post Office.
To the liberality of Mr. Watson we were indebted for a flag-staff,
and a puncheon cask was converted into a post-office, with shelves in
it for small stores, books, &c. The flag-staff, 20 feet high, was an
old fore top-gallant and royal mast of the Torch, and the “ New
Post Office ” was a new puncheon placed on its end, three bung staves


taken out to the hoops, shelves placed in it, and a tarpauling nailed
over the top, with a flap covering- the opening-, and painted “ Post
Office.” In this were placed the library hooks, pens, ink, and paper,
the “Letter Bag” for the Postmaster General, Sydney, and all the
small perishable articles placed on the shelf, such as tea, cigars, sugar,
salt, &c.
The provisions in the cave were found to consist of—two barrels of
beef, two ditto pork, one keg of rum, three bags of bread, one cask
of bread, eight hogsheads of water, twenty tins of preserved meats,
two bottles of rum ,• besides many smaller articles noticed before.
A large strongly bound book for the purpose of noting any parti-
cular incident that may befal the passer by, was left there by us with
the following memorandum in it: —Note Book for Booby Island, or
Shipwrecked Sailors’ Retreat. Left here by Lieut. W. Chimmo, of the
Torch steamer, 17th of July, 1856. It is particularly and earnestly
requested that all sailors, Ac., visiting this island, will note in this
book any information they may have collected during their passages
which may be of use to the mariner while threading his way through
the Barrier Reefs; and when this book is complete to transmit it by
the first and safest opportunity to the Secretary of the Admiralty,
London (Hydrographer).
It would he of the utmost benefit if captains of ships would on en-
tering- the Barrier get an observation for latitude.
The Torch steamer called here and anchored on the 17th of July,
1856, twenty-two days from Newcastle, Sydney, N.S.W. The wea-
ther has been in general fine, with strong S.E. trades, and occasion-
ally a thick and rainy day. No vessels have been seen, and few na-
tives. She came the Inner Route from Sydney. No sickness on
board. Letters have been left for conveyance to Sydney for the Go-
vernor-General, for the Australian Exploring Expedition, and for
Capt. Browne.
Onions, potatoes, and pumpkins have been planted in the most
available spots, for the use of those who may be cast away in this
vicinity. It is to be hoped others not in distress will follow this
example.
The Torch , Mr. Watson, owner, with Lieut. Chimmo on board, sails
to-morrow for the Albert River, Gulf of Carpentaria, to search for the
North Australian Expedition • thence to the Victoria River, for a si-
milar purpose, as well as to look after the schooner Tom Tough ;
therefore let all passers by have an eye to this, and aid if opportunity
offers.
Government provisions in quantities will be found in the cave on
the lee side of the island. Wells of fresh water are to be found on
the weather side of the island.
The Post Office is removed to a more secure spot in the cave with
the provisions. A cask will be found (water tight) marked “ Post
Office by Torch, 1856,” with notices for passers by and letters for
transmission.


A flag-staff is erected by Torch , 20 feet high, on the most elevated
part of the island, with a flag flying on it, to attract the attention of
ships passing.
Copy of notice left for Mr. Gregory or any member of the N.A.E.E
Booby Island, 17th July, 1856.
The Torch , steam-vessel, under the guidance of Lieut. W. Chimmo,
has been sent to render assistance to the above expedition by his Ex-
cellency the Governor-General of New South Wales.
The steamer leaves Booby Island this day with provisions and
dispatches, intending to call first at the Albert River, whence, if no
traces of this expedition are to be found, she will proceed to the Vic-
toria River, tracing the coast along the West of Carpentaria Gulf,
along the North coast from the Wessel Islands to Port Essington,
(perhaps call there,) and from thence down the East coast to the Vic-
toria River, where Lieut. C. hopes to find the expedition in health
and favourably progressing.
A notice was also left for the Governor-General of New South
Wales, apprising him of my arrival and future movements.
While I was taking my observations for the correction of the chron-
ometers, a party had erected a flag-staff with a flag on it, and the
carpenter, under the superintendance of Mr. Watson, was fitting the
New Post Office. Books were added to the library by the Chief
Officer of the Torch , with the hope that they would pass away a
dreary hour for the shipwrecked sailor.
All being complete, we left this retreat, in some measure represented
in the sketch.
Cave on Booby Island.—Provisions for the Shipwrecked.
The anchor was tripped, the ship’s head turned south, and I con-
templated with anxious feelings the task I was about to perform.
There lay before me an expanse of water of 81,000 miles area; disco-
vered in 1663, its shores were traced by Flinders in 1802. Its southern
portion was surveyed by Stokes in 1841. But between the meridians


of 137° and 141° 30', and the parallels of 11° and 17°, embracing
81,000 square miles of water, many have regretted they had not an
opportunity of seeing.
It has been stated that “ land exists in this gulf.” I quote from
Stokes’ Voyages, vol. ii. p. 328.—“ After the S.W. monsoon had set in
strongly, numbers of cocoa-nuts are thrown on the N. W. shore of the
Gulf of Carpentaria. In the year 1839, a small proa was driven off
the coast of Timor Laut, during the N.W. monsoon, the wind blowing
hard drifted them to the S.E. for three days and three nights, when
they came to a low island with no traces of inhabitants, and abound-
ing in cocoa-nut trees, upon the fruit of which they lived until the
monsoon changed, when they sailed back to Timor Laut. Flinders,
when off Batavia River on the N.E. side of the gulf, was led to sup-
pose that an island existed to seaward of him, from seeing some
flocks of geese coming from that direction one morning. Wilson
also, in his Voyage round the World, speaks of the Macassar people
reporting an island in the Gulf of Carpentaria with sandal wood
on it.”
With these prospects of new discoveries I certainly did feel proud
at being the first to traverse these waters, and to find from day to
day that I was going- over regions hitherto unexplored; and I must
also add that I felt very much indebted to Capt. John Washington,
the Admiralty Hydrographer, for having nominated me for the ser-
vice about to be performed, although perhaps the prospect of such a
glorious track’ as this was not contemplated, as the Victoria River
in the Cambridge Gulf was supposed to be head quarters.
Anticipating therefore seeing something new, (if but water,) I had
a constant look out from the most elevated part of the mast-head, and
took our departure from Endeavour Strait; but at lOh. p.m. we an-
chored for the night in 10 fathoms, finding that we were under the
influence of a tide.
At five the next morning, the 19th of July, with a breeze fresh
from E.S.E. we made all sail. There was an unusually disturbed sea,
with the wind heading us from S.E, and South; 16 to 26 fathoms,
sand and mud; great quantities of seaweed seen; several tern, fri-
gate-birds, and a tropic bird, porpoises, nnd flying-fish, were our
occasional companions. But the novelty of sailing in unlathomed
waters, suggested the idea of towing a drag overboard. At the first
haul we obtained some curious specimens, which were duly pre-
served. This amusement, besides that of looking out for new land,
was varied on the 23rd by a visit from a large muster of boobies,
which settled on the rigging and about the ship, until the crew be-
came tired of catching them for amusement, and letting them fly from
the deck, which was difficult. Several turtle were also seen about.
During the night the wind increased, and, as the moon rose, became
a gale, to whiclx the sail i had to be furled. The sea also very heavy.
By my noon observation we had been set considerably to the West-
ward among the Pellew Islands, in the S.W. part of the gulf, having
seen nothing of any new land.


At sunset the weather moderated, and we saw for the first time
“ smokes,” which set us speculating- whether they were from civilized
or uncivilized mortals.
To our mortification and surprise it came on ag-ain to blow with re-
newed effort, and we were compelled to lay to, the sea as before get-
ting; up very suddenly. The wind was more from the Southward
(S.S.E.) At daylight we had no more cheering prospect. There
seemed no chance of a change, and we were within a few miles of our
destination without being able to* reach it.
On the next day the gale had subsided, but the weather we had
was very different to that experienced by the Beagle, where, during
the same month and almost the same day, they had generally calms
at night, wind from S.E.
On Sunday the 27 th the noon position proved we had been set to
the Westward the last twenty-four hours half a mile per hour. And
as it appeared that we were losing precious moments in endeavouring
to get to windward, I determined, if no favourable change came, to
get up steam next day; it is but twenty-four hours distant, whereas
under sail it is impossible to say when the vessel may reach it, I think
this would be a saving to government, although in opposition to my
“ charter party.” Accordingly at noon the following day the Torch
was under steam, and passed through quantities of sea saw-dust of only
one species, resembling a grain of linseed, and not smelling unlike it,
containing a great quantity of animal matter. On decomposition
taking place it turned an emerald green, —unlike the last fourteen
kinds, which turned pink.
At daylight, on the 29th, Rocky Islet, the sentinel of Isle Morn-
ington, was N.N.E. of us three miles, and the low sand bank on its
western side somewhat nearer. The islet is a low flat rock standing-
on some loose dark material, about 20 feet in elevation. The sand
spit or rather islet, for it is nearly of the same elevation, appeared to
be a mass of conglomerate of coral, sand, and shells ; its position with
regard to the rock appears to be in error.
Isle Mornington, a low wooded island, was to the Southward of us
as we were taking every advantage of a dead calm.
The natives appeared now to have made out the Torch to be a
stranger , and began to light their fires in all directions to attract us
to them. Turtle were occasionally seen asleep on the water, and nu-
merous gannet passing to seaward for their daily allowance of fish.
We were now passing easterly along the North side of Mornington
Isle, and much outside Flinders’ track, in, irregular soundings from
12 to 6 and 20 fathoms, when suddenly a shoal was seen ahead, and
which from its discoverer I have for the present called “ Watson’s
Patch,” having- only a few feet water on it; it is three miles from the
nearest land. Flinders must have passed inside of it without seeing it.
After being diverted from our course to avoid coral ledges, and
alarmed by shoals as well as made nervous by muddy water, collec-
tions of sea saw-dust having the appearance of coral reefs, and numer-
ous eddies and similar nautical varieties, which kept us on the alert
i)


with our lead, we anchored at oh. p.m. off Bountiful Island, (of Flin-
ders,) S.E. of the N.E. part of Isle Mornington. We had now hut
a few gallons of water remaining, and it was absolutely necessary that
some should be obtained. Therefore, before dawn of the next day,
the 30th of July, all boats were away looking for water; none was
found with the exception of two brackish water holes; but it was a
great consolation to know that if the North Australian Exploring Ex-
pedition called here, although disappointed in water there would be
abundance of turtle awaiting them on the beach at low water. The
crew of the Torch turned and brought on board twenty-nine turtle
from eight to ten in the evening.
During the rambles of the crew they came across some graves;
and one turtle was found turned above high water mark, a circum-
stance which excited our curiosity. Having ascertained that some of
the crew had incautiously indulged themselves in eating of the pod
of a creeper much resembling our broad bean, on their return on board,
after pointing out the danger they were in of poisonous effects, I
made them all swallow an emetic. I took good care that for their
sakes it should be effectual, so it was not very long before a series of
operations commenced similar to those common to our Dover packets.
But instead of the rueful faces displayed in them over the steward’s
basins, waiting for the first shot, as it is technically termed, my men
made light work of it, although they had enough that time to make
them cautious in future not to eat “ everything they see.” The
creeper might not have been poisonous, but as they were all very much
frightened, and did not recover their dosing until next day, the lesson
was well administered.
At nine the following morning, disappointed in our search for water,
we left our anchorage for Sweers Island, to the Southward, where I
knew that if the Investigator’s well was no more, that of the Beagle’s
would at all events be found. In my passage down I took a more off
shore track than that of the Beagle, and was enabled to add another
line of soundings to this chart. After rounding Locust Rock in very
irregular depths, from 12 to 3 and 6 fathoms, hauled up N.W. |W.
for Investigator Road, placing another line of soundings in a blank
space and in the immediate approach to the roadstead.
At sunset we anchored in 3 fathoms, within two cable’s lengths of
the sand spit, and although dark at once landed to see if the well dug
by the Beagle, fifteen years previous, contained water. On landing
we found that natives had preceded us, their tracks were plainly visi-
ble, and they had left a bundle of wood for fire or signals on the spit;
they had taken a canoe with them into the wood, and had evidently
come from Bentinck Island. It was too dark even to find the well,
so I had to return on board, where we had but seventy gallons left,
the greater portion of which was unfit for use, the sediment of all the
other tanks having deposited in it.
Before day dawned on the 31st of July, all hands were on shore
looking for water. About a mile East of our anchorage we found what
remained of the Investigator s well, completely blocked up, to be dis


tinguished only by a slight undulation in the ground: traces of na-
tives were seen under almost every tree. Sticks for erecting tents
or huts were lying* about, tied up
with grass-cord, and bundles of sticks
ready for burning. It was not long
before we all assembled beneath the
Tree, which still plainly bore the
inscriptions of the u Investigator and
Beaglethe former fifty-four years
since, the latter fifteen: and here we
indulged in a glass of the u Queen’s
own,” to the memory of the adventu-
rous and intrepid Flinders, and to the
health (I hope) of the next follower of his footsteps, Capt. J. L. Stokes,
R.N., with all the honours due to the occasion. The Torch’s name was
not added, for if all did the same the original would soon be obliterated,
which I hold to be next to sacriligious, considering that the original
and originator stand alone as long as wind and weather will permit.
On our return to the spit we picked up a piece of a lower deck mess
plate, (China,) as well as a metal inkstand of European manufacture
with the lid gone; it is about nine inches long, by five wide, by three
deep, figured on the outside, —leaves of trees that would puzzle a
botanist, —which will form a valuable or rather most interesting relic
for the British Museum, It was found at high water mark (by Mr.
Watson, owner of the Torch, to whom I am indebted for it) and
about a cable’s length from u the Tree;” such a thing could hardly
be left there by the Beagle, and if in the hands of the natives for
fifty-four years would have been destroyed if lost or left by the In-
vestigator. How it came there was a riddle.
The remains of the Beagle’s well was found, but full of earth,
stones, and wood, whether accidental or intentional I do not know, I
hope the former, for I hardly suppose the natives would act in such
opposition to their own comfort as to destroy it intentionally; by
constantly going up and down for water earth and stones may have
fallen in.
Our hearts sunk within us as we g'azed on this piece of destruction,
and also at the prospect of finding no water. However, gazing did
not last long, all tools were brought from the ship, sheers were soon
up, and an awning spread, and every one went to work to clear the
well. By noon this was done, and the water was dripping into it, (a
depth of 25 feet,) through a rock of concreted lime, sand, shells, and
pebbles. We were indeed overjoyed, the main-brace was spliced, and
that evening we had one ton of water on board, but somewhat brack-
ish. At Bh. p.m. I fired a rocket to attract the attention of any one
looking in our direction.
In our rambles on the West side of the island we discovered the
remains of a Malay proa, at high water mark, the beams of which
were teak. We concluded she had been cast away during the
N.W. monsoon; her beam was 17 feet; length could not be asc^r


tained. By the afternoon we had completed water (although some-
what brackish) to about five tons; and in return deposited pumpkin
seeds and Indian com round the well, where the soil was rich; cut
our vessel's name on a log of wood across the well, and hade it adieu,
after leaving a full account of our visit, the object we had in view,
and our intended movements.
With the intention of examining Albert River for the object of our
visit, at 2h. p.m. we made sail for the mouth, watched by the natives
who were on Bentinck Island, gazing at us with astonishment to see
a vessel move through the water by “ smoke.” To this we attributed
their shyness.
Although at daylight the next morning (2nd of August) we shifted
position nearer to the mouth of the river, in 2 fathoms, we were still
six or seven miles distant, when suddenly a North wind with a dense
fog threw a veil over our prospects, leaving us time to prepare the boats.
Soon, however it cleared away, and left us to carry forward out plans.
At first I had intended to send the two mates on this service; but
on second thoughts I could not resist taking the galley with five men,
a motley crew, which for their own sakes ought to be duly recorded
here.
Charles Petersen, a Swede, originally “ fancy man” in a toy-shop.
David Kerry, a sailor and Scotchman, tenant of the Duke of Argyle.
George Barton, a hairdresser and unfortunate gold-digger.
James Lussoni, an Italian, descendant of the old Genoese merchants.
James Anderson, “ runaway man of war” and worn out.
Mr. Marshall Williams, the Second Officer, in the whale-boat had
also five men.
William Hursey, an exile of New Zealand.
Lew's Johnson, American, long time in the possession of the natives of
King George Sound.
Thomas Glover, a specimen of a discontented growler.
Charles M l Casky, a cockney, an unsuccessful digger, sings a song.
John Jones, was at the Diggings, subject to apoplexy.
But most of these are what a man-of-war’s man would term pur-
ser's names; that is, borrowed until worn out and no longer service-
able, as articles of clothing are taken up from the purser. Falstaff
himself might have mustered a more ragged crew, but not a more
motley one of race and origin, to say nothing of qualifications.
The boats were victualled for six days; armed with a brass one-
pounder swivel in the bows, each man with a musket and pistol, and
forty rounds of ammunition, rockets, blue lights, and portfires in pro-
portion. Thus provided and ready to meet a host of hostile natives,
at ten we made sail to a light North wind on our interesting cruize
for the river.
I had nearly forgotten the colours we were to sail under; but hap-
pily in my boat was a new “blue silk ensign,” which very soon
gracefully floated over our little party. It was a beautiful piece of
work, and had come from the hands of three of “ Ireland’s fairest
daughters,” on my appointment to the Torch in 1852, with a promise


that it should only be displayed on u special occasions.” Was not
this one of them !
After leaving 1 the ship we steered W.S.W. for the entrance of the
river (or rather for the high trees on the Island to the West of the
entrance.) These were supposed to be Flinders’ trees whether they
are so or not, being the conspicuous objects (as Capt. Stokes also ob-
serves) about here, and if they are Flinders’ they are not in their
proper places. When the river opened South of us, we made
all sail, spreading the awnings for studding sails, and‘the spare ham-
mocks for topsails, with a light North wind, the tide running against
us two knots per hour. At one p.m. we entered the river, and pur-
sued our course up the stream. When about six miles from its mouth
the evening set in; the sunset was grand and imposing, but too much
so to last, for the time was an instant ; no twilight! and all was
darkness, leaving us only a few minutes to look for a place to bivouac.
This was no easy task, for the whole shores were lined with man-
groves, behind a beach of soft mud. One place, however, a little
clearer than the rest, offered us a retreat. The boats were secured to
the mangrove trees, and in about five minutes a blazing fire announced
that we had encamped on this spot. Here, before retiring for the
night, a rocket was fired and answered by the ship,—a preconcerted
signal,—telling all was well. The men slept on shore on a tar-
paulin, with- the sails for awning-s. The officers in the boats, with
the awnings spread; the watch looking out. But, alas!
“ As sparks fly upward to the sky,
So man is born to misery
All had yet gone smoothly, but unhappily about midnight the whale-
boat filled up to her thwarts, by which a bag of bread, all her fresh
provisions, sugar, Ac., were spoiled; and Mr. Williams was awakened
from his dreams by finding his boots full, of water. If all the capes,
inlets, and creeks, were not already called Disaster, Accident, &d,
this mud bank would have been well named so.
Before daylight we were moving, the flood tide having commenced,
and fortunately when it turned left us the legacy of a gentle N.E.
wind.
The thermometer in the sun to day was 122°.
The salt water arm of the river was passed without seeing one' na-
tive. During the dinner hour the whale-boat, which had proved
leaky, was hauled on the bank, turned up, and when quite dry her
seams (which were much open) stuffed up with soap and the inside
part of piecrust, which answered well, and prevented her playing us a
similar trick. As the evening closed in the boats were hauled on the
sandy spit of Island Reach, the first spot since entering the river
where one could land without sinking to the knees in mud, although
we were now twenty miles from the entrance.
The fire was soon blazing on the spot where not many minutes be-
fore natives had encamped, and we found a store of wood all ready
for us. In hopes of meeting with natives I wandered away a short


distance, but they had all fled, and a small kangaroo was the only
stranger seen.
About eight in the evening, when dark, a rocket was fired, to an-
nounce to any of the North Australian Expedition that a party was
at hand in search of them. In fact this, which was the chief object
of our expedition, was also the theme of general conversation. The
boats’ crews concluded without a question that Mr. Gregory must
be found at the head of the river; one would give him this, another
that, others would go without grog and tea, so that they might have
plenty. Every tree, creek, shrub, island, and beach, were well scru-
tinized, in the hope of discovering some signal that would lead us to
the persons of whom we were in search; and although I was con-
vinced that our search would be fruitless, I encouraged the desire of
who should be first to discover traces, and looked out as eagerly as
the rest for them. Frequently as we passed the banks the exclama-
tion,—there’s a mark, there’s a stick 5 listen, there’s a gun! would be
heard from either boat. Our hopes were at one time raised by the
sudden appearance of a dog; and without thinking there were such
animals in Australia, all exclaimed at once,—“There they are!”
when soon after his master appeared in the shape of a native with
his spear. ,
We all enjoyed this sandy beach, at which we arrived m the even-
ing, on which we could have as much exercise as we pleased, for we
had not been on shore for forty-six days; and it was a curious coin-
cidence that on this very day (4th of August, 1840) Captain Stokes,
when in command of the Beagle, was ascending the river at precisely
the same spot!
Before daylight the next morning we were en route , and now we
began to feel the inconvenience of thirst, our principal stock having
been lost by the unfortunate accident to the boat. However a fresh
S.E. trade wafted the boats along through some of the reaches with
great velocity, alarming the whistling ducks and here and there a na-
tive in our progress. .
The river was still salt, although I had expected to find it fresh
much sooner, and we were in consequence without water for breakfast
or dinner, and the boats’ crews were suffering from
tastino 1 the river water to ascertain if it were fresh. In the midst of
our cares about 4 p.m. we landed, and found a muddy water-hole, con-
taining about a gallon of—water (I was about to say), but it was
a mixture exactly resembling preserved milk, and yet it was with
much difficulty that the men could be prevented from taking large
draughts of it. Two of them suffered much from it, as it appeared
to contain a quantity of magnesia. It produced giddiness as well as
other unpleasant sensations; but fortunately I had brought with me
some medicines, which relieved them from the effects of the cieam,
as they called it, which they had so inconsiderately taken.
As we were pursuing l our way up the and in order to avoid the
tide were keeping close to one of the banks, a huge alligator suddenly
rolled off it and disappeared in the river. Waiting for the whale


boat, to place the crew on their guard against these visitors, I was
about to tell them of it when the monster reappeared with his jaws
ag-ainst the side of the boat, and within six inches of where my elbow
was resting; no doubt he had been attracted there by the sleeve of
my white jacket. The next instant found me on my legs ready for
a shot, but he was gone. Still we waited his reappearance, and in a
few minutes were not disappointed. My gun snapped. Mr. Williams
fired, and lodged a ball in the fleshy part under the cheek. He
writhed and slashed the water furiously, until he appeared exhausted
and sank, and we proceeded on our way satisfied with our exploit.
Many more were seen during the day, but none afforded so much
sport as the first. It was very difficult to distinguish them from
floating logs of drift wood; their huge prominent eyes were the only
unmistakeable features. They rose to the surface very gently, only
showing the nose, eyes, and the crown of the head. But the first
alligator which I saw in Albert River made an impression on me
which I shall never forget.
At five in the evening, parched, tired, and weary, we arrived at
the head of the Albert River, and having first examined the West
arm, which was choked and impassable from dead trees, we followed
the Southern one until the boat had scarcely turning room. Al-
though disappointed in hot finding Mr. Gregory and his party, we
were rewarded by a supply of fresh water, having been long enough
without it under a scorching sun to know by experience the misery of
such a privation. Here we had a treat indeed, in abundance of ex-
cellent spring water; and those only who have been deprived of it
under the circumstances we had been, knew how to appreciate the
happiness it restored to our party.
I was now compelled to conclude that the Tom Tough with Mr.
Gregory had not been here.
The remains of native fires recently extinguished were about us as
we lighted our own on the elevated tongue of land which divided the
arms of the river, fifty miles from our vessel; and the grass having
been burnt around for many miles, fortunately for us, prevented our
being surprised.
The boats were hauled off, the watch was set, and we were all glad
indeed of a few hours’ rest after our fatigues of the day.
But wearied as we were and in need of rest, our night was not free
from care. In the boats our slumbers were now and then disturbed
by the momentary expectation of an alligator’s paw on the gunwale,
and finding the water rushing over it as the weight of these monsters
would bear it down. This was no pleasant inducement to sleep. Nor
did the cry of night birds, the laughing jackass, or the hooting of
owls, contribute to lull our senses • —but they all combined to help the
wandering imagination, and with a jumble of alligators, night-birds,
jackasses, and owls gradually fading away in visions, we slept as
soundly under the care of a look out man in each boat, as we should
have done in the best feather-bed ever prepared for us in England.
The morning of the sth of August found us at our furthest en


campment on the Albert River. While the necessary preparations
were being- made for breakfast, a short ramble over the plains
afforded me an opportunity of being disappointed with them. They
did not present to me that boundless luxuriance which I had been led
to expect.
The whole country around was parched and and, the long grass
appeared to have been recently burned, whether by accident or design
by the natives with the view of killing kangaroos and snakes for food
was a subject for speculation. The large gum and acacia trees (ex-
cept those overhanging the river) wore an autumnal dress. The land
was furrowed by the deluge of waters in the rainy season, leaving
huge trees rooted up and lying entangled with each other, the finest
of the soil being thus transported to the river, and leaving on the
surface of “ the plains ” a few flattened porphyritic stones, with quan-
tities of perfectly round ironstone particles varying in size from one
tenth to half an inch; and thus neither the importance of the stream
nor the richness of the country, although now seen under the most
promising and favourable circumstances, left any pleasurable impres-
sion. But this was in the winter, and the S.E. trade blowing.
What it would present in the summer, during the N.W. monsoon hot
winds and heavy rains, varied by a burning sun occasionally, may he
imagined.
In the course of our rambles no sign appeared of an European en-
campment, nor any traces of white people having visited this place.
I therefore concluded that the Australian Exploring Expedition, of
whom I was in search, had not been here.
In the event of any of Mr. Gregory’s party coming after us, a no-
tice was secured in a bottle to inform them of my intended movements.
It was suspended on an overhanging branch of the largest and most
conspicuous tree, plainly to be seen by a boat coming up the river,
hut not by the natives on shore; on this same tree were cut in large
letters the ship, date, &c.
Here, on this point Aridity, where only very recent traces of the
aborigines were found by us, I left a spare bag of biscuits, also some
pipes and tobacco, of which latter I do not think they know the use.
Our mission up the Albert River having thus been completed, we
commenced without regret our passage downwards. As we passed
the palm trees, they were such conspicuous objects that we hung a
bottle containing a notice for Gregory on the summit of the highest
(under the leaves in the spot occupied by the fruit). The tree was
about sixty feet high, and it required considerable efforts and per-
severance to reach the top of it under a temperature of 110°- Besides
attracting attention, which the palm tree does, I considered the bottle
would denve safety from the natives knowing there was no fruit to be
obtained from the tree,
A small elevated spot, covered with long grass and a deep red bul-
bous creeper, afforded us a resting place for the night. Behind us
were lagoons of brackish water fringed with dwarf mangroves, and
here and there neat native bridges across the narrow parts. There


appeared to be abundance of wild fowl, and recent marks of natives ;
dead muscles shells, feathers of birds, and bundles of wood for fires,
attested their vicinity! but we saw nothing’ of them, and had no de-
sire for anything- but rest.
Before the dawn of day on the 6th, we were again in our boats,
and assisted by the ebb were making good progress, when suddenly
up started a party of natives on the North bank, whose numbers soon
increased to twenty-nine. They were all provided with spears, bome-
rangs, waddies, and shields, and broke out with so much noise and
clamour, that I expected every moment nothing less than the bome-
rang whirling at us that the chief held in his hand. Two muskets
were loaded without their perceiving it, in case of such an event.
They endeavoured, by the most exciting gestures they could make,
to induce us to land; but this I was not inclined to do. However,
with the view of leaving a good impression on them for those who
might come after us, I made signs to him that all his party should
remove to a distance, and I would come and speak to him. This he
did, and they all at once sat down on a small elevation, and watched
our proceedings intently. The boats were now backed in, and pre-
sents of biscuits, pipes, tobacco, and fish-hooks, were made to him.
But his delight was beyond bound when a large coloured pocket
handkerchief was presented to him. He seemed distracted with joy,
wrapping it first round his waist, then round his head, dancing most
vigorously in the mud all the time, as well as its soft nature permit-
ted him, for he sunk almost at every step or jump up to his knees.
He cared not for his waddy, bartering it freely. In fact, a free trade
had dispelled every symptom of anger, and we had become excellent
friends. Their demonstration of violence most probably arose from
an idea that every intruder they saw was an enemy.
As we continued our course down the river, after this friendly ex-
change of civilities instead of hostile demonstrations, they followed
us on the bank, by which we had ample opportunity for observing
them. The usual sign of the eye-tooth being removed indicating that
they have arrived at a marriageable age (generally sixteen or seven-
teen) was remarked. Some had horizontal scars along the body, about
five or six inches long, gradually lessening from the chest downwards,
and altogether their appearance was by no means agreeable. I con-
sidered we had managed them fortunately, for a single act of hostility
would have turned the tide of events. They had no women among
them, which was a sure sign that their visit was not for peace. They
kept company with us for fifteen miles along the banks of the river,
until a creek prevented any further communication, when we gave
them some parting presents, another coloured handkerchief, &c., in
exchange for anything they had, and we parted excellent friends.
By the evening we had reached to about six miles from the en-
trance, and determined to pass the night there! We accordingly
landed, while thousands of fish, somewhat resembling the mullet and
smelt, were jumping out of the water around us, reminding us that
we were without a seine.
E


Having now examined the Albert River, I should describe it as a
very unimportant stream, the banks of which, for the first few miles
from its mouth, are formed of mud covered with a dense mangrove
hush, the monotony of which is slightly broken here and there by a
few independent gum and acacia trees. Then assuming a South and
S.W. direction, patches of cliff from ten to thirty feet high divide
the mangroves, and change the scene, although small mangrove
islets, with sandy spits, appear at low water. At forty miles up the,
river a complete change is evident; there is no vestige of a mangrove,
hut gum trees and acacias, with an occasional palm, the banks of the
river with bamboos, rushes, creepers, and long grass. The river is in
general tortuous, presenting at low water a far different aspect to that
when the tide is high. At high water snags, dead trees, sand banks,
mud hanks, embryo islets forming round sunken logs, are all covered,
and an unbroken sheet of water is then presented to the eye, that
contrasts remarkably with the scene presented at low water.
The maximum last night was 67°, the minimum 55°.
In the evening the Torch's preconcerted signal was seen and an-
swered by us. In the course of the night I was suddenly seized with
sickness, and in the morning became worse, with symptoms of fever,
and at early dawn directed the boats to he got ready, determined on
hastening our return to the ship, and rejoicing that we were so near
her.
As the boats moved along, I recollected having the evening before
visited the deserted native huts close to our encampment; about four
feet high, with the opening to the S.E., that would just admit a man,
and the fire-place at the entrance.
We were soon at the mouth of the river, and by noon found our-
selves once more on board the Torch.
To all of us, and especially myself, very unwell, this was a happy
return; for ours had been no trip of pleasure! Exposed in light
open boats, unsuited like their crews for detached service, half our
provisions lost, our water short, and under a constant infliction of
flies and mosquitoes, threatened by alligators and natives, and cramped
in a small boat for six days, the thermometer 124° in the sun, and
down to 55° at night;—these are not the conditions of pleasure
parties, but rather tests for the constitution of a stranger to meet the
call of duty; and this performed, the conclusion of our expedition
was welcome.
It was however gratifying to know that this portion of the task
was done; that any of Mr. Gregory’s party or his schooner had not
been here, a result I had anticipated from the first. But our visit
will have the good effect of conciliating the natives, who will be in
some measure accustomed to the white faces of those who follow us. ,
In the evening I had sufficient strength to walk the deck and make
preparations for leaving the Gulf at daylight the next morning.
At sunrise on the Bth of August, after getting the vessel’s head on
sixteen points of the compass, to obtain the deviation on each, we
tripped our anchor and made sail with her head once more to the


northward, to leave, with no regret, the Gulf of Carpentaria. The
wind was light from S.E. which afterwards came round to N.E., fell
calm at midnight, with heavy dews; then S.W. and S.E. at sunrise.
Our progress was therefore slow.
During the last few days the winds seem to have daily gone round
the compass. Commencing at S.E. as the sun rises, they gain
strength with the sun, drawing round to East and N.E. as the sun
declines, then to the northward; at midnight a calm of short dura-
tion, followed by very light airs from N.W., West, and S.W., until
daylight, when it again assumes its S.E. direction as the sun appears
on the horizon. These appear to he characteristics of the winds
in the depth of the gulf when the S.E. trade or monsoon is not fresh.
The morning of the 10th brought us a dense fog, lasting seven
hours, and when it cleared away Bountiful Island lay before us,
N.N.W. In the afternoon again becalmed. At sunset’ light N.W.
wind; Grassy Hill N.W. about seven miles.
This morning (11th) a few minutes before daylight I was suddenly
called to look at “ land close to the ship.” To the N.E. of the vessel
was a dark mass apparently close to us, the extremes on the horizon
being S.E. and N.W. There was a gentle breeze from the S.W., and
a heavy dew had been falling all night. A sandy beach was plainly
visible beneath the land, which appeared in peaks, and seemed to be
formed of mountains apparently 3,000 or 4,000 feet high. The an-
chor was ordered to be cleared immediately for letting go.
I now began to consider that there was’ no land in the gulf so ele-
vated. The land of Bountiful Island, near which we ought to be,
was not half so high as our mast-heads. When all at once, in the
midst of my deliberations, the mass began to ascend (it may have
been doing so before, but we did not perceive it), quickly changing
its outline and form, and as day dawned a sudden puff from the N.E.
passed over us, to which we reduced our canvas—its force, however,
was not more than three to four; some rain passed North of us, and
a light northerly wind put an end to the deception.
This is the third squall, with its strange accompaniment that we
have had. The phenomenon was extremely grand and was more im-
posing when assisted by the darkness of night. The dense body of
vapour, so exactly resembling lofty peaked land, and it was the dawn
of day in the East that gave the appearance of a sandy beach un-
derneath. However, no changes in barometer or thermometer, but a
heavy dew falling all the time, and it had been preceded by brilliant
meteors. The mass was gradually rolled up before the wind and
after passing the zenith settled down in the S.W. horizon, but small
particles of cloud, not connected with the main body, were exceed-
ingly agitated and quick in motion, flying about in all directions until
quietly dispersed by the light N.N.E. wind that ensued.
With the assistance of the ebb tide, setting North, we endeavoured
to get to windward against light and variable N.W. and N.E. winds;
but at eight we were compelled to anchor about six miles S.S.E. of


our old acquaintance, Bountiful Island, to avoid being- drifted to the
southward oy the flood tide, as our fate had been last night.
This was enough to try the patience of any one, interested or not.
On endeavouring to enter the gulf we had to contend with light S.E.
winds and calms. On going out we meet the reverse, light N.E, and
N.W. winds along with calms; our progress must therefore be tardy.
This evening we caught a dwarf male shark, eight feet in length.
He had no parasites on his liver. In his stomach were portions of
turtle, crabs, and other odds and ends, with a few circular gelatinous
perforated plates about the size of a shilling, —puzzling us amazingly
to account for them.
At daylight on the 12th we had a similar squall to that of yester-
day ; but, happening a few minutes later, it had not that imposing
appearance imparted to it by darkness that the previous one presented.
We were now close to Bountiful Island. The wind being light
and adverse, I landed and placed a notice on an elevated whitewashed
staff, one of the Torch’s late beacon-staffs, with her name cut deeply
on it, intended for Mr. Gregory and his party. It was to the effect
that we were in search of them; that, not having found them in the
Albert River, we were on our way to the Victoria; that water was
on Sweer Island, and that turtle were in abundance on this. While
thus employed, the boat’s crew turned and brought on board twenty-
one turtle without any difficulty. Having left the foregoing notice
of our visit, I had just time enough to visit the graves, of which I
had previously heard from one of the boat’s crew.
In the midst of a hard sandy patch of ground near the centre of
the island, we discovered the complete skeletons of five persons, who
appeared to have died the victims of starvation, after having been
cast away. They all lay in the same position with their heads to the
North, and it appeared no attempt had been made at forming a grave
for them, the drift sand having accumulated about the bodies—thus
Nature performed what man had left undone. They had no spears
or other weapons or any implements near them; a few turtle bones
and dead shells of the lialiotus and helix were in heaps about them.
The front teeth of the upper jaw were perfect in all, showing that
they were not natives of Australia. We concluded that they were pro-
bably a portion of the crew of the Malay proa, the remains of which we
found on Sweer Island, The North Australians generally bury their
dead in trees or caves, wrapped up in bark or matting, and with their
heads to the eastward, and have always some of their war or fishing
implements near them. These remnants of humanity were without
any of these forms of funeral ceremonies, and I directed them to be
carefully covered again with sand.
We returned on board at 10.30 a.m., and made sail to a light ad-
verse wind, having only the assistance of the ebb tide to the North
to help us along, and, as a variety in our day’s work, we caught an-
other shark, having in his stomach nineteen inches of the back-bone
of the shark taken yesterday, and a shoulder-bone of turtle.


As we drew to the northward by the morning- of the 14th our
prospects of leaving the gulf became a little brighter, for it brought
us a fresh and pleasant breeze from the eastward, which carried us
with it at the rate of two or three miles per hour; but, as usual, it
went down with the sun, and was followed by a light S.W. air.
We here availed ourselves of the opportunity of ascertaining the
transparency of the sea by means of a plate nine inches in diameter.
This was lowered, and was seen sixty-six feet below the surface,
exactly half the depth of water —twenty-three fathoms, sand and
mud. Scarcely was this completed when seven sharks were about us
at once. Two of them were hooked at a time ; one of which mea-
sured nine feet in length, and contained the usual meal in his stomach.
The thin perforated gelatinous plates before-mentioned, and which
had assumed such a contorted shape, were the vertebrae of the same
fish. A great quantity of oil was collected from the livers of the
two sharks we had killed (about two gallons each), which burned
well for ship’s purposes. The liver was merely allowed to remain in
a copper kettle in the sun, and was strained off into oil cans.
On the 17th we were again in new and unexplored waters; the
same vigilance commences as before; all eager to get a sight of
something new. The mast-head is constantly visited for any new
object on the horizon. A small porpoise was caught, the flesh of
which was very good and much sought after.
The wind commences further North, being first at N.E., and then
East as the sun mounts the sky, freshening as it approaches the meri-
dian, and gradually diminishing in force as it sets, and veering to
S.E., South, and, during- the night, to S.W., and sometimes W S.W.,
commencing again with the sun at N.E. and East in the morning.
On the 19th, we had fairly gained the region of the S.E. trades;
and at noon we were only sixty-three miles from Cape Wessel, which
was then bearing N. 60° W. At five we saw land, bearing N.W.,
distant about three or four miles. Sounded in 39 fathoms, coral, and
hauled up North until morning broke.
None of the charts having a positive sounding in the vicinity of
the cape within sixteen miles, that would indicate its vicinity to those
coming from the Eastward, I sounded round it on different bearings
and at the distance of four or five miles found irregular bottom, with
43 to 25 fathoms, coral, gravel, sand, and mud. These few will ne-
vertheless be a guide to ships shaping a course from Booby Island.
The island to which Cape Wessel belongs is - uniformly level, and
from forty to fifty feet high, with a perpendicular cliff on its N.E.
face. Small sandy bays indent the coast, and a clump of trees here
and there on its summit interrupt the regularity of its outline. On
the West side of the cape is a sandy bay, with a clean appearance,
offering anchorage. No natives nor smokes were seen, although the
late Adml. King discovered some in 1819.
In the voyage of the Beagle , vol. ii., p. 330, an error in the lati-
tude of the cape is attributed to its not having been seen at the dis-
tance of eleven miles. The cape is in its proper latitude, which I


found to be 10° 59' 7" South, and it was plainly seen at tlie distance
of seventeen miles and a half from the deck, hearing- then E.b.S. \S.
magnetic.
After obtaining my sights for a meridian distance, I steered a
course due West that would enable me to fill in a space where sound-
ings were necessary, and these were added to the chart.
In compliance with the terms under which the Torch was hired,
she was now made over for the present to her owner, Mr, Watson,
who had accompanied us, although I still continued to navigate her,
by which I was enabled to pass over blank spaces on the chart, with-
out occasioning any delay whatever to the vessel’s progress. The
Torch had been thirty days under sail, four under steam, in the gulf,
her expense being £732 to the Government.
On the 21st we found ourselves fourteen miles North of our latitude
at noon, and attributed it to rounding the vessel to the wind every
hour to sound. This I did not regret, as it gave me a broader line of
soundings, which were extremely regular, from 25 to 33 fathoms,
gradually increasing, the bottom soft mud. The current was there-
fore about 06m. per hour to the westward. lam led to think now,
although I have no direct observation to prove it, that the currents
partake more of tides, being to the Westward during the day, and to
the East during the night, the former being the stronger.
A brisk S.E. wind carried us along all night, with fine weather,
freshening occasionally, with all possible sail tor the Victoria River.
At noon on the 22iid, we found a trilling current to the Eastward
against us, and at 2h. p.m., we passed the entrance of Port Essing-
ton, a place associated with my early days in China, when its fame
spread among us, and its unhealthiness, compared even with that of
the African coast, was spoken of by every one who had friends con-
nected with that settlement. Great'discontent and internal bickerings
had made it more miserable than it really was.
I regretted much not being able to visit this oven, (as it is called
by some writers,) our former capital of North Australia, for an idea
has been lurking in my mind, that if Leichardt still exists, (which is
not at all probable,) this is the only possible place in which to find
him. He knew that he could find provisions there; he knew the
place, and he knew the way to it. It appears to me also that it is
probable, the vessel, or some portion of the expedition we are now in
search of, are there, if they have left the Victoria for the season be-
fore the N.W. monsoon commences.
Port Essington, as a harbour, is good and spacious; but as a set-
tlement, as a depot for steam communication, or a retreat for ship-
wrecked crews, it is ill adapted. For the first, it is unhealthy ! for
the second, it is out of the route; and for the latter it is 600 miles from
the general scene of such disasters. Moreover, Port Essington is ex-
posed to all the violent ravages of the N.W. monsoons, and receives
but a small proportion of the benefits of the fresh S.E, trades. It
was here H.M.S. Pelorus was fairly blown “ into the bush,” and
twelve brave fellows perished ! It was abandoned in 1849, and the


persons and stores removed by the Mceander , Capt. Hon. H. Keppel.
An interesting and detailed account of this “ unhappy and unfortunate
spot,” will be found in the first volume of the voyage of the Rattle-
snake, as well as in several numbers of the Nautical Magazine.
Such was the fourth attempt to form a settlement in North Aus-
tralia, all of which have failed! The fifth seems likely to be on
Albany Island, Cape York, admirably adapted for it, standing high,
and enjoying the full strength of the S.E. trades. What effect the
N. W. monsoon has on it, is not yet known; but steam communication
must pass within a mile of it, and it is in the immediate vicinity of
the shipwrecked!
At ten in the forenoon the high white cliffs of Melville Island bore
S.W., agreeing with the dead reckoning. The instant we were seen
smokes in all directions burst forth.
At noon, the North part of the sand spit was due West, and a good
meridian altitude gave the latitude 11° 5' 2" S.; it is placed in Capt.
Stokes’ chart in 11° 6', and in Capt. King’s 11° 4'. There has been
quite time for the sand to accumulate, (thirty-four years,) an effect
which is more than probable.
The cliffs on a S.W. bearing are white sand; but when they bore
South-Easterly, appeared red. On this latter bearing the sand' bank
was found to have extended fully a mile to the Eastward, the breakers
being considerably outside it.
Melville Island, in the vicinity of the cape, is moderately elevated,
about 100 feet, and densely wooded, having a face of regular sand
cliffs on its N.E. side, and a low red cliff a short distance to the East-
ward of the cape, which is a low sandy broken point. Point Piper,
the western part of the island, is a bold and nearly perpendicular
bluff.
This day the Torch again comes into my possession, having been
only three days from cape to cape, a distance of 370 miles, —a good
run for this latitude.
In the course of the night I was roused by a strange and most un-
accountable noise about the vessel. I have Ixeard the singing fish of
the East Indies, which adhere by suckers to vessels’ bottoms, and
keep up a continuous singing all night; but this, which was like the
noise of a boiling cauldron, was nothing like theirs. I attribute it
to an under stratum of current or tide ripple; but there was none ap-
parent on the surface: it lasted about three hours. Several of the
watch below obtained lanthorns, and went round to see where the
water was rushing into the ship. It was much more plainly heard
forward than aft, and only heard below. It was not unlike the trem-
bling of the ship when the water is about to boil in the boilers on
getting the steam up,*
* Might it not have been the effect of some internal commotion under-
ground, preparatory to an outburst of lava from a submarine volcano, for the
moderate depth the Torch was in would place her close over it ? All these
conditions are similar to those experienced by ships during earthquakes, and


I seldom went on deck with spirits more elevated than I did this
morning-, the 24th. A fine clear day, an “ Australian sunrise,” which
is so beautiful and still so short, a moderate breeze from the East-
ward, and the sea as smooth as Farm Cove, Sydney, with the pros-
pect of reaching the Victoria River in a couple of days. At noon we
had been set direct on our course S.W.b.S., twenty miles in eighteen
hours, since rounding the Mermaid Bank.
Towards the afternoon the wind gradually fell away, and also drew
ahead of us to South and S.W. I determined at once to get the
steam up, as we were but twenty-four hours’ steaming from the river,
and having apparently lost the S.E. trades, and with the warning of
the Albert River before us, making good sixty-five miles in five days.
The order for steam and floats was given, and before dark we had
all sails furled, and were steaming seven knots an hour, half speed,
against a light head wind.
On the morning of the 25th, with alternate feelings of hope and
despair in regard to finding Mr. Gregory, and in a dead calm, we
were progressing at the rate of seven knots per hour, and finding a set
of ten miles in sixteen hours against us, I was glad that I had come
to the conclusion of getting up steam, as we passed on merrily over
a sea covered apparently with sawdust.
But in the evening- finding a current evidently against us, we were
compelled to anchor for the night in 14 fathoms: after which, a
rocket and blue light were fired, in the hopes that our position would
be observed by Mr. Gregory’s party.
At daylight the next morning Point Pearce was East about
and a half miles, when we made for it; but from the indistinctness of
the outline, and the haze over the land, it was difficult to make out
any feature. Passed through the race off the S.W. point, and found
3 fathoms, one less than found by the Beagle (when the cliff bore
N.E.)
-It was at this point that Capt. Stokes, of the Beagle, received a
spear wound from a treacherous party of natives, which nearly proved
fatal, while obtaining observations, on December 7th, 1839.
We passed round the bay in the Torch as nearly as we could, and
carefully as well as eagerly examined every tree and log which would
bear a mark of our people'; (it was here they first landed, in Septem-
ber, 1855;) but not yet could we discover a vestige of them. I
therefore bore up for the Victoria River. No natives were to be seen
with whom I could communicate. They of course had fled at first
sight of our vessel rushing through the water without the aid of sail,
smoking- like an Australian bush fire, and leaving, besides a tail of
smoke, a long boiling bubbling wave behind her. They were sur-
prised at seeing the Beagle, what would they think of the Torch !
We steered S. \ E. for the entrance of the river, passing close to
it is even recorded that the effect of the great earthquake at Lisbon was felt
on board ship far away at sea—those on board imagining that it was immedi-
ately beneath them.—Ed.


the S.E. end of the Mermaid Bank, carrying 8 to 10 fathoms, with
some casts of no bottom all the way. When Table Hill and Fossil
Summit were in one, I sounded closely to ascertain if the Beagle's
end oi the bank extended further. But no less water than 8 fathoms
were obtained j it was then half ebb tide.
noon we entered the Victoria River, between two small dry
sand banks. And it is a curious fact, and one that did not pass un-
noticed by us, that the Torch should be the first steamer to enter this
river, and that too on the anniversary of the natal day of her most
gracious Majesty’s Royal Consort, the river likewise bearing the illus-
trious name of u Victoria.” The Torch of course was dressed in all
her colours, and at noon a royal salute, the first that found echoes
among the mountains of this stream, pealed forth, with cheers from
the loyal and devoted subjects of her Majesty embarked in her.
These ceremonies were followed by others in due course, and our
hopes had fairly overcome our fears that a few hours would bring’ us
to those we were anxiously in search of. Alas! how little did we
think that all our joys would soon be annihilated! that what now
was full of joyful promise was in a few minutes to be turned to
cheerless, hopeless despondency. '
As we entered the river the thermometer in the sun was 130°, in
the engine-room 118°, and in the stoke-hole 134°. Snags, medusae,
pelicans, and all the uninteresting and muddy portion of the river
wei ® P as f a^on B’ w ifh Quoin Island ; but when we reached the
sanc y' )an k °ff Observation Island it was most difficult to tell where
the channel really was. However, by keeping near the sand-bank
we carried three fathoms with us, altering course to the best of our
judgment. We were fairly within the river, and every reach as it
became presented to us elicited a general exclamation of u What a
lovely river!” and the Victoria really is a noble river.
Entrance Island came in view, which, together with the opposite
shore, assumed the appearance of ruined fortifications. Huge blocks
0 j eddish sandstone presented themselves, standing one upon another
and forming regular sides of a fractured edifice, looking more like
the work of man than that of Nature at some not very distant period.
1 was tracing closely all these natural curiosities with my glass,
when, lo !it fell on a mark! The truth rushed on my mind in an
instant Gregory was gone ! His vessel had left the river—all our
extorts useless ! The orders to port the helm hard, bring ship to an
anchor, and lower away the galley, were obeyed as quickly as they
were given.
I landed on the North point of Entrance Island and found, to my
mortification, the following notice:—
Victoria River, July, 1856.
The schooner Tom Tough, attached to the North Australian Ex-
pedition, passed down the river this day on her voyage to Timor, and
thence to the Albert River, in the Gulf of Carpentaria, where she
will meet Mr. Gregory. On her passage up in September last she
F


grounded on a bank of rocks above Skoal Reach, and, drifting to the
sands above Curiosity Peak, did noG finally clear them for twenty-
eight days, or to about the end of October, when she proceeded up
the river to the camp, which had been formed on the 13th about ten
miles below Steep Head, on the western side. From this camp Mr.
Gregory made one trip up the river in portable boats and two jour-
neys by land: in the last of which he penetrated to 20 18_S., and
has now started with part of the expedition for the Albert River.
During the detention of the schooner at the camp her frame was
strengthened and damages partially repaired by Captain Gourlay;
and on leaving it she was laid on a suitable bank near the Dome,
caulked, and repairs completed. , T i „
Six of the crew were disabled for some time by sickness and Jolm
Finlay, the Carpenter, died April the 22nd, 1855 [?6]. His grave
is near the bank on which the vessel lay, and from a gouty stem tree
near it, with head board and inscription, the following bearings were
taken: the Dome, W.N.W. ; the Valley, N.N.W.; the points of the
Table Hill, N.|E. and N.E.
The detachment of the expedition on board left camp on the 2nd
of this month and joined the schooner below the shoals, with the
Dome E.N.E., ten miles. __ T , , ,
Wood was taken in from the point on the North, and water from
the bight' about three miles on the other side. The well, which is
uncovered only at three-quarters ebb, bears from the Dome W.b.fe.,
and from Curiosity Peak W.N.W. A cask has been sunk. Boats
may be laid alongside in the soft mud, and 300 gallons of water
filled in each tide. ,
Letters have been buried in the forge and oven, at the camp, and
the places indicated by inscriptions on the trees.
F T. T. Baines, N. A. Expedition.
While reading this notice, disappointment, with all its tram of
withering sensations, were gradually creeping through me . Sixteen
thousand long miles had I come at an hour s notice, after being i:
England only three weeks, to perform this service, and heie was e
result! To repine was useless, and the next thought was oui fu me
disposal. The Tom Tough was gone to Timor, Gregory to the Al-
bert River, one month since. I was two months at Sydney, and was
now to return home, having effected no earthly good.
On returning on board my plan would have been to proceed at
once out of the river for Timor; but there was no chance of seeing
Gregory there, and letters, according to the notice, having been let
at the camp, it appeared to me better to obtain those destined for
England, to take home. So we passed the remainder of the day m
sober meditations on the short sightedness of poor hiiman na ure anc
moralising on our want of luck. This being, as I have e oie no
ticed, the birthday of our illustrious Prince, we had even prepared a
good dinner for Gregory and his associates; there were the ten turtle
in fine order, too, which were ready for them at Bountirul Islan .


On the 27th, at daylight, we proceeded up the river for water, and
moored in Holdfast Bay, in the same position occupied by the Beagle
sixteen years since. Seven natives, having made their “ coey,” fol-
lowed us for some distance.
All hands searched in vain for the wells dug by the Beagle; but
we found two water holes about a mile from the beach, which sup-
plied plenty of good water. 1
In the course of our search for water we discovered the a play-
house,” as it is termed, of the interesting Bower Bird. It is a rare
and beautiful specimen of this little artist of Nature’s own teaching.
The work consists of a number of twigs of the same size, being
placed by it with their larger ends in the mangrove mud, their upper
and smaller ends being brought together neatly, so as to form a com-
plete bower. This done, the bird (chlamydera nuchalis) then amuses
itself by flying to and fro with a shell in its beak, always carefully
depositing it at the entrance of the bower, then flying off for another
and another, and, as if to store it, bringing’ seeds or anything orna-
mental it meets with and placing them also with much care at the
entrance of the bower, but always passing through it in the course
of its work. Our speculations about this being the nest of the bird
were soon at an end, by discovering that the bower was below high
water of spring tides.
Many of the natives were now seen on the opposite bank of the
river lighting fires with ruthless destruction. We saw them also
blazing over many miles of country, and considered their doing so
was to “ burn us out,” as is their custom. •
All hands were employed wooding and watering; in the course of
which they found a tree with the following interesting inscription on
it:—“ This river was discovered by the officers of H.M.S. Beagle,
on the 18th of October, 1839, and was named the “ Victoria River,”
in honour of her Majesty the Queen of England.” Near it two
water holes were found, which are no doubt the Beagle’s wells.
We found the tides were regular and very strong’, the ebb running’
seven hours, the flood five.
Next morning, before daylight I started with a whale-boat’s crew,
accompanied by the Second Officer, to visit the late camp and to
search for letters left there by Gregory, taking with us provisions
sufficient for five days.
We had gone many miles before daylight showed us where we
were, and the scenery by which we were surrounded was truly grand.
Every mountain top presented the appearance of a naturally inacces-
sible fortress. The river stream was rushing’ onwards in u bores,” and
hurrying our boat rapidly on its bosom, sometimes indeed rendering it
quite unmanageable. How readily might a fertile mind consider this
as emblematic of those happy moments of the sunny days of life
which rush from us, and which no sooner come than they are gone !
But we had no time for comparisons. Before the tide had turned
down we found we had thus gone over fifty miles. We accordingly
landed, and commenced our search, with the hours of daylight left, in


the spot indicated by the notice, namely, ten miles below Steep Head.
But we could find nothing’, not a trace of the camp in all the places
that we searched, through which people could only enter by openings
in the mangroves. At sunset we looked out for a camp for the night,
and hauled our boat on a flat rock where there was hut two feet rise
and fall. The thermometer in the sun was 125°.
Next morning having determined to proceed as far as Steep Head,
we examined every spot on both sides of the river for the camp.
After a hurried breakfast, and when rounding the lower portion of
Long Reach to the S.E., discovered the camp before us. But it was
six miles below Steep Head and not ten. It looked like an English
farm-yard, abounding in thatched houses, huts, sheep-pens, horse-
sheds, forge, &c. ; and the place, too, was well selected for a camp.
We landed on a pier made of large stones and pigs of ballast; and
as we proceeded in our road lay iron hoops, rope, tubs, buckets, old
clothes, Indian corn, old boots and shoes, pieces of harness, and a
pair of Mr. J. Wilson’s new flannel inexpressible linings shall I call
them; and we arrived at the Oven, in the interior of which, protected
by four iron pigs of ballast, we discovered a bottle, containing a no-
tice to the following effect.
Camp, Victoria River.
On Saturday, 21st of June, 1856, the exploring party of the North
Australian Expedition, consisting of seven persons, (as under,) left
this camp on their way to the Albert River, in the Gulf of Carpen-
taria; and on Wednesday, July the 2nd, the remainder (as under)
finally abandoned the camp and proceeded down the river to join the
schooner Tom Tough , which had dropped down to Shoal Reach about
three months previously.
The vessel will sail as speedily as possible for Timor, whence, after
obtaining supplies, she will proceed to the Albert River, and the de-
tachment of the Expedition on board will form camp and await the
arrival of Mr. Gregory.
Subsequent information will be left on Entrance Island.
Exploring Party: —A. C. Gregory, Commander; H, C. Gregory;
Dr, E. Mueller; J. R. Elsey; R. Bowman; C. Dean; J. Melville;
and thirty-four horses.
Onboard: —T, Baines; J. S. Wilson; J. Flood; G. Phibbs; C.
Humphrey; J. Fahey; H. Richards; J. McDonald; W. Dawson;
F. Showel, and J. Selby.
John Finlay, carpenter of the schooner, died April 22nd, 1856, and
is buried near a gouty stem tree.
Tuesday Evening Is* of July. —The finder of this document will
greatly oblige the Expedition by giving it every publicity, and, if
possible, by forwarding it to his Excellency the Governor of New
South Wales, or any other of the Australian Colonies that may be
convenient.
T T. BAINES.


After perusing- this information, we went to the Forge, where ano-
ther paper was found buried, containing a similar notice. We then
passed an hour at the Camp, admiring all the arrangements. It con-
sisted of seven thatched houses, three huts, some sheds for cattle, and
sheep pens, two deep and good wells, and an entrenchment all round.
No natives had been near the place since the party had left it. A
road was cut several miles in a S.S.E. direction as straight as an ar-
row. Before leaving I sat down at Gregory’s table and penned a
notice to leave there, small as was the prospect of its being ever
found. But it related our arrival, object, and intention; and then
proceeded to place the papers in security for the next visitor. The
boat’s crew meanwhile having dined, had discovered a small pot of
black paint, and were amusing themselves by painting some facetious
notices outside the doorways, and a board would inform the visitor
that at the u Victoria Hotel ” Good Beds would be found, besides
Ginger Beer and Refreshments. But it was acknowledged to me
that a person had actually to his disappointment, made his fortune at
the Diggings by selling ginger beer.
After filling our water casks at Gregory’s well, we commenced our
descent of the river.
Although the scenery around was magnificent, and would have
attracted the attention of the voyag’er, I could find no interest in it.
My mind was entirely absorbed in the movements of Gregory’s party
and my own disappointments; and to my discredit as it may be na-
ture had no charms for mei
We hauled the boat up at dark on a sandy tongue of land in Long
Reach, and were compelled to burn fires all round us to keep off the
swarms of musquitoes and flies that infested us. At our dinner we
had actually to put our great coats on and turn the collars up to keep
off these interminable pests. But all this was of little avail. They
found the way to give us a sleepless night, one of continual torment
instead of rest. The men suffered on that nig’ht who had never felt a
musquito. In the morning, as might be expected, we scarcely knew
each other. Our faces, eyes, and hands, were fearfully swollen, —
and, without waiting for breakfast, we made off for the centre of the
stream, by which in some degree we managed to avoid our tormentors.
As we were hurried down the river by the ebb, it presented at low
water a far different appearance to that which it had done; —all the
extensive mud flats scarcely leaving us a channel to proceed through.
On these flats we saw the stately black and white ibis, with his
red legs; and also a few pelican, but we were too weary to think of
our guns.
On Musquito Flat we intended to have dined; but the moment the
boat touched the shore we were assailed by such a host of musquitoes
that we thought it wiser to haul off and take refuge at anchor in the
river. At this anchorage I had the misfortune to lose my gun over-
board by accident irrevocable, for the tide was too rapid and the
water too muddy to attempt to recover it. Here also the chrono-
meter was thrown nff the compass-box, the effect of which was to


break the balance spring and glass, and to add to my misfortunes,
which it is well known never come singly, while using the pocket
chart of the river, that I had treasured much, a sudden puff of wind
blew it overboard. This Musquito Flat had brought us nothing but
a series of disasters.
Having anchored to the flood so as not to lose ground, at 2h. a.m.
on Sunday morning the ebb commenced and we again started; but
I had no chart to guide me, and had to guess our way, when sud-
denly, in the midst of the stream, we were stopped by land, of which
I knew nothing. The tide was rushing rapidly by, and I recollected
there was a rise and fall of 20 feet, and that we passed this place at
high water. We therefore proceeded slowly until daylight showed
us a steep sand bank, far over our heads, on part of which we man-
aged to land.
The tides had now become very rapid, on the change of the moon,
and it was impossible to cross them except at slack water, which was
almost instantaneous, for the moment the one tide ceased the other
commenced.
At length we arrived on board completely knocked up ; not having
seen a single native. Their fires, however, and the howling of the
dogs at night, had proved to us that they were not far off. The
thermometer had been at noon of each day consecutively 125°, 116°,
and 134'5°, And it was with no satisfaction that I found the men
were so fatigued that it would not be prudent to attempt removing;
five were on the sick list with fever, dysentery, inflamed eyes, and
rheumatism.
When the tide slacked we unmoored with difficulty; and after some
round turns and twistings by the tide, which took great liberties with
my Torch , we pursued our course down the entrance of the river.
The heat was so excessive to day, and the evaporation so great,
that the backs of all my books parched and curled up; a box-wood
ruler lying on my table warped three eighths of an inch in twenty-
four inches ; a box-wood thermometer, three eighths of an inch thick,
warped one tenth, threatening to break the glass tube, which fortu-
nately had a little play.
At sunset on the 2nd, we anchored between Entrance Island and
Indian Head, where I at once sent a boat to place a notice our of
proceedings and intended movements.
While at dinner, the vessel took a shear with the flood tide, the
chief officer having omitted to stopper the cable after veering: and
before she could be brought up, 70 fathoms of chain had run out,
which placed the vessel in a most dangerous situation, only a ship’s
length from the sunken rocks off the North end of Entrance Island.
In this position, if we had hove in, even with the steam up, she would
have broken her shear and gone on the rocks; our only chance was
to wait until slack water and save the anchor. A man was therefore
kept at the helm to ease her, and I remained anxiously watching her
movements. The tide was running six or seven knots flood.
At llh. p.m. the tide slacked, and after a long and tedious heave


the anchor was up, and we steamed closer under Indian Head, bear-
ing South, (magnetic,) where the anchor was let go for the night
This occurrence prevented my visiting Indian Head, where I had
hoped to see Gapt. Stokes relic of his voyage, and leave one in its
place for the next visitors.
Early in the morning of the 3rd of September, 1856, we left our
anchoi age on the mouth of the Victoria, to ensure having hi°'h water
on the Flat with the highest tide, (the third after the change,) with
which 1 concluded we should go over any part of it; but off Observa-
tion Island we unfortunately grounded immovably. The tide had
fallen three feet in a few minutes; but we had shored her and pre-
vented her falling over. We watched the tide falling foot by foot
until it left her keel seven feet above low water mark. Indeed it
seemed as if there would not be sufficient to float her off until the
following springs. The Torch had never been on shore before in the
course of this voyage, and we had the poor consolation of knowing
that this bank had accumulated, since Capt. Stokes’ visit and survey
from a quarter fathom below the level of low water spring tides to
seven feet above it. i &
Every proper measure was adopted for her safety, and we waited
patiently for the tide to rise, counting the minutes and watching its
progress from the time it commenced to flow, which was at 6h. p.m.
It rose twelve feet in two hours, when the ship rose from her bed
and off she went, and we soon let go the anchor in seven fathoms to
wait for daylight.
The bearings of this new portion of Australia arelndian Head,
River p eak, S. 49° E., nearly on with South extreme
of Observatory Island; North extreme of Observatory Island, S. 68° E •
Dome, S. 83° E.; left extreme of same range, N.'?o° E • ria-ht ex-
treme of high land, S 23° W., two hillocks. Ship’s head,° N.W.
Deviation, 6° 30' W. Variation of the compass, 1° IF easterly
On leaving- our anchorage the next morning (4th September) at
daylight we found she had gone four miles after being afloat instead
of one, as intended,—a fact that will show the strength of the tides
and how entirely a ship is at their mercy, an evil, indeed, which was
very nearly the cause of running on shore again. But we now
shaped our course for Timor over a space left blank in the chart
being desirous of connecting- the soundings of Captain Stokes with
those of the French, as well as those of Captain King, as far as the
Pn-eat oanul Shoal. Being calm and under steam, we were enabled
to do this closely and correctly. The soundings were regular, from
twenty to sixty fathoms, generally coral, sand, and green mud, with
sometimes broken shells, showing no dang-er or irregularity in the
track.
The wind being light from S.W., steam was indispensable; but sail
w as made, and we ran 150 miles, by patent log-, in twenty-four hours.
I was indeed glad at finding myself once more in deep water, and
although there was a little anxiety in passing through an unexplored
sea, yet, being clear, it was preferable by far to the muddy waters
G


of the Carpentaria Gulf, with an atmosphere that always deceived
the eye. We bade our final adieu to Australia, having taken the
last walk on ground that no loot had ever pressed.
At sunset on the 7th September the lofty range of Timor Hills
were in view. So accustomed had we been to seeing low land that
we could hardly reconcile ourselves to elevating our eyes to look for
it so high j hut at daylight the high mountains of Timor were again
before us, and soon after the island of Rottie ; through which straits
we passed at noon without a chart to guide us!
It was scarcely dark on the evening of the next day when we
rounded the point which opened Koepang Roadstead, allowing us
sufficient daylight to see the way to the anchorage.
In the bay were at anchor the Sultana, English ship, preparing lor
Hongkong, from Sydney the I2th August; also the English whaler
Mary, hound to England, two small schooners, and some coasters.
Soon after we anchored in 5| fathoms, the flagstaff on the Eort
Concordia hearing S. 20° E.
The hoarding-boat came alongside and we learnt that the Tom
Tough had been here and sailed for Sourabaya, having been con-
demned as unseaworthy. Thus has our visit here been successful;
we have a clue at last to the expedition, which appears to be scat-
tered and disorganized.
We found Koepang very healthy, although universally admitted
as a sickly spot. The houses were all newly whitewashed and painted,
and the streets very clean; Fort Concordia particularly so, but not of
any great strength. For the half hour that I was waiting for a
despatch from the resident to Sourabaya, I rambled up one side of
the river and down the other, through groves of cocoa-nuts, bananas,
bamboos, and tamarind trees, and was surprised at the contrast it
presented to the parched and arid land we were only within a few
miles of, —Australia! I visited the Chinese joss-house, and was par-
ticularly struck with the neatness of the small shops, kept mostly by
Chinese, but most exorbitant in their prices, asking four or five times
as much for a thing as they would really let you have it for. I pur-
chased a few curiosities made from bamboos, cocoa-nut shells, &c.,
and got them for half the sum demanded.
Chewing the beetle-nut is carried to a great extent among the
Malays. In every man’s mouth a huge roll of tobacco is seen pro-
truding, the process of chewing being as follows. The Malay first
bites off an inch of the beetle-fruit, then he places a, leaf in his mouth,
with a quarter of a beetle-nut, a little chinam or lime about the size
of a pea (moistened), and, lastly, a roll of tobacco about the size of a
wallnut. All these are then chewed together, the lime or chinam
giving the whole a deep red appearance. Sometimes the tobacco is
kept outside the teeth, and the juice of the beetle-nut, &c., oozes
through it. Therefore five ingredients are necessary to make up the
delicious mouthful which the Malay enjoys in chewing the beetle-nut.
Among the notes which I made while here are the following: —
A great quantity of bee’s-wax is lying in front of the custom-house.


Gold is found still in the running’ streams and in mud adjacent to
the mountains.
Public companies, as well as private ones, are forming- for the
growth of coffee and for working the copper mines with which Timor
abounds.
From the peculiar and unusual dryness of this season all the crops
of maize and rice throughout the islands have failed.
The only British merchant residing here is Mr. Drysdale, from
whom supplies of all sorts can be obtained. He has a' small vessel
constantly running to Sourabaya, Ac. Mr Tielman, son of an old
and much esteemed merchant, still resides here.
There is steam communication between Batavia and this place every
twenty-eight days. This would be an advantageous way of connect-
ing our steam postal arrangements to Sydney.
The rise and fall of water during the” S.E. trade is eight feet; and
during the N.W. monsoon twelve feet.
Koepang is densely and luxuriantly wooded, and the geological
face of the rocky projections forming the bays consists of limestone
and coral (recent). Coal, wood, and water in abundance.
In the afternoon of the 10th of December, the wind being off the
land, we left Koepang for Sourabaya, in company with the barque
Mary (whaler).
At daylight on the 15th the South part of Balie Island was in
sight, light S.E. wind. The next morning proceeded through Balie
Straits; and in the evening’ of the 17th, with just sufficient light to
find our way through the shipping, we anchored in the roads of Pas-
sarang, in seven fathoms, among nine Dutch vessels.
At daylight the next morning a pilot came off, and we proceeded
for Sourabaya, anchoring at llh. a.m. off the dockyard. In the har-
bour were twenty-six vessels of all nations, as well as one Dutch
frigate, a screw corvette, three paddle-wheel steamers, a brig, and the
old Dotterel packet, now called the Java. The Tom Tough was
here, condemned, and I handed over the Torch to her owners.
During my stay at Sourabaya I visited the iron and steam foundry,
the steam dock, and two sugar fabrics in the interior, and find the
following notes in my journal:—
The former, the government steam factory, is on a very extensive
and solid scale, conducted with g’ood order and arrangement, having
300 to 400 workmen, principally Malays, with a few European
leaders, carrying on a brisk work for all the sugar-mills and steam-
vessels, The different turning, planing, and drilling lathes are driven
by a neat eight horse power engine. The steam-hammer, furnaces,
&c., are all perfect, but what most attracts the eye is the pattern loft
and the mouldings, the latter throwing the castings out clean and
finished as if by hand. This is done entirely by Malays, who take a
great fancy to this work, preferring it to the manual part. They are
possessed of much patience and ingenuity, and are considered neat
and good workmen. They do not require looking after or watching;
give them a job and it is done. There were not more than 250 at


work at the time of my visit, it being; their marrying- month. They
were taking advantage of it; newly married couples were met every
five minutes in the streets, guarded by crowded and gaudy pro-
This factory does the late superintendent (Mr. Bennett) much
credit The wages of the Malays is from eightpence to fourteen-
pence per day, according to their ability. There are smaller private
factories equally as effective, but not on so extensive a scale, iwo
small iron steamers of sixty horse power have been built here.
The dockyard is neatly built. The wet dock is capable of accom-
modating about twenty vessels of various sizes from 100 to 800 tons.
Each basin is surrounded by all necessary conveniences,—shears,
sheds, &c. A floating dry dock, with a forty horse power engine, and
a patent slip, both under iron sheds, are also to be found.
Every morning between daylight and 7h. a.m. the yaid is alive
with the drums and fifes of the marines and blue jackets performing
their evolutions and marching round for the benefit of their health,
under the direction of the lieutenant of the guard.
The vessels in dock are a 26-gun frigate, the guard-ship, the Mon-
trado (screw), Vesuvius, Etna, a brig, and another paddle-wheel
vessel Two of the vessels are; unfit for sea. The water m the dock
is very shoal, and the guard-ship, at its entrance, grounds every tide.
There is also a powerful steam dredge constantly at work, and the
mud is taken away in small boats and assists to build the banks of
the Kalimas River. .
The sugar fabrics are well worth a visit. I went fifteen miles into
the country to see one at work, and, it being the first I had seen, was
much interested. The cane is so rich that it produces seventy-five
p- T cent. The country was beautifully luxuriant. The roads, level
and in excellent order, are bounded on either side by lofty tamarind
trees forming an arch overhead which shaded the road, and which
extends for upwards of 700 miles East and West through Java. I
was assured that the revenue of this island alone more than pays the
interest of the national debt of Holland. It is indeed a lovely island.
I regretted not being able to visit the Blue Waters and the Land
Sea near Passourau; objects of great interest and curiosity.
The water frontage of Sourabaya is fast filling up. Where vessels
of some tonnage once anchored a boat will now scarcely float, and
by and by we shall see the town surrounded by an extensive mud
C The rich island of Madura forms the passages to the anchorage,
the eastern one having sixteen feet water, the "North twenty-three
feet; the latter protected by a fort. r ,
On the 4th of October I started in the Dutch steamer King of the
Netherlands for Batavia and Singapore. It was strange that this
steamer I should have once picked up m distress off the South coast
of Australia, and took her into King George Sound. _
We called at Samarang next day at noon, and having a lew houis
to remain, I ran on shore and found the place superior to Sourabav a.


A gunboat lay at the mouth of the river, or rather gutter, and twenty-
two ships were at anchor in the roads.
Early next morning we steamed for Batavia, where we arrived on
the 7th in the morning. Here were at anchor the Boreas, Dutch
corvette, and many sail of merchant ships, principally Dutch.
While at Batavia, on landing the mob had scarcely dispersed from
before the court-house after witnessing the execution of two Chinese
for poisoning seven persons. One, a person possessed of immense
wealth, had bribed the other, also a Chinese, to poison the fathers,
husbands, and brothers in order to obtain their daughters, wives, or
sisters. He had succeeded with his seventh victim, when he was
found out, and, with his accomplice, suffei’ed the extreme penalty of
the law. Hanging is of rare occurrence here and consequently drew
together many thousands, chiefly Chinese.
I visited the hydrographical office, one of the largest, most ancient,
and substantial buildings in Batavia. Here I had the pleasure of the
acquaintance of Mr. P. M. Collard, the leader of the department and
a lieutenant of marine. He said he much regretted that the many
additions made to hydrography in these seas, the addition of lights,
buoys, beacons, and the discovery of new dangers, were not published
for long periods after their being communicated, and when the in-
terest, novelty, and importance attached to them had passed away.
At Onrust’lsland, a few miles from the roads of Batavia, a dock
has just been completed, under the superintendence of Lieutenant
Melville, capable of docking a vessel of large burden, lam sorry to
add that when we left Batavia this young and clever officer was on
his death bed.
On the 11th left Batavia for England but before I could embark
I had to proceed to the assistant-resident’s office and pay 2| rupees
for my passport out of the country, I thought this strange, but it
was the “ custom of the country,”






