

m : m * " ■ I
■P'


k •


VOYAGE
OF THE
BOAT “PACIFIC’'
FROM
SAN FRANCISCO TO AUSTRALIA.
BERNARD GILBOY.,
’Tis come at last, the hour to part,
And leave the land behind ;
My glorious boat strains on the start,.
Her flag flaps in the wind.
Then up, true friends and spirits brave,
And watch the swelling sail;
For, 0, there’s life upon the wave—
Hail, boundless Ocean, hail! — J. S. Moore .
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
j|j|hnFjj:
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER, 26 JAMISON STREET.
1 8 83.




3 3SS/f 9?/o
PREFACE.
In publishing the within “ Log,” taken on my voyage
from San Francisco to Australia, I am simply acceding to
the request of the many friends I have met both in Queens-
land and New South Wales. And as I think that my
readers will be interested in the exact state of mind of a
human being tossed on the raging ocean, and “out of
humanity's reach,” I have furnished the precise words as
entered, day by day, without any embellishment. I
include a few lines, extracted from Sydney Punch, of
February 17th, the writer of which grasped my innermost
feelings and position.
B.GK
Sydney, April 21st, 1883.


GILBOY’S JOURNEY FROM AMERICA TO AUSTRALIA,
From Sydney Punch, February 17, 1883,
Alone on the raging ocean, alone In my craft I ride,
Alone on the foaming billows, in all their crested pride,
No man before hath ventured, alone, so far to sail ;
Nor mind hath ever yet conceived a ship so small, so frail.
The heavenly firmament above ; beneath, the sea’s expanse,
With none but cruel fiends around, doth my “ Pacific ” dance.
In wreck no helping hand to save, no friendly comrade near,
No messmate by to feast or starve, no human voice to cheer.
For God above, who watches all, kept watch o’er poor Gilboy.
n / / u .a* Jr
M. J. F.
For many months I’ve travelled ’midst fair winds, calms, and storms,
Through miles of watery desert, I’ve braved all peril's forms ;
I’ve fought the great sea monsters, IVe dared the tempest’s frown ;
I’ve felt myself a mighty king—heaven’s halo for my crown.
But when Old Christmas came around—l well knew day and date—
Provisions gone, my heart sank low, I feared to meet my fate ;
I thought of loving ones at home, aye, starving on the deep,
I jealous wished that some dear one, my lonely death would weep.
I thought of boyhood’s joys and pains, in turn I laughed and cried,
I thought of her I loved and lost, I cowered low and sighed ;
I.thought my mother long since dead, would see me on the morrow,
And pensive steered I knew not where, my heart was full of sorrow.
0 yes, grim visaged death did seem, my very soul to stare,
And hope, sweet hope did wrestle wild, with nature’s dread despair - f
And being weak I slept awhile, slept to wake to joy,


VOYAGE OF THE BOAT “PACIFIC”
FROM SAN FRANCISCO TO AUSTRALIA.
Haying had considerable experience in sailing small boats,
in heavy seaways, and reading accounts, at different times,
of voyages across the Atlantic, I became somewhat in-
terested in such adventures, and more especially in that of
Captain Johnson, the only man that ever crossed the
Atlantic alone ; his boat was loft, keel, beam and 28in.
deep, I finally made up my mind to make a voyage
in the Pacific, to Australia, in as small a boat as I thought
would be possible to hold provisions enough "for a five
months’ voyage. Taking advantage of what I had read
of the' experience of other voyagers, with my own, I made
arrangements with Messrs. Burns and Kneass, of San
Francisco, to build a boat expressly for the voyage. Length
of boat to be 18ft. overall; beam 6ft.; depth, 2ft. 6in.;
with a water-tight partition about 6ft. from the after
end of the boat; keel, 5 inches (measuring If ton); to be
decked over, having two hatches. Where the masts shipped
there were water-tight boxes, so that they could be un-
shipped at any time, and no water could get into the boat.
The after compartment was about 6ft. long, with a hatch
in the centre. On each side I had lockers fitted ; in one I


used to keep my sextant, books, &c; ;■ in the other I
used to keep what provisions I would have aft, as I had
to take provisions enough from the fore compartment to
last about a week. The boat was launched on Friday,
Aug. 3rd, 1882. I started to work to get her ready for sea
as soon as possible, as I intended to get off before the 15 th
of the month, if I could manage to do so- ; but it was the-
17th before I had everything ready for sea. I then up
anchor, and sailed down the bay to the Clay-street wharf, in-
tending to get a clearance from the .Custom House, and
sail that afternoon, as the tide would ebb about four o’clock.
Up to this time I had. not made known my intentions to
any but a few intimate friends, as I wanted to got off as
quiet as possible; although a great' many were anxious to
know what I intended to do with the boat ? to which I gener-
ally answered that I intended to take a cruise outside the
heads, which is a common expression for the entrance to
San Francisco Bay. My reason for acting in this way was —
First of all it was getting rather late in the season to
start off the Coast, in a small boat deeply laden, so I could
not spare the time to go outside the bay on a trial trip.
Therefore I did not know how the boat would act in a
heavy sea. I thought that if I made known my intention
of starting on a voyage to Australia, and getting a large
crowd to see me off, they might have the pleasure of read-
ing a full account in the morning papers of my return for
repairs or refitting.
I made the boat fast alongside of the wharf, and went
to the Custom House. There I found that L would have-
to get her measured to see what tonnage she was. As
she was laden, and in the water, I was told to get her di-
mensions from the builders, and take them to the Marine


Surveyor, and he would give me her tonnage ; then Mr.
Jerome, Deputy-Collector, would give me a clearance—to
certify that the boat was American built, and it would an-
swer also to certify that 1 had sailed from San Francisco. As
it was then 3 p.m. —closing hour for the Custom House—l
had to give up the idea of sailing that day, so I secured the
boat for the night, and then went to the hotel, had a good
sleep, and started next morning to get the boat’s dimen-
sions from the builders, and clearance from the Custom
House. I succeeded, and was ready for sea as soon as the
tide was favorable —which was about 1 p.m.
The boat was very deep in the water, being loaded
with 14 ten-gallon casks, filled with water ; one hundred
and sixty-five pounds of bread, in fifteen pound tin cans
(air tight) two dozen roast beef in two and-a-half pound
cans; two dozen roast chicken, in one pound cans;
two dozen roast salmon, in one pound cans ; two dozen
one pound cans of boneless pigs-feet; two dozen cans of
peaches; two dozen cans of milk ; one box containing
twenty-five pounds of cube sugar; one gross of matches,
packed in a half dozen glass jars ; one half gallon of alco-
hol, in a druggist’s glass jar ; four cans of nut oil—two
and-a-half gallons in a can; five gallon can of kerosene
oil; three pounds of coffee and two pounds of tea, in five
tin cans; one bar of Castille soap ; three pounds of nails ;
one wooden pump ; 12ft. of half-inch hose, which I used as
a syphon to fill the kegs, or get water out of them, one
grains, hammer and hatchet; paper, copper tacks; kero-
sene oil stove ; alcohol pocket stove ; two lamps; one pound
of parafine candles ; two compasses, barometer and sex-
tant ; patent taff-rail log; double barrelled shot gun,
powder and shot, revolver and cartridges; clock and


watch; nine knives, anchor and sea drag, with about forty
fathoms of l£in. rope; some spare marline amber-line, and
marline-spike; navigation books, sheet chart of the South
Pacific; an American flag; clothing necessary for the
voyage; two pounds of lard ; 1 pair of twelve feet oars ;
and an umbrella, which I found very handy when the wind
was light and the sun strong.
I managed to find room for all, after a great deal of
trouble, but had none to spare ; and, in fact, I w r as some-
what cramped for a place to sleep, but consoled myself
with the idea if I kept my usual good health, with a hearty
appetite, that there would be room enough in due time ;
and so there was.
Friday, August 18th (noon). Went down to the boat;
it was then nearly high water. Started to prepare for going
to sea ; quite a large crowd had gathered on the wharf ;
one of them asked, “Where I was bound for ?” I an-
swered “Australia,” which caused quite a surprise. I
next was asked, “If I intended to go alone, and when I
had determined to start?” I answered “As I was then ready
I would start right away, and try it alone.” One of the
crowd warned me “ that Friday was an unlucky day to go
to sea ;” to which I replied “ That I could not help it, as I
was ready for sea, and one day was as good as another to
me.” At 1 p.m. cast off lines, and sailed from the wharf ;
the crowd gave me three cheers—wishing me a pleasant
voyage, and good luck. When I got off Lime Point, near
the entrance to the bay, I could see that it was foggy out-
side ; and not liking the appearance of the evening (be-
sides, I had got a wetting, as it had been a little rough in
the bay), and the water splashed over the boat quite lively,


so I ran into a small bay round Lime Point, and came to
anchor for the night. At 5 - 30 p.m. I furled the sails, and
made everything secure. I then started the kerosene oil
stove, and cooked my first meal abroad the “Pacific.”
After supper I went to sleep for the night.
Saturday, August 19th, 6-30 a.m. Being cold and wet,
and as the tide in the afternoon would be the largest, I did
not intend to sail till afternoon; but, after breakfast was
over, as I saw several small boats sailing out, I made
a start, thinking I might get as far as Point Boneta, and
come to anchor till afternoon. Besides it would give
me a chance to try the boat outside in a heavy sea. I beat
out with the ebb tide and reached Point Boneta, intending
to make one more tack out from the land and then come
to anchor, I sailed out too far from the point, got caught
in the flood tide, and had to beat against it till the tide
ebbed, which was about 3 p.m. By that time I was
nearly back to Fori Point, the entrance to the bay.
3 p.m. Three steamers and several sailing vessels
coming out; two ships and one bark heading southward.
6 p.m. Clear of the land, and heading southward,
with fresh breeze from W.S.W., and heavy beam sea.
10-30 p.m. Sighted Farallone light, bearing W.N.W.,
£ W.; distance, fifteen miles Point Boneta; bore
N.N.E. £ E., distance, 26 miles 12m., wind freshening
with the sea abeam. The boat being deeply laden caused
her to ship a great deal of water on deck.
4 a.m. —Passing squalls. I hove to and went to sleep.
Fearing that I should be run down by a passing ship, if not


watchful during night, I made it a rule to rest as soon as
possible after daybreak.
About the first question I am usually asked is, how I
managed to sleep ? As the boat was schooner rigged, hav-
ing jib, foresail and mainsail, and a three-cornered sail,
that I could use for a storm mainsail, or studding sail. I had
a sea drag made of canvass, about 4 feet by 6 feet, fastened
to a yard or round pole, 8 feet long. Then there were
four lines about four fathoms long, two fastened to the
yard, the other two fastened to the lower corners of the
canvass—the two fastened to the canvass being a little
the shortest. I had a line made fast to the end of the four
ropes, about 4 fathoms long. When I hove to, I threw
the drag overboard, on the weather side of the boat; hauled
down the jib, lowered the foresail, and fastened the main-
sail and rudder amidships. Then as the boat drifted to
leeward, the drag would keep her bow to the sea, and the
mainsail would tend to steady her, and keep her heading
to windward, so that, in a heavy sea, she would lay hove to
quite comfortable. As I was very sleepy and tired after
the first night out, I slept long and well. When I awoke
I cooked dinner before getting under way. The sky being
cloudy I did not get an observation of the sun, much to
my disappointment, it being my first day out of sight of
the land.
Sunday, the 20th, the wind and weather about the
same.
Monday, lat. 35.03 N. ; long. 125.00 W
Tuesday night. Squally with rain. I hove to at 4.30
a.m., and at 11 a.m. got under way. It usually took me


about a half-hour after heaving to before I was ready to
go to sleep, and about the same time to- get under way.
Wednesday, August 23rd.
and making good time.
Weather more favorable,
Saturday, at noon, one week out —lat. 29., 23; long.
126., 32. Bearing from San Francisco S.S.W., dis-
tance, 540 miles. Distance sailed, by patent log, 501 miles.
Saturday p.m. and Sunday —beginning of second week.
Weather clear and pleasant, with a fresh breeze and
favorable current..
Monday, a.m. Wind light and inclined to eastward.
Monday, pan. Baffling winds for the rest of the day.
Tuesday. The wind more steady, and remained so for
the rest of the day, with pleasant weather, wind varying
from North to North East.
Friday morning, before getting under way, got pro-
visions and water out of the forward compartment.
Saturday, at noon, Sept. 2nd, lat. obs. 24., 33 N.
Long. 128, 26 W., distance sailed since previous Saturday
311 miles; course S.S.W. Distance sailed by log, 298-
miles.
Saturday and Monday of third week. Steady trade
winds, with passing rain squalls.
Tuesday. Weather more pleasant, with steady trade
winds.


Wednesday, wind freshening-, with do weather.
Thursday, September 7th, 5 p.m. Sighted a ship,
to North and Eastward, about nine miles off. She was
heading about W.S.W., lat. 18.,41 N. Long, 133.04 W.
I did not speak her, and I suppose the persons on board
did not see my boat at all, as there was quite a sea on ;
but the sight of the vessel served to break the monotony of
the voyage, as she was the hist sail I sighted since I
started.
Friday and Saturday. Strong trade winds, with high
sea and passing rain squalls. Several sea gulls flying
about. Up to this time there being no fish or birds in
sight, the gulls seemed like company.
Saturday, noon, September 9, lat. 17,51 N. Long.
134.,16 W. Course and distance sailed during past week,
S.W., i S., distance, 511 ; Sailed by log, 445 miles.
Saturday, p.m., and Sunday of fourth week. Strong
trade winds, with high sea.
Sunday, p.m. Passing rain squalls; and, Monday,
weather more moderate, with clear sky.
Tuesday, September 12. Awoke by something striking
the boat ; sounded as though she was striking a rock ;
found it to be a large sea tortoise ; struck it twice with the
grains, but it got away. I took some provisions and water
out of forward compartment, and got underway. 12, N.
I was sailing before the wind wing and wing, that is the
foresail on one side, and mainsail on the other. I felt the
boat strike something that nearly brought her to a stand-


still; X, at the time, thought she must have stove herself
against something floating in the water. She sailed over
it, however, and it came up astern. It turned out to be a
piece of a scantling, about 2x6, 24ft. long. I went forward
to see if there was any damage done to the boat, but there
was none. Fortunately she struck it amidships, and went
right over it.
Wednesday, September 13, wind and weather the
same.
Thursday, p.m. Light passing squalls, with rain ;
wind baffling. 3 a.m. Sighted a ship’s light, astern; dis-
tance off about seven miles, I fastened a lantern to the main
rigging, so that it could be seen astern. I think the per-
sons on the vessel saw it, for they altered her course and
headed more to the Westward. Lat., at noon, 13.,06 N,
Long, 137.,30 W.
Thursday, September 14, p.m. Calm and smooth
sea ; weather very warm. At sundown a light breeze
sprung up from northward; 8 p.m. a school of whales in
sight, and so near that I didn’t feel comfortable. They
stayed around the boat but a short while, then swam off.
Friday, September 15, a.m. Calm and very warm,
with smooth sea and clear sky. Taking advantage of the
calm I aired my clothing and forward compartment. 5 p.m
A light breeze sprung up from North and Westward.
Saturday, September 16, 4'3oa.m. Calm and smooth
sea ; a school of porpoises coming towards the boat; they
never altered their course, and when they got to the boat
they completely surrounded her —some going right under


the bottom to get past. 4 a.m. Hove to and had a sleep.
10 a.m. Under way with light breeze 12 N. passing
squalls—sun obscure —Lit. dead reckoning, 12.,45 N ;
Long l . 138., 20 W. Course and distance sailed the
last week S.W., £ S., distance, 390 miles ; distance sailed
by log, 317 miles. P.M. Light wind and constant rain
for the rest of day.
Sunday, September 17th, 10 a.m. Under way ;
weather clearing up, with steady breeze. P.M. Wind and
weather same. Midnight wiatl light and inclined to
Northward.
Monday, 5 a.m. Hove to under mainsail, without
'drag. 10 a.m. Underway with steady breeze ; weather
clear and pleasant; started on the fourth can of bread.
P.M. Wind and weather the same.
Tuesday. Steady breeze, with passing squalls; set
■studdingsail. 10 a.m. Passing squalls and high sea; handed
•studding sail.
September 20th. Wind light, with heavy rain. From
this date, for twenty-nine days I had nearly all head wind
and calms (not making two hundred miles headway in that
time) with almost constant rain. I now give the -wind and
weather for each day, as follows :
Thursday. Wind light with constant rain and pass-
ing squalls. 4 p.m. Caught the first bonetta with the
grains; not having any salt, boiled salt water and made
some, but it was a great deal of trouble. From 8 p.m,
until midnight constant heavy rain ; wind, South.


Friday, 4 a.m. Hove to, the wind being light.
September 22, 10 a.m. Light wind and constant rain; did not
get underway until after I had cooked dinner, wind E.S.E.
Noon. Underway, still raining, but lighter. 4p m. Wind
hauling more to southward. 8 p.m. Baffling winds and
constant rain for the rest of day.
Saturday, Sept. 23, 4 a.m. Calm; hove to ; a squid
jumped on board to pay me a visit; I cooked it for din-
ner. 10 a.m. Strong head wind and heavy sea, with rain;
did not get under way. Wind, S.S.W. 12 (noon). Still hove
to; sun obscure. Latitude ace. 8.,52 N. Longtitude
acc. 140.,31 W. Course and distance sailed in past week,
S.S.W., % W., distance, 267 miles. Distance sailed by log
244 miles. P.M. Strong head wind and high top sea;
still hove to; raining hard. 4 p.m. Pain cleared off ; got
water out of forward compartment; remained hove to for
the night, the wind being S.S.W.
Sunday. Wind hauled more to southward. Wind,
south. 9 a.m. Weather clear and pleasant; wind
the same; got underway; not making any headway,
on account of a heavy head sea. 12 (noon). Wind and
weather the same; found I had drifted four miles
to the northward. P.M. Strong head wind and heavy
sea. There is a large number of sea gulls in sight every
day; they are good company, and fish is quite plentiful,
but they are bonettas, and rather dry eating. I don’t
care much for them. Sometimes flying fish come aboard ;
they were always welcome, as they taste much better;
one flew aboard that measured 12£ inches in length.
12 m. Sky overcast, wind and weather the same. I
hove to and went to sleep.


Monday, 9 a.m. Under way, wind still south; mj'
watch stopped to-day, but started it going again; the
clock stops very often; I try everything to keep them
going, butAvdth so much rainy weather everything is damp
and wet. P.M. Sky overcast, weather pleasant, with
head wind and sea. 3 p.m. Wind inclined to westward.
Wind, S.S.W. 8 p.m. Wind S.W. Wind and sea moder-
ating, inclined to southward. 12 m. Clear sky and
pleasant weather.
Tuesday, 2 a.m. Wind south; hove to; wind
and weather the same. 9-30 a.m. Wind, S.S.W.
Underway; weather clear and pleasant. 1 p.m. Wind,
south. Light baffling wind. 6 p.m. Wind S.S.W.
Sky overcast and cloudy. 9 p.m. Wind N.W. Breeze
sprung up from north and westward. 12 m. Wind died
away, with mizzling rain.
Wednesday, September 27th, 2 a.m. Calm, with con-
stant rain; I hove to. 9 a.m. Wind N.N.W., light
breeze; weather clear and pleasant. 12 (noon). Wind
and weather the same. 4 p.m. Wind light and baffling,
and inclined to southward. 6 p.m. Sky heavily clouded.
8 p.m. W r ind, south ; steady breeze and passing rain
squalls. 12 m. Wind and weather the same.
Thursday, September 28, 3 a.m. Wind south; steady
breeze, with constant rain. I hove to. 9 a.m. Wind
south; underway with strong head wind. 12 (noon).
Wind south; strong head sea; sky, cloudy. 4 p.m.
Wind, S.S.W., wind inclined to westward. 6 p.m. Wind
S.S.W., raining do weather. 8 p.m. Wind S,, wind and
sea going down; sky clearing off; baffling winds. 12 m.
Wind, S.S.W.; light wind; weather clear and pleasant.


Friday, September 29tb, 2 a.m. Strong squall
from the S.W., with heavy rain; handed foresail.
3 a.m. Wind, S.S.W. Hove to and went to sleep. 9
a.m. Awoke, but did not get under way ; the wind and
sea being too strong to make any head way; got water
and sugar from forward compartment. Wind, S.S.E.
2 p.m. Wind and sea moderating; got under way.
6 p.m. Sky cloudy. 12 m. Wind and sea quite
moderate.
Saturday, September 30. Wind, S.S.E, 4.30 a.m.
Hove to ; wind and sea moderate. 9 a.m. Under way,
with strong head wind and sea; weather clear and pleasant.
Noon. Wind and weather the same; Lat. 9,,05 N., Long
138.,09 W. Course and distance sailed the past week,
E. \ N., 143 miles; distance sailed by log, 142
miles. P.M. Wind, S.S.E. Weather clear and pleasant,
with steady breeze. 8 p.m. Clear, starry sky. 12 M.
Wind and weather the same.
Sunday, October Ist, 4-30 a.m. Wind, S.S.E.
Steady breeze, with clear, starry sky; hove to. 9 a.m.
Wind S.S.E. Under way, with light breeze; weather
clear and pleasant. 2 p.m. Wind light and baffling.
8 p.m. Calm and smooth sea ; sky cloudy. 10 p.m.
Wind, south. Light breeze, and pleasant weather.
Monday, October 2nd. 230 a.m. There being no
wind, I hove to. 9 a.m. Wind, N.W. Under way, with
light breeze, and smooth sea. 12 (noon). Wind, S.W.
and inclined to southward, with smooth sea; weather
clear and pleasant; started on fifth case of bread, 4 p.m.
Baffling wind and rain, sky cloudy. 7 p.m. Wind in-


clined to westward. 8 p.m. Heavy squall from N.W.,
with rain. 9 p.m. Wind moderating and inclined to
southward, remaining so for the rest of the night.
Tuesday, October 3rd. 3 a.m. Calm and smooth
sea ; hove to. 9 a.m. Still no wind, so remained hove to.
2 p.m. Light breeze sprung up from northward,
11 p.m. Wind, N.E. Clear, starry sky, wind inclined to
eastward. 12 m. Wind, E.S.E. and inclined to south-
ward.
Wednesday, October 4th. 5 a.m. Wind E.S.E,
Sky overcast, with light breeze; I hove to, 8 a.m. Wind,
E.S.E., and very light; got under way. 12 noon. Calm
and smooth sea, sun obscured. 3 p.m. Wind and rain
from the southward. 4 p.m. Weather clearing off. 6 p.m.
Wind S.S.W., and baffling. 10 p.m. Clear, starry sky,
with light breeze.
Thursday, October sth. 4 a.m. Wind, S.S.W,
Clear, starry sky, with light breeze; hove to. 9 a.m.
Wind, S.S.W. Under way, with baffling wind and rain,
12 noon. Wind and weather the same ; sun obscured. 1
p.m. Calm. 2 p.m. Wind, S. Light baffling wind,
with constant rain, remaining so for the rest of the day.
Friday, October 6th. 5 a.m. Wind, S.W. Steady
breeze; weather clearing off ; hove to. 9 a.m. Wind, S.
Awoke ; there being a heavy head sea and wind, I did not
get under way. 10 a.m. A large sea tortoise around the
boat; as the grains were of no use with the other, I con-
cluded to try my hands with this one, so I caught hold of
his hind leg or flipper, and jerked him aboard. Got a


knife and cut his head off, and he bled a great deal. I
let him lie near the side of the boat, on the deck, to give
the blood a chance of running into the water. About half
an hour after I had cut off his head I saw a large shovel-
nose shark coming towards the after part of the boat, I
have s ;en a great many sharks in different parts of the
world, hut this one was a monster as compared to any that
I had seen before, and the size of the ravenous brute for a
moment startled me. As he came nearer the boat I
thought of getting my revolver and shooting him, as he
was swimming near the top of the water ; hut, as he came
on with such boldness, and knowing I could not kill him,
with the revolver, I thought it best to have the grains at
hand and wait for him to make the attack. When he got
within about three feet of the boat he stopped, and two or
three small fish swam out from underneath him, and
came over to the boat and went back again ; he then swam
past the stern of the boat, almost touching the rudder, tak-
ing it quite easy, and not seeming in the least hurry. As
he was passing I mustered up courage enough to prick
him a few times in the back with the grains. This did not
seem to make any impression on him, as his skin seemed
to be as hard as a board; neither did it cause him to
quicken his speed, for he kept the same easy motion—in
fact he did not seem to notice my action at all, and, as I
thought he was going off, I did not trouble him any more.
As the wind and sea had moderated, I went forward to
haul in the drag to get under way, at the same time keep-
ing my eye on the shark. He had swum away past the
boat, and, then swimming in a complete circle, he came
back to the same place he stopped at before, and stayed
for a few moments. Finally, he started, passed the stern


of the boat again, rubbing his side against the rudder,
which, being lashed amidships, I was afraid he would
break it. I then finished hauling in the log, and
got under way, and he started to follow me, but
as he did not quicken his speed I soon left him astern,
feeling much relieved after parting with his company. His
length, comparing it with the length of the boat, was fully
12ft., and, I should judge, across his mouth or head he
would measure three feet. These figures are not his ex-
treme dimensions, but what I feel sure he would have fully
measured. I next started to get the tortoise ready for
cooking, cutting what meat I wanted off it, I threw the
remainder overboard, as I had no way of preserving it. I
then boiled what I had kept with salt and fresh water mixed
together, and made soup, which tasted well. 4 p.m.
Wind freshening, weather clear and pleasant. 7 p.m.
Wind and sea moderating, and remained so for the rest of
the night.
Saturday, October 7, 5 a.m. Wind, south. Light breeze
and pleasant weather; I hove to. 9 a.m. Underway with
steady head wind, and it seemed as though it would never
change. 12 (noon). Wind and weather the same. Lat.
by obs. 8.,53 N.; Long. acc. 136.,17 W. Course and
distance sailed during past week E. £ S., distance, 113
miles ; sailed by Log, 105 miles. P.M. Strong head wind
and sea. 2 p.m. Wind, S.S.E.; hauling to eastward. 4 p.m.
Wind and sea moderating. 8 p.m. Baffling wind and
rain, remaining so for the rest of the night.
Sunday, October Bth. 3 a.m. Baffling winds, with
passing squalls and rain; hove to. 9 a.m. Wind,
S.W. Under way, with light breeze and pleasant


weather. 12 (noon). Wind and weather the same. P.M.
Light breeze ; weather clear and pleasant, remaining so
for the rest of the day.
Monday, October 9th. 2 a.m. Wind inclined to
westward, with constant rain; hove to. 11 a.m. Under
way, with light breeze and constant rain for the rest of the
day. P.M. Light bathing winds and rain.
Tuesday, October 10th, 5 a.m. Light baffling winds ;
hove to. 8 a.m. A squall sprung up from north and
westward, with rain; lost no time in getting under way.
830 a.m. Calm; got provisions and oil from forward
compartment. 9 a.m. Wind and rain from N.E., with
lightning and thunder. P.M. Light baffling wind;
calm and rain for the rest of the day.
Wednesday, October 11. 4 a.m. Wind, 8. Steady
breeze, with constant rain; hove to. 9 a.m. Strong
head wind, with high top sea. 8 p.m. Wind and sea
more moderate; got under way; raining, with passing
squalls for the rest of the day.
Thursday, October 12th. 4 a.m. Wind, S.S.E. Light
breeze, with smooth sea; hove to. 11 a.m. Under way;
strong breeze and passing rain squalls. 4 p.m. Wind
baffling, with passing rain squalls, remaining so for the
rest of the day. 4 p.m. Caught a bonetta.
Friday, October 13th. 3 a.m. Strong head wind
and sea ; hove to. 9 a.m. Wind and weather the same ;
did not get under way, as the sea was running too high,
with constant rain. 4 p.m. Wind inclined to westward.
5 p.m. Got under way; found the sea too high ; had


to heave to ; wind inclined to southward. 8 p.m. Wind
moderating, and inclined to northward, with mizzling rain,
remaining so for the rest of the day.
Saturday, October 14th. 2 a.m. Wind, N.N.W.
Light breeze; weather clearing off. 6 a.m. Calm ; got
up water and sugar. 9 a.m. Under way, with light breeze;
wind inclined to southward. 12 (noon). Sun obscure.
Lat. acc. 8.,04 N., Long, ace. 133.,47 W. Course and
distance sailed in the last week, E. by S. £ S., distance,
158 miles. Distance sailed by log, 83 miles P.M.
Steady head wind and sea. 4 p.m. Wind, inclined
to westward, remaining so for the rest of the day.
Sunday, October 15th. 4 a.m. Steady breeze,
with sky overcast; hove to. 11 a.m. Under way;
strong head wind and high sea. 4 p.m. S.W. Wind
squally and baffling with constant rain, remaining so for the
rest of the day. 10 p.m. Wind, E.N.E. Heavy squall;
handed foresail.
Monday, October 16th. 5 a.m. Wind light and
baffling ; hove to. 10 a.m. Wind and weather the same.
P.M. Light wind, with rain ; got under way. 4 p.m.
Light wind, with alternate calms; remaining so for the
rest of the day.
Tuesday, October 17th. 4 a.m. Calm, with mizzling
rain ; hove to. 9 a.m. Under way, with light breeze;
sky overcast. 4 p.m. Baffling winds and heavy sea from
southward, with rain and passing squalls, remaining so
for the rest of the day.
Wednesday, October 18th. 4 a.m. Wind fresh-


ening and inclined to southward, with high top sea;
hove to; paid out all the drag line. 4 p.m. S.S.E.
Wind still blowing fresh; thought I would try and get
under way, the sea running high ; sky clearing off to east-
ward, wind inclined that way. 10 p.m. Wind, S.E. Clear
sky and pleasant weather. 12 m. Sky overcast, with pass-
ing rain squalls.
Thursday, October 19th. 4.30 a.m. Eresh breeze,
wind inclining southward ; hove to ; paid out the whole of
the drag line. 9 a.m. Strong head wind, with high
sea. 12 (noon). Wind moderating; sun obscure.
P.M. Wind, S.S.E. Got up provisions, and under way,
with strong head wind and sea; sky overcast; wind and
weather remaining so for the rest of the day.
Friday, October 20th. 4 a.m. Wind moderating,
and inclined to eastward; sky clearing off to eastward;
barometer rising. I did not heave to this morning, as it
was the first fair wind I had had for 29 days, I wanted to
make the best of it. 9 a.m. Wind freshening, with
clear sky and pleasant weather; it looks as though I
was getting near the trades. Wind and weather remained
the same for the rest of the day.
Saturday, October 21st. 4 a.m. Strong breeze,
with clear sky; weather pleasant. 10 a.m. Wind,
E.S.E, Passing squalls. 12 (noon). Weather clear
and pleasant, with heavy head swell; the clock I can
hardly keep going ; I have a lamp burning alongside of it
to try and keep it dry, but still it fails; it is fortunate for
me that I have my bread in air-tight tin cans, for with the
weather I have had for the last 29 days, it would all be


spoiled. Lat. in 5.,05 N, Long. 132.,33 west. Course
sailed in last week, S.S.E.; distance, 193 miles.
Distance sailed by log, 181 miles. P.M. Wind,
E.S.E. Weather clear and pleasant, with fresh breeze.
10 p.m. Wind inclining to southward, with passing rain
squalls. 12 m. Wind, S.E. Light breeze, with weather
clear and pleasant.
Sunday, October 22nd. 3 a.m. Light wind;
sky overcast. I hove to, having been under way
for fifty-one hours; I had so much head wind that I
was sick and tired of it; I was twenty-nine days from
9.,02‘ N. to 5.,05‘ N., the distance by steering due south,
237 miles; besides there being an easterly current, I drifted
to the eastward a great deal out of my course. 6 a.m.
Wind, E.S.E. Under way, with strong breeze and high
sea, remaining so for the rest of the day ; so anxious was
I to cross the Equator, and make up for the lost time,
that I used to do with as little sleep as possible, never
sleeping more than four hours out of the twenty-four, and
very often doing with less than three. Some mornings, if
the weather looked favorable, I would lower the foresail,
lash the tiller, so that she would steer herself, and let her
run with the jib and mainsail, and go to sleep, trusting to
luck for safety. I caught a great many large flying
fish, they used to fly aboard in the night; I reduced
my allowance of food to two meals a day, as I had a long
distance to travel; besides I did not require much food on
account of having so little exercise.
Friday, October 27th. 12 (noon). I was four miles
south of the Equator, the wind keeping fair and weather
pleasant with little variation.


Saturday, October 28tb, 11 a.m. Wind, east; weather
clear and pleasant; got up water and overhauled my pro-
visions, which were as follows: bread, five cans, or 751 b. ;
canned pigs feet, sixteen 11b. cans; chicken, fifteen lib.
cans ; beef, thirteen 2lb. cans; salmon, thirteen lib. cans;
peaches, ten cans ; milk, ten cans ; water, ninety gallons ;
sugar, 151 b.; lard, 21b.; tea and coffee, 4lb. Lat. by
obs. 1.,07 S. Long. acc. 135.,11 W. Course and distance
sailed in last week, S.S.W., distance 400 miles. Distance
sailed by Log 420 miles.
Thursday November 2nd. A sword-fish followed the
boat for about an hour, keeping quiet close to her; it was
the first one I saw on the trip; several times it darted
under the bottom of the boat as though it was trying to
strike her with its sword.
Saturday, November 4th. The weather for the last
week has been generally clear and pleasant, with the
exception of a few passing squalls, the wind varying from
east to southeast. Whenever I went to sleep, I lowered
the foresail and let her steer herself, so she has not stopped
for the whole week. Noon, Lat. by obs. 6.53 S. Long. acc.
140.,25 W.; course and distance sailed, S.W. 470 miles.
Distance sailed by Log 410 miles.
Saturday, November 11th. This week passed with
light and steady trade winds; weather clear and pleasant,
with the exception of a few passing rain squalls and one
calm which lasted for about three hours, the wind varying
from N.N.E. to S.E.; there has been a great many small
fish following the boat and the sharks gave me a great
deal of trouble; they used to come when I would be asleep,


just a little before daylight, at the stern, and would turn
on their sides, and, in doing so, would strike the bottom of
the boat a tremendous blow, which would always awaken
me, their object was to run along the bottom of the boat
with their mouth close to it, and thus scoop in the small
fish that would be following the boat ; their time for
hunting prey was after the sun went down, then during the
night and before sunrise in the morning ; during the day,
when the sun would be shining, they would keep away
from the boat, still keeping within sight of her, and as
soon as a squall would come up, so that it would be a little
dark, they would make for the boat and after the fish
again; the fish generally would swim under the bottom of
the boat, and when they would see the sharks coming after
them, they would crowd to the top of the water and keep
close to the side of the boat; by so doing they managed
to keep clear of the sharks ; I tried everything to keep the
sharks away, but with little success; I struck them with
the grains, shot at them with my revolver, and, in fact,
did everything that I could think of. The grains are
formed with five spears, or points, forming a square—one
spear at the four corners and one in the centre. By knock-
ing out a key, two of the spears can be taken out, which
leaves the other three in a row. By doing so, and sharpen-
ing the three that remained, I could get them into a shark
better, and it would give it a great deal of trouble to get
clear after b ing struck. I afterwards used those two
spears which I took out to hang my rudder with, of which
I will speak hereafter. However, the sharks in time
became a little shy when they saw mo about. Then their
time was when I went to sleep, so that I got an old shirt
and set it up the same as if I was sitting down steering
the boat, which would sometimes answer to keep them


away. Lat. and Long, at noon —Lat., by obs., 11.,33 S.,
Long. ace. 144.,28 W. Course and distance sailed the last
week, S.W.-J-S., 370 miles. Distance sailed by log, 320 miles.
November 15th. There was a school of large dolphins
following the boat, and while a heavy rain squall was pass-
ing, the sharks got among them and seemed to dispatch quite
a number of them before they could get out of their reach.
Friday, November 17th. The wind for the past week
has been light and steady ; no calms, and but a few passing
rain squalls. The fish and sharks keep after the boat,
also quite a number of sea birds in sight. At 6 p.m.
sighted a sail to southward, and altered my course to
speak her. When they saw my boat, they hove to and
waited for me to get alongside. The Captain said that he
thought it was some boat that had got lost from a ship.
They asked me where I was from ? and seemed somewhat
surprised when I told them San Francisco, and that I was
alone. The vessel was the “Barkentine Tropicvance,”
Captain Burns, a few days out from Tahiti, bound for San
Francisco. I asked what his Longitude was ? and found
it was 149.,02 W. He told me my position was a good
one, if I was bound for Australia, and kindly asked if
there was anything he could do for me ? I thanked him
for the information I had got, and told him I did not want
for anything, but hoped he would report me in San Fran-
cisco. He said he would. He asked if I did not want
some fruit ? to which I answered yes. He then passed me
abundance of bananas, oranges, and limes, and kept
sending them down until I told him I had as much
as I could use before they would spoil. I was then 90 days
out from San Francisco. After he gave me the fruit we


parted, wishing each other good luck and a pleasant
voyage. This was the first vessel that I had a chance of
speaking since I started on the voyage, and I was pleased
to have a chance to exchange a few words, as well as to be
reported in San Francisco. Lat. 14.,50 S., Long. 149.,02 W.
Saturday, November 18th. This week has passed
pretty much the same as last week, the wind generally be-
ing light, the weather clear and pleasant, getting along,
but with very little sleep. Lat. and Long, at noon. Lat.
obs., 15.,10 S. Long. ace. 149.,42 W. Course and dis-
tance sailed during the week, S.W. by W., 370 miles.
Distance sailed by Log, 278 miles.
Monday, November 20th. The wind freshening, and
the sea running high, the “ Pacific” had all she could do
to run before the wind and sea, but she made good time
and weather for a small boat, running 89 miles in twenty
hours, by log.
Thursday, November 23. She sailed by log 106
miles in about the same time.
Saturday, November 25th. The last week the wind
has been stronger, with a high sea running; lost track of
the fish and sharks in the middle of the week ; the weather
has been generally clear and pleasant, with the exception
of a few passing rain squalls ; I also had a small fly make
its appearance aboard, which I looked upon as company.
Lat. and Long, at noon, lat. obs. 17.,54 S.; long, acc.,
162.,00 W. Course and distance sailed, 730 miles. Dis-
tance sailed by log, 610 miles. The reason there is such
difference between the log and the actual distance sailed is


that there was a strong westerly current which was in
my favor.
Saturday, December 2nd. This week has passed with
fresh trades; weather generally clear and pleasant, with
the exception of a few passing rain squalls. I bad the
mainsail i 'Ted for a few hours, the wind varying.from
E.N.E. to south east. Lat. and Long, in at noon, lat. obs.
21.,12 S. Long, acc., 172.,22 W. Course and distance
sailed, W. by S. \ S., 611 miles. Distance sailed by
log, 588 miles.
Tuesday, December sth. 8 p.m. Sky cloudy, w r ith
mizzling r a. 11 p.m. Sky heavily clouded to N.W.,
with lightning.
Thursday. December 7th. 5 ’4O a.m. Sighted a four-
masted steamer, about 10 miles off, heading to eastward.
Lat. at noon. 21.,41 S. Long, 173.,53 W.
Friday. Oecember 8. 5‘30 a.m. Sighted the Island of
Eoa, distai about 20 miles; bore N.W. by N. I ran to the
northward >as to pass close to the island ; ran between Eoa
and Cattov Islands, with steady breeze ; weather clear
and pleasai Lat. in at noon, 21.,31 S. Long, 175.,03 W
Saturc s , December 9th. A.M. Light trade wind ;
sky overca ; weather pleasant; annoyed by a large
sword-fish . locking against the boat, the wind being too
strong to ,e the grains on him. The weather for the
past week is been generally clear and pleasant, with
light trade aid varying from S.E. to N.N.E. Lat. in at
noon, by .s. 21.,32 S. Long, 176., 19 W. Course and


distance sailed, 230 miles W. \ S.. Distance sailed by
log, 220 miles. P.M. Wind freshening, with high top
sea ; handed studding sail; passing squalls.
Sunday, December 10th. Strong trade wind, with
sky overcast and high sea running; weather pleasant.
2 p.m. Handed studding sail. 6 p.m. Reefed mainsail.
12 m. Passing squalls, with rain.
Monday, December 11th. 2 a.m. Hove to, with
drag. 6 a.m. Under way, with fresh trades; high sea
running; sky overcast, running with reefed mainsail;
wind and weather remaining the same for the rest of the
day. 12 m. Carried away foresail halyard block strap;
hove to. Lat. and long, at noon, lat. obs. 22.,02 S. Long
acc. 179.,53 W.
Wednesday, December 13th. 6 a.m. Repaired hal-'
yard block strap. 7.30 a.m. Under way, with fresh
trades and high sea ; sky overcast. Having crossed the
opposite meridian to Greenwich, or the Long, of 180- W.,
I subtract one day from the Greenwich date. Lat. by
obs. at noon, 22.,23 S. Long. acc. 178.,43 E. P.M.
Passing squalls; wind and weather the same. 7 p.m.
Wind and sea moderating, 9 p.m. A heavy sea broke
right under the rudder. I shifted the helm, so as to hold
the boat against it, but it was no use, as she turned, al-
most instantly, bottom up, throwing me backward into the
water, and underneath. I came up on the weather side,
and crawled upon the bottom. I had a long oilskin coat
on, and a heavy flannel overshirt, both of which I took
off, and rolled up, putting my watch inside of all, as I
intended to dive down and get the rope which I used with


the sea drag. I always kept one end fast on deck ; by
the time I had got my clothes rolled up, and ready to dive
down I saw the sea drag had got from underneath the
boat, and was floating on the weather side; I reached
over and got a hold of it, and dragged it up on the bottom
of the boat. Taking one of the small lines attached to it
I fastened the clothes which I had taken oft, the
watch being inside of the bundle, seemingly secure,
and the oilskin coat being wrapped around the outside ; I
then drew up the line until it was tight, the end being
fast to the deck, and got over on the opposite side of the
boat’s bottom, it also being on the leeward side ; 1 then
pulled with all my might to try and right her again ; had
there been much of a sea on it would have helped me
considerably, but as the sea by this time was quite mod-
erate it seemed to be a hopeless task; however, as it was
my only chance, I kept at it, and after an hour’s hard work
she began to right. Finally I got her upright and started
to cut the shrouds or rigging which held the masts in their
places —when over she goes again. This time I had no
trouble in righting her, as she was full of water, and when
I got her deck up I quickly unshipped both masts, cutting
everything that tended to hold them in their places; after
I got them unshipped, I made them fast to the drag-rope,
also everything that lay loose around the deck, threw it all
overboard on the weather side, so as to form a drag to
keep her head to the sea and give me a better chance to
get the water out of the after-hatch—which measured
18 x 24 inches, the main hatch being on and it being water-
tight, would keep the water from getting in. The
way the forward compartment came to get full of
water, was through there being two one inch holes


bored in tbe partition, close to the bottom of the boat,
so as to let what water there might at any time leak into
her run into the after part, and I would have a better
chance to pump it out. I had wooden plugs made to fit in
these holes, which could be taken out at will; but, unfor-
tunately, both of them were out when she capsized. I also
had strips or battens, four inches wide, nailed solid to the
frames on the inside, instead of having her lined ; they
also answered to lash the water casks to, so as to keep
them in their places in case she should turn over. That I
might right her, without much trouble, I had them all
lashed with hemp rope, which was new when I left San
Francisco ; but as I was nearly four months out, and they
being wet about all the time with salt water, besides as I
seldom had the hatch off, and everything used to be
mouldy and damp, consequently the lashings, being rotteu,
carried away, with the exception of three or four, and the
casks kept bumping against the inside of the boat, I fear-
ing all the time they would start some of the planks off the
deck. As soon as possible I started to bail the water out.
Beaching down the after hatch I got hold of a cube sugar
box, which would hold about 251 bof sugar; I then stood
in the hatch and managed to work with the box, bailing-
out the water, and leaving but little spare space for it
to get in again, as the swell used to wash over the deck of
the boat, so that it seemed to come in faster than I could
bail it out, and I was working for a long time before I
could see that I was making any headway in getting the
water out; fortunately the boxes, kegs, and other things
that were in the forward compartment had worked to the
fore part of the boat which tended to raise the after part
up a little, so it gave me a better chance to bail her out,


not letting the water in so freely as before. My position
when I capsized, was lat. 22.,36 S. Long, ace.,
177.,54 E. Course and distance from Sandy Cape, Aus-
tralia, east £ north 1430 miles, which was quite a distance
to go without a compass and a short stock of provisions ;
the only instruments I had left to navigate with was my
sextant and patent log, therefore, I had to lose a great
deal of time on account of not having a compass. When the
sky was cloudy at night I had to heave to, not being able
to see the moon and stars, and the same in the day time
when the sun was obscure ; neither could I keep account
of what distance I sailed, nor her longtitude, as I would
lose a good deal in not steering a straight course which I
found I could not always do without the compass. The
most of the small articles that I had in the after compart-
ment got lost, especially what I had in the locker on the
port side ; that was where I kept my provisions; all the
canned meat and fish I had there was lost; and, as fate
would have it, I had more at that time than I usually kept
aft ; and it was only a day or two before that I opened a
fifteen-lb can of bread, which was also in the locker; it
being large did not work out, but got mixed with salt
water and kerosene oil, so that I could not use it; that left
me with only one more can of bread, and part of it got wet
with salt water, although I managed to use it.
Thursday, December 14th. About daylight the next
morning I had all the water out, and, as the weather was
clear and pleasant, I spent the day in drying what few
things I had left, and started to repair the damages. I first
hauled in the drag rope and found that my mainmast and
sail had worked adrift and were lost; the bundle of clothing,
which my watch was in, was also gone; the rest of the


things that I had fastened to the rope were all right, so
I hauled them all on deck, re-set the sea drag, and left them
to dry while I re-stowed the water casks and other articles
that were in the fore compartment. P.M. Shipped fore-
mast and spliced the rigging, which was pretty well cut up,
and repaired things in general; as I lost my rudder I took
one of the oars which was too short to steer with, being
only twelve feet long, and lashed it to a spare boom,
eleven feet long —that answered for the present as a rudder.
Sundown. I got under way, and sailed for a while, but
found, as night came on, that I was too tired and sleepy
to keep my eyes open, so I hove to and went to sleep for
the night. In heaving to is where I missed the main-
mast and mainsail, as she would not lay as steady as
with them, but kept shifting about from one side to the
other. I tried every' way I could think of to heave her to,
even trying her with her stern to windward, without much
success, until, finally, I fastened the studding sail to the
other oar, and set it aft as far as I could, so that it an-
swered for a mainsail when I hove to or sailed with the
wind abeam; and when I ran before the wind I rigged it
out for a studding sail; therefore, it became a very useful
sail, while before it had been used but very little.
Friday, December 15th. Sunrise; underway, with
steady trade wind; weather clear and pleasant, the sun
coming out strong; I got out my books, clothing,
and, in fact, everything that I had room for on deck, and
had a general drying day. The five gallon can that had
the kerosene oil in was fitted with a patent faset (or cock) so
there was some oil in it still; although it was not
much, it lasted to warm all the meat that I had left, so


1 got the oil stove going, and had a warm meal, it being
the first since I capsized. P.M. The weather clear and
everything drying nicely. 3 p.m. Wind freshening with
sky overcast; put clothing and everything below. About
5 p.m. a sword fish, that had been following the boat for
some time, struck her with its sword, putting it right
through her bottom ; it gave the boat a jerk when draw-
ing the sword out; I could hardly believe at first that it
managed to pierce her, thinking that it only partly got
its sword through, and as I had the plugs in the partition,
no water could come in, in the after part; I only had to wait
in suspense for a short while ; I soon heard some of the
tin cans that were in the fore compartment knocking about
with the water; I then drew one of the plugs and the
water rushed out quite lively ; I hove to, and took off the
main hatch, and by that time there was about ten inches
of water in her; I started.to bail it out, and gained on the
leak ; also found where it was, and plugged it up from the
inside with lamp wick, and other rags that came to hand—
it being so close to the keel of the boat that it gave me a
good chance to plug it up, and wedge it in, that it never
came out for the rest of the trip, but it still used to leak
a good deal, although not enough to give me much trouble, as
I kept the pump rigged in the after hatch, and could pump
her out and steer at the same time; I got under way a
little after sunset, and sailed until the moon went down ;
then hove to; as the sky became cloudy, and not being able
to see the stars, which were my compass, after the sun and
moon had disappeared.
Saturday, December 16th. I awoke in the morning,
and found the sun well above the horizon ; the boat had
made considerable water since I hove to; pumped her out,


and got under way with steady trades. Weather clear and
pleasant. Noon. Lat. by ohs., 23.,05 S. Long. ace.
177., 11 E. Course and distance sailed during the week.
W. by S.E., 360 miles. Distance sailed by log, 382 miles.
P.M. The wind freshening, and high sea running 12 m.
Hove to; wind and weather the same.
December, 21st. A large sword fish was swimming
around the boat; he afterwards got foul of the log line,
and in trying to clear himself he nearly cut it in two ; after
getting clear he went off without doing any more damage.
Saturday, December 23rd. The last week passed
with steady trade winds, with weather clear and pleasant,
with the exception of one day, on which I had a few
passing squalls, with rain. I was getting under way, at
sunrise, when a large shark paid me a visit by coming up
close to the side of the boat, and, holding bis head partly
out of the water, looking right towards the boat as though
e was looking for some one, or was surprised at the rig of
he boat. I struck him a few times with the oar, and off
ie went and did not trouble me any more. At noon, lat.
22.,38 S, Longitude acc. 173.,00 E. Course and
distance sailed during the week, W.fN., 222 miles.
DistfOice sailed by log, 369 miles. P.M. The wind
to southward, with cloudy sky; as I have no
clock it is all guess work, in regard to time ; I heave to at all
hours of the night, and try to be up about sunrise to make
a start for the day.
Sunday, December 24th. 9 a.m. Sighted Fern
Island, about seven miles to westward. 11 a.m. Island
bearing south; passed to northward of island. lam now


about 1200 miles from Australia. All the provisions I have
got is twelve pounds of canned meat and fish—the bread
having given out yesterday—half a gallon of alcohol, and
fifteen gallons of water. The chances of sighting a ship,
I think, is poor. My intentions were, at this time, to keep
in the same latitude, which was 22.,30 S., hoping that I
might sight a sail and get some provisions to finish my
voyage ; and, in case I did not sight any, I could run into
Noumea, a port on the Island of New Caledonia. I suc-
ceeded very well until I got to where I thought I ought to
sight the Island of Walpool, which is close to New Cale-
donia. There I got a heavy northerly wind which lasted
for four days; hove to all the time. I drifted down to
the south and westward, of New Caledonia, as far south
as Lat. 24.,00 8.
Monday, December 25th —Christmas Day! A little
after sunrise under way, with steady trade wind; weather
clear and pleasant, remaining so throughout the day. For
Christmas dinner I had beef and alcohol straight, with
water. 4 p.m. Sighted the Island of Mathew, about 15
miles to the westward. Both of these islands are without
vegetation of any kind—Fearn being a barren rock, about
400 feet above the level of the sea, and Mathew being a
volcanic island about 350 feet above the level of the sea.
Tuesday, December 26th. At sunrise, as usual, I was
under way, with light breeze; weather clear and pleasant.
The south-eastern part of Mathew Island forms a separate
island —being connected by a reef about four miles long,
which I did not see until I got close to it and well in under
the land. I intended to go between the two islands and
keep to the southward of Mathew; but on seeing


there was no passage, I had to haul close to the wind and
go round the north side of the island, which compelled me
to go over a hundred miles to northward of my course, and
caused the loss of a great deal of time, as there were reefs
extending out from the island eight and ten miles into the
sea, making it too dangerous to sail after sunset.
Wednesday,. December 27th. I hove to at sundown,
with drag ; when I awoke next morning I saw the boat
was hanging by the log line, and the drag had drifted to
leeward of the boat, the log haying got fast to the rocks at
the bottom ; I was then about eight miles from the shore,
and when I hove to, the night before, there was no sign of
shoal water in sight; I tried every way that I could think
of to get the log clear of the bottom, as I did not wish to
lose it, for then I would have no way to tell what distance
I had sailed, and, having no clock, I could not very well
guess what the boat was going ; I hauled away at the line
until it parted, and went off, leaving my precious log at the
bottom.
Thursday, December 28th. I had sailed all day, with a
steady, fresh breeze, the weather being pleasant; at sun-
down there was a point of the island that extended so far out
to sea that I could not see land on the other side of it ; I
therefore mistook it for the western end of the island, and as
it was only about five miles off I did not heave to, but
kept under way in hopes that I might get clear of the
island —of which I was well tired by this time. About 8
p.m. the sky was overcast ; I had got nearly to where this
point was, when, all of a sudden, I heard the roar of
breakers ; X looked in all directions but could see nothing
of them; thinking it was from the surf on the beach, I


kept on, at the same time keeping a good look out.
I sailed but a short distance when I saw the breakers
ahead; they extended from the shore for quite a dis-
tance out past the boat; so sudden did they appear
that I could scarcely believe my eyes, so that I shut them
and opened them again, and looked to see if I was not mis-
taken, but sure enough there they were, and so near that
no time was to be lost; my first thought was to haul
her on the wind and try to sail round the reef, but seeing
that I was then too close for that I came to the conclusion
that my only chance was to keep her before the wind and
sea, and try to sail over the reef or upon the rocks, which-
ever it might be ; so I kept her straight for the reef. In
going over she nearly capsized, shipping water on deck
and washing the sea drag overboard —which was on deck.
Very little of the water went down the hatch ; and, fortu-
nately, one sea landed her over the breakers, and into
smooth water, which I found was eight feet deep. When
I saw that I had got over safely I was very thankful; I
quickly picked up my drag and came to anchor,
feeling satisfied that I had ventured enough for
one night. Just before I heard the breakers roar, a very
large flying-fish landed on deck ; I grasped it with my right
hand, and thought how fortunate I was to get such a prize at
a time that I needed it so much; but as I was changing it
to the other hand, to put it in the binnacle for safe keeping,
it dropped on deck, and overboard it went. As I was re-
gretting my loss I heard the noise of the breakers.
Friday, December 29th. About 2 a.m. I was awoke
by hearing the boat strike the rocks. I arose and saw
that it was low water and the place had a rocky bottom,
so that she was rubbing against the rocks, I hauled up


the anchor and poled her round until I found deeper water
and a sandy bottom. As the moon was shining bright, I
had a good chance of seeing where I was going to. I then
dropped the anchor again and went to sleep till morning.
Sunrise. Under way, with steady breeze; the weather
clear and pleasant. I sailed over the shallow patch for
about two miles, then got into deep water on the opposite
side; it extended out from the land about eight or ten
miles. I also saw, after getting up to the point that I
thought was the west end of the island, that the land still
extended to the westward as far as I could see. I sailed
along for the rest of the day without any more mishaps,
and hove to at sundown.
Saturday, December 30th. Sunrise. Under way,
with fresh breeze; weather clear and pleasant, remaining
so throughout the day. Lat. and Long, at noon —Lat. obs.
20.,38 S., Long, 171.,00 E. Course and distance sailed the
past week, N.W., 170 miles. Distance sailed by log,
333 miles. P.M. lat last, without mistake, sighted
the western extremity of Mathew Island, and as I
had a fresh breeze, I was in hopes, before night, that I
would be clear of the land that was so barren. While
sailing along the shore, I was still hoping that I might
come to some spot that would have a few cocoanut trees, so
that I might land and get some ; but the whole distance I
sailed, which I should judge was between 30 aud 40 miles,
not a sign of a tree could I see —nothing, in fact, but lava.
When I got abreast of the point, I found that a reef ran
out to sea, about W.N.W., as far as the eye could see.
I sailed along the reef for an hour, when I came to where
it did not break heavy—the water being deeper than the
other part of the reef. I sailed across here, there being


about ten or twelve feet of water on it, the shoal water
extending around the point and quite a distance to the
southward. At sundown I was abreast of the westernmost
point of the island, it bearing due east. I hove to for the
night.
Sunday, December 31st. Sunrise ; under way at 8
a.m. ; clear of reefs and shoals on the south side of the
island, the weather being clear and pleasant, and remained
so throughout the day. About 10 p.m. the wind being
quite moderate, one of those small dark birds which are
seen at sea, a short distance from the land, came flying
round the boat, trying to light on the mast or the gaff ;
but there being too much motion, it flew away,
and I took no further notice until it had alighted on
my head. I sat still, for a while, thinking that if I could
catch it what a treat it would be, as my provisions were
running very short. However, I ventured, and lost, and
off it flew. That was the first bird of any kind I saw to
light on the boat. I mention this, as it seemed strange to
me, that as my provisions gave out, four birds should alight
on my head—three of which I caught and ate; three
landed on the boat—two of which I caught, the other got
away after I had shot it with my revolver. The catching
of these birds caused me to keep up my spirits, and not
give up hope of relief, from some quarter, although it often
looked as though the end of life was not far off. Still
through all I lived in hopes, and tried to console myself by
repeating the old proverb—“ Dark is the hour before
dawn.”
Wednesday, January 3rd, 1883. I have to-day four
pounds of beef, one quart of alcohol, and ten gallons of
water left.


Friday, January sth. Up to to-day the weather has
"been clear and pleasant, with fresh trade wind and a few
passing squalls. At sunrise, as usual, under way, the
wind being inclined to northward, and freshening. 8 a.m,
I had to heave to, the wind remaining due north for the
rest of the day, and. blowing quite strong, with a high sea
running.
Saturday, January 6th. A.M. The wind north, but
more moderate; not sufficient to get under way. Noon.
Lat., 23.,18 S.; Long. 168.,09 E. Course and distance
sailed during the past week, S.W., distance, 227 miles.
From henceforth I cannot give my position weekly, as I
have done, as I have no way to tell how much I make to
the westward; besides, after being driven so far south I
got into the south-west current, which runs to southward
of New Caledonia. As I have my sextant left, I can
manage to keep track of what I make north or south, and
that is all; the rest is all guesswork.
P.M. The wind freshening, with high sea and passing
rain squalls.
Sunday, January 7th. A.M. Wind freshening, with
sky overast; clearing off to eastward. After having a
short sleep, I awoke and quite carelessly threw off the
after hatch to see how the weather was. As I put my
head above the deck, I saw a bird standing on the stern of
the boat, looking towards me. I wondered at it not fly-
ing away, with all the noise I made. I kept quiet and
watched till it would turn its head, thinking then I might
catch it. After a while it turned to peck itself; I
made a grab and caught it. It was of the same kind
as I spoke of before, about the size of a small pigeon. I


skinned it, thinking it would taste Letter, besides I could
not get all the pin feathers off any other way; but after
taking the skin off there was not much of it left. I cooked
it and made some soup and had a feast. I have to-day
one 2lb. can of beef, some alcohol, and about seven gallons
of water. There being no sign of the wind moderating, I
am still hove to.
Monday, January Bth. A.M. Clear sky, wind in-
clined to eastward, with high top sea. P.M. Strong head
wind, with high sea ; sky overcast. 6 p.m. Wind and sea
moderating.
Tuesday, January Oth. 6 a.m. Wind and sea moder-
ate ; I hauled in the drag to make a start, having been
hove to for four days, my latitude at noon, 23.,57 S. I now
stood to the northward, hoping that I might be to the east-
ward of New Caledonia, and still sight the island, although
my hopes were faint ; on the other hand I thought that if
I was to the westward of the island I would be more apt to
fall in with a vessel by being farther north.
Wednesday, January 10th. A sea-bird, after flying
about the boat several times, lighted on my head ; this on©
I managed to catch.
Thursday, January 11th. 8 p.m. To-day a bird landed
on my head, which I also caught—keeping it till the next
day for breakfast.
Saturday, January 13th. At about 3 p.m. to-day I ate
the last of my meat, which was about two ounces.
The two pounds of beef, the three birds and a few flying-
fish that I used to pick up on deck, which generally were


about two or three inches Jong, with alcohol and water, were
what I lived on since January 7.
Sunday, January 14th. After sailing north as far as
Lat. 22., 00 S, and neither sighting land or a sail, I stood
to the westward, making but little headway from this
time until I was picked up, as I had light winds and
calms; besides, I became very weak, and used generally
heave to at sundown to preserve my strengh.
Monday, January 15th. The oar I used to steer
with I always had fast to the boat, with a short piece of
line, in easel wanted to go forward, at any time, and attend
to anything, I could leave it in the water and not lose it,
as I had not always time to haul it on deck. To-day I took
a better piece of rope for keeping the oar fast, as I thought
the line in use was not strong enough. At sunset, when I
hove to, I left the oar in the water while I put the drag
overboard and furled the sails. When I came to look for
the oar I found it had got adrift and was lost. I wondered
what would go next, as I was losing everything that I had,
and what to steer with I really did not know. The line
being cotton, and very stiff, caused it to work adrift.
Tuesday, January 16. At sunrise I started to see
what I could find to make a rudder with. I took one of
the mast boxes and two doors from the lockers in the after
part of the boat; as I had nails I commenced to make the
rudder. All the time I was making it I was thinking what
I would get to hang it to the boat with ? when, all at once,
I thought of the piece that I had taken out of the grains,
so by cutting it in two it answered splendidly. 2 p.m.
Finished the rudder, but the sea being too high to get un-
der way I remained hove to for the rest of the day.


Wednesday, January 17th. At sunrise the wind was
blowing strong, with high sea. About 10 a.m. wind and
sea more moderate, I got under way ; found that the
rudder worked well —with the exception of it not being
quite deep enough in the w T ater. With it I found I could
steer the boat so easy that I was glad I had lost the oar—
as it used to tire me to steer with it.
Thursday, Jauuary 18th. I put a piece on the rudder
and made it deeper; got under way about 9 a.m. 10 a.m.
Sighted Middle Ballona Eeef, Lat. 21.,29 S., Long.
159.,00 E. I passed to southward of reef. About a half
hour after sighting it, a bird flew, as before, around the
boat and alighted on my head. I tried to catch it but
missed, and off it flew again; finally it came back, and I
caught it on the wing as it was flying past my head. As I
was very hungry, I could not think of skinning this one
and throwing the skin away, so I plucked the feathers off
and singed what I could not pick off with a candle—even
the blood I saved and cooked it all together, making a
little soup with it, using alcohol to cook with. I divided
it in two parts, keeping half for the next day. I sailed
along the reef and sighted several patches of sand above
the water. I was in hopes I could find some with a few
eocoanut trees on, but did not find any. When the wind
was light or calm there was small fish around the boat. I
tried everything I could think of to catch them, but it was
no use, as I had no fishhooks. I took my dividers and
bent them, and fastened them to a short piece of wood,
with which I tried to spear some of the fish, but it was all
work in vain.
Sunday, January 21st. Light wind and calm through-


out the day. I was So hungry to-day that I picked the
largest barnacles off the boat, chewing them and spitting
them out again.
Monday, January 22nd. Calm. Spent the forenoon in
trying to catch fish, but without success ; from to-day I
started to keep count of how many flying fish I found;
this morning I found two, the largest about two inches
long.
Tuesday, January 23rd. Found one about the same
length. About 6'30 p.m. a bird lighted on the boat several
times; I tried to catch it, but failed ; it landed again on
the end of the jibboom ; I took my revolver and shot it;
it flew about six yards to windward and dropped into the
water apparently dead ; the wind was very light and I
tried to get the boat to windward, so that I might pick up
the bird, but I could not get her to come around, so I
drifted to leeward, soon losing sight of my much-prized
bird.
Wednesday, January 24th. Found two flying fish, about
the same size as the one I got yesterday.
Thursday, January 25th. I was rather fortunate this
morning, finding four fish, two three and two two inches
long. 3p m. I was steering the boat, and happened to
look astern and saw a bird standing on the rudder, which
I caught and cooked with a lot of matches that had been
wet with the salt water when I capsized ; using the top
part of the oil stove for a fireplace, which answered well
for the purpose; I also divided the bird, keeping part for
the next day. This was the last one I caught.


Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, 26,27, 28th. Iremained
hove to, it being calm. Friday or Saturday did not get
any fish, but on Sunday morning found one that measured
five inches long ; it was the largest I caught for some time.
As the alcohol was getting short, I made the fish answer
for breakfast with some water. About 6 p.m. a light breeze
sprung up from the north and eastward. As I was tired
of being hove to, I got under way, and let her steer her-
self by setting the sails so that she would sail by the wind.
The sky was clear, with pleasant weather, so I let her go
that way all night, awakening up once and awhile to have
a look at the weather.
Monday, January 29th, Sunrise. Light steady breeze,
the weather being clear and pleasant; looked around the
deck for flying-fish, but could not find any. I felt very
weak and hungry. After taking my morning’s allowance
of alcohol there was but enough for another meal, which
was about two teaspoonsful. I then measured the
water, and found there was four and a half inches in the
ten gallon keg. So after that day I would have nothing
but water to sustain life, and there being but little of that,
made me think I could not last long unless I got relief.
Monday, p.m. After writing the log for the day I
let the boat head by the wind, and steer herself; leaning
over the weather side with my head down, I, for the first
time, began to give up all hopes of escaping from starva-
tion, and wondering how long before the last would come ;
I was very weak, so that every move I made had its elfects,
and I felt myself daily getting weaker and weaker, I
remained in meditation for about an hour, when I looked
to leeward, and there saw a sail quite plainly, about eight


miles off ; she was heading to the south and westward. I
could hardly believe, for a moment what I really saw, but
seeing it was no dream, I quickly altered my course and
ran before the wind, which was very light, heading to cross
her bow. I caught hold of the umbrella, which was lying on
deck, opened it and kept waving it in hopes of attracting their
attention ; after waving it for a short time it slipped out of
my hand, and went overboard; that was I think about the
last article I lost on the trip ; after it went I got the flag
and fastened it to a stick and kept it waving without at-
tracting any attention. I took my revolver, which had the
last six cartridges in the chambers, and went forward and
tired them off, without any effect. I then hauled down the
jib and made the flag fast to the upper part of it,
with the Union down, hoisting the jib up again.
By this time the sail, which I saw, was right ahead of me
and 1 began to fear that they would pass without seeing
me, when, finally. I saw her tack, which satisfied me that
they had seen the boat. It was then about 2 o’clock. 1
sailed before the wind, and the vessel beat to windward
towards me. The wind being light, and the boat’s bottom
full of barnacles, it took till 5 o’clock before I got
alongside. I sailed under her lee quarter; they threw me
a line, and it fell across the bows of the boat. I was so
exhausted, partly, I suppose, from the excitement, as well
as hunger, that I could scarcely crawl forward to take a
turn with the line, which at last I managed to do as quickly
as I could. They then hauled the boat up alongside—several
of the hands jumping down to look out for the boat. The
captain telling me to come up as soon as possible.
Having placed a ladder over the side for me, I managed to
crawl up, and when I got on deck started to walk aft,


but staggered against the cabin and had to be assisted aft,
where I lay down on the skylight. They were surprised
when I told them I was from San Francisco. The first
thing I asked for was hard-tack and molasses, as I had
been so long without bread. I was more anxious for it
than anything else. They gave me the bread, but as the
captain said the steward was making some soup for me,
and it would be ready in a few minutes, I did not eat the
hard-tack, but waited for the soup ; and while it
was being got ready they gave me a cup of tea.
I thought of the alcohol I had left, and told them where
they would find it. They passed it out of the boat, I
mixed it with the tea and drank it, which revived me
wonderfully. I afterwards drank a tea cup full of soup,
with which I ate a small piece of toasted bread, and that
was as much as I wanted. I felt as though I had done
very well for that day. I was surprised at myself not being
able to talk enough to converse with anyone ; they advised
me not to try, as they would have plenty of time when I
got stronger to hear the particulars of the voyage. About
eight o’clock I went to the berth prepared for me in the
cabin, and slept sound for about four hours, feeling greatly
refreshed on awakening. The next morning I had a salt
water bath and went to breakfast, and managed to control
my appetite without much trouble, improving wonderfully
while I remained on board. The vessel was the schooner
“Alfred Yittery,” Captain Boor, from the Solomon group,
eleven days out, where she had been on a voyage recruiting
Polynesians for labor work on plantations. She was bound
for Maryborough, Queensland, Australia. She had 97
Islanders on board, who evinced great amazement at seeing
me alone in the boat, and gathered round me whenever I


came on deck, chattering with intense interest. The captain
told me his Lat. was (when he picked me up) 22,,08 8.
Long. 154.,46 E. Bearing N.E. by N., distance 160
miles from Sandy Cape. I had then been 162 days out
from San Francisco, California. The distance from San
Francisco to Sandy Cape is about 7000 miles. So the
“ Pacific” must have sailed something over that amount.
The distance the log registered to the time I lost it was
about 6500 miles. The kindness I received from Captain
Boor, and, in fact, the whole of the crew, I can never
forget. They all seemed so anxious to do all they could
for me. After the vessel lay in port for four weeks, she
started on another voyage in the same trade. My wish in
parting with them was that by some good chance we might
happen to meet again under more favorable circumstances.
Log of schooner after I was picked up :
Monday, January 29th, 2 p.m. Sighted boat. 5 pm.
Alongside ; contained one man; hoisted it up to the davits
and secured it, and then proceeded on our course.
Tuesday January 30. Light wind and pleasant
weather, with clear sky, 8 p.m. Moderate breeze and
fine weather. 12 p.m. Sighted Sandy Island light; bore
S. by E., |E. Distance, 23 miles.
Wednesday, January 31th, noon. Sandy Cape light-
house ; bore N.E,, Distance 16 miles. 5.30 p.m. Passed
Fairway Buoy. 7 p.m. Pilot Evans came on board and
took charge. 8 p.m. Came to anchor off Woody Island,
Thursday, February Ist. 10 a.m. Hove up anchor


and proceeded with light S.E. breeze, 5.30 p.m. Entered
the Mary Eiver. 10 p.m. Came to anchor four miles
below Dundatha. Midnight. Calm and clear.
Friday, February 2nd. 12.30 a.m. Hove up and
towed vessel with boats, 8 a.m. Made fast alongside of
Wilson and Hart’s old Mill. 9 a.m. The Doctor passed
the Polynesians. 11a.m. Cast off the lines and set sail;
came to anchor in the river on the east side, and moored
ship to the bank. P.M. Discharged the Polynesians and
cleared ship. In the evening I went ashore and took up
quarters at the Melbourne Hotel, feeling tired and ex-
hausted after the day. As night drew on I got worse, so
that I was hardly able to speak. I found that I had talked
too much during the day, and over-exerted myself. The
night was warm and close, not a breath of wind, which was
very trying to me, after being so long at sea, accustomed
to plenty of fresh air; and, as fate would have it, the room
was poorly ventilated, so that sleep was out of the question.
After lying awake all night, I got up in the morning, feeling
feverish and exhausted, and had to be taken to the
hospital, which I found cool and pleasantly situated, with
plenty of ventilation, kind and attentive nurses, and a
gentlemanly doctor, who told me the next day that I
had no fever (which I was glad to hear), but that I had
been interviewed too much, and wanted rest and quietness.
I improved for a few days, but as the weather became very
warm, I got worse; so that after remaining three weeks
in Maryborough, I found myself weaker than when I
landed,; and much reduced (weighing only 1341 b.; my
usual weight being 1771 b. I weighed, on landing from
the schooner, 1481 b. I then thought I would try the sea


air of Pialba, which was cool and refreshing, with a
splendid beach for bathing, opposite the hotel. I made
good use of this change by bathing daily; so that
on March 9th, I felt myself strong enough to return
to Maryborough; and I commenced from this date to
improve slowly in strength and weight, but I had to be very
careful of my diet, and frequently felt quite enervated. I
had great difficulty in abstaining from talk, although every
word I uttered caused me considerable suffering, both in
lungs and head ; and I believe my attempts to relate inci-
dents of the voyage, retarded my improvement. However,
from the end of March I made rapid strides in the right
direction; and, at the date of publishing my log, I feel
quite convalescent, and I am sure none the worse for my
long, tedious, and lonesome trip.
My readers may well imagine the feelings of gratitude
I bear towards Captain Boor and his crew; and, although no
words can possibly express the delight I experienced at the
sight of ,the “ Alfred Yittery.” I take this opportunity of
recording my heartfelt thanks [to Captain Boor and his
crew for the attention and consideration I received on
board ; and, also, for the many kindnesses I received from
friends in Maryborough, since my landing, although I was
an absolute stranger in a strange land. I was treated as
hospitably as a man could be, and I shall have exceeding
great pleasure, when I return to my native land (America),
in expressing my experience of Australian hospitality.
April 4th. Left Maryborough for Sydney in the S.S.
“Leichardt,” with the intention of exhibiting the “Pacific.”
Called in at Brisbane and stayed two days.


April 9th. A-rivei ; n Sydney, but failed to procure a
suitable budding to exhibit boat, so I concluded to travel
in the country districts uutil I should obtain a central room
i-i Sydney. I have been questioned by several as to the
state of my mind during the voyage. I certainly felt very
lonesome the fßst month, but 'found my mind fully oc-
cupied after that. It is my present intention to see all the
colonies, returning to Maryborough before I ship for
America, as I shall be glad to see the faces and land from
whom and where, I may say, I received my second life.
Since my arrival in Sydney, I saw by a paragraph
extracted from the San Francisco Bulletin, of December
Dst, that Captain Bums, of the barquantine “Tropic-
vance,” which I referred to in my “ Log,” was kind enough
to keep his promise, and report me in San Francisco. And
perhaps it will interest my readers to know I have already
received a letter from my home in Buffalo, New York,
stating that it was a great consolation to all my friends, at
Christmas time, to know that I had been seen alive, after-
completing more than half of my voyage, as they had
abandoned the hope of ever again seeing or hearing from
Your humble servant,
BERNARD GILBOY.
J. Gr. O’CONNOR, PRINTER, JAMISON STREET, SYDNEY.






H. P. GREGORY. 11. SHAW SMITH. S. W. GREGORY.
H. P. GREGORY & CO.,
iii|il jflqtljattfs.
77 Pitt Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
SOLE AGENTS FOR
J. A. FAY & CO.’S WOOD WORKING MACHINERY.
THE TANITE CO.’S EMERY W r HEELS AND MACHINES.
BLAKE’S BRASS LINED SPECIAL STEAM PUMPS.
KORTING’S STATIONARY, LOCOMOTIVE, AND MARINE
INJECTORS.
THE ECLIPSE CO.’S WINDMILLS, FOR ALL PURPOSES.
STURTEVANT’S FAN BLOWERS AND EXHAUSTS.
THE INGERSOLL CO.’S ROCK DRILLS.
THE NEW YORK RUBBER AND BELTING CO.’S GOODS.
A large stock of' the above always in our Store,
as well as all
vm wen 0.5 an
. V r T'*
SAW MILL, MINING, AND PLANING MILL REQUISITES.
• CORRESPONDENCE SOLICITED,
• " 1 ' -* jlPs
