

W. B.
BEAUTY
BOOK


CONTENTS
Pa^e.
Proportions of the Perfect Woman 3
The Quest of Beauty ------- 4
The Part the Corset Plays ----- 7
Physical Exercises for Improving the Figure 15
Massage ----------- 22
The Use of Cosmetics ------ 25
Putting the Corset on 34
Weingartcn’s W. B. Corsets ----- 36
Special Physical Culture Offer 48
Copyright 1908.
Weingarten Bros.




PR OPORTI O NS of the PERFECT WOMAN
If there has been any approach to a universal type it
is the Greek, esteemed by all moderns. By the common
agreement of artists the proportions formulated by the
sculptors of Greece have been accepted as those of the
ideally perfect woman. These require that her height
shall be 5 feet 7 inches; and when her arms are extended
she should measure exactly her height from the tip of
one middle finger to the other. The length of her hand
should be a tenth of her height; her foot just a seventh,
and the diameter of her chest a fifth. The perineum
should be the medial point in the stature, and the knee
should come exactly midway between the perineum and
the heel. The length from the elbow to the piiddle
finger should be the same as from the elbow 'to the
middle of the chest.
From the top of the head to the chin should be the
length of the foot, and from the chin to the armpits the
same measurement. With this given height, the waist
should measure 24 inches ; the bust under the arms,
36 inches, and measured outside of them, 43. The
upper arm should be ll£ inches in circumference; the
wrist, 6i inches; the thigh, 22; the calf of the leg, 14;
and the ankle, 8 inches; and the weight which this
frame gracefully can carry is 138 pounds.
3


The Quest
of Beautv
*'
beautiful is the right desire of every
true woman ' Her beauty is the supreme
gift of Nature to Humanity; it is the regal
power by which a woman reigns unquestioned sovereign
of the hearts and minds of men.
Beauty has many attributes, and it has long been an
open question whether fairness of face or perfection of
figure has the greatest power of attraction. But both are
certainly desirable, and both are dealt with in this book.
The point we wish to press home in the course of the
following pages is that it is quite possible for every wo-
man to develop her powers of beauty that lie latent with-
in her, and by following the simple but so frequently
ignored precepts of Nature, to retain her charms and
her fascination for many, many years.
In the first place, every woman should possess a beau-
tiful figure. As a matter of fact the majority of women
are thus endowed, but far too many ruin their appear-
ance by confining the most supple parts H their bodies
in badly-made, badly-constructed and unhygienic corsets.
Upon the style and fit of the latter article depends to a
very considerable extent the whole question of grace of
movement and perfection of figure.
ExCrCiSC and
the Figure
We are aware that Physical Culture
' s S reat value to women as
a further aid to beauty. We have
therefore gone to the greatest authorities on Physical
Culture and at a tremendous expense have had prepared
a special series of exercises which will be found of great
value in developing and'perfecting the figure, (s* pane is.)


Unique Proposal to
Women of Australia
and New Zealand.
Realising this essential truth,
Messrs. Weingarten Bros., the
makers of the celebrated W.B.
Corsets, "Nuform,” "Reduso,”
and "La Vida,” are making an unique proposal to the
women of Australasia. They are, in fact, giving to every
lady reader of this book the opportunity of obtaining
free of all expense what is undoubtedly one of the finest
corsets for style and shape in the world, and one which
will fit the figure of its wearer, not nearly, but exactly.
This corset is usually sold at one guinea.
The only condition made by which any reader of this
book may secure this valuable award—valuable both
from the point of view of appearance and from the point
of view of health—is that she will interest a certain
number of ladies in the great question of Figure
Perfection.
For the purpose of this competition Australasia has
been divided into twelve sections or divisions.
COMMONWEALTH OE AUSTRALIA.
Section 1. Victoria (Country Districts).
~ 2. ~ (Melbourne City).
~ 3. New South Wai.es (Country Districts).
~ 4. ~ (Sydney City).
5. Queensland (Country Districts).
~ 6. ~ (Brisbane City).
~ 7- South Australia (Country Districts).
~ 8. (Adelaide City).
9. Western Australia.
10. Tasmania.
DOMINION OF NEW ZEALAND.
~ 11. New Zealand (North Island).
~ 12. ~ (South Island).


Enclosed with this book
will be found a number of
post cards. All that those
who enter the Competition
have to do is to distribute
these cards amongst their
lady friends, asking them
to post them to Messrs.
Weingarten Bros., Block
Arcade, Collins Street,
Melbourne, applying for a
copy of this book.
Each set of cards bears
a registered number, so
that when the applications
come in, it is known
exactly who it was to
whom the post cards were
originally sent.
Every month for three
months, Messrs. Wein-
garten Bros, will present
The W.B. Corset, sold at one guinea,
which may be obtained free of charge
by readers of this book.
one of their celebrated W B. Corsets, as illustrated, to
the one hundred ladies who, in their respective divisions
of Australasia, have originated in this way the largest
number of applications for the book.
The regulations governing the Competition are quite
simple. There is no entrance fee. All that readers of
this book have to do is to take care that they give their
post cards to the ladies of their acquaintance who are
most likely to forward their cards to Weingarten Bros.


Ladies who are unsuccessful one month will have
their votes carried on to the next month’s total. Ladies
who have already received a presentation corset will be
disqualified from any further award.
For example, say, in the month of January, 1909, the
five winning ladies in District No. 6 (Tasmania) score
80, 63, 60, 54, and 51 votes respectively—they are
disqualified for any further entry. The lady who has
succeeded in taking the sixth place with, say, 49 votes,
will start the next month, February, with these votes
already credited to her name, and will therefore have a
very excellent opportunity, if her friends support her by
forwarding their post cards to Weingarten Bros., of being
awarded a W.B. Corset in the February competition.


THE PART THE
CORSET PLAYS
The part the corset plays is so important that serious
consideration must be given to the matter. On the corset
depends health;
on the corset, it
is therefore only-
reasonable to sug-
gest, depends
happiness; on the
corset depends
development o f
the figure; on the
corset therefore
depends the ques-
tion of perfection.
T h e results
from wearing the
iron - like, high-
built corsets that
are still to be
found in many
stores are very
serious. Instead
of strength comes
weakness, and
with weakness
comes ill health ;
instead of beauty
of figure the fig-
ure is ruined.
Venus at the Toilet.


A Criminal
to Women
The ** fis ure forcing” corset is the big-
gest cr ' m ' na l * n l^le world. As a rule
it is sold in a haphazard manner over
the counter without any care being taken that it shall
exactly fit the figure of its wearer. Indeed, it never can
do so, seeing that it is constructed on lines which have
no more relation to the natural shape of a woman’s body
than they have to the delightful contour of beauty. It’s
merely a mould into which a woman is supposed to
squeeze her figure. Consequently it has been condemned
by medical men all over the world as being the sole
cause of nine-tenths of the ailments with which women
are afflicted to-day. But to this matter we shall return.
The Corset
35 3 SuDDOrt
The first quality that the perfect corset
s h°uld possess is that of giving suffi-
dent assistance to the muscles of the
waist in their work ot supporting those soft parts of the
body which under present conditions of life so certainly
require it. At the same time there is no need to carry
matters to grotesque extremes. Because woman must
wear boots and shoes, it does not follow that she must
bind up and torture her feet after the manner of an
Oriental race. Similarly, although a woman must wear
a corset to help support her waist, that is no reason why
she should torture her body by squeezing it into a tightly
fitting, vice-like prison of steel and whalebone, thereby
distorting her naturally beautiful figure as Chinese ladies
distort their feet.
Support, Hot
Suoerscssion
or does support mean supersession.
’ s suPP the muscles to
save them the trouble of doing their
proper work. Sir Kdmund Beckett in his book, “The
Origin of the Laws of Health,’' says that “any organ of
9 B


the body that is not exercised, or is less worked for a
time, declines both in size and in strength.”
And this is just what the muscles of a woman’s waist
have been doing under the pernicious influence of the
“ figure-forcing ” corset.
Freedom of
Movement
The second qualit}- of the perfect corset
t^at £' v ' n S le body, especially the
abdomen and the chest, freedom of
movement. This the figure-forcing ” corset does not
do. Its wearer is practically on the rack. It is no more
possible for her to curve her form between her hips and
her chest than it is to bend her arm when it is confined
in splints. Yet Nature, just as she has provided the
joints of the elbow, as surely fashioned the muscles of
the abdominal region for the purpose of movement.
Slight and
Youthful Figures
Young ladies who are slight ought
to be as particular about their
corsets as those who are stout,
for their slim figures are apt to develop with maturity,
and while they develop they should be perfectly moulded
to the lines of symmetry and beauty.
An American
Example
It will be readily admitted that the
classic type of American girl is a well-
developed, healthy being. The Ameri-
can girl has forsaken the “figure-forcing ” corset, and
to-day wears only those corsets that give her freedom
of action in addition to the necessary support of the
body. American women to-day practically show that the
corset made on the lines of the W.B. Nuform and W.B.
Reduso is the only one that can give support and freedom.
10


Medical
Onininn
'
e(^' men sa y that the perfect corset
mu st not unduly restrict the action of the
internal organs. The perfect corset must
lend support to the muscles of the waist, but enable the
chest and lungs to fully develop. The corset must en-
able the whole figure to assume a proper dignity when
standing erect, and must be “ built ” in such a manner as
to induce the figure to assume perfection of outline. The
high, steel coiset breaks every rule laid down by both
medical and beauty authorities—impairs the health and
ruins the figure. The modern corset, such as the cele-
brated W.B. models, is the practical outcome of con-
tinued hygienic, medical and artistic skill.
As is well known, the natural body of a woman
should run nearly in a straight line from the chest
downwards to the abdomen. This gives a slight curve
from side to side, and it is this natural line of beauty
that the “figure-squeezing” corset, with its vice-like grip,
tyrannically squeezed into an artificial and absurd circular
waist, so compressing the figure as to interfere with the
movements necessary to digestion and respiration.
At the same time, by reason of its unscientific make,
this corset pulled the important internal organs of the
waist in a downward direction.
A CaUSC of
Fcmale Ailments
This action would of course pro-
duce an unlovel y development of
the lower part of the abdomen.
To prevent this, therefore, the corset—with an ingenuity
almost diabolical—caught this lower region, pressed it
11


down, and kept it flat with a torturing plate of whale-
bone and metal.
And yet people wonder at the increase of late years
in the number of ailments peculiar to the feminine sex.
As a doctor once said to the writer of this chapter, “De-
pend upon it, the vast proportion of these female dis-
orders are due to badly-fitting corsets. When I think
of it, and think of the mothers of the coming generation,
I tremble for the future of the race.”
JudicioUS
Corset-Wearing
°
The reason why medical men
«*ommend the use of the W.B.
Corset is now obvious.
The W.B. Corset is moulded on the lines of the body.
It gives the lungs room to expand, and instead of press-
ing the internal organs in a downward direction, it lifts
them upwards, and keeps them in their proper place.
In fact, the difference between wearing a W.B. Cor-
set and any other corset is the difference between judi-
cious and injudicious corset-wearing. And in many cases
its use has been prescribed by medical men as a means
for curing indigestion and other bodily ailments.
The Question
of Fitting
The corset which plays so important
a * )ar *' * n conl^ort ’ health and ap-
pearance of a woman, should always
be fitted to the figure. This is not always done. Corsets
are bought which are not exactly “ fits,” and in conse-
quence the gowns worn over them are not “ fits ” either.
No costume can look quite satisfactory save over the
w'ell-proportioned basis of a perfect fitting corset.
12


W. B. Corsets are made in scores of styles to suit all
figures. Most high-class manufacturers of ladies’ outer
apparel cut their garments over the newest W.B. models
Ladies wearing
W.B. Corsets there-
fore can always be
Sure of obtaining a
garment which ex-
actly suits them.
Practically every
Drapery Shop keeps
a complete stock of
the various W.B.
sizes, styles and va-
rieties, and a visit to
the shopkeeper usu-
ally patronized will
result in perfect sat-
isfaction of personal
requirements.
In the remote
event of this not be-
ing possible, you are
invited to write di-
rect to Messrs.
Weingarten Bros.,
makers of the fa-
mous brands of
W.B. Corsets, Block
Arcade, Collins St.,
Mel bou ni e, me n tion -
ing the name of your
dealer, and they will
see that jour needs
are supplied.
13


The Rules
of Beauty
J
Of course we know no two people are
made exactly alike. One may be tall,
another short, a third of middle height.
Similarly, different women are endowed by Nature with
waists of different sizes. But there is, most certainly,
in spite of this, a range of variation within which perfect
beauty is to be found.
But what beauty can there be in a corset-spoiled
waist, compressed out of its naturally graceful shape by
artificial, meaningless lines ?
The W. B. Corset is built in harmony with the beau-
tiful proportions of a perfectly-formed waist; it defines
its undulating outline, it allows for full freedom and
grace of movement, it makes, in fact, all the difference
between a well-dressed woman and a woman who is
merely dressed.
A Choice that
determines the
pj 6
From these few statements it may
readil y be seen lhat the corset >
made upon proper lines, is bound
to exert a great influence upon the
figure. It may be definitely said at once that the choice
of a corset will, especially for young women and girls,
determine both the question of perfection of figure and
bodily health. No greater injustice can be done to the
developing body and figure than to encircle it in the con-
straining, unhealthy embrace of a corset which has been
constructed without any regard for the health and con-
venience of its wearer, and the serious injury which, in
many cases, is caused thereby, has often far-reaching re-
sults. Apart from the questioir ot grace of figure, the
fact should not be overlooked that the feminine organism
inevitably sustains prejudicial pressure and deformity by
reason of the unnatural action of a badly built corset,
and the future happiness and welfare of the wearer is
considerably affected.
14


The body needs some outside support, as many, dis-
gusted with the “figure-forcing ” corset they once were
forced to use, have realised, finding that the abolition of
all support resulted in loss of figure. If the women of
to-day led the Spartan-like life of their predecessors,
the corset question might not be so important a matter.
But the times have altered, and modern conditions and
circumstances have necessitated the adoption of the cor-
set, for without its aid the modern woman would present
an entirely incongruous figure, lacking the slightest gift
of attractiveness and beauty of form. Civilization has
made the corset a necessity, and the woman of to-day
cannot do without this garment —that is, if she has any
care for her figure, and, we might add, health.
Sir Frederick Treves, the greatest medical man of
the age, has definitely stated that the support that a
correctly made corset gives to the waist is absolutely
necessary to a well-made woman.
We cannot, therefore, debate the necessity of the
corset when such an eminent authority, among many
others, declares that it should be worn.
Your own physician will inform you, in precisely
the same manner, that, from corseting the feminine
body derives the greatest possible assistance, and that
when true corseting principles are adhered to the hap-
piest results will follow.
Ladies cannot, however, be too careful in their choice
of a corset, and they should insist that the one they wear
fulfils all the functions which are desirable.
It is always possible to be corseted in a manner
which will produce the most graceful beauty of figure
and yet at the same time reap physical advantages which
will go far towards making a woman —not only beauti-
ful —but healthy and strong.
In the W. B. Corsets, with their wide range of styles
to fit every possible form, will be found all the essential
featutes for elegance of form and maintenance of health.
15


PHYSICAL
CULTURE
FOR IMPROVING THE FIGURE
AND CORRECTING DEFECTS.
In this chapter is given a series of exercises that will
be found of great value towards beautifying the figure.
Readers of this book must, however, remember that in
a book it is impossible to suggest individual exercises
for individual cases, but general exercises that will in
most cases be found beneficial are here given.
Physical Culture exercises are undoubtedly a valuable
aid towards the perfecting of the figure, but it certainly
must not be supposed that here is "the be all and the end
all” of the whole matter. These exercises, however,
have their distinct value, and may be confidently recom-
mended to all women.
The best time for indulging in Physical Culture ex-
ercises is undoubtedly on rising in the morning. It is
certainly not advisable to prolong any one series of
exercises for over half an hour, and, while firmness
and concentration are necessary, the exercises should
be gently carried through. Violent exertion is always
detrimental to the system, and without concentration has
little or no value for the body physical.
Concentration
The wor d 11 concentration ’ ’ has been
used above. In all these Physical
Culture exercises, concentration of will-power is abso-
lutely necessary. Any exercise loses its power for good
16


if slovenly or inattentively performed. The mind must
be concentrated on the idea of the exercise. If the
particular exercise is being done for the reduction of
flesh, the mind must realize that some special force is
being applied for this purpose at the desired spot. If
the exercise is for the development of any particular part
of the body, the mind must imagine that development is
gradually taking place. The exercise of will-power is
to a certain extent the secret of the success of Physical
Culture exercises.
Breathing
Correrflv
J
One °f *-' le fi nest exercises for developing
' 3Ust ' s "’hat is known as the breathing
exercise. How many people know how
to breathe correctly ? The number is not very large.
Breathing correctly is of the utmost importance, both
as a special exercise and as a necessity of life.
The breathing exercise for developing the bust is
as follows: Stand erect with arms at the sides of the
body, shoulders well back. Exhale slowly through the
mouth. Close the lips and slowly draw air in through
the nose until the lungs are quite full. Hold the breath
in the lungs for about six seconds, then very slowly
exhale through the lips.
This exercise should be repeated five or six times
at the beginning of the series of exercises.
Throughout the exercises the breath must not be
held, but allowed to enter and leave the lungs regularly.
A closing word with regard to dress. All exercises
should be performed in a very loose gown. The corsets
will not, of course, be worn at this time. Eow-heeled
bedroom shoes should be worn, and the arms must be
kept free. If long sleeves are worn they should button
securely at the wrist. If they are allowed to slip down
to the forearm they hamper the upward movements.
17


NOTES FOR EXERCISES.
1. Stand erect. Slowly expire all breath from the body. Keep hand
pressed firmly against the body.
2. Draw breath in slowly, evenly, shoulders well back, head erect.
3. Arm exercise. Stand erect, arms at sides. Smartly raise right arm
in front of body above the head, use each arm alternately.
4. Hands just touching shoulders,
elbows away from body. Slowly
move hands out as shown in dotted
line and back again.
5. Arms stretched straight
from shoulders, palm upper-
most. Turn palms downwards
and upwards.
18


6. Exercise for throat
and neck, incline the
head well back, and
move the same in a
circular manner over
the shoulders and
chest.
9. Stepping over the stick. Hold
an ordinary walking stick at the
extreme ends. Now carefully en-
deavor to step through the space
made by the arms and hands.
10. The mowing exercise. Re-
duces the waist and develops hips
and bust Place the arms away to
the right and imitate a mowing
movement as shown in dotted line.
7 & 8. These com-
prise a splendid bracing
exercise for all the
muscles of the body.
First let the whole body
droop as if quite ex-
hausted, the hands fall-
ing helplessly at the
side. Smartly pull the
body up as in No. 8,
shoulders well back,
and every muscle
drawn tense.
19


11, Stand erect, arms straight
out from shoulder. Keeping arms
straight and body from hips down-
wards rigid, bend from side to
side as shown.
13. The balancing exercise.
Stand erect as shown in dotted
line. Swing forward on foot with
arms extended, balancing the
whole body on the toes. Use each
foot alternately as balance.
12. The Lunge. Stand Erect.
Lunge forward on the foot as
shown. Keep the body straight.
14. A splendid exercise for the
muscles of the back and legs.
Lunge forward as in No. 12, and
reach forward, touching ground in
front of foot. Feet forward alter-
nately.


15. Touch the toes without
bending the knees. Do not try
to touch toes at first. After two
or three trials, the hands will
touch as desired.
16. Lie flat on floor. Hands side
of shoulders, press body rigidly
upwards from knees and return
slowly.
17. Lie flat on floor. Hands at
side of shoulders, press body up
rigid from the toes.
18. Lie flat on the floor, hands extended beyond head.
Raise body as shown on dotted lines and return. Legs
must be kept firm during this exercise.
21


19. Lie flat as in No. 18. Raise
knees, keeping the lower part of the
leg straight.
20. Lying on the side, raise foot,
keeping leg straight. Lower again
slowly.
22. Chair exercise. Sit up-
right in chair. Bend slowly
down to touch ground in
front of foot, using each hand
alternately.
21. Stand erect. Raise foot
sideways and lower again slowly
23. Sitting upright, clasp knee
with hands and draw well into
the body. Gently lower again.
22


Massage
Massage is undoubtedly of great value when properly
applied. There is so much ignorance prevailing as to its
proper method of application, that often more harm than
good is the result of the various operations. It is quite
possible for every woman in her own home to use the
massage treatment to great advantage, and for this pur-
pose a special series of massage exercises has been pre-
pared for the readers of this book.
All the exercises here given are intended for self-
application, and will be found beneficial in the specific
cases mentioned. Needless to say, it is impossible to give
the necessary exercises for the development or restoration
of every part of the
body in such a book
as this, but just those
exercises that particu-
larly bear on the
question of perfection
of face and figure
have here been in -
eluded-
Many women suffer
with fleshiness of the
throat. The following
exercise will, if care-
fully carried through,
relieve this trouble-
With the right hand
fully extended, clasp
No. 1.—For reducing flesh under eyes and
on cheeks. Gently draw fingers in
circular movement across cheekbone.
23


No, 2—To remove wrinkles round eyes.
Firmly draw finders along the flesh
below the eyes in tin outward direction.
the throat ami gently
stroke downwards,
keeping a firm pres-
sure on the flesh- As
soon as the right hand
has finished its move-
ment, employ the left
hand, and so con-
tinue alternately.
Massage of the
chest is very benefi-
cial to those who suf-
fer with thinness. The
parts affected should
be gradually stroked
with either hand al-
ternately in a down-
warddirection. Pinch -
ing massage is some-
times recommended.
The flesh of the chest
is gently pressed be-
tween the first finger
and thumb, both hands
being used. The slap -
ping of the chest
quickly with the fiat
open hand is often
beneficial in cases of
lung trouble. Women
who suffer with obesity
No. 3.—For filing out the chin and
rounding cheeks. Diaw fingers firmly from
the chin upwards along the cheeks.


No. 4. —To overcome thinness of throat.
With firm fingers pressed well into
fiesh, stroke down towards chin.
No. 5. —To prevent frown wrinkles.
From top of nose with firm stroke,
draw fingers up to top of forehead.
may find the following ex-
ercises on the abdomen of
great value. In all these
exercises, of course, con-
centration is necessary, the
mind must be fixed on the
exercises and the desired
end. The hands are placed
on the body with the fingers
No. 6.—To prevent wrinkles.
Draw fingers firmly across forehead
from eyebrows to hair.
just touching over the
heart. A stroking move-
ment is then employed
downwards away towards
the sides. The point where
the fingers touch is low-
ered after each exercise.


the use of Cosmetics
Many women whose facial beauty falls short of the higher
standards of perfection are inclined to look with scorn on
methods of beauty culture. Nevertheless, surprising results
may be attained if proper care be given to the complexion.
This was certainly the belief held by the Ancients. The
Greeks, for instance, regarded the use of ointments with
great favor. We read that it was the custom of the women
of Corinth to take a bath of perfumed olive oil for two hours
every day. Sophocles represents Venus perfuming her hair
before the mirror, and Minerva anointing her chaste body.
In a lady’s toilet case discovered at Thebes was found a
marvelous array of jars and bottles for perfumes and cos-
metics. In Rome the ladies of fashion spent the hours of
their mornings in the vapour baths, followed by douches and
massage. The Empress Poppaea used to take baths of asses’
milk twice a day, and it was for this reason that the Im-
perial Court was accompanied wherever it went by flocks
of several hundreds of asses.
In England, as far back as the days of King Henry 111,
ladies used to wear during the night a mask composed of
flour and white of eggs.
As far as France, chosen home of beauty, is concerned,
we are told that by the use of cosmetics Diana of Poictiers
preserved her youthful charms to an advanced age. Anne
of Austria introduced a cream made of paste of almonds
for whitening the hands and shoulders. In the time of the
Directory it was the fashion to take baths of crushed straw-
berries and raspberries, and even of champagne and" wine
of Bordeaux, Nowadays modern science has substituted for
these strange performances, baths of glycerine, ammonia,
and various chemicals, while the electrical current has also
been utilized in various ablutionary processes.
It is not surprising that all this trouble has been taken
and ingenuity exercised by women of a ! l countries and eras
when we consider that on the care of the complexion realh-
depends the question of facial beauty. Those in whose
cheeks the pink and red roses softly bloom will ever com-
pel admiration, while the pale cheeks and sallow complexions
are passed by unnoticed. Dr. Startin, the great skin spe-
cialist. in one of his works, has the following sentence as
his closing words of advice: "Take care of vour skins as
you value the treasure of a good complexion ” Dr. Startin
is such an authority on this question that his words of ad-
vice in reference to the use of cosmetics will be of especial
interest to readers of this book. He says in one of his
treatises on the skin: "The Romans and Greeks appear to
26


have been accredited with the power to enhance their per-
sonal charms, with many and various blooms and cosmetics,
and many years ago a list was published of the various
perfumes that they met on such occasions: mint for the
arms, palm oil for the cheeks and breast, marjoram for the
eyebrows and hair, and ground ivy for the neck. . In
England we are mainly indebted to the patronage of Queen
Elizabeth for the introduction of cosmetics. There are some
skins which are tender and fine and which may be prevented
from becoming rough and broken by the occasional dusting
on of some simple powder. . . With a little knowledge
and a little trouble, the existing beauty of the skin may be
rendered much more enduring, and the natural defects so
far subdued and ameliorated, that practically they cease to
exist. . . . It is important, therefore, in all derangements
of the skin to lose no time in the application of suitable
remedial treatment.” Thus writes one of the greatest au-
thorities on the skin, and to us having the idea of perfection of
beauty before us. the advice will be found valuable.
Cosmetics, ointments, powders and pomades are quite
necessary for the protection and healing of the skin. Under
such wonderful climatic conditions as prevail here in Australia
and New Zealand, no ordinary complexion can remain a thing of
beauty unless carefully guarded.
Unfortunately so much nonsense has been written anent
cosmetics that the popular prejudice has gone against the
use of such preparations. The proper use of cosmetics,
however, can only be beneficial, providing always the prepa-
rations are pure and contain no harmful drugs.
The following preparations are given as being the most
beneficial and the most simple. It will of course be recog-
nised that the cosmetics here recommended may be prepared
at a very cheap rate and will cost much less than the various
and wonderful preparations on sale at the chemists.
r-*
For Red Nose Tllis is clliefl y Caused through faulty
circulation. A little cold cream applied
will be found beneficial. The use of cold water will some-
times relieve this trouble.
Complexion
Powders
All face powders have the effect of drying
the skin Perhaps the dusting powder in
greatest demand is trisnitrate of bismuth,
which, mixed with French chalk or talc, forms blanc de
perle, or pearl white.
Powdered starch, either by itself or mixed with orris
powder and perfumed with essential oils, constitutes "violet
powder,” a cosmetic to be recommended on account of its
harmless qualities.
27


RoilfiC Rouge is made from the red coloring matter of
* the saf-flower, a species of caithamus, grown in
many of the countries bordering on the Mediterranean. This
plant is treated with carbonate of soda, and a product called
carthamate of soda extracted. This latter is then decom-
posed with vinegar or lemon juice, and the powder obtained
mixed with French chalk.
An inferior kind of rouge is composed simply of a solu-
tion of carbonate of potash and carmine, the product of the
cochineal insect.
Lip
Salve
This is a recipe for a good rose lip salve: Oil of
almonds, 2 oz.; while wax, 1 oz ; alkanet root, 1
drachm. These having been melted together and
macerated, a few drops of otto of rose should be added.
Complexion
Washprs
**
A good complexion wash recommended by
Seymour Churchill, the eminent beauty spe-
cialist. of 2 Alexander House, 56 Ludgate
Hill, London, E.C., is made as follows; Blanched almonds,
1 lb.; rose water, 1 quart; spirits of wine, i pint; otto of
roses, 1 drachm; white wax. 1 oz.; and spermaceti 1 oz.
The method of mixing is thus described; "Melt the wax
and spermaceti, and heat the almonds in clean water, add-
ing the rose water to them, drop by drop. When reduced
to a paste, strain through clean muslin; then add gradually
the melted wax and spermaceti, stirring all the while; then
the spirits of wine, also drop by drop, and stirring all the
while, and finally the otto of roses, all this drop by drop and
continually stirring (otherwise the milk curdles), then strain
again and bottle ”
The following preparations will also be found to give
satisfactory results, and to be free from any injurious con-
comitant :
An emulsion of sweet almonds, borax, curd soap and
styrax, scented with rose.
An emulsion of bitter almonds and corrosive sublimate,
or perchloride of mercury.
An emulsion of bitter almonds and elder-flower water.
Aromatic vinegar has for many years been greatly es-
teemed as a cosmetic, and is often used as an addition to the
bath. It has the great merit of clearing the pores of the skin.
The following preparations are recommended in a work
on "Useful Arts and Handicrafts’’:
Strong aromatic vinegar.—Hlacial acetic acid, 4 oz.; otto
of lavender, 1 drachm; otto of rosemary, 1 drachm; otto of
cloves, 1 drachm; rectified spirit, 1 oz.; water, 3 oz.
This preparation is very strong, and a teaspoonful of it
added to a quart of water is sufficient for ablutionary pur-
poses, If used undiluted it would be apt to blister the skin.


Weak aromatic vinegar—Wine vinegar, malt vinegar, or
distilled vinegar, 1 quart; lavender flowers, 1 oz.; powdered
camphor, drachm; bruised cloves, i oz. This preparation
should be put in a bottle and agitated occasionally. Strain
off the liquid at the end of a week.
In the Bast there is in common use a perfectly white
cream, composed of jasmine and benzoin, by means of which
a very natural but transient bloom is imparted to the cheeks.
The famous cosmetic " Lait Virginal” is made thus: A
tincture of gum benzoin containing 2 oz. of gum to 16 oz.
of spirits of wine. Mix i oz. of this with 8 oz. of rose
water or elder-flower water. The milky emulsive liquid re-
sulting is then ready for use.
r*
SodDS Ordinary soap being often found to be too harsh
“ and severe in its effects on the skin an excellent
substitute is almond powder. This is prepared by pressing
out the oil from either bitter or sweet almonds, and then
grinding up the resulting cake. To every 1 lb. of this pow-
der about 9 or 10 drops of otto of rose should be added and
well worked in.
r~-'
Rubbing Mrs. Humphry, in her book, "How to be Pretty
® though Plain,” has the following paragraph:
"Rubbing with a soft chamois leather is excellent for the
skin, giving it both smoothness and gloss. A girl who was
much troubled with an eruptive disorder was advised to pro-
cure a very soft chamois leather and gently but persistently
to rub the skin for a few moments daily. She did so and
never suffered from the same disfiguring cause again. The
arms and shoulders are greatly improved by being rubbed in
the same way; but the chamois leather must be very soft or
it will break the skin.”
r~<
Wrinkles The f°U° w i n R recipe may be recommended to
those troubled with wrinkles. Rose water, 10 oz ;
glycerine, 3 oz.; tannin, 1 oz. This preparation should be
used once a day and carefully rubbed into the skin.
r
Moles The f°l' ow ' n R is recommended for the removing
of moles: Sage leaves, 1 oz.; rosemary, 1 oz.;
lavender (flowers), 1 oz.; cloves, i oz.; camphor, 1 drachm;
vinegar (distilled), 1 pint; water, i pint. This mixture will
take about ten days or a fortnight to prepare, but will be
found very effective. The substances mentioned above must
be allowed to "work” in the vinegar and water, and then the
whole must be filtered.
29


Blackheads The following simple preparation will be
found valuable in this trouble : Glycerine,
4 oz.; lavender water, 1 oz. Rub well into the affected parts.
r*
Freckles Pure elder-flower water is an excellent wash for
removing freckles.
Rejuvenating
Eyebrows
For this purpose a pieparation of pow-
dered charcoal a little iron oxide, combined
with a waxy basis, will be found useful.
For much of the valuable advice on facial troubles and
blemishes we are indebted to Seymour Churchill, the well-
known Continental and English beauty specialist, of 2 Alex-
ander House, 56 Ludgale Hill, London, E.C.
The Management
of the Hair
Water should rarely he applied to the
hair as it removes the natural oil, and
thus produces a tendency towards
baldness. The hair should be shampooed about once a fort-
night, and the best medium that can be used is good soap
and hot water, with yoke of egg or a little Quillai bark This
latter contains saponin, a substance the use of which has a
very beneficial effect on the hair.
r*
Drv Hair Some people require the occasional application
* of a little grease to the hair. The following
recipe, extracted from Dr. Biegel’s famous work on the
hair, will be found of use in such cases: Provence oil, 3 oz.;
essential oil of almonds. 2 drops; essential oil of roses, 2 drops;
orange oil, 5 drops; lemon oil. 10 drops. Color by digesting
a little alkanet root in it for a few days.
Greasy Hair Hair which is too greasy not a common
complaint this—should be washed in soda
or ammonia, diluted with water.
Glossy
J-|-jjp
The following preparation has the effect of making
the hair glossy and keeping it in position ; Mix
gum-tragacanth with distilled water. Allow it to
digest for 5 or 6 hours, strain through muslin, press, and add
alcohol and rose water.
A mucilage of quince seeds and eau de Cologne will have
a similar effect.
30


The Brush
and Comb
The following information may be found of
use. Hair should be trimmed or clipped once
a fortnight to prevent any splitting of the
ends. Singeing is absolutely valueless, the hair not being
hollow and containing no blood-vessels. The hair-brush
should have long soft bristles of uneven length, so that every
part of the scab) may be touched. Wire brushes irritate the
skin. Combs sho ild have blunt points, placed fairly widely
apart. If the teeth are too close together they are liable to tear
the hair. The small-tooth comb should never be used under
any consideration whatever.
r*
To make
Hair curl
Hair being oval in shape it is unequal in
strength all round, and has a tendency to curl
on iis weakest side. Upon the hot iron taking
away the moisture from the side nearest to it, the cells form-
ing the hair on that side approach more nearly to each other,
and consequently the hair curls.
Anything, therefore, which removes the natural lubricant
from the hair makes it curl.
Any alkali, such as potash or ammonia, will do this, but
in order to protect the hair from damp or moisture that
might cause it to uncurl again, the potash, or whatever may
be used, should be mixed with some aromatic oil.
Hair
Washes
A few hair washes are here given: Acetic Acid,
1 part ; cantharides (essence), 1 part ; rose water,
1 part; water, 5 parts.
Another good hair restorative is made as follows ; Can-
tharides (tincture), 1 part; rosemary water, 2 pints; sal. vola-
tile (spirits), 1 part.
Another hair wash. —Ammonia, 1 part ; water, 12 parts ;
the white of two eggs to be added.
The base of most hair washes and restorers is cantharides,
and this is perhaps the best hair strengthener possible to
obtain.
Macassar Oil This recipe for Macassar oil is given by
A. J. Cooley m his book. " loilet in Ancient
and Modern Times”: Oil of almonds (reddened), 1 pint; oil of
rosemary, 1 drachm; oil of origanum, 1 drachm ; oil of nutmeg,
15 drops; oil of roses, 15 drops; oil of Neroli, 6 drops; essence
of musk, 3 or 4 drops
Mix, and add alcohol drop bv drop with agitation as long
as it will bear it, or until 2 fluid ozs. have been added.
31


Pomatum This is the simplest form of pomatum: Take
2 parts of hog’s lard and X part of beef suet;
melt at moderate temperature, and to each 1 lb. mix 1 oz.
of Provence oil, and scent.
Soft Pomade This is the recipe for the original old-
fashioned pomatum as given by Messrs.
Leland and Bolus in their work previously mentioned: Melt
purified lard at the lowest possible temperature. Into it drop
cuttings of small fragrant apples sufficient to rise to the top
of the lard. Allow it to solidify and rest for three days.
Then melt it in a water bath at the lowest possible tempera-
ture and pour off.
r*
Emulsive Pomade ° f oil of almonds take 8 oz.; of
white wax, 2 oz. Put mixture in a
jar and melt it at a low temperature in an oven. Stir in 4 oz.
of rose water into which 10 grains of borax have been
dissolved. Stir vigorously till cold.
r*
The Nails The nail is very sensitive and a very slight
effort will produce a permanent mark in its
substance. Therefore only a groove-shaped ivory, presser
should be used to prevent the skin growing over the
lunula, or half-moon at the base of the nail. If this skin be
allowed to grow its frayed edges will cause pain. Finger-
nails should be cut round, toe nails square.
r*
Chapped Hands X n or^er t° make camphor balls for
chapped hands. 1 oz. of almond oil, i oz
of spermaceti, and i oz. of white wax should be melted
together. Into this i oz of powdered camphor must be
stirred, and the resulting mixture made up into balls.
Chilblains For P a,n f u * and frequently inconvenient
affliction no better application can be used than
the famous Pond’s Extract, which readers can always pro-
cure from their chemist. Chilblains at once yield to its re-
medial effect.
32


ANATOMICAL EXACTITUDE
OF THE W.B. CORSET
Frequent emphasis and continued reference has been
made in this book to the altogether perfect manner in
which the W.B. Corset coincides with the anatomical
requirements of the figure. The whole principle of its
construction is based upon a complete understanding of
the nature and formation of the body, and from every
point of vierv it materially assists towards physical ex-
cellence, not only of contour, but of internal organism.
The bust by its aid is developed into symmetrical
beauty without that undue constriction of the ribs which
marks the wearing of the ordinary corset, and the abdo-
men is kept in place and its organs strengthened by the
unique system of lacing which characterizes W.B. cor-
seting.
All physicians who have examined the construction
and witnessed the wearing of a W.B. Corset are unani-
mous as to the beneficial results which follow. Indeed,
this could not be otherwise, for the fundamental princi-
ples on which this Corset is made embody the greatest
scientific comprehension of the needs of the " female
form divine.” In this respect the very recent approval
of a well-known London physician is worth quoting,
for it manifests the professional endorsement of the ex-
cellence of the W.B. Corset.
A Physician’s Endorsement.
Glengariff, 58 Croydon Road, Anerley.
Messrs Wkingarten Bros.. 134 London Wall.
Dear Sirs: —Having witnessed a practical dem-
onstration of the fitting of your various styles
of corsets, I must say that in my opinion, from
an anatomical point of view, your idea of cut and
the arrangement of lacing is perfect.
Thomas F. Devank, L.R.C.P.
Messrs. Weingarten Bros, always welcome the critical
inspection of medical men, and have had the pleasure of
receiving many similar expressions of opinion to that
given above.
The W.B. Corsets represent anatomical perfection
of construction, and are thus enabled on purely hygienic
and scientific lines to mature the elegance of form which
should characterize any woman’s figure.
33


LANGDON-HOPE’S APPROVAL.
The name of Langdon-Hope, the eminent English
doctor, is too well known to require comment, for this
great bloodless operator and surgeon’s fame is wide-
spread. Naturally he takes the keenest interest in all
that makes for perfection of form and never hesitates
to decry any methods which tend to mar or abuse the
suppleness and grace of form.
Mr. Langdon-Hope has always made a special fea-
ture of feminine ailments and deformities, and invariably
insists upon his patients adopting the best methods of
assistance for regainment or production, not only of ele-
gance of carriage, but of general satisfactory physique.
Readers will therefore be deeply interested to learn that
their specialist holds the highest opinion upon the health -
giving qualities of the W.B. Corsets, and that he spe-
cifically recommends them as being helpful in a great
degree to all women.
He dwells on the fact that they are free from the
harmful pressure which is so injurious to the feminine
organism, and that they materially assist in the removal
of the cause of disease.
66 Victoria Street, London, S.W.
Messrs. Wkingarthn Bros.
Gknti.kmKn: —The corsets you have fitted my
lady patients with during the last IS months
have given me every satisfaction.
I find in treating women’s ailments by my sys-
tem of bloodless surgery that your special cor-
sets are a great help to me, as they remove the
cause (in my opinion invariab’y the original
cause) of the trouble—pressure, which is often
brought about by badly fitted old-fashioned
stays. Yours faithfully,
J. LANC.nox-Hoi’K,
January 2, 1908 Bloodless Sms:eon.
Such approval as this clearly establishes the undeni-
able general advantages of the W.B. Corset, and ladies
who regard their health as a first consideration can do no
better than adopt the advice given by this eminent man.
W.B. Corsets not onl}' enhance personal beauty, but
they always increase and maintain the general health.
34


CORRECT METHOD OF LACING
AND PUTTING ON A CORSET.
Even a perfect corset, such
as the W. 8., requires careful
and correct lacing and putting
on in order to derive the best
results from its wear. The
lacing of the corset is a most
important matter, and the
wearer of a W.B. should pay
implicit attention to the fol-
lowing directions : Three laces
are used in W.B. Corsets, and
the first one should be inserted
at the waist line, using,
according to length of waist,
either 3 or 4 holes.
The two parts should then
be drawn in, leaving a space
from li to 2 inches. The
second lace should then be in-
serted at the top of the corset
and laced down to meet the
waist lace; then the third lace
FIG. 2.
FIG. 1.
35


FIG. 3.
should follow iu the eye below
the waist lace and threaded
downwards. The corset should
be put on as in Fig 1, and then
as in Fig. 2, the abdomen
should be drawn up into its
natural place, in the fulness of
the corset, by pulling the corset
down at the same time as the
abdomen is drawn up, to get
perfect adjustment. Finally,
the waist lace is crossed and
drawn in as desired, and by
this means the only pressure
is exerted at just the point
necessary. Fig. 4 shows the
corset on and the waist lace
about to be tied in front, both
the other laces being tied in
hows at the back.
The employment of three
laces is the only correct method
whereby every part of the fig-
ure may be properly drawn in
without sacrificing one part for
the benefit of another, and
without unduly compressing
the sensitive and delicate por-
tion of the anatomy.
FIG. 4


Reduso
THE ADVANCED IDEA IN CORSETS.
A woman is as stout as she looks, but with a W.B.
REDUSO corset, she need be no stouter than she de-
sires. The REDUSO is the first corset to really help
idealize the figure of over-fleshy women. In the
REDUSO, scientific corset construction completely
displaces the torturing, harness-like contrivances that
have heretofore masqueraded as a “ reducing type ”
of garment. Completely free of straps, over-taxed
weight or unyielding stiffness, the “REDUSO” per-
forms its remarkable work as simply and effectively
as the other “W. 8.” models. It reduces the ab-
domen and hips from one to five inches without
unduly confining the figure. Think of the comfort
of moving about all day with perfect freedom —per-
fectly corseted and yet without feeling the constraint
of stays. In a word —the REDUSO is an achievement
of science and sense. Study the and
described.


REDUSO No. 770.
Reduso No. 770
(as pictured) for tall,
large women. Made of
very serviceable white
coutil or batiste with
three pairs of hose
supporters. Sizes 19
to 36. Price 18 '6
Reduso No. 772
For short. large women.
Made of durable white cou-
til and batiste, same con-
struction and hose sup-
porters as Style 770. Sizes
19 to 36. Price ! 8/6
Reduso No. 774
A most desirable corset
for tall, large women. Made
about one inch longer below
the waist line than Style
770, but of a material spe-
cially woven to withstand
extreme wear and strain.
Three pairs hose supporters.
Sizes 19 to 36 Price 26/6
Reduso No. 775
Another model for tall.
large women. This garment
is perfection in all essentials
of this type of corset. Fabric
is the finest self-striped im-
ported coutil. richly trimmed
and especially boned to in-
sure extra flexibility and
undoubted strength. Sizes
19 to 36. Price 45/-


Reduso No. 760
Reduso is a boon Cor
large women—the ideal
garment for over-de-
veloped figures requir-
ing special restraint.
It not only restrains
tbe tendency to over-
fleshiness,but it moulds
the over - developed
proportions into those
pleasing, graceful out-
lines, hitherto thought
to be attainable only
by slighter figures.
The particular feature
of this Model is the
apron over the abdo-
men and hips, boned in
such a manner as to
give the wearer absolute
freedom of movement.
Made of an excellent
quality coutil, in White
and Grey, with hose
supporters attached to
front and sides. Sizes
24 to 36. Price 1 8/6
Style No. 750 is the
same as above, except
that the bust is some-
what higher all around.
Price 1 8/6
REDUSO NO 760


NUFORM
THE HIP-SUBDUING F[?]T
The “NUFORM” is the actual expre perfection,
the impersonation of supple grace. It is the 'he “pulse
of fashion,” adapted to the needs of the mode talian woman.
The makers of “NUFORM” Corsets are alive to the wants ol the
Australian woman—not only keeping apace with the latest creaFons,
but even anticipating them, and subtly suggesting the coming fashions.
Properly selected and fitted, the “NUFORM” will give you the
figure desired. It will round off sudden bulges into fading curves,
build out sunken lines, flatten the abdomen and lend to the hips and
bust just the effect that the new styles demand
These Corsets are made in a large variety of distinctive styles.
All the latest creations in costumes are corresponded with. Each pair
is carefully wrought from materials of undoubted desirability.
Erect Form CORSETS
The “ERECT FORM” is a scientifically constructed Corset.
It supplements nature, and is planned to piotect, support and
rest the body.
The “ERECT FORM” Corset is resilient and allows complete
freedom of body. There is a complete absence of any restraint, and
yet, through its peculiarly perfect construction, the “ERECT FORM”
presents the wearer in perfect poise, shoulders back and abdomen in.
They help the wearer to cultivate vigorous deep breathing, so strongly
advised by physical cufturists.
In the following pages, we accurately picture and carefully de-
scribe the most popular types of “ERECT FORM” Corsets. Study
the model meant for you. Their success shows that their principle of
construction knows no equal. No matter what your build, there is
the ideal “ ERECT FORM ” Corset made in just the precise model
that you ought to wear.


LA VIDA No. 1516.
La Vida No, 1516.
An average model that will fit nine out
of ten women The bust is moderately
high, not extreme, and the hips are long.
The material is a durable coutil in white
only. It is prettily trimmed with lace.
Hose supporters at front and hips. Sizes
19 to 30. Price 18/6
Erect Form No. 749.
A girdle top model for medium figures.
Constructed above waist line exactly like
an Empire girdle, but has long hips
and quite some length over abdomen.
Material is a staunch coutil, in white and
grey Ribbon trimmed. Hose supporters
at front and sides. Sizes 18 to 26. Price
8/1 1
Erect Form No. 990.
An exceedingly well - proportioned
Corset for slender figures Medium bust
with short hips. Made of a good quality
jean, in white and grey, trimmed with lace
and babv ribbon. Size 18 to 24. Price
5/1 1.
ERECT FORM NO. 749.
ERECT FORM No. 990.
41


Erect Form No. 916
Is a Corset for average figures. Has medium bust and tong hips. Made
of white and grey jean. Has supporters front and sides. Trimmed across
top with lace and ribbon. Sizes IS to 30. Price 5/11
Erect Form— Price per pair. Erect Form— Price per pair
Style 742 In Jean 4/6 Style 90S In Coutil .. 11/6
917 In Batiste .. 5/1 1 .. 909 In Batiste .. 11/6
~ 991 In Coutil .. 8/11


Nuform No. 411,
A “long line" model, for average
tall figures: high bust with very
long" straight effect " hips and ex-
ceptional back length. The material
is a durable coutil, in white and grey,
and is trimmed with lace and ribbon.
Hose supporters at front and sides.
Sizes 19 to 30. Price 11/6
NUFORM No. 411.
NUFORM No. 406.
Nuform No. 406.
A model for average figures. Th«
bust is high, but not extremely so
The hip is deep and has an adder
apron extension to restrain over
fleshiness around the hips. Thr
material is coutil, in white and drab
Trimmed with lace and ribbon,
Hose supporters on front and sides.
Sizes 19 to 30. Price 8/11
This model with losver bust, No.
426. Price 8/11
43


ERECT ORM No. 902.
Erect Form No. 902
An excellent Corset for slender figures
—how Bust. Short Hips, and long over
abdomen : daintily trimmed with Em-
broidered pawn. Specially suited for
tennis and golf. Sizes 18 to 24. Price. 8/11
NUFORM No. 466.
Nuform No. 466.
A Corset specially designed for tall, long-waisted figures, in accordance with the
very latest fashion demand. Tt is high above the waist-line, and has great length
over hip and back, which ai>* so constructed as to give just the correct willowy long-
line effect. The material is an excellent quality Coutil, in White only, trimmed with
Tace and Ribbon. Hose Supporters at front and sides. Sizes IS to 30. Price, 13/6
44


NUFORM No. 470
Nuform No. 470
V -ph ml id nu>del for average
ixi e-v 1 equn in high br and lone .up
an>< rusek ku.' A spe *+V n of
t: - its ext. , skirt
kngih qumc that nmc' cu-sired
“ '-Paipld 1 itstr effect over hip. and
glove-like smoothness over the back
The material is an excellent quality
of clinging strong coutil, trimmed
with wide lace and ribbon. Three
pairs of hose supporters attached.
Sizes IS to 30. Price 1 8/6
Nuform No 446
This model is adapted for average
and well-developed figures. It has an
especially deep back to restrain undue
development in that part of the back
below the spine. The bust is of
medium height, not exireme : the hips
aie long. The material is a white
coutil of excellent quality, and is
trimmed with lace and ribbon. Hose
supports are attached at the front and
hips. Size 19 to 30.
Nuform— Price per pair
417 Coutil 5/1 1
446 Coutil .. 1 1/6
La Vida —
2540 Coutil .. 26/6
1506 Coutil -- 28/6
NUFORM
No. 446.
NUFORM No. 459.
Nuform No. 459
An exceptional model for well-
developed figures It is constructed
with roomy bust lines, and is speci-
ally built up in back to prevent the
flesh lying over the corset. It has
exceptional back length below the
waist line, with a splendid narrow
hip and abdomen arrangement. Ma-
terial is a staunch quality of imported
coutil, tastefully trimmed with lace
and ribbon Has hose supporters
front and sides. Sizes 19 to 3u. Price
13/6


Erect Form No. 761
A popular model for
figures developed a bit
beyond the averagi
low bust, very long
over abdomen, hip and
back. The hips . .id
back are so constructed
that without discom-
fort they reduce all
unseemly curves into
the graceful long lines
demanded by the pres-
ent fashion. The mate-
rial is a staunch coutil
in white or drab,
trimmed with an effec-
tive ribbon binding,
with a fall of lace.
Hose supporters at
front and sides. Sizes
19 to 36 Price 8/! 1
ERECT FORM No. 761.
46


No. 750.
There are cer-
tain women who
desire the prevail-
ing long line effect
below the waist
line, with the least
possible height
above. For such
figures this style
will appeal. Very
long over abdo-
men, hip and back,
above the waist it
is constructed like
a girdle. The ma-
terial is a coutil, in
white only. It is
trimmed at top with
binding of batiste
and lace. Hose sup-
porters front and
sides. Sizes 18 to
30. Price 8/ t 1
ERECT FORM No. 759.
47


This is the
Special Physical Culture Offer
Messrs. WEINGARTEN BROS. INVITE
EVERY READER OF THE BOOK
TO FILL UP THE FORM THEY
WILL FIND OPPOSITE PAGE 48
The prescription of exercises, which will be sent together with
full instructions, will be carefully thought out for each lady on the
merits of the particulars given on the form.
THERE IS NO
CHARGE WHATEVER
for this, and Mkssrs. WkingarTKn Bros, hope that every reader
will take advantage of this offer, as they will then be receiving a
course of physical culture arranged by the greatest living authority
on the subject, and such as they would in the ordinary course have
to pay from five to fifteen guineas for.
Ladies who suffer from LACK OF FLESH or OBESITY in
general, or who desire TO DEVELOP F'LESH in any particular
part of the figure, or to reduce flesh in any particular part of the
figure, TO IMPROVE CARRIAGE, and acquire those graceful
lines of contour which are so much desired, are, in particular,
recommended to
FILL IN AND RETURN THE
ADVICE APPLICATION FORM.
You are not placed under any obligation to purchase a corset,
but we invite you to commence wearing a Weingarten W.B. Corset
at the same time as you begin the Physical Culture course. We
tell you which style would be best for you. and on request will
supply you through your local draper.
48


Messrs. WEINGARTEN’S PHYSICAL CULTURE.
Measurements should be taken over all clothes.
Gratis ADVICE FORM for Ladies.
SHOWING HOW TO TAKE
MEASUREMENTS.
Date 190
Name
Address
Age?
Married or Single?
Occupation ?
Digestion ?
Bowels stssaw
Liver ?
Are Lungs Sound?
Is Heart Sound?
Sleep ?
Any special physical defect ?
Do you take baths regularly ?
How often , and if hot., cold or tepid?-
Post to SUPERINTENDENT, PHYSICAL CULTURE DEPARTMENT,
Messrs. WEINGARTEN BROS.,
Block Arcade, Collins Street,
Melbourne.
Measurement from arm pit to top of hip bone.
V#
Here state the special object of improvement to which you desire the exercises directed and
any other remarks you consider will be useful for our guidance in advising you.
N.D. —All measurements should be taken completely round body,
There is No Charge whatever for the Special advice we send in reply to this Form.
Please fill in Fully and Carefully. IVe con only advise when all the measurements are tilled In.


Weingarlen Bros.
NE.W YORK, LONDON. SAN fRANCSCO.
CHICAGO. NEWARK. PORTSMOUTH.
PARIS.
And at
Block Arcade, Collins Street,
MELBOURNE.
Wholesale Agents for Australia:
Sargood Brothers.
MEI BOURNE. ADELAIDE. BRISBANE.
SYDNEY. LAUNCESTON. NEWCASTLE.
PERTH. BALLARAT. KALGOORLIE.
BENDIGO.
Wholesale Agents for New Zealand;
Sargood Son & Ewen Ltd.
DUNEDIN.
AUCKLAND.
WELLINGTON.
CHRISTCHURCH.
INVERCARGILL.
NEW PLYMOUTH
NELSON.
WANGANUI.
NAPIER.
GISBORNE.
