

d-ftFf
0/# r
SID
w.o.w
11th FEBRUARY, 1878 — 21st MAY. 1921


“ And, as the greatest only are,
In his simplicity divine.”
\AjxyJ


WALTER OSWALD WATT
LIEUr.-COL., A.F.C.
0.8. E., CHEVALIER DE LA LEGION D’HONNEUR
CROIX DE GUERRE (TROIS PALMES)
M.A. CANTAB.
“Fine character, I believe, is as rare as fine art —perhaps
rarer. I have met a good many men in my life of all sorts
and professions, bnt none impressed me quite in the same
way as did the late Colonel Oswald Watt.
Fie was a gentleman after the way of Cervantes—
modest, generous, and brave. Sportsman and man of action,
he possessed the sensitiveness of a woman, hiding an extra-
ordinary delicacy of mind behind a quizzical humour, a
cheerfulness that was invariable as his courtesy. I have
never looked into eyes so honest and straight-seeing—
mirrors of a clear and noble mind. Ever thoughtful of the
happiness of others, he wore generosity as a garment, and
of his virtues, I feel sure, he was quite unconscious.
Flis tragic death but emphasises our loss; it has robbed
his generation of a great character, leaving to his friends
an irreparable gap in life.
His record stays —-a light to all brave youth, of worth,
high courage, and that nobility of mind which is the crown
of civilisation.”
—Lionel Lindsay.


“That he was the best commanding officer we had ever
served under was my opinion and that of every officer and
man in the Flying Corps. He had every quality to make
him a great leader of men —courage, determination, an
immense capacity for work, a stern and just sense of
discipline, unfailing courtesy to, and thoughtfulness for, his
subordinates; and, above all—the greatest factor in leader-
ship—a genius for endearing himself (without any con-
scious effort) to all who served under him. His officers and
men would have gone anywhere and done anything for him.
Could anyone have had a better record? He was just
about the best it was possible to be. He was indeed a
‘most parfait gentle knight,’ and Australia is the poorer for
having lost a most gallant officer and a splendid man.”
—Extract from a letter received from one of his officers.
He is a man without either pride or fear.”
—General Pau.
“Having served under Capt. Watt as Aviateur Mechanic
since the beginning of the war, anything connected with
either himself or his country has for me the very tenderest
of associations,”
—Extract from a letter from a French poilu.
“I read with great pain the news of the sad tragedy
which had befallen Colonel Oswald Watt, as I had the great
pleasure of being under him for 18 months in the Flying
Corps at Tetbury. All I can say as regards expressing my
feelings is that you have my very deepest sympathy.”
—Extract from a letter from a member of the A.F.C. to
Gilchrist, Watt & Sanderson Ltd.


“He has gone from this world deeply beloved, respected
and honoured: a brave soldier in the Great War, and in the
still harder battle of life. Such a memory is like that of a
beautiful sunset. It softens and gives light in the very
darkest hour.”
“Dear Toby will be a loss to all the world, but it is
very sweet to think there are thousands who will have loving
memories of him.”
“His loss to us is greater than I can express, and I know
that I am only one of many others who will feel his loss as
a personal sorrow. To my mind, he was the finest man God
ever made.”
“Toby was loved and honoured, and his generous heart
will be a lasting memorial. You must feel proud of him.”
“He was a fine and gallant man, and I feel these days
heavily overclouded by his death.”
“I always regarded him as a worthy son of his father.”
“He will long be remembered not only by the Flying
Corps, but by everyone who had the war at heart as a
brilliant soldier and a gallant gentleman. Not only have you
lost a brother, but Australia has lost a splendid citizen.”
“I do not suppose there is anyone in Sydney who will
leave a larger gap and be more mourned. He was the best
friend I ever had, and I feel as if I had lost a very dear
brother. He had a glorious life and never once failed a
friend in need.”
“Your brother was beloved, respected and admired by
all who knew him, and we were all proud of his friendship.”


“All who knew Toby loved him, and he will be sorely
missed.”
“His death removes one from our midst who was
beloved by all who knew him, and his loss to the community
is a great one.”
“I loved him as a brother, and it is no exaggeration to
say that this world will never be quite the same to me again
without him.”
“He was rightly named ‘the Father of the Australian
Flying Corps,’ and we, who were in close touch with him,
realize how his influence for the betterment of aviation had
continued beyond the period of the war. We shall sadly
miss the inspiration of his outstanding personality.”
“Their (the Diggers’ Aviation Co.) highest praise and
sincerest gratitude was always freely expressed for one who
lived and died a soldier and a man.”
“I very much doubt if there was anyone else in Aus-
tralia whose passing away would cause so many men to feel
that they had lost the best and truest friend they had in the
world—and I can imagine no finer epitaph. It was the
blackest week-end for me since the Easter of TB.”
“He was such a wonderful man, and I think all who
knew him loved him.”
“Toby, like Kim, was a friend of all the world.”
—Extracts from various letters.


OSWALD WATT.
Master of Air! Your spirit soaring free
From greater heights looks down upon us all.
What the sky failed to take the winter sea
Has robbed us of and borne beyond recall.
How strange is Death! Old men by dying fires
Linger and dream, and at their shadows start,
While at Death’s call, ere the red coal expires,
Beauty and Youth and Chivalry depart.
—E.O’F. (From Smith’s Weekly.)
w. o. w.
Ilth February, 1878 21st May, 1921
“He was a great man and a great soldier.”
—Gen. Jobson, 23rd May, 1921
Airman, whose feats have oft-times rous’d our praise;
Comrade, who won the love of ev’ry heart,
We gaze upon thy tomb with dull amaze
And wonder why God will’d thou should’st depart.
Glorious thy deeds in those dark battle days!
Courageous, selfless, noble-hearted, true,
Victor in war, and in a thousand ways
The best and kindest friend man ever knew.
Like as the sun, sinking o’er orang’d hills,
Turns dazzling day to dark and dismal night,
So now our hearts a fest’ring sorrow fills,
For we are robb’d of life’s main source of light.
Yet, hark! for softly mingling with our tears
A shout of triumph echoes on our ears,
And well we know the path that thou hast trod
Must lead direct to glory and to God.


St. JUDE’S, RANDWICK
23rd MAY. 1921
PSALM 15. Domine, quis habitabit?
Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle: or who shall rest upon
thy holy hill?
Even he, that leadeth an uncorrupt life: and doeth the thing
which is right, and speaketh the truth from his heart.
He that hath used no deceit in his tongue, nor done evil to his
neighbour: and hath not slandered his neighbour.
He that setteth not by himself, but is lowly in his own eyes:
and maketh much of them that fear the Lord.
He that sweareth unto his neighbour, and disappointeth him
not: though it were to his own hindrance.
He that hath not given his money upon usury: nor taken reward
against the innocent.
Whoso doeth these things: shall never fall.
HYMN 197 (A. & M.)
“The Lord is my Shepherd.”
The King of love my Shepherd is
Whose goodness faileth never;
I nothing lack if I am His
And He is mine for ever.
Where streams of living water flow
My ransom’d soul He leadeth,
And, where the verdant pastures grow
With food celestial feedeth.
Perverse and foolish oft I stray’d,
But yet in love He sought me,
And on His Shoulder gently laid,
And home, rejoicing, brought me.
In death’s dark vale I fear no ill
With Thee, dear Lord, beside me;
Thy rod and staff my comfort still,
4 Thy Cross before to guide me.
Thou spread’st a Table in my sight;
Thy Unction grace bestoweth;
And oh, what transport of delight
From Thy pure Chalice floweth!
And so through all the length of days
Thy goodness faileth never;
Good Shepherd, may I sing Thy praise
Within Thy house for ever. Amen.


HYMN 27 (A. & M.)
“Abide until us; for it is toward evening, and the day
is far spent.”
Abide with me; fast falls the eventide;
The darkness deepens; Lord, with me abide;
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, O abide with me.
Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day:
Earth’s joys grow dim, its glories pass away:
Change and decay in all around I see;
O Thou, Who changest not, abide with me.
I need Thy Presence every passing hour;
What but Thy grace can foil the tempter’s power?
Who like Thyself my guide and stay can be?
Through cloud and sunshine, Lord, abide with me.
I fear no foe with Thee at hand to bless ;
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness;
Where is death’s sting? Where, Grave, thy victory?
I triumph still, if Thou abide with me.
Hold Thou Thy Cross before my closing eyes;
Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies;
Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee;
In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me. Amen.


“We are met together to do honour to the memory of
a great man. Col. Watt rendered good and gallant service
during the Great War. Fearing that England might not
come in, he threw in his lot with France the very day that
country declared war, and for France he performed signal
service—service for which France had shown her apprecia-
tion and gratitude.
“Later, he did great things for the newly-formed
Australian Flying Corps. The work he did whilst with the
A.I.F. it would be impossible to overrate. He never asked
a man to do what he would not do himself. He never
allowed one of his pilots to fly a machine he had not him-
self previously tested. His service was absolutely self-less,
and his example was followed by his subordinates; the
result being, that amongst his Squadron—and later amongst
the various members of his Wing —there existed a feeling
of comradeship and a devotion to duty such as is seldom met
with.
“After the war was over, his services to the community
were even greater. No Digger has ever gone to him, appeal-
ing for help, and not found it. He not only gave willingly,
too, but he gave with a blessing. Failures, of course, there
were; but when the man he had started in life came back
to him and told him that he had failed, the Colonel would
only shrug his shoulders, smile, and say, ‘Well, then we
must try something else.’
“He was a great soldier, and he was a great man.”
—GENERAL JOB SON.
“The flag half-mast on the old Church, the aeroplane
circling over his grave, and dropping a wreath, the band and
firing party and mourners, are all a tribute to the memory
of a great Australian. Col. Watt gladly gave his services
and risked his life for his country, and when Peace was
declared he thought of others, and tried to help them. We
pay our tribute of love and esteem to his memory, and
pray that others may be raised up to take up worthily the
work he has laid down.”
—THE RECTOR OF ST. JUDE’S.
23rd May, 1921.


“ We fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
Sleep to wake.”
ST. JUDE’S, RANDWICK
23rd MAY. 1921


