





WAIFS AND STRAYS
J> t a f ift anh %b I)titta xt :
PICKED UP BETWEEN
LIVERPOOL & MELBOURNE.
[being fragments of a diary kept on board the “tudor,”
CAPTAIN W. J. ANDERSON, MASTER, WHICH SAILED FROM
LIVERPOOL FOR MELBOURNE, ON THE FIFTH OF NOVEMBER,
1856.]
“My thoughts are not of lands unknown,
Or hurled gold beneath the Southern zone,
But of a treasure dearer far to me,
In a far Isle of the sail-shadow’d sea ” —T. D. M‘Gf.e.
MELBOURNE:
MICHAEL T. OASON, ELIZABETH STREET.




A FEW WORDS OF PREFACE.
When about mid-way between Liverpool and Melbourne, I was re-
quested by a majority of my fellow-passengers to prepare a narrative
of our voyage for publication. After a brief delay, I consented; and
the following little brochure is the result. Written entirely at sea,
where there seems to be a perpetual conspiracy between the winds
and the waves to render literary labour impossible, and frequently under
the disagreeable influence of sea-sickness or ennui , it would be unjust to
criticise it with any severity. I have endeavoured to make it a vivid and
faithful picture of what one must ordinarily endure on the way from
the Old World to the Antipodes; and, as such, I trust it will be in-
teresting to many who still hesitate on the verge of the experiment.
Somebody may be absurd enough to cavil at the large meed of
praise I have bestowed upon Captain Anderson and his officers. Let
him. He is perfectly welcome to his sneer. I cannot consent to be
unjust because he is ungenerous, however. I have simply and sincerely
described what I witnessed with my own eyes.
I am quite certain that I have offended a few, by alluding to their
eccentricities; and a still larger number by having “let them alone
so severely.” I cannot help it. To the worthiest and wisest on board,
1 believe the pamphlet will really be a pleasant souvenir of perhaps the
most important episode in their lives.




WAIFS AND STRAYS,
CHAPTER I.
Our Departure—The Last Glimpse of Erin—Night at Sea.
On the morning of the fifth of November, eighteen hundred and
fifty-six, I stepped on board the ship Tudor, then lying in the Mer-
sey, ready to proceed on her voyage to Melbourne. It was a dark
day, in one of the darkest months of the year—and the anniver-
sary of one of the darkest stains upon the annals of England. Liver-
pool was so dark, that the sun seemed to have given up the notion
of shining upon it any longer. A dark cloud, like a bird of ill
omen, spread its murky wings over Birkenhead. All above and
around, the dark horizon loomed like sombre drapery; and the
Mersey seemed to be simply a dark mass of liquid mud, rolling
along to an Ocean of Chaos. A more dreary or depressing spec-
tacle it would be difficult to conceive; and its gloomy influence
was but too distinctly perceptible in the hopeless demeanour of
many a sad exile, who only then, for the first time, fully realized
how bitter it was to say “Farewell!”
There were nearly four hundred of us on board, impelled by
Heaven knows how many a varying impulse to sever the tender
associations of home, and seek a happier career in the newest New
World. Most of my fellow-passengers remained on deck during
the day; and I soon discovered among them representatives from


almost every country in Europe. It was no difficult task to recog-
nise the frank, intelligent face of the Irish Celt; the cold, self-
important bearing of the Englishman was equally unmistakeable:
upon every side resounded the pleasant dialect of the Scot; and,
scattered here and there might be seen natives of Poland, Germany,
Italy, and France, still retaining a little of their picturesque
national costume. As it was understood that we should not weigh
anchor till evening, and small steamers continually plied between
the Tudor and the shore, our friends availed themselves of the sad
privilege of remaining with us to the last. When the moment of
separation arrived, the deck presented scenes of sorrow, which
moved many a passionless nature to tears—parents bidding adieu
to children, lovers to lovers, sisters to brothers, friends to friends.
My own part in that moment of agony I shall not venture to
describe.
At half-past three o’clock we fired a few farewell shots, weighed
anchor, and proceeded to sea, in tow of the steamer Fury. I be-
lieve that to most of my fellow-passengers all that evening
remained a dreary blank, as we glided down the Mersey into the
Irish Channel. Night fell rapidly; and nearly all retired to their
berths, too weary or wretched even to think of trying to render
themselves comfortable. A right dexterous and indefatigable tug
was the Fury. At midnight she had brought us abreast of the
Skerries Light, on the coast of Wales.
Few words were said, few eyes were closed, that dismal night;
and upon ascending the deck next day, sick and heart-weary, the
aspect of both sea and sky was such as might have sent a chill to
more jubilant voyagers. A fresh breeze was blowing; and just a
little a-head was the Fury, still gallantly tugging us along between
the coasts of Ireland and Wales. All above spread a dull, leaden
sky, and around still stretched a horizon of impenetrable mist. At
about eight o’clock a.m. we knew that the dark outline which
loomed on our left was Holyhead; but not even thus dimly could
we discern to the right, the “ green, holy hills of Ireland.” At
noon, we saw Bardsey Island, bearing south-east; but not a glimpse
of the pleasant homes of Dublin, or the romantic glens of Wicklow.
I had anticipated the sad, sweet pleasure of taking a last glimpse
of the Irish coast, and yet, although I knew that we were sailing


past it the entire day, I strained my eyes in vain, endeavouring to
pierce the invidious curtain of clouds that intervened.
The day continued gloomy and sullen, and was succeeded by
an evening quite worthy of it. Heavy masses of clouds obscured
the sky; the atmosphere was cold and damp; the vessel was tossed
to and fro by a heavy ground-swell and a breeze which our inexpe-
rienced eyes magnified into a gale. At half-past eleven o’clock
Captain Anderson gave orders to “cast off” from the Fury alto-
gether, and stood out to sea. Immediately a shrill whistle, followed
by a noise which might be mistaken for the rumbling of distant
thunder, reverberated through the ship. It was the boatswain pip-
ing all hands upon deck to get ready sail. Any human sound
resembling the hoarse prolonged roar with which our boatswain
issued his mandates, I never heard before nor since. With his
huge, well-knit frame, bronzed features, and immense beard—but,
above all, his stentorian voice—Jack Williamson might have been
the original of Cooper’s Long Tom Coffin.
A deafening clamour now commenced upon deck. Groups of
sailors were engaged upon every side in bawling up the canvas, or
adjusting the spars, or heaving the capstan —alternately shouting,
singing, laughing, or swearing. For every particular rope or spar
they seemed to have an appropriate song,—singing and bawling in
time. The execution was decidedly creditable to the capacity of
their lungs, but their poetry disdained the ordinary attributes
of both reason and rhyme. At intervals the clear, firm voice of the
captain, and the ready “ Aye, aye, sir,” which greeted his order's,
could be discerned amid the din. But, above all, as we lay listen-
ing through the long night, rose the sweet, solemn music of Nature,
appealing to our souls with unutterable sublimity—the plaintive
cry of the sea-birds —the melancholy moaning of the winds, and the
grand organ-tone of the waves. Then, indeed, we thought of that
dread Eternity from which we were separated by but a few feeble
planks—and of the dear friends we might never, never, look upon
again!


CHAPTER 11.
The Tudor Executive —Organization of the Passengers—Romance and Sea-sickness.
Vert soon, indeed, we became conscious of having entered an
entirely new world of idea and action —with new interests, sym-
pathies, and associations. One salient fact dawned upon us with
little delay—that the Tudor was to he our home during a voyage
'which would certainly exceed two months; and, as a matter of
course, we forthwith commenced an anxious study as to the
capacity of the vessel herself, and the character of her principal
officers. In every essential particular the result gave satisfaction ;
and we rested confidently in the knowledge that our lives and
property were perfectly secure. There always continued to be a
few grumblers, however—gentry who would be inclined to sneer
at the Poles, or pick a personal quarrel with the Equator.
Although sailing under the celebrated banner of the Black Ball,
the Tudor was the property of Samuel Robert Graves, Esq., of
Liverpool. She had been chartered for the voyage by Messrs.
James Baines & Co. Her length was 276 feet, with propor-
tionate breadth of beam. It would be difficult to find a “ safer”
vessel, or a more graceful and speedy sailer. I have often stood
at the bows while she was going 14 knots an hour, and yet it was
only by looking at the sea I could ascertain that she was moving
at all.
Our captain was a Scottish gentleman —W. J. Anderson—who,
although in the prime of life, seemed, by both knowledge and ex-
perience, to be a veteran in his profession. The Stormy Petrel was
scarcely a more genuine child of the sea. It would be impossible
to over-praise the care and anxiety with which, during the entire
voyage, he watched over the weighty interests confided to his care.
Always accessible, he redressed every reasonable grievance without
a minute’s delay. He seldom slept, was seldom absent from the
deck—never, when there appeared the slightest symptom of danger.


Mr. Hall, the chief mate, a native of Cork, was a prompt, skilful,
and vigilant officer, The second mate, Mr. Belcher, also a Cork-
onian, discharged the duties of his office with habitual prudence
and care. The third mate was Mr. MTarlane, an American ; and,
the fourth, Mr. Gill, a young Irishman, from the historic borough
of New Ross. Our medical adviser was Dr. George Robertson, of
Edinburgh, who executed his laborious task, with admirable judg-
ment and skill, and endeared himself to us all by his gentle, kindly
demeanour. Mr. Henry Demarchi, a member of an illustrious
family in Genoa the Superb, held the onerous office of purser.
Passionately fond of his own beautiful country, he always displayed
a warm sympathy for mine ; and, with the ardour of a patriot, he
combined the taste of a lover of literature. Here is a little sonnet
which he wrote in Italian, while a mere boy, suffering the sorrows
of exile. It reminds me of poor Clarence Mangan’s “ Groan of
Despair” ;
SONNET.
O, sweet, inspiring Spring-breeze! once the crown
That decked with Love and Faith my early years,
Thy smile hath fled! Now Winter’s tempest-frown
Tortures my soul, and fills my heart with tears.
Already, in my lone despair, I see
The Shadow on my life’s short day descend.
My cold limbs touch the shroud ; in vain I flee
The stern, black midnight of Eternity!
Far from my own dear Italy, I pine—
From thee, sweet Friend, whose love could soothe my woe;
'ln vain my lips cry for one fond kiss from thine —
Earth’s noblest treasure —ere my final throe;
Alas! my faint cries, unheeded by foe or friend,
Are answered but by echoes, and with echoes blend.
We had a band, too —selected from the hapless German Legion
which England had called to her aid during the recent war. There
were half-a-dozen of them, their blue eyes, white hair, and fat,
funny faces, at once revealing their connection with the Yaterland.
That red-bearded little man, with a perpetual twinkle in his eye,
who played an ophicleide as big as himself; and the tall one, with
the French horn, who stooped at every breeze, as if he was afraid


he should be broken off; and the thin one, of the clarionet, who
seemed always under the impression that we regarded him as the
God of Music—l, at all events, shall retain these daguerreotypes.
The “ Ship’s Company!” At the first glance we thought we had
been trapped by a pirate, such a wild, grotesque aspect did the
sailors present, with their bronzed, bearded faces, and sheathed
knives. There were some really fine fellows among them, however;
the bad spirits were in the minority, as we afterwards found.
Such were the Tudor and her executive. Now for a glance at
ourselves. There is a stern reality in the life on board an emigrant
ship which “fast” young gentlemen, and sentimental ladies, will
abhor. In a very short time we had settled down to the prosaic
but very indispensible task of arranging our berths, and providing
for our culinary necessities during the voyage. Of course, the
inmates of the. first cabin had very little trouble to take, having
pleasant rooms, an unexceptionable bill of fare every day, and the
attendance of an excellent chief steward, Mr. Flatman, and an
accomplished stewardess, Miss Whitfield ; but in the second cabin,
intermediate, and steerage, the passengers had, in a great measure,
to take the care of their own comfort into their own hands.
As usual, the first cabin was situated under the quarter-deck.
The saloon was a comfortable and tastefully decorated apartment,
down each side of which were arranged the berths, —at one end there
was a staircase leading to the poop —at the other a passage opening
upon the main-deck.
During their lunch at twelve o’clock, and their dinner at four,
the passengers were regaled by the energetic performance of our
band.
The second cabin passengers were located in the “ aft end” of the
dock-house, at the forward extremity of which were the sail-room
and cook’s galley. Here the accommodations were not quite satis-
factory ; but I understand that every omission which might be
complained of is to be remedied in every future voyage of the
Tudor.
The intermediate and steerage cabins were between decks.
All the passengers’ food was cooked at the ship’s galley—a small,
dingy-looking apparatus enough, but which executed its enormous
task with admirable punctuality. The chief artiste was a negro,


named Bill, whose salient characteristic was a decided weakness
for rum ; and it was often amusing to see him cajole some un-
sophisticated passenger out of his favourite beverage. “ Massa,”
said he, one evening, to a group of good-natured young Celts,
“Lor’ knows I’m an Irishman myself, —only I was born in
Demerara ! ” The first and second cabin passengers had the at-
tendance of servants, who drew their rations, got them cooked,
and served them up to table. The intermediate and steerage
passengers had to do all this for themselves. On the day after our
departure the purser organised them into “ messes,” in order to
facilitate the distribution of rations, and to prevent confusion at
the cook’s galley. In a few days, however, a new arrangement
was found necessary —some grumbled for having been associated
in the same mess with parties for whom they entertained an
antipathy; others murmured at having been separated from their
friends.
But to resume. On Friday the weather continued gloomy and
overcast, but what the sailors call a “ fresh ” breeze filled the sails,
and we were making our way rapidly down the British Channel.
I was not in any particular humour to he amused, but indeed the
scenes observable on every side were often comical enough to
seduce even Diogenes into a smile. For example, there are a
large number of the first and second class passengers walking upon
the quarter-deck, from which the intermediate and steerage pas-
sengers are excluded by a notice posted on the main-deck;
some half-a-dozen young gentlemen are making desperate efforts
to seem perfectly at their ease—to be rather enjoying the roughness
of the weather, in fact; suddenly a lurch of the vessel spreads
them on the deck, their companions hailing the catastrophe with
a roar of laughter. There is another group smiling at what
Must of course be a very excellent joke, but, alas! the joker him-
self has ceased to be merry. “ Why you are quite pale, my dear
fellow—you don’t feel well, do you ? ” “O, no, old boy—only a
little queer ” —(with a hideous grimace)—“ I—l—think I’ll just go
below for a minute.” But he has not time to go below—an in-
vincible fascination attracts him to the gunwale, over which he
leans pensively for the next hour or so! Isn’t that an interesting
young couple yonder—only married a few weeks ago ? How


tenderly he folds the shawl around her; how sweetly she smiles
as he dilates upon the pretty little sentimentalities of the season!
But even here the insatiable monster intrudes. “ I do feel so
queer, love; I wish I was at home with mamma—or at the side of
the vessel.” “Lean upon me, darling, and just look into the
water —it will make you quite well.” She leans upon his arm and
looks into the water, but it doesn’t make her well; and the tender
swain himself feels “ his own soul sicken o’er the heaving wave.”
O, Romance! Romance! how funny you do become during the
first week at sea.
Though the moon rose early the weather continued rough and
squally till midnight; and it required no little dexterity to avoid
being ejected from our berths by the rolling of the ship. (Lat.,
50 deg. 45 min. N.; long. 7 deg. 30 min. W., by account.)
CHAPTER 111.
11l Omens.
Our experience of one of the most formidable perils of sea-life com-
menced just three days after our departure from Liverpool—noth-
ing less than the development of a real, positive mutiny.
The wind having shifted more aft, on Saturday our course was
altered to S.W. £ S.; and the ship’s company were kept tolerably
busy during the morning squaring the yards, trimming sail, etc.
Even to the eye of a novice, however, it was evident that they did
not work with alacrity, and occasionally the commands of the
officers, especially those of the third mate, were received with a
muttered grumble or a curse, instead of the customary boisterous
music. Decidedly something appeared to be wrong, yet we knew
not what. But, about mid-day, there could no longer be any doubt
upon the subject—the port watch suddenly “knocked off” work,
and descended in a bodv to the intermediate cabin. In a few


moments Mr. Hall and Mr. Demarchi, armed with cutlasses, fol-
lowed, and induced them to return to the main-deck, where Cap-
tain Anderson was waiting to hear what they had to say. Two ot
them, named Murphy and Smith, apparently leading spirits, were
the principal spokesmen—the others, for the most part, preserved
a dogged silence. The gist of their demands was that the captain
should dismiss the third mate, because they “ didn’t want a foreigner
over them,” and that he should give them “watch and watch”—
a larger allowance of sleep. The announcement of this ultimatum
was garnished by the usual accompaniment of bluster and blas-
phemy.
Captain Anderson listened patiently, and then expressed his
surprise that sailors, knowing their duty, should ask for “ watch
and watch,” before the ship was sea-worthy. They had been doing
merely what every ship’s company had to do while in the Channel,
and it was his duty to see the ship made sea-worthy before all
other considerations. He would make them no promise con-
cerning “watch and watch.” He declined to censure Mr.
M‘Farlane until some reasonable complaint should be urged
against him.
After some delay, the sailors retired to the forecastle, grumbling,
and repeating that they would not resume work until they had got
“ watch and watch.” Captain Anderson, accompanied by the ship’s
officers and several passengers, followed, to search there for some
stolen property; and, in the meantime, Smith was ordered twenty-
four hours’ imprisonment for having struck Mr. M‘Farlane the pre-
vious day. Murphy said that if Smith were imprisoned he would
dash out the captain’s brains; and the other murmurers made a
motion as if they would back him in carrying out the menace.
Bloodshed seemed inevitable; but Captain Anderson, anxious to
avoid extreme measures while the Tudor , containing so much life
and property, continued in the Channel, contented himself with
stopping their rations. This remedy proved effective; in a few
hours they returned to their work.
It was a day of anxious suspense, and though it terminated with-
out any serious disaster, it left a shadow of doubt and apprehen-
sion, which long rested upon our minds. Maclean, another in-
subordinate sailor, assaulted Mr. M‘Farlane soon after; and there


were other symptoms which indicated clearly enough that the
mutiny had been suppressed but for a time.
Not a little interest was excited this day by the discovery of a
man stowed away in the forehold. (Lat. 49 deg. 9 min. N.; long.
10 deg. 59 min. W.)
CHAPTER IV.
Sunday at Sea—Our Ocean Friends—Moonlight.
Our first Sunday at sea was spent in the perilous vicinity of the
Bay of Biscay. Tossing about on these wild waves, and under the
glorious temple of the sky, it would be impossible for even the most
besotted nature to resist the holy, beautiful associations of the day.
Filled at once with emotions the most tender and sublime, we
mused over the sweet memories of home, and worshipped God in
sight of the most magnificent of his creations.
Divine service was performed in the saloon by the Rev. Mr.
Grant, a clergyman of the Free Kirk of Scotland, who, accompa-
nied by his amiable lady, had left Aberdeen to seek a new home in
Australia. Albeit not kneeling at the same altar as Mr. Grant, I
had many subsequent opportunities of appreciating his character.
A kindly, courteous gentleman, a zealous minister, without the
faintest tinge of bigotry or affectation, his fellow-voyagers will long
remember him with respect and regard. For myself, there being
no Catholic clergyman on board, I knelt alone in my berth—per-
haps thinking of the magnificent shrines of Dublin, or of the grand
old Black Abbey and Capuchin Convent by the Nore.
Here and there, in nooks upon the main-deck and forecastle, I
was delighted to observe men, women, and children engaged in
sincere and unobtrusive devotion.
But still all day we were overshadowed by a sullen sky, and
tossed about by an ever-varying wind. At five p.m. it- became
necessary to alter our course to S.W. At nine, for the first time,


we enjoyed the magnificent spectacle of moonlight at sea. We
were still skirting that terrible Bay, whose waters have certainly
discovered the perpetual motion ; and all night the stately
Tudor swayed helplessly from side to side, as if she were
sea-sick like ourselves. Our latitude was then 45 deg. 6 min. N.,
and our longitude 12 deg. 30 min. W. Early the next day (Monday)
our sails were filled by a fresh, steady breeze, and we bounded
gaily along over the waves, passing every other vessel on our
route. Anchors taken in, and chains “ unbent ”at noon.
Taking a glance over the vessel, from poop to forecastle, it was
painful to see how intensely the passengers suffered from sea-
sickness. Some of the first cabin ladies were either confined to
their berths or reclined languidly on the poop. Many of the
gentlemen had emerged from the ordeal, however, and could then
really enjoy a read, or a stroll, or a game of quoits. Pleasant
intimacies soon began to spring up among them, and Damon and
Pythias seemed revivified in the persons of Mr. Eddowes and Mr.
Mackay, Mr. Kopwood and Mr. Redfern, Mr. Ordish and Mr.
Stockdale, Mr. Richardson and the brothers Hamilton. Mrs.
Cusworth and Miss Durran, Mr. and Mrs. Grant, were among the
first to appreciate the pleasure of a stroll on the poop. Mr.
Brooke paced up and down, or read in company with his interest-
ing wife and pretty little daughter. In the second cabin also
there were some pleasant groups—Miss Fox and Miss Bertram,
Mr. and Mrs. Nicholl and Mr. Field, Mr. Kear, Mr. Bertram and
Mr. Swift, Mr. Gilmore and Mr. Dalzell, Mr. Wilson, Mr. Muir,
and Mr. Eddon.
In the intermediate the “ messes ” soon began to work pleasantly,
the general happiness being secured by a little mutual forbearance
and self-sacrifice. There were a few fastidious young gentlemen,
of the “ gent ” species to be sure, whom the mess duty inspired
with extreme disgust. For example, each person had to take week
about to draw the rations, get them cooked, and carry them from
the kitchen. At eight in the morning and six in the evening the
cry of “tea-water! ” summoned them to the cook’s galley; and at
mid-day they were roused by the exhilarating shout of “ come for
your pork! ” It was often amusing to witness the agony with
which some spruce, moustachioed and bejewelled young gentleman


glided away with the mess bread, meat, or soup, half-concealed
under his coat-skirt. Both in the intermediate and steerage I ob-
served that, after the sea-sickness had entirely disappeared, the
passengers were generally occupied in reading, or in studying the
mysteries of latitude and longitude, or the new natural phenomena
then coming within their ken.
So sped our days inside the Tudor , and without we found a
never-failing study in the winds and the waves. Then, at night,
“ Anon the moon, the meek-faced minion, rose,”
and we soon began to perceive how very little we had known of her
real beauty and grandeur till we saw her lighting up that stupendous
arch of clouds and illimitable circle of heaving waters. Never
did I witness a more sublime manifestation of Divine Wisdom and
Omnipotence. (Lat. 41 deg. 40 min. N.; long., by account, 13 deg.
55 min. W.
On Tuesday our course was altered to S. W., and on Wednes-
day to S. W. on Thursday it was again altered to S. W. At
noon three vessels were in sight, and in the evening, off the
Western Isles, we passed a schooner bound to the West Indies.
Rain, rain, rain, all day, evening, and night. (Lat., 32 deg.
17 min. N.; long. 19 deg. 40 min. W.)
CHAPTER V.
The Fire —Brummagem Aristocracy.
We were startled, on Saturday, by an adventure which might
have brought our pilgrimage to a speedy and terrible close. It was
a bright sunny morning; we were bounding along gaily before a
fresh breeze, with all sail set; and most of the passengers were
upon deck, reading, chatting, or gazing upon the ever beautiful
face of the sea. Suddenly, an unusual tumult was heard upon the
main deck, and excited groups might be seen hurrying rapidly to
and fro in the direction of the cook’s galley, from which a dense


volume of smoke ascended, eddying and curling among the white
sails. Then arose a shout which struck terror into many a manly
bosom—Heavens! the Tudor was on fire! There, on the wide
ocean, hundreds of miles away from land, and not a friendly sail
all round the horizon! It was a moment of agony never to be
forgotten. Strong men seemed for a time to be paralyzed, and
looked at each other in silent agony; the terror of the females it
would be impossible to describe.
In a few minutes, however, our courage revived—there was a
general rally to the scene of the disaster. It appeared that the
intense and continual heat of the cooking apparatus had ignited
the woodwork behind, which communicated with a sail-room, full
of combustible material, and there was reason to fear that the fire had
already reached the stores. Captain Anderson at once ordered the
sail-room to be cleared out; and a hundred willing arms soon com-
pleted the task. Then, with his own hands, he directed the
hose, and in about half-an-hour he had succeeded in removing all
cause of alarm. Many a stubborn knee was bent in gratitude for
our escape from such a terrible doom —(lat. 28 deg. 40 min. N.;
long. 22 deg. 30 min. W). On Saturday the sailors got “ watch and
watch,” and were divided into companies as a precaution against any
future accident by fire.
An amusing display of character took place the same evening
upon the quarter-deck. Two days after our departure from Liver-
pool, a notice had been posted up prohibiting intermediate or
steerage passengers to walk upon the poop ; that privilege invariably
belonging to the first cabin by right, and to the second cabin by
courtesy. This limitation, however, was far from being strict
enough for the “ exclusive” ideas of a certain lady in the first cabin,
who had peculiar notions —so to speak—upon the subject of good
taste and good breeding. Full of her own importance, she affected
to look with supreme disdain upon her fellow-passengers in general,
and particularly those beneath the rank of first cabin. It was death
to her to see any of them walking the poop at the same hour as
herself; and what rendered the matter worse, instead of being
withered, they were intensely amused, by her indignant glances.
On this day her agony reached its climax. A lady from the second
cabin had the audacity to—bid her “Good morning!” Fancy


that! Burning with rage, she rushed to the captain, and insisted
that the second cabin passengers should be excluded from the
poop. In this she found but one solitary sympathiser among the
inmates of the first cabin. Captain Anderson, with his habitual
courtesy and good sense, endeavoured to pacify the lady by remind-
ing her that there were very friendly relations between the first
and second cabin passengers, and that he would not feel justified
in debarring the latter from a privilege they had hitherto
enjoyed. The only alteration he made was to allot one side
of the poop for the first cabin, and the other for the second—an
arrangement which gave general satisfaction. There was really a
likelihood that the aristocratic element would develop in rather
a funny fashion about this time—First looking down upon Second
Cabin, the latter despising the Intermediate, and, forthwith, Inter-
mediate treating Steerage with ineffable hauteur. Alas! poor
human nature, even in an emigrant ship ! (Lat. 25 deg. 4 min.
N.; long. 24 deg. 24 min. W.)
The faint silvery tinkle of the ship bell summoned the passen-
gers to worship next day. The weather then became very un-
settled, and we had strong south-east winds when we ought to have
north-east “trades.” One mischievous squall carried away our
flying jib. Next day the three sailmakers were at work preparing
fresh canvas. These were—Barry, an industrious and intelli-
gent young man from Waterford; Rogers, a native of Cork;
and Lucas, a Swiss. Captain Anderson regarded these men
as among the best of the company. Little thought we then that
two of them were destined to meet a tragical fate before the
termination of our voyage. Sunday evening ended with heavy
showers and squalls, and vivid flashes of lightning to windward.
(Lat. 21 deg. 20 min. N.; long. 25 deg. 15 min. W.)


CHAPTER VI.
A Tropical Thunderstorm—The Architecture of the Clouds at Sunset—Explosion
of the Mutiny.
We had then reached those wild Tropical latitudes where nature
indulges in some of her most eccentric achievements, and displays
such magnificent treasures of grandeur and beauty. Next morning
the red sun glared down from a cloudless sky, the atmosphere was
sultry and oppressive, unrelieved by the faintest breath of air, and
so till noon we enjoyed all the equivocal delights of a Tropical
calm. One or two vessels were in sight—a stately craft to the
north-east hearing the banner of the Stars and Stripes—perhaps
one of the American whalers which in these seas “ most do con-
gregate.” At about 6 p.m. we were exposed to the full fury of a
Tropical thunderstorm.
It would he impossible by mere words to give any adequate idea
of that tremendous spectacle. After a few single vivid flashes of
lightning, the sky became awfully dark, the rain began to descend
in close, heavy drops, and a peal of such thunder as I never heard
before seemed to burst directly over our mast-head. The lightning
then continued to play incessantly for nearly three hours—now
darting from the zenith, and again flashing around the horizon—each
flash rivalling its predecessor in colour and beauty and glory.
But it was not alone in mere flashes that the lightning revealed
itself. Sometimes the dark canopy of clouds opened like an immense
curtain, and disclosed a glowing region of fire and light within;
again, for an instant, the entire firmament blazed with almost
noon-tide brilliancy. At one moment the gigantic pile of clouds
to the westward were suddenly lighted up, like mountains of varie-
gated fire, which as suddenly expanded, and the bright fluid leaped
and flashed into the sea ; another second, and the entire firmament,
north, south, and east, blazed with a lustre too painful to behold —
the awful thunder pealing at intervals like a trumpet of doom, and
the black rain rushing down like another deluge.


The squalls had subsided on Tuesday, scarcely a ripple disturbed
the face of the waters ; in fact it was but too evident that we had
missed the “ trades.”
At this period every evening we witnessed those rich Tropical
sunsets which have been so frequently described, that my humble
pen has no notion of attempting the task. I only ask you to
imagine a sky, not more beautiful certainly, but far grander than
the finest of those witnessed during our sunsets at home—a deep
brilliant purple being the predominant tinge, and every lineament
of the glorious picture mirrored in the waves below.
Then, as the night deepened, we used to lean over the bulwarks
for hours, observing another curious and beautiful phenomenon—
the surface of the sea, particularly around the ship, glittering with
innumerable particles of phosphoric fire, shining the more brilliantly
then as the moon had disappeared, and the sky shed nothing but
the pale lustre of the stars. Occasionally a shoal of porpoises
leaped and gambolled around, keeping company with us for many
a mile.
The heat had then become almost intolerable, and as there was
not the faintest possibility of evading it, we generally submitted
with a good grace to the torture- sleeping with doors and windows
open, vainly wooing the vagrant breeze, and with nothing to speak
of as a covering. A canvas awning was stretched over a portion
of the quarter-deck, to accommodate the first and second cabin,
and the steerage and intermediate had a pleasant retreat under
the boats on the main-deck. On this evening somebody proposed
that the passengers should have a merry dance under the boats,
and Captain Anderson, ever ready to promote any rational amuse-
ment, consented at once, providing lanthorns, and permitting the
ship’s band to furnish the music. Dr. Robertson good-humouredly
volunteered to act as master of ceremonies. The arrangements
were soon completed, the band “ struck up ” merrily, and every-
thing proceeded most agreeably for about half-an-hour, when the
two malcontent sailors, Smith and Murphy, true to their old in-
stincts, had the impudeqce to interrupt the entertainment.
Through sheer wantonness, in order to chagrin the captain, they
induced some of the steerage passengers to get up a rival dance—
Smith himself playing the tambourine, and another playing the


flute. They also threatened to dress themselves next evening,
and insist upon their right to amusement “ the same as everybody
else.” “We are free niggers,” they cried, “ and, by G , nobody
shall prevent us.”
Not content with having broken up the dance, they spent the
remainder of the night in ridiculing and abusing the captain and
chief mate. Smith wound up by expressing a hope that he would
soon have an opportunity of flinging Captain Anderson overboard.
The evening terminated quietly; but few of us retired without
a vague consciousness of impending evil. It was evident that
Murphy and Smith had sympathisers not only among the crew, but
among a few ignorant and ill-disposed passengers, who might
eagerly enter into any conspiracy having plunder for its aim;
and it was scarcely unreasonable to apprehend that we might
soon be exposed to all the perils of a mutiny. In a few hours
our gloomiest forebodings were realized.
A fresh, bracing breeze from the east filled our sails on Wednes-
day, and most of us remained on deck during the day, enjoying the
delicious weather. Shoals of flying fish, literally glistening in the
sun like flakes of silver, frequently sped along a few feet above the
surface of the water, retreating from the voracious but exquisitely
coloured honito that glided below.
In the evening the passengers prepared for another dance under
the boats; but scarcely had the amusement commenced, when
Murphy and Smith appeared, dressed in their tawdry finery, and
insisted upon dancing “the same as everybody else.” Now, under
any circumstances, such cool effrontery as this would be reprehen-
sible on the part of the sailors in a passenger-ship ; but the culpa-
bility of Murphy and Smith was enhanced by the fact that at that
very time it was their turn to be upon deck duty. It was at first
amusing to observe their vulgar swagger through the crowd of
gaping passengers. Of course they repeatedly asserted their rights
as “ free niggers,” and expressed the most sublime contempt for
Captain Anderson and his officers. In the height of his enthusi-
asm, Smith declared his astonishment that the passengers could be
so stupid as to support Captain An derson, while he (Smith) was at
their service. Let them but intrust him with the management of
the vessel (heaving Captain Anderson overboard) —and he was the


man who knew how to conduct them safely to port! The passen-
gers, however, displayed no extravagant eagerness to accept this
tempting offer.
At this moment a message came from the chief mate, ordering
Murphy to go aloft and take in a brace-block. Take in a brace-
block ! and the “ free nigger ” already decorated for a dance, and
his cher ami from the steerage looking admiringly on ! Was there
ever such insolence? Of course Mr. Murphy had no notion of
doing any such thing—so, in his own delicate style, he told the
messenger to inform the mate that “he would see him d d
first ” Upon this, Mr. Hall communicated with the captain, who
forthwith ordered Murphy to come to the quarter-deck. Murphy
walked jauntily up to the poop —Smith, foreseeing the storm,
retreated to the forecastle, divested himself of his fine feathers, and
appeared immediately after in his working clothes, leaving his com-
rade to get out of the dilemma as best he could.
The passengers crowded in large numbers to the quarter-deck to
witness the interview between Murphy and Captain Anderson.
“ Why did you not go aloft, according to orders,” demanded the
captain. “I cleaned and dressed myself for a dance, Sir,” was
Murphy’s reply, “ and I don’t like to be disappointed.” “Is it not
your duty to be on watch ? ” “ I’ve got a man to work in my
place, Sir.” “ Take off these clothes instantly and go to your
work.” “ I wouldn’t take off this dress for the Queen of England ”
was the reply. “ I have as much right to dance as any free
nigger,” he continued, “ and if it comes to that, take care I have
not more friends in the ship than yourself, though you are cap-
tain ! ” Having three times refused to proceed to his work, Cap-
tain Anderson had no alternative but to order him into irons.
Murphy was accordingly handcuffed, and ordered to be confined in
a portion of the intermediate cabin sometimes used as an hospital.
He descended laughing contemptuously, and rattling the fetters
that they might be seen by the other sailors, a large number of
whom had assembled upon the main-deck. Immediately his com-
rades raised a cry to “ knock off work and leave the bloody ship to
its fate,” and they rushed pell-mell down the gangway to the inter-
mediate cabin, where they soon contrived to break Murphy’s
fetters and set him at liberty.


By this time the passengers were in a fearful state of excitement.
A "desperate and bloody struggle seemed inevitable. In a few
minutes the captain, attended by Mr. Demarchi, Mr. Hall, Mr.
Flatman, and others, armed with cutlasses, followed the mutineers
down the hatchway. They found the prison door open and
Murphy flown ; the sailors were grouped together at the port side
of the cabin. As Captain Anderson approached, one of them,
named Robertson, cried out “ Where are your arms, boys ? ” The
captain ordered him to go upon deck. Robertson put his hand
behind to draw his sheath-knife, when Mr. Demarchi caught hold
of him, and endeavoured to induce him to desist. Robert-
son extricated himself, however, and attempted to strike the cap-
tain. The latter avoided the blow and struck his assailant. Mr.
Hall, seeing the captain attacked, rendered Robertson hors de
combat by a blow of his life-preserver. All the mutineers then
rushed up to the deck, Smith being the first to retreat.
Captain Anderson and his officers also returned to the deck
where by that time nearly all the passengers had assembled. The
captain proceeded to call upon them for assistance against the
mutineers. In a brief emphatic address he reminded them that
his sole object was to preserve the discipline of the ship, and to
secure their lives and property. A loud, ringing cheer burst spon-
taneously from the multitude, and with one voice they declared
themselves ready to support the captain in every extremity.
Cutlasses were immediately distributed—among others, to Mr.
Brooke, Mr. Stockdale, Mr. Redfern, Mr. Ordish, Mr. Hamilton,
Mr, Gilmore, &c.
All the ship’s company, except those engaged at the wheel or on
the look-out, were then ordered upon deck, and Captain Anderson
proceeded to address them—saying, that he was resolved upon sup-
pressing the mutiny, and keeping Murphy in irons; and that he
knew it was only a few bad spirits who had been fomenting dis-
content in the ship. He called upon them to return to their duty,
and at the same time surrender the formidable sheath-knives which
hung at their belts.
Awed by the unanimity of the passengers, the entire body sur-
rendered their knives, and returned to their duty.
And now to recapture Murphy. The captain and his officers,


with the passengers already mentioned, armed with cutlasses and
revolvers, proceeded to search the ship. A cry having been raised
that Murphy was concealed in the mizen rigging, lights were
carried aloft by one of the apprentices (Charley Atkinson), and
every spar scrutinised, hut in vain. It was thought that he might
have obtained shelter from his fair friends in the steerage —hut a
search there was equally fruitless. The forecastle then seemed to
be the most likely place of concealment; and thither all parties
repaired, searching the gangways, deck-house, &c., on their way —
but there, also, their vigilance was at fault; no trace of the fugitive
could be discovered either inside or outside. At length, after about
two hours search, he was discovered on the forecastle by Mr. Hall
and Mr. Flatman ; and Mr. Belcher, the second mate, succeeded in
arresting him. He was brought to the saloon, which was crowded
with ladies —one of whom seemed to regard him as an object of
romantic interest. He was subsequently put in irons, together with
Robertson, who had attempted to strike the captain. During the
search for Murphy on the forecastle an intermediate passenger is
said to have drawn a knife to stab the chief mate, and to have
attempted exciting a mutiny among the Irish, He denied both
charges, but in the meantime he was conveyed a prisoner to the
saloon by Mr. Mayne and Mr. Delany, two respectable young
Irishmen.
So ended what might have been a fatal mutiny, but for the vig-
our, courage, and promptitude with which Captain Anderson took
it in hand, and the unanimity with which the passengers sprang to his
side. The mutineers had evidently calculated upon receiving more
sympathy than opposition from some of the passengers ; and there
is reason to believe that they had been meditating quite a romantic
scheme for capturing and disposing of the ship. One of the crew,
a Frenchman named Louis Gossat, wrote to the captain about
this time, complaining that his life had been threatened by his
comrades because he would not join the conspiracy. It appears
that this man had once been a ship-master, and they probably
wished to obtain his services to guide them, with their fair steerage
sympathisers, to some “ sweet little isle” in the Atlantic, where
they could enjoy .their plunder undisturbed. (Lat. 14 deg. N.;
long. 26 deg. 50 min. W.)


CHAPTER VII.
The Irish Exiles—How we passed the Cornelia.
I hate said that it was soon easy to recognise the frank intelligent
face of the Irish Celt among my fellow-passengers. There was a
large number of my countrymen on board, and one of the few real
pleasures I enjoyed was to observe the good sense and good nature
by which they were habitually distinguished. Avoiding every un-
reasonable ground of quarrel, they associated in a kindly brother-
hood with their fellow-voyagers, of every country and creed ; and
it was equally novel and delightful to see Irish, English, and
Scotch doing justice to each other, and avoiding the dismal feuds
which originate in the vices of their rulers. But still the exiled
Celts seemed proud of their old historic island, and evidently re-
garded themselves as defenders of her fame. Some stupid insult
having been offered to Ireland by a few ignorant malcontents
one evening, it was resented in a manner which effectually
prevented its repetition. “Although we have been driven into
exile,” observed one of the actors in this scene (a fine young
fellow from Cork,) “ don’t think that we have forfeited our
nationality.” So true it is, that
“ Wheresoe’er the exile roams, though oceans roll between,
He dearly loves his native land, and proudly wears her green.”
Towards evening the breeze freshened, dark clouds scudded over
the sky, and the air was full of electricity. (Lat. 11 deg. 14 min.
N.; long., by account, 26 deg. 28 min. W.)
We had a delightful adventure next day (Friday). A thick
hazy, disagreeable morning, sudden squalls and heavy showers,
alternating and jostling each other (so to speak) until noon. Four
sail are in sight, standing to the southward, and at three o’clock
one approaches near enough to be signalized. She proves to be
the Cornelia, from Liverpool, 37 days out, and we are selfish


enough to reflect, with considerable pleasure that we have accom-
plished the journey in 16 days less.
And yet the Cornelia ought to beat us, it would appear; she sits
far more lightly in the water, the style of her spars is unexcep-
tionable, and the very coyest of breezes might be wooed by such
dainty sails. See! by Neptune, she is “picking us up”—now we
are abreast —now she heads us, and the glory of the Tudor has
vanished for ever. But look to windward. A mass of black, heavy
clouds has been gathering there for the last hour, like conspirators
meditating a revolution ; and now they seem to have matured their
plans, and prepared for the explosion. How rapidly that low,
thick mist strides over to us, breaking up the surface of the water
into angry foam-crested waves. Ha ! it is the black squall, and in
a few minutes it will be down on us in all its fury. “ All hands on
deck to take in sail!” “ Ay, ay, Sir.” Captain Anderson flies
about everywhere giving the necessary orders, and apparently
gifted with the power of being in several places at a time. Now
ring out the rude songs of the sailors, and the stout ropes are
strained to bursting, and sheet after sheet of canvas disappears,
till every unnecessary spar of the Tudor stands out in its native
strength, ready to meet the coming enemy with a haughty
defiance. Now, it is upon us—ha! one lurch to leeward, and the
gallant ship rights herself and catches up the wind. Down comes the
thick black rain, penetrating our canvas awning like a sieve, and
drenching the venturesome passengers who insist upon remaining
above.
“Hold de reel dere,” cries Mr. MTarlane. “Ay, ay, Sir.”
“ How many knots ? ” “Fourteen, Sir.”
Yes, indeed; instead of being frightened we are now actually
delighted with the storm; and the stately Tudor, enjoying her
natural element—a right stiff breeze —bounds over the waves at the
rate of fourteen miles an hour. But where is the Cornelia ? Bah !
at the first breath of the squall we shot by her like an arrow, and
now she is—that little black speck upon the horizon! (Lat. 8 deg-
-52 min. N.; long. 26 deg. 41 min. W.)
All the next day (Saturday) we suffered from almost intolerable
heat, although the sun continued to screen himself behind the
clouds all day, as if he knew that his services could be very readily


dispensed with. We had light winds to he sure—quite as refreshing
as the blast from a furnace ; and occasional showers—apparently
of lukewarm water, from some steaming apparatus in the sky. On
Sunday, light winds, heavy clouds, tantalizing showers, and the
atmosphere of an oven. (Lat. 5 deg. 36 min. N.; long. 26 deg. 40
min. W.) On Monday, light baffling winds, blowing at once from
all points of the compass except the right one ; and showers which
seemed resolved upon overflowing the Atlantic. There never was
such tantalizing weather. The poor Tudor is continually changing
her course; and a fresh breeze which springs up at noon, making
all kinds of promises to be steady, has the audacity to split our
mizen top-gallant sail right up. Sad, sad ! (Lat. 4 deg. N.; long.
37 deg. 24 min. W.)
Tuesday set in with a strong but uncertain breeze, dark cloudy
weather, and a heavy swell from the south-east. We had so far
diverged from our course that it became necessary to “ bout ship
and we accordingly tacked round to the eastward. The wind still
continued adverse, however, and, although the weather took up
after noon, it was wretched to know that we were making scarcely
any real progress towards our destination. Of all the disagremens
of a long sea voyage, defend me from the necessity of “ bouting
ship.” We were not without sympathy however; far away to the
lee was a friendly sail, driving Nowhere quite as rapidly as ourselves.
(Lat. 3 deg. 43 min. N.; long. 29 deg. 16 min. W.)
CHAPTER VIII.
A Tropical Calm—The Boats out—Our Symposiac.
Not a cloud in the clear, blue sky —not a breath of air—not a
ripple over the fair face of the sea. Once again (Wednesday) we
are becalmed ; and the abominable Genius of Ennui seems to have
touched everything and everybody with his stupid wand. The
sails flap around the groaning masts, evidently thinking even that


amount of exertion quite superfluous. The Tudor herself rolls
languidly from side to side, seeking something to lean upon, hut
seeking in vain, for the water retires from her advances, murmur-
ing a drowsy protest at being disturbed. The sun even has the
appearance of shining, merely because he couldn’t obtain leave of
absence. Under the awning on the poop two or three ladies make
an hysterical effort to sew; another is reading intensely, with
spectacles on her chin, and the hook turned upside down; half-a-
dozen quiet-looking young gentlemen, with fiery moustachioes
(which seem to have grown by mistake), look as if they were about
to ignite every minute, and they retire at brief intervals to the
saloon in order to take some mysterious precautions against that
catastrophe. In the second cabin, the stout gentleman sustains
himself by imbibing a fabulous quantity of lime-juice—of course it
is lime-juice; indeed all parties appear to have a periodical weakness
for that exhilarating beverage; the tall young gentleman, with
the military aspect, doesn’t look in the glass to arrange his whiskers
more than fifty times a-day ; the delicate gentleman casts off one
of his fifteen waistcoats, and limits himself to three quarts of gruel
for supper; Mrs. has for once ceased to knit her perpetual
stocking; and Mrs. indulges in a siesta all day long, fully im-
pressed with the notion that she is the most beautiful, witty, and
important personage on board the Tudor —which she is not. All
the Intermediates, who have retreated from the deck, recline in
their berths or their saloon in a state of incipient asphyxia. In
the Steerage you may perceive toil-worn English tradesmen or
Irish peasants, basking in the novel luxury of no work and plenty
to eat, and mayhap indulging in vague hopes that the Tudor may
continue for ever at sea.
“O for a new sensation! Hurrah! we have it! Lower the
boats, let us row round the ship, and refresh our parched limbs in the
pure waters of the Atlantic.” Captain Anderson’s permission was
soon obtained, the boats were lowered, and for two or three
hours we rowed round and round and ahead of the Tudor , some of
us really venturing to bathe, nathless the sharks.
An interesting re-union of the cabin passengers took place in the
saloon the same evening, for the purpose of devising a series of
entertainments which might in some measure relieve the tedium of


the voyage. Of course it was a fatal blow to the “ exclusives ”to
see first and second cabin working so cordially together, but no-
body seemed to consider their murmurs of the faintest conse-
quence.
The meeting was composed of the following gentlemen :—Cap-
tain Anderson, Dr. Robertson, Rev. Mr. Grant, Mr. Brooke, Mr.
Elliot, Mr. Carter, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Hopwood, Mr. Joseph
Mackay, Mr. H. Mackay, Mr. Wm. Hamilton, Mr. Eddows, Mr.
Doyle, Mr. Richardson, Mr. Grimes, Mr. John Hamilton, Mr.
Redfern, Mr. Stockdale, and Mr. Ordish.
Dr. Robertson was elected chairman; and out of this meeting
originated several delightful entertainments, combining songs,
readings, and recitations. I regret that I cannot here give a more
copious chronicle of the proceedings.
CHAPTER IX.
Crossing the Line—The Sick Sailor.
The once exciting adventure of “ crossing the line ” has for some
time been divested of all its terrible interest for neophytes. We per-
formed the exploit on Friday (our lat. being 0 deg. 45 min. N.; long.
30 deg. 4 min. W.), but so quietly that none except the officers of
the ship were aware of it till a day or so afterwards. A few feeble
jokes were expended upon the occasion. One story detailed how
one of the sailors had struck his head against the Line ! Another
informed us how opportunely the captain had discovered it through
his telescope! Of course there was no shaving, Captain Anderson
having peremptorily forbidden Neptune to approach his dominions.
The weather was delightful. In the course of the day we signalized
the American ship Vites, bound for California, 30 days out, from
Ferro, one of the Cape de Yerde islands.
Saturday was another delightful tropical day, the sun rising and
25


setting with a beauty and glory of which we had no previous con-
ception, and the fervid atmosphere tempered by a light steady
breeze. On Sunday evening we witnessed a delightful spectacle.
As the sun descended below the horizon, surrounded by a gorgeous
retinue of golden and crimson clouds which spread over the west,
the new moon, like a silver sickle, rose directly above, attended by
the evening star. That exquisite tableaux it will not be easy to
forget. Out of our course again—we had to tack round to north-
east. Next day (Monday) we tacked to the south-west, and, with
a fresh and fair wind, proceeded pleasantly on our course.
Joyous and happy groups were assembled upon the quarter-deck on
Monday, laughing, chatting, reading, or playing, when, lo! a ghastly
procession ascended from the main-deck —four sailors carrying the
almost lifeless body of a comrade, who seemed to be far advanced
in consumption. His features were pale and emaciated, blood
oozed from his shrivelled lips, and his feeble frame was shattered
by a wrecking cough. Poor fellow! —his wife in Liverpool
and his mother in London —there he lay, sadly waiting the
coup de grace of death. All that medical skill and a kind heart
could desire had been done for him by Dr. Robertson; and Cap-
tain Anderson bad ordered him to be brought up to the quarter-
deck every fine day.
On Tuesday we continued to enjoy delicious weather, and, hav-
ing altered our course to south, had the pleasant certainty of
speeding along with the south-east “trades.” An untoward
accident occurred next day. One of Phillips’ Fire Annihilators,
while being examined, exploded prematurely, inflicting a severe
burn and contusion upon the leg of our respected fellow-passenger,
Mr. Brooke. (Lat. 10 deg. 46 min. S.; long. 32 deg. 40 min. W.)
26


CHAPTER X.
More of the Mutiny—The Island of Trinidada—Sunrise—Greetings at Sea.
And now we were to have another morceau of the mutiny. Since
the imprisonment of Murphy and Robinson, Smith, elated by the
impunity with which he had escaped, persevered in his disrespect-
ful and insubordinate conduct towards his superiors, and a large
number of the cabin passengers at length requested the captain to
put him in irons, lest he should succeed in exciting another emevte.
That extreme measure became unavoidable upon Saturday night.
In the evening the mate directed him to go aloft upon duty, but he
delayed doing so till the order had been twice repeated, and he
then went expressing a hope that he should be able to “do ” for
both captain and mate before arriving at Melbourne. At half-past
ten o’clock he absented himself from his watch upon deck, and
when discovered asleep, he impertinently refused either explana-
tion or defence. Justice had overtaken him at last. He joined
his colleagues in their hospital prison. As he was conveyed below,
a lady in the first cabin was indiscreet enough to describe the cap-
tain’s conduct as unwarrantable. She found but one person to
agree with her, however, all the rest of the cabin passengers, in-
cluding the Rev. Mr. Grant, emphatically expressing their approval
of Captain Anderson’s management. After rather an exciting
scene she was induced to retire to her apartment. (Lat. 18 deg.
36 min. S.; long. 30 deg. 10 min. W.)
“Land! Land! ” was the welcome shout which aroused us on
Sunday morning. At first we believed the news too pleasant to
be true, but in a few hours the Island of Trinidada became dis-
tinctly visible to the naked eye, and we sailed past it in the even-
ing, at about 44 miles distance. As it lay to the west, in the
setting sun, it reminded me, both in colour and shape, of Inismac-
Ncssan, or Ireland’s Eye , over which I have watched the sunbeams
play, many a delightful evening, sitting upon pleasant Ben-Beder.


(Lat., by account, 19 deg. 47 min. S.; long. 29 deg. 8 min. W., at
three p.m.)
The heat was almost intolerable on Monday, and we glided along
but slowly. Discontent seemed to be still rife among the crew. In
the evening two of them got drunk, and insisted upon being put
in irons with their friends; at night the captain discovered the
“watch” asleep: of course they were appropriately dealt with.
On Tuesday another malcontent flung himself overboard, but
was saved, probably as a verification of the old proverb, “he
who is born to be hanged,” &c. On Wednesday we found
that both mornings and evenings had become decidedly cooler
—the tropical heat was gone. This we had anything but an objec-
tion to. A real grievance, however, was it to observe that we had
but little wind, and that we were again obliged to resort to the
process of “ bouting ship.” As the night fell we saw five sails in
company. (Lat. 26 deg. 20 min. S.; long. 27 deg. 45 min. W., at
three p.m.) Another bright golden morning greeted us upon Thurs-
day, combining tropical beauty and fervour with the clear blue sky
and exquisitely refreshing breezes of the south. We are to be
envied, for we saw the sun rise—a tropical dawning at sea. A
superb procession of clouds, literally bewildering our senses with
their magical variety of form and colour, heralded the approach of
the sun, and gradually spread above and around, covering the
entire sky with their exquisitely-hued tracery. Then appeared his
own glorious face above the horizon, and our dazzled eyes glanced
down to the sea for relief, but in vain, for spreading over the tremu-
lous waves was a vivid daguerreotype of the magnificent picture in
the sky.
At mid-day we had the pleasure of enjoying one of the most
interesting adventures of sea-life. Almost simultaneously at day-
light we had perceived four ships standing to windward, on the blue
rim of the horizon. One of them in a few hours approached near
enough to be signalized, and we ascertained that she was the Am-
brosine, from London, bound for Launceston, with emigrants. Not
content with the frigid medium of signalizing, however, her cap-
tain intimated that he would be delighted to come alongside and
have a friendly gossip. Gladly enough we accepted his invita-
tion, and held to, while the Amhrosine gracefully glided round


to our leeside, till within seeing and speaking distance. The pas-
sengers of the two ships gazed upon each other, silently, with emo-
tions it would be difficult to describe. I don’t know how to account
for it, but certainly there was something in that crowd of eager faces
which touched a deep chord of my nature, and I had some difficulty
in repressing a ridiculous tear. Nor was I alone in this. Sad eyes
and throbbing bosoms were all around.
Speaking-trumpet in hand, Captain Anderson ascended the ship’s
side, and held a short colloquy with the captain of the A rnbrosine,
who proved to be a friend of his own, Captain Melville. After
exchanging a few civilities they wished each other a pleasant
voyage, and sheered off again. Some of our passengers gave them
three farewell huzzas, and the hand played “ Cheer, boys, cheer,”
with characteristic energy.
Day closed with a magnificent sunset, of quite a different char-
acter from any which we had yet witnessed. As the sun dipped
into the sea, the west was covered with exquisite streaks of gold
and crimson and yellow, which gradually spread round to the east,
covered the entire sky for a minute, and disappeared. But their
last tinge had scarcely died away when the full moon emerged from
the sea towards the east, her pure, soft, silvery beams tinting the
scene with a novel and delicious beauty. Come up to the quarter-
deck, and stand with me at the stern, endeavouring with all your
might to impress the beauty of that magnificent picture upon your
soul—the moon and her attendant stars, shining with almost preter-
natural brilliancy, through the radiant atmosphere of the South—•
the illimitable blue arch, studded from horizon to horizon with
glowing orbs, of which our world is but a miniature—the vast ex-
panse of living waters, heaving and throbbing in the moonlight,
with a melancholy sound which one might imagine a sigh from the
myriads whose white bones glisten beneath; —one look upon this
magnificent picture, and your soul has received an ineffaceable
image of sublimity.
This was the time to lean over the gunwale and gaze upon the
changing face of the sea. The clouds, too, varying in shape and colour
every second, furnished an inexhaustible panorama for the imagina-
tion. As I live, there to the east stand the ruins of an old Irish abbey,
the yew trees growing in the deserted aisle, and the superb Gothic


windows in the gable half hid by festooning ivy. Alas, it vanishes
as I gaze, —a sad emblem of poor Erin’s national glory! Now
the musicians came upon deck, and gay parties arrange for a dance
under the awning.
But it must not be supposed that dancing was the amusement
selected by all during the delicious hours of moonlight. Glancing
around the fleck, or in the boats at the side, you might see affec-
tionate little groups, sitting or reclining, or slowly pacing the least
frequented corner of the poop, in low, earnest converse ; and I am
very much mistaken if the air was not redolent of many a roman-
tic vow. Is that a ship’s light upon the western horizon? No;
it is the planet Venus descending into the sea. Look ! she disap-
pears for the night—and so shall I. (Lat. 26 deg. 20 min. S.;
long., at 3 p.m., 27 deg. 45 min. W.)
I shall not attempt to describe the beauty of the next delicious
morning (Friday), but content myself with saying that it was fully
equal to that of the preceding day—a bright golden sun in a clear
blue sky, and a pleasant breeze wafting us on to the Promised Land.
In the course of the day no less than five vessels were in sight.
We signalized the Akhbar, from London, for Hong Kong, 45 days
out; and we had a pleasant chat with the Etherial , from London
to Sydney, who informed us that “the Merrie England was two days’
sail a-head.”
The evening became decidedly cool— the sky cloudy and unsettled,
and the sun retreated prematurely behind a mass of dull slate-
coloured clouds. Scarcely had he disappeared, however, when a faint
glimmer appeared upon the eastern horizon, and for the first time
we witnessed the moon actually ascending from the sea. In a
minute she had completely emerged, three dark streaks of cloud
extending across her disc—a glorious captive glancing through her
prison bars! Higher and higher she ascended, till her beams poured
a direct path of light over the tremulous waves to the side of the
vessel, and every object around the horizon became distinctly
visible. A fresh breeze now filled our sails, and we sped rapidly
along, soon leaving our companions’ ships far behind. (Lat. 28
deg. 39 min. S.; long. 28 deg. 13 min, W.) At 1 p.m. next day
we spoke the Alida Maria , from Amsterdam to Bombay, with coals.
(Lat. 30 deg. 31 min, S.; long. 26 deg. W.)


CHAPTER XL
The Shark—The Southern Cross—Whales.
On the morning of our seventh Sabbath at sea we were startled by
a cry of “ The Shark! the Shark ! ” and upon hastening to the deck
we did really see one of those terrible monsters playing around the
stern of the vessel. It was precisely the weather in which we
might have expected such a visitor—the air hot and sultry—no
breeze —the sea clear and placid as a mountain lake—the Tudor
completely becalmed. Mr. Hopwood was the first to perceive the
monster, swimming astern.
He is evidently a young one, quite green (but in colour only),
and about nine feet in length. Hooks, baited with pork, are
cast out, and the monster is soon cautiously scenting at the bait.
Look—he approaches—bites. Confusion! the rogue has carried
off the pork in triumph, and disappeared. But see, here he is
again, and nibbling at the other hook. Now, he bites—the hook
gets well into his mouth —pull, pull! now he is half-way out of
the water —bah ! Mr. Grimes, you are a bad fisher for sharks—the
hook has slipped from his iron jaws, and he is once more off with
the pork. I can fancy him grinning at you.
For two or three hours he continued gambolling near the vessel,
occasionally swimming round and round. At last, evidently seeing
that Mr. Grimes had relinquished the line, he sallied away in search
of some other angler equally expert.
Never can we forget the gorgeous “architecture of the clouds ”
as the sun set that evening. With shaded eyes, we gazed as he
descended to the level of the horizon, dipped into the sea, and dis-
appeared. Two large clouds of dazzling whiteness, which hovered
over the point of his departure, were suddenly suffused and
mottled by a glow of bright deep crimson, and in a few minutes
a faint tinge of the same brilliant colour spread round to the east.
At half-past 10 we again witnessed the descent of the planet Venus,


a few minutes before the rising of the moon. (Lat. 31 deg. 41 min.
S.; long. 23 deg. 45 min. W.)
Bright, bracing, and sunny was Tuesday till about two o’clock,
when the sky to the northward became overcast, and we were
visited by a slight shower. This soon passed away, however, and
an uncommonly stiff breeze was good enough to succeed. Glancing
around the horizon we saw no less than eleven vessels, all evi-
dently steering the same course as ourselves. Two large whales
were also discovered close astern.
Every night, at this point of our voyage, the sky was spangled
all over by the magnificent constellations of the Southern hemis-
phere, shining with such superb brilliancy as we are strangers to
in the frigid latitudes of the North. Most beautiful and interesting
of all was the Southern Cross, which we had been long anxious
to see—the representative constellation of the South. We saw
it for the first time this evening. Right over the Cross were two
clusters of stars, apparently small white clouds, and which are
actually called “ The Magellan Clouds,” after the illustrious navi-
gator.
There was a dance upon the poop in the evening, but most of the
ladies retired early, as the air had become positively cold, anl our
hair, faces, hands, and clothes, were saturated with the heavy night
dew. (Lat. 34 deg. 1 min. S.; long. 19 deg. 55 min. W.)
On Wednesday five vessels were in sight—one being the Bombay,
of Dundee, from London, 58 days out. Immense quantities of
Cape pigeons now visited us every day; and for the first time we
saw the celebrated albatross, around which Coleridge’s fine ballad,
“ The Anciente Marinere,” has shed such romantic interest. The
night was cold, misty, and moonless. (Lat. 34 deg. 56 min. S.;
long. 16 deg. 50 min. W.)
We were again becalmed for some hours next day, and Captain
Anderson permitted the boats to be lowered. Glancing around the
horizon at sunset, we perceived several ships in company. One
schooner stood to the west, the setting sun lighting up her spars
and sails; and, a little to the east, an immense shoal of whales were
sporting on the water, their blubber spouting up like jets of steam.
(Lat. 35 deg. 16 min. S.; long., by account, 15 deg. 26 min. W.)


CHAPTER XII.
The Cape—Tristan d’ Acunha—Catching the Breeze.
Breathing an atmosphere clearer and milder than that of an Irish
Midsummer eve, and reposing upon a sea as placid as the bosom of
a lone lake in the mountains, was it not difficult to believe that we
were then actually spending Friday, the 19th of December, south
of the terrible Cape of Storms? Yet so it was. The Cape is in
34 deg. of south latitude, and we had then attained 35 deg. 50 min.
In the course of the day a French and a Dutch vessel came close
enough to be signalized ; and a sailor, belonging to the latter, was
good enough to furnish an incident by falling overboard while
painting the bowsprit. Fortunately he caught a rope and wiis
saved. Towards evening we sighted the picturesque little island,
Tristan d’ Acunha, bearing S. by E., at a distance of about 80
miles, from which some idea may be formed of its immense height
above the sea. Some excellent arable land and delicious water
has Tristan d’ Acunha —its circumference is about fifteen miles—it
is considered a British possession—whaling vessels generally find it
a desirable rendezvous —and it is ruled by an enterprising Robin-
son Crusoe from the Cape.
Here again the faithless breeze deserted us, and we drifted along
at the rate of merely a few knots an hour, lurching lazily from side
to side, with flapping sails, and that detestable straining creek-creek
from the masts and yards which made one almost wish them
overboard. Passengers grumbling —captain silent and stem—chief
mate in despair. I didn’t envy the amiable glance Mr. Well-up
obtained from Captain Anderson in return for his timely comments
upon the delightful “ fineness of the weather.” All day everything
seemed a bore to everybody! Delicious moonlight, but no gay
groups upon the poop. All had vanished but a certain few, to
whom the “calm” was simply a prolonging of their own romantic
dreams, and who loved to linger, gazing upon each other or the


stars; or perhaps some pensive solitaire, whose sad thoughts were
far* over the sea.
About this time some of the steerage passengers were absurd
enough to present the captain with what they termed a “petition,”
but which was virtually a threatening letter, impugning the entire
management of the ship, and demanding a more rigid enforcement
of the Passengers’ Act. What rendered this demonstration pe-
culiarly disagreeable was that, upon almost every previous day, in
reply to Captain Anderson’s personal inquiry, they had stated that
they had nothing whatever to complain of. Nor had they, in point
of fact—for the captain’s sole error lay in having interpreted the
law too leniently, in order to afford them a larger meed of comfort
and pleasure than they were entitled to. He replied promptly and
literally with their request, however, and the result was that their
privileges were considerably curtailed. All the steerage passengers
thus suffered for the absurdity of a discontented few —a pregnant
lesson for all future emigrants.
So passed many a dreary day and night, until existence became
a perpetual ennui. On Saturday our main-yard, an immense spar,
was taken down, and replaced by a new one. Sunday had all the
characteristics of Tropical weather —we were becalmed in a dead,
motionless sea, though in lat. 36 deg. 6 min. S ; long. 9 deg. 4 min.
W. Eight other vessels shared our misfortune, however. On
Monday, we altered our course to S.E. half S. Mr. Stockdale suc-
ceeded in capturing a fine albatross, 10 feet broad from tip to tip.
And then we emerged from the region of calms. A fresh breeze
filled our sails, we altered our course to S.E. half E., and sped
along rapidly over a magnificent wave-covered sea. Far as the
eye could scan, the mighty waters foamed and leaped and roared-
mimic mountains of a rich deep green, crested with wreaths of
foam, at first pure white, then tinged with innumerable beauties
by the warm kiss of the sun. It was as if the ocean rejoiced at
escaping from the trance which had held him so long, and leaped
forth a perfect image of strength and beauty. At midnight our
course was altered to S.E. by E. half E. (Lat. 37 deg. 4 min S.;
long. 5 deg. 30 min. W.)
All next day we sped along in the same fashion, with an oc-
casional squall, in one of which we lost a top stunsai). At mid-


night, a soft chime from the bell on the quarter-deck announced
that it was Christmas morning. (Lat. 38 deg. 14 min. S.; long.
30 min W.)
CHAPTER XIII.
The Shroud at Christmas.
A wild, bleak morning ushered in that which, at home, in the
old country, is the most joyous and beautiful of all festivals.
Overhead was a black, sullen sky ; the wind blew so fiercely as to
carry away some of our topsails; and the waves every now and
then leaped and foamed over the deck, sometimes bounding com-
pletely across from gunwale to gunwale, like a crystal arch. Far
away from home and friends, tossing about on that pitiless sea, all
the tender associations of what Christmas once was, spreading be-
fore us in a gloomy procession—need I say that this festival morn-
ing found us in no rejoicing mood. And yet there was a still
darker tinge to be shed over our sorrow: the first announcement
we heard, upon reaching the deck, was that one of our fellow-
voyagers had “ been stricken by the cruel hand of death.” Yes,
indeed. Mr. Carter, son of Colonel Carter, of Jersey, after suffer-
ing a dreary illness, had yielded up his spirit the night before, and
we were now asked to assist at his funeral. Poor fellow!
He was just in his prime handsome, gifted, and accom-
plished. He had been a captain in the British service, and was
proceeding to Australia, I understand, to rejoin the army. Hav-
ing been stitched up in canvas, a weight was attached to his feet,
and he was then carried on a frame to the bulwarks, where I had
often seen him sitting in the sun, with the apparent promise of
enjoying many a happy year. The funeral service was read by
the Rev. Mr. Grant. At the words, “ committed to the deep,” the
frame was elevated—there was a dull, heavy plunge, which still


rings in my ear—and then we had seen the last of Robert Carter.
Sad, sad! with no mother, or sister, or wife, to weep over him,
or receive his farewell sigh, he descended into the cold bosom of
the ocean!
“ The winds the sullen sea that tore,
His death-song chaunted loud,
The weeds that line the clifted shore.
Were all his burial-shroud;
For friendly wail and holy dirge,
And long lament of love,
Around him roared the angry surge,
The curlew screamed above.”
A deep gloom rested over the remainder of the day. In the first
cabin, however, there was a superb dinner, presided over by Cap-
tain Anderson, whose health was repeatedly toasted by the guests.
(Lat. 38 deg. 48 min. S.; long. 5 deg. 11 min. E.) On Saturday
our course was altered to S.E. by S. (Lat. 40 deg. 40 min. S.;
long., by account, 18 deg. 1 min. E.)
The weather had by this time become intensely cold; we had
frequent a fresh, stiff breeze, and a heavy sea
swept our decks night and day. This was a complete con-
trast to the delightful temperature we had been enjoying so
long. The sea was either calm, presenting a dull black or
slate-coloured aspect, or it was covered with enormous waves, the
foam of which had all the cold glitter of snow. Even the sun set
devoid of his habitual lustre. At rare intervals we enjoyed a de-
licious day, or a magnificent moonlight, but for nearly the re-
mainder of our voyage Nature retained this stern, rugged de-
meanour.
On Sunday our lat. was 42 deg. 6 min. S.; long. 21 deg. 43 min.
E. —both imperfect. On Monday we had attained lat. 43 deg. 30
min. S.; long. 2G deg. 46 min. E.; on the 30th, lat. 43 deg. 45 min.
S.; long. 32 deg. 27 min. E.; and we ended the Old Year in lat.
43 deg. 44 min. S.; long. 37 deg. 4 rain. E.
On New-Year’s evening, during a very heavy breeze, the cross-
jack tack gave way, very severely hurting Mr. Hopwood and
Master Stockdale. (Lat. 44 deg. 11 min. S.; long. 41 deg. 17
min. E.)


On the 7th we had once more to witness the melancholy spec-
tacle of a funeral at sea. Robertson, the sailor whose illness I
have already alluded to, breathed his last, and was buried at mid-
day. An infant, three months’ old, named Jane Stewart, belong-
ing to a steerage passenger, was buried at the same time and in the
same shroud. On the 18th we had attained lat. 45 deg. 9 min. S.;
and long. 91 deg. 54 min. E.
CHAPTER XIV.
The Catastrophe—Suicide—Our Arrival in Hobson's Bay.
After our long and dreary pilgrimage over the vast desert of
waters, it was delicious news that we now heard from Captain
Anderson—that we should probably sight the pleasant shores of
Australia in less than a week. A fresh breeze blew from the very
“ airt ” that we desired ; our spars were covered wth every stitch of
canvas they could bear with safety; and it was positively exciting
to witness the rapidity with which the Tudor bounded over the
waves. No grumbling was heard on board now. A kindly cheer-
ful word was on every lip ; and every eye seemed to light up with
the fire of courage and hope. Nor was the purely romantic ele-
ments wanting. Kalf-a-dozen marriages were spoken of as certain
to be solemnized upon our arrival in Melbourne. But, alas ! for
human enjoyment.
“ There’s nothing true but heaven.”
We were disturbed from this brief interval of repose by the
occurrence of a fearful tragedy—the most melancholy episode of
our entire voyage.
On the evening of the iGth of January, as we approached Bass’s
Straits, the faithless breeze suddenly deserted us, and, to our in-
finite chagrin, we merely drifted along two or three knots an hour,
E


while we knew that a few days of tolerably rapid sailing would
bring us to the end of our journey. On Saturday and Sunday we were
almost becalmed; and one could conceive that the immense flocks
of albatrosses, boobies, Cape pigeons, and ice-birds, which flew all
day around and over the vessel, almost within reach of our hands—
were enjoying our ridiculous dilemma. In vain Captain Anderson
glared indignantly at the sky ; Mr. Hall’s low amorous whistle for
wind was a decided failure.
A quiet solemn silence usually prevailed throughout the Tudor
every Sunday. The 18th of January was “a calm, mild day,”
and scarcely a sound was heard louder than the lazy ripple of the
waves. But at about five o’clock in the evening we were startled
by a terrible crash, as if some immense spar had fallen upon the
deck; and this was immediately followed by the bursting of chains
and ropes, and the awful shrieking of women and children. We
rushed upon deck ; there everything was in confusion—sailors and
passengers running to and fro, and every face bearing the impres-
sion of sorrow and alarm. A fearful catastrophe had taken place.
Half-a-dozen of the ship’s company had been aloft, arranging the
rigging; among the rest, Christian Lucas, a fine young fellow, whom
I have already mentioned as one of the best men in the ship, was
working on the main top-gallant yard. Suddenly the large spar
called the “ boom ” gave way, and poor Lucas was precipitated into
the water, a depth of about 200 feet, his head striking the main-
yard in the descent. He must have been completely stunned, but
he soon rose to the surface, by the side of the vessel, the blood
streaming down his face. There was a heavy and gradually in-
creasing swell, and the current was right against us, so that Lucas
was rapidly drifted sternwards, and at the same time we were
running along five or six knots an hour. Poor Lucas was far be-
hind us in a minute—we could see him rising and sinking with the
waves. Three or four life-buoys were thi own overboard, but the
waves unfortunately drifted them out of his reach.
Captain Anderson and all the ship’s officers rushed to the poop
on hearing the crash. “Down with the life-boat instantly,”
shouted the captain; “ don’t wait to untie the tackling—cut it
away.” A hundred hands at once set to work, and six men, in-
cluding Mr. Hall, the chief mate, and Rogers, a sailmaker, leaped


into the descending boat. By an unlucky mischance, the forward
tackling had been loosened too rapidly, so that the boat reached
the water head foremost, and was immediately capsized. Mr. Hall
and two of the sailors contrived to get upon her keel, two other
sailors seized the oars, but poor Rogers went down by the side of
the vessel, and was never seen again. The three men on the boat,
and the two on the oars, were far behind us in a minute, drifting
in the same direction as Lucas.
The ship was now put about —another boat was lowered, and
Mr. Belcher and Mr. M‘Farlane, the first and second mates, with two
or three sailors, sprang in, and pulled vigorously away in search of
their comrades. But Nature seemed resolved upon overwhelming
us with disaster. The sky, which had hitherto been cloudless and
serene, suddenly became black and gloomy; the wind rapidly
freshened into an unusually stiff breeze; and the swell increased
so much, that the boat containing the rescuing party was some-
times completely hidden from our view. Conceive what must have
been the sufferings of the men on the capsized boat and on the
oars—but, above all, the agony of poor Lucas, who had nothing at
all to sustain him in his struggle with that terrible sea! Before be
entirely disappeared from our view, we saw flocks of the cruel
albatrosses dipping and whirling around, preparing, according to
their usual habit, to swoop down and plunge their horrid beaks
into his skull!
It was a terrible tragedy; and the rapidity with which one dis-
aster followed the other filled the passengers with unspeak-
able awe. The poop, the rigging—every elevated position was
crowded—every eye strained to catch a glimpse of the rescuing
party. After a long pull, they were seen taking the men off the
boat and off the oars; and soon afterwards we observed that they
had taken the capsized life-boat in tow, in the hope of bringing
her back to the ship. But had they succeeded in saving Lucas ?
It was too far off for us to see. For about two hours they strug-
gled gallantly to secure the life-boat, but they could make no
way against the heavy swell. Night was rapidly approach-
ing too, so the signalized them to return. Sending the
life-boat adrift, they pulled for the Tudor , and in a few minutes
were by our side. It was a moment of anxious suspense.


“ Are you all safe ? ” inquired Captain Anderson.
“No, sir,” r-eplied Mr. Hall; “ there is one man lost—Christian
Lucas. J. Rogers on board ? ”
“ No.”
No, indeed! Lucas had probably sunk from exhaustion long
before he could have been overtaken by the boat; and Rogers had
never risen to the surface. There was genuine grief throughout
the ship for the sad fate of these poor fellows, for they were held in
unusual esteem by both officers and passengers. Lucas was a native
of Switzerland. A clever and aspiring young fellow, he spent his
leisure hours studying navigation and writing his autobiography.
He yearned to revisit the historic mountains and glens and lakes
of his childhood, and purposed doing so upon his return to Eng-
land. Alas! alas 1 Rogers was a native of Cork. Shrewd, sober,
and industrious, he had realized a little money. This was to have
been his last voyage —he was betrothed to a young girl in Liver-
pool, and was to have been married on bidding a final farewell to
the sea. Sad to think of the venerable father and mother and
tender bride hoping to clasp him in their arms in a few short
months, while he himself was being done to a death of agony by
the merciless waves!
It was all over at about nine o’clock, and the ordinary routine
of sea-life was resumed. The heavy swell of the waves subsided,
and a fresh steady breeze drove us onward to Melbourne. The
clouds vanished from the sky, the stars glared down with exqnisite
brilliancy, and the moon seemed to shed a halo of more than
usual grandeur and beauty over the sea. Nature seemed to re-
joice over her fearful achievement. I turned from the delicious
picture almost with disgust.
Early on Wednesday morning we caught the first glimpse of
Australia—sighting Port Fairy and the bold, picturesque headland
of Cape Nelson. As we were on the deck, feasting our eyes with
the long-coveted spectacle, we suddenly heard a splash by the side
of the ship. A poor imbecile passenger, named Dawson, had
escaped from confinement, and deliberately thrown himself over-
board. The ship was held to, and a boat lowered, without delay,
but the hapless suicide was too soon beyond the reach of human
assistance.


The wind now became adverse, blowing from the very point to
which we wanted to steer, and we had to continue tacking and
“ bouting ship ” all day and night. At length, at about two o’clock
p.m. on Thursday, we sighted Cape Otway, shortly afterwards
approaching near enough to have a superb view of the Australian
coast. It was a magnificent picture—that long undulating range
of cliffs, sometimes rising to an immense height above the sea, and
again sloping gently down to the yellow strand, over which the
waves rolled with a sweet, solemn music, that reminded us of happy
days that are no more. All the sea-side country seemed to be
mountainous —hill rising over hill, as far as the eye could reach—
but with a rich, generous soil, for in some parts the grass was as
fresh and green as an Irish meadow in Spring, and the hills were
densely studded with gigantic trees. Here and there the coast
was broken up by picturesque little valleys or ravines, and the
rocks occasionally assumed shapes of the most fantastic character,
as the sun tinted them with light or shade. An air of intense
solitude seemed to pervade the entire scene ; and we were just be-
ginning to believe that here at least was a spot which had never
been trodden by the foot of man, when, lo ! a pillar of blue smoke
mounted up to the sky, and we saw a little range of canvas tents—
our first glimpse of Australian enterprise and energy. We reached
the “Heads ” at nine o’clock, and vainly endeavoured, by dint of
cannon shot, blue lights, and rockets, to seduce some good-natured
pilot into our service for the night. At day-break next morning,
one of these ancient mariners condescended to take us in charge,
and by him we were guided safely into Hobson’s Bay, where we
cast anchor on Friday evening, the 23d of January, 1857.


SANITARY MEMORANDA.
[Our medical adviser, Dr. Robertson, has kindly furnished the following account
of our sanitary condition during the voyage—interspersing the narrative with
practical suggestions which will he found of real interest and importance to
future emigrants.]
It was with much pleasure that I consented to contribute a short
Medical Report to the Narrative of our Voyage; and I am
especially pleased at being able to furnish such a one as the fol-
lowing :
The total number of persons on board at the date of sailing was
448_0f these 11 were infants under one year, 43 were children
under 12, and the remaining 394 were above this age. At the ter-
mination of the voyage there were on hoard 445, all of whom were
able to land in as sound condition as they had embarked. Thus
there is a deficiency of three, who died on the voyage, and wfcose
loss was not compensated by any births —of these, two were adult
males, the one a seaman, and the other a passenger —and the third
was an infant three months old, who was cut off by the relapse of
an acute inflammation. Both adults came on board affected with
structural disease —in the one this was certain, in the other it was
highly probable. In the former consumption had already begun
its ravages; but had he been a passenger, instead of a seaman, he
too might have been spared to see the golden land. This is likely
from the amendment that took place among the few passengers
afflicted with this malady, not from medical treatment, but from
the milder climate which they enjoyed during the greater part of
the voyage. These had, in general, laboured under it previously,
and had recovered from its incipient inroads, but in one, a saloon


passenger, who also improved on the voyage, the disease was of
much longer standing. This, therefore, may furnish a ground for
hope, but not a reason for delay, in such cases; the maxim, that all
who are in jeopardy from this disease and think of emigrating
should do so early, is the safest and best to act upon. The absence
among those on board of changes in the structure of the body, pro-
duced by existing or former maladies, is one great reason of the low
mortality.
Although the deaths were few, there were numerous slighter ail-
ments ; but of course had these not been attended to they would
often have become of graver character. At first there was abund-
ance of sea-sickness, but, except in a few persons, this soon sub-
sided. 'Much of it might be prevented, or greatly mitigated, if
proper attention were paid before sailing to bringing the stomach
into good order by aperients and due regulation of the diet. After-
wards, with the tropical climate, came slight affections of the skin,
as rushes and prickly heat, but these, too, soon died away. The
majority of the ailments affected the chest and the bowels, shewing
themselves in the former as colds and coughs and mild inflamma-
tions, while the latter exhibited the opposite states of constipation
and relaxation, this being sometimes inflammatory. The relaxa-
tion was chiefly seen in children of tender years, the inflammatory
form occurring in adults; but in these indigestion and constipation
were most prevalent. Rheumatism also was not unfrequent among
them.
The causes of these ailments generally were exposure to cold and
damp, the changes of climate, and the alteration in the diet and
whole mode of living. The first ought especially to be provided
against by suitable clothing, by the constant use of flannel, and by
careful protection of the feet and ancles: changes should at once be
made in the dress also according to the weather; and regular exer-
cise taken daily so far as circumstances permit. In the derange-
ments of the bowels, and especially in their relaxation in children,
the diet is greatly concerned; but this cannot be amended, except
by laying in a private store, consisting for adults of vegetables
chiefly. This also is very necessary for children who have been
weaned shortly before sailing: infants still at the breast do not
experience much change, but for the others there ought to be a


special supply of provisions, hi particular of preserved milk and
eggs, with sago and arrow-root.
The question then comes to he, how shall we account for the
general good health enjoyed on board ? Firstly, the greater num-
ber consisted of seamen and of a good class of emigrants, who, by
their very names, are pre-supposed to be young, robust, and healthy.
Secondly, almost all the circumstances in which they were placed
were favourable, —the speedy voyage, the fortunate season, the
good dietary, the abundant space, the free ventilation, and the
strict cleanliness. Thirdly, no contagious disease was brought on
board, or sprang up amongst them, and no very serious accidents
occurred; and, lastly, something may fairly he attributed to the
care and attention of the captain and officers.
GEO. ROBERTSON, M.D.
Jan. 17th, 1857.
P.S.—The foregoing report was written at a time when we
expected to reach our destination within a couple of days, and in
safety. The very next day, however, there happened the double
accident, touchingly .related by the Editor, whereby we lost two of
our best seamen; and, the wind continuing foul, three days after-
wards, an imbecile passenger, left alone for a few minutes, jumped
overboard and also perished. Thus, when our prospects were
fairest, our mortality was doubled almost at once, and most dis-
tressingly; so true is it, that in the midst of joy there is sorrow.
But, latest of all, on our arrival at the Heads, the scale of existence
was turned in the opposite direction, by the unlooked-for appear-
ance of a young “ Tudor,” so supplying an incident seldom wanting
in a large passenger ship.
G. R.


ADDRESSES
€usl H filter 0f % Slri|i “Mwr.”
[I have always considered it the duty of emigrants to let the public know pre-
cisely how their officers may have conducted themselves during the voyage—
administering censure or eulogy with rigid justice. Subjoined are a few
documents which denote our estimate of Captain Anderson.
Respected Sih, —On the eve of our arrival in Melbourne, be-
fore departing to our various homes in this newest New World,
we, the passengers of the intermediate cabin, desire to tender our
sincere thanks for the manner in which you have conducted our
voyage in the Tudor. We believe it to be an imperative duty, and
we enjoy it as a genuine pleasure, to acknowledge the care and
anxiety with which you have habitually watched over our interests,
during our protracted sojourn upon the high seas.
Throughout the entire period you have omitted nothing which
had a tendency to promote our comfort or amusement, and you
have done everything in your power to bring the voyage to a
speedy and pleasant termination. You were always accessible
when we requested an interview—always just when our demands
were reasonable —and always prompt in granting redress when we
were really aggrieved.
Nothing could be more satisfactory than the manner in which
you have discharged your peculiarly professional duties. Day or
night you were seldom absent from the deck—never when there
seemed the faintest possibility of danger—and we always felt our
lives and property secure, because we always found you skilful,
vigilant, and conscientious.
We trust, Sir, that you will accept this simple address, not as a
merely formal eulogy, but as a memorial of genuine affection and
respect; and we conclude by wishing that you may enjoy, what
you so truly deserve, many happy years of honour and prosperity.
[Here follow seventy-eight signatures.]


Ship Tddor, January , 1857.
TO CAPTAIN ANDERSON.
Dear Sib, —We, the undersigned first cabin passengers of the
Tudor, now happily in safety within sight of Melbourne, after a
most satisfactory passage, have no ordinary pleasure, as we feel it
a duty before parting, in tendering to you an expression of our
common feelings on the occasion.
We beg to assure you of our sincere admiration of your uniform
conduct as master of this ship—conduct which has at once shown
you to be a thorough seaman, a prudent navigator, and an able
commander. Your constant solicitude for the comfort of all has
been marked, and duly appreciated.
A committee of our number has been instructed on landing to
purchase and present to you, in our name, a slight memorial of the
time spent under your care, which we hope you will accept rather
as an indication of good feeling than for its intrinsic value.
In returning to England, we cordially wish you a prosperous and
speedy voyage ; and if, as you hinted, this may possibly be your
last, and that you enter into business there, we trust that, however
you may be engaged, you may be quite as successful on shore as
you have always been at sea.
With great cordiality and respect, we beg to subscribe ourselves,
Dear Sir, yours faithfully.
[Here follow the signatures.]
TO CAPTAIN W. J. ANDERSON.
Respected Sib, —As we have now happily arrived within sight
of the pleasant shores of Australia, it becomes our agreeable duty,
as passengers in the second cabin of the Tudor, to acknowledge the
unerring skill and untiring vigilance with which you have con-
ducted our long pilgrimage over the sea.
During a voyage beset with unusual difficulty, you have at every
crisis displayed adequate courage and discretion; and you have
protected us from every disaster with which human endeavours


could cope. You have promoted our comfort and amusement
without thinking of pleasure for yourself. You have watched over
our lives and property, frequently at the expense of your own
health. You have passed anxious days and sleepless nights, while
we rested securely in the knowledge that you occupied the post of
danger. As master of the Tudor, you supported your position with
becoming dignity; yet we invariably found you affable and con-
siderate, and as accessible as the humblest officer of the ship. *
For all this, sir, we beg to tender you our sincere thanks, and to
assure you that we shall always remember you with real affection
and esteem.
[Here follow seventeen signatures.]
Michael T. Gasom, Printer, Elizabeth Street.


