

Kip 21? /\LL
I
W ake up
Brothers and Sisters
■


THING in the universe is created useless ; patient
research in our studies declares that everything in
the universe has its use, nothing is created in vain,
and has warned us against hasty inferences and
jumping at rash conclusions. The scientists of the old school
regarded certain parts of the body as useless, and believed that
they served no other purpose but to remind us of the stages of
physical evolution through which man has passed. They even
considered them to be actually prejudicial to human health, and
recommended their removal, regarding them as responsible for
certain diseases. But the advance and development of scientific
knowledge and man's varied experince and increased learning
have established the unreality and baselessness of this idea and
have unmistakably demonstrated the truth and soundness of the
Quranic hypothesis. There is an intestine in the human body
which the doctors call vermiform appendix. It was generally
thought that small pieces of half-digested food remained stuck
in it, causing appendicitis. Believing this intestine to be
apparently of no use, the doctors have till very recently been
removing it when performing an operation for appendicitis. But
the recent researches in surgery have shown this idea to be
possessing no foundation. Experiments have established its
groundlessness. The most recent experiment in this connection
was made on twelve monkeys. Appendices of six of them were
removed, and all of them were put on the same diet. An examina-
tion of their general physical health showed those six monkeys
whose appendices were removed had lost their agility and quick-
ness of movement. The effect of this and other experiments
of the same nature has been that the doctors who used to cut off
the vermiform appendix without any hesitation, even when the
patient was not suffering from a serious disease, have become
more careful. They have realized that this intestine is not
altogether useless, as they first generally believed it to be. Experi-
ments and researches have shown that nothing is useless. If these
experiments had not been made and the vermiform appendix
would have continued to be regarded as a useless relic of the


com is
- 3 NOV 1936
physical changes through which man has passed in his evolution,
how could the truth of the Islamic principle that all things have
their uses have been proved? Islam, indeed, encourages the
study of Science because, based on the Revealed Word of God,
scientific discoveries reveal the resplendent beauty and un-
challengeable truth of the teaching of the Quran.
One very common cause of the conflict between Science and
Religion is that some people come to look upon their own capri-
cious whims and fads and their ideas based upon imperfect and
unsound knowledge as Religion, which necessarily collide with
accepted and established scientific facts. Experiments and obser-
vations can never agree with fads and fancies, neither are these
fads and fancies Religion. The men of science sometimes are
as unreasonable and illogical in their attitude as some so-called
religious men are. Like the latter, they, too, sometimes are
tempted to regard their pet theories as Science. They naturally
conflict with religious truths. But theories unprobed and un-
supported by regular and reliable experiments are not Science,
as ideas and views uncorroborated by reason and intelligence
of some so-called religious leaders are not Religion. A mere
invention of the brain of a man can carry no weight before the
Revealed Word of God, as the foolish fancies of a mullah are
trash before the established and proved historical facts. Theories
continue to change. The advance of knowledge and learning has
given rise to new theories which have falsified the old ones.
Einstein’s theory of Relativity has shown some generally accepted
theories to be foundationless. Scientists are as capable of making
mistakes as religious men are. All theories are not Science, as
all that is said or believed by those who are regarded as religious
men is not Religion. We should base all true knowledge on
experiment and the Word of God. Then there will be no conflict.
If there appears conflict anywhere between Science and Religion,
then either a wrong interpretation has been put on religious teach-
ing and the Word of God has been misunderstood and mis-
construed, or there has remained some error, some flaw in making
scientific experiment.


“All Men Are Brothers”
The chocolate-coloured aboriginals of Australia, the brave
Maoris of New Zealand, the Red Indians of America, and the
Kaffirs of South Africa.
The conquering, empire-building white man robbed them
of their lands, their honour and their wild, free independence.
And, along with the men of India, Afghanistan, and ancient
Japan and China, the intolerant white man is apt to display,
in his arrogance, a “superiority complex” over these children
of an ancient race. This is wrong.
Human brotherhood admits of' no barriers of creed,
colour, occupation, or descent.
The members of the human race are all alike in the sight
of God, and it would be far better if the white man, instead
of alluding to the aboriginals as “niggers,” would remember
this great fact.
The Holy Quran, the jewel of Islam, says:
“All people are a single nation. O men, we have created
you all of a male and a female, and then made you tribes
and families.”
I have been dubbed A Quack by one of your magistrates.
I am proud of the fact that such people call me by that name.
They might have called me something much worse.
But, though I thank God that I possess no medical degree;
while I at least will not have to one day face my Maker to
answer a charge of having mutilated the bodies of His
creatures, I am satisfied to leave a Higher Power to decide
whether the magistrate’s statement is a true one, “that
I am a cunning and deceitful Afghan,” and “that I do not
cure my patients.”
MAHOMED ALLUM.
