

w " k ®
B
-UNIVERSAL LEAGUE


wake
IF. and live ?!
Vim^I
ISSUED BY THE
UNIVERSAL
OPPORTUNITY
LEAGUE
TEXT AMD ILLUSTRATIONS
COPY R I G H T


; ■ .■ v . r s ■■ - p


P 0 RT U N IT Y LEAGUE
began in a small way a quarter-century ago when a little group of
pioneers, whose lives had been completely changed by the appli-
cation of a few simple psychological principles, felt the call to
help those still struggling as once were they.
From that humble aspiration has grown the one-hundred-thou-
sand-member Organization helping ambitious men and women
all over the civilized world. The Headquarters of the League are
situated in the Victoria Buildings, 80 Swanston St. (corner of
Collins St.), Melbourne, Victoria. Tel. Cent. 1867.
INTRODUCTORY
To A Correspondence Course Entitled
"4ew to CttMtfe fyouA Life
This is a system of Self-Adjustment, Self-Expression, Self-
Advancement, which will make you from two to ten times more
effective, efficient and financial, and with about half the wear
and tear you experience at present. It is based on the human
sciences of Psychology—Anthropology—Biology—Preventative
and Productive Psychology as applied to Scientifc Mind and
Memory Training and your individual aims and needs. It will
help you also to destroy Fear, cure Inferiority Complex, solve Your
Health Problems, Love Problems, Domestic Problems, Personality
Problems, Success Problems, and will enable you to live from five
to fifty years longer than the average person does live.


THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK
“Mind is the,mighty power
That moves and makes
And Man, is Mind,
And evermore he takes
The fool of thought
And, shaping what he wills,
Brings forth a thousand joys,
A thousand ills.
He thinks In secret
And it comes to pass,
.Environment is but
\ His looking-glass.”
THIS book has been written with a single purpose-—to
AWAKEN YOUR MIND to your own unlimited powers
and possibilities. It is not a book to be skimmed through.
Find a quiet room, a comfortable chair. Then relax and
read it slowly, pausing to think as you read. For its vital
message will bring you into a realization of the great
truth that your only limitations are those which you scf
upon yourself. Here in its pages you will find new hope
and courage for the future, your ambition will be kindled
afresh. You will stand on tie threshold of a new day and
glimpse at Iasi the shining toa4 to health, happiness and
your very heart’s desire.


You, too, can experience this
transformation — not just
temporarily but permanent-
ly. You can rise above the
failures and disappointments
of to-day and go forward
into a radiantly successful
to-morrow. You can achieve
your goal . . . make changes
in yopr personality . . . im-
prove your health . . . con-
quer worry, over-sensitive-
ness, inferiority complex . . .
strengthen your nerves . . .
attract friends or win some-
one’s affections . . . improve
your financial or social stalv
us. All we ask of you is a
litflc enthusiasm, sufficient
ambition to grasp the golden
opportunity which this book
brings within easy reach.
THE ancient Creeks believed
that human destinies were
controlled by three God-
desses of Fate, the Parcae.
Even today there are people
who “fust trust to luck” and
then wonder why success
passes them by. For you—
and you alone — determine
your own destiny! Lay hold
on that fundamental truth
and you will become in very
fact the MASTER OF FATE.
That message—the message
of this book — has freed
thousands from fear and
failure and frustration.
Reading these pages, they
have felt the stimulation of
NEW IDEAS the power to
overcome obstacles. Within
a week they have been men-
tally and spiritually trans-
formed.
The Parc*
MASTER
YOUR FATE!




engraven into tie heart, mind and
r reader of this brochure is the firm assurance
roy CAN!
These two words arc the biggest in the language. Every-
body needs to have them told him powerfully and often.
They are worthy of being written over the door of every
school, church, office, hospital and home in the land.
Remember—success comes in “cans” but failure comes in
glass bottles which all the world may see through! If you
are afraid of failure you are already half-way to the land of
the “Has-beens.” Remember—YOU CAN!
We guarantee that you can have, be and do whatever you
seriously and whole-heartedly desire. And you can have
these worth while things with about one tenth of the effort
you have been spending on the lesser, unimportant things
which you did not really want or enjoy.
You can do as much as you think you can
And you’ll never accomplish more,
If you’re afraid of yourself, my man,
There’s little for you in store.
For failure comes from the inside first;
It’s there if we only knew it,
And you can win, though you face the worst,
If you WILL that you’re going to do it!


YOUR
AIM
L n arrow,
Therefore you must know
What marl m at,
IF you arc in a rut today, ten to one you
got there through living in a fog—a mental
haze an aimless wandering because you
do not definitely know what you want to
have, be or do. Success calls for a plan.
If we aim at nothing we shall certainly
achieve nothing.
Life demands that you set yourself a goal
—and then aim at if. Determine exactly
what you want—then plan for it. Know
first—then ACT!
You have one supreme desire. There is
something you want more than anything
else on earth. Whatever that desire hap-
pens to be (and it may be, as yet, only a
sort of subconscious yearning scarcely
known to your conscious self) you are
NOW in reach of its fulfilment. Of con-
verting your dreams of “what might be’*
into the glorious certainty of “What Can
Be”!
Live in constant recollection of the follow-
ing eternal law: THE DESIRE TO DO A
THING IS PROOF OF YOUR INBORN
ABILITY TO DO IT. It is simply your
talen *empt to express itself in reality.
The intense desire to do is not a cause but
an effect. The cause is your inherent God-
given ability.
How to use the bow;
Then draw it to the head
And—let it go!


there is no Sun!
Accusest thou the Sun
That He makes the shadows,
Nay! But His light
ings pure
f earth
then?
*hou sta rides f
’twixt the sun
i thine own shadow.
' shadow is thy thought
)f empty vapour spun,
man can behold
sun and shadow both—
turn from the shadow
the sun!
YOUR ATTITUDES
YOUR predominant attitudes make your life—but you make your predominant
attitudes. They are the cause of your physical, financial, professional and
social condition today. You make your own habits, your own environment,
your own world!
Once you realize that you have made all these, you can unmake them and
then remake them to suit yourself. The moment you learn this greatest law
in human life, you can set about using it constructively and consciously,
instead of allowing it to use you destructively and unconsciously as in the
past.
Look forward—not behind, upward—not down. Discard old thoughts that
hold you down, think new ones that will help you forward. The greatest
mistake in the world is to worry over past mistakes. The past is dead—it
only exists in memory. Bury your past and don’t visit its grave! Know this:
until you have failed you are not ready for success—and when you have once
touched bottom there is nowhere to go but up! To get up, never give up!
And remember, success or failure in business is caused more by mental
attitudes than by mental- capabilities!






BCONSCIOUS
modern Gulliver! Gulliver was a giant whom the dwa*G caught
napping. They bound him with threads, any of which he could easily have
broken. But he slept on and was made captive. So it is with you. Small
early influences have bound you hand and foot and these little demons may,
for example—
burden you with self-consciousness . . . make the words of your carefully pre-
pared speech die on your lips .. . torKio ( \U with fear bef «>,*>' . x "< important
interview . . . cause you to leave the prizes you have earned to others with
no more ability and sometimes less character . . .
make you shirk responsibility . . . prevent promotion and success in business
. . . deprive you of happy, care-free social joys . . , make you uncomfortable
before superiors and awkward and tongue-tied in the presence of the opposite
sex . . . jeopardise your chances of finding the right life-mate . . . cause psychic
impotence
make you dread change and suffer from indecision . . . deprive you or youth
and progress by making you afraid to try new and better methods . . . weigh
you down with vague, undefined fears . . . rob you of the ability to relax . . .
cause sleeplessness and torment you with troubled dreams and nightmare—






:ar of faking this prac
>e talking about






IT’S ' URS/
of controlling the Subconscious Mind—a secret
which has proved to be a veritable Aladdin’s Lamp to
thousands—can be yours! Possess it, and you can have
you wholeheartedly desire. The Genie-of-Your-
Mind has a magical talisman which makes obstacles dis-
appear. Applying this technique to a difficulty is like
applying a pin to a balloon. If vanishes into thin air.
Perhaps you arc saying to yourself: “I ean’f believe that I
wonderful Cenic-of-thc-Mind.” 'That is quite
understandable, for these all-important truths have never
been taught. Many people arc bringing on themselves the
very things they dread and dislike because they do not
THE GENIE
fit VII II D iillin understand the laws of human life. The science of human
life, of happiness in the Here and Now, has never been
taught in the schools, homes, clubs or anywhere else. We
all expected school or college to do if but found that—
although these urged us to make our lives great and happy
—they did not show us how to do It.
Put the Universal Opportunity League DOES! It brings
you the most up-to-date and practical application of modern
discoveries for your individual aims and needs —mental,
physical, cultural and financial.


human race is entering a new and won-
derful age. We have had the Sto be
Iron Age and the Golden Age. Now we are
entering into the Mcnt; and the things
that some people are already able to accom-
plish by mental attitudes seem like miracles
to those who do not yet understand the
wisdom a iwcr of the Subconscious
Mind.
The “CHANG Course will
explain to you the twenty powers of your
own Subconscious Mind. It will teach you
how to get your “inspirations" without
which no great achievement is possible, if
will show you how to set in motion and
harn tur own health, happiness and
succ is omnipotent power within you.
We will teach you—if you will let us—the
easy, sensible and scientific principles for
sensitizing the Subconscious Mind, your
Siler -ncr, and setting it to work for
you.
HERE k k . won w many people
never achieve succes ey are content to
run their whole lives on surf a ergy!
When you make active use of only the
conscious part of your mind, you are using
but a fraction of your real ability. You are
running on low gear.
DON’T RUN ON LOW GEAR






miuses of literature, art, commerce, government,
politics, music and invention are according to the
scientists —but ordinary men like ourselves. They have
somehow tear aw upon their Subconscious Minds.
Consider the case of Nancy Weir. When, as an infant, she
was trough , \ offic ros vocational guidance, we
recommended a career in Music. You have probably heard
or read of he hild, she could listen to a piece of
music for the first time and immediately reproduce it per-
fectly on the piano. People call that abnormal. But, as a
matter of fact, sh ' w in % pect normal than
any of us. We , normal because we cannot do it!
Or consider the case of that “Lightni Iculator,” Sir
Geor ndley Knibbs. Even as a boy of ten, if asked to
divide 8,894,2 would give you the result
in less time than it would take yo rrite the figures
down on pape u call him a genius. Yet you ought to
be able to do the same yourself. NSCIOUS
MIND CAN I Our wonderful Course of Lessons will teach
you how to draw on your Subconscious Mind te the full.






DON’T BE A VEGETABLE
VEGETABLES, when they cease grow-
ing, go to seed at the top. Don’t be a
vegetable! Many people, even youths
of twenty, have gone to seed at the top.
They arc dead from the eyebrows up.
‘‘Vacancies Within” is the sign over
their foreheads.
men really are.
ters of people die at forty-
e not buried till sixty! They'
from the neck up and
stealing behind, slips another board of
the coffin: info place. Such men are
to place. Such men are
literally cl
walking around
of ambition
Wc know that
this class or
for this book
The vital spark
not belong to
one of the m . ring people in this
country. You like to absorb new ideas
as you absorb new air. arc alive
in every cell. Get your ambition fired
up! Bring your God-given powers info
play. Don’t wait for things to happen.
Let us help you to MAKE things
happen!
■eading an advertisement,
live man,” asked, “Aren’t
men?” He little realised
have sent
far! You arc
WAKE UP AND LIVE!


MILLIONS are starving on three meals
a day! That may sound strange-—-but
it’s true. Food lacking in the neces-
sary mineral elements impoverishes the
blood and starves the nerve cells and
tissues. Thousands of people are slowly
being poisoned. Thousands will die this
year of preventable diseases because
they don’t know what to eat!
For every one who dies of alcohol, ten
thousand die of food-poisoning. A
child is knocked down in tragic circum-
stances- —and there is a public outcry.
Several arc killed in road accidents—
and the minister takes action. But fens
of thousands can agonize and rot
through eating useless or poisonous
foods and nobody seems particularly
concerned. Hundreds of thousands of
pounds have been spent on scientific
investigation, but the average Austra-
lian hasn’t changed his eating habits.
We spend eighty pounds trying to re-
gain health instead of eight pounds
learning how to retain it!
■ i
The “Changing Your Life" System ex-
plodes food fads and dangerous falla-
cies. If teaches no freak diets—for
freak diets make freak people. If takes
the “die" out of diet and the “wear”
out of weariness by giving you the facts
about food and teaching you to cat
sensibly and scientifically.
Many a man is digging his grave with his knife and fork, arc you?


LEARN TO RELAX
YOU have only a certain amount of energy—so why waste it on
trashy, unimportant things? Why not go after the big, worth-
while things? Most people arc like the hunter who went out
after big game and returned with a bag of mosquitoes! Then
they wonder why they lack nerve control and reserve energy.
The foolish habit of tension breeds nervous prostration. After a
thorough examination, the doctor declares, “There’s nothing
organically wrong with you. Nothing but nerves.” His tone,
sardonic smile and air of washing his hands imply that there is
nothing wrong, that this condition of yours is a weak, childish
complaint.
Of course, he’d have looked serious and done something about a
broken arm. Ye*- a broken arm is a pleasure compared with a
real ease of “nerves.” We would ten times sooner have an arm
break-down than a genuine nervous break-down.
Nervous breakdowns arc often due to inability to relax. The
“Changing Your Life” System explains fully the marvellous in-
fluence of the Mind upon the body and how you can use that
power to heal yourself and others. You will learn how to cure
“nerves” and how to have radiant health without using drugs.
Thro \ , ysic '■ Y <• 'on’t hurt -them—they know better thai ■ - vailow it!






i make all your fondest dreams coi «•:
be forever free from fear and worry;
;o stop manufacturing ill>iiealth, ill-luck, and ill-fortu
sleep deeply, soundly and scientifically;
poised and self-controlled;
THE "CHANC/MC “IUR Lh
be thoroughly self-confident and dynamic;
win admiration and commendation i erything
eat for greater health and ment r;
kno me of your most significant vocational
pier nergy;
be k-om body fatigue and "brain-fag";
develop personal force, both in business interviews
be so self-reliant that no one and nothing can hurt
financial with about half the wear and tear you
be throughly alive in every cell and centre:
results;
9 alwyc youthful and fail v«^ty
attain anything you truly desk *, vp-jiii or
Let “Excelsior” be your
and many other equally valuable success secrets of
the GREAT.






AND YOUTHFULNESS .


situated In the small of the
back, near the kidne t the Glands of physical activity,
in emergencies, they lend wings to the feet and strength
to the weakest arms. They gii ' e runner his second wind.
Walter Dill Scott showed baseballl players how they could
get fourteen winds in succession. When the secretion is
deficient —low blood-pressure', palpitations, etc., are the
result. Depletion of the Adrenals cans urasthenia.
THE THYROID is situated ;ion of the neck known
AND ENERGY


GLANDS
AND
HEALTH
OTHER interesting Glands of the Ductless >rc THE
THYMUS, known as the Gland ol truthfulness, anti THE
PiNIAL, often called the Inner Eye. This tiny Gland, situated in
the back of the brain and only the size of a grain of wheat, acts
as a link between the body and the mind. It is the Gland of
spirituality.
Many people suffer from despondency, pessimism, fear, worry,
despair, self-pity, nervous debility, brain fag, physical exhaustion,
inferiority complex and premature old age because they arc
failing to use, or using wrongly, these Ductless Glands. Unless
the blood is charged with vitamins and contains all the organic
mineral elements necessary to life, the functioning of these
delicate organs is quickly impaired—with disastrous results to
health and personality.
Over-work and worry deplete the Grinds, as well as lowering
vitality, harassing the nerves and causing hardening of the arteries
and blood pressure. These conditions lessen efficiency and make
you less at cope with difficulties, giving you further cause
for worry. Break this vicious circle—before it breaks you!
All this valuable knowledge of how to feed and care for your
Glands is comprehensively set forth in the “Changii ir Life”
System.




IS this first picture a bird or a beast?
Perhaps it appears to you to be a
rabbit. Look again and you will see
, f-ifd. If you have seen only a bird
look again and you will see the rabbit.
In this case—as in all other cases in
life —you see whatever you look for.
Cultivate an optimistic attitude. Get
the habit of looking on the bright side
—not the blue!
POI
people wouldn’t
They
are born seif-pitiers, happy only when
Looking at life
through the wrong end of tl i-
scope, they see everything distorted
seem remote
LIFE is a grindstone. Whether it
polishes you up or grinds you down
depends on the stuff yc lade of.
Meet the issues of life with calmness,
confidence and courage prove to
the world that you “can take it!”
tows on us powers of perpetual renewal.
Science has already lengthened man’s life by ten years.
. . . Said Mike to Pat as they stood on deck, “Pull that
rope till you get to the end of It.” Pat, after pulling and
pulling, replied—“l think they’ve cut the end off.” . . .
That is just what scientists are endeavouring to do to
life.


LIFE is a mincing machine. You get out of it exactly
what you put into it —no more and no less. What you
put in to it is chiefly determined by your reaction to the
events of life. An event in itself is not significant. It’s
the way you take it and allow it to affect you that matters.
DEVELOP self-confidence. Every-
body needs it, Yew will never
amount to anything in this world if
you lack confidence in yourself. Next
to honour, confidence is the greatest
mental quality you can possess.
DER
YOU wouldn’t p acehorse into
a plough—or a plough-horse into a
race. Yet ten chances to o a
yourself are in the wrong work? It
is estimated that 90 per cent, are
misfits—square pegs in round holes.
EVERY individual is born for something special. There
is a kind of work you can do better than anything else,
something you will love to do. If you are in the wrong
job today, let us help you to discover your true talents
and capabilities, thus enabling you to find your place
in the world!


tn- 1 1
t ,V,U little messageldea,
Th ! TyCmthe "CHANGING J istingu ished person
a troduce you i c tha t very a make that
Jfl but to 'n^“ C e e r y Self-to m.P‘re V°n ( , fe
Abater “ItF *.
, yo ur»e» ™®t R b LIFE” C Sysre m
w
f RETIRING? 'interest in
Are you thinking o find a vt yo unger,
Don’t let tne
. lh . oiy” -w
coMPLBX-
ness, r edl
hat this Course
do not promise
a p.i. - 'tfs'gssir&'tzz at
»“■ ‘■“'.‘S be change ‘„4 "T
We make even o
A Perfect «. * - - fJS S-j?^
of the several
Tb. p-“ b i„?; v ';.. s c»h * ;«i.* , yo‘; at
■Ac vou with. But
A M«ic C.,P« „”"S
z.rs »*- -
WANT to be.
iiiSS sli


* sss a-wrß4K‘ / £f /VCf
*°®»t son a
tiess m®*, *. * (Many of r ** indoor a«ri up| e
We ” h «v e “* e f «*e and r outdoor
Wed &r h*.
madam * e *«»Pi«.)
° n, F w oai mte^ UNß D’AIROV
earn* ;*. nn, We n ow of «* iK OV, n f r„„ .
- *r ,p P S“* ~~p. “•«» • 4”’ *•
Course. >» «d |
“n-CHis , a
C 'Sg 1 - m«» »,
Co “«e.» g th,s mr to going
ar eho^ K ’^?P l °hation M
,a^2v«s;
t£L‘°j° t “'« '"cvr «»»”s
. W. B. SIMS u
ptS! “v ss ;“"S“”tc s »"'. r. ci .
*fro«, 5 C T e d wore *
a iicr E .s.x«
“F W'holc-
■•"»? <. srt
t ■“V.r.r'y.-<.£”£fj l *>« -
fi„j „ ent doing. me y nav e !>•«_ » Four W
i, *
oppression of Arthur
MMBS H CO, Pprec «t.on.» *
Australia, when former p • t
*«on Wlt |, TJje r/i 9 , rman f rinse Minister „#
“ object of vS ,VeMal Opportune? 6 « con„ e “f
active w ay .v ,ln Port ance present" 6- ' " lf « gJk.
°f DAVy , Austral’ > ®
telleceual an j .° Ur Courses ,a s °nly jL a< j n I
I^P®^o r tiie w 5 ,nspir, ’ng 1 L D ° ctor I
Ae . orW ,y « uaity |
greate « wort


T H E
POWER
WITHIN
YOU vc beginning to realize that you have more POWER than you ever
dreamed possible—more STRENGTH than you ever call info action—more
WISDOM than you ever use—more LOVE than you ever express.
Where did Demosthenes get his eloquence? Who taught Disraeli statesman-
ship? Where did Mozart get his music? Where did Shakespeare get his
poetry? Where did Cromwell get his courage? Where did Columbus get
his daring—and his vision of the Unknown?
Each and all somehow found a way to draw on the wonderful wisdom of the
Subconscious Mind!
What they have done you can do. You are wasting this precious power with-
out even realizing you possess it! A great, powerful elephant, obedient to
the little Mahout sitting like a pigmy on his neck, is enslaved because he is
unconscious of his power. You, too, arc held captive by your own ignorance.
. . . A monkey has the ability to put wood on a fire but—unconscious of that
ability—-he lets the fire go out and sits shivering!
Your only weakness is ignorance of your power. Your only defeat is tolerance
of that ignorance! Through the wonderful “CHANCING YOUR LIFE” system
you may, for the first time, come into conscious, living realization of your
own powers.
irage person uses less than 10 per cent, of his inherent
mental power. Let us show you how fro use the other 90 per cent.


ETHELRED the Unready tried to
buy off the warlike Danes with
bribes ranging from 10,000 to
48,000 pounds of silver. They took
the silver and came again with the
sword. Ethelred’s army was always
in the wrong place. Psychology is
no such irresolute Ruler—it mobil-
ises human forces and keeps foes
at bay.
TT ING
Whatever we get ready for, we get! The
more quickly we prepare, the more quickly
we get it. The more completely we prepare,
the more completely we get it. Look around
you and you will see that the realizations
of the people you know match precisely the
preparations they made in advance.
Successful people do not differ from unsuccessful people
as much as most folk imagine. The main difference is that
successful people are organized, co-ordinated, while the
others are not. A person with a fully co-ordinated little
“Baby Austin” brain can outstrip even those with big
“Rolls Roycc” brains which are not organized!
Start getting ready for greater things—now! If your desire is an
increase in salary a better position with greater influence
leadership in your group, your department, your company, more
love and friendship . . . the answer is simple. PREPARE!


ann, America’s greatest e




THOMAS LANAGAN, 83 Rose Street, West Brunswick,
Vie.: I want to thank you for your Course and also for
the trouble you went to In order to secure for in®, that
LEO. LEVY, LL.B., A. 1.1.5.: There is no greater vi
than that being done by your Institution. I should lik<
be doing it myself.
uu uh« e |/»tiuiu6cu ,*uu t»‘ t
valuable services rendered.
LeedervlUe, Floral and In*
•eet, Leederville, W.A.: I
Road, Five
find them
Albert Street. Brisbane: Twelve
undle of nerves, unhappy, sick,
I had tried numerous doctors
them useless. To-day at the age
months ago
worried all
Vestern Beach, Geelong: Might I be permitted
sincere appreciation for the practical help
has been to me? I know you offer other
a study of which, I will benefit more than
your Course
in my speech, and in my self-confidence. Yesterday I ran;
up three friends (a practice which I have always avoided
and scarcely stammered at all. I was more thrillei
A. U. MSCJaU.UfU'I, Mi
Pty. Ltd., 414 Bourke
i I derived from your
proved a boon to me.
d I have been appointed
ig, I feel sure, to the
, wunteii s arrvice uuim,
Street. Peflb, W.A.: This
■ork you are doing. The benefits derive*
ling are greater than. I can say.
Manager, Radio Department, The Myei
# w nit;, »m vtnijr ntjf riucm «»»»c .
my salary. Its possibilities are immense
jauoiia iu. vjvviv, i/.ai o. * u. x ,v.J ti.A.o., » ttuttitb
Street, Abbotsford. Vic.: The more I do of this Course—
the more fascinating and helpful it becomes.
W. RODAN, 8.E., 1 Frederick Street, Glenferrie, Vic.: I
am enjoying the lessons immensely—they are a revela-
tion. Thank you for your wonderful help.
Street. Dunedin, N.E.I :
of the fresh views of life s worth and possibilities which
1 have learned from your inspiring lessons. My daughter
In Newcastle, Mrs. Myles, an old student of yours, asks
me to convey to you her cordial goodwill and greetings.
She often speaks of the profit she has received from your
teachings.
', juuncuia ; wi:
small token of
of your wonderfully inspiring lessons, which have been
so enjoyable and helpful to me? I have found your
Course most helpful—much more go than any other
course I had previously taken.
ildberry Street, Woolston. Christ-
the dead. I who was so despondent am as happy as the
day is long—l have been writing to all my friends tell-
ing them what the New Psychology has done for me.
I am sitting on top of the world. I heartily recommend
MIBB liAioi m. nivo wi’t, m i-e in iweio., m»w v./v juucns
& Co. Ply. Ltd., Yerco Buildings, North Terrace, Ade-
laide : I wish to thank you for the benefit received from
your Course. For the past six months I have been
managing a branch of the above firm in Adelaide, and
have been very successful. This is mainly due to the
instruction gained from your Course.
don, N.W 3: For years I was a bundle of nerves, un-
happy, sick, worried. I tried many doctors and reme-
dies and found them useless. To-day at the age of 91,
thanks to your wonderful Course in ‘ ‘How to Change
Your Life,” I am a changed man. My health is almost
perfect and I am once more happily earning my own
CHARLES A. HOLSWICH, Campbell Parade, North Bondi,
N.S.W.: The Course has brought great benefit to myself
and undoubted gain to my company. When I commenced
the Course in May last I was outside representative for
the company.
Manager and in
unhesitatingly


ami rapid promotion which have come to me.
THOMAS RAMBLING, Queen Street, Brisbane: Your
Course has changed my life! To-day in the office, I was
singing. My partner in the business asked me what I
was so happy about—-had I had a fortune left met I.
replied: ‘‘Better than that!”
LEO. S. CHEERY. M.A., M.P., Hawthorn Hoad, Caul-
field, Vic.: As the result of your inspiration and advice
I have launched out on a great career.
E. GLADYS GRIFFITH, B.A„ 7 Hawkestone Street,
Wellington, N.Z.: When I derided to lake your Course
I never dreamt what I was going to get, Just hoped for
some help by the way. Well, there has been considerable
progress made—progress all the time. Things I wanted
such as home adjustments choice of a career, etc., came
very quickly, like » miracle.
HERBERT H. OSBORNE, §l5 r'.dlins Street. Melbourne.
Vic., Sales Manager for Knight A Harwood; I urn en-
joying the Course immensely It ha*, been a wonderful
revelation to me, and has had s irememlou* p»j.chological
effect upon me in every way. Ii has made me see
the errors in my past method*, and has given a won -
derful stimulus to my self-confidcm-r
HE. G. w. GEE, 81 Wright Ntrw-i, Adelaide, S.A : I
appreciate your most wonderful very much. They
are so simple and concise the* n child can cmnpr*-hend
them. They are wonderfully in,-qn ring, who-h ,sn only
tend to elevate .one's whole Ilfs s m a higher plane spirit u-
nlly, morally, mentally and ohy^.-MUi. Th» uu-nmr>
training is invaluable for public *•»».,,a sn k and U ’.ndi
pensable for one’s success.
MRS. H. A. EYE, 127 Hawkestone Street, Wellington,
N.Z.; I ara pleased to report that I have derived un-
speakable benefit from your Course. I had siiffmc.l Horn
sleeplessness for years and bad consulted the
world over—in vain. Now, thanks to your Stem l r’“rmnlre,
insomnia is a thing of the past.
MISS GEORGINA SIMON SEN, 5 Mosman Street, Mosman,
N. ; It is with heartfelt gratitude that I write you.
The lessons have been one long inspiration and delight.
The benefit to roe is incalculable.
MATRON ETHEL MOBEELY Dnlce Bomura Hospital.
Hardie Street, Neutral Bay, N.S.W.: I am writing you
with such a full heart I don’t know where to start. Shall
I tell you how. I felt last night I After reading and re-
reading lessons 11 and 12, I Just had to fall on my knees
and thank my Maker for them.
REV. E. BOYLAN, S.J., Editor Australian Messengc ■ of
the Sacred Heart, St, Patrick’s College, Melbourne. C. 2:
I am now at the twentieth lesson of the ‘‘Changing Your
Life” System. All the lessons, gre certainly proving of
great interest They contain many excellent points and
I like tnem very much
O. ADAMS. 23 Ballarat Street, Footscray, W.l 1, Vic.: I
want to express my deep gratitude for the tremendous
help you b» T o been to me. In my recent examinations
in technical studies I averaged 98 per cent. What ft
difference vo 43 per cent,, which was my average before
taking your course. For this improvement. I shall be
eternally grateful to you.
AMELIA WATSON. 24 Lane Cove Road. Ryde. Sydney,
NSW,: It was the greatest day of my life when I came
under your kind sympathetic and encouraging guidamu
am! training.
MSB. W H. EANPELL. “Flora Park,” Lardner Road.
Warriigul, Yic.: I would like to tell you how pleased T
am with the improvement in Hilda’s outlook on life and
general bearing. Before taking your course she was
always such a shy little mouse doing all she could to
bide in the background at all times. Now she is quite
different at. her school work and has no difficulty in
carrying out her duties as senior prefect and captain
01 the Warragul High School. Tl}|S f« us seems a mar-
vellous achievement and the great change has been en-
tirety due to your course.
MRS. ETHEL P POMEROY,. Maxwell Street. Bun»hine.
W 30: All my friends remark constantly upon the won-
derful change that has come over me daring the last few
months. I count these lessons my greatest treasure and 1
find, that no matter how of ton I read them there is always
something new to be found within their Inspiring pages.
You have indeed made a new woman of me amt I want
to express my true thanks and appreciation,
VF.EA STEPHENS. 8 Waverley Street. North Perth, W.A.:
Before taking your course I was run down, exhausted,
nervy and Irritable, Now. thanks to the lessons. I am
an entirely different person. I am quite fresh, bright and
cheerful even at. the end of a busy day. The diet has
mado a wonderful difference to my skin and complexion,
ME. THOMAS DEBEL. Kalrl. via Cairns, Q’ld.: I was
self-conscious, lacking In self-confidence, but since taking
tho lessons I trove overcome this and have an entirely
different outlook on life.
ME li. GILMOUR, * ‘Norwood.” Private Bank, Warrack-
unheal. Vic,: Ymir wonderful lessons lave entirely cured
me of worry and have enabled me to reduce from 16
stone to 12 stone 6 pounds. The lessons have greatly
improved my general health.
NEVER TOO YOUNG, NEVER TOO OLD.
My parents are right when they 1 wish to slat! that the lessons have
say that ymir course has bene- been » wonderful and valuable help to
filed me more than my last me and my only regret is 'that I did not
two years at school. Equipped r..ceire this class »f ediimlkm in earlier
with‘your wonderful training lifp ' Wishinf ytm the best »f luck.
i am certain to succeed. Bridget 8. Hmtrah’u!.
aged 12), MR. T. I.AMB. MRS. E. BICHAfiDSUN*.
: " Christclmrcb, N.Z. MRS. BRIDGET S. HANRAHAK.
“The Ballarat Courier,” in a two-column editorial, stated
that it was most interesting ' ast
number of young people wh est
appreciation of the ‘‘Changing Ycm lute 'e r b. Pm of
many * ‘not so yoin i ( 0 Ue 1 t u -, h t t t A , t l un
right), aged 76, of
Richardson (on left
la rat; an d Mr. Tom
hi rat. who are full
practical results a entered.












tl ure




dJranL Bertram i3oijd
Has completed a Course of Instruction in
APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY
Under the direction of
Universal Opportunity League
and has satisfactorily passed the Examinations prescribed by the
League in the following subjects;—
SELF-ADJUSTMENT
SELF-EXPRESSION
SELF-ADVANCEMENT
MEMORY TRAINING
MENTAL AND
PHYSICAL EFFICIENCY
Given under the Common Seal of the League this First day of
March Nineteen Hundred and Forty-two.
JMH k.
Manager Secretary
This is a reproduction of the Diploma issued to all Students who
complete the "Changing Your Life" Course and pass the Examinations.




>" m
< =>
o <
O J
»- K
Z
»e r
Z © I
tn O 1181
o 2
z
g
2o
tt ?
o 5
“■ £
>-
m
*“ o
Z?
“i*
2 tt
-j°
ui
O “
tt z
Z u
i
w >-
a.
O
u
*" «
mm UI
if
i- s
Ik
a
U S
2]
UI
Q 5




i .!
\h\
00425013


