

SUPPLEMENT
TO THE
OXFORD
ENCYCLOPAEDIA;
DICTIONARY
ARTS, SCIENCES, AND GENERAL LITERATURE.
ILLUSTRATED WITH ELEGANT ENGRAVINGS.
BY THE
REV. W. HARRIS; J. A. STEWART, A.M.; C. BUTLER, ESQ.; AND
THE REV. J. H. HINTON, A. M.
ASSISTED BY OTHER LITERARY GENTLEMEN.
Mrj kvkXlcov Cv Tel KoXvdpovv cttixov' is pe yap aQpuv,
Evprjcreis iv ipo\ ttavff oaa Koapas ex et>
Appollod. ap. Phot.
—— nil dulcius est, bene quam munita tenere
Edita doctrina sapientum tempi a serena.
Lucret.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY RICHARD CLAY, BREAD-STREET-HILL, CHEAPSIDE ;
FOR THOMAS KELLY, 17, PATERNOSTER ROW
1831.




P. Pramol
1200
P. Pral
800
... 25
P. St. Germain
... 800 .
. .. 60
P. Pomaret
.... 660
... 20
Anvers Pinache ....
500
... 100
Massel
500 .
. .. 40
Riclaret
600 .
. .. 50
P. Ville Seche
... 500 .
—
Fact
... 400 .
... 200
Rocheplate
... 400 .
. .. 20
Rodoret
... 350 .
. .. 40
P. Manegle .
... 300 .
. .. 50
Salsa
. .. 60
Bovile
... 150 .
... 100
Cheneviere ........
... 150 .
—
St. Martin ........
... 100 .
... 150
Traverses
. .. 30
Chabrant
60 .
. .. 50
WAL
WAL
Waldenses.
Wales, JVeiv South.
Protestants. Catholics.
Total 19,770 1725
These days of peace and prosperity did not long continue,
for soon after a season of persecution again arose. From the
known character of the princes of the house of Savoy, the
Vaudois expecting no favourable consequence to attend the
return of Victor Emanuel to his dominions, after the downfal
of the French power, deputed M. Paul Appia, then judge of
the peace, and M. Peyran, pastor of Pramol, to wait on his
excellency Lord Bentinck, commander of the British forces at
Genoa, to request that he would take them under his high pro-
tection, and recommend them to the king on his return from
Sardinia, that they might receive the same good treatment from
him with his other subjects. The king arrived at Genoa while
the Vaudois deputies were in that city, and Lord Bentinck
took that opportunity of recommending their cause to his
majesty; but his solicitations were without effect. Almost
one of the first acts of the sovereign’s return, was to put in
force all the obnoxious edicts against the Waldenses which his
predecessors had issued. The injustice of this step was
evident, nor could it be supported on the plea of necessity. It
is a well-known fact, that there is nothing in the conduct or
character of the Vaudois to require this severity. Their
humanity and good conduct have obtained for them friends
among the various powers who have carried their destructive
armies into their sequestered valleys, and over these tremend-
ous mountains. Suchet, in the name of the French ; Suwar-
row (who it seems could receive mercy, if he did not shew it,)
on behalf of the Russians; and Niepperg for the Austrian
armies, have acknowledged the assistance and hospitality they
experienced at the hands of these injured people.
Impressed with the excellency of their cause, and knowing
how unsuccessful Lord Bentinck had been in his application to
Victor Emauuel, Count Bubna, and Mr. Hill, the English
: envoy, presented a short list of requests to the court of Savov,
in behalf of the Vaudois, of which the following is the substance :
1. I hat they might have secured to them a perfect liberty of
conscience, and of situation, in common with the other sub-
jects of his Sardinian majesty. 2. That their religion might
be no obstacle to their employment in civil and military offices,
according to the scale of promotion. 3. That they might keep
the property acquired beyond the limits to which they were
confined. 4. That they might be permitted to settle in any
part of his Sardinian majesty’s dominions. 5, That the sup-
port of their pastors should be insured by the enjoyment of the
property granted to them under the French government. 6.
That they might be permitted to keep open the temple built at
St. John, beyond the ancient limits, as well as to build others,
and to keep schools where it shall be found necessary. 7.
That they might have liberty to print, within the dominions
of his Sardinian majesty, such books as are necessary for con-
ducting their public worship. 8. That persons educated in
their religion might have perfect liberty to practise as phy-
sicians, apothecaries, surgeons, advocates, and notaries. 9.
That, in forming the municipal councils, regard be paid in each
commune to the proportion of the mixed population, and that
strangers to the commune, or indigent catholics, do not re-
ceive appointments without their consent. 10. That they
might be permitted to enclose their burial places with walls,
and to repair or build edifices adapted to public worship or
instruction. 11. That children, under fifteen years of age,
should not, under whatever pretence, be compelled or induced
to change their religion. 12. That they might not be under
the necessity of observing the festivals pointed out in the
almanack. Lastly, That they might wholly, and in every
respect, partake of the privileges of the catholic subjects of his
majesty, in the same manner as they enjoyed them after the
revolution.
It appears that very few of these reasonable requests have been
granted, and that the Waldenses are still, in great measure, an
oppressed and persecuted people. The interest excited towards
them by foreign nations, particularly England, has, however,
been the means of awakening for them considerable sympathy.
Many influential and respectable Englishmen have visited their
valleys, and have gladly borne testimony to the excellence of
their character. Effective subscriptions have been raised ;
government allowances, which had been discontinued, have
been revived; and we trust that better and brighter days are
opening on this simple but admirable people. To their visitors
from England, they have given a characteristic reception,
cordial and hospitable to the full extent of their means, and we
rejoice in the belief that those means will be henceforward
less restricted. The Sardinian government has, we believe,
latterly somewhat relaxed in the enforcement of the obnoxious
edicts; and we understand, from the latest intelligence, that,
though far from enjoying the privileges to which they are
entitled, the Vaudois are at length allowed a reluctant and
restricted toleration.
For an account of the doctrines and tenets held by the
Waldenses, see the article Reformation, vol. vi. p. 12, 13.
The following works may also be consulted for further in-
formation respecting the history of this persecuted people.
Jones’s History of the Waldenses; Sketch of the past and
present State of the Vaudois, or Waldenses, inhabiting the
Valleys of Piedmont, translated from the original Manuscript,
by the Rev. T. Morgan; The Glorious Recovery by the
Vaudois of their Valleys, from the Original, by Henri Arnaud,
their Commander and Pastor, with a compendious History of
that People, previous and subsequent to that event, by Hugh
Dyke Acland; Authentic Details of the Valdenses in Piemont
and other Countries, with abridged Translations of L’Histoire
des Vaudois, par Bresse, and La Rentree Glorieuse d’Henri
Arnaud, with the ancient Vaidensian Catechism, to which are
subjoined, Original Letters, written during a residence among
the Vaudois of Piemont and Wiitemberg, in 1825.
WALES, New South. The origin and early history of
this colony, the importance of which, as a point for emigration,
is rapidly increasing, have been given in the article Holland,
New, vol. hi. p. 907 —910. Our present object will be to
enable our readers to form some adequate idea of the present
state and probable future prospects, not only of this colony, but
of the other settlements in New Plolland, now usually called
Australia. Among the recent works on New South Wales,
that of Mr, Cunningham, being the result of a two years’
residence, deserves particular notice. His qualifications as a
writer on this subject are many and important. Independently


WALES, NEW SOUTH.
Geography.
Climate.
of his residence there, he has also made no less than four
voyages to New South Wales, as surgeon-superintendant of
convict ships, in which were transported upwards of six hun-
dred convicts of both sexes, whom he saw landed at Sydney
without the loss of one single individual; a fact of itself quite
sufficient to attest bis judgment and ability in the treatment
and management of a set of beings not easily kept in order.
He has also travelled over a considerable portion of the
colony, and has enjoyed, he tells us, the society of the
most thriving and respectable inhabitants of Sidney; and,
lastly, he has had the fortune to be brought into contact, in a
variety of ways, with the aboriginal natives. From Mr.
Cunningham’s work, therefore, in connexion with other re-
cent sources of information, we extract the following par-
ticulars on the present state of the colony.
The geography of the inhabited parts is comprised under the
names of, and divided into the counties of, Cumberland, Camden,
Argyle, Westmoreland, Northumberland, Durham, Roxburgh,
and Londonderry. Thus have our familiar English names
marked the divisions of Australia as well as in North America
by the founders of that great empire. On both regions the
appellations and language of England are for ever engrafted.
Two penal settlements, north of Hunter’s river, have been also
established, named Port Macquarrie and Moreton Bay. The
former receives the river Hastings, and has a soil and climate
well adapted for tobacco. Port Macquarrie is about 120
miles from Liverpool, with eminences, or rather a mountain
range, at some distance, 6500 feet high. Moreton Bay is
480 miles from Port Jackson, upon the Brisbane river. The
temperature of Moreton is nearly that of the southern provinces
of Brazil. The principal towns are Sydney, Bathurst, Para-
matta, Liverpool, and Windsor. Sydney, which is the largest
in the colony, and the seat of government, was founded by
Governor Philip, in 1788. But it appears that Bathurst is
now fast rivalling Sydney. It has already its Literary Society,
its Classical and Mercantile Academy, and its “ hunt.” To
such a pitch of luxury and prosperity is Bathurst grown, though
eight years ago it did not possess a single respectable resident
settler; the district now abounds in a wealthy population, in
possession of all the comforts and luxuries of life, and of a
healthy climate to enable it to enjoy them. New settlements
are forming on the southern coast, by which a short and
speedy communication will be maintained with the sister
colonies of Van Dieman’s land. Port Western has recently
been occupied, and though the land in the immediate vicinity
of the bay may not be of the first quality, yet as it has been
ascertained to improve in advancing to the interior, there is
little doubt that in a short space of time, the intervening country
between this port and Sidney will be planted with inhabitants.
Van Dieman’s Land is a large island south of the main,
and was always supposed to form part of New Holland,
until the adventurous explorations of Messrs. Bass and
Flinders ascertained its insularity. See Dieman’s Land,
vol. ii. p. 833. It is in all respects highly distinguished by
its natural advantages, and has become the seat of a thriving
colony; it contains several noble harbours: its climate is
much more steady than that of Port Jackson ; and it is well
supplied with rivers whose inundations are sufficient to
fertillize their banks without attaining an alarming elevation.
The facilities of communication are very great; it is a suffi-
cient illustration of this, that Lieut. Jeffreys, w'ho is the author
of the best description of Van Dieman’s Land extant, traversed
nearly the whole extent of the Island, from Hobart town
(the capital) to Launceston and Port Dalrymple on the Tamar,
a distance of 125 miles, in a barouche, with three, and some-
times four, horses in hand, and yet had not more than twenty
miles of what could possibly be called a road ; the whole being
a beautiful level pasture, with but few trees to obstruct the
view or the passage. Lieutenant Jeffreys gives the following ac-
count of a grand spring-head for several of the principal rivers
of Van Dieman’s Land. The great lake, on the summit of the
Western Mountains, which are supposed to be about 4000 feet
above the level of the sea, and sixty-five miles west of Hobart
Town, is said to be upwards of fifty miles in circumference, but
its depth has not yet been fathomed: it is described as a most
beautiful sheet of water, of an oval form; abounding with
variety of fish ; the banks moderately covered with wood, and
the opposite sides but indistinctly seen from any part. At all
times there are great overflowings of water from different
parts of this lake, but, in wet weather, the flood is tremen-
dous. The rivers Derwent, and those emptying themselves
into Macquarrie’s Harbour and Port Davey are supposed to
have their respective sources in this lake.
The geography of Australia is yet in so unsettled a state,
from the constant advance of the colonists to new settlements,
that it is difficult to convey a correct idea of the different
localities; we can only add, therefore, that Jarvis and Bate-
man’s bays have been occupied by respectable emigrants; and
King George’s Sound, near the south-west corner, or Cape
Leuwin, commanding the entrance of Bass’s Strait, has also
been settled. This is a most important station ; the land
about it is of good quality, and continues so the whole way
to Swan River on the western coast, abounding with exten-
sive plains of the finest grass, not inferior to Bathurst plains,
with the additional advantage of hilly ranges, clothed with the
finest timber for building, of the same species which occurs on
the eastern coast, but of much finer growth. See Swan
River Settlement, Supp. On this latter coast the settlers,
in proceeding northerly, will speedily get within the tropic,
and communicate with the new settlement on Melville Island
on the northern coast, which is to be augmented by a cor-
responding settlement on some of the islands to the eastward
of it. These northern colonies were established with the
view of drawing the Malays concerned in the extensive
fishery of the Trepang on this coast, to exchange that article
of consumption in China for British manufactures, instead of
dealing, as at present, with the Dutch settlements. As the
Malays are a cautious and suspicious people, it would be
desirable if possible, to induce some of them, with their fami-
lies, and also of the Chinese, who mix with them freely at
Singapore, to remove to the northern coast of New Holland,
as the best means of securing the trade, and also of improving
the new settlements on that coast.
It is remarked that the healthiness of the colony of New
South Wales is a singular feature, distinguishing it from new
countries in general. This is ascribed to the small quantity of
vegetable decompositions, the trees in the forests being all
evergreens. Intermittents, remittents, typhus, scarlet-fever,
small-pox, measles, hooping-cough, and croup, are unknown.
Dysentry among the free-livers is the most fatal complaint,
and dropsies, principally affecting the same class of persons.
Dyspeptic complaints, common in the low lands, are relieved
by the dry air of the uplands. Children are liable to worms,
and at puberty phthisis is frequent; but the European species
of that disorder is relieved, if not cured, by removal to this
climate. Inflammation of the eyes occurs during some par-
ticular winds, but it is mild in character. Syphilis is un-
known. The hot winds of the northern part of the globe, are
the cold of New Holland, and vice versa. The north-west
wind is a scorching sirocco, raising the thermometer twenty or
thirty degrees at once, the effects of which are obviated by
closing the window shutters. The climate, however, is very
pleasant. The coldest month, July, averages fifty-four; the
hottest seventy-five degrees of Fahrenheit; and there are
about a hundred days in the year on which rain falls. The
air is remarkably dry, and therefore less disagreeable than that


WALES, NEW SOUTH.
Progress of the Colony.
State of Society.
of summer in England, often with the thermometer twenty
degrees higher, owing to cur humidity. The dews are re-
markably heavy, and night follows quickly the going down
of the sun : the beautiful twilight of England is wanting.
Mr. Cunningham has given an interesting account of the
gradual progress of the colony since its establishment, with
tire date of the most remarkable incidents. The first landing,
he observes, was on the 26th of January, 1788 ; in 1789,
the first harvest was reaped at Paramatta; in 1790, the first
settler, James Reese, took possession of his land; twelve
prisoners located in 1791, upon the Hawkesbury, supplied,
in 1793, twelve hundred bushels of corn ; in 1796, the first
play was performed; in 1803, the first newspaper was printed;
and in the same year the first suicide occurred, that of a man
who hung himself in gaol; in 1805, the first colonial vessel
was built; in 1806, the first great Hawkesbury flood hap-
pened; in 1810, the first census of the population, stock, and
cultivated land was made; the first toll-gates were built;
caterpillars first made their appearance ; the streets of Sidney
received names ; weekly markets were established, and the first
public races instituted ; in 1813, the first fair was held, at Para-
matta; in 1817, the first bank was established; in 1820, the
first colonial tobacco was sold; in 1825, the first book was
reviewed; in the same year the first breach of promise of
marriage came before the criminal court; and in 1826, the
first public concert was held. “ When,” says our author,
“ we seriously contemplate the wonderful revolution wrought
in the colony since its formation, we cannot but be proud of
the energies displayed by our enterprising community. Here,
where, thirty-eight years ago, not one civilized being disputed
the dominion of the woods -with their savage inhabitants, now
forty thousand such exist, spread over an extent of country of
two hundred square miles, having justice administered by civil
and criminal courts ; six separate courts of quarter-sessions,
and eleven separate benches of magistrates being instituted
among them. Where, thirty-eight years ago, not a single
European animal breathed, now upwards of 200,000 sheep,
upwards of 100,000 head of cattle, and many thousand horses
and other animals, destined for the support and pleasure of
man, are peacefully grazing. Where, thirty-eight years ago,
not an ear of grain was cultivated, we now see 50,000
bushels advertised for, for the mere annual consumption of
one of our distilleries; while four steam-mills, ten water-
mills, eighteen wind-mills, and two horse-mills, furnish abun-
dance of excellent flour from our own wheat; two very
extensive distilleries, with several hundred thousand gallons
annually of a pure spirit from our barley and maize; and
thirteen breweries, with ale and beer from our various de-
scriptions of colonial grain, 8000 hogsheads being the average
yearly amount of this wholesome beverage supplied to the
public. On the site of Sydney alone what a change has
been effected ! Where, thirty-eight years ago, not a human
hut-was to be counted, nor the slightest hum of commerce
heard, we have now a city occupying a mile square, crowded
with industrious citizens, and teeming with vehicles wheeling
along the varied productions of the soil, the market-dues
for this traffic renting, the present year, at 840/., and the
toll-gate dues at 1000/. : the town containing twenty-two
agents for the management of shipping affairs; eleven auc-
tioneers for expeditiously disposing of colonial and foreign
wares: a chamber of commerce to push forward and watch
over colonial enterprise, effect insurances, and arbitrate in
matters relating to shipping ; two flourishing banks, dividing
forty per cent, on their advances ; and three newspapers, (one
weekly, and two printed twice a week,) in one of which I
counted one day 124 advertisements.”
The inhabitants of New South Wales may be divided into
three classes : the aborigines, which are but few in number ;
b 53. S.
the voluntary emigrants, and their descendants; and the
convicts, most of whom are emancipated by lapse of time.
The aboriginal inhabitants, Mr, Cunningham thinks, are a
cross between the Malay and oriental negro of New Guinea.
That these poor creatures are among the lowest, if not the
very lowest, in the scale of human beings, the simple facts of
their having no fixed habitation, no domestic animal of any
description for food, and of their never having planted a tree,
or put a seed into the ground, are quite decisive. Yet,
degraded as they are, it is agreed on all hands that these
aborigines are a shrewd intelligent race of men, capable of
being instructed in mental acquirements, and in arts that
require manual dexterity. It would appear, therefore, but a
bad compliment to the colonists, for we see no indication of
an intractable or invincible brutality on the part of these
savages, that they are found, in the thirty-eighth year, prow-
ling about the streets of Sydney, stark naked, or lying drunk
in corners, or stopping strangers as they pass along, teasing,
and begging from them money, spirits, or tobacco, and, if
refused, insulting and abusing them in language more gross
than the grossest Billingsgate. No doubt it happens here,
as everywhere else, that the poor savage, whose happiness
consists in excitement, becomes an easy prey to the debasing
and destructive effects of spirituous liquors and tobacco,
the excessive indulgence in which leads, in the end, to the
extirpation of his race ; and while this state of things continues,
we apprehend little improvement is to be looked for in the
existing generation. Mr. Dawson, the intelligent agent of
the Australian Agricultural Company, thinks that, notwith-
standing this deplorable state, they are quite capable of being
elevated in the scale of society. “ I have heard them,”
says he, “called the most degraded of all God’s creation, and
that their nature will not admit of civilization; and this is,
unfortunately, the language of nine out of ten people in the
colony. They are, in fact, in the first stage of society, and
are, in my opinion, just as susceptible of advancement by
degrees as savages in the same state in other countries. I
should be sorry to think that God created a race of human be-
ings unsusceptible in their very nature of light or improvement.
Having stamped upon them the image of his own likeness, for
what end did he design them, if they are perpetually con-
demned to .the level of brutes?” Under this favourable im-
pression, Mr. Dawson had assembled about a hundred of the
natives at Port Stephens; and at their hands, from the moment
of his landing, he received the most valuable assistance : they
collected bark and built huts for the whole establishment;
they carried the luggage from the boats to these huts; in a
few minutes, says Mr. Dawson, they were seen carrying
boxes, bags, and other things upon their heads, under the
directions of different families, to their respective huts. He
describes them as generally cheerful and good-humoured,
though keenly sensible of injuries ; strictly faithful in the
performance of duties which they have undertaken, and
remarkably honest, which was shewn by the punctual return
of anything lent to them, or intrusted to their care. But then,
it must be stated, he cautiously kept them from the knowledge
of spirituous liquors. Whether he will be able to preserve
them in this happy state of ignorance, when many hundred
families, and as many convicts, are added to the establish-
ment, may very much be doubted, indeed, we should sav it
will be impossible; and then, in spite of every exertion and
kind intention on their behalf, it is to be feared that the
result will not be unlike what Mr. Cunningham speaks of in
his description of the town of Sydney.
The European population of New South Wales are variously
divided and subdivided, and much of party spirit is prevalent
among the community. The two great conflicting classes are
the voluntary emigrants, and their descendants, on the one
PART IV.


WALES, NEW SOUTH.
Government.
Administration of
side, and the emancipated convicts on the other; the former
sometimes called illegitimates, (the law having nothing to do
with their removal,) and the latter legitimates, (having legal
reasons for their visit to the colony.) There is also a par-
ticular party among the emigrants known by the name of
exclusionists, and another among the emancipists denonomi-
nated confusionists. The nicest distinctions are made between
these conflicting classes, who are, each of them, as tenacious
of the assumed place they hold in society, as was the case in
the early stages of some of our North American colonies.
The pure emancipists, or those who have never been convicted
of a crime in the colony, will not suffer an impure or re-
convicted emancipist to associate with them. The origin of
the sect of exclusionists, or that class of emigrants who
strictly exclude from their society all emancipists, however
fair a character they may have acquired, or however wealthy
they may have become, has been attributed, in some degree,
to the benevolent, but, perhaps, mistaken, views of the late
Governor Macquarrie, who, deeming the colony to have been
founded as much with the view to reformation as punishment,
conceived that offenders who had passed through the ordeal of
purgatory, possessed a fair claim to all the privileges of the
new community; and that the best mode of accomplishing
this object would be to elevate the character of the emancipist,
by raising him once more to a respectable station in society.
He soon discovered, however, that the countenance of the
governor was not enough to overwhelm opposition to his bene-
volent intention, and that authority was unable to enforce
what a mere expression of his wish had failed to effect.
Another distinction is made between persons born in the
colony and in the mother country; the former being known
by the name of currency, the latter by that of Stirling; a
distinction given, as Mr. Cunningham tells us, by a facetious
paymaster of the seventy-third regiment; the pound currency
being at that time inferior to the pound sterling. By our
author’s account, however, the keeping up this distinction,
in an invidious sense, does not appear to be very defensible ;
“ our currency lads and lasses,” says he “ are a fine interesting
race, and do honour to the country whence they originated:
the name is a sufficient passport to esteem with all the well-
informed, and right-feeling portion of our population.” They
are, Mr. Cunningham says, in a degree free from the vices of
their parents ; drunkenness is almost unknown among them ;
and their honesty is proverbial. He adds, that they are
warmly attached to the country of their birth, and that when
they have been sent to England, they hail the day of their
return as the most delightful in their lives.
The administration of the government in a colony composed
of such heterogeneous materials may well be conceived to be
a matter of extreme difficulty. We have noticed the humane
and liberal conduct of the late Governor Macquarrie, who
placed emancipated individuals of good character and the
emigrants upon a footing, in their privileges and eligibility to
offices and honours. He invited them to his table alike, and
made no invidious distinctions between them and those whom
inclination or poverty had caused to locate themselves in the
colony. On the departure of Governor Macquarrie, the eman-
cipated individuals were never noticed by the governor, and a
feud was created. They thus became a stigmatized race.
The emancipated persons were not allowed to sit on juries,
and on their being anxious to remove the disability, both
emigrants and emancipists were excluded, and naval and
military officers appointed to form them in criminal courts:
a very objectional body in cases where the subject and the
government might be at issue. In such an infant establish-
ment, the decision might be committed to a bench of two or
three civilians appointed as judges from home, without any
jury at all, much more satisfactorily. The very rules and
practices of martial service disqualify the mind for judging
in civil cases ; such courts can be little other than courts-
martial. Some important facts, recently disclosed, have
placed the impolitic conduct of the local government in filling
civil offices almost wholly with military men, in a very im-
portant light. It appears, according to a statement made a
few years ago, that out of 100 justices of the peace appointed
by the governor, fifty-seven were gentlemen of the army and
navy ; out of nine paid police magistrates, six were majors,
captains, or lieutenants ; and though the list of freeholders
amounted to more than 1,000, all the juries on criminal trials
in the supreme court were military officers. A general order
of the governor might thus decide upon a panel to try a
question in which the governer himself was implicated.
Some striking consequences of this extraordinary state of things
were soon brought to light. In the end of the year 1827*
the editor of the Australian was tried for a seditious libel on
the colonial government. His jury was composed of seven
military officers, five of whom had agreed on a verdict of guilty.
Two had the courage to stand out, and thus defeated the
prosecution. But they never were recommended to sit on
another jury, and were thus deprived of their fifteen shillings
for trying causes, and were, moreover, sent to distant stations
in the colony, under such treatment as would effectually deter
others (who did not covet a similar martyrdom) from follow-
ing their example. Another instance of the working of this
military-jury system, in cases between the governor and the
public, will be sufficient to show the abuses to which it leads.
On the 9th of April 1829, the editor of the Sydney Monitor
was tried for a seditious libel. The seven military jurors
retired to consider their verdict. One of them was refractory.
The foreman came into court to announce that they could not
agree in their verdict. Attention was called to their dispute,
and as it became warm, one was heard to say to the other.
Well, S., the governor will soon know that you are the only
man standing out against conviction. To which he replied,
“ Then I shall be ruined, as my only dependence is upon the
government. 1 must therefore yield.”
In estimating the conduct of the governor, on this and
other occasions, due allowance should be made for the nature
of the society over which he is placed. It certainly would
be absurd to hope that a penal settlement, peopled to a
large extent by the refuse of our gaols, and the outcasts
of our society, should all at once become an orderly com-
munity ; or that a mixture of convicts and their descendants,
with free colonists who despise them, and with official func-
tionaries who look down with contempt upon both, could be
instantly transformed by any code of laws, or system of
administration, into a social fabric distinguished for its con-
sistency of parts and beauty of proportions. But we certainly
did not expect to find so much mismanagement and abuse in
any settlement under the crown of England, as are said to exist
in the administration of New South Wales. In so far as it is
a penitentiary, we might have expected to see it governed on
the principles of a penitentiary : in so far as it is intended to
be a free community of settlers, we might have expected to
see it ruled on the principles of civil justice and English law.
But in neither case is this expectation realized. As it is to
Great Britain an expensive establishment, we had a right to
expect that the money which is sent to it should be usefully
laid out. As it is connected with us, and governed by En-
glishmen, we are entitled to require that our institutions and
our honour shall be respected in its treatment. The instances
we have adduced, however, which are only a few selected
from a mass of facts of the same nature, show that there is much
need of reform, and w T e hope that the attention of the legisla-
ture, which has been in some measure directed towards it, .will
continue to be engaged on the subject till the evils are remedied.


WALES, NEW SOUTH.
Commerce and Agriculture.
Civilization and Population.
Of the commerce, manufactures, and agriculture of New
South Wales, Mr. Cunningham gives some pleasing details.
The commerce of the colony can only be considered as dating
its existence about eight years ago. From 1822 to 1828 the
trade with England increased from three to twenty-four
vessels, importing emigrants of property and cargoes valued
at 200,000/., while the exports in seventeen ships, consisting
of wool, skins, oil, timber, pearl-shells, trenails and hides,
exceed in value 100,000/. The foreign trade with India and
China, in 1822, did not require above six or seven vessels; in
1827, they amounted to twenty-six, with imported cargoes
worth 200,000/., a great part of which consisted of tea, sugar,
wine, and tobacco—articles all of which, Mr. Cunningham
supposes, may, in time, be produced in the colony itself. On
the banks of the Hastings, which discharges its waters into
Port Macquarrie, "the sugar cane,” he says, "thrives well,
and a good quantity of fine sugar and fair samples of rum
have been produced here of late, ninety acres of cane being
this year (1826) in cultivation.” But though wine, sugar,
and tobacco will, we doubt not, be speedily reckoned among
the valuable products of the colony, we are pretty sure that
tea will never be included among its staple commodities. The
labour that is required for the preparation of this plant can
only be undertaken with advantage in countries like India and
China, where population is abundant, and food cheap. What-
ever products, however, the colony is or may be capable of
yielding, it is agreed on all hands that, for some years to
come, its progressive prosperity must depend mainly on the
cultivation of the fine-woolled sheep, for the introduction of
which it is indebted to a gentleman of the name of Mac
Arthur. From three ewes and a ram, with which it appears
he began the breed, his stock of pure merinos is now said
to exceed 2000; and from the produce of these he has of
late years sold upwards of forty rams annually, at an average
of seventeen pounds per head. His property in the colony,
by grants and purchases, is said to exceed 30,000 acres, con-
stituting a square of seven miles nearly each side, all lying
contiguous, and consisting chiefly of undulating, thinly,
wooded hills, covered with a sward of fine dry native pasture,
with the addition of extensive plains stretching from each
bank of the river, of the most fertile quality, producing excel-
lent wheat, and maize of the most luxuriant growth. His
breeds of horses and horned cattle are of the first description.
He has succeeded in introducing most of the European fruits;
has a spacious vineyard, from which he annually makes an
increasing quantity of wine, said to be not unlike the sauterne ;
and cultivates the English grasses, which are found to thrive
well.
The Australian agricultural company will, in no great
length of time, give a new aspect to that part of the eastern
coast on which they have received a grant of one million of
acres, intersected by several fine streams falling into Port
Stephens. The whole district is bounded on the south by a
harbour, into which ships of any tonnage may enter at all
seasons, and anchor in safety : it abounds with numerous
kinds of excellent fish, and communicates, through the medium
of its rivers and creeks, with a country well qualified to form
a large and important portion of the grant. Port Stephens is
situate in latitude 32° 40', one degree north of Sydney, and
appears to consist in an outer and an inner harbour, the outer
entrance being a mile in width, with a depth of thirty-six feet
at low water. From the latest accounts which have been
received of the proceedings of this company, it would appear
that their concerns are going on as prosperously as could be
desired. At no great distance from the settlement, and in
addition to their original million acres, they have obtained
from the government a grant of five hundred acres of the
•oal-fields of Newcastle, which, by means of steam-engines
and proper colliers from England, already arrived there, they
are about to work in a systematic manner, and from which
they expect to serve not only Sydney but the whole colony,
with coals at a cheap rate. Sydney alone, it is calculated,
will require an annual supply of 12,000 chaldrons, and the
masters of vessels proceeding to India, Batavia, the Cape, &c.
who cannot at present be supplied, from the inefficient state
of the workings, will be glad to take coals, not only for their
own use, but on the speculation of a market for such cargoes.
The establishment of steam-boats will probably next take
place ; and these will be of infinite importance in the naviga-
tion of the smooth water within the reefs, along the extensive
eastern coast both to the northward and southward, at such
times as the periodical winds are adverse to sailing vessels.
As to the attempts which the Australians have been making
in manufactures, we cannot expect much progress, for some
time to come, in that department; a great deal more, however,
than the North Americans accomplished in thrice the time,
has already been achieved. Their manufactures, as yet,
consist chiefly of articles of the first necessity, such as are in
daily and universal use. Coarse and second cloths, from
their owp wool, are manufactured at Botany Bay, but at a
dearer rate than similar articles imported from England ; these
cloths, however, are represented to be stronger, and perhaps,
therefore, cheaper in the end, than those with which they
have to compete. Coarse woollens are made by the women
confined at Paramatta, who likewise weave twills made of
New Zealand flax. Many of the settlers tan their own
leather, make their own shoes, and manufacture soap for their
own consumption. In Sydney they manufacture hats, bea-
vered with the fur of the flying squirrel, which are said to
look well and wear well, except that they become soft, and
loose their shape in moist weather. Here also are carried on
for sale, soap-making, tin-ware, workings in brass and iron,
saddlery, harness and whip making; boot, shoe, and straw-
hat making; all Kinds of common pottery-ware, large jars
and tubs for salting meat in, wine and water coolers, and
spruce-beer bottles, are manufactured in sufficient abundance
for the wants of the whole colony, and sold cheap. Carts,
drays, ploughs, harrows, and other instruments of husbandry,
are made of good and strong materials, and are sold at En-
glish prices; and colonial coasting vessels and boats are built
of gum-timber, which is stated to be as durable, and every
way as fit for ship-building as Indian teak.
The present state of society in Sydney, and other principal
towns, in regard to civilization, literature, science, &c. may
be considered as surprising specimens of the rapid and still
progressive improvement of the colony. Many of the luxuries
of life are already to be found in the capital, and we under-
stand that they are extending over every part. In Sydney
many private carriages are kept, and there are few individuals,
if any, who pretend to respectability, without their gigs or
riding-horses. Every town has its post-office, and a regular
system of post-horses is established for the conveyance of
letters. A four-horse stage-coach runs twice a-day, and a cara-
van once, between Sydney and Paramatta, and another coach
thrice a-week to Liverpool, while a third proceeds from Para-
matta to Windsor three times a-week also ; no mean proofs of
the general wealth and prosperity which this infant colony has
attained. Nor while comfort and convenience are thus studied,
is the improvement of the mind by any means neglected. A
great variety of respectable schools throughout the colony fur-
ther the purposes of education ; the most celebrated being the
Sydney Free Grammar School, under the able management of
Dr. Halloran; the Caledonian Academy, founded upon the
principles of the Scotch schools, under the management of the
Rev. Mr. Lang, the Presbyterian clergyman; Mr. Cope’s
seminary ; and the naval seminary, for instruction in seafaring
5 p 2


Came out free
1955
Came out free
1193
Bom in the colony .
1823
Bom in the colony ..
1857
Free by servitude.. .
4218
Free by servitude ..
1800
Absolute pardon ...
138
Absolute pardon ....
14
Conditional pardon .
1000
Conditional pardon ..
56
FREE CHILDREN.
Bom in the colony .
. 2293
Born in the colony ..
2206
Came free
115
Came free
110
WAT
WAL
Watson, Richard.
Wales, New South.
matters, under the superintendance of Captain Beveridge.
Various ladies’ schools are to be found also, but few possessing
much celebrity. Scholastic institutions are also endowed
with a certain portion of land, and placed under the direction
of the ministers of the gospel, at the head of whom is a highly
accomplished, as well as philanthropic gentleman, Mr, Arch-
deacon Scott. A dispensary is established, to furnish medicine
and advice gratis to the poor. There are several reading-
rooms and libraries; and the inhabitants are further enlightened
by the Sydney Gazette and the Australian, published twice
a-week, and the Monitor, once a-week. “ The former,” says
Mr. Cunningham, “ almost equals in size the Morning Herald,
and usually comprises a vast fund of colonial news, as well as
interesting and entertaining advertisements : while the two
lattter are conducted with an ability which few papers out of
London can boast. Journals conducted by men of sound
judgment and ability are certainly vast acquisitions to any
new colony, and such, in the Australian and Monitor, we
undoubtedly possess. All these journals average from seventy
to eighty advertisments in their pages, and have an average
circulation of 650 impressions each, or a total of 3250 impres-
sions weekly. No duty is levied by way of stamps, or on
advertisements, the charge for three insertions of eight lines in
the Monitor being seven shillings; and of fifty lines, one
guinea. Our colonial Almanack is a most useful and excellent
little work, which no settler ought to be without, since it con-
tains short but valuable treatises on colonial farming and
gardening ; the periods for planting, sowing, and reaping the
various local productions: the usual state of the weather
throughout the year ; the rates of ferries and tolls, and conve-
nient money tables. A good practical treatise on the vine
has lately issued from our press; while a history of the
colony, a treatise on sheep-husbandry, a diary of travels in
the interior, and two volumes of poems, (one by Mr. Tompson,
a young Australian, and the other consisting of birth-day
odes, songs, and jeux d’esprit, by our venerable laureate Mr.
Michael Robinson,) are all about to appear. In fact, printing
is now executed here very neatly, as our newspapers (to go no
farther) manifest.”
The amount of the population of New South Wales, agree-
ably to a census taken towards the end of the year 1825, is
as follows :
MALES. FEMALES.
FREE ADULTS.
Free males .... 11,542 Free females .. 7236
CONVICTS.
With tickets of leave. 1949 With tickets of leave. 129
In servitude 13,156 In servitude 999
Class unknown .... 994 Class unknown 214
Total males 27,641 Total females .. 8578
General total 36,219
Military, with women and children .. 2,000
Grand total 38,319
From this return, it would appear that the number of adult
emigrants amounts only to 6828; whereas that of convicts,
emancipated and in service, is 23,459, being in the propor-
rion of about three and a half to one; that the emancipists
alone are equal in numbers to the adult emigrants ; that
about one-half of the population are convicts in a state of
servitude, the other half consisting of free settlers and
emancipists. Mr. Cunningham, in 1827, makes the popula-
tion amount in round numbers to 40,000 ; and a more recent
estimate by one of our most popular journals, states the popu-
lation at 60,000, occupying a space, (as included by the land
commissioners, within the boundaries of the colony,) of 34,505
square miles, or 22,083,200, acres of land.
WATER-WORKS. Under this title may be compre-
hended almost every hydraulic structure or contrivance. In
this sense it may include Canals, Conduits, Locks, &c. all
of which are introduced in the body of the work, under their
proper titles. But the term water-works is more particularly
applied to mill-work in all its various branches, as employed
in water-mills for grinding, the supplying of towns with
water, &c. See Mill-Work, vol. iv.
WATSON, Richard, a distinguished British prelate, was
born at Heversham, in Westmoreland, in August, 1737. His
father had formerly been head master of Heversham school,
where young Watson afterwards received his grammar educa-
tion. He was admitted a sizar of Trinity College, Cambridge,
in November, 1754, at which period he was not acquainted
with any individual in the university, except his tutor, Mr.
Backhouse, who had been one of his father’s scholars, and his
schoolfellow, Mr. Preston, afterwards bishop of Ferns. He
had no expectations from relations, and 300/. the slender
portion left him by his father, was the extent of his resources.
He accordingly commenced his studies with the greater eager-
ness, from knowing that his future fortune was to be wholly
of his own seeking. Perceiving that the sizars were not so
respectfully looked upon as they ought to have been, he
offered himself for a scholarship a year before the usual time
of the sizars sitting, and succeeded on the 2d of May, 1757.
At this time, he had been resident in college for two years and
seven months, without having gone out for a single day;
during which period, he had acquired some knowledge of
Hebrew, greatly improved himself in Greek and Latin, made
considerable proficiency in mathematics and natural philoso-
phy, and studied with much attention Lock’s works. King's
book on the origin of evil, Puffendorf’s Treatise de Officio
Hominis et Civis, and some other books on similar subjects.
He gloried in being the disciple of Locke, and maintained,
through life, an unshaken adherence to those grand constitu-
tional principles, of which that acute philosopher was the
champion. Another work, accidentally met with, which
appears to have made a strong impression upon his mind, was
Vertot’s Roman Revolutions. The perusal suggested the
subjects of two declamations, in which he discovered that
political bent of his mind in favour of civil liberty, which was
formed in it, as he remarks'in his Life, written by himself,
before he knew of what selfish and low-minded materials the
public -world is made. “ Were such kind of books,” says he,
“ put into the hands of kings during their boyhood, and tory
trash at no age recommended to them, kings in their manhood
would scorn to aim at arbitrary power, through corrupted
parliaments.”
In January, 1759, Mr. Watson took his bachelor of arts’
degree. He was the second wrangler of his year ; according
to the general sense of his examiners, he deserved to have been
made the first. In the September following, though only a
junior bachelor, he sat for a fellowship. He was elected a
fellow of Trinity College the subsequent year. He took his
master of arts’ degree in 1762, and in the course of the following
