

Malt Mbitman
tTbe poet
WILLIAM GAY
1893.
Price One Shilling
E. A. PETHERICK & CO.
flbelbourne, anb Hbelatbe
f r /SS^
of H)cmocrac\>




WALT WHITMAN




WALT WHITMAN
THE POET OF DEMOCRACY
WILLIAM GAY
E. A. PETHERICK & CO.
/IDel&ourne, anfc Hfcelatoe
1893.


c. s.
MY FRIEND
AND THE MORE MY FRIEND
THAT HE IS THE FRIEND OF ALL


PREFATORY NOTE,
This little work is a reprint, with considerable
alterations and additions, of three articles
which appeared in 'Tine, Australian Herald about
a year ago, shortly after Whitman’s death. It
aims in the first place at a portrayal of the
man, and, after that, at a vindication of the
poet and his message. Whitman’s faults,
chiefly of literary execution, are, like his merits,
great; but as they are so very obvious and
have so often been expatiated upon, I have done
little more than allude to them. What is ex-
cellent in him completely overshadows what is
defective ; and what that excellence is, I have,
in what follows, imperfectly tried to indicate.
South Yarra,
Melbourne, June 2, 1893.


As 1 ponder'd in silence,
lieturning upon my poems, considering, lingering long,
A Phantom arose before me with distrustful aspect,
Terrible in beauty, age, and power,
The genius of poets of old lands,
As to me directing like flame its eyes,
With finger pointing to many immortal songs,
And menacing voice, “ What singest thou? ” it said,
“ Know'st thou not there is but one theme for ever-enduring
bards ?
And that is the theme of War, the fortune of battles,
The making of perfect soldiers
“ Be it so,” then I answered,
“ I too, haughty Shade, also sing war, and a longer and
greater one than any,
Waged in my book with varying fortune, with flight, advance
and retreat, victory deferr'd and wavering,
(Yet methinks certain, or as good as certain, at the last,) the
field the world,
For life and death, for the Body and for the eternal Soul,
Lo, I too am come, chanting the chant of battles,
I above all promote brave soldiers
—Walt Whitman.


WALT WHITMAN.
Walt Whitman was born on May 31st, 1819,
at the farm of West Hills, Long Island, in the
State of New York. His father and mother
both came of people who had been farmers in
the neighbourhood for several generations. A
paternal ancestor of his, named the Eev.
Zechariah Whitman, emigrated from England
to America in 1640. His mother was of Dutch
extraction, her maiden name being Louisa
Van Yelsor. Whitman was the second in a
family of eight. In 1824 the Whitmans went
to live in Brooklyn, where the father followed
the trade of carpenter and builder. In the
same year an incident occurred which is
chronicled as follows by John Burroughs:
“ On the visit of General Lafayette to this
country in 1824 he came over to Brooklyn in
state, and rode through the city. The children
of the schools turned out to join in the welcome.
An edifice for a free public library for youths
was just then commencing, and Lafayette con-


sented to stop on his way and lay the corner-
stone.. Numerous children arriving on the
ground, where a huge irregular excavation for
the building was already dug, surrounded with
heaps of rough stone, several gentlemen assisted
in lifting the children to safe or convenient
spots to see the ceremony. Among the rest
Lafayette, also, helping the children, took up
the five-year-old Walt Whitman, and pressing
the child a moment to his breast and giving
him a kiss, handed him down to a safe spot in
the excavation.” Thus the veteran of two
great revolutions and one of the pioneers of
democracy embraced the future poet of demo-
cracy and inspirer of revolutions (peaceful, let us
hope) which are yet to be. Was there a
memory of this kiss in Whitman’s mind when
he wrote of his songs ?
Not songs of loyalty alone are these,
But songs of insurrection also ;
For I am the sworn poet of every dauntless rebel the
world over,
And he going with me leaves peace and routine behind
him,
And stakes his life to be lost at any moment.
After having been for some years at the
public schools in Brooklyn, Whitman, when
about ten years of age, began life as a boy in a


lawyer’s office. “ I had a nice desk and win-
dow-nook to myself,” he says ; “ Edward C.
[Clarke, his employer] kindly helped me at my
hand-writing and composition, and (the signal
event of my life up to that time) subscribed for
me to a big circulating library. For a time I
now revelled in romance reading of all kinds ;
first, the Arabian Nights, all the volumes —an
amazing treat. Then, with sorties in very
many other directions, took in Walter Scott’s
novels, one after another, and his poetry.”
Two years later he went to learn the trade of
printer at the office of the Long Island Patriot ,
and afterwards worked on the Long Island Star.
The boy grew fast, and was “nearly as big as a
man at fifteen or sixteen.” He spent much of
his time down Long Island among the farming
and sea-faring folks, and made excursions in
all directions on foot, on horseback, and by
sailing-boat. He had a great love for nature
in all its aspects, even for those which are
usually considered common or unsightly ; but
his love for the sea was of a special and
passionate kind. The sea inspired some of his
best writing, as, for example, that reminiscence
of his boyhood beginning,
Out of the cradle endlessly rocking.


In many of his lines we hear its near thunder
or its distant boom, and in many the meanings
and whisperings of its quieter moods.
In 1886 and 1887 he worked as a compositor
in New York; and at the age of eighteen he
went school-teaching in the country districts of
Long Island. In 1839 he started the Long
Islander , a weekly paper, in the town of Hun-
tingdon, near which he was born.
During his boyhood, and, indeed, all his life.
Whitman was an omnivorous reader ; and he
made himself acquainted with, and had a real
preference for. the masterpieces of literature.
He says : “I went regularly every week in the
mild seasons down to Coney Island, at that
time a long, bare, unfrequented shore, which I
had all to myself, and where I loved, after
bathing, to race up and down the hard sand,
and declaim Homer or Shakspere to the surf
and sea-gulls by the hour.” In another place
he says that he often used to ride the whole
length of Broadway on the top of an omnibus,
declaiming some stormy passage from Julius
Caesar or Richard, which he could roar as loud-
ly as he chose in the “ heavy, dense, uninter-
rupted street bass.” And Mr. Moncure Conway
says, in describing a visit he paid to him in


later years: “ The books he seemed to know
and love best were the Bible, Homer, and
Shakspere ; these he owned, and probably had
in his pockets while we were talking.”
As a boy he was also fond of debating soci-
eties, and went to the theatre in New York as
often as he could. As to his first attempts at
authorship, he says : “I commenced when I
was but a boy of eleven or twelve, writing
sentimental bits for the old Long Island Pa-
triot, in Brooklyn. This was about 1831.
Soon after, I had a piece or two in George
P. Morris’s then celebrated and fashionable
Mirror, of New York City. I remember with
what half-suppressed excitement I used to
watch for the big, fat, redfaced, slow-moving,
very old English carrier, who distributed the
Mirror in Brooklyn; and when I got one, opening
and cutting the leaves with trembling fingers.
How it made my heart double-beat to see my
piece on the pretty white paper, in nice type.”
From 1840 to 1849 he worked in New York
and Brooklyn as a printer and journalist,
taking, as he says, “ an occasional shy at
poetry.” A tall and well-proportioned man, of
robust health, tingling with vitality, and radiat-
ing that peculiar influence vaguely called mag-


netism, he lived during these years a life that
was full of natural enjoyment. It was in the
ordinary scenes and occupations of everyday
life that he found that satisfaction which others
find in literature, or in art, or in studying the
habits of earth-worms, or in some special set
of religious formulas, and which, indeed, many
never find, though they seek for it carefully
and with tears. The external aspect of the
city, with its rush of variegated crowds and
thunder of vehicles; the bay, with its various
craft, its ocean tides and picturesque surround-
ings ; the evening streets in moonlight or
darkness; the theatre, the opera,—all these he
absorbed with eagerness and delight. He had
a passion for ferries and omnibuses, and was
intimate with the pilots and drivers, remember-
ing the names of many of them till the end of his
life. New York—a name which for many sums
up all that is prosaic—was his best beloved
among cities, as the following lines may show :
City of the sea ! city of hurried and glittering tides !
City whose gleeful tides continually rush or recede, whirl-
ing in and out with eddies and foam !
City of wharves and stores—city of tall fa9ades of marble
and iron !
Proud and passionate city—mettlesome, mad, extravagant
city !


and these :
City of hurried and sparkling waters ! city of spires and
masts !
City nested in bays ! my city!
During 1848 and 1849 he edited the Brooklyn
Eagle, one of the organs of the Democratic
party ; but in the latter year, having quarrelled
with the Democrats, he accepted an engagement
on the Neiv Orleans Crescent. After a while he
went north again, up the Mississippi, visited the
great lakes and Lower Canada, and arrived back
at New York by way of the Hudson in 1851,
having accomplished a journey, from north to
south and back again, of about 5,000 miles,
during which his knowledge of American cus-
toms, character, and scenery was greatly en-
larged. His conviction of the real unity of the
American character, in spite of its great vari-
ety and apparent local contradictions, if it was
not acquired, was certainly strengthened during
these wanderings ; and it must have been about
this time that he was taken possession of by
the idea of attempting to confirm this unity by
expressing the native American genius in a
national literature which should draw the
American people close together in the pursuit of
common ideals and in the participation of a


common affection for America and for each
other, a literature which he himself should ini-
tiate. He sings—
Solitary, singing in the West, I strike up for a New World;
and again—
»
Come I will make the continent indissoluble ;
I will make the most splendid race the sun ever shone
upon;
I will make divine magnetic lands,
With the love of comrades,
With the life-long love of comrades ;
and again (which has some bearing on our own
question of Federation,lmperial or otherwise) —
It shall be customary in the houses and streets to see
manly affection ;
The most dauntless and rude shall touch face to face
lightly ;
The dependence of Liberty shall be lovers ;
The continuance of Equality shall be comrades.
These shall tie you and band you stronger than hoops of
iron,
I, ecstatic, 0 partners ! 0 lands ! with the love of lovers
tie you.
(Were you looking to be held together by lawyers ?
Or by an agreement on a paper ? or by arms ?
Nay, nor the world, nor any living thing, will so cohere.)
In 1851 he started in Brooklyn a newspaper
called the Freeman , but soon gave it up, and
was occupied in house-building till 1853, in


which year he began Leaves of Grass, a volume
of poems the most splendidly audacious, both
in conception and execution, which have ever
been given to the world—a world which in
some odd corners was roused to a glad and in-
telligent enthusiasm, but which for the mo§t
part was only startled and shocked. This
work, which many regard as a rude monument
of careless workmanship, was, in reality, care-
fully rewritten several times before being set
up in type by Whitman’s own hands, and pub-
lished in 1855. Emerson, with his usual
insight, was among the first to draw attention
to it by saying that it was “ the most extra-
ordinary piece of wit and wisdom that America
has yet contributed,” thus rightly adjudging
to Whitman a higher place than himself.
From that time to this it has been only from
the few —such as Swinburne, Eobert Buchanan,
W. M. Eossetti, Professor Clifford, Professor
Bowden, J. A. Symonds, John Burroughs, and
Moncure Conway—that Leaves of Grass has
called forth admiration. In general it meets
with nothing but ridicule or indignation. It is
a favourite butt of witty persons, who remind
one of the insects that dart about the surface of
some unheeding stream ; or it is the target


whereat the bigots of literature and art, of re-
ligion and politics, shoot the arrows of their
wrath. In 1876, writing of Whitman, then sick,
poor, and prematurely old, Kobert Buchanan
says: “He who wanders through the solitudes of
far off Uist or lonely Donegal, may often behold
the Golden Eagle sick to death, worn with age
or famine, or with both, passing with weary
waft of wing from promontory to promontory,
from peak to peak, pursued by a crowd of rooks-
and crows, which fall back screaming whenever
the noble bird turns his indignant head, and
which follow frantically once more, hooting
behind him, whenever be wends again upon
his way.” “ I find a solid line of enemies to
you everywhere,” said a correspondent in a
letter to him in 1884, and he has himself put if
on record that “ from a worldly and business
point of view, Leaves of Grass has been worse
than a failure.” This opposition the book will
in the long run overcome, partly by its own
inherent power, and partly because the opposi-
tion itself must decrease as the literary and social
conventions of the present develop into those-
of the future. And the direction which literary
and social development must take will in some
degree be determined by Leaves of Grass itselL


It does not appear that Whitman was fond
of work in the sense generally understood.
When the average man appears to he doing
nothing he is usually an exception to the rule
that appearances are deceptive. It is good for
such a man that he should go into harness and
be driven his eight hours a day. But geniuses
like Whitman do not often work well in harness.
If we would get from them what is great and
characteristic we must leave them to them-
selves ; and when they seem most unoccupied,
the activity in the substrata of their minds is
often most intense. What could seem more
full of repose than a ploughed field, newly sown,
lying in the radiance of an afternoon sun ? Yet
the work of germination is going on in every
part, resulting at last in a golden expanse of
ripe and waving wheat. How silent has been
the complex and ceaseless process of which this
is the rich achievement! And with what
clamour and obtrusiveness we carry out the
simple operation of grinding the wheat into
flour ! The idleness of a man of genius may


be like the repose of a ploughed field, which
furnishes at last both food to nourish the body,
and beauty to nourish the soul, while the noisy
labour of other men is too often like the grind-
ing of indifferent flour out of good wheat.
The next few years succeeding the publica-
tion of the first edition of Leaves of Grass seem
to have been passed by Whitman in apparent
inactivity. Mr. Moncure D. Conway has given
an account of a visit which he paid him about
this time, and from that account I make the
following extracts : —“ Haviug occasion to visit
New York soon after the appearance of Walt
Whitman’s book, I was urged by some friends
to search him out. . . The day was excessively
hot, the thermometer at nearly 100 degrees,
and the sun blazed down as only on sandy
Long Island can the sun blaze. ... I
saw, stretched upon his back, and gazing up
straight at the terrible sun, the man I was
seeking. With his grey clothing, his blue-
grey shirt, his iron-grey hair, his swart
sunburnt face and bare neck, he lay upon
the brown-and-white grass —for the sun had
burnt away its greenness—and was so like the
earth upon which he rested that he seemed
almost enough a part of it for one to pass by


without recognition. I approached, gave my
name and reasons for searching him out, and
asked him if he did not find the sun rather hot.
‘ Not at all too hot,’ was his reply; and he
confided to me that this was one of his favourite
places and attitudes for composing ‘ poems.’
He then walked with me to his home, and took
me along its narrow ways to his room. A
small room of about fifteen feet square, with a
single window looking out on the barren soli-
tudes of the island ; a small cot; a washstand,
with a little looking-glass hung over it from a
tack in the wall; a pine table, with pen, ink,
and paper on it; an old line engraving repre-
senting Bacchus hung on the wall, and opposite
a similar one of Silenus—these constituted the
visible environments of Walt Whitman. There
was not, apparently, a single book in the room.
He confessed to having no talent
for industry, and that his forte was ‘ loafing
and writing poems.’ He was poor, but had
discovered that he could, on the whole, live
magnificently on bread and water.”
But a period was approaching, the most in-
teresting and significant in the history both of
Whitman and of America. This period—that of
the Civil War —was to show that with the same


intensity as Whitman could write poems he
could act them ; that the “ love of comrades ’ ”
of which in his writings he makes such strong
profession, was no mere poetic furor, but a
passion that burned for other than verbal ex-
pression ; and that if he could “loaf” and lie
in the sun he could also spend himself to the
uttermost in working and watching by day and
night for his fellow-men. This period was also
to justify the faith of the poet in the future of
his country, and was to give the world a bloody
and decisive object-lesson in the potentialities
of democracy, in the virtue and strength which
lie at the heart of it. It was to show how a
democratic community, composed of average
specimens of different races, could be taken
possession of by a great idea ; how average men
could fight with unswerving resolution and
reckless courage for a moral principle, forsaking
without hesitation, and even with enthusiasm,
their leprous politics and their ignoble worship
of the almighty dollar.
The war broke out in 1861. In 1862, hearing
that his brother George, an officer in the 51st
New York Volunteers, had been wounded in the
first battle of Fredericksburg, fought on De-
cember 18th, Whitman hurried down to the


front. From that time to the end of 1865 he
gave himself up almost entirely to attending
the sick and wounded, both on the field and in
the hospitals. It was through Emerson he ob-
tained the permission of President Lincoln to
undertake this work, and to draw the usual
army rations ; but remuneration in money he
altogether refused. His descriptions of scenes
in the war, given in his prose work Specimen
Days and Collect, and reproduced from rough
notes made at the time, are terrible and pa-
thetic by turns, and one cannot give a better
idea of the work he did at that time than by
quoting some of them :
“ The results of the late battle [Fredericks-
burg] are exhibited everywhere about here in
thousands of cases (hundreds die every day),
in the camp, brigade, and division hospitals.
These are merely tents, and sometimes very
poor ones, the wounded lying on the ground,
lucky if their blankets are spread on layers of
pine or hemlock twigs, or small leaves. No
cots ; seldom even a mattress. It is pretty cold.
The ground is frozen hard, and there is occa-
sional snow. Igo around from one case to an-
other. Ido not see that Ido much good to
these wounded and dying; but I cannot leave


them. Once in a while some youngster holds
on to me convulsively, and I do what I can for
him ; at any rate, stop with him, and sit near
him for hours if he wishes it. Besides the hos-
pitals, I also go occasionally on long tours
through the camps, talking with the men, &c. ;
sometimes at night among the groups around
the fires, in their shebang enclosures of bushes.
. . . . I soon get acquainted anywhere in
camp, and am always well used.”
“ In my visits to the hospitals I found it was
in the simple matter of personal presence, and
emanating ordinary cheer and magnetism that
I succeeded and helped more than by medical
nursing or delicacies, or gifts of money, or any-
thing else. During the war I possessed the
perfection of physical health. My habit, when
practicable, was to prepare for starting out on
one of those daily or nightly tours of from a
couple to four or five hours by fortifying myself
with previous rest, the bath, clean clothes, a
good meal, and as cheerful an appearance as
possible.”
“ This afternoon, July 22nd, [lß6B], I have
spent a long time with Oscar F. Wilber, Com-


pany G, 154th New York, low with chronic
diarrhoea, and a bad wound also. He asked me
to read him a chapter in the New Testament.
I complied, and asked him what I should read.
He said, ‘ Make your own choice.’ I opened at
the close of one of the first books of the evan-
gelists, and read the chapters describing the
latter hours of Christ, and the scenes at the
crucifixion. The poor, wasted young man
asked me to read the following chapter also—•
how Christ rose again. I read very slowly
for Oscar was feeble. It pleased him very
much, yet the tears were in his eyes. He
asked me if I enjoyed religion. I said, ‘ Perhaps
not, my dear, in the way you mean, and yet,
may be, it is the same thing.’ He said, ‘lt is
my chief reliance.’ He talked of death, and
said he did not fear it. I said, ‘Why, Oscar,
don’t you think you will get well ?’ He said, T
may, but it is not probable.’ .... I felt that
he was even then the same as dying. He
behaved very manly and affectionate. The kiss
I gave him as I was about leaving he returned
fourfold I had several such interviews
with him. He died a few days after the one
just described.”


“ I am back again in Washington (summer
of 1864) on my regular daily and nightly
rounds. Of course there are many specialties.
Dotting a ward here and there are always cases
of poor fellows long-suffering under obstinate
wounds, or weak and disheartened from typhoid
fever, or the like, marked cases, needing special
and sympathetic nourishment; these I sit down
and either talk to or silently cheer them up.
They always like it hugely (and so do I). Each
case has its peculiarities, and needs some new
adaptation. I have learnt to thus conform—
learnt a good deal of hospital wisdom. Some
of the poor young chaps, away from home for
the first time in their lives, hunger and thirst
for affection ; this is sometimes the only thing
that will reach their condition. The men like
to have a pencil and something to write in. I
have given them cheap pocket diaries and al-
manacs for 1864, interleaved with blank paper.
For reading I generally have some old pictorial
magazines or story papers (they are always ac-
ceptable), also the morning or evening papers
of the day. The best books Ido not give, but
lend to read through the wards, and then take
them to others, and so on ; they are very punc-
tual about returning the books. In these wards,


or on the field, as I thus continue to go round,
I have come to adapt myself to each emergency
after its kind or call, however trivial, however
solemn, everyone justified and made real under
its circumstances—not only visits, and cheering
talk, and little gifts—not only washing and
dressing wounds (I have some cases where the
patient is unwilling anyone should do this but
me), but passages from the Bible, expounding
them, prayer at the bedside, explanations of
doctrine, &c. (I think I see some of my friends
smiling at this confession, but I was never more
in earnest in my life.)”
“ Some of the half-erased, and not over
legible when made, memoranda of things
wanted by one patient or another, will convey
quite a fair idea. D.S.GL, bed 52, wants a good
book; has a sore, weak throat; would like some
horehound candy. . . . C. H. L., . . .
bed G, with jaundice and erysipelas, also
wounded; stomach easily nauseated ; bring him
some oranges, also a little tart jelly.
J.H.G., bed 24, wants an undershirt, drawers,
and socks; has not had a change for
quite a while; is evidently a neat, clean
boy from New England. (I supplied him;


also with a comb, tooth-brush, and some soap
and towels. . .)”
“ March 27th, 1865. —Sergeant Calvin F.
Harlowe ... a marked sample of heroism and
death ... in the late attack by the rebel
troops, and temporary capture by them of
Fort Sherman, at night. .. . Suddenly awa-
kened from their sleep . . . Harlowe, with
others, found himself in the hands of the
secesh* ; they demanded his surrender; he
answered, Never while I live. Of course it
was useless ; the others surrendered ; the odds
were too great. Again he was asked to yield,
this time by a rebel captain. Though sur-
rounded, and quite calm, he again refused,
called sternly to his comrades to fight on, and
himself attempted to do so. The rebel captain
then shot him, but at the same instant he shot
the captain. Both fell together, mortally
wounded. Harlowe died almost instantly. . . .
Harlowe was only 22 years of age, was a tall,
slim, dark-haired, blue-eyed young man . . .
and that is the way he met his death after four
years’ campaign. . . . Though so young,
and in a common rank, he had a spirit as
* Secessionists.


resolute and brave as any hero in the books,
ancient or modern.”
“ During those three years in hospital, camp,
or field, I made over six hundred visits or tours,
and went, as I estimate, counting all, among
from 80,000 to 100,000 of the wounded and sick,
as sustainer of spirit and body, in some degree,
in time of need. These visits varied from an
hour or two to all day or night; for with dear
or critical cases I generally watched all night.
Sometimes I took up my quarters in the hospital,
and slept or watched there several nights in
succession. Those three years I consider the
greatest privilege and satisfaction (with all their
feverish excitement and physical deprivations
and lamentable sights), and, of course, the most
profound lesson of my life.”
Many other descriptions like these are to be
found in Specimen Days and Collect. The fol-
lowing lines from the poem called “ The Wound
Dresser ” may also be quoted :
I am faithful, I do not give out ;
The fractured thigh, the knee, the wound in the abdomen,
These and more I dress with impassive hand (yet deep in
my breast a fire, a burning flame).


The hurt and wounded I pacify with soothing hand ;
I sit by the restless all night, some are so young,
Some suffer so much, I recall the experience sweet and sad,
(Many a soldier’s loving arms about this neck have crossed
and rested,
Many a soldier’s kiss dwells on these bearded lips.)
Such passages indicate better than pages of
eulogy the sort of man that Whitman was, and
one may be forgiven for lingering over and am-
plifying the delineation of so great a soul.
John Burroughs, his intimate friend, records
the following incident, in which is shown the
warm democratic feeling with which the poet
was in the habit of entering into relations with
his fellow-creatures. “I give here a glimpse
of him in Washington on a Navy Yard horse-
car, toward the close of the war, one summer
day at sundown. The car is crowded and suffo-
catingly hot, with many passengers on the rear
platform, and among them a bearded, florid-
faced man, elderly, but agile, resting against
the dash, by the side of the young conductor,
and evidently his intimate friend. The man
wears a broad-brim white hat. Among the
jam inside near the door, a young English-
woman of the working class, with two children,
has had trouble all the way with the youngest,
a strong, fat, fretful bright babe of fourteen or


fifteen months, who bids fair to worry the
mother completely out, besides becoming a
howling nuisance to everybody. As the car
tugs around Capitol Hill the young one is more
demoniac than ever, and the flushed and per-
spiring mother is just ready to burst into tears
with weariness and vexation. The car stops at
the top of the hill to let off most of the rear
platform passengers, and the white-hatted man
reaches inside and gently but firmly disen-
gaging the babe from its stifling place in the
mother’s arms, takes it in his own, and out into
the air. The astonished and excited child,
partly in fear, partly in satisfaction at the
change, stops its screaming, and as the man
adjusts it more securely to his breast, plants its
chubby hands against him, and pushing off as
far as it can, gives a good long look squarely in
his face—then, as if satisfied, snuggles down
with its head on his neck, and in less than a
minute is sound and peacefully asleep without
another whimper, utterly fagged out. A square
or so more and the conductor, who has had an
unusually hard and uninterrupted day’s work,
gets off for his first meal and relief since mor-
ning. And now the white-hatted man, holding
the slumbering babe also, acts as conductor the


rest of the distance, keeping his eye on the
passengers inside, who have by this time
thinned out greatly. He makes a very good
conductor, too, pulling the bell to stop or go
on as needed, and seems to enjoy the occupa-
tion. The babe meanwhile rests its fat cheeks
close on his neck and grey beard, one of his
arms vigilantly surrounding it, while the other
signals, from time to time, with the strap ; and
the flushed mother inside has a good half-hour
to breathe, and cool, and recover herself.”
All that Whitman did and wrote went to
show how clearly he realized his spiritual kin-
ship with men and woman of every social and
moral rank. He sings :
This moment yearning and thoughtful, sitting alone,
It seems to me there are other men in other lands yearning
and thoughtful,
It seems to me I can look over and behold them in Ger-
many, Italy, France, Spain,
Or far, far away, in China, or in Russia or Japan, talking
other dialects,
And it seems to me if I could know those men I should
become attached to them as I do to men in my own
lands,
0 I know we should be brethren and lovers,
I know I should be happy with them.
lii another place he exclaims :


I walk with delinquents with passionate love,
I feel I am of them —I belong to these convicts and
prostitutes myself,
And henceforth I will not deny them—for how can I deny
myself ?
Addressing a fallen woman he says :
Not till the sun excludes you do I exclude you,
Not till the waters refuse to glisten for you and the leaves
to rustle for you, do my words refuse to glisten and
rustle for you.
When spiritual kinship such as this is recog-
nised as a fundamental fact of our nature, “it
generates,” as is well said by Mr. W. Clarke,
M.A., the author of an excellent little work on
Whitman, “ a feeling of brotherhood very dif-
ferent from that condescending pity which a
benevolent peer might entertain for a starving
needlewoman.”
The poet’s appearance, too, was in keeping
with his character and genius. “I have studied
him as I have studied the birds,” says
Burroughs, “ and I have found that the nearer
I got to him the more I saw His
face exhibits a rare combination of harmony
and sweetness with strength—strength like the
vaults and piers of the Roman architecture.
Sculptor never carved a finer ear, a more ima-
ginative brow He does not make


the impression of the scholar or artist or lit-
terateur, hut such as yon would imagine the
antique heroes to make, that of a sweet-blooded,
receptive, perfectly normal, catholic man, with
further than that, a look about him that is best
suggested by the word elemental or cosmical.”
Thoreau, keen of eye and tongue, said of him
that he suggested something a little more than
human; and the impressions of other observers
might be given in corroboration of those already
quoted, but all of them may be summed up in
the words of Abraham Lincoln, who exclaimed
on seeing the poet, “ Well, he looks like a
man.”
Although never actually called upon to take
up arms in the cause of the North, he always
kept his name on the list of those willing to
serve. He did not, however, come through the
war unscathed. In the summer of 1864 he was
disabled for six months by hospital malaria, and
was never the same man again. In the begin-
ning of 1865 he obtained a clerkship in the
Office of the Interior, but still continued his
work in the hospitals. In June of the same
year Mr. Harlan, Minister of the Interior,
hearing that Whitman was the author of Leaves
of Grass, dismissed him, as, in the passages


where it treats of sex-relation, the book was
said to be indecent. It may be admitted that
in bis treatment of the great fact of parenthood,
as in bis treatment of other subjects, there is in
Whitman a frequent crudity and baldness ; but
the passages in question are no more indecent
than the undraped statue of a Greek athlete, on
which, when one looks, his feelings are elevated
or impure according to the elevation or impurity
of his character. No natural object or function
is in itself indecent, and only a prurient way of
thinking can make it so. Nor is it the exact
truth to say that to the pure all is pure. Every-
thing that is in itself pure will always under all
circumstances be pure to the pure ; hut avarice,
hate, lust, greed, cruelty, injustice, being in
their very nature vile, will to the pure be ever
impure and hateful. It is only the impure
who in the obscene recesses of their thought
can debauch things that are in themselves
healthy and clean, things, moreover, which are
not merely pure by the absence of impurity,
hut which are positively sacred as normal and
inevitable facts of a natural order which is the
deliberate expression of a self-conscious abso-
lute divine Spirit. And it may even be said of
the condemned passages in Leaves of Grass that


they are so far from ministering to pruriency
that they actually tend to rebuke and purify it.
“ Well has it been said,” says Burroughs, to
whom every student of Whitman must ever be
indebted, “ that the man or woman who has
Leaves of Grass for a daily companion will be
under the constant, invisible influence of sanity,
cleanliness, strength, and a gradual severance
from all that corrupts and makes morbid and
mean.” Many of Whitman’s admirers, how-
ever, including Emerson, draw the line at the
point where he begins to deal with this subject
of parenthood, and it must be confessed that
his utterances in this regard are pretty strong
meat, unfit for babes, adolescent or adult; but
they are certainly to be recommended to the
serious private study of properly matured men
and women.
Soon after his dismissal Whitman got another
appointment in the office of the Attorney-Gene-
ral. In 1865 he published- Drum Taps —a
volume of poems on subjects suggested by the
war. A Sequel followed shortly after, and was
of the same character. Both works, as, indeed,
all the poems that Whitman subsequently
wrote, are now incorporated with Leaves of
Grass. His prose writings, which are mostly


of a fragmentary character, are collected in the
volume called Specimen Days and Collect ; and
most of them are included in two volumes of
the Camelot Series, called respectively Specimen
Days in America, and Democratic Vistas and Other
Papers. A good and cheap selection from his
poems is published in the “Canterbury Poets,”
with an appreciative introduction by Ernest
Rhys ; and an even better selection is published
by Chatto and Windns, to which a biographical
and critical preface is contributed by W. M.
Rossetti. The only British edition of his com-
plete works is published by Wilson and McCor-
mick of Glasgow.
In 1873 he was struck down by paralysis,
having never quite recovered from the strain of
the war-time. He rallied somewhat in 1876 by
going down to live at a farm-house near Cam-
den, New Jersey, where, dragging himself
through the lanes and by the creeks, he made
those copious nature-notes which were after-
wards published in Specimen Days and Collect,
and which read as if Nature herself were
peeping between the lines, Nature with her
bees and blossoms, her sunbeams and breezes.
Two extracts may be given :
A while since the croaking of the pond frogs and the


first white of the dog-wood blossoms. Now the golden
dandelions, in endless profusion, spotting the ground
everywhere. The white cherry and pearblows—the wild
violets, with their blue eyes looking up and saluting my
feet as I saunter the wood-edge—-the rosy blush of budding
apple-trees—the light, clear emerald hue of the wheat-
field—the darker green of the rye—a warm elasticity per-
vading the air—the cedar bushes profusely decked with
their little brown apples —the summer fully awakening—
the convocations of blackbirds, garrulous flocks of them,
gathering on some tree, and making the hour and place
noisy as I sit near.
As I write, I am seated under a big wild-cherry tree—
the warm day tempered by partial clouds and a fresh
breeze, neither too heavy nor too light—and here I sit long
and long, enveloped in the deep musical drone of these
bees, flitting, balancing, darting to and fro about me by
hundreds—big fellows with light yellow jackets, great glis-
tening, swelling bodies, stumpy heads, and gauzy wings,
humming their perpetual rich mellow boom. (Is there not
a hint in it for a musical composition, of which it should
be the background ? some bumble-bee symphony ?) How
it all nourishes, lulls me, in the way most needed ; the
open air, the rye fields, the apple orchards.
From about 1878 to 1884 he was well enough
to “travel round considerably,” and made ex-
cursions to various parts of the States and Canada,
visiting Concord among other places, where in
1881 he saw Emerson for the last time. The
later years of his life may be indicated in his
own words. Writing to a German friend on


May 31st, 1882, he says: “The paralysis that
first affected me nearly ten years ago has
since remained. . . I easily tire, am very
clumsy, cannot walk far ; .but my spirits are
first-rate. I go around in public almost every
day—now and then take long trips, by railroad
or boat, hundreds of miles—live largely in the
open air—am sun-burnt and stout (weigh 190)
—keep up my activity and interest in life,
people, progress, and the questions of the day.
About two-thirds of the time I am quite com-
fortable. What mentality I ever had remains
entirely unaffected ; though physically I am a
half paralytic, and likely to he so, long as I live.
But the principal object of my life seems to
have been accomplished—l have the most
devoted and ardent of friends, and affectionate
relatives, and of enemies I really make no
account.”
In March, 1887, he wrote in a postscript to
Specimen Days in America (the first of the two
volumes in the Camelot Series above referred
to) —“At present . . I find myself con-
tinuing on here iCamdenJ quite dilapidated,
and even wrecked bodily from the paralysis
&c., hut in good heart (to use a Long Island
country phrase), and with about the same


mentality as ever. The worst of it is, I have
been growing feebler quite rapidly for a year,
and now can’t walk around—hardly from one
room to the next. lam forced to stay indoors,
and in my big chair nearly all the time. We
have had a sharp, dreary winter too, and it
has pinched me. lam alone most of the time ;
every week, indeed almost every day, write
some reminiscences, essays, sketches, for the
magazines ; and read, or rather, I should say
dawdle, over books and papers a good deal—
spend half the day at that.”
The tenor of his life continued like this till
his death, in the spring of 1892, in his 73rd
year. His work has long been done, and con-
sidering the way he sang of death no lover of
his can bitterly mourn his loss, or, rather, his
translation, his entrance from the outer courts
into the inner chambers of being. Nothing
more strong and beautiful than the lines about
to be quoted has ever been written ; there are few
greater men than he who could sincerely write
them ; and he whom they cannot touch must be a
clod indeed. They are the lyrical expression
of that highest faith which, with joyful acqui-
escence, accepts even death as the good gift of
Him who doeth all things well. Men fear


death and rail at it, without considering that
it is an essential part of a rational world-order,
a necessary step in a rational divine process.
The real evils of this world spring from our
own free actions as moral beings. Of such
evils, death, since it is beyond our control, is
not the consummation ; it is a provision of
love, through natural law, for their alleviation.
Many a one will find it difficult to accept these
Hues of Whitman, but if they are without justi-
fication the world is a farce and God is the
Lord of Misrule.
Come, lovely and soothing death,
Undulate round the world, serenely arriving, arriving,
In the day, in the night, to all, to each,
Sooner or later, delicate death.
Praised be the fathomless universe,
For life and joy, and for objects and knowledge curious,
And for love, sweet love—but praise ! praise ! praise.!
For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding death.
Dark mother, always gliding near with soft feet,
Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome ?
Then I chant it for thee, I glorify thee above all,
I bring thee a song that, when thou must indeed come,
come unfalteringly.
Approach, strong deliveress
When it is so, when thou hast taken them, I joyously
sing the dead,
Lost in the loving, floating ocean of thee,
Laved in the flood of thy bliss, 0 death.


From me to thee glad serenades,
Dances for thee I propose, saluting thee, adornments and
feastings for thee,
And the sights of the open landscape and the high-spread
sky are fitting,
And life and the fields, and the huge and thoughtful
night.
The night in silence under many a star,
The ocean shore and the husky whispering wave whose
voice I know,
And the soul turning to thee, 0 vast and well-veiled
death,
And the body gratefully nestling close to thee.
Over the free tops I float thee a song,
Over the rising and sinking waves, over the myriad fields
and the prairies wide,
Over the dense-packed cities all, and the teeming wharves
and ways,
I float this carol with joy, with joy to thee, 0 death.


111.
It is not possible in the space at command to
give an adequate account of Whitman’s writings,
much less to discuss the numerous questions
which they suggest. A few words, however,
may be said in vindication of his poetic worth,
and to indicate in a general way the nature of
his message.
There are many who deny that Leaves of
Grass has any right to the name of poetry, and
there can be no doubt that the most obvious
and urgent, though not by any means the most
important, question which is raised by Whit-
man’s book is the question of what is poetry.
To give an exhaustive and. final answer to this
question is, however, impossible; but just as
it is impossible to define fully and exactly such
things as goodness, justice, and liberty, though
we have no difficulty in recognising their con-
crete presentations, so, although we cannot
give a definition of poetry that would reveal its
inner secret and cover its future developments,
yet, if we have an eye for it, we know it when
we see it.


The ways in which the spiritual nature of
man strives to express itself are many. Yet its
different expressions (such as religion, love,
art, morality, and the struggle for freedom) are
but the organically related parts of the single
aspiration of the human spirit to realise its own
true or ideal nature. But what our own true
nature is we cannot tell. “It doth not yet
appear what we shall be,” says one. “ Man is
not man as yet,” says another. We are
ignorant of the ideal towards which we are
striving. It reveals itself to us bit by bit in
our efforts to reach it. It is the effort itself,
indeed, which is the gradual revelation. And so
it is that poetry, as a special form or depart-
ment of this aspiring effort of the human spirit,
is a partial unfolding of the powers of the ideal
man and must change, in ways of which at
present we are necessarily ignorant, as man’s
realisation of his ideal self becomes more com-
plete ; and it is consequently not so improbable
that the poetry of a higher humanity will
transcend the poetry of to-day as much as
contemporary man transcends the palaeozoic
mollusc, although in both, of course, the vital
principle is the same. In short, since poetry,
in its present stage, is not merely an aspiration


after the ideal, but is the ideal itself partially
realised in a special aspect, it is impossible to
foretell what will be its characteristics when it
has become a fuller embodiment of the ideal;
or (to use language less metaphysical and less
precise) poetry cannot be defined because it is
a hidden thing of the soul, of which all written
poetry is but the attempted expression.
To this theory—that poetry cannot be defined
because it is not a thing which is, but a thing
which is becoming and which can only be
known in the same degree in which its poten-
tialities become actual—it may be objected that
poetry cannot be developing, since it is
generally admitted that some of the earliest
poetry of which we have any knowledge—the
Iliad or the Book of Job—has never been sur-
passed. But there are some facts by a con-
sideration of which this objection may be
obviated. One is, that though the forces of
evolution, both in the realms of nature and of
spirit, are, on the whole, progressing towards a
definite rational end, yet in some departments
they are occasionally inactive or even retrograde.
Another is, that poetry is constituted primarily
by the ideas which inspire it and only in a
secondary degree by the manner in which these


ideas are expressed, and although its artistic
treatment has varied from age to age, yet the
ideas which inspire it have been steadily en-
larging, so that in a spiritual regard, which is
the only vital one, Wordsworth, Tennyson,
and Browning are greatly superior to Homer.
It may be said that this is an attempt to
evade the question of what is poetry by a trans-
cendental quibble. It is certainly permissible
to call the argument transcendental, but as that
is a word which has a different meaning for dif-
ferent minds it would be more accurate to say
that the argument is one which, proceeding on
the grounds of a perfectly rational idealism,
attempts to show that we cannot at present
completely define the essential nature of poetry
or grasp its whole secret. And if it be objected,
as it will be by many, that a rational idealism
does not furnish grounds for argument of any
kind, it may be sufficient, without discussing
the merits of idealism as a philosophical
system, to point out that from Socrates and
Plato to Kant, Fichte and Hegel, Emerson and
Carlyle, Browning and Tennyson, it has claimed
the greater number of the best minds of every
age ; and that Christianity, the greatest spiritual
movement the world has seen, is, in a philo-


sophical aspect, neither more nor less than this
same rational idealism, which to many of our
learned men seems to have no more meaning
than the whisperings of an idle breeze, though
the breeze, too, has its articulate message for
some. The fact, moreover, that the question
as to the nature of poetry is still open after so
many centuries of discussion, lends support to
the contention that it cannot at present be
finally solved.
But in spite of all this, there can be no harm
in attempting to answer the question so long
as the various answers which it is possible to
give to it are regarded as merely approximate
and provisional; and if we cannot say with ex-
actness what poetry is, we can safely say that
rhyme, rhythm, quantity, accent, are not of the
essence of poetry, but are merely the accidents
of it. Occasionally we are forced to exclaim
that some passage of a prose author is pure
poetry; and still more often, if we were quite
honest with ourselves and were not devotees of
the idols which fashion sets in the high places
of literature, we should have to admit that a
good deal of what passes for poetry is nothing
but bad prose. If, therefore, no special form
of literary expression can arrogate to itself the


name of poetry, how is poetry to be known ?
The answer to this must be, that the test of
poetry lies not in the poetry but in ourselves.
If a man does not know poetry when he sees
it, there is no treatise on poetry that would
clear his eyesight. He will have to wait for
the growth of the spiritual faculty by which
poetry is discerned, and if he wants it to grow,
and tries to make it grow, the germ is there,
and grow it will, for to hunger and thirst after
spiritual good is indeed to be filled.
Prose is the sober expression of the undis-
turbed intellect. Poetry is the language of a
mind deeply moved by its own great or beauti-
ful thoughts or perceptions, and able to give
to its emotion an expression more or less
adequate; and the final test of poetry lies not
in its outward form, but in its power to make
us feel as the poet felt. Let it obey every law
of prosody, let it abound in happy phrases,
quaint conceits, and dainty archaisms, yet if it
leave its readers cold, it is not poetry. On the
other hand, let it break all the conventional
rules of verse, let its aspect be that of the
baldest prose, let it jar on the ear as it stumbles
from line to line, let it offend the taste with
barbarous idioms, yet if it fire the heart of a


reader but here and there, it is true poetry.
(In reality, however, there is perhaps no
instance in which poetry is guilty of all these
delinquencies at once. A certain grace and
music, if not essential to poetry, seem at least
to be inseparable from it.) In judging of poetry
it should be remembered that it is a thing and
not merely a form, and that its first office is to
satisfy in some degree, not our artistic literary
sense, but our needs and powers as men with
living souls.
Poetry, then, originates in feeling, especially
in that elevated • moral feeling which is the
highest of all; it only deserves its name in pro-
portion to the adequacy with which it expresses
such feeling; and the test of it is, that it should
induce a similar state of feeling in the reader.
Putting aside, therefore, all considerations of
form and diction, and asking how Whitman
stands this fundamental test, it must be an-
swered that no poet stands it better. Arising
out of a high unwavering faith (of that true sort
which is but a supreme act of reason), his sin-
cere and powerful emotion is overmastering.
It is impossible to read him with calmness.
His breath fills the drooping sails like a mighty
wind, and the bark of the soul rushes onward


through the surges, buoyant, exultant. For
those, therefore, whom he makes to feel like
this, Whitman is a poet and a great poet. He
belongs to the front rank of literature, and in
the literature of America his is the greatest
name. He is greater even than Emerson, for
with equal insight he has a larger heart.
Another influence which he exercises over-
men and women of very different mental charac-
teristics, is that he makes them feel that he and
his works are one; and it is not so much his
works that they admire, as himself that they
love. It is not so much that he enunciates,
theories which rouse their enthusiasm, as it is
that their higher nature is stimulated, as it
would be by the personal friendship of such a
man as was Whitman himself—serene, benign-
ant, brave, of noble presence and simple
habits, with a wide experience of life and an
absolute confidence in the nature of things,
with a heart full of love for his fellows, and a
mind fit to grapple, and cheerfully grappling,
with the deepest problems of the soul. It is
not so much that he gives them new ideas as
that he gives them new strength. He makes
new creatures of them, and puts them into a
renovated universe. He makes them feel the


essential greatness of man, so that they begin
to assume an unaccustomed dignity. He
causes them to see with a new tenderness in
their eyes the divine light that enhaloes persons
hitherto despised and rejected, and things till
now thought common and unclean. From dark
and dingy houses of caste and prejudice he
brings them out into the open air and the sun-
shine, and what they thought were cracks in
the sky they find were cracks in the windows.
The great and beneficent nature of his in-
fluence cannot be doubted. Examples of it
have come within the writer’s own observation ;
and when reading articles by W. M. Eossetti,.
Professor Dowden and others, one is struck by
the effort which these writers evidently make
to maintain a critical attitude towards a man
whose greatness they feel, but are afraid to
estimate. J. A. Symonds, also, the well-known
writer on the Kenaissance, has confessed that
Whitman’s writings revolutionised his ideas,
and determined the course of his subsequent
life. Critics may sneer, but critics who sneer
are generally as far out critically as they are
ethically, and facts like these must prevent
earnest people from passing an off-hand judg-
ment.


One cannot claim for Whitman, however, the
stock graces of poetical literature. It is not
for the absence of metrical form that he is to
be blamed, nor for his occasional roughness of
expression, but rather because of his frequent
obscurity and flatness. It is not always easy to
trace the sequence of his thought, and much of
his writing consists of long and winding mazes
in which phrase is added to phrase without
much regard for the clearness or coherence of
the sentence. If he has lofty peaks he has
also arid plains. If many of his passages are
as impressive as the rolling thunder, and some
of his lines as illuminative and startling
as a lightning-flash, yet he is often merely a
maker of noise, which, though it is certainly
loud enough to command attention, is yet with-
out inspiration. Of these defects he himself
was not unaware ; and he compares his poetry
to the huge chaotic scenery of the Western
States :
Spirit that formed this scene,
These tumbled rock-piles grim and red,
These reckless heaven-ambitious peaks,
These gorges, turbulent-clear streams, this naked freshness,
These formless wild arrays, for reasons of their own,
I know thee, savage spirit—we have communed together,
Mine too such wild arrays, for reasons of their own.


In his address “To a Locomotive in Winter”
he again very aptly describes the character of
much of his writing ;
Fierce-throated beauty !
Eoll through my chant with all thy lawless music, thy
swinging lamps at night,
Thy madly-whistled laughter, echoing, rumbling like an
earthquake, rousing all,
Law of thyself complete, thine own track firmly holding,
(No sweetness debonair of tearful harp or glib piano thine,)
Thy trills of shrieks by rocks and hills returned,
Launched o’er the prairies wide, across the lakes,
To the free skies unpent and glad and strong.
Yet poems and passages of great beauty and
pathos abound in his works. The poem on the
death of Lincoln, for example, beginning—
When lilacs last in the door-yard bloomed,
And the great star early drooped in the western sky in the
night,
I mourned, and yet shall mourn with ever returning
spring—
for intense and lofty feeling is not surpassed by
any elegiac poem in the English language.
Even in the few lines just quoted, the note of a
master may be detected.
The general characteristic of the outward
form of Whitman’s poems, and the only quality
of accepted poetical form which they possess, is
& rhythm at once majestic and subtle, com-


pletely separating them from verse as well as
from prose, yet defying analysis. Considering
his poetry, however, not merely in its formal
aspect, but regarding it as an undivided whole
in which matter and form are organically one,,
regarding it as the single and sincere expression
of the mind of a poet who says what he thinks
in his own best natural way, we shall find that
Whitman’s most general characteristics are a
sustained and magnetic power, and a deep
spiritual insight. He writes with the force of
the primeval poets, as well befits one who is
indeed a solitary singer in the early morning of
the new day of men and women which has suc-
ceeded to that of lords and ladies, kings and
hierarchs. In him the world, retaining the
wisdom of ages, renews its youth. Confronting
history, science, philosophy, he cheerfully ac-
cepts and absorbs them, and goes on singing
with the joyful freshness that springs from
perfect faith. In complete rapport with modern
life, he is the poet of the great movements in
which that life is expressing itself. He does
not merely go to science for new metaphors,
but he takes up the inanimate mechanism of
science itself and breathes into it the breath of
life. He is the poet, too, of that great move-


ment of thought which may be dated from the
appearance of Kant’s Critique of Pure Beason in
1781, which took a tremendous stride in Hegel,
appeared in New England as Transcendentalism,
and is still active as a powerful leaven in the
thoughts of men. The ideas which are at the
root of all that Whitman wrote may be described
generally as Hegelian; and it must be an as-
tonishing thing to many that the poet of the
greatest philosophical movement since Plato,
should have belonged to New York. Truly we
cannot afford to despise Nazareth. And as this
philosophy proclaims that man is not merely
the puppet of natural forces, but is, on the con-
trary, both in his nature and in his powers, akin
to the great Being who informs and sustains
the whole of existence, so Whitman comes to
the average man telling him of his native di-
vinity and urging him to act worthily of his
origin; and it is this recognition of the truth
about the average man that makes Whitman
the poet of Democracy.
The reign of poetry is said to be over, and,
no doubt, the kind of poetry of which Tennyson,
in much of his work, represents the consumma-
tion, has had its day. The poetry of mythical
heroes and beautiful women, of romantic


episodes and outgrown ideals, lias little vitality
left. But the first clear and lusty note of a new,
living poetry, which rebels and philosophers
and men of science had long been preparing,
was sounded by Whitman in 1855. The poetry
of the future is the poetry of the free, individual
man, the equal and lover of his fellows, and
co-heir with them of the universe. Its special
mission is not only to celebrate the democratic
spirit, but to exalt and purify it. It is to sing
of that ideal world in which men and women —
the woman the equal of the man and the man
the equal of the woman—are to find in their
own souls the law of life, a law which, since it
is the expression of their own enlightened wills,
is not a law at all, but perfect freedom.
Haase & Stevenson. Printers, 17 Swanston-st., Melbourne.




