

WANDERINGS
IN A WILD COUNTRY
BY WILFRED POWELL






Frontispiece.
TOBERRAN HOUSE, NEW IRELAND.


WANDERINGS
IN
A WILD COUNTRY;
OR,
THREE YEARS AMONGST THE CANNIBALS
OF NEW BRITAIN.
BY
WILFRED POWELL, F.R.G.S., &c.
WITH MANY ILLUSTRATIONS FROM SKETCHES BY THE. AUTHOR.
DRAWN BY J. MEDLAND, ESQ.
LONDON:
SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE, & EIVINGTON,
CROWN BUILDINGS, 188 FLEET STREET.
1884.
[All Rights reserved.]


LONDON :
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.


TO THE READER.
In the following pages I have tried to place before
yon an account of the little known Islands of New
Britain and Duke of York as they really are,
especially describing the habits and manners of their
inhabitants; and if my style of doing this should
appear to he somewhat crude, I must ask you to
extend your indulgence to one who is more accus-
tomed to handle the tiller than the pen, and to
writing his log than manuscript for the publisher.
However, I have been persuaded by those who
have a far greater knowledge of the literary world
than myself to publish what little I know of these
hitherto comparatively unknown parts; and should
it be found that I have been mistaken as to some of
my statements, then let me again beg your indulgence
and remind you that a lifetime would hardly suffice
to enable one to become so thoroughly acquainted
with these primitive races as to be able to write about
them without some hesitation. Indeed, the more
one sees of these most interesting people so much


the more does one become aware of the difficulties
of obtaining authentic information of many of their
customs.
I conclude with the hope that the following pages
may be of use to many and interesting to all my
readers.
Yours, &c.,
WILFRED POWELL.
IV
TO THE READER.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
PAGE
My vessel and crew —Encounter rough weather—Waterspouts—
Courtesy of Captain Heath —Tragedy at Lizard Island—Brumer
Islands —Teste Islands—Our cook aud duck—Fighting imple-
ments and ornaments of natives of Heath Island—Women traders
—Buying a petticoat—Possession Bay—Grandeur of the Pacific
Islands —Natives of Hayter Island „ .. .. .. 1
CHAPTER 11.
Remarkable whirlpool near Duke of York Islands—Mistaken for a
pirate —Shameful kidnapping by “ Christians ” —Description of a
Goonan village—Hotwater creek —Matupi Island—Fever : its
symptoms and treatment —Trading establishment at Matupi
Island —Copra—New Britain quail—Torrortooroo—Accident with
Aleck’s gun .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
CHAPTER 111.
Duke of York Island—Visit Mr. Brown—Lotu and the chief—Ad-
venture at Utuan Island—Messrs. Godefroy and Son’s head
station —Weira —Custom of inhabitants of Port Hunter—“ Buck-
war ” “ Dewarra ” Bight wives— “ King Dick ”—■ Human
joints—Tora-good—Law of succession—The Duk-duk—Supposed
origin of the Duk-duk—Wind-makers—Dances—The “ Toberran ”
dance—Musical instruments— Ornaments Fishing Fruits—
Taro—Tan—Papaw .. .. .. .. .. .. 43
CHAPTER IV.
Kininigunun Build a house —■ Tor-Rarrabay Native battle—
Cruelty of women—Marriages—Mode of carrying infants—Start
for Mount Beantemps Beaupre Peculiarities of country—
Horrible affair at Nuogunigu—The talking man and butcher—


PAGE
Tor-Earrabay wishes to return—He decamps in the night—My
cogitations—Pig-catching—My loneliness—Want of water —Re-
freshing sleep—Buy cocoa-nuts from women —Return to Kinini-
gunun—Tor-Rarrabay’s astonishment at my return, and excuse
for leaving me .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 79
CHAPTER Y.
Start with Mr. Brown for Spacious Bay—Hostility of the natives—
Land at Turner Point —Bartering—Grunting, and its effects—
Human bones —Fighting implements Ornaments Fields of
pumice-stone —Wonderful eruption of a volcano —Grand sight—
Hot ground—Peculiar colours of inhabitants of South Seas .. 102
CHAPTER VI.
Defence of Mr. Brown’s policy—Murder of teachers—Sad story
by Ratu Levi —Treachery of natives —Start for Ruterwool —
Just in time—Tarlily’s message—Bad state of affairs—Forced to
fight—Council of war—Our orders —Demand compensation—
“ Nothing succeeds like success” Beginning of the war —
Native traps—Reach the enemy’s country—Sudden assault by
Tarlily—Complete defeat of the enemy—House moving—Our
scouts —Failure of signal apparatus—Reach Karavia—Sharp en-
counter—Another success—Find a baby—No women killed—
Bum Lower Karavia—Thanksgiving service—Our fighting-party
reinforced—No resistance at Dewawon —A dead man’s paddle—
Capture and burn Dinawon —Save a native woman —Submission
of chiefs—Native teachers, a mistake —Salutary effects of the
fighting—Opinions of the Australian Press .. .. .. 117
CHAPTER VII.
Arms and implements of New Britain natives—Surgical implements
—Bleeding—Wind and rain makers —Tricks of “ doctors ”
Native ideas of religion—Spirits of departed—Cure a native by
magic—Inundated with patients—Articles of food—Cooking—
Fishing—Houses—The taboo tree .. .. .. .. .. 159
VI
CONTENTS.


CHAPTER VIII.
PAGE
Unexplored part of New Britain Cunning of Tarlily— Junior
Mission House Point —Sham fight by boys—Sand-cake throw-
ing—Market women—Amusements of children—Opening for
sugar-cane growing—Port Webber—“ Tatooing ” a warrior—
Armlets—Hospitality and offer of a Cambira chief—His taboo
but—Council bouse —He visits my vessel—Fire a gun—My
musical box —Amusing incident with a bad egg—Natives of Ma-
terbert Island—Mode of carrying fire and water —Interment of
dead—Timidity of natives of Matukanaputa—Novel dance—Dis-
crepancies of charts—Curious effects of atmosphere—Magnificent
scenery—Crocodile fly-catchers—Rover and the crocodiles —Sem-
si-gorro—Our animals—Turtle-catching—Wife-hunting .. 180
__ CHAPTER IX.
Red patch at Pondo—Luxuriant vegetation—Remarkable waterfall
—Father and Son volcanoes —E’Watto—Cleverness of natives
at signs—lnquisitive women—lll with fever—Craters of Father
and Sons—Duportail Island —Trading with natives—Uninterest-
ing country—Fearfulness of inhabitants off Jenkins Island—
Terrific thunderstorm—Willaumez Island—Mistrustfulness of
natives —Low state of our crew—Extraordinary volcanoes —
Heavy sea—The native and the crucifix—Threatening aspects
of natives —Commence stoning us—Soon beat a retreat —Carried
away by current —Dashed on a reef—Take to the boat—Critical
state of affairs—Ruse of natives—Alarm in the night—Friendly
advice —Another ruse —Fire my swivel gun—Natives decamp—
Board my vessel and destroy everything—More deception—
Almost a crisis—Providential appearance of trader’s boat —Return
to Sydney .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 209
APPENDIX.
Notes on New Ireland .. .. .. .. .. .. 247
Notes on New Britain .. .. .. .. .. .. 251
Vocabulary of Words .. .. .. 281
VII
CONTENTS.


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
PAGE
Toberran House ....... Frontispiece
“ Stak of the East ”... .... 2
Native House, Teste Island, New Guinea .... 9
Tortoiseshell Mask ........ 10
Canoe Shield, New Guinea ....... 17
Fighting Shield, New Guinea 17
New Guinea Canoe ........ 23
"Village, Duke of York Island . . . . .To face 53
The Duk-duk ......... 61
Skull Mask, Blanche Bay ....... 69
Tom-tom .......... 70
Pan Pipes .......... 72
Jews’ Harp .......... 72
Instrument of Music . 73
Sword and Club, Spacious Bay ...... 109
Shield, Spacious Bay . . . . . . . . 110
Earring, Spacious Bay ....... 11l
Stone Clubs and Hatchets, New Britain .... 160
Stone Club, Blanche Bay . 161
Spears, New Britain and New Ireland .... 164
New Britain Canoe, Gazelle Peninsula .... 168
Woop or Fishing Basket, New Britain .... 176
Fish Trap, New Britain 177
Fish Hooks from New Britain ...... 178
Village, New Britain (Gazelle Peninsula) . To face 178
River Scene in New Britain ...... 200
Waterfall of Holmes River, Open Bay . . To face 211
Open Bay .......... 213
Man Native, E’Watto, Open Bay 215
The Father and Sons 219
Head-dress, Native Man, Duportail Island . . . 220
SESSSRT :::::: }»*,«•
Native of Willaumez Island ...... 227
Clubs, Cape Hoskins ........ 228
New Britain Signs 256-260
Cocoa-nut Shells and Slip Noose used in catching Sharks,
New Britain . . ..... 274


WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY;
OR,
THREE YEARS AMONGST THE CANNIBALS OF
NEW BRITAIN.
CHAPTER I.
My vessel and crew—Encounter rough weather—Waterspouts—Courtesy
of Captain Heath—Tragedy at Lizard Island—Brumer Islands—Teste
Islands—Our cook and duck —Fighting implements and ornaments of
natives of Heath Island—Women traders —Buying a petticoat—Posses-
sion Bay—Grandeur of the Pacific Islands—Natives of Hayter Island.
With the kind assistance of several gentlemen in
Sydney, who were anxious to obtain information of
the hitherto unknown parts of the Islands of New
Britain and New Ireland, I purchased a small vessel
of fifteen tons, which I considered would be amply
large enough for safety among the numerous reefs
and dangers we were likely to encounter. My
experience has shown me that, among these islands,
there are many and dangerous currents, which will
place a vessel in danger of drifting on shore should
it fall a calm ; in this case a large vessel becomes
perfectly helpless, but so small a craft as the one
I obtained could be managed with sweeps, and by
this means be kept off many dangers on to which a
larger vessel must inevitably drift. Besides, a large
,R


vessel must keep a good distance from any island,
which was just what we did not wish to do. Further,
we could carry a small crew, therefore fewer men to
grumble at any hardships we might have to put up
“STAR OF THE EAST.”
with; and lastly, but certainly not of least conse-
quence, we could get into places that no larger
vessel could possibly attempt; moreover, it is useful
at times to be able to run a vessel on to the lee-side


of a reef or sandbank, should any repairs be
necessary or the copper require cleaning.
Our little ketch, the Star of the East, having
been docked, recoppered, and passed through the
carpenters’ hands, we stored her with all the neces-
sities for a two years’ voyage, and having fitted her
as comfortably as was possible for so small a craft, we
sailed on the Ist of June, 1877, from Sydney Heads.
I must now, before going any further, introduce
the ship’s company to the reader : myself the captain ;
first lieutenant, H ; second, Jack; third, Aleck
(native of New Britain), and the cook (an American
“ darkie ’’) ; Rover, Bluff, and Pincher (better known
as the “ policemen ”). A very fine crew, and very
orderly, only one sailor having to be put on the black
list before starting ; this was Rover, who would break
out of the ship the moment I left the vessel, wishing
to come after me, and therefore had to be tied up
until we sailed, his attendance on shore not being
required at that time, although of the utmost value
afterwards.
We had a fine boat on deck, and a “ stewardess”
galley in a small corrugated iron house ; two bunks
in the cabin, and a table ; two bunks in the forecastle,
and two in the hold, the latter to be used in case of
having any natives on board ; the crew slept under
the boat on deck.
The first few days out we had calm weather, and
made very little progress; then came a strong breeze
from the southward, and we proceeded some way on
our journey. Off Port Stephens the wind increased
b 2


to a gale, and blew very hard, veering round to the
N.W. There was nothing for it but to heave to and
wait till it moderated. That was a very anxious
time, as it blew a perfect hurricane, and our little
cockle-shell of a boat pitched and tossed as though
she were possessed, yet behaving splendidly, never
shipping a single sea, though the spray was blown
in sheets over the deck. The only trouble we had
was with the pump; the carpenters had left a
quantity of shavings under the skin, when replacing
it, and these were washed by the water she made
into the pump well and choked it. Of course it
would have been impossible for so small a vessel to
avoid making some water in so heavy a gale, and
besides this, we found that the deck was not as
watertight as it ought to have been. We had to
take the pump out, and in such heavy weather this
was no small matter; however, we managed it
successfully, cleared the shavings away and put
everything right again ; we lay hove to for four
days and nights.
On the third day a large barque came running
past with lower topsails and forecourse set; she
hailed us to know if we wanted help—they could not
understand so small a craft being out such a long
distance from the land.
We observed a somewhat rare phenomenon (for the
latitude we were in) during this gale; two water-
spouts passed at about half-a-mile from us, working
against the wind, and we distinctly heard the rushing
sound made by them above the noise of the storm.


During the four days we lay hove to, we drifted
to windward, or ‘‘ head reached,” as sailors say, a
hundred and forty miles, but when again able to
make sail, shaped our course for, and shortly after-
wards anchored in, Trial Bay ; then laying in a
stock of fresh meat, bread, &c., we started again, with
a fair wind, for Brisbane, reaching that port in a
few days. With great courtesy, Captain Heath, 8.N.,
Harbour Master, allowed us to lay alongside the
Government wharf, where we took in water, had a
square sail-yard fitted, laid in a necessary supply of
onions, potatoes, &c., and obtained permission from
the Government to enter all harbours on the
Queensland coast free of dues. This shows the
difference between the Governments of Queensland
and New South Wales, for the latter, when asked
for permission to ship bonded stores for our vessel,
which was under fifty tons, and on a scientific survey,
returned the polite (?) answer, “ No departure from
the law to be permitted.”
From Brisbane we passed on to Townsville, sail-
ing inside that wonderful “ Great Barrier Beef,”
the terror of those that do not know it, the comfort
of those that do. Leaving there we proceeded north,
past Cooktown, and stood over to Lizard Island for
firewood. This island was lately the scene of so bad
a tragedy that I cannot refrain from giving the
outlines of it here.
A Captain Watson formed a station on the island
for fishing and curing “ beche-de-mer,” where, with
his wife, young child, and a number of Chinamen, he


lived for some months. Having occasion to go to
Cooktown in his schooner, he left his wife and child
behind at the station, with a few of the Chinamen.
He had not been gone long before a number of
blacks from the mainland landed and attacked the
station and the inmates, murdering some of the
Chinamen and eating them ; but Mrs. Watson, with
one Chinaman, made such a resolute defence from the
house (so it appears from the account in her diary
written at the time) that the blacks were driven off
for a period.
Fearing their return, Mrs. Watson and the China-
man took one of the vessels that had been used for
boiling the beche-de-mer (a large iron tank cut in
half), and somehow managed to rig up a mast in
it; in this unwieldly craft Mrs. Watson, her baby,
and the Chinaman, started for another island som’e
twenty miles off, under cover of the night, to escape
observation by the blacks. They reached the island
in safety, but seeing native canoes during the day,
they again started for another island, thirty miles
distant from their first refuge, but on neither of
the islands did they find any water, and had none
with them. In the meantime Captain Watson had
returned to find his home and station sacked, and no
traces of the missing ones, except a few articles of
his wife’s clothing, some of her hair, and the bones
of the Chinamen that the blacks had eaten. He
captured one of the black women, who described to
him in the most graphic manner the murder of his
wife and child; how Mrs. Watson had eventually


been tomahawked and the body thrown into the
water —she even pointed out the spot; but when
divers were sent down nothing of course was found —
this at the time was attributed to the sharks; she
also said that the baby had been kept for a time, but
because it would not stop crying one of the natives
dashed its brains out. Her story was such a well-
connected lie that it was believed by the unhappy
man, and vengeance was accordingly taken on the
supposed murderers.
Some time after a Captain Bremuer, having
occasion to call at the island on which Mrs. Watson
had last taken refuge, discovered the bodies, and
what confirmed their identity beyond all doubt was
Mrs. Watson’s diary, which he found near her body,
written apparently up to a short time before her
death, which was caused from want of water. It
appears they saw a steamer pass and tried to attract
attention, but failed. Mrs. Watson’s last entry was
to this effect, “ Chinaman gone away to die by him-
self in the bush ; baby very fretful and weak.” Ho
word of her own sufferings; not once is there to be
found any complaint for herself entered in the whole
of her diarv, which was written in a firm, hold hand.
•/ 7 “
What a noble spirit passed away in silent anguish
on that lonely island! One of the search parties
looking for traces actually landed on that very
island, but did not go on the right side of it.
After taking in wood and water at Lizard Island,
we shaped a course for the Barrier Reef, and passed
out through the same passage by which Captain


Cook passed in on board the Endeavour in 1770.
We had a splendid strong fair wind, which soon
carried us past and clear of the “ Osprey Reef” in a
N.W, course, and in a few days we sighted Brumer
Islands. These islands are high and rocky, the
highest peak being six hundred and sixty-five feet,
according to the latest Admiralty chart. Here we
found discoloured water where the Admiralty chart
gives “ twenty fathoms and no bottom ; ” this, how-
ever, has probably risen since the soundings marked
on the Admiralty chart were taken. This shoal lies
to the N.E. of the largest island.
I am sorry to say I was too busy at the time to
take any soundings or cross-bearings, but the shoal
is of large extent and easily observed from the
masthead. I should say there were about three
fathoms in the shallowest place we passed over.
Several canoes came off, the natives appeared friendly
and wished to trade. We bought a few little articles
they had in the canoes, but being anxious to get on
to Teste Island did not stop long.
The natives of the Brumer Islands are a dark race
of the same type as those of the Grulf of Papua, but
somewhat darker than the natives .of China Straits
and surrounding islands.
The following day we reached Teste Island, and
anchored on the north side, about three hundred yards
from the shore, as the water is too deep further off.
The natives were very friendly, and brought off
cocoa-nuts, yams, fish, and other articles, which they
exchanged for iron hoop, red cloth, and beads.


We went on shore to visit the village, which lies
on the south side of the island, there being only a
few huts on the north side. The houses are built on
piles from four to six feet high ; on these are placed
large round pieces of wood, and on these rests the
house. These large plates of wood are for keeping off
snakes, rats, &c. The house seems to consist of root
NATIVE HOUSE, TESTE ISLAND, NEW GUINEA.
and floor only, for the roof is rounded oif to each
side, something like an inverted boat; it is thatched
with grass or sugar-cane leaves; the floor is made of
canes laid across the beams, and lashed together with
plaited string made of cocoa-nut fibre. The door is
only an opening on one side, approached by a rude
ladder constructed of forked stakes with pieces of


wood laid across in the forks. Inside the house
there is not room enough for a man to stand upright.
They sometimes make a small fire on a large flat
stone in the centre of the house, but most of the
cooking is done outside. The framework of the
roof is made from bamboo cane, and the interior of
almost every house was blackened by the smoke
from the burning cocoa-nut shell, which will not rub
off.
The inhabitants of Teste Island are an intelligent-
looking people, and very friendly ; they have large
sailing canoes, with oval-shaped sails of various
sizes, which they change according to the strength
of the wind: the mast is formed with a tripod, two
legs resting on the outrigger, and one on the bottom
of the canoe; the ropes are made out of the bark of
a tree twisted tightly together. The length of the
largest canoe I saw was about thirty feet; they
are decorated with a rough carving and the white
cowrie shell, also with pieces of grass, flowers, &c.
These islanders have, besides, smaller canoes, cut
from the trunk of a single tree, with outriggers on
one side only. These are whitewashed and orna-
mented with forms something like eyes in shape.
On nearly every house we observed skulls hanging;
I offered to buy one, but was refused in a very
decided manner ; they were probably not skulls of
enemies, but rather those of relations.
On going to the top of the hill to look round, I
found that the reef marked in the Admiralty chart
was in reality a fine lagoon with apparently an


excellent entrance at the south-east corner, and on
the western side of East Island; I took a canoe and
went out to see if the entrance was as good as it
looked from the hill-top. On arriving I found
there was a good-sized rock in the centre of the
channel, on which the swell occasionally broke. It
would, I think, however, make a good harbour for
small vessels, but it requires entering by daytime
until known, as there are several coral patches about
it, besides the rock in the entrance.
We found the - natives exceedingly pleasant and
obliging; they are intelligent looking, and have
that peculiar Jewish cast of features that one finds
all along the north-east coast of New Guinea, and is
without question of a higher type than that of the
tribes on the south coast (Gulf of Papua), or those
of the Calvados Chain, who are cannibals. It was at
the last-named place that five hundred Chinamen
(who were on their way to form a colony in New
Guinea) were wrecked and eaten as required by the
natives—at least all but three or four, who were
bought back from the savages for looking-glasses,
beads, &c.; but the circumstance is well remembered
by many traders of the South Sea Islands.
We left Teste Island with regret, promising to
return some day (which promise I fear will hardly
be fulfilled now), and steered for Blanchard Island,
where we came to anchor in the evening, off the
northern point, very close to the shore. Next day we
landed, when H succeeded in shooting the first
duck I had seen in New Guinea ; we took it on board
11
FIVE HUNDRED CHINAMEN EATEN.


thinking we had a great prize, and hung it up, telling
the cook not to touch it, as I wanted to skin it. We
then returned on shore to try and get its mate, hut
failed to do so, seeing the bird get up out of range.
On returning to the ship in the evening we found
our beautiful duck plucked andi cooked for our
supper, and all the feathers carefully put in a bag;
the cook triumphantly presented me with them
saying, “Me no like you make work belong cook,
massa; I take out all feathers belong bird, and put
him in hag.” The fellow had evidently thought that
I wanted to pluck the duck myself and couldn’t
stand any interference in his department, and
thought he would take this opportunity of showing
his disapproval; I felt very sad about it, and poor
H was jumping mad. The duck was a white
one, with grey head and dark grey bars on wings
and tail, the beak yellow green; I have never seen
another. We left Blanchard Island next morning
for China Straits, and had many canoes off to us from
both sides of the straits—Hayter Island, as well as
from Heath Island—bringing us many things for sale.
Amongst them was a cuscus (a tree marsupial), a
flying squirrel, and a small wallaby. The cuscus
was a very handsome fellow, brown and white; they
become quite tame, and we had several on board
afterwards, where they lived a long time. The
flying squirrel is a pretty little creature, and will
also become very tame if caught young. The
wallaby was of the same description as those found
in New Britain and on the mainland of New


Guinea. Full grown it stands about two feet six
inches high ; it is a dark brown colour, turning to
white on the stomach and breast; it is very delicate,
and will not live long in confinement—at least I
have not been successful with them. We found that
though there are plenty of pigs on this island they
will not sell them, as they are the property of the
women, who regard them much in the same light as
their own children. I have seen one of these women
hugging and caressing a pig more than ever she
would have done one of her own babies.
The same evening we anchored off Heath Island
(named after the President of the Marine Board and
Harbour Master of Brisbane, Queensland, the same
courteous gentleman to whom when in Brisbane we
were indebted for so much kindness; he was, I be-
lieve, in these parts some years ago). Here we found
that the natives brought off a description of sponge,
which, though covered with a black film, speedily
yields to a weak solution of muriatic acid, and turns
out a really very presentable washing sponge.
We went on shore and tried to find the village
marked on the Admiralty chart, but were not
successful; I think it does not exist now, as we
passed over the spot marked, and saw no trace of
any house; we followed a small freshwater stream,
hoping to find another duck, but were disappointed.
We saw, however, several tracks of crocodiles, which
seem to be pretty numerous here, though we did
n °t actually come across one.
Many canoes came alongside our vessel with
13
FONDNESS FOE FIGS.


tortoiseshell and small black edge-pearl shell; we
also bought a good many implements of war, toma-
hawks, spears, clubs, and shields.
The tomahawks are made of a stone very nicely
ground into somewhat the shape of a flat wedge, and
beautifully smooth; some of them are from three to
four inches across the widest part, which is ground
to a sharp edge for cutting; the other end is jammed
into a wooden handle, the part that holds the stone
being formed of two pieces of wood lashed firmly
round with split cane ; the remainder of the handle is
in the form of two sides of a right-angled triangle,
the part for holding being the longest leg. These
tomahawks are so formed that the harder the blow
the more the stone is wedged into the handle. The
largest size, I believe, being so unwieldy, is used
merely for ornament. Some of them have the
wooden holder movable, in order that the stone
head may be turned to make an adze. The spears
are varied in shape, those for fish having five or six
hard betel-nut wood points, so lashed together into a
handle that they spread out into a circle, distant
about one and a half inches from each other, having
one in the centre. Another fishing spear had two
prongs barbed at the ends, carved out of the same
piece of wood as the handle.
Of the fighting spears some are smooth-pointed
but roughly made, others have many barbs, and are
very neatly carved; they are made from various
kinds of wood; the rougher ones appear to he of
cocoa-nut wood—the others of a black wood like


ebony, or a red wood that is much like the Fijian
“ greenheart.” The clubs resemble swords in shape,
some notched along the blade, others smooth,
mostly made of betel-nut wood.
The paddles of the canoes are made of a light-
coloured wood, with heart-shaped blades, the handle
being about four feet long with a crutch-headed top,
often very nicely carved into the shape of a bird.
The shields are black, with white markings on
them ; they are about three feet long, and two broad,
slightly curved at the sides; these are hung on the
outrigger of the canoe, to form a bulwark, when
fighting.
Some of the native ornaments are armlets, made of
plaited cane dyed red; pieces of ground clam shell
through the cartilage of the nose, which is pointed
at the ends. The men often wear wigs, much in the
same way that our young ladies wear fringes, only the
native fringe can be pulled down over the chin to
form whiskers. I noticed they did this several times
when, having been paid for some article, they came
back and asked to be paid a second time; however,
this innocent ruse did not succeed more than once.
I noticed also necklets made of cassowaries’ feathers,
worked on to a cord, some also being made of bird
of paradise plumes ; these last they also wind round
the uprights on the outriggers of their canoes for
ornament. The waist-cloth is made of a bark of a
tree, and is unornamented; whilst above the waist
they wrap their bodies round and round with a de-
scription of black plaited cord, with bright yellow
15
NATIVE ORNAMENTS.


strands worked into it, which has something the
appearance of a small snake. What the cord can be
for Ido not know; it cannot be only for ornament;
it may be for catching turtle, but I hardly think it
TORTOISESHELL MASK.
(From Mt. Thompson, New Guinea.)
is strong enough for one of any size. We also
bought a curious mask made of tortoiseshell which
is worn in dancing ; it is ornamented with casso-
16
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


waries’ feathers, whitened round the eye-holes with
lime, and coloured round the lips with red earth ;
the nose-piece is fastened on, and the nostril holes
have pieces of pearl shell inserted. This mask, I was
informed by a native, comes from the mainland
(Mount Thompson),
All this time we had seen no women ; I suppose it
was too far for them to come in canoes.
Leaving Heath Island, we passed “Dinner”
CANOE SHIELD,
NEW GUINEA.
FIGHTING SHIELD,
NEW GUINEA.
Island, and stood in for “ Possession Bay ” (Hayter
Island), anchoring in seven fathoms water pretty
close to shore.
Here an immense number of canoes came otf to
Us ; I do not think I exaggerate when I say that
there were three hundred; two large fighting
canoes cruised round outside the others, doubtless
fo keep the peace, as well as to intimidate us should
We show any hostile intentions; the latter were very
c
17
WOMEN TRADERS.


long, holding about thirty men each, the outriggers
hung with shields, and bundles ol‘ spears. Here
several women came out, paddled by their respective
lords and masters (?). However, the grey mare
appeared the better horse, as they abused and scolded
the men if they did not keep close enough to the
vessel’s side to trade. When they did get alongside of
it, it was amusing to see how they settled down into
company manners, not giving way to eager excite-
ment like the men, hut sitting calmly in the canoes,
giving orders to the sterner sex what to sell and
what to take in exchange.
All barter goods that the men exchanged were
handed to the women, who examined them very
carefully, and then placed them under where they
were sitting. The women are evidently very clever
in the art of forcing trade. One lady had on a very
brightly-coloured grass petticoat, which we had some
delicacy in asking for. However, H mustered
up courage to point to it, upon which she shook
her head and pretended she could not sell it,
being ashamed to take it off; she, however, went so
far as to stand up and unfasten the string, then,
apparently being overcome by her modesty, sat
down again. This made H more urgent to get
it, so he showed her a tomahawk, upon which she got
up and took it off, and to our surprise had another
one underneath; thus by a piece of clever acting
getting double the price she would otherwise have
received, the other natives seeming to think it a good
joke. I must add that before this lady left she was
18
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


very anxious to part with her second petticoat, but as
we would not give the same price for it she had not
to sacrifice her modesty.
Possession Bay was taken “ possession ” of in the
Queen’s name by Captain Moresby of the Basilisk
in 1873, at the time he discovered China Strait. On
a fine day this strait is a most beautiful passage, the
cleared green patches on the land, and the beautiful
foliage coming down to the water’s edge, with here
and there a village surrounded with its groves of
cocoa-nut palms, canoes hauled up on the beach or
darting out from under the shadow of the trees, the
natives that manned them wishing to intercept the
vessel so as to have a look at the strangers, or else
with something to sell.
There are the mountains rising at the back, with
the signs of cultivation on their ample breasts ; and
as you pass close to the shore, the innumerable
sounds of the woods become audible, the songs of the
birds and the shouts of the natives, softened and
harmonised by distance; above all there comes
the indescribable perfume that seems to find its
w ay into your very soul, the sweet odour of all
the flowers and herbs, intermingled with the rich
scent of the earth; it is in these unknown spots
alone that nature is natural. Here you see no
broken bottles or pieces of newspaper lying about
—nothing in fact to mar the perfect beauty of the
scene.
It surprises me much that some of those who own
yachts do not visit these lovely haunts. One reads of
c 2


cruises by these pleasure vessels to all parts of the
civilised world in search of the beautiful, yet here,
and indeed in all the Pacific Islands, is marvellous
beauty unmarred since its creation. There, too, is the
excitement of feeling that you may be (perhaps) the
first white man that has set foot on this shore; and
for those that like a little spice of danger thrown in
(and where is the sailor, I may say the Englishman
that does not ?), I would remind them that the
natives are not all friendly, and although they may
become so by fair dealing, treachery must he looked
for at all times. Here is enterprise on which our
yachtsmen may expend their energies; let them come
here and discover new islands and new people.
We Englishmen are far too apt to think that all
parts of the world are discovered —we are much
mistaken in this idea. There are hundreds, nay
thousands of islands in the Pacific never seen by white
men, save in the distance, and many, I have little
doubt, never seen at all.
Only seven years ago I saw a small rock marked
on the chart, and the sailing directions said it was
reported to be a rock, but its existence was very
doubtful. This rock was sixty miles out in the
given longitude, it is true, but instead of one rock
I found twenty-one islands and the finest race of
inhabitants I have seen in these seas. What was
most curious was that they had no weapons of war
at all amongst them, only fishing spears, and such
instruments as were necessary to maintain existence.
They were most friendly, and gave us of the best


they had; we in exchange leaving them two pigs,
and probably now they have plenty of pork to eat,
where before they had only fish, cocoa-nut, taro,
yams, and land crabs.
Perhaps this is something that can hardly be
credited by people in England, who see thousands of
ships in their docks, and imagine they have sailed
over every sea, and visited all the places of the
ea/tth ; yet I have little doubt that there are many
such islands still to be discovered in the Pacific
Ocean.
New Gruinea in itself, too, is an enormous field for
discovery; the north-east coast is still comparatively
unknown, and whereas it is delineated in the map
as a straight, bold coast-line, it has in reality
many beautiful harbours, and the scenery is truly
grand.
I must apologise to the reader for thus leaving
him alone in Possession Bay, whilst I have been
Wandering all over the Pacific; so now to return.
On leaving the Bay we ran past Mekinley Island,
and thus leaving China Straits behind us, steered for
Challis Head, and clear of China Rock, which has
grown considerably larger since I saw it in 1875.
Phe sand and broken coral have silted up all round
what was once a small reef, and formed a sandbank.
Moreover, we found what I feel sure was not in
existence when I was here before, that is, two coral
patches, with about two fathoms of water on them;
this seems to show that the reefs are growing in this
direction. A little further on, though, I found a
21
FIELD FOR DISCOVERY.


shoal patch marked four fathoms, and on sounding
found it still the same, so that seemingly some reefs
grow much faster than others.
There is a very swift current at times through
China Straits either way, ebb and flow, which may be
favourable to the growth of reefs, and it seems to
me certain that a strong current plays an important
part in their growth, from observations made else-
where.
To the west of Mekinley Island lie Paples and
“Didymus” Islands, both good fields for the
entomologist and the bird collector, for there are
no natives living on them, yet he can always get
some to go with him from the other islands, to help
collect, if not afraid to trust himself in a canoe.
After Challis Head comes Negro Head, so called,
I imagine, from a round hillock on the coast, much
the shape of a negro’s head, and the foliage on it,
which is short and thick, tending to increase the
resemblance. Negro Head is tbe northernmost
point of “ Basilisk ” Island, and after leaving it you
cross the mouth of Fortesque Strait; it was to the
north and east of this Strait that we sounded on the
coral patch marked four fathoms and obtained a
similar sounding.
From this we made for Mudge Bay, and anchored
just inside the western head, as the bay appeared
full of shoals, though ten fathoms of water was
marked in the chart.
We found the natives not nearly so quiet as those
of Hayter Island; they wanted to get on board, and


were inclined to be impertinent over their trading.
One man, more determined than the rest, got up out
of his canoe, reached over o the skylight, and stole
a knife that was lying on it; we did not see him, as
we were all busily engaged with the other natives,
but Master Fincher did, and caught hold of the
thief’s hand, at the same time Rover had him bv the
7 %/
part o' his body that was on the rail. The first we
NEW GUINEA CANOE, CHINA STRAITS.
heard of it was a fearful howl from the man, who
jumped about ten yards clear off the rail into the
water. This made all the other natives laugh, and
we got on better with them afterwards. The bitten
native took the knife away with him, but did not
come again to trade with us.
Natives in all parts of the South Seas do not
consider thieving a fault; it is the being found out


that is the crime in their eyes, therefore when I
occasionally made signs as of being bitten, and
pointed to the land, the others would shake their
heads, laugh, and wave their hands, expressing that
the other would not come off again.
These natives use the same sort of weapons as
those before described ; they do a great deal of
trading from island to island in their large canoes,
the sails of which are oval in shape, something like a
tea-tray, and are made of mats of cocoa-nut leaves.
Of these they have three different sizes, a large one
for fine weather, a small one for strong wind, and
very small for a gale. In going about they have only
to haul down the other end of the sail, and shift the
steering paddle; they lie close to the wind and sail
very fast.
Taking them on the whole the natives of these
islands are a very friendly set, especially those on
Teste, Basilisk, and Hayter Islands, I trust they
may never become otherwise, but fear they will some
day have to pass through the ordeal which all
natives that have become intimate with whites have
suffered —rebellion at first, then subjection, and at
last entire extinction. White men will never become
natives, natives cannot become white men, and of
the two the weaker fails. This appears to be a most
strongly illustrated law of nature throughout the
vast regions of the South Seas.


CHAPTER II.
Remarkable whirlpool near Duke of York Islands —Mistaken for a pirate—
Shameful kidnapping by “Christians” —Description of a Goonan
village—Hotwater creek—Matupi Island—Fever: its symptoms and
treatment—Trading establishment at Matupi Island —Copra—New
Britain quail—Torrortooroo—Accident with Aleck’s gun.
It was about six o’clock in the afternoon that we
passed between Blakeny and Hull Islands and out
into deep water beyond. Keeping on our course we
steered to the eastward of Cape Yentenat to clear
its dangerous reefs, and along the east coast of
Normanby Island, with its rugged mountain peaks,
crags, and chasms, a grand and broken outline.
There must indeed have been a terrible convulsion
of nature to have caused such an upheaval; it is a
beautiful scene.
Leaving Cape Pierson we steered to pass between
Jouveney and Jurien Islands, and suspecting a
strong set from the eastward, I kept as far over in
that direction as practicable to keep off the Luscanay
Reefs, which extend from Welle Island tiorth to
Lagrandiere Island, with only a few passages
through. I found that my suspicions were correct,
as we were set to the westward of Jurien Island,
passing between it and Trobriand Island.
The former presents a strange appearance, rising
as it does to a considerable height in terraces one
25


above the other, and looking as though it had been
raised out of the sea in jerks, each terrace having at
one time formed the sea beach, Jouvency Island,
seen in the distance, appeared to be of the same forma-
tion, though it was too far off to see whether it was so.
Trobriand Island is low, and covered on the eastern
side with what appeared to be iron bark trees, they
having that peculiar spiked appearance that the
foliage of this class of tree always has. The
northernmost point of this island is Cape Denis, o\ne
hundred and eighty-two miles from Cape Orford in'
New Britain, about two days’ sail, the Duke of York
Islands being sixty-two miles from Cape Orford. We
intended to make these islands our first stopping-place.
We actually passed Cape Orford in one day from
Cape Denis, being carried along by the south-east
monsoon, but as we passed Spacious Bay the breeze
grew lighter, and at last fell altogether when we
were about thirty miles south of the Duke of York
Islands. That night it came on a fog with thick
drizzling rain, such a thing I never saw again the
whole time I was in these waters; but a fog we had,
and a very thick one. About midnight we heard
as we thought the sound of breakers, and there
being no wind I was afraid the current must have
set us on to the coast of Duke of York Island. The
only chance to keep clear was to take to the sweeps,
which we did, but too late, as we found ourselves in
the middle of the break, which was rushing round
with the most tremendous roar.
I shouted to Aleck to get the lead over the side


and see what water we had under us, and to the
others to pull for their lives to get us clear. Forty
fathoms and no bottom was the sounding given.
This seemed so strange that I took the lead myself,
and let out fifty fathoms and still no bottom, yet we
heard breakers all round us, and just as if they broke
in shallow water. This must be a tide rip I thought,
and of no ordinary sort. I looked at the compass and
found that the ship’s head was going round and
round; then I thought of whirlpools, &c., when
suddenly the breakers ceased as suddenly as they
had begun.
We were afterwards in several of these miniature
whirlpools in this St. George’s Channel, and from
observation I have come to the conclusion that they
are caused by the uneven formation of the bottom
and the swiftness of the current over it, sometimes
running at the rate of five or six knots in the
direction of each monsoon.
The next morning we found ourselves to the north
of Duke of York Islands, the current having drifted
us thirty miles in the night. This will give some
idea of the strength of these currents, which appear
to be produced by the wind alone.
A German barque, the Etienne , was the best part of
three months trying to beat a distance of twenty miles
against the current. She would make a good start
in the morning, when the monsoon began at about
nine a.m., and would sometimes nearly reach her desti-
nation, but at sundown the wind always fell light, and
back she would drift, further perhaps than she had


come in the day. Therefore I would strongly advise
any master coming from China this way during the
south-east monsoon to go round the north of New
Hanover, but through St. George’s Channel if going
there.
I can quote an instance of a large iron barque
that we spoke in the St. George’s Channel that took
only thirteen days out from Newcastle, N.S.W.,
which was pretty good work, and this track I should
certainly advise masters to take outwards in the S.E.
and homewards in the N.W. monsoons, with clear
water through St. George’s Channel and to the north
of New Britain.
By the way, I think this barque took us for a
pirate, though we flew the British ensign, for she
made sail as soon as she saw us, but as we were in
the channel between Duke of York Island and New
Ireland, and she was coming up it, I could have cut
her off, whichever way she. had headed ; when at last
I hailed her they told me she was 13 days out from
Newcastle, bound for China, and was going right
on, not stopping. They might well be pardoned for
taking us for pirates, for our deck was full of natives,
quite naked or with only a piece of cloth tied round
their waists or heads, and we white men did not
present a very respectable appearance about that
time. Besides this we had two little guns peeping
over the sides, and being in such an out-of-the-way
place we must have had altogether a rather sus-
picious appearance. But lam running on talking
about things that occurred after we had been in these


waters some time, and we have not even arrived at
New Britain yet.
Dampier, in 1699, was the first to decide that
New Britain was a separate island from New
Guinea, he having passed through those straits
which are now called by his name, and which lie to
the westward of New Britain and the eastward of
Rooke Island. Some portions of the island were
afterwards more exactly described by D’Urville,
although this navigator visited it under very adverse
weather. He gives it the native name of Birara,
which I found to be the name also given to a part of
the island some two hundred miles to the north-
eastward of that portion which he describes—a
circumstance which, I think, tends to prove that at
some previous date the natives of the eastern and
western ends of the island were connected, though at
the present time their language, appearance, and
customs are very different.
I was anxious to get to Nodup, a village just
beneath the Mother Mountains in New Britian, that
being my boy Aleck’s home. I felt sure of finding
friendly natives there, he having been kidnapped
from this locality some years before.
However, we could only get near enough for a
canoe to come off, and when they got alongside the
natives were very surprised to see Aleck, as they had
long since given him up, believing him to be dead.
They asked him many questions about the others
that had been taken with him, and he had to repeat
that shameful story so often told, of how these poor


natives, after being kidnapped by white men, were
allowed to die like sheep on the wharf of a wealthy
firm. They were housed in an old condemned deck-
house on shore without windows and with a leaky
roof, and this in the winter. There were eight at
first, six of whom died on the wharf and one after-
wards from the exposure. (The head of the firm on
whose wharf the poor creatures perished passes for
a very Christian man !) Aleck was the last of them,
and he, I am glad to say, I was able to bring back to
his own people. Poor fellow ! when his countrymen
began to talk to him he found that he had forgotten
a great deal of the language, and could not answer
them very well, having been away for five years.
He found on asking for them that his father and
mother were both alive, but living on an island called
Matupi (in Blanche Bay) on the other side of the
Mother Mountain.
As we could not get into Nodup, owing to the
current setting north so strongly, I ran round Cape
Stephens to anchor off the Groonan District, just the
other side of the Cape, and out of the strong current.
Here I found that I could get over the hills from
Goonan to Blanche Bay, and thence to Matupi Island.
So the next day Aleck, I, and some of the natives
from the shore as guides, started off across the land,
and found that it was only about twenty minutes’
walk after all to get to the head of Blanche Bay,
over one steep hill too, though the Admiralty charts
make it at least four miles wide.
We found the land we passed through nearly all
30
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


cultivated, large crops of bananas, yams, and taro
being all around us; the soil, too, seemed very rich,
being formed of decomposed volcanic and vegetable
matters.
Two villages that lay on our route struck me as
being most remarkable for the neatness and taste
with which the pieces of ground surrounding each
house were laid out; the natives seemed to have
collected from the bush a quantity of the brightest-
looking variegated shrubs to plant round their
dwellings, though this I found afterwards was done
as much to save trouble as to look ornamental, as they
use the bright leaves, &c., in their dances, and it is
convenient to have them handy.
The houses are for the most part made of bamboo
thatched with the pandannas leaves, and are not
very high, with the exception of that belonging to the
chief, which is generally a considerably larger build-
ing. The natives have a bad habit of making fires
inside their huts, which is a pity, as if it were not
for the dirt from the smoke they would not be bad
at all; the strong smell, too, of the burnt wood is
objectionable; but taken as a whole, the appearance
of a Gloonan village is very pretty.
The sleeping bunks, as I will call their beds, are
generally made of the sides of a canoe split off and
laid on posts driven into the ground; on them are
laid mats, made of green cocoa-nut leaves, which,
although very cool, are rather rough, as they leave
part of the thick stem on them. One of these mats
is always brought out for a visitor, followed by a
31
A GOONAN VILLAGE.


native with the inevitable betel-nut, which you
must chew or give offence.
As we passed over the top of the hill we had a
grand view of the Mother Mountain and South
Daughter, with Blanche Bay and the shore on the far
side of it; under the Mother we could see the volcano
with its dense volumes of smoke and steam.
After crossing the hill the road descended all the
way to the beach, along which we had to walk about
a mile and a half to get a canoe, which, after a lot of
haggling, Aleck made arrangements for hiring, to
take us over to Matupi Island.
(doing along the shore we passed one freshwater
creek, and another of hot water, which, being at a
temperature of about 120 Fahrenheit, was unpleasantly
hot to the bare feet. This creek appeared to have no
particular source inland, but was rather a shallow
crater with one side open to the bay. The whole
shore is covered with pumice-stone, and the natives
told me they had a terrible eruption about twelve
years ago, in which many men were killed by the
falling of huge blocks of pumice-stone, and that there
had been several smaller outbursts since.
The canoe we had secured was a good-sized one,
paddled by two women and a man ; these, with Aleck
and myself as passengers, made up all hands.
About this time I began to feel that terrible
languor which is a precursor of fever and ague, and
had to lie down in the canoe on some cocoa-nut mat
baskets they had with them; so, unfortunately, could
not take as much notice of our surroundings as I


wished to do. We passed about a quarter of a mile
from the two remarkable rocks known as the
Beehives, the largest of which, though rising per-
pendicularly out of the sea for about two hundred
feet, has on it quite a thriving village of fishermen.
I also noticed several cocoa-nut trees growing ap-
parently on the bare face of the rock, clinging to it
with their roots as a parasite plant does to the trunk
of a tree. These rocks lie east by north of Matupi
about a mile and a quarter.
Matupi Island is evidently formed by volcanic
agency, as there is an extinct crater in the centre,
now partly filled up, and most of the island is sand
and pumice-stone.
It is covered with cocoa-nut trees and thickly
populated. On landing I was too much exhausted
with fever to go even as far as the house of a half-
caste trader who was living on the island, so lay
down in one of the open canoe sheds on the beach.
Here I had quite a large audience to see the “ white
man” who had brought back “ Etugerier ” (Aleck’s
native name). They brought me some green cocoa-
nuts, which were very refreshing; and in about an
hour’s time, the shaking fit having passed off, I
started across the island to the trader’s house.
Let me now describe this fever for the information
of those who do not know its nature or do not
appreciate its virulence. No man escapes it that
travels much on shore in these islands ; I first got it
long ago in New Guinea, so that it was not new to
we. The first symptoms generally are these: an
D


aching in the legs, and a tired feeling generally,
then the eyes begin to hurt, and lastly your back
feels cold, and shivers go through and through the
body, although your skin feels burning hot. You
then pile on blankets, but cannot get warm for some
time; when you do you feel hotter and hotter, and
perspiration pours off the body till everything is
wet. Off go the blankets then, which is a bad thing,
as doing so drives the fever in again; great thirst is
then usually felt, and when the heat is passed you
fall asleep as a rule, thoroughly worn out, and on
waking feel weak and shaky.
The fever begins generally as an intermittent, and
as it becomes more settled in the body, a remittent,
perhaps every other day ; at last the shivers do not
come at all, but instead, heavy vomiting and cough.
This is the last stage, and if you do not then get
away from the climate it will prove fatal.
Many white men I have seen with it have taken
so much quinine that the remedy has been almost
worse than the disease, for in one case that I had
special knowledge of, the poor fellow took so much
that be lost the use of his left eye altogether. I
myself have frequently lost my hearing for some
days, and found my memory confused through
the same cause, too much quinine ; for in order to
kill this fever, such large doses are needed that
they injure the system almost as much as the fever
itself.
By far the most useful medicine for it is citrate
of iron and strychnine; one of strychnine to one


hundred of iron, taken in doses five grains to an
ounce of water. This has never failed where the
case was not too far advanced, and in some cases
made a cure when continued with ; and it would, 1
feel sure, keep fever away almost entirely if taken
twice a day before any symptoms are felt.
You will never catch this fever if you are as much
as a quarter of a mile even from the shore, nor on
the shore even if you keep clear of mangrove swamps
and thick forests. Only stick to the iron, and avoid
all spirits ; their use is certain death in such a climate
as most of these islands possess ; a little wine now and
then is a good thing with your meals, or light beer.
Any one feeding well, and keeping up strength in
this way, is less likely to catch the fever than one
who lives poorly and overtaxes his strength.
One thing 1 omitted to say, viz., that white women
seem to stand this climate better than white men, as
an instance : a missionary’s wife I have the pleasure
of knowing has never had fever, though she has been
many years in the South Seas, while her husband
has had it many times. I must also mention that
thin people seem less liable to it than stout ones.
My advice is, do nothing that can possibly weaken
the body, and don’t take quinine.
Now back again to .Matupi. I stayed with the
trader that night, and next morning he was kind
enough to assist me in purchasing some pigs from the
natives. I got three very fine ones for a tomahawk
a piece, the tomahawks cost tenpence (retail) —a
very cheap pig ! They are all fed on cocoa-nuts, and
d 2
35
FEVER: ITS TREATMENT.


the flesh has something of the flavour of the nut to
the taste, which is to my mind very pleasant.
The trader’s house is a weather-hoarded, framed
one, roofed with corrugated iron, and divided into
three compartments; the front door opens into the
general room, where we took our meals, &c. On one
side was a door opening into the bedroom, and on the
other a door into the trade-room, where all the stock-
in-trade is kept.
Each room was furnished, though roughly; the
sitting-room having a deal table, two chairs, and a
roughly-made couch ; the bedroom a trestle-bed and
a chest of drawers ; whilst the trade-room possesses
merely shelves all round for the various goods, &c.
Each room has one window, furnished with wooden
shutters in case of an attack from the natives; the
first room has also a door at the back, for communi-
cation with the kitchen, a native built house some
yards away from the main building; the cooking
arrangements being of the most simple order. Near
by is the copra-house, a large building of native con-
struction (bamboo anfl thatched), to which is fixed a
strong door, kept padlocked. Here is kept the copra
bought from the natives, ready cut and dried, and
placed there till a ship comes to take it; the houses
being obliged to be strongly built and kept locked,
or the natives would steal the copra and sell it to the
trader over again.
I suppose there are but few English people outside
the trade who know what copra is ; I will therefore
explain:—it is the white pith of the ripe cocoa-nut


cut into strips and dried in the sun. This is brought to
the trader in baskets, varying from three to twenty
pounds in weight; the payment at the time of which
I am speaking was a thimbleful of beads for each
pound of copra, though this alters as time goes on
and more traders come to make opposition. The nut
is full of oil, and on reaching Europe the copra is
crushed in mills, and the oil pressed from it. This is
cocoa-nut oil, and it can be now so well manipulated
that half the oil sold as “ olive oil ” is really from
the cocoa-nut. The refuse is made into oil-cake, for
feeding and fattening cattle. The value of copra
in the English market varies from about £lO to £l6
per ton. The traders are very rarely trading for
themselves, but for a firm who send ships now and
then to fetch the copra, and supply the traders with
provisions; and for the work the traders sometimes
receive a salary and sometimes are paid about £2 per
ton. Others, again, receive their money in both
ways, that is, a small salary, and receive also a rate
of perhaps three dollars per ton of their copra.
Trade is not limited to their copra; traders also
get tortoise-shell, pearl-shell, candle-nuts, and the
bark of a tree called “ fowbash,” which is to send to
Europe to be manufactured into paper. For all these
things they get small sums allowed them ; but then
they have to buy all their provisions from the ships
at very dear rates ; and though their trade is supplied
to them, they have to give an account of the way in
which it is expended.
It is not an easy matter to be a good trader, and


some who go to the South Sea Islands are not at
all fitted for the post. It requires a man to have a
cool judgment and great tact in dealing with the
natives ; he also ought to know what to do, and at
the right moment, in the event of a dispute arising
whilst trading. The trader I visited at Matupi was
the first that had been able to stay on the island, two
others having been driven off, in fear for their lives:
but the one now there appears to have great
influence with the people, and to be liked as well
as feared.
That is the great secret in getting on well with
the natives, you must be feared as well as liked. If
you are liked only (as missionaries try to be), their
avarice gets the better of their liking, and they will
murder you on the very first opportunity, for the
sake of some small possession they covet. But if
they fear you as well, then they will not be very
likely to attack you, lest they should come to
harm themselves; and, liking you, will bring you
anything they have to sell.
Each trader as a rule has a boat, in which he goes
round to the villages to collect and buy copra, tortoise-
shell, &c., manned by a native crew, to each of whom
they pay a stick of tobacco a day, or a clay pipe.
The trader very often depends upon the chief to pro-
vide him with men, to whom he also pays something.
The boat is generally kept in a boathouse on the
beach, of native construction, to prevent the sun from
warping and cracking it.
The whole of the trader’s house and outbuildings


are surrounded by a palisade, made of strong bamboo
lashed together, and this is a “ trading establish-
ment ”as it exists in New Britain. Should I have
to refer to traders again, the reader will now
understand all about them.
From this house I could observe the volcano more
closely than before, as it seems to tower up just above
the island, though in reality it is quite a mile distant
from the base. The Grater is not very large, and
has several cavernous outlets, through which the
steam and smoke escape; not to any very large
extent in dry weather, but the volume is much
increased in the rainy season.
There appears to be a good deal of sulphur in the
crater, the nearest wall of which is broken away, so
that from Matupi one can see well into it. The
mountain itself appears to be formed of decayed
pumice-stone, partly overgrown with small bushes
and grass, and is, I should say, about one thousand
feet high.
There is good anchorage between the maitdand
and Matupi on this side, having the Mother
Mountain on a line with the centre of Matupi, and
about two and a half cables length from the island.
On leaving Matupi I determined to return to
Cxoonan by another route, longer, but very interest-
ing, I landed in the northernmost bight of Great
Harbour, on low, flat, marshy land, sparsely covered
with stunted trees ; the ground is thick with rotten
pumice, overgrown with grass.
Here I saw the New Britain quail, a small bird


about the size of a three weeks’ old chicken. It lies
very close in the grass, and when disturbed springs
up with a whirring noise not unlike a miniature
pheasant. The flight is short and quick, and the
bird affords good sport with the gun, and is very nice
eating, though you have to get a good many to make
a meal.
We ( i.e ., my guides and I) passed over about a
mile of this sort of country, and gradually ascended,
the trees becoming thicker and more stately as we
advanced, till at last we came to a steep ascent,
beautifully covered with palms, other trees, bananas,
and dracoenas, all growing in wild luxuriance.
We walked over the low range that extends from
the noble Mother to her scarcely less stately North
Daughter ; then rapidly descending, passed through
a smooth though sloping tract of land, which was so
hollow that it sounded like walking on the roof of a
house, and is quite hot from the subterraneous fires,
though, strange to say, grass and other herbs grow
here quite luxuriantly. I must say I should not
care to live in this place, for even walking on it
makes one feel nervous, lest it should give way and
you should be precipitated into the abyss.
We came, after crossing this volcano trap, on to
the beach, and on walking along it a short distance
southward reached Nodup. This village is situated
just under the Mother on the north side. The
name of the chief of Nodup is Torrortooroo, and a
very fine man he is. At one time he was a bitter
enemy to the white men; but being gifted with


common sense above that of his countrymen, he
found it was the best policy to be friendly with them,
and if possible to help the whites in any quarrel
with the natives of his districts or with other tribes.
Thus he has become a very powerful chief, and is
a firm supporter of the white men. In the course
of conversation he said to me, “ One time I did not
know what the white man was. I thought he was
the devil, and I did not want him in my country.
But now I know if I kill one white man, ten more
will jump up and kill me. The white man has
plenty of guns, plenty of ball and powder. Why
should I fight against him ? He is my friend, and I
am his; he has big ships, guns, powder, ball, and
beads, and everything my countrymen want; why
should I drive him away and hurt myself ? ” This is
a literal translation of what he said. I told him in
reply that I should tell my countrymen what he said,
and that I felt sure that any of them that came in
this direction would be glad to meet so good a friend.
I then asked him about a house, and where he
thought would be the best place for going inland,
and he recommended Kininigunun as most suitable.
He provided canoes for our return to Gloonan, which
we safely accomplished in the evening, taking the
pigs with us; Aleck staying behind with his father
and mother, relating, no doubt, wonderful stories of
how the white men live, &c.
A few days after he came off with another lad who
had hurt his arm. Aleck, it appears, had bought
a gun in Sydney with some of the money I had
41
TORRORTOOROO'S FRIENDLINESS.


given him; he loaded this gun to shoot at a pigeon,
but did not, however, discharge it, lying down to
sleep instead. His brother saw another bird, loaded
the gun again, but did not fire, and left the double-
loaded gun lying by Aleck; then this other man
came up, and, loading the gun a third time, fired;
the result can be imagined; the gun burst, and
the man was badly wounded in the arm: he was
lucky to escape with so light an injury.
I doctored up his arm for him, for which he
wanted to pay me in native money. I did not of
course wish to take it, but Aleck told me I had
better do so, as there is an idea amongst these
people that if they do not pay they do not get
well. What a pity for our medical profession that
the same superstition is not more prevalent amongst
us !


CHAPTER III.
Duke of York Island—Visit Mr. Brown—Lotu and the chief —Adventure
at Utuan Island—Messrs. Godefroy and Son’s head station —Weira —
Custom of inhabitants of Port Hunter—“Buckwar” —“Dewarra”—
Eight wives—“King Dick”—Human joints —Tora-good—Law of
succession—The Duk-duk —Supposed origin of the Duk-duk —Wind-
makers—Dances—The “Toberran” dance—Musical instruments —
Ornaments—Fishing—Fruits—Taro—Tan—Papaw.
From G-oonan we sailed to Duke of York Island,
where I heard there was now a mission-station
erected, with a missionary of the name of Brown
at the head of it. We were carried a good deal
N. by the current after leaving Cape Stephens,
but getting under the lee of Duke of York Island,
we found that by making short tacks we could work
up very well indeed, and I am inclined to think there
must be an eddy-current setting back towards Duke
of York Island; we anchored in Makada Harbour,
off Makada Island. Duke of York Island is about
five miles in length E. and W., by three and a half
miles N. and S., and Makada Island lies to the
extreme north of Duke of York, with two more
small islands, Myet Islands, again to the eastward.
These three, with the northern coast of Duke of
York, form Makada Harbour, better known to
traders as Ferguson’s Harbour.
This is a pretty fair harbour during the S.E.
monsoon, but it cannot be considered first-rate,
43


owing to the very strong currents that sweep
through the narrow channels between the islands,
and the inferior holding ground, which is mostly
white, shifting sand, with a varying depth of water
from three to ten fathoms.
We here had a visit from the trader in charge
of Hernsheim and Co.’s station, Mr. Blohm, who
thought that we were a schooner he expected. After
we had returned his visit and seen his station, which
is really a very fine collection of buildings (though
in an unhealthy place), we landed on Duke of York
Island, and crossed the very narrow spit of land
(about two hundred yards) which divides Makada
Harbour from Port Hunter.
This is a beautiful little bay, surrounded by white
beach, with cocoa-nut trees thrusting their long
stems over the still blue water, and there is a cluster
of houses in the bight at Mowlott, with dense bush
behind. The land rises on each side of the hay to
the height of about one hundred feet, covered with
many-hued plants and creepers, flitting over which
are the brightly-coloured birds and butterflies. This,
with the tropical blue sky above all, forms one of
those lovely visions that are retained by the mind
all one’s life.
The ground rises all the way to Mr. Brown’s
house, which is situated at the summit of the hill, on
the north side of the bay, overlooking that portion
of St. George’s Channel which lies between Duke of
York and New Ireland, the side of the hill facing the
channel dropping sheer down to the sea one hundred


feet or more. We found Mr. Brown at home, who,
with his good lady, made us welcome to a meal of
somewhat native fare, though there was that which
we had not tasted since leaving Australia, a good
loaf of bread.
He asked us for all the news of the civilised
world, which of course is like another world to him
here, as he can only get news when some mission
vessel arrives (the great event), once a year. Mr.
Brown has employed his spare time in making a
very fine collection of birds from Duke of York
Island, New Britain, and New Ireland; he has
also some few beetles and butterflies, but not many.
Port Hunter was first visited by Captain Hunter,
a whaler ; he was also, I believe, the first to find out
that New Britain and New Ireland were separate
islands, for it was before supposed that St. George’s
Channel was only a deep bay, and indeed it very
much presents this appearance from the southward
as you come up the channel.
There was a whaling station formed here for pre-
paring the oil for shipment, and the look-out place
was on nearly the same spot as that on which
Mr. Brown’s new house is to be built, a little higher
up the hill than the site of his present residence.
A trading station too was started afterwards, but
■was burnt by the natives, who had quarrelled with
the trader.
The mission had been there three years at the
time of my visit, and I cannot speak very favourably
of the progress it had made, though it was from no


want of zeal on the part of the missionaries them-
selves, but rather from lack of sympathy in the
natives, who do not appear to take much interest in
learning anything, except perhaps a new dance.
The first two or three times “ lotu” or religions service
is held at any fresh place, members come down to
see what it is like ; after that they seem to get tired
of it, and stay away. I asked an old chief one day
if he had been to lotu, and how he liked it. “ Well,”
said he very seriously, “ I went to sleep, but it was not
at all comfortable. I don’t think I shall go again.”
Going to sleep in church, however, is not peculiar to
savages ! Ido not think there are ten real converts
amongst the Duke of York natives.
From Makada Harbour we sailed S.W. for the
northern entrance of Mioko Harbour, which is said
to be a very fine one; it is really very convenient,
having one entrance bearing N.W. and another 3.E.,
which enables a vessel to make use of it in either
monsoon to come in and go out with a fair wind.
On leaving Makada Harbour the first headland you
pass is Peninsular Point, a curious little hillock
jutting out into the water by itself, with only a low
neck of sand joining it to the mainland ; the next
being Eukukuroo Point, then a straight piece of coast,
with shallow water extending some distance from it,
belted with cocoa-nut trees, and every here and there
a native house. Eukukuroo Point is the next,
rising suddenly from the sea with a nasty reef lying
off it, about B. three-quarters, S. one mile, with also
another reef, to the northward of it again, about


half a mile, bearing from Eukukuroo Point E.
by N.
Foul Bay is a wide one full of patches and rocks;
and then you get to the northern entrance to Mioko
Harbour, which is between TJlu Island and a small
but somewhat elevated island off the coast of Duke
of York.
There are no inhabitants in Hlu Island, but
there are a large quantity of wild pigs on it; the
small island on the other side is also uninhabited
but is used as a sort of half-way house for canoes
going to and from Makada, Port Hunter, &c.
Next to Hlu Island lies Utuan Island—this is spelt
Outan on the Admiralty charts ; why, I do not know,
as Outan can never sound like U-t-u-a-n ; indeed, I
am not at all sure it should not be spelt Utuwcm, so
very pronounced is the an. I think particular care
should be taken to get the native names as nearly
correct as possible, as it is of great assistance in
communicating with the natives, and saves much
trouble in other ways ; no native, I feel sure, would
understand the name of Outan, as they are not quick
at understanding roughly pronounced words.
The natives of this island are troublesome and
dangerous. On one occasion, having to do some
repairs to my vessel, I grounded her on the sand-spit
lying to the eastern extremity of Utuan, and wanting
a piece of land for my work on shore, I sent for the
chief and bought about an acre with a house on it
just opposite where the vessel lay.
I then told him that if the things I brought on


shore were left alone, and not tampered with by
the natives, that I would return him the land, and
give him a present. This seemed to satisfy him
thoroughly, and he promised that it should be all
right, and that he would taboo the ground, that is,
he would not allow any one to come on except those
I required to help me. This went on very well for
a short time, but at last I began to miss small
things, and one morning H came to me and told
me that during the night some of the natives had cut
the bellows of the forge through at the nozzle.
This of course was irreparable, and foolishly I went
on shore by myself to see about it.
I found the chief not far off, and I said to him,
“ One of your people has broken my bellows, you
must make him pay for it ” (this is the native custom
to pay in shell money (dewarra) for any mischief
they may do, even to killing a man). He answered
me in that impudent manner the natives know so
well how to assume : “Ido not know anything about
it, and I do not mean that any one shall pay for it.”
I answered, “ You will find out who did it, and they
shall pay for it. I came on your land by your own
consent; I have given you presents, and your men
have stolen from me and I have not spoken; now I
mean to have payment for this.”
As I spoke I looked round, and found about fifty
armed men coming out of the bush behind me.
Hallo ! thought I, this looks like fighting; so I began
to back down to the beacb, at the same time prepar-
ing a small revolver I had in my pocket. The old


chief meanwhile had taken a tomahawk and spear
from behind a tree, and made a rush for me, and as
he lifted his tomahawk to strike I fired full at his
breast, but the revolver missed fire, and I only saved
my skull by catching his arm as it fell, and giving
him a trip at the same time, which enabled me to
back away faster than he could follow me.
It was not safe to turn and run, as then I could
not see to ward off any spears they might throw;
but as the chief was making for me the second time,
one of the others threw a spear, which I avoided by
knocking it off with my hand; however, it pierced
it below the first finger. Then the chief made
another rush for me, and as he struck I fell back-
wards over the root of a tree. I tried then to fire
the revolver, and it would not work, but at that
moment I heard a rushing noise in the leaves and a
howl from the chief. My old dog Rover had him by
the leg, in which he made his teeth meet, but he did
not stop long enough to let the man get a blow at
him, and though the natives threw many spears,
they could not hit him; he was too quick for them.
Rover’s timely assistance enabled me to get down
to the beach and call H , who jumped ashore with
the muskets. The natives, however, had cleared off
into the bush, and I am glad to say we had no occa-
sion to use them. I sent then for Torrortooroo, who
came over wdth his canoes, and when they saw I
meant business they came to terms, and paid the fine,
one hundred fathoms of dewarra. Then I made the
chief a present, he made me one, and we were good
E


friends again. Since my return to England I hear
they have killed Mr. Klienschmit and two French-
men on this same island. Mr. Klienschmit was
a naturalist collecting for the museum of Messrs.
Grodefroy. However, I believe the natives received
a severe lesson for his murder. It was a narrow
escape for me, and taught me that it is unwise to go
alone unarmed amongst the natives ; they always
carry arms themselves, so will despise and take
advantage of any one without, especially in the case
of a quarrel.
My hand gave me much trouble for some time
afterwards, indeed I was almost afraid the spear
had been poisoned, but fortunately it was not.
They poison their spears by dipping them into
a putrefied dead body; and though this does not
last long on the spear it is very deadly while it
does.
You have now some idea of what these natives
are like ; it would have been a very bad thing to
have gone away and left the quarrel unsettled, as
they would have attributed it to cowardice, and told
other natives that they had driven me away. This
would have led to others attempting the same thing
elsewhere; and this is also why it is so difficult to
wait for the coming of a man-of-war or other
authority to arbitrate.
The next island to Utuan eastward is Mioko,
after which the harbour is named; on it is the
head station of Messrs. Grodefroy and Sons for these
islands. It is a curious-looking island, in shape
50
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


something like the dried tongues one sees in grocers’
shops ; there is a little cove or creek running up
into the bush with water deep enough for small
vessels to anchor in if they wish to be sheltered
from the wind. On this island Mr. Klienschmit
and his wife had their house; the natives are
friendly and thoroughly accustomed to white men.
Mioko Harbour is really a very good sheltered
harbour, with fine anchorage and holding ground,
the only disadvantage being a nasty piece of foul
ground in the centre, with rocks showing at low
springs •, the rise and fall is about three feet, but
it greatly depends on the strength of the wind.
On the coast of Duke of York, and immediately
before coming to the eastern entrance of the
harbour, is a creek running a considerable distance
inland, on one side of which fresh water is obtain-
able. The eastern entrance to the harbour is
between Mioko and a small rocky island that is
nearly steep to, therefore on going out or coming in
keep the small island well aboard, for there is shoal
water on the Mioko side.
To the south of Mioko Harbour lies another
small one enclosed by the islands Kerawara and
Kubokonilik, and the reefs attached to them ; it
affords good shelter for small vessels. On leaving
Mioko we coasted along Duke of York Island,
and when off Weira Point a canoe came out with
the chief of that place in it, Lip-lip by name, who
wanted to sell some tortoise-shell.
He is a great rogue and an inveterate cannibal,
e 2
51
LIP-LIP.


though he denies it most determinedly, as do all the
natives of Duke of York who have had sufficient
intercourse with white men to know that the latter
do not approve of cannibalism.
The people of Weira are great travellers, going
long distances in their canoes, which are different
from the small coasting ones, having no outrigger
and being built much in the shape of a whale-boat,
sharp at both ends. The planks are all lashed
together and on to the ribs, and the lower part is
hewn out of a single piece of wood, into which the
ribs are fixed and lashed to keep them in.
All the seams and crevices of any kind are filled
with the kernel of a nut, grated very fine and
pressed into the holes. This in time gets quite hard,
indeed it is easier to break the wood than wrench a
joint apart.
The canoes are very neatly made, and I think the
natives must have learnt the art of building them
from the Solomon islanders, for the canoes much
resemble those made by the latter people. Some
whites have told me that the idea was taken from
the whalers’ boats, but I feel sure this is not the case,
as these natives are not at all inventive out of their
own groove.
After leaving Weira Point we reached Port
Hunter, where we anchored.
The natives of the Duke of York group appear to
be a mixture of the inhabitants of New Britain
and New Ireland. I fancy at some former date a
tribe from New Britain must have been driven off


To face page 53.
VILAGE DUCK OF YOUR ISLAND.




the mainland (probably from Birara) and colonised
the Duke of York group, beginning at the southern-
most end, where they appear to be the original
inhabitants, and still hold intercourse with Birara.
Then it is probable that they went over to New
Ireland to trade for provisions, and eventually
bought wives there ; this I imagine to be the case, as
the Duke of York language more closely resembles
that of Birara than that of New Ireland, though the
New Ireland natives seem to understand Duke of
York dialect, unlike as it is to their own language.
When speaking of New Ireland I of course refer t(
that part immediately opposite Duke of York group
In parts of this group, too, the women have a custom
of covering the loins, which custom only belongs to
New Ireland, seeming to point to the fact that the
women must have come from thence and continue
the same practice ; the men go entirely naked.
I cannot say that I found much more intelligence
amongst these natives than in'either of the other
islands, and though Mr. Brown has chosen it as his
head mission-station, it was probably more for its
central position than from any intellectual supe-
riority in the natives. The men are very well-
built, sturdy fellows, of medium height (about
5 ft. 8 in.) and dark skinned, though by no means
black, the skin of a healthy native having a rich
copper tinge. They do not allow their hair to grow
to any great length (as in New Guinea) ; it is in-
clined to be woolly, though not so much so as that of
an African.


A practice prevails among them of covering the
hair with lime, which turns it a light tawny red; I
never remember having seen a bald man or woman
unless they were shaved, which is sometimes the
case when in mourning for a relative, and the head
is then blackened with charcoal and oil, or some-
times for sanitary reasons.
The women when young are well-made and
upright, but as they grow older get, from the im-
mense burdens they carry, an unnatural stoop, which
they afterwards retain, whether carrying or not;
they also age very quickly, which may be partly the
effect of the climate, but perhaps is more from the
ill-treatment they receive at the hands of the men,
who look upon them as quite inferior beings, only
existing for their pleasure and profit. The women
work in the yam patches to prepare them for
planting, they turn up the ground with sharp sticks,
and burn all the grass and weeds, they then plant in
the tubers which, when grown, the men condescend
to get up.
Women also do most of the marketing, the men
as a rule only accepting the payment.
There is a very disagreeable skin disease amongst
these natives, which indeed prevails all over the
islands ; it is called “ Buckwar,” and attacks a great
number ; it consists in a peeling off of the skin,
sometimes all over the body, sometimes in one part
only, and appears to be hereditary, though in the
young children it does not show until they are about
three or four years old; and those who have it do


not seem to be inconvenienced in any way, except
that they are continually scratching. The natives
attribute it to inoculation from a poisonous plant
that grows in the bush, but Mr. Brown told me
that he had treated it with partial success by
giving sulphur and rubbing flour of sulphur on
to the parts affected, This would give one the idea
that it was a kind of scabies, though in my own
mind I connect it with the total absence of salt in
their food. It does not appear to be catching to
white men, and though whites have said to me that
they have caught it, the sores on examination did
not appear to be the same thing, but were brought
on by eating too much pork and by the heat of the
climate.
Moreover, these sores soon disappear from the
white man’s skin, whereas the natives never lose
them, the only partial recovery even being that
mentioned by Mr. Brown.
The native money in New Britain consists of
small cowrie shells strung on strips of cane, which
in Duke of York is called “ dewarra.” It is
measured in lengths, the first length being from
hand to hand across the chest with the arms ex-
tended ; second length from the centre of the breast
to the hand, one arm extended, and the third from
the shoulder to the tip of the fingers along the
arm; fourth, from the elbow to the tip of the
fingers; fifth, from the wrist to the tip of the fingers ;
and the sixth, finger lengths. Fish are generally
bought by their length in dewarra unless they


are too small. A large pig will cost from thirty
to forty lengths of the first measure, and a small
one ten.
The dewarra is made up for convenience into
coils of one hundred fathoms or first lengths; some-
times as many as six hundred fathoms are coiled
together, but not often, as it would be too bulky to
remove quickly in case of an invasion or war, when
the women carry it away to hide ; these coils are
very neatly covered with wicker work, like the
bottom of our cane chairs. If asked where the shells
came from the natives will tell you that they do not
know; but several of the chiefs do, and it is from a
place called Nukani, a considerable distance down
the north-west coast.
The shells are buried in the earth to bleach them,
after which they are tapped with a stone on the top,
which breaks a small hole; they are then strung on
strips of cane; this last process is, I believe, done by
the chiefs alone.
The measurement of the shell-money is the same
in New Britain as here, though it is called by
another name (taboo). At Mioko and Utuan they
use another kind of money as well as this, the other
being made of a little bivalve shell, through which
they bore a hole and string it on pieces of native-
made twine; it is also chipped all round till it is
about a quarter of an inch in diameter, and then
smoothed down into even discs with sand and
pumice-stone. This is of no use in Duke of York
Island, but is eagerly asked for in Birara (another


connecting-link between the south of Duke of York
and that district of New Britain).
The arms the natives carry are nearly all imported
from New Britain or New Ireland. They used to
have the stone tomahawk before the white man’s iron
“ trade ” tomahawks became so plentiful; this they
fix on to a long handle (about four feet long) with
carved ornaments at the end, and below the blade
on the handle they cut notches to signify the number
of men they each have killed. Polygamy prevails
here, and any man that has much dewarra can have
as many wives as he feels inclined to purchase. The
most I ever saw was eight, I think, and the man
seemed to have a great difficulty in managing them.
The only w r ay he did so was by the aid of a big stick,
which he used pretty freely, judging by the screams
that were frequently heard when near enough to his
enclosure.
There are several chiefs to Duke of York, the
greatest, that is to say the most powerful, is Tor
Poulo; he is king of the greater part of Duke of
York, and he also has possessions in New Britain
and New Ireland. This chief goes amongst the
whites by the name of “ King Dick.”
I shall never forget his coming on board the
first time; he came off in a small canoe paddled by
two of his wives. IT said to me, “ Who in
the world is this gentleman ? ” He had on a stove-
pipe hat, somewhat the worse for several crushings,
and a red flannel shirt.
He happened also to be in mourning for one of his


wives, and was therefore blackened with charcoal
and oil all over his face and head.
When he came alongside, H asked him what
he wanted. “I am King Dick,” he said, coming
on board. “ Where is the captain of this vessel ? ”
(he spoke really very good English). When I was
pointed out to him as the captain, he came aft to me,
and again introduced himself with so much real
hauteur and grace that, in spite of his ridiculous
appearance, I could not help admiring him.
But the spell was soon broken, when he began to
beg for tobacco and pipes, in fact anything he saw
that pleased him; we became very good friends, and
I always had a friendly reception from him when I
paid him a visit on shore.
But he was a very crafty, subtle, and in fact
one of the best of native statesmen; indeed he
would hardly have held his large possessions
against his numerous enemies had he not been
what he was.
Next in importance is Tora-good (I forget his
native name), which is a corruption of thorough-
good, the name given him by whites.
His country is Eukukuroo, and extends for a
considerable distance inland; he is a terrible old
cannibal. I have myself seen the disjointed limbs of
a man hanging near his house on a tree that is
tabooed for that purpose.
Mr. Brown went to him one day to expostulate
with him on having a body hanging up near his
house, to be sold in joints; and he answered by


saying, “ What can I do ? that man helped to eat
my mother ! ”
He knows that cannibalism is abhorrent to white
men, so is ashamed to speak to one of them about it.
The practice once having been started, I suppose it is
almost impossible for these poor creatures to give it
up, so great is their desire for human flesh, and
cannibalism has existed in these islands no one knows
how long.
They prefer taking their victims alive in order
to torture them. One poor fellow was taken so from
a small village situated inland (in Duke of York
Island) that had been attacked; he managed to
escape, but was unfortunately caught again ; they
then cut off his feet, burning the stumps of his legs
to prevent his bleeding to death, and so took him to
the place where they intended to eat him; happily
the poor fellow died before they could torture him
any further.
This was not done by Tora-good, though I cannot
say he has not done something of the same sort; yet
this man, when first I visited him, was fondling one
of his children in his arms and two more were play-
ing about his knees, a perfect picture of domestic
happiness. He called to his wife to bring out mats
for me to sit on, and then came the inevitable betel-
nut ; after which he talked to me in such a fond
parental manner about his children that I found it
hard to believe that such a man could be guilty of
the awful crime of cannibalism.
He made me a present of a fine pig, and I gave


him some red cloth and beads for his wives and
children, and a knife, a tomahawk, and tobacco and
pipes for himself; he took me to see some dewarra
he had just been paid by another district, to prevent
his going l to war with them, about four hundred
fathoms. When he began to talk about fighting his
whole manner changed so completely that he no
longer seemed to be the same man ; the wild beast
look came into his eyes, which I have always noticed
when the natives only speak of such things; but alas !
what can one expect of men who devour each other
like wild animals ?
The next chief in importance is Lip-lip, chief of
Weira; he is an old man and a big villain, not to
be trusted, though he pretends to be a great friend
of the white man; and after him Warroowarrum,
who is King Dick’s brother, and chief of Port
Hunter and the Tobaran canoe.
King Dick is chief of the Duk-duk, from which
he gains much of his power, both of which things,
the Tobaran canoe and the Duk-duk, I will describe
later on. There are many other minor chiefs in
Duke of York, but they are in reality subject to the
greater ones.
On the death of one of the chiefs the eldest
nephew on the sister’s side always succeeds his
uncle, as they remark with some sense, “ that a man
may always know who his mother is, but not always
his father.” So should the eldest sister not have any
children, the eldest son of the second sister succeeds,
and so on.
60
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


Should there be no descendant at all, the people of
that district elect a new chief, generally choosing an
individual for his wealth, as that constitutes the
sinews of war. and they choose the one who can pay
them best for fighting.
The Duk-duk, of which Tor Poulo is chief, may
be spoken of as the administration of law, being
THE DUK-DUK.
judge, policeman, and hangman all in one, as he
settles-all disputes and punishes all offenders.
This mysterious power is in reality one man,
appointed by the chief, and who is dressed in leaves,
which cover his body to below the waist; he wears a
large helmet, coming completely over the face and


resting on the shoulders, in shape like an extin-
guisher.
This is made of net-work, so that he can both
breathe and see without being seen ; it is painted to
represent a hideous face. This strange figure travels
through the bush visiting each village, and if any
man has received wrong at the hands of his neigh-
bour he pays the Duk-duk so much dewarra to
settle the question. This functionary then goes off
to the aggressor’s house, and demands restitution of
the stolen goods, or payment for the harm done,
which if the person accused does not pay, or restore
at once, the Duk-duk sets fire to his house, or in
some extreme cases spears the offender. Women
and children are not allowed to look at the Duk-
duk, or they will die. This superstition is so strong
amongst them that they will run away and hide
themselves as soon as they hear him coming, which
they know by a peculiar shrieking noise he makes
as he goes along.
When the young men are old enough they are
admitted into the secret, on payment of about one
hundred fathoms of dewarra, which if they cannot
pay they must always keep out of his way.
At stated periods the Duk-duk goes his rounds,
and afterwards there is a big feast and a dance, at
which all the initiated attend; and there is much
dancing and dressing up in flowers and fern leaves
on the occasion.
There is sometimes more than one Duk-duk if
the chief can afford it; no man is allowed to lift his


hand against him, bnt must submit to everything the
Duk-duk does, if not his life is not worth a day’s pur-
chase, as the chief of that Duk-duk’s district will find a
method of putting the offender quietly out of the way.
The secrets of the Duk-duk are not allowed to
be spoken of outside the “ taboo-ground,” where he
is supposed to live; and no one who is not initiated
is allowed on that ground under a penalty of a heavy
fine, or, if this be not paid, of death.
A case occurred at Rukukuroo where a young man
was driven, through stress of weather, in his canoe
on to the taboo-ground, and it happened that the
Duk-duk was holding, or just about to hold, a feast.
The young man was seized and carried to the Duk-
duk who tomahawked him on the spot, and served
his body as part of the feast in course of preparation.
Of course no one outside the Duk-duk Society
ever knew what had become of the poor fellow.
The Duk-duk is both a curse and a blessing of
his people ; he certainly keeps order and makes the
natives afraid to commit any flagrant act of felony,
but at the same time it encourages cannibalism and
terrorism.
There are secret signs between the initiated by
which they know each other from outsiders. It is
curious how widely distributed is this Duk-duk
system in the north peninsula of New Britain; it is
in nearly every district, also in New Ireland, from
the west coast lying south of the Rossel Mountains
to Cape St. George, and how far it may spread on
the other side 1 cannot say.


Duke of York Island is the stronghold of the
system, and I fancy it originated there, though there
are good arguments in favour of Birara, Tor Poulo
says it began in Duke of York, but then he is chief
of that place ; and though he might know, he lives in
that group, and I find these natives always inclined
to boast about the place they live in (this is not only
peculiar to savages !), therefore his statement must
be taken cum grano sails.
The evidence in favour of Birara’s being the
original place in which the system started, is borne
out by a legend told me by a very intelligent young
man, who was himself a native of Duke of York,
which strengthens my belief in his story.
He said : “ A great many seasons ago (monsoons)
there was a young man quarrelled with his father and
all his family, and started off by himself into the bush.
Having nothing to eat he became very hungry, and
at last hit upon a plan to get flesh to eat.
“He made a large head-dress out of cane, and
painted it with the juice of the betel-nut, and made
eyes on it like the raorroop’s (cassowary’s). He then
dressed himself up in leaves so that his hands were
hidden, and yet he could use them at pleasure, took
a club and wandered off through the bush, making a
noise as he went to frighten people.
“In this way he surprised many young boys and
girls, whom he killed, and carried their bodies away
to eat them.
“At last it got so bad, and every one was so
terrified, that the father of the young man, who was


a great fighting chief, determined to go out and
conquer this monster.
“He overcame the Duk-duk in a struggle, and
the latter was thrown to the ground; he then called
out that he was the chiefs son, and that if his father
would spare him he would show him how to become
powerful and get much dewarra.
“ So the chief spared his life, and the monster that
had frightened and killed so many became subject to
his conqueror.
“ He thenceforth lived by himself in a tabooed
house, and every one was afraid to go near the
place.
“ If any one was rash enough to injure or disobey
the chief, the I)uk-duk would visit them with
vengeance, and make them repent their temerity.
“ The real secret of the people’s terror rested
in their not knowing what the Duk-duk was;
they attributed superhuman powers to it, and this
of course gave the Duk-duk great advantage,
especially in the event of his having to fight. The
women and children were ordered to keep out of the
way, as it would probably kill them if it met them in
the bush, and you may be sure they did not need
telling twice.
“ In course of time it was found necessary to let
others into the secret; they were always admitted
under an oath of secrecy, and so it spread from one
place to another.”
I think that the young native fully believed in the
truth of this story, and allowing some latitude for
F


the time that has occurred since the custom was
started, it is very likely that something of the kind
really did occur; but whether the site was Birara or
Duke of York it is impossible to state.
It seems to remind one of the “ Mumbo-Jumbo ”
of Africa; can it be possible that it is the remnant
of a tradition brought from the original birthplace
of these native tribes ?
In speaking of the habits of the Duke of York
natives and of the Duk-duk, one is reminded of
the curious custom they have of propitiating the
sea-god as it appears, though they do not in fact
acknowledge any power of the water, and make out
that the wind also is subservient to the wind-makers
or doctors. Therefore I have reluctantly been
obliged to put this curious and almost beautiful
custom down to a piece of swindling on the part of
the chief who inaugurates it, which is a great pity,
as so much might have been made out of it about
their worship.
One chief in each district (always the same man)
has a canoe built (I do not think any special time of
year is adhered to), and which is decorated with
carved wood, flowers, ferns, and scented herbs.
It is then placed in a house by itself, which is of
course tabooed, and no one may enter without
paying so much dewarra, which they place in the
canoe.
The chief (who is also a doctor) gives out that in
order to catch plenty of fish this season every one
must pay as much dewarra as possible into the


canoe, that he (this chief) may make the fish easy to
be caught.
This dewarra is supposed to be launched in the
canoe to pay the fishes for those they lose by being
caught; but the canoe is always carefully covered
up when launched, and in reality not one shell of
dewarra ever leaves the shore in that canoe, which
floats away with the monsoon and is lost sight of.
If a bad season follows, of course the chief puts it
down to there not being enough dewarra in the
canoe; hut not one native I have ever spoken to
believes in it; that is, they do not believe it brings
more fish; but they know it brings a feast and a
dance, and they will do almost anything to obtain
those.
So this custom, though still kept up, is not believed
in now, however much faith may have been put in
its efficacy formerly.
They have many dances in New Britain, and
any excuse is sufficient for a “ Malargen.” The
usual form of the dance is in two lines, like front
and rear rank, and the dancers are dressed up in
variegated leaves from the dracoena and other
plants, and they have ferns and flowers on their
heads and in their hands. The various kinds of
dances are too numerous to describe, but, as I have
said, they mostly consist of two lines of dancers
facing each other, who move their arms and legs in
very correct time to the music, then turn either to
the right or the left, and come round each other
different ways.
f 2


I am afraid that short description is difficult to
understand, but were I to attempt a fuller one I
should get hopelessly confused.
There is one dance, however, I must try and
describe —that is the “ Toberran,” which is arranged
by the same chief that has the management of the
fish canoe.
It occurs about once in two seasons at the full
moon, and is really a very impressive sight; and
the men and women who take part in it are all
picked dancers.
At about nine p.m. we were all seated round in a
large semicircle, the other side of the circle being
formed by heaps of firewood, all ready for lighting.
As yet there was no appearance of any performers,
but by-and-by the tom-toms commenced to play
very slowly, and the women, who were seated In
front as orchestra, began to sing a weird kind of
song, which I can only describe as a combined
wailing of cats and dogs, which gradually got
faster and faster. Presently one of the fires blazed
up, and we saw some sort of creatures creeping out
of the bush in all directions; they did indeed look
like devils, which the word “ Toberran ” signifies.
Some wore masks composed of skulls cut in half,
and filled in with gum to represent a human face ;
these are held between the teeth by a stick, fastened
across at the back of the mouth of the skull; on
their heads they wore long black wigs composed of
cocoa-nut fibre, and their bodies are covered with
dead leaves.


Some that had no masks had their faces painted
an unearthly green colour, and on their shoulders
were fastened a kind of wings (on closer inspection
I afterwards found these were actually fastened
through the loose skin in the side of the neck).
On came these unearthly figures, creeping from
the bush on every side, some with tails, some with
spikes all down their backs, all keeping step and
Front.
Back.
SKULL MASK, BLANCHE BAY, NEW BRITAIN.
beautiful time, no matter what position their bodies
were in.
Suddenly the tom-toms stopped, and all the
Toberrans rushed to the centre of the open space
with a fearful yell; then the music strikes up again,
and there begins a dance that defies all description;
heads there, arms here, legs one way, tails another,


and yet in perfect unison, for if there was an arm
one side there was a leg to correspond on the other.
The shrieks and yells grew louder, and the singing
became shouting; and as they dance, the fires are
lighted and blaze up, throwing a lurid light on one
TOM-TOM.
of the most hideous scenes it has ever been mj lot
to witness.
Demon faces showing here, toothless skulls there,
the air above them seeming full of arms smeared
with blood, and below legs apparently in the last
stages of mortification, and above all this a moon that
70
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


sends a fitful light through the overhanging trees,
whilst the huge fires alternately blazing up and
dying down casting strange shadows which suggest
things even more horrible than the frightful reality.
Indeed, however terribly' we might try to put a
“Dance of Death” on one of our stages, we could
never equal this in its diabolical and hideous effects.
The tom-toms I mentioned, or drums, are hollow
wooden cylinders, burnt out inside, in shape some-
what like two cones joined at the apex, covered at
one end with iguana skin tightly stretched. This
instrument is held under the arm or across the knee
and is beaten with the hand.
There is also a larger drum called “ garamoot,”
made of the trunk of a tree, hollowed out, I believe,
by dropping small red-hot stones continually into
the inside through a small slit on one side. The
cylinder is struck with a long stick just below this
slit, and produces a deep note that can be heard for
an immense distance in calm weather.
Drums of this latter kind are heavy, and therefore
are seldom moved from the dancing-ground, which
is generally an open space in front of a chiefs house,
and is kept swept and clean by women specially
appointed to look after it. The “ garamoot ”is also
used for alarm signals in case of war, when it is
struck so as to give a sharp quick sound, also for
calling the people together.
There is another kind of drum, composed of three
pieces of soft wood cut with a slight cavity on the
under side of each; these are laid across the knees


and beaten with two short sticks with heads to them,
something like our small drum-sticks.
PAN PIPES, NEW BRITAIN.
The other native musical instruments are a fife,
JEWS’ HARP, NEW BRITAIN.
made from a small piece of bamboo, on which they
72
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


can play three or four notes; pan-pipes, also made
of bamboo with seven pipes or more, and a jews’ harp
very cleverly constructed. It is a piece of bamboo
cut into a shape resembling a frond of the fern we
call “ hart’s tongue,” with a vibrator down the centre ;
it is played resting against the mouth in the same
manner as our jews’ harp is, except that the thumb
INSTRUMENT OF MUSIC.
of the left hand is always used. There is also a piece
of string passed tightly over the instrument from
the thick end, which is struck against the vibrator.
Another small instrument looks like a primitive
banjo; this consists of a large piece of bamboo, cut
through at the joint horizontally and also about four
inches above the joint, another small flat piece of
bamboo being fastened across the mouth, projecting


beyond the edge of the circular piece about three
inches ; thus very much resembling a banjo. There
are, however, only two strings made of a piece of the
outer bark of a cane that grows in these islands;
these are stretched tightly along the projecting piece
of bamboo, and fastened below on to the larger
portion by a wooden peg.
It is played with a small stick, struck sharply
against the strings, making two humming notes.
These instruments appear to be common to all these
islands, and are to be seen in any village, and in
almost every home, except the larger drums which
belong especially to the chiefs.
The ornaments of the Duke of York natives are
fewer and less used than in either New Britain or
New Ireland; they consist chiefly of dewarra shells
formed into necklets or placed round the head. The
ear-lobes are cut, and distended by inserting rolled
leaves of a springy nature, generally pandannas
leaves, which, constantly pressing against the sides of
the opening, enlarge it till in some cases it hangs
nearly to the shoulder. The nose is also pierced on
each side of the nostrils, and a small sharp-pointed
piece of wood inserted in each hole ; on the wood aie
sometimes threaded a few beads (when they have
them) ; more commonly there is only the wood,
which I was informed is to act as a “sight” for
throwing the spears, though I can scarcely think it
would help an European to do anything else but
squint.
Variegated leaves are tucked under the armlet,


which is made of plaited twine and dyed with
different coloured juices. These armlets are worn so
tight that they squeeze the arm out of shape, and in
many cases cannot be got off except hy cutting them
through ; if not so tight as this, however, they may
be moved by oiling and pressing the arm.
The men of the island of Duke of York, and in-
deed throughout the whole group, wear no clothes ;
but the women of Mioko, Utuan, and the South
Peninsula wear a small covering hanging in front
and behind, made of grass dyed bright red.
These natives fish with a rod, the hook being of
tortoise-shell, but they more often prefer going on to
the reefs with a small narrow net, which they spread
out with stakes, and then drive the fish into it,
where they become meshed.
They have also a net stretched on poles something
like a shrimping net, with which they catch the
shoals of small fish that at certain seasons visit these
shores in great numbers, and are delicious eating.
It is a curious and remarkable fact that there are
no cassowaries or white cockatoos to be found on
Duke of York Island, although in New Britain
there are a great many of the former birds and
thousands of the latter.
The only cockatoos in Duke of York are those that
have been brought over from New Britain, to which
place they always return if they make their escape.
I cannot discover any reason for this peculiar fact,
as there appears to he much the same kind of feed for
these birds on one island as on the other. The


cassowaries may all have been killed off Duke of
York Island, as it is more thickly populated than
New Britain ; but were this the case one would expect
to find them on New Ireland, but they are not to be
found there either.
Duke of York Island is only fourteen or fifteen
miles from New Britain at the furthest, and New
Ireland only thirty or so, a distance that could
easily be traversed by the cockatoos. I can there-
fore see no accountable reason for their non-existence.
The fruits on Duke of York Island consist of the
banana, cocoa-nut, tan, mummy-apple, and a kind of
wild mango. Yams and taro also grow on the
island, but sweet potatoes are the chief product, and
serve as one of the main articles of trade between
this and the other islands.
The bananas in some parts of Duke of York are
very fine, but the yams and taro are not to be com-
pared with those of New Britain, or the yams of New
Ireland, which are noted for their size; the taro of
New Britain is considered the finest in the South
Seas.
Perhaps all my readers do not know what taro
is ; I will therefore try and describe it. It is a large
bulbous tuber, with leaves of much the same shape
as the caladium, but I have never seen it in flower.
There are two different kinds, one of which grows
in swampy ground, the other on the hillside, the
latter being the largest and the best, as the swamp
taro is waxy to eat. It is planted in rows about one
pace apart, and kept clear of weeds by the women.
76
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


The hill taro grows to the size of fifteen inches long
by twelve inches in circumference, that is considered
a large one.
When cooked in only a small quantity of water,
the starch that exudes from it makes the water into a
thick paste, it therefore requires water to be added
continually; when cooked it is soft and mealy, and
one of the best vegetables I have ever eaten.
The native way of preparing it is even better than
boiling it; they first scrape off the rough outside
brown coating with a sharp shell, and after cutting
the taro in half lengthways, wrap it in banana
leaves and place it in a fire where it is not too hot.
When cooked it is very much like good new bread,
and is extremely nutritious. After taking the taro
out of the ground, the tuber is cut off, leaving about
one inch of it still adhering to the stalk and leaves;
this is replanted, and in about three months another
large tuber is ready for cutting.
The leaves are very astringent, and if eaten raw
will take the skin off the mouth, and render it very
sore for some days; but the young leaves cooked
with cocoa-nut milk make a very delicious dish.
Tan is a fruit which I do not suppose many
Europeans know anything about. It grows on very
high trees, whose wood, by the way, is beautifully
grained and very hard, though at the same time
nice to work. The fruit is shaped like an apple, and
grows in bunches as some apples do; but when ripe,
if you take one in your hand and press it, the skin
will come off entirely, and the inside is a beautiful


clear, jelly-like substance that melts into water in
your mouth.
This jelly surrounds a brown stone, of which the
natives make a sort of cake, after it has been soaked
for some days in salt water.
The papaw, or mummy-apple, has also some
curious facts connected with it, which are useful to
know. The young fruit, when boiled, makes a
delicious substitute for vegetable marrow; whilst
the stalks and leaves, if boiled with clothes, will
make them beautifully clean and white; the clothes
come out of the boiler a bright gamboge-yellow,
but when hung up in the air to dry, they turn
perfectly white again. Also a small piece of the
leaf or stalk boiled with an old fowl or a tough
piece of meat will make it quite tender.


CHAPTER IV.
NEW BRITAIN —KININIGUNUN.
Kininigunun—Build a house —Tor-Rarrabay—Native battle—Cruelty of
women—Marriages —Mode of carrying infants—Start for Mount Beau-
temps Beaupr é—Peculiarities of country —Horrible affair at Nucgunigu
—The talking man and butcher —Tor-Rarrabay wishes to return—He
decamps in the night—My cogitations—Pig-catching—My loneliness
—Want of water —Refreshing sleep—Buy cocoa-nuts from women—
Return to Kininigunun —Tor-Rarrabay’s astonishment at my return,
and excuse for leaving me.
We sailed from Duke of York for Kininigunun, in
order that I might build a house, which was to serve
as a depot for inland work. The first difficulty was
to decide in which part of this district to build, for
Kininigunun is a large one, and extends in a
W.N.W. direction from Gazelle Point to Eulunana
Point. It contains smaller districts within it, of
which Abercole is at the S.E. and Eulunana at the
N.W. ends, whilst the centre is Kininig-u-nun
proper, and it was here that I at last settled to
build.
I was greatly indebted to one of Mr. Brown’s
Fijian teachers for his assistance ; he worked for me
splendidly. I soon made arrangements with Tor-
Earrabay, one of the chiefs, for the purchase of a
very fine piece of land on the coast, close down to
the water in front, but extending a considerable way
79


into the bush at the back, and beyond again to a
small open plain covered with long grass, near
which lay one of the main tracks inland.
My house was a large one, sixty feet long by
twenty feet broad, and a good height; it was of
native material and roofed with long grass.
It was divided into four rooms, two sleeping-rooms,
a cupboard, and the rest for a general room. At the
back was the cooking-house and garden, the whole
being enclosed with a double fence of bamboo.
The natives were friendly and seemed anxious to
please, each one helping a little all round, though
they made a great noise over it; indeed, they seem
unable to do anything without making a great deal
of noise.
When everything was finished, we had a big feast
and a dance by way of house-warming; Tor-Rarra-
bay asked me if he should provide a human body for
the feast, upon which I told him in the strongest
terms I could command, never even to think of such
a thing again, as white men hated cannibalism, and
that I could not bear to think of him as one.
After this I never heard it mentioned again, so
pigs, yams, taro, bananas, &c., in profusion formed
our feast; and after the dancing, I served out tobacco
and pipes all round.
Our first journey inland was in order to see a
battle between the Kininigunun tribe and another
from the interior.
We went through the bush for about two or three
miles, amongst high trees and thick scrub, after
80
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


which we came upon more open ground, with
banana plantations, and here my guides began to
move more cautiously, as we were approaching the
fighting-ground.
Presently we heard the shouting of the com-
batants, and coming out into an open plain, found
the natives hard at work with their slings.
It was apparently only a skirmish, as the main
body of the opposing tribe were quite half a mile
oft; and only a few on each side were actually
engaged.
These slings they use are composed of oblong
pieces of bark, with two strings of about a yard in
length fastened to either end, on one of which is a
button of pearl-shell, in order that the sling may not
slip through their fingers. The stone rests in the
centre, on the oblong piece of bark.
They use these slings with great accuracy and
considerable force; indeed, I have seen a native
discharge a stone to the distance of two hundred and
fifty yards with sufficient force to break it against
another; but I believe it is more knack than strength
that is required to use them.
The natives engaged were running about in the
long grass, and dodging to escape the stones from
the enemies’ side.
As we were on high ground near the Kininigu-
Mn tribe, we could see all that was going on, and
observed that the natives who were fighting had
only their slings. This, I presume, was in order that
they might move more freely, and as they seldom
G


come close to the enemy, other weapons would have
been useless.
Whilst I was watching, Tor-Rarrabay (who, by
the way, is considered a great warrior) came up to me
and entreated me to go away, for fear I should get
hurt. As I could not see the smallest chance of it, I
told him that I was not more likely to get hurt than
he was, and that the white man never ran away
because there was fighting going on. He then
informed me that they were only waiting for one of
the other side to be hit with a stone, to attack with
the whole force (and the other side the same, I
presume).
Soon after he left me; I suppose this must have
happened, as a great shouting was raised by the
Kininigunun tribe, they beginning at the same time
the “ too-tooing ” noise they make when anything
exciting occurs, and a general rush forward of the
whole body was made to join the skirmishers, women
following with bundles of spears and stones for the
slings.
However, there was not much fighting done, as
the other side took to their heels and ran for the
bush. I heard afterwards that the conquerors
obtained two bodies, which of course were eaten,
though they took good care not to let me know where,
yet I heard it from a “ private source,” as we say.
Tor-Rarrabay was very boastful when I met him
afterwards about winning the battle, but I dashed
his ardour somewhat by saying, “if he called that
fighting I did not think much of it.” I then told


him about the white men's fighting ; upon which he
asked me what was done with all the bodies, hoping
evidently to make me confess that they were eaten ;
but when I told him they were buried, he turned
away, evidently in disgust at such a waste.
The war had been about some houses on the plain,
which had been burnt, the men murdered, and the
women carried off. It terminated in a tragedy
which occurred soon after the battle. Some young
men of the bush tribe came into Kininigunun district
to see if they could not pick up a stray man or
woman.
Instead of this they were themselves surrounded,
and being young and active, fought hard for their
lives, but were overpowered by numbers. A few of
them were taken alive; these of course were tortured,
one manner being to tie the victim’s hands and feet to
stakes in the ground, and place fire on his stomach.
This fiendish operation is done by the women, who
are far more cruel than the men, as a man will some-
times free the poor wretch from his pain by a spear
thrust, or a blow from a tomahawk, but the women
will laugh at and enjoy it, poking the sufferer with a
spear to rouse him up if he do not writhe and howl
enough to satisfy them.
The women generally accompany their husbands
to war, carrying their spears, stones, &c., and excite
them by their language; but as the women are
looked upon as little more than beasts of burden by
the men, how can one expect anything better ?
One of the chief’s spies told me that if he wished
G 2


to find anything particular he always listened behind
a tree to the women talking, and he was sure to find
out all he wished to know.
They have a saying in New Britain, “ Never trust
any secret to a woman, for their tongues are hung
with a double joint.”
Here it may be well to give some account of a
woman’s social position.
When a man intends to take a wife he tells his
father who it is (if he has no father he tells his
mother or the chief of the district). He then is sent
off into the bush, where he stays for some days, until
the father calls him back; the father and mother in
the meantime go to the girl’s relations, and after
making them presents say they will pay so much
dewarra for the girl.
There is a great deal of haggling over the price,
and the girl’s relations generally succeed in raising
it; when settled, the man’s father and mother go
home again. On the day fixed the young woman’s
relations go to the house of the man’s father and
mother, who have (if rich enough) invited all their
friends to meet them; the former give presents to
their host and there is a feast and a dance; also a
young women’s dance, in which the bride-elect is
supposed to take a leading part.
After all this festivity is over, the girl is left with
the young man’s parents, and he is called in from the
bush, that is to say, some one is sent to find him,
which is sometimes a difficult matter, as these young
men often go a long way, in order to escape from the


spirits of departed relations, who are said to exercise
a very bad influence at this time.
It is not an uncommon thing for the young man
never to return, having been killed by some hostile
tribe.
Marriages are often settled before the woman is
born; for instance, should a chief wish to marry
into any particular family, he buys the child when
there is a prospect of one being born. Should it be
a boy, the “ taboo ” is returned, but if a girl the
“ taboo” is retained by her family, and the girl
becomes the property, and ultimately the wife, of
the chief, though she lives with her parents until
a marriageable age—about ten years.
The woman at her marriage becomes completely
the property of the man, even to power over her
life, as for instance, a chief who lives on the shore of
Blanche Bay had purchased a young wife, who cried
and wished to go back to her friends, and would do
no work. Upon this her husband became angry,
and telling her that as she was no use as a wife he
would make use of her in another way, which he did
by immediately killing her and cooking her body for
a feast.
There was also a case here in Kininigunun, where
a man belonging to a bush tribe was surprised in the
bush with his wife, and taken prisoner by one of the
sub-chiefs and a few followers. They killed the man,
but the woman was taken to be one of the sub-chief s
wives; and the marriage-feast was the body of her
late husband.
85
MARRIAGE CUSTOMS.


The laws against intermarriage are very strict:
there are in every tribe two distinct parties between
whom only is marriage allowed; generally the men
bny women from foreign tribes, having found, no
doubt, as we have done, that intermarriage weakens
the race.
The chief of the tribe must be asked for his per-
mission before marriage can be contracted. Should
a young man who is unable to purchase a wife be
desirous of doing so, he goes to his chief and asks
him to buy one for him. If the chief knows that
the young man is likely to be able to pay him back
either in dewarra, work, or fighting, he will purchase
the wife for him, and also make a feast on the
occasion, but the chiefs are careful to see first that
there is a likelihood of their being repaid in some
way.
The women carry their babies in net-work bags,
the band or strap of which comes round the forehead,
and the child in the bag rests on their shoulder-
blades, and in travelling to market or elsewhere,
should the child require suckling, they do it over
the shoulder.
They will also carry two or three cocoa-nut mat
bags full of merchandise on their back, as well as the
baby; this gives them a stooping gait, and makes
them always walk in a double-up manner, even when
not carrying anything.
Women also suffer from the skin disease “ Buck-
war ”in common with the men; it appears to turn
the skin a lighter colour than when it is healthy.
86
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


My second long journey inland was taken with the
intention of reaching Mount Beautemps Beaupre,
which is situated about thirty miles from the coast,
and is a high volcanic peak of about one thousand
eight hundred feet, and would have been a grand
place for observation on the contour of the sur-
rounding country.
Having obtained as guides Tor-Earrabay and
several other natives, we made all preparations for
staying away four days. Tor-Earrabay told me he
had never been so far inland, but boasted he was not
afraid to go anywhere.
So we set off, going along the tracks in Indian
file, I myself bringing up the rear.
In front of me was a young man carrying my
observing instruments and ammunition, next to him
came Tor-Earrabay in full dress, with spear and toma-
hawk, in front of him other natives with provisions,
&c., and the guides leading the way.
We took a general course of S.W. by W., which
brought us to a more northerly part of the plain, on
which the fight I have previously described took
place.
I here noticed a most peculiar feature of the land,
namely, a natural wall, composed mostly of decayed
pumice-stone, which rose about twelve feet from the
level on which we stood. It appeared as though the
land where we were standing must have suddenly
sunk and left this wall, which extended for several
miles.
The land on the other side was level with the top


of the wall, but on ours it was perpendicular, cut as
smoothly as if by the hand of man.
The natives did not seem to recognise it as any-
thing strange, but then they have no knowledge of
other lands, and can only know of what is in their
own small range of travel.
After passing over the plain, which was in some
places covered with high grass, and in others was
bare, where the grass had been burnt away, we
again entered a thin belt of dense scrub, so thick in
some places that we were obliged to cut our way
with tomahawks and knives.
This extended for half-a-mile, when we again
emerged on to a beautiful grassy table-land. We
were now about six hundred feet above the sea,
which was just visible in the distance, with New
Ireland showing far beyond.
We had come about twelve miles, and decided
to camp a little further on, where there was fresh
water, and a slight scrub for firewood. It ap-
peared to me whilst in conversation with Tor-Rarra-
bay that he did not appear quite so brave and
boastful about getting to the mountain as he had
done when we started, for he began to tell me
all the stories he could think of about “ devils ” in
that part of the country, and how people who
had gone towards the mountain had never returned,
&c., &c.!
However, I determined not to take any notice, and
answered, “ Oh, yes, but we are not afraid to go any-
where.” This seemed to remind him of his talk in


Kininigunun, and he replied, “ Oh, no,” though
somewhat doubtfully.
Next morning we started off again towards a
village belonging to a tribe at peace with Tor-Earra-
bay. We kept on over the grassy tableland, that
seemed to extend on both sides as far as I could see,
until about eight o’clock a.m.; we then came to the
village, which was prettily situated on a rising knoll
and surrounded with cocoa-nut trees.
We stopped in the open place in front of the
chiefs house, and received a very hearty welcome
from him; he was an elderly man of about fifty, I
should say.
Tor-Rarrabay introduced me with a great flourish,
and explained that I was living with him—a little
stroke of policy on his part, meant to show that he
was powerful enough to have a white man living in
his village. He told this chief of a hundred different
qualities of mine, of which had I possessed but the
half I should have been far away the cleverest man
in the world; of course this was one for me and half-
a-dozen for himself.
The chief of “ Nucgunigu,” as this place appeared
to be called, was determined to display his hospitality
to the new arrivals, and so our coming was the
occasion of a murder so horrible that I can never get
the sight of it out of my mind. After the betel-nut
had been duly discussed, our host said something to
Tor-Rarrabay that I could not understand, and the
old villain must have given his consent, or this would
never have occurred whilst I was there, at all events.


Presently I saw two men lead forward another man
who had his hands tied behind him.
Never having seen anything of the kind before, I
did not in the least know what was going to happen.
They led the prisoner up to the chief, and made him
sit down in front of him, and they all looked so
pleasant and friendly one would never have sus-
pected anything fearful was going to take place.
The prisoner had his back to a dead tree, which I
noticed was painted in red and white stripes, and
had a number of pigs’ jawbones hung about it; it also
had a kind of signal halyards, made of cane, sus-
pended from the topmost branch ; this was presently
taken round and made fast to the other side of the
tree. The chief now began to ask the man questions,
some of which I could understand, such as : “ Have
you any father and mother ? ” Then followed others;
and then, “ Will you eat or drink ? ” was the last I
understood.
Upon this a woman brought him a cocoa-nut,
which she held to his mouth whilst he drank from
it.
I asked Tor-Rarrabay what was going to happen,
but all he would say was, “ You will see.” Presently
some young men went to the hack of the tree, and
one of them, quick as lightning, slipped the end of
a noose round the prisoner’s neck, and the men
behind the tree began to hoist.
I knew that Tor-Rarrabay was watching me very
closely to see the effect it had upon me, so it behove
me to be very careful.
90
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


“Tell the chief,” said I, “that if he will sell me
that man alive I will give him six tomahawks and
as much red cloth and beads as ona man can carry.”
But Tor-Earrabay answered, “ What is the use ? I
will sell you a man for that, and you would only
offend this chief, and —we are on his ground”—a
very significant hint, as there must have been
about three hundred or more people there.
The sight was now sickening, as the poor fellow
was hanging with his toes just reaching the ground;
so that he was being gradually choked to death, and
at the same time a number of women rushed at him,
and began beating him with their hands and with
stones on the stomach. It was a fearful sight; I had
a deadly feeling, yet I dared not show any repug-
nance.
“Ask the chief to let me show him how white men
kill men with their guns,” I said to Tor-Earrabay,
with as much unconcern in my voice as I could
muster. “ No, no ! ” said Tor-Earrabay, “no one
would eat him after if you shot him, for fear he
was poisoned.”
How truly thankful I was when the poor victim’s
sufferings were terminated by a man who only waited
a sign from the chief to thrust a knife slowly into
the sufferer’s heart, and with one convulsive
struggle all was over. I tried to make myself
believe it was a bullock they were cutting up after-
wards.
At the feast I told Tor-Earrabay that I was
“tabooed” from eating any flesh whilst on this
91
HORRIBLE FEAST.


journey, which saved me from taking any meat. I
managed a little fruit, but even that was hard work
after what I had seen.
Some people may say I might have interfered
more than I did ; but all I can say is, one cannot be
too careful not to offend, when it is such tremendous
odds as one against three or four hundred; and
though fire-arms and an Englishman may do
wonders, yet it would have been too great a risk,
and I did the best thing I could, which was first to
try and buy the man, that could not offend any one ;
but being refused, next to try and put him quickly
out of pain. But when denied that request, there
was no more to be done.
Whilst we are on this subject, and it is one that
cannot be avoided if New Britain is to be described,
we may as well go through with it at once.
Each chief has two ministers, or dependents, a
talking man, and a butcher. These are permanent:
the former does all the talking, the latter the killing
and cutting up. The part of a man that sells for
most “taboo” is the thigh, that of a woman the
breast; the head is never eaten, nor are the entrails,
they are buried. The leg and arm bones of men
who are enemies are placed at the butt end of spears,
as the natives believe it gives them the strength of
the man whose bone they carry. They also think
that it makes them invulnerable to any wounds from
the eaten man’s relations. They seldom eat a man of
their own tribe ; but should one have been killed by
his own chief, or a member of the tribe for wrong


doing, the body may be sold to another tribe;
women are more often killed and eaten by their own
friends!
I have said all I need to say. I hate to write
about such things, more even than you do to read of
them, for I have seen and remember the sight only
too well.
At about four p.m. we had to start again on our
journey, of which I was very glad. Tor-Earrabay
could, I feel sure, have stopped that horrible spectacle
if he had chosen; but I think he wanted to see what
I should do, and to frighten me, if possible, into
going back, as I know now that he himself was
afraid to go much further inland.
We travelled on, still over plain-land, but it was
now more rocky, and covered in places with stunted
bushes, with not much cultivation to be seen. Mount
Beautemps Beaupre towering up above us so close,
it appeared as if we should be there in half-an-hour.
I knew, however, it was still some miles off, and the
sun was going down.
As we went along Tor-Earrabay kept on hinting
that the men would not go any further, as the other
chief had told them there were very bad spirits
living in these parts, and they were afraid; he
thought it would be better for us to return.
However, I succeeded in getting them along till it
was time to camp, by promises of large presents, and
inventing all manner of yarns as to how I could
overcome any evil spirit because I was more power-
ful than they were. I fear, though, I did not


convince them. As the sun went down we camped;
fortunately we had brought water with us this last
stage, as there did not appear to be any in the
neighbourhood, and it proved a wise step.
After supper we lay down, but it was a long time
before I could sleep; and -instead began to think of
our journey. Here we were only five miles from
the base of the mountain, a short valley to cross, and
we could begin the ascent, which would not be a
difficult one. Then, after taking bearings and sights,
we might return, and I should have accomplished
the object of my journey, and found out many things
I wished to know.
Next I began to think of dear old England and
my home, and wondered if they could see me now
what they would think, till at last I fell asleep.
Next morning the sun was not yet risen, when I
suddenly woke, and jumped up with that indescribable
feeling that tells you you are alone. Yes ! too true,
after I had fallen asleep, or very early in the
morning, Tor-Rarrabay and all the guides had de-
camped, and, what was worse, all the provisions
and water were gone with them, as well as the
ammunition, save about ten rounds of small shot
cartridges for my fowling-piece, and five charges in
my revolver. I did not at once take in my situation,
for I had made up my mind to go on, and on, and
climb the mountain. But then I thought, “I do not
know what sort of people are on that mountain, and
also, I shall be going further away from where I can
get food and water, for should I meet any natives on


the mountain, they will surely take me for a devil,
and run away from me, even if they do nothing
worse. Anyhow, I cannot reckon upon getting
provisions from them, and I have not ammunition
enough to force my way up; besides, if I did so,
it would interfere with my getting up in a friendly
way, should I be so fortunate as ever to get here
another time. So I must go back, but not by that
horrible village.”
Thus reasoning, I determined to start, and rejoiced
to find my little prismatic compass in my pocket, and
made up my mind to steer a straight line for Blanche
Bay, as this would be the most open country and the
shortest way.
I knew I had nothing to fear from the natives as
soon as I was in Ruluanna district, and, moreover, by
taking this line of country I should avoid Nucgunigu,
where I should have been either murdered straight
off, or kept to make “ things grow.”
The idea amongst these natives with respect to
the trade articles the white men bring is that they
are all grown just as they are—tomahawks, heads,
knives, redcloth, looking-glasses, all grow, and there-
fore we must have an unlimited supply.
This, I imagine, is because they have nothing of
their own that does not grow, except the stone for
their tomahawks, and this is found in the country.
Then had these people found I could not make the
things they wished for grow, I should have been put
out of the way.
These may have been foolish ideas of mine, and no


doubt were, still it was not strange that I should
feel suspicious after what I had seen there the day-
before, and I do not think my nerves were very
steady, or perhaps I should have acted differently.
However, I started off and pushed through the long
grass as fast as I could.
On my way over the plains I saw many flocks of
cassowaries, and once or twice a wallaby springing
along over the cleared burnt patches, or stopping to
nibble at the fresh green blades that were forcing
their way up through the blackened vegetation
above.
■I will now leave myself struggling through the
long grass and try to explain what these large burnt
patches of grass mean. No doubt, they are some-
times the result of carelessness on the part of the
natives, but are perhaps more often the results of the
method they adopt to catch the wild pigs and the
cassowaries which abound on these plains. On the
day fixed for the sport they send out the women and
boys early in the day, who on reaching the appointed
spot spread themselves out into a large circle or
cordon of perhaps a mile in circumference, or even
more, according to their numbers.
At a given signal, which is generally a smoke from
the bush-grass, fired at one place, they all light the
grass by them, and along to where the next person
has lighted theirs, forming a wide circle of fire,
which on the outside edge is well beaten down, to
prevent its spreading too far.
One opening is left to windward ; towards this all


the frightened animals within the circle rush, and are
speared as they come out. Large numbers are
taken in this way; sometimes when a tribe has
killed more than enough for themselves the chief
sends all that is not wanted as presents to the
surrounding friendly chiefs.
■ As I went along (keeping my course as well as I
could, for the long grass and clumps of trees) I
saw in the distance what appeared a good-sized
freshwater lake on the N.B. side of Mount
Beautemps Beaupre —it had a small island in the
centre. I could not see any river falling into, or
flowing out from it, so it may be of the same forma-
tion as the water-hole that lies in the crater of the
Mother Mountain, which also has apparently no
outlet or inflow, and which I sounded to the depth
of five hundred fathoms, no bottom. Yet it has fish
in it: the only other instance I know of this is at
Pantelleria, an island in the Mediterranean off the N.
coast of Africa.
After travelling on some distance further, I began
to feel the want of water very much, and also was
getting exhausted for want of food. I had seen
nothing of any natives, or I might have been
tempted to force them to give me water, but whiled
was considering what was best to do, I suddenly
bethought me of some betel-nut and lime which I
had in my pocket. This lat once began to chew,
and found that it entirely satisfied both thirst and
hunger. This nut is eaten with the flower or catkin
of the pepper-plant, or with the leaves; these are
H


dipped in powdered burnt lime. It turns the saliva
quite red, and tends to make the teeth black. It was
an immense relief to have found I had it.
Night was now coming on, and I determined to
lie down in the long grass and have a good sleep if
possible, in order to be fresher for going on next
morning early. However, I found it impossible to
sleep, and every rustle of the grass seemed to me to
be natives creeping upon me. There was only a
faint reflection of light in the horizon, when I was
up and off again, I was in great hopes of reaching
Euluanna that day, but was hardly calculating upon
the very hard work it is to struggle through the
thick grass and still denser bush ; and having no
boots, my feet were getting very sore.
I found boots were too hot and heavy for travel-
ling in; besides, all mine were worn out. If ever I
should have to do this sort of work again I certainly
will lay in a good stock of moccasins. On I went, still
chewing my betel-nut and pushing my way through
the grass, though the sharp stubble was very painful
to tread upon. About midday I saw a thick belt of
trees ahead which gave me fresh hope and spirits, as
I could shelter there from the fierce sun which was
literally baking my brain. Indeed, I fancy I must
have been somewhat delirious, for I found myself (I
don’t know how) rolling on the ground in the
shade of the trees, as if I had been in water. I was
soon off again, however, pushing through the scrub,
and having my clothes torn in the most ill-natured’
way by the prickly palms.


I began now to suffer very much from the want
of water, though the betel-nut continued to soothe
my mouth somewhat, causing saliva to flow, yet I
found in my exhausted state I could hardly stand
the very mild intoxicating effect it has. A small
piece of tobacco that I tried to chew seemed to burn
my mouth like fire. As night came on again I
seemed possessed with a sort of fierce determination
to get on at all risks. When about sundown I fell
into a native track. Oh! what a relief was that
smooth ground to walk upon, and an assurance of its
leading somewhere! I did not care where now, for I
was getting desperate, and I could not have gone
more than a mile-and-a-half when I came to a
water-hole.
I flung myself down, and drank—well, I suppose
I did not empty the pool; but I felt as though I
could have done so. Then I lay down by it, and fell
asleep, regardless of all dangers. Luckily no natives
came whilst I was there. It was about eight a.m.
before I woke, refreshed but very weak ; however, I
judged I could not now be more than ten miles from
the outskirts of Ruluanna. The travelling, too, was
comparatively easy, and I got along pretty well.
Soon I began to come upon signs of natives, by
finding patches cleared for yams, &c., and at midday
met some native women carrying their heavy loads
to market.
I stopped them and bought some cocoa-nuts with a
few beads I had left, and sitting down there and then
h 2


ate a whole one, ranch to the astonishment of the
women, who were startled at seeing a white man at
all, to say nothing of finding him so far in the bush.
After the cocoa-nut I felt much stronger and got on
quite quickly; soon I saw native houses, then native
men, who at first appeared suspicious as to what I
might want there, but I reassured them, and they
took me down to the chief’s house. Here I was
given some yams and cooked taro, and I thought it
was the most delicious food I had ever eaten. I got
the loan of a canoe from this chief, and after walking
about half-a-mile came to the beach, and embarked
for Kininigunun, which lies to the east further along
the coast.
On arriving at Kininigunun, I found Tor-Rarra-
bay had not been seen on board the vessel, or at my
house, yet when I went ashore I found that every-
thing my guides had carried off when they left me
was put hack again into the house. So I sent up
word to Tor-Rarrabay to come and see me, and not
to be afraid. By-and-by he came, and told me the
reason they ran away was, because one of the men
declared he had seen a “ toberran,” or evil spirit, and
that the others were all frightened. He was not;
he only went with them in case they might get into
trouble with other tribes. You can imagine how
much of this story I believed.
He seemed greatly astonished to see me again,
as he evidently thought I could never find my
way back without a guide. “ Oh,” said I, “ I had
100
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


a guide,” and showed him my compass, which he
regarded with mysterious awe, and would scarcely
touch. “ Yes,” I said, “ that was my guide, and a
better one than you and your men, for it did not run
away and leave me alone.”
101
TOR-RARRABA VS ASTONISHMENT.


CHAPTER V.
Start with Mr. Brown for Spacious Bay—Hostility of the natives —Land
at Turner Point —Bartering—Grunting, and its effects—Human bones
—Fighting implements —Ornaments —Fields of pumice-stone —Won-
derful eruption of a volcano —Grand sight—Hot ground—Peculiar
colours of inhabitants of South Seas.
We had made arrangements with Mr. Brown, the
Wesleyan missionary whom I have already intro-
duced, to go with him along the coast to Spacious
Bay, he bringing his little steam-launch to do the
inshore work; so we left Kininigunun for Duke of
York, from which place we were to start. Shortly
before this I had lost poor Bluff: the poor thing
had jumped overboard to swim ashore after the
boat in which I was, when we saw a crocodile
seize her and drag her under, and we never saw her
again.
We crossed to Duke of York, and found Mr.
Brown all ready for our journey, with steam up in
his launch; and on the Ist of January, 1878, we
started for Spacious Bay.
We sailed and steamed down St. George’s Channel,
crossing to New Britain to the south of Duke of York
group, and fetched Gazelle Point (Birara).
From this place we ran along the coast to a small
bay, in which was an island and a sandbank with a
large river running into it at the southern end.
102


There was also a small barrier reef on the outer and
north side of the bay. We did not see any natives,
and the only sign of them was the presence of a good
many turtle hones, which must have been cooked
there by them. From this bay the land trends
somewhat to the south and east, until Cape Palliser
is reached, when the line of the coast takes a south-
west direction to Cape Buller, which cape forms the
north headland of Spacious Bay. This part of the
coast is hilly, pretty steep hills too, and is thickly
covered with hush. From Cape Buller the coast
falls more to the south, and is intersected with small
bays and creeks, until Archway Point is reached, so
called from its being a curious natural archway with
a span of about twenty yards straight out into
the sea. It is covered with ferns and creepers, and
there is a depth of three fathoms immediately beneath
the arch, it being high enough to allow a good-sized
vessel to pass underneath. On the outside it is
precipitous; on the south-west side is a small
embayment, in which we anchored for the night.
There was a small freshwater creek at the north
end of this bay, and whilst we were there some
natives came down. I went on shore to try and
converse with them, but found their language was
quite different from that spoken either in Birara or
Kininigunun. These natives had also apparently
never seen white men before, though they must have
heard of them, for though they were very frightened
they did not run away. I went ashore by myself, in
the “ dingy,” in order not to frighten them away.


There happened to he a cocoa-nut in the boat, which
they immediately made signs for; I therefore think
that in this district there can be no cocoa-nut palms,
though probably they buy them from adjoining tribes.
These natives wear a waist-cloth, with a plaited tail
hanging down behind, otherwise their arms and
appearance are similar to those of the northern tribes.
After leaving Archway Point, we constantly
observed natives along the shore, but were unable to
hold any communication with them, owing to their
assuming an exceedingly hostile appearance on our
attempting to land, using the most objectionable
gestures, apparently in order to show their contempt
of us. Indeed, in one place where we were anchored
in a small cove, they came down in great numbers
on to the beach, and began to throw stones from their
slings, so that it was considered advisable to haul
further off the shore. The next headland is a long
hilly point which stretches about three miles to the
southward due south, and which I named Tongue
Point from its shape. After leaving this point we
found ourselves entering a most beautiful bay, which
I named “ Henry Reid ” Bay, after the name of the
missionary steam-launch.
The bay forms a complete harbour, measuring
from Tongue Point to the W. shore four-and-a-half
miles, with a stretch of about the same extent N.
and S.
It is surrounded by a beautifully wooded shore;
and on the N.W. side two rivers of considerable
extent enter it, the northern and smaller one called


Pleasant Elver ; the mouth of the one to the south-
ward, about a mile distant from the former, is large
and deep. At the entrance we found a depth of from
two-and-a-half to three fathoms, which depth con-
tinued up the river for about half-a-rnile, and we
found sufficient water up the river for the steam-
launch for about three miles. The course is in a
westerly direction, trending slightly northwards.
At this distance up the river we landed on the
north bank, and, going about two hundred yards
into the bush, discovered a deserted fishing village of
about twelve or thirteen huts, outside which were
lying numbers of empty shells of river clam, which
the natives seem to have been fishing for here, and
probably the object that attracted them to this spot.
The huts appeared to be newly constructed and could
not long have been deserted, though they were so
slightly built that I do not think the natives could
have resided in them for any length of time.
The banks of the river were beautifully covered
with ferns, intermingled with the sago and betel-nut
palms. We observed, too, a beautiful creeper hang-
ing from the trees with a magnificent red wax-like
flower, also a kind of gum-tree (Eucalyptus), and
some of the most lovely kinds of dracoenas lent their
colours to enhance the general beauty of the scene.
We found the water of the river was perfectly fresh
at a quarter-of-a-mile from the mouth, and returned
to the open water without seeing any signs of
natives. Getting out into the bay again, we pro-
ceeded on our course towards Turner Point, which
105
DESERTED FISHING VILLAGE.


is the S. point of Henry Eeid Bay, observing on the
way a small island, lying close in to the S. shore
also, about one-and-a-half to the northward, a small
reef, on which there was a considerable break.
Henry Reid Bay averages for the most part a depth
of about twenty fathoms, though it shallows con-
siderably towards the S. shore.
Whilst anchored in the bay we observed several
large hornbills flying about amongst the trees,
making that curious rushing noise with their wings
like a railway train in motion, which obtains for
them the native name of “ Bauga-banga.” We also
observed the foot-tracks of cassowaries on the shore,
and one evening we saw a small wallaby come down
to the beach, apparently to lick salt off the stones.
After rounding Turner Point we came upon a
long stretch of low land, the beach running very
nearly north and south for a distance of about four
miles; upon it we observed a large number of
natives, who were waving green branches, and ges-
ticulating to us. After we had anchored, Mr. Brown
and I determined to go ashore, though, having been
so badly received hitherto, we were rather doubtful
of the result. On landing the natives at first ap-
peared to be rather shy of us, but after some little
persuasion, and showing them strings of beads and
red cloth, they began to venture round us; where-
upon we began to barter for some small things they
were wearing, such as armlets, necklets, &c. The
first man who obtained a few beads appeared to be so
much overcome by his immense wealth (as soon as he
106
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


had them in his hands) that he rushed off along the
beach yelling like a maniac, presumably to show his
friends the wonderful treasure he had obtained from
the mysterious creatures who had come to visit them.
After this others were more eager to obtain a similar
treasure, and pressed round us, trying to barter
everything they had on, even the very rings out of
their ears.
Wishing to purchase a pig, and not knowing very
well how to set about it, as I was ignorant of the
dialect, which is totally different from that spoken in
the north, I asked Mr. Brown what would be the
best way of making them understand. “ Why don’t
you try grunting ? ” he said, whereupon I began to
grunt most vociferously. The effect was magical—
some of them jumped back, holding their spears in
readiness to throw; some ran away, covering their
eyes with their hands, and all exhibited the utmost
astonishment and alarm; in fact, it was so evident
that they expected me to turn into a pig, and their
alarm was so irresistibly comic, that Mr. Brown and
I both burst out laughing, which gradually reassured
them, and those who had run away came back.
Seeing us so heartily amused, and that I had not
undergone any metamorphosis, they began to laugh
too, and upon my drawing a pig on the sand with
a piece of stick, and making motions of eating, it
suddenly seemed to strike them what was wanted,
for they all burst out laughing again, and nodding
their heads, several natives ran off, evidently in quest
of the pig we required.


After this they were very much more friendly,
and took us off to show us a village close by. When
we got near, it struck me at once, seeing no women
or children about, it must be a village they had
conquered; and this idea as we came closer was
confirmed by large heaps of human bones lying
about, all charred and blackened by fire. I picked
up what appeared to be a shin-bone, and showed it
to a native with an inquiring look, whereupon he
snatched it out of my hand, and, pointing to his own
leg, put the bone into his mouth, and began munch-
ing all round it, at the same time rubbing his
stomach, and grinning as much as to say it was
very good. Although there were so many bones
about, I did not see any skulls, which led me to
imagine that they had been taken away for trophies.
There was no appearance of any one living in the
houses of this conquered village, and that was because
of a superstition they had in common with the
natives more to the north of the island, namely,
that if a man lives in the house of an enemy he has
killed in battle, he will be haunted by the dead
man’s spirit. The houses were beautifully made,
and far superior to any I had seen before in New
Britain ; they were of a semicircular shape, with the
roof sloping down to the ground at the back, and
the front filled in by beautifully constructed wicker-
work, having a small door. The inside of each
house was really very well decorated, with figures
and designs, some burnt into the wood, others stained
in with dyes, made from the juices of various nuts.
108
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


The village itself was built in a circle, with an open
space in the centre, which was planted with small
trees and variegated plants. I cannot account for
the village being thus depopulated in any other
manner than that the natives who were now show-
SWORD AND CLUB, SPACIOUS BAY, NEW BRITAIN.
ing it to us must have surprised it at night, thus
catching all the inhabitants asleep.
We bought a good many curious implements of
war and ornaments from these natives ; they had
shields, really very cleverly ornamented, and their
spears were the most dangerous weapons of that
description I have seen in New Britain, the points
of them being tipped with a cassowary’s claw, only


fastened on with a kind of wax or gum ; so that
when the spear entered the body, the cement would
be melted by the heat, and on the weapon being
drawn out, the cassowary’s claw be left embedded in
the flesh. Their clubs are varied in shape, some
being well carved, with knobs all round the end,
SHIELD, SPACIOUS BAY, NEW BRITAIN.
and some, like one Mr. Brown bought, shaped
exactly like a billhook, though where they can
have got the idea from I cannot imagine.
Some of the ornaments were fairly well carved :
these were tortoise-shell earrings, armlets of the same
materials or made of the spiral conch-shell, and
curious masks made of network, and cleverly worked
110
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


in with feathers, which they stretch over their faces
when dancing. They also wore a very neatly-stained
waist-cloth marked in very good patterns, in most
cases with red, yellow, and black. In bartering with
the people I found they did not know the use of the
iron hoop, so much prized in New Guinea by the
natives, nor did they seem to care about a trade toma-
EARRING, SPACIOUS HAY.
hawk when I showed it to them, they themselves
using stone tomahawks. They would only barter
■with us for beads and red cloth, a circumstance seem-
ing to me pretty conclusive that they can have had
very little intercourse with white men.
Return Point, at the bottom of Spacious Bay, was
the furthest spot we visited on this side of the coast.
111
BARTERING.


Captain Hunter mentions Spacious Bay in these
words; “At noon we found ourselves ten miles to
the E.S.E. of Cape Buller before a deep embayment
which exists between Cape Buller and Cape Orford,
which in this part must reduce the connection north
of New Britain to a narrow isthmus. The deep and
spacious bay spoken of above was not sufficiently
explored to affirm that it does not disconnect the two
portions of New Britain ; but if so the channel must he
narrow, and was not distinguished from the offing.”
After this excursion to Spacious Bay we returned
to Makada Harbour (Duke of York Island), where
we lay some few days. It was now May, One morn-
ing I was awoke by feeling and hearing something
grating violently against the ship’s side, and running
up on deck found the whole of the harbour covered
with huge blocks of pumice-stone, and indeed as far
as I could see over towards New Britain the sea was
covered ; it really appeared as though one could walk
to New Britain on it, or, as one of the natives
expressed it, “ as though the bottom of the sea had
jumped up.”
We then heard that a great eruption had taken
place in the volcano situated at the foot of the
Mother Mountain, and the smoke and fire could
be plainly seen from Duke of York Island. Next
day we set out for Blanche Peninsula, in order to get
a nearer view of the sight, but we found we had to
go a long way round to the northward, to avoid the
enormous fields of pumice-stone that had been drifted
down the channel.
112
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY,


teachers, eighteen fully armed Nodup natives,
several Matupi natives, two other white men and
myself, making a total of about sixty actual fighting
men. Of course there were a great many followers,
who came merely to see the fighting and obtain
loot, but these were not to be counted on as helpers,
for probably at the first attack they would all run
off. The guides were then told that if they showed
any signs of treachery they would be shot; if on
the other hand they were faithful, a large present
would be made them.
We then started on our march up the high range
of hills that runs like a backbone from the “ North
Daughter” southwards to liuterwool, the ascent
being made in the same district from which we had
started, and the guides leading the way with long
sticks in their hands to probe the tracks for pits.
These pits are dug by the natives a little on one side
of the track, and they place spears at the bottom and
sides, covering them with long grass and leaves;
the reason for their digging them on one side being
that the enemy stepping on the edge will be
precipitated sideways into the pit, which ensures his
falling on the spears, whereas were the pit in
the middle of the path he might fall forward and
save himself by clinging to the side.
Another method is to conceal two spears in the
high grass, one on each side of the track, with the
points towards the direction from which an attack
is expected ; to the head of each spear is fastened an
®od of a very fine hut very strong piece of line.
K


This line catches an advancing enemy just above
the waist, and his forward movement draws both
the spears forcibly into the body. The latter plan
is a very dangerous one, especially to any one
moving quickly. The natives also place spear-
points and pieces of split bamboo in the road; these
run through the foot like a knife if one happens to
tread on them, and a boot will hardly save you.
I do not think there was a boot to be found in all
our little army; so the guides were of the utmost
importance when fighting with these natives. They
are generally very experienced warriors, and have
to be paid better than other fighting men, as they
commonly bear the brunt of an attack.
About daybreak we entered the enemies’ country,
marching in Indian file, which is necessitated by
the narrowness of the tracks, and also on account
of following the guides. On reaching the fight-
ing ground we threw out scouts or skirmishers
on each flank, to guard against surprise on either
hand; these were the Nodup natives. The first
village we came to we immediately set fire to; by
this time it was pretty light, and the smoke was a
signal that the fighting had commenced both to
friends and foes. This village was deserted saving
one or two spies dodging about amongst the
bananas. There was nothing to be seen of the
main body of natives. They had evidently received
warning of our approach. We fired upon the spies,
and cut down the bananas. Then we went on,
burning each village as we came to it, the natives


making very little stand, merely slinging stones
and throwing spears from a distance.
At ten a.m, we were in Kabakadaie, and before
noon at the head of Port Webber, having marched
twenty-five miles and burnt at least twenty villages
in less than ten hours. We then doubled, and came
back by a different route into the very centre of
Tarlily’s land, and at noon we halted at a single house
that stood on a hill, surrounded with cocoa-nut trees,
having on one side a patch of thick scrub, and here
we determined to have dinner. Had we thought
first, we should have seen what a disadvantageous
spot it was in the case of an attack, as the ground
that was covered with scrub was slightly above
the open spot on which we were camped.
We were just in the middle of eating our food,
consisting of yams, taro, and fowls, taken from the
different villages we had burnt, and our arms were
laid aside, when one of the scouts came running in to
say that a body of men of about two hundred under
Tarlily were coming up the other side of the hill
under cover of the scrub. He had hardly finished
speaking when we were assaulted by a shower of
stones from their slings, one of which passed a few
inches above my head and buried itself in the
stump of a cocoa-nut tree, showing with what terrific
force they fly.
The stones were accompanied by a few rifle shots,
so that now was the time to see who were really to be
depended upon. Most of the natives who had been
following us all day when things had been all smooth
k 2


ran off down the hill as fast as they could. However,
it did not take long to get our arms ready, and charge
out on the enemy. It was a sharp skirmish while it
lasted, which was not for long, as we soon dislodged
them from the hatch of scrub and drove them down the
hill. However, they really fought well and showed
some good manoeuvring. As soon as they were on
clear ground, they opened out into a sort of skirmish-
ing order, though not of course with much regularity,
and retreated down hill in this manner, keeping up
a storm of stones with their slings and occasionally
firing a rifle. We pressed them hard, keeping a sort
of open order also, to avoid giving them much mark
to aim at.
There were a large number of them fully armed
with slings, spears, and tomahawks; some few had
muskets also. It is a most reprehensible practice,
that of selling muskets to savages, as it makes, them
much more dangerous than they naturally are, and
that is bad enough. We followed them at the
double, only halting to fire, which must have been
pretty precise, to judge from the bodies we passed.
At the bottom of the hill they gave way altogether,
turning and running for the thick bush. We made
one final charge as we too reached the bottom of the
hill, and the Nodup natives set up a war-cry of
triumph.
I had then time to look round and see who were
with us, and found that there were only the Nodup
and a few of the Matupi natives. I don’t think our
force was more than sixty altogether, and though up


to this time there had been quite three hundred
natives following as professed friends, they only came
to loot, and decamped on the slightest alarm. We
did not follow the enemy into the bush, but returned
to finish our dinner, leaving the Nodup natives to
watch Tarlily’s movements. He, lam sorry to say,
was not killed, but was wounded in the arm—l
hope sufficiently to assure him that he could not
dodge “ the white men’s bullets ” as easily as he
supposed.
After dinner we determined that we had done
enough for one day, we therefore moved on about a
mile to a hill crowned with cocoa-nut trees but with
clear ground all round, which was a more suitable
place to form a camp for the night. By degrees the
natives, who had left us on the first alarm, came back,
and set to work preparing for the night. Then came
one of the most curious sights I have ever seen—the
natives went out in parties, and brought back
houses with them, the posts of which, being only
driven a short way into the ground, were easily
lifted out, and the house was then carried to our
encampment! so that in a short space of time this
spot, that had been destitute of anything in the shape
of a dwelling, was covered with native huts, and each
hut had at least one fire burning by it, and this in
the darkness of the night presented a most weird
appearance. I could quite have fancied that a town
had sprung up by magic; indeed, when I saw the
first house coming along apparently by itself, I was
utterly taken aback for a moment. The grass was
117
MOVING HOUSES.


set fire shortly after we arrived, in order to burn a
clear space round us.
The Nodup natives were out on all sides, watching
for spies, and every now and then we heard a musket
shot away in the distance, which showed that they
were on the alert. Indeed, the way these men
performed this duty was splendid, it could not have
been better done. They crept through the long
grass from place to place, not a movement seemed to
escape them, and every now and then they would
come in and report. It appeared that Tarlily’s party
were watching us very closely in order to take
advantage of any opportunity that might occur for
attacking us.
I had made arrangements with Mr. Brown to fire
a rocket as soon as it was dark in order to show him
that we were all right. However, although we fired
it, it would not go up, but went hissing down
amongst the grass. This was very disappointing, as
there were no other means of communicating to him
that all was well; indeed, I think it was a wonderful
thing that not one of our party had been hurt.
Next morning we were up betimes, about four
o’clock, and again on the march to Karavia, a large
town situated above the N.E. coast of Blanche Bay,
which rises from the bay to a height of eight hundred
feet, and it is on the top of these hills that Upper
Karavia is situated. Lower Karavia is about three
miles lower down near the coast.
The country as we approached Upper Karavia
was beautiful open table-land, spreading as far as we
118
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


could see on either side, only broken here and there
by groups of cocoa-nut palms and small clumps of
other trees, denoting in most cases small villages or
single huts. We had a long march of about ten
miles, during which we burnt several small villages
and had one sharp skirmish with the natives, who
appeared to be congregating at Karavia to give us
a warm reception. This party with which we had
the skirmish was undoubtedly a scouting party sent
to find out where we were and to check our advance,
in order to give the natives time to hide their taboo.
But in this latter attempt they did not succeed, for
we continued to advance in spite of their sling stones,
and as they had no intention of coming to a hand-
to-hand encounter, they kept retreating in front of
us. In order, therefore, to get rid of them we
charged at them, when they turned and fled.
Great caution was required in approaching
Karavia, as this could only be effected from inland
by two entrances on account of the thick bush by
which it was surrounded. We therefore divided
into two parties, in order to attack the town by each
entrance. It was evident that they were ready for
us, although I think they had hardly expected us so
soon, as there was great shouting and beating of
tom-toms. Whether Tarlily was there in person
I never discovered, but I almost fancy he must have
been.
One of our two parties consisted of Ratu Levi and
most of the teachers, with the Matupi men ; the other
of the Eodup natives, the remainder of the teachers,
135
TARLIL VS PLANS—ATTACK KARA VIA.


myself, and one other white man. We found the
entrance we had to pass in at was blocked by having
a quantity of prickly palms pulled down over the
path. This with bare feet was anything but pleasant,
hut the enemy was in front, and we were not to be
stopped by thorns, yet great care had to he observed
for fear of spear points or pieces of bamboo. As we
got towards the town we could hear that there were
a great number of natives there, and determined to
give them a volley as soon as we were inside the
belt of bush and could see them, also before they
had time to attack us with their spears and stones.
So we dashed in upon them and fired; the place
seemed to be full of howling demons, who threw
spears by the dozen, though without much aim, as
none of our party were hit.
After firing our first volley, we reloaded as quickly
as possible under cover of the trees, and then
began a kind of independent firing, so that those
who had loaded could cover those that were loading.
We could see that several natives dropped, though
the remainder stood fast, encouraged by the women,
who looked like devils, jumping about and dancing
and shouting out defiance and abuse of the most
disgusting kind.
In the meantime spears and stones were being
showered amongst us, and I felt we could not last
any time at this, as some of our party must be hit
before long. I could not think what had become of
our other party, for we had as yet seen no signs of
them, and I was beginning to feel very anxious; but


the Xodup natives behaved splendidly, with old
Torrortooroo encouraging them, telling them to fire
true, and calling them his boys, going from one to
the other, only stopping now and then to fire
when he saw a good opportunity. When he fired
I always noticed an enemy dropped.
We must have kept on at this nearly half-an-hour
when suddenly we heard a heavy volley of musketry
some distance to the right of us. I never was better
pleased in my life than to hear that sound, as we
could not have held our position much longer with-
out losing some of our men. As it was I cannot
understand how some one was not hit, the stones and
spears were falling so thickly all round us.
As soon as the enemy heard the firing of a second
party, they seemed to become quite demoralised ; they
undoubtedly thought that in fighting the first party
they were fighting all. We saw that they were
giving way, and pushed them harder, advancing as
they retired, and soon they were running helter-
skelter down the hill-side below their town. The
fight lasted altogether about an hour, after which
there was not an enemy to be seen, save those
that would never eat human flesh again: these
were all buried in holes we dug in the ground.
Great quantities of taboo were found in and around
the town, which was taken as spoil. Here we
had something to eat, and then proceeded down the
hills towards the coast, to attack Lower Karavia.
On the way we found a poor little baby, which
the mother had thrown away, and doubtless had the
137
REINFORCED—COMPLETE VICTORY.


native looting party accompanying us found it they
would have killed the poor little thing. We, how-
ever, had it carried with us, giving it to a hoy, telling
him that if he did not bring it down to the coast in
safety, he would have to answer for it with his life,
hut if he brought it down in safety he would be paid
for it. It appears that the mother was escaping
with the child and a bundle of taboo, and that,
rather than lose the shell-money, she threw her
baby away, as one of the teachers, not knowing it
was a woman, was chasing her.
I may here state, that with my own eyes I did not
see the dead body of one woman, and I do not know
that one was killed, which speaks well for our native
contingent, as the women are hard to distinguish
from the men at any distance, and they also take
quite as prominent a part in the fighting as the
men. It was in this village that some of Sailasa’s
bones were found, but how they were determined
to be his bones I cannot explain; however, the
teachers said that they were, and of course that was
sufficient.
The whole town was soon in a blaze, and we again
marching to Lower Karavia. This was a somewhat
dangerous route, as we had to pass through a deep
ravine, with overhanging sides, which, had the
natives been more used to this mode of warfare, they
would have taken advantage of, by rolling down big
stones on us from above. As it was, however, we
passed through without any opposition, though we
saw a large body of natives watching us from some


distance away. These quickly dispersed on having
a few muskets discharged at them. We were now
approaching Lower Karavia, having burnt many
villages on the way, and as we entered the town
we could see the natives escaping in their canoes,
leaving the town in our undisputed possession, which
we were heartily glad of, as we had had enough of
fighting.
After burning Lower Karavia we camped on the
shore, to await the boat and canoes from Matupi to
take us hack there, as it was determined to leave the
other places for a future date, and also give them a
chance to surrender and pay their fine. We had
given Tarlily such a lesson as he was not likely to
forget, and which we hoped might be a warning to
the villages of Dewawon and Dinawon, the two
principal places still unburnt that were implicated in
the murder and eating of the teachers.
On arriving at Matupi I sent a letter to Mr.
Brown, telling him of all we had done, and what
must have lightened his heart very much, that all
were unhurt. He then joined us and explained that
the reason that we had seen nothing of Bu-lilli (the
chief who had promised to attack Tarlily from the
Ruterwool side) was, that he had not shown up
at all. Indeed, as it afterwards appeared, he had
received taboo from Tarlily not to fight against
him. No doubt, Bu-lilli thought that we should not
be able to stand against Tarlily by ourselves; how-
ever, it was shown by the sequel that he was much
mistaken.


As the 21st was Easter day, we stayed quietly at
Matupi, where Mr. Brown held service and offered a
prayer of thanksgiving for the merciful manner in
which we had been preserved from all harm ; in the
evening messages were sent to Dewawon and
Dinawon of a pacific nature, requesting them to pay
the fine and return the bones of the teachers in their
possession, the alternative being that their towns
would share the same fate as the other places, the
natives of which had eaten portions of the teachers
and assisted in the murder. Answers were sent
back daring us to come, and refusing to pay. On
Monday morning, therefore, we started for Dewawon,
which lies on rising ground a little on the west side
of the south bight of Blanche Bay.
In the meantime two traders from Ruterwool and
Kabakadaie had joined us at Matupi with their boats,
which were very acceptable for taking some of the
party over to the mainland instead of having to use
canoes ; moreover, we now had Mr. Brown’s boat, and
one from Makada, in all four boats, and these, with a
number of canoes, formed our fleet of transports.
We had also a really stronger fighting party than
before, having been reinforced by Mr. Brown’s party
as well as by the two traders who had not deemed it
prudent to leave their stations whilst the fighting
was going on in their direction, but who now that so
decisive a blow had been given to Tarlily felt sure
he would attempt no more attacks upon the foreigners
for the present. They had therefore come over to
help us as soon as safety permitted.


We landed just below Dewawon, and climbed tbe
steep hill leading up to it in two parties, intending to
attack the town on each side. However, there was
no resistance made whatever, as the natives appeared
to have left everything and run away into the bush.
I cannot understand what reason they had for
sending so defiant a message as they did if they had
no intention of braving it out. There was much
taboo found and many curiosities in the huts, which
were taken as spoils of war, and the town was soon
in a blaze.
We then moved on rapidly upon Dinawon ; this
place is about three to four miles further on inland,
yet reaches down to the water’s edge in the extreme
head of the south bight of Blanche Bay. The main
part of the town is inland and surrounded by thick
bush and cocoa-nut trees. In the only open space a
few of us halted on a small hillock, from which place
we could see the whole of our forces winding up the
hill, and it was a very strange sight. First came the
armed party, then a number of natives with spears
and tomahawks, and after them an apparently
innumerable number of natives carrying all manner
of spoil taken from Dewawon—pigs, poultry, yams,
taro, ornaments, spears, and clubs decorated with
parrots’ feathers; others with dogs caught about
the huts, which are considered a great delicacy by
these natives; again, two men would be carrying
huge bunches of bananas or cocoa-nuts slung upon a
bamboo and carried on their shoulders; some, again,
Would have tame cockatoos or parrots in their hands;


others had large basketsful of taboo —in fact, every
conceivable thing that is to be found in and around
a native town.
I here found a very curious article, which previous
to this I was not aware had any existence in these
islands, viz., a dead man’s paddle, which is buried with
him to enable him to paddle his way across the
water to the sky or horizon, which is where they
imagine the sky touches the water. From whence
they get the canoe does not appear, but I suppose
the spirit steals it from the shore tribes; this
superstition is not found amongst them, however,
but only with the bushmen or natives of the interior.
These paddles are large and flat, very elaborately
carved, and ornamented with that curious face-like
ornament that is the same looked at either way, up
or down, and which occurs so often amongst the
decorations of these people. The handle is long and
also carved in an irregular triangulated pattern with
lines running diagonally. The whole is rubbed over
with white lime, which fills the crevices of the
pattern and makes it show white against the dark
wood. Considering the tools these people work with,
I think it is very wonderful they turn out such good
work; these tools I will describe further ou. I
found on inquiry that the Karavia people joined
with our party, and were actually guiding those
they were at war with two days before to make
war on a tribe that had been their friends—thus
showing that nature is stronger than colour, and
that “join with the stronger to oppose the weaker ”


is as true a maxim with these savages as it is with
the civilised white man.
At Dinawon we had very little trouble to possess
ourselves of the town; a few rounds of musketry,
and all the natives ran away, leaving the whole
place in our possession. Here also we found a good
deal of spoil in the way of curiosities, clubs, spears,
nets for fishing, &c. These were confiscated, and the
place burnt, as well as any huts that were passed on
the way down to the beach; each hut on every
occasion was carefully examined to see that there
was no one in it, besides being entered by natives in
search for loot. lam glad to say we saved one old
native woman from being killed by a native of
Karavia, who had found her in a hut, left evidently
by the owners, who were in too great haste to get
away (when they saw us coming) to remove her.
We heard a loud screaming, and on coming up
found a native of Karavia just about to split her
skull open with his tomahawk.
I told him I had a good mind to knock his brains
out, and that if he did not take himself off imme-
diately I should do so. We then placed two men
on guard over the hut, to prevent its being burnt,
as the old woman could not get away, being too
infirm. The men remained by it until all the
other houses were burnt, leaving the woman to
her friends when they returned; hers being the
only house that was left standing of any place we
had visited during the whole expedition.
I have often wondered whether the natives ap-
143
SA VE A WOMAN'S LIFE.


predated that little act of humanity, but I fear they
could hardly understand it. On arriving at the
beach we found Mr. Brown waiting in his boat, all
the three other boats and the canoes waiting to
take us off; indeed, I was very glad it was all over,
as my feet were in such a state with thorns, cuts,
and bruises, that I could not have done another day’s
march had I tried.
We returned at once to Matupi to stay the night.
About seven o’clock that evening a number of chiefs
came over to see Mr. Brown, to declare their sub-
mission, and bringing some of the bones of the
murdered men.
They also brought taboo, in order to pay the fine.
Mr. Brown told them that had they paid it in the
first instance they could have saved bloodshed and
their houses and plantations.
They said, “ We did not know; it was not
fighting —it was an earthquake.”
Mr. Brown would not take more than one roll of
taboo, and that was to show that friendship was
again established between us and them. They also
begged Mr. Brown to send them a teacher to each
village of which they were chiefs; indeed, during
the next few weeks requests of this kind were
constantly coming to Mr, Brown, in some instances
from tribes we had never heard of before. However,
Mr. Brown had not sufficient teachers to send to
half of them.
The only chief that did not submit was Tarlily,
the greatest offender, though Mr. Brown sent to him,


promising him perfect safety if he would come and
see him. He was afterwards several times on board
my vessel, but I never could persuade him to
accompany me to Duke of York Island in order to
hold an interview with Mr, Brown,
Indeed, later on he burnt one of the missionary
teacher’s houses that had been built at Kabakadaie,
so inveterate was his hatred of missionaries.
I am glad to say, however, this did not extend any
further amongst his family, as his son was very
friendly with the whites, and was some time on hoard
Hernsheim and Co.’s schooner as a passenger.
I think that many of the troubles that missionaries
have to contend with arise from having native
teachers. They are but lately reclaimed from savage
life themselves, and much of its odour still clings to
them ; and they can hardly be expected to have that
enormous fund of patience and tact that is required
by a missionary.
Moreover, their colour is against them; their habits
also are too much like those they come to live
amongst to raise them to that height of superiority
that is necessary, for never was maxim made that
could apply better than to these people, “Familiarity
breeds contempt.”
How can the head of a missionary station feel
sure that a native teacher will not make use of some
expression in a sermon that may offend; or if he
does not offend, make use of some statements that
ar e unadvisahle and derogatory to the religion they
ure striving to teach ?
L
145
“ FAMILIARITY BREEDS CONTEMPT ”


I myself heard one sermon that I think was any-
thing but wise delivered before a chief of some note
and a good muster of his tribe, by one of the Fijian
teachers.
He was trying to explain how good a thing
“lotu,” or religion, was. He said :
“See what the lotu has done for us—we have
houses, we have a big ship to come and visit us,
and bring us cloth, heads, &c. Mr. Brown has a
big house and is a powerful chief; all this has
lotu given us; then how good a thing lotu is—it
is better than taboo.”
I spoke to the chief afterwards, and he said, “If
lotu will give all these things, then it can give
taboo also; if they can show me how it will give
me taboo I will go to lotu often.” Thus a wrong
impression was made by a well-intentioned man.
Do not think for one moment that I do not give
all credit due to those noble fellows, who try to do
their duty as far as their light goes, but what I
contend is, that their light is not sufficient. White
men are undoubtedly the men to send as missionaries
to these people; and if they cannot cover so large a
field of work as if native teachers were employed, yet
the work they do would be more thoroughly done.
There is one certain advantage in having
white men, that if a white teacher was murdered
and eaten, his hones would not be likely to be
recovered by his fellow white men. There would
have to be half-a-dozen Commissioners and a High
Commissioner to try the case, and by the time they


got to the spot there would he no case to try,
because there would be no complainants left!
This would save an immense amount of trouble
and expense to the Government, and would make
room for other missionaries to share the same fate.
Mr. Brown was tried for manslaughter because he
could not wait for the High Commissioner.
They received the news in Fiji just three months
after the occurrence, and it would, no doubt, have
taken another two months before the High Com-
missioner could arrive on the spot; and by that
time where would the foreigners in New Britain
have been ?
I think it shows great common sense on the part
of the authorities that they acquitted Mr. Brown.
The effect upon the natives on all sides was
marvellous; they were civil, tractable, and obliging ;
no danger was now apprehended from travelling
where before it would have been the height of folly
to go.
I cannot refrain from giving a few of the opinions
of the Australian Press, as they really give a very
fair and impartial account, I quote from the
Weekly Advocate of October the 12th, 1878: —
“We propose, in fulfilment of a promise made a
fortnight ago, to notice some of the comments made
by the Press, secular and religious, on the recent
painful intelligence from the Eev. George Brown.
We begin with the leading journal of this colony.
It must be borne in mind that the article now in
L 2
147
BENEFICIAL RESULTS OF THE WAR.


question appeared before the full text of Mr. Brown’s
lengthy letter was published. In respect to the
massacre the Sydney Morning Herald says that so
much of the civilization of Polynesia has been due
to the pioneer work of missionaries, and so much
now is still to be hoped for from the same source,
that it is much to be deplored that efficient men
capable of good service should have fallen victims
to the unreduced barbarism of the natives.
“ After a sentence in which is expressed a generous
appreciation of what Wesleyan missionaries had
accomplished in other groups of islands, the Herald
observes; —
‘“lt has always been the case, that the mountain
tribes are fiercer than those on the coast, more
backward in civilization, more difficult to subdue.
Even in Fiji, which has so many years been the
scene of missionary operations, the hill tribes have
only been brought under control since British
authority has been established, and since the
Government has had at its disposal an armed force
representative of its authority. By missionaries,
therefore, hill tribes must always be approached
with great caution, or with a fully recognised risk,
and prudence matured by experience should always
regulate the efforts which energy and devotion
inspire. From the brief account which has reached
us it is doubtful whether the attempt made to
penetrate the interior of the island was not pre-
mature.
“ ‘ Enough had scarcely been done to naturalize


civilization and Christianity on the coast to make a
further advance politic.
“ ‘ The elevated interior will, in days to come, be
by preference the residence of European missionaries
and settlers, because the climate is likely to be
healthier ; and, therefore, the conquest of this district
to civilization is a matter of importance. But the
moral subjugation of the mountain tribes will take
much time and much patience.’
“The reply to these remarks is (1) that the
interior which was visited by the murdered teachers
was not an area of broken hill country, hut a level
plateau, only dotted with timber, so that ‘ mountain
tribes’ in the ordinary acceptation of the words do
not exist in that part of the island; and (2) that
the massacre was instigated by a coast chief, who
possibly would have carried out his diabolical pur-
poses at some other time if no inland expedition
had given him the opportunity he actually availed
himself of,
“ The Herald further says: ‘ But much as the
massacre of the missionaries is to be deplored, the
retaliation organized and inflicted by the Eev. Mr.
Brown is still more to be deplored. That gentleman’s
statement and explanation are not yet to hand, and
his past services and his devotion to the missionary
cause claim for him every fair consideration at the
hands of hostile critics.
“ ‘ But we fear that in treating aggression as the
best mode of self-defence he has, as a missionary,
committed a serious blunder. This policy may be


proper enough in a civil government, though even
then it should be carried out with discretion and for-
bearance towards absolutely uncivilized natives. But
Christian missionaries undermine their own special
force when they bear the sword. Every missionary
who treads untrodden paths goes with his life in his
hands, fully conscious of the risk he is running, and
prepared, if need be, to be one of those martyrs whose
blood is the seed of the Church. Ordinary civilians
are not expected or called upon to abstain from self-
defence, and we have no right to complain if in pro-
tecting their own lives they find it unfortunately
necessary to take the life of a barbarian who, from
a misunderstanding of the nature of their visit,
threatens theirs.
“ ‘ The views thus voiced are doubtless widely held
both within and without the Wesleyan denomination,
but the editor of this journal—speaking here only
for himself —is absolutely unable to understand how
it would be right for an ordinary civilian to take
the life of a barbarian in self-defence, and yet wrong
for a missionary to act after the same fashion.’
“ And it should not for a moment be forgotten in
this discussion that Mr. Brown was chiefly concerned
to protect the lives of his remaining teachers and
their families, above all, the widows and orphans of
those who fell on the plateau. It is one thing to
sacrifice oneself; but what right has any man,
missionary or other, to hand over by non-defence a
number of helpless women and children to the clubs
and ovens of a swarm of cannibal savages ?
150
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


“We have heard that Tarlily, having eaten
Sailasa, the native minister, designed to reserve
Sailasa’s eldest daughter for a worse fate than the
one which overtook her father. Ought Mr. Brown
to have contented himself with being a passive
spectator of heathen lust and bloodshed ?
“ The criticism of the Town and Country Journal,
like that of the last paper quoted, is generous in its
tone towards mission work in general and Mr.
Brown’s labours in particular. We give it entire :
‘ The despatches of the Eev. Gleo. Brown respecting
the recent massacre and retaliation war are marked
by a straightforwardness that is commendable. He
has acted in a manner that appeared to him best
under the circumstances, and he boldly defends his
cause, well knowing that many will take exception
to it. Whilst we admire his candour, as well as
his personal courage, we must respectfully protest
against his conception of missionary duty, and we
rejoice to see that the Wesleyan Board of Missions
has passed a resolution in the most considerate terms
in which a censure could be conveyed. To other
Polynesia missions it has been the rule that when
the danger of murder became so great that teachers
could not be asked to risk it, they should be with-
drawn to some spot where they could wait the turn
of events and the providential openings which mark
such undertakings. When withdrawal has not been
practicable, the teachers and Christian natives have
been gathered together and have assumed an attitude
of defence. In Mr. Brown’s narrative we see nothing
151
‘THE TOWN AND COUNTRY JOURNAL. ’


to justify the departure from these almost sacred
traditions of missionary work, and we sincerely hope
no other missionaries or native teachers will follow
his example, for we look upon the men of peace
scattered throughout the Southern Seas as pioneers
of commerce, civilization, and religion, whose in-
fluence will be quite different in kind if it is thought
that they may be transferred into warlike leaders if
sufficiently provoked.’
“ But our contemporary is in error, we think, in
its interpretation of the resolutions of the Board of
Missions—Mr. Brown was not censured. For the
rest the letter of the general secretary in our last
issue shows how impracticable was the idea of with-
drawal.
“ The Echo regards the finding of the Board of
Missions as 4 cautious, in fact, a sort of open verdict.’
It speaks of the New Britain natives as a compound
of the simplicity which is childish and the ferocity
which is devilish, and remarks that the effort to lift
a people from such unspeakable brutishness is one
at which most of us can only wonder. Mr. Brown’s
defence must rest on the supposition that the mission
party and the traders were in imminent danger, and
is put thus; ‘lf the rest of the teachers and their
families, if Mr. Brown’s own family, and if the
traders scattered among the islands, were in danger
of becoming the victims of a horde of savages, who,
fresh from one cannibal feast, were longing for a
more sumptuous one, then what Englishman, what
Australian, would blame him, who was a man as
152
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


well as a missionary, for defending all the lives
which were threatened ? The plots for the murder
of the widows and children of the slain teachers,
and for the slaughter of the other teachers and
their families ; the evident belief of the traders that
their lives were in great danger; the general in-
solent and clamorous temper of heathens, hitherto
friendly; the abduction of a teacher’s wife by the
chief of the town, and the message sent to Mr.
Brown, that the taro was ready with which to eat
him—all this was enough to make an ordinary
European, even though a Christian, think that the
time for gunpowder had come, as well as the time
for prayer.’ But the Echo adds: ‘We must add,
however, that it is no part of missionary duty to retali-
ate, and that violence was justifiable only so far as it
was essential to immediate self-defence and personal
safety, and even then it is a question whether safety
should not have been sought by avoiding conflict
rather than by aggression. It is not right that any
man or body of men should usurp the functions of
Her Majesty’s High Commissioner for Polynesia.
Sir Arthur Gordon is the High Commissioner, but
is at present in England, having recently obtained
leave of absence. We hear that Chief Justice Gorrie
of Fiji is Sir Arthur Gordon’s deputy, and it may
be presumed that prompt inquiry will be made into
the affair.’
“ The Australian Witness, organ of the Presbyterian
Church in New South Wales, thus refers to the
expedition against the inland natives. Such pro-
153
‘ THE ECHO ‘ A USTRALIAN WITNESS.’


cedure has often been the means of checking the
wild savages of hill tribes in the South Sea Islands.
But many will question the action of Mr. Brown as
a missionary in this slaughter. A High Commis-
sioner, the Governor of Fiji, has been appointed to
deal with all such cases. And even the commodore
has to respect his authority. If Mr. Brown could
have waited for the High Commissioner or his
deputy to take action, no doubt he would gladly
have protected his own missionary reputation from
the peril to which it is now exposed, but how could
he tarry ? The danger was immediate, while on
the other hand the intelligence has only just
reached the Deputy High Commissioner in Fiji.’
The Australian Witness adds: ‘ The Gospel has
turned the savage people in Fiji, and some of
the converts have become first-rate teachers and
missionaries to other islands.
“‘ It is this influence alone which can bring the
other savage races of Polynesia into civilization ;
Christianity has invariably been the civilizing
process in the South Seas. It is not at all likely
that the mission will be given up because of this
disaster.
“ ‘ The blood of the martyrs will in New Britain,
as in Old Britain and other lands, become the
seed of the Church.’
“ The Queensland Evangelical Standard epitomises
the narrative which appeared in these columns, but
does not commit itself to any decided criticism.
“It says : ‘ Opinions will differ among friends and
154
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


foes as to the propriety of the action taken by the
avengers (?), Persons at a distance, who have had no
dealings with treacherous savages, can have but a
faint idea of the great peril the foreigners were in.’
“ The Southern Cross , an unsectarian Protestant
paper published in Melbourne, observes : ‘lt is deeply
to be deplored that blood has been shed, and we are
not surprised to read that great diversity of opinion
exists as to the course adopted by the Rev. George
Brown. The affair has an ugly look, but we feel
sure that we have not all the facts of the case before
us. Fuller information may give it quite a different
complexion, and meanwhile it is better to suspend
judgment. Past experience has taught us to be
cautious how we receive the first accounts that
reach us of alleged aggression and violence on the
part of Christian missionaries.’
“ The Spectator , Melbourne, says: ‘ While we must
regret that it was deemed necessary for the pro-
tection of the white men and native teachers to
inflict severe punishment even on cruel and treache-
rous cannibals, no one but Mr. Brown and those
who took the lead in the expedition are capable of
estimating the nature of the emergency, and the
fact that a brave but humane and good man should
have deemed himself justified in taking up arms
against the murderers, is at leastym’ma facie evidence
that he acted for the best.’
“‘ X. Y. Z.,’ a constant contributor to the Spec-
tator, with characteristic outspokenness, writes: ‘ Mr.
Brown’s relation to his teachers was peculiar. He


had led them into peril —it was in response to his
call they had left their native islands and sailed
over strange seas to death. And when the men
had fallen was their leader to look calmly on and
let their wives and little ones perish under the club
of the cannibal ? Let us translate the case into
terms we can better understand. Suppose some
midnight the Mission Secretary of Sydney discovered
an assassin in his house bent on taking his children’s
lives. It is certain that on the highest Christian
principles he would knock the ruffian down, and if
no gentler dissuasive were sufficient to shelter the
lives dependent upon him, would knock the man’s
brains out. It would, no doubt, be a distressing and
shocking necessity; and it seems to have been a
necessity not less sharp and tragic which spurred Mr.
Brown to action. Perhaps when all the facts are
known it may be possible to dissent from this
reading of the necessities of the case, but it is unfair
and ungenerous to condemn him before the full facts
are known.’
“ One other Press criticism we notice—it is that
of the Melbourne Age. Flippant, palpably unjust
comment might be expected from some insignificant
prints in the colonies. There are papers without a
shred of moral character, scandals to journalistic
literature, pandering to infidelity and lust, and that
they should attack Mr. Brown might grieve those
who appreciate a self-sacrificing life, but could not
possibly excite surprise.
“ The Age, however, enjoys a very large circulation,
156
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


and is understood to be the organ of the dominant
political party in Victoria; it is therefore astonish-
ing to find in its columns a sub-leader which, for
flippancy of style and prejudiced distortion of facts,
could hardly be surpassed. This precious deliver-
ance is thus perorated: ‘lf Wesleyan Christianity
obtains a foothold in New Britain it will have been
by the means introduced by Mohammed—the sword
in one hand, the book in the other—baptism or
butchery, the only alternative of the people.’ The
Rev. John Watsford replied to the Age in just
such a manly letter as might have been expected
from him, in the course of which he says: ‘I do not
complain that you condemn Mr. Brown’s conduct,
but I do most earnestly protest against the way in
which you have done this. For the murderers you
can find some excuse, some pity, but for the mission-
ary none. Surely Mr. Brown’s character, his noble
work, and the peculiarly trying and dangerous
position in which he was placed, demand some
consideration, and should lead those who blame him
to do so as tenderly and mercifully as the circum-
stances of the case will warrant.’ After narrating
Mr. Brown’s services in the cause of humanity, and
recounting the difficult circumstances in which he was
placed in New Britain, Mr. Watsford thus concludes:
‘The Age might have shown some consideration for
the committee so sorely tried by these painful events.
That it has not done so has not surprised us, for the
Wesleyan Church has learned to expect from certain
quarters but little commendation for the good it
157
‘ THE MELBOURNE AGE!


does, and no mercy for the mistakes it makes.’ We
only wish to add in this connection, that the exten-
sive Press criticism (of which the foregoing is but a
part) which has followed the news of the defensive
measures adopted by the mission party in New
Britain, cannot fail to produce one result; it will
impress upon missionaries—if such impression should
he necessary—that force should be resorted to with
infinite reluctance, and can be justified by nothing
save peril of the most unmistakable and extreme
character.”


CHAPTER VII.
Arms and implements of New Britain natives—Surgical implements—
Bleeding—Wind and rain makers—Tricks of “doctors”—Native
ideas of religion—Spirits of departed—Cure a native by magic—Inun-
dated with patients—Articles of food —Cooking—Fishing—Houses—
The taboo tree.
I shall now try and describe some of the arms
and implements of the New Britain natives in the
district of Kininigunun and Blanche Bay.
First in importance are the tomahawks, the heads
of which used to be formerly entirely of stone, hut
since the white trader has come to this part of the
island it has been much given up for the iron head.
The stone heads “were wedged between two pieces of
wood, much in the same manner as those in New
Guinea, but not so nicely finished, and the handle
was also longer and more awkward. But with the
iron-head tomahawk they fasten it on to a long
handle highly ornamented, and the head is kept
well greased with candle-nut oil, as is also the staff
of the handle; notches are cut just below the head to
show the number of victims that have fallen by the
hand of the owner. Next in importance are the
clubs. These are of several kinds; the most common
are made of wood, in the shape of a somewhat
elongated constable’s staff. Another kind have a
curious head of a conical shape —these are decorated
159


with different colours, red, white, and blue, with
strings of beads fastened to the handle. The stone
club is the most formidable weapon of the kind that
I have ever seen —it is formed by a large round
STONE CLUBS AND HATCHET, NEW BRITAIN.
ball of stone on one end and with a long wooden
handle through a hole in its centre.
The way it is made is peculiar : the native first
160
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


takes a piece of suitable granite which he places in a
slow fire of cocoa-nut shells, which give an immense
heat, and allows it to become red hot. He then, by
the aid of a split bamboo in the place of tongs,
STONE CLUB, BLANCHE BAY, NEW BRITAIN.
removes it from the fire, and begins to drop water on
it drop by drop, each drop falling exactly on the
same place.
That portion of the stone on which the water
M


falls begins to fly and crack off, until the heat has
gone out of the stone. He then repeats the operation
until an irregular hole is formed through the centre ;
he then fixes a stick through it, and takes it off to a
place where there is a large granite rock in which is
a dent like a small basin.
He hits the stone upon the rock until all the
rough corners are knocked off and it is worn fairly
round ; then takes the end of the stick, and pressing
the stone down into the hollow of the rock makes
the stick revolve rapidly between his hands, weight-
ing it with other stones fastened to the top of the
stick, until that side of the stone is worn perfectly
smooth and round. He then shifts the other side of
the stone downwards and works at that until both
are smooth and even, choosing a handle of tough
wood, about four feet long, on to which he fixes the
stone with gum from the bread-fruit tree, leaving
about four inches protruding at one end beyond the
stone.
One club that I bought had a flat circular stone
beautifully made and of the size of an ordinary
china plate, with a sharp edge on the circumference.
There are only certain natives who can make
these stone clubs, for which they obtain high prices.
The sling is also a weapon that these natives use
with great accuracy and force. It is formed of two
long strings, each of which is about two feet six
inches in length, one having a pearl-shell button
fastened to the end; this is to prevent its slipping
through the fingers, whilst the other string is


finished off to a taper point. These two strings
are joined together by a flat piece of bark of
the cocoa-nut tree (usually) which is the recep-
tacle for the stone. On throwing, the two ends of
the string are held in the right hand, the button
being between the second and third fingers, the
stone resting on the piece of bark is swung rapidly
round and round the head with the right arm bent,
and when sufficient impetus has been given, the
pointed end of the string is let go, and the stone
flies, the string at the same time cracking like a
whip.
I have seen a native knock a bird off a tree
at about one hundred yards distant; they seldom
pitch the stone further from an object aimed at
than three or four yards.
The spears are of various kinds—some, and these
the most commonly used, are made from the hard
outside bark of the cocoa-nut palms ; they are quite
plain and rough, only having the sharp point burnt
in the fire a little in order to harden it.
Others are made of tan-wood, which is very
tough; others from a bastard ebony that grows
in these islands—they are generally plain.
The spears they use for “ close quarters ” mostly
have a shin or arm-bone stuck on to the butt end.
These bones are those of some enemy killed in fight-
ing, as they attach superstitious value to them,
supposing them to give the throwing power of the
man to whom the bones belonged in addition to their
own.
M 2


SPEAR WITH CASSOWARY’S CLAWTIP, SPACIOUS BAY, NEW BRITAIN.
SPEAR WITH HUMAN BONE, NEW BRITAIN AND NEW IRELAND.
SPEAR, NEW IRELAND.
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


The spears used for festive occasions are decorated
with a large conical-shaped arrangement of feathers,
very artistically worked, blue, green, red and white
being the usual colours. The feathers are obtained
from the gay-plumaged parrots that abound in these
islands. Their clubs used in the dances are also
decorated in the same manner. In some of their
dances they use a “ Marlargen ” in each hand ; these
are thin pieces of wood with the figures of men or
animals carved on them, and being so light and thin,
they bend and shake with each movement of the
dancer.
These natives have also a curious idea that the
skull after death is the place to which the spirit
of the departed person resorts when it returns
from its journeyings, and for this reason they use the
skulls of their departed friends in dancing. The
method is this, they cut the skulls in half, taking
away any small bones or other matter from the
inside of the face half of the skull, which on the
outside they fill up in the original form with gum,
lime, &c., to represent the face of the human being as
nearly as possible. Across the back of the lower
jawbone they fix a piece of wood, which is held in
the mouth of the person that is dancing; these
masks are used in the “ toberran ” dances else-
where described.
The surgical instruments used by these natives
are a piece of obsidian, a shark’s tooth, and if
obtainable a piece of glass bottle.
In the case of a broken leg or arm the flesh is
165
PRESERVATION OF SKULLS.


cut open to the bone, which is drawn into position,
and a piece of bamboo inserted next to the bone to
keep it in its place, and the wound is then bound up.
After the bone has set the bamboo works out
through the opening that was made, and the wound
is then allowed to heal. I have seen men that have
undergone this operation and they walked with ease.
I have also seen a man that had new teeth put in
made of pearl-shell. This was accomplished in the
following manner ; the gums in the place where the
teeth were required were cut lengthways down to
the bone, then a piece of pearl-shell was inserted of
the required size which rested on the bone, the
gums were then allowed to grow back into their
place, being held by a little arrangement made
of bamboo, which pressed them together, the man
in the meantime being fed on soft food so as not
to disturb the healing. They bleed for every
conceivable ailment, cutting that part affected.
If a man has a headache they will tie a tight
band round the head across the forehead, and
then cut deep gashes into the skin until the
blood flows freely. When sufficient has been
taken away they stop the bleeding with burnt
lime. It is a common thing to see a man with his
face, chest, arms, legs, and stomach covered with
the marks of the surgical bleeding-instrument.
The surgeons are also magicians or wind and rain
makers ; they pretend to be able to cure anything, or
make any one ill, however distant that person may
be: also that they control the wind and rain. I
166
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


saw a very peculiar cure performed by one of these
wind-makers or doctors, which tends to show how
much trickery there is made up with what is real in
their practice, and also what a great help faith is in
sickness. I wanted a man to go with me in a canoe
to a place some distance off. When I got to his
house, his “ woman ” told me he was sick, and could
not go. “ Oh,” I said, “ I will give him a good big
present if he will come, besides paying for the hire of
the canoe.” “Well,” she said, “will you pay the
doctor for him ? then he may be able to go.” I
consented, and the doctor was sent for. The man
came out of his house looking indeed wretchedly ill.
I felt bis pulse, looked at his tongue, and he
appeared to me to be suffering from a description
of fever. On his arrival the doctor first asked
him what he felt; he told him and the doctor then
said, “ Oh, yes, there are two worms in your
stomach, I can see them, I will take them away and
you will be all right.” The doctor then made the
man stand up with his hands over his head, and
waved some sprigs of ginger-plant about him, the
meanwhile singing a sort of chant; after this he
took some burnt lime in the hollow of his hand
and blew it against the man’s stomach three times;
he then began to scratch the man’s navel with one
finger, gradually approaching his mouth to the
patient’s stomach and drawing in his breath. The
woman then supplied him with half a cocoa-nut
shell full of water, which he took in his left hand,
placing his mouth close to the man’s navel, drew


back suddenly and began retching violently over
the cocoa-nut shell. Presently a large worm
dropped out of his mouth. The doctor did all this
a second time with the same result, and then told
the man he was cured. The man went with me
to the place I wished, paddling the whole way
there and back —a distance of some thirty miles.
NEW BRITAIN CANOE, GAZELLE PENINSULA.
I looked at the worms, they were unlike any I
had seen before, and appeared as if they certainly
might have come from a man’s body.
One of the native boys, who had accompanied me
to the man’s house, and to whom I had expressed
my opinion that the doctor was a humbug, turned
round to me and said, “ There, do you call that
gammon ? ” It certainly was a very clever bit of
imposition, but it had the desired effect.
168
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


In the case of a chief wishing to make a trading
voyage in his canoes, he generally first consults one
of these wind-makers, and pays him to make the
weather fine. Of course it is part of these men’s
business to be thoroughly conversant with the
changes of the weather, and if they see that it
is likely to be adverse they plead all manner
of excuses. They sometimes say that another
chief is going the opposite way, and that they
cannot change the direction of the wind until his
journey is over. This is but one of the many
excuses they make use of in order to put off their
dupes.
If, however, they see the weather is likely to be
fair, then they make the best bargain they can with
the chief who is wishing to start; but of course,
should the weather turn out bad during this journey,
they put it down to the want of payment.
They are very sharp, clever men, these wind-
makers ; indeed, were they not they would soon
lose their custom, and as likely as not get a spear
through them as well.
When pretending to make the wind blow in the
right direction they take burnt lime in their hands,
and throw it up in the air singing a sort of chant
all the time. They then wave sprigs of ginger and
other plants about, throwing them up and catching
them. At the last they make a small fire with these
sprigs on the spot where the lime has fallen thickest
to the ground, walking round the fire chanting
a few notes repeatedly, but in a low tone. They


then take the ashes and throw them on the water,
and the ceremony is complete.
To any one who was a casual observer of these
natives it would appear that they were trying to
propitiate some god or performing a rite of worship ;
but in reality it is not so, but simply that these
clever rogues know how easily their fellow-natives
are impressed by outward ceremonial, and when they
see all this going on, and find that the result is as
they wished it to be, of course these simple savages
part it down to the wind-maker having a super-
natural power, or at all events one superior to their
own. This is the result the doctor wishes to obtain
in order to establish his reputation, and therefore
nothing can be done by these men without a great
deal of outward show.
Of the religion of these natives it is hard to speak
with assurance, as there appears at first sight to be
no positive law, order, or even similar ideas in any
two places.
The real fact is that they have no knowledge of
any Glod, that is to say, one to be worshipped. They
have a belief in a superior being, that originally
formed the land on which they live, but it is always
spoken of as a being that was at a very remote
period, not one that is now, in existence.
I have heard some declare that it was a huge pig
that rooted the earth up and formed the mountains
and valleys.
The natives are very superstitious regarding the
spirits of their departed friends or enemies, which


they consider have either a bad or good influence as
the case may be.
In conversation one day with an old man about
the spirits of the deceased he told me that the stars
were lamps hung by the departed spirits to light
the way for those that should come after ; where he
did not say, and although I questioned him closely
on the subject, he had no ideas as to the sort of place
that it is they come to at last. He only knew that
the spirit went across the water to the moon at
rising, and getting into her was carried to the
region of the stars, from whence they returned to
visit the earth by the same means.
I tried to puzzle him by asking him how it was
that the moon was sometimes large and sometimes
small; he replied that when it was small there were
not so many spirits requiring to go, as it was always
at the full moon that most people died, and that was
always the time when most spirits required to visit
the earth.
They are terribly afraid of an eclipse as being
something far beyond their comprehension, indeed
they cannot account for it except by the wild notion
that the spirits are angry.
I had a native on board at one time who was
suddenly seized with fever, though he said that’some
one of his enemies had bewitched him. This, he
explained to me, had been done by obtaining some
banana skins of which he had eaten the fruit, and
making magic over them and then burning them.
This is the reason that these natives are always


careful to hide or burn the refuse of anything that
they have been eating, for by this means they
declare it is possible to make your enemy ill, or even
to die. In the case of the young man in question
I determined to try a little simple magic myself, as
this appears to be the best and only manner of deal-
ing with these natives when they get this idea into
their head. I therefore agreed with him, and told
him I could drive the evil out of him, as white men
understood far more real magic than his people. I
told him to stand forward by the foremast and look
at a penny which I placed in his hand—that was
in reality to gain time.
I went below into the cabin and fastened a long
string to the starting catch of a large musical box
I had. I then went to my medicine chest, and
mixed a strong dose of quinine and brandy; I also
took out a spoonful of flour of sulphur, which I placed
in a glass tube.
These I then took on deck as well as the string
attached to the musical box, which I concealed on
one side of the skylight. Then I called the man
aft, and told him to open his mouth and shut his
eyes (as one does to children), and I blew the sulphur
down his throat. This nearly choked him, but I
knew it must be something severe or he would not
believe in my magic. I walked round him a little,
and then gave him the quinine and brandy ; I then
told him to lie down on the deck, and if he heard a
“ toberran ” singing he would be perfectly cured.
Without moving from where I stood, I pulled the
172
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


string and the box began to play; in the meantime
the native was extremely agitated, and when the
music began he shouted and screamed with excite-
ment.
I would not allow him to run away as he wanted
to, but made him lie down on a mat on the deck, and
soon the brandy began to affect him, and he fell
•asleep, to wake up quite cured. But it had rather
an unfortunate result, for he sounded my praises so
much amongst other natives that I found myself
inundated with patients to such an extent that I had
to refuse any more medical aid.
These natives have very diverse laws with regard
to their feeding. In Kininigunun the women are
tabooed from eating any pig or tortoise; in Karavia
the men are tabooed from eating anything but
human flesh, fowls, or fish; this is also the case in
Nodup, or was before cannibalism was supposed to
be stopped.
The natives are extremely fond of dogs’ flesh, but
this only on rare occasions that one is cooked, most
generally on the occasion of the death of a chief,
when a feast is made by his successor.
The flesh of young alligators is also considered a
great delicacy; the cassowary, wallaby, and maga-
pode are eaten; fowls’ eggs are very numerous, as
also in some parts are those of the magapode —these
latter are very rich.
Cassowaries’ eggs are generally blown before being
eaten, as the shell is much prized as an ornament.
Turtles’ eggs are consumed in large quantities both
173
CUSTOMS AS TO EATING.


raw and cooked. There is a large description of
spider that is considered a very delicate article of
food. They take off the legs and place the bodies
in a half cocoa-nut shell over a fire, and when
thoroughly warmed they eat them.
They eat every kind of bird they can catch, as
well as flying foxes, flying squirrels, and bats; yams,
taro, and sweet potatoes form their staple vegetable,
but they also cook the leaves of the taro and sweet
potato. Bananas are seldom eaten ripe, as they
generally pick them quite green, and say they are
more wholesome cooked in this state than if eaten
ripe; bread-fruit and jack-fruit are also very com-
monly eaten by these natives.
Their method of cooking is to make a hole in the
ground and light a fire in it, into this is dropped a
number of hard stones that become red hot. Should
it be a pig that they intend cooking, some of these
si,ones are taken out by a pair of bamboo tongs and
placed inside the carcase, subsequent to its having
been singed over a grass fire and cleaned; it is
then wrapped in banana leaves, placed in the hole
and covered with the remainder of the stones, and is
finally all covered in with banana leaves and heaped
up with earth; this is left for about two hours,
when it is taken out and the skin is divided
into little squares with a sharp shell or piece of
obsidian.
Every other article of food is treated in the same
manner, as they have no vessels in which to boil.
The natives make a kind of cake of the flour
174
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


obtained from the kernel of the “ tan ’’-fruit, and also
from crushed “ turnups ” or wild almonds. They smoke
pigs’ flesh for keeping, as well as some kinds of fish.
Salt is never used in their food, nor do they seem to
have an idea that it is necessary, except as medicine;
for this it is much prized by the inland or bush
people, who buy cocoa-nut shells and bamboo bottles
full of salt-water from the shore tribes.
They eat all manner of shell-fish, and most of the
sea fish and eels, but there are some kinds that they
consider as very poisonous, and undoubtedly they are
so, as I have seen some of my men very ill from
eating a fish that was stated to be poisonous by a
native of the place.
Squid or cuttle-fish is a delicacy they are fond of,
hammering them well with a heavy stone before
cooking, which is done in banana leaves, with cocoa-
nut milk added, which gives it a most delicious
flavour.
There is in these islands a small bee that makes
a honey tasting much like raspberry vinegar, and
is considered a great luxury by the people. The
cooking is on the whole very good, and I must say
I like most of the native dishes, and think good taro
is the best vegetable of the kind I ever tasted.
In fishing, these natives use beautifully made fish-
traps, as well as the rod and net (as before described).
These traps are moored with a rope made of cane
twisted together attached to a stone. This kind of
fishing is practised sometimes in very great depths
of water, even as much as one hundred fathoms.
175
NATIVE DISHES—FISH-TRAPS.


This fish-trap is made of plaited cane, very neatly
worked in pattern something like the seat of a cane
chair, and is oblong in form, open at both ends, with
a number of slight canes converging from the
opening to the centre, where a space is left for
the fish to get into the pot; but these canes being
pointed, they on trying to return are met by the
points, and so cannot get out.
WOOP OR FISHING-BASKET, NEW BRITAIN.
Another mode of catching fish is with a number
of prickly palm branches, which are all tied to-
gether at one end and worked round with fibre so
as to form a cone with the hooked thorns pointing
inwards towards the apex, where a piece of bait is
fixed. A bit of light wood is fastened to the trap with
a long string. With this trap the native dives
and places it on the edge of a reef, putting a
stone on the string near it, so that the wood will
float on the water whilst the trap remains below.


The fish seeing the bait makes a rush for it, and
gets his head into the trap, without any difficulty,
but when he tries to back out he finds himself
hooked on all sides, and in his frantic endeavours
to get clear pulls the string from under the stone,
and the native, seeing the piece of wood moving,
jumps into the water and tows it to shore.
The hooks for lines are made of tortoise-shell, and
the bait for spinning is formed of pearl-shell in the
FISH TRAP, MADE OF PRICKLY PALM, NEW BRITAIN.
shape of a fish, having a tortoise-shell hook on the
tail. They also use a spear with five points, four on
the outside and one in the middle.
There is a description of creeper which, when
bruised and thrown into the water, the fish eat and
appear to become intoxicated, for they turn up and
become quite helpless, when they fall an easy prey
to the native.


The houses of these natives are as a general rule
not of a very high order, being often only small
huts made of bamboo and thatched with either grass
or sugar-cane leaves. For each village two large
(1.) Spinning pearl-shell bait. (2.) Hook made from iron nail.
(3.) Tortoise-shell hook. (4.) Tortoise-shell hook. (5.) Clam-shell hook.
FISHING HOOKS FROM NEW BRITAIN.
houses are built, one for the men, the other for the
women. No man is allowed in the women’s house,
nor is any woman allowed in the men’s house; the
178
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


To face page 178.
VILLAGE, NEW BRITAIN (GAZELLE PENINSULA).




latter is generally used for a council house. They
are lined with bunks made of bamboo which extend
along both sides of the house, serving either as beds
or seats.
These houses are generally built in the form of
an ellipse, the eaves of the thatch coming down to
within three feet of the ground, but inside the walls
are six feet high, over which the roof arches to about
eighteen feet. The inside is carefully blackened with
the smoke of cocoa-nut shells, which forms a descrip-
tion of enamel, and does not rub off; it also (the
natives assured me) preserves the rafters and timbers
from rot and worm. The outside enclosure is planted
generally with variegated plants and the ground is
kept beautifully clean ; the whole being enclosed by
a fence of bamboo.
Opposite the chiefs house is generally the taboo
tree, decorated with the lower jawbones of pigs, which
are hung in profusion all over it. It is on this tree
that the unfortunate victims of cannibalism are de-
spatched and their bodies exposed for sale; it is
generally painted with red and white bands as well
as with representations of faces.
x 2


CHAPTER VIII.
Unexplored part of New Britain —Cunning of Tarlily—Junior Mission
House Point—Sham fight by boys —Sand-cake throwing—Market
women—Amusements of children—Opening for sugar-cane growing—
Port Webber—“Tatooing” a warrior—Armlets —Hospitality and offer
of a Cambira chief—His taboo hut—Council house —He visits my
vessel—Fire a gun —My musical box —Amusing incident with a bad
egg —Natives of Materbert Island—Mode of carrying fire and water-
interment of dead —Timidity of natives of Matukanaputa—Novel
dance—Discrepancies of charts —Curious effects of atmosphere—Mag-
nificent sceneiy—Crocodile fly-catchers—Hover and the crocodiles—
Sem-si-gorro—Our animals—Turtle-catching—Wife-hunting.
Thus far what I have written applies only to the
east and a portion of the north coast from Return
Point to Kabakadaie in New Britain, and to Duke
of York Island. I will now ask the reader to
accompany me into the western and hitherto
unexplored part of New Britain lying between Cape
Lambert, the northern point, and Cape Gloucester,
the easternmost point of this island. From Cape
Stephens westward along the coast of Goonan and
Ruterwool districts, which terminate in Tarlily
Bay, are groves of cocoa-nut palms interspersed
with the foliage of other fruit-bearing trees, such
as the bread-fruit, banana, and turnup, whilst
further inland are seen the tops of the elegant
betel-nut palm waving above the less lofty
greenwood and fey-fey trees, at the back rising
the volcanic upheavals of probably thousands of
180


years covered with grass that in the distance looks
soft and velvety, but in reality is higher than a
man’s head, in many cases coarse and thorny.
It is strange that the custom of the Duk-duk is
not practised in Ruterwool, although it is in full
operation amongst the tribes surrounding it, I
have never found any reason for this, which is
certainly a very curious fact.
Tarlily Bay is surrounded by comparatively low
land, with large plantations of bananas flourishing
close to the shore; inland, at a distance of about two
miles, the hills spring up to a considerable altitude.
This bay is named after that chief who caused so
much trouble to Mr. Brown, as I have already
described.
This man was certainly the most cunning, at the
same time one of the most fearless, chiefs I met with
on this island. He was constantly on board my
little vessel whilst she was anchored in this bay.
He appeared to be confident that I would not
take any mean advantage of him, although I had
been very active against him in the late fight-
ing, and might at any moment have made him
a prisoner; indeed he at last went so far as to
promise me that he would go to see Mr. Brown at
Duke of York with me on my promising that no
harm should befall him. However, I never had a
chance of taking him, I am sorry to say. He is
small in stature and covered with buckwar, and
is altogether a very ugly man, but his eyes are
quick, piercing, and very intelligent. I believe that


although he is cunning, cruel, and a cannibal, it is
solely from want of better knowledge, or rather
perhaps I should say from force of habit.
Junior Mission House Point is the north-eastern
point of Kabakadaie, and is now distinguished by a
mission-house that has lately been erected here for
the residence of the Junior White Missionary. It is
rather a warm corner for him though, having Tarlily
on one side and a chief called Bulilie on the other,
who is anything but a true friend of the mission.
This point on Tarlily Bay side falls abruptly to
the beach in a cliff of about forty feet drop ;
on the north-western side it is more shelving,
but has moderately steep hills at the back. There
is a considerable fringe reef lying from it about a
quarter of a mile, inside of which there is a boat
passage; this reef extends along the whole of
Kabakadaie, which is the next district, and is
fronted by a long, nearly straight piece of coast
running in a west-south-westerly direction to Shoal
Point. There is a good anchorage off the reef,
the depth of water varying from six to twenty
fathoms. It is a very lovely piece of coast with its
many groves of palms and surrounding villages of
more or less importance, whilst at the back are seen
rising lofty hills, dotted here and there with many-
coloured shrubs and trees ; on the beach are a number
of canoes and long lengths of “ cudda ” or cane
ropes, with the “ woop ” or fish-traps to which they
are attached to moor them in deep water.
Every here and there is seen the peculiar fence
182
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


painted in fantastic patterns to denote the taboo
ground of the Duk-duk, inside which fence is
invariably seen the house of this gentleman, where
he is supposed to reside ; and at times one may
see strange figures dancing along the beach and
uttering those peculiar cries that give notice of his
approach, whilst at another spot in an open space
are a crowd of small boys engaged in a sham fight.
Sides having been formed, each of them proceeds
to collect as many of the green fruit of a tree that
grows on the shore as they can, having already pro-
vided themselves with long green reeds that grow
on swampy ground. When sufficient ammunition
has been collected the mimic fight begins ; the green
seeds are used in slings, and the reeds are for spears,
both of which are thrown with great accuracy by
these embryo warriors, who often have an old man
acting as instructor and umpire. These fights are kept
up with great spirit for hours together, and by this
means the lads are trained to the use of their native
arms, and some become great experts in the use of
one or the other weapon, if not both. It is a great
disgrace to be taken prisoner, and therefore it is
practice to them in running as well as the use of
arms. I have seen some very nasty blows given by
the seeds used in the slings, but as they have only
been considered a laughing matter by the others I
suppose nothing much was thought of such trifles.
Further on will perhaps be seen a group of
children of both sexes engaged in making little oval
cakes of sand in their hands and throwing them up


into the air to fall into the water ; if they break it is
not considered to count as one to the thrower. The
game consists in seeing how many can be thrown
without breaking, and the higher the more success ;
if they drop whole into the water they do so with a
hollow sound that always determines the mark. As
each one drops in whole the player makes a mark on
the sand with his foot to enable him to remember
how often he succeeds running; if one breaks he
has to rub out and begin afresh. I have often seen
grown men and women playing at this game, and
have tried to throw them myself, but found it no
easy matter to do so successfully ; they appear very
fond of it, and will keep it up all day.
Sometimes, too, may be seen a long line of women
tramping along with their heavy loads to market,
some with baskets full of yams, others with taro,
cocoa-nuts, &c., strapped on to their backs and across
the forehead. Perhaps on the top of the baskets on
some woman’s back will be a network bag containing
her latest olive branch, either sleeping in perfect
comfort or taking refreshment in the most stoical
manner possible ; here and there are men and boys
running and playing in the water. I have seen little
children that could hardly walk when on shore swim
like little fish as soon as their legs were off the
bottom—they seem to take to it like water-spaniels.
On calm days some boys will sail their toy canoes,
and beautiful little models they often are, though
others seem to be just as pleased with half a cocoa-
nut husk, in which they fix an upright stick with a


leaf on it to represent a sail, and this seems some-
what curious as both in New Britain and New
Ireland they have no proper sails to their canoes —
just a mat on a pole for going before the wind. I
suppose the idea must come from the vessels that
they have seen passing their shores.
Altogether it is a most animated sight, and looking
at it and hearing the merry peals of laughter that
ring out from the shore, it does seem hard to realize
that perhaps to-morrow some of them will be engaged
in torturing some poor wretch that has fallen into
their hands and afterwards in eating him. It is a
most unpleasant thought to come at such a time of
apparent happiness and innocence, yet it is, alas, too
true that here, where nature seems to have expended
her greatest art in rendering the earth beautiful,
where her lavish hand has spared nothing to render
these islands most exquisite, here her most perfect
work man is the one thing evil and debased.
On our way to Port Webber we passed Midway
Reef, that lies almost mid-channel between Shoal
Point and Man Island: it shows a-wash at low
water. Next comes Luin Bay, a pretty fair
anchorage for small vessels during the south-east
monsoon. A valley runs hack from Luin Bay,
formed by the Kabakadaie Hills on one side and
Ruin Hills on the other; it is a pretty open piece
of country, and would form a good spot for sugar-
cane growing, I should fancy, were there any
mills in this part of the world to crush the cane
when grown. However, it will be many years, I
185
AN INTERESTING SCENE.


suppose, before agriculture of that kind is carried
on here. Next comes Cape Luin with an immense
reef running from it about a mile in extent. Luin
itself is high and thinly covered with trees ; several
fishing villages may be seen on the shore on the
other side of the reef.
Between this reef and the Island of Urara is the
passage that takes us into Port Webber. Now we
round the extreme edge of the reef and run along
the shore, the reef gradually getting smaller and
smaller, and as the last of it loses itself on shore we
sight the noble mountain of Beautemps Beaupre,
which serves as a good landmark to steer for, as
running up for it will take us into a good anchorage,
clear of the fringe reefs off the Cambira coast. This
anchorage to which we are now steering appears to
be the only one for vessels of any size in Port
Webber; it is sheltered from the south-east monsoon,
but the north-west blows directly into it, though it
is seldom that much sea gets up inside, owing to
the numerous reefs which surround the mouth of
the port.
Port Webber is a deep embayment about six miles
long, and with the south-east monsoon is almost
like an inland sea, it is so smooth and calm. On the
eastern side it is formed, as we have before stated, by
the shore of Luin district, but the head of the bay is
a district called Cambira. This is fairly populated,
and a good many villages show themselves amongst
the thick foliage along the shore, but the main part
of the inhabitants have dwellings on the high grassy
186
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


hills about two miles from the beach, above which
towers Mount Beautemps Beaupre to the height of
about one thousand eight hundred feet. Several
small streams gush out from under the bushes and
plough their way through the sand to the sea. Here
I landed, and wishing to go some distance inland,
obtained the guidance of the old chief of the district
(I forget his name, but it was a very long one). We
started off through the bush, a party of about ten,
natives leading. The shore was belted with scrub for
some little distance, and then gradually merged into
grassy plain land; the grass is very high in some
places, quite two feet above our heads, though the
tracks are quite clear, but they are only about two feet
wide. How easy it would be for these natives to form
an ambush in the high grass did they intend any
treachery; a spear could be launched at one without
your being able to see where the thrower was in the
least.
In some places the grass had been burnt in
patches to make way for yam planting. All my
guides were armed with different weapons, some with
the common wooden spear, others with trade toma-
hawks (though not many of those), and one had a
kind of sword made from the outside wood of the
cocoa-nut or betel-nut palm, and cut with jagged
teeth something like a saw, with which they beat
back any stray bushes or grass in the track; one
man had a club something the shape of a spade
without the shoulders. These I saw many of after-
wards : they generally have the end of the handle


covered with net-work, sometimes stained with
different colours, but generally whitened with “ ker-
bung” or lime; the broad end is concave, with a
half-moon shaped ornament on either side ; the chief
had a long-handled comb stuck in his hair, which is
common to nearly all the different tribes on tbe north
end of the island; one or two had stone clubs.
One of tbe men had lately been made a warrior, and
consequently had his breast and stomach tatooed (?),
small gashes being cut in the skin in volutes —on
the two breasts surrounding the nipples and on the
stomach. Into these gashes lime had been rubbed to
prevent them bleeding, whilst the front of his body
was very handsomely decorated with a red, blue, and
white pattern. This poor fellow must have been in
great pain from the many gashes; indeed, when
stooping he showed how stiff and sore he was by
having great difficulty in raising himself again
without a groan ; however, the others only laughed
at him and seemed to consider it an excellent
joke, no doubt having been through it themselves
before.
The armlets that these natives wear are composed
of finely-plaited grass stained black and yellow,
very neatly made with diagonal patterns worked
into them. These, I understand, are made by the
women, though I never saw any at work on them ;
they are worn on the upper part of the arm imme-
diately over the biceps. Why they are worn so
tight I cannot say, but suppose it is the fashion.
The dialect of these people is much tbe same as


those of Blanche Bay with a slight difference in the
pronunciation.
We shortly got into rising ground, and after
traversing a distance of some three miles or there-
abouts we found ourselves on the top of one of the
grassy hills that appeared over the trees from the
head of Port Webber. Here I found the grass
cleared away and cocoa-nut trees growing in large
clusters about an open space, in which were several
houses with a large one in the centre; this large
house appeared to be the council or reception house
of the chief; in front of it was a large “ garamoot ”
or wooden drum, to be beaten for war or an
assembly of any kind. On arriving the chief shouted
to some women, and immediately a great bustle
commenced, the women hurrying off in all directions.
The chief’s head woman brought out some mats and
placed them in a half circle in front of the large
house; she then went into another house, and after
we had seated ourselves, myself and the chief in the
middle, she returned with a quantity of betel-nut and
pepper leaves, and a small bag made of a dried
banana leaf full of burnt lime; she handed the betel-
nut round to all of us, and then gave the lime-bag to
the chief, who courteously handed it to me; but seeing
I had some difficulty in getting off the husk of my
betel-nut, he took it from me, and putting it into his
own mouth, cracked it, and, taking out the kernel,
presented it to me. Of course I had to appear
pleased and chew away at it with the best grace I
could. Soon after tbe other women came back with


cocoa-nuts young and old, of which I was very glad
to partake.
We sat and talked a considerable time, he asking
many questions as to my country, and also if I would
not come and build a house in his district and live
with him, he promising for his part to build a
house for me and buy me two wives to look after it;
for this -I was to go fighting with him against his
enemies. I did not tell him that I would not , and
thanked him for his kind offer, hut told him that I
Could not leave my vessel yet, as I had many more
people to visit. He held out the advantages of
Cambira over any part of his known world (which
did not extend more than at most fifty miles away)
and did not seem very pleased that I did not jump at
so tempting an offer. However, I assured him that
when I saw my own people I would tell them what a
delightful spot Cambira was, and I had no doubt that
some would like to come and live with him. This
pacified him somewhat, and he then made me a
present of a pig. I told him I would give him a
tomahawk and some other things if he would come
and see me on board, which he promised to do.
After this he was very civil and conversed in a
very friendly manner, and eventually took me to see
his taboo (or money), of which he appeared to have a
good deal. It was kept in a small hut, in which slept
some of his women, and was beautifully packed
in coils, covered with split cane netted together,
somewhat in the form of a life-belt covered with
wicker-work. Each coil contained about two hundred


fathoms of this shell-money, and I suppose there were
at least four dozen of them laid on mats in this hut.
In the case of an attack the women carry them off,
and hide or bury them in a pre-arranged spot. We
next entered the large hut or council house.
Now I have no ground for saying that it was a
council house (as the probabilities are that any
council to be held would be in the open air), except
that it gave me that idea, as otherwise what use
could it have been ? Certainly it might have been,
as in other parts of New Britain, a young man’s
sleeping house, but I saw no young men about except
those that came with us, and they did not live here,
and all the other houses belonged to either the
chiefs women, his butcher, or his talking man, and
their women. It may have been for housing people
coming to visit this chief. It was, of course, blackened
inside with the smoke of the cocoa-nut shell, as all
these natives’ houses are, and decorated with the jaw-
bones of pigs large and small; a few spears and clubs
were stuck up against the wall. It seemed to be
about fifty feet long by twenty feet wide, and was
also about nine feet high, having two entrances, one
on either side. The walls were not more than five
feet high, with the thatch overlapping on the outer
side and nearly touching the ground. After he had
shown me all that he thought would interest me
we again sat down on the mats, and then women
brought us fowls cooked in banana leaves with
cocoa-nut juice and small yams; they also brought
us some baked taro and young cocoa-nuts. As


I was very hungry it was to me a most delightful
meal.
After this was over we partook of more betel-nut.
I then left him, after giving the women all the
tobacco I had as well as a few beads, with which
they were highly delighted, and, accompanied by
some of the men who had guided us up, and who
carried the pig slung on a bamboo, I went down
to the shore again, and after rewarding them with
tobacco returned on board.
The next day the old chief came according to
promise, and was much interested in looking over my
vessel, and was particularly inquisitive about the
little swivel guns; so thinking to please him I loaded
one with a blank charge and fired it; he was
horribly frightened, and sank hack on the deck
shaking his head and trying to pull the sound out of
his ears. He looked so comical that I began to
laugh, and after telling him, “ Putta mat ” (“ No kill
anybody ”), he seemed much more reassured, but
carefully gave the guns a wide berth. He hardly
seemed to comprehend my musical box, but held my
arm very tight until it had finished playing, then,
putting his hand to his mouth, gave vent to the
common expression of astonishment of all these
natives, “Wo—wo—wo!” I then gave him the
promised present, with which he seemed well pleased.
We did a good deal of trading with the natives here
in yams, fowls’ eggs, &c. I had some fun with them
about some bad eggs I had bought from one man,
which as I was paying for so many things I did not


notice until H told me they were bad, when
taking one in my hand and seeing the native who
had sold them to me standing up in his canoe not far
off, I threw one at him, saying at the same time,
“Picoyina ” (“ It is bad”). It happened to hit him
just in the middle of the forehead, and of course
breaking ran down into his eyes and mouth.
This so amused the others (and there were a good
many there) that they laughed till they cried, and
even rolled out of their canoes into the water with
laughter. I never saw men in such a condition,
they could not forget it, and every now and again
would burst out afresh ; it quite stopped my buying
anything for some time.
The next day we started off along the western
coast of Port Webber towards Materbert Island. On
the way we passed a small village built on stakes
some distance out into the water, with canoes moored
under the houses, very much the same sort of village
as one sees in the Gulf of Papua, only not so large;
it is built for fishing, the natives not residing there
in the north-west monsoon, as the whole village is
liable to be washed away. The coast here is low
and swampy, but behind this apparently narrow
belt of low land rise the grand volcanic peaks of
Byning, rugged and solemn.
Materbert Island seems on approaching it to be
part of the mainland, but it is really a rocky islet
some quarter of a mile from it, and thickly populated.
The chiefs name was “ Tobrian,” and a good old
fellow he was (he died shortly before I left New
o


Britain), a great friend of mine. The island is a
more healthy spot to live on than on the main,
though there is also quite a large settlement on the
other side of the water, but a river that runs down
from the mountains above on this side makes the
spot somewhat damp and malarious. I fancy this
river contains the coldest water I have felt in any of
these streams, and from its being so cold I presume
it flows direct from the highest mountains of Byning.
The natives here are a mixture of two races, that
of the eastern side of the northern peninsula, and
that of the western side, as many of them have that
greater regularity of feature and Jewish look that is
possessed by the western natives in such a marked
degree, that any one seeing them for the first time
would immediately notice it, whereas those that we
have just left to the east have features less clearly
cut and are far more negro-like in appearance. Un-
doubtedly there are two classes of natives in this
island, those that have come from the Solomon
Islands and have landed on the eastern and southern
sides of it, and those that have come from the
north-east coast of New Guinea, and settled on the
western and northern sides. It is worthy of note
that when Dampier visited Port Montagu he found
the people called that land Birara; this name after
a considerable interval crops up again just to the
northward of Spacious Bay on the east coast. I
fancy this goes some way to prove that at one time
the south-east and north-east coasts of this island were
inhabited by people speaking the same language, and


which language is even at the present time somewhat
similar to that found in parts of the Solomon group.
In Spacious Bay, where the island is very narrow,
are found the same class of natives as those on the
western and northern shores, and are identically the
same tribes as those found in Open Bay on the north-
western side. Whilst I was in these islands a canoe
drifted on shore near Gazelle Point with a woman
and a boy in it; from what I could gather of the
desfcription of the canoe it must have been a Solomon
Island one. The woman was killed and eaten, but
the boy was kept alive, and I afterwards saw him on
board one of Messrs. Godefroy’s ships, and judging
from his language and appearance he was un-
doubtedly a Solomon islander, though he seemed to
have very confused ideas as to where he had come
from.
To resume : these natives of Materbert Island are
undoubtedly a mixture of the east and west.
They use the same implements as the natives to
eastward, and are great fishers. I have seen beauti-
ful nets made by these people: one that I saw was
one hundred and twenty feet in length and seven
feet in depth, the sinkers being stones or pieces of
coral with holes in them attached to the bottom of
the net, whilst the floats were made of pieces of light
wood cut into the shape of fish.
Their canoes are large and numerous, some of
the larger ones holding as many as twenty natives.
When starting for a long trading voyage they are
supplied with bamboo buckets as much as six feet
o I
195
EATING A WOMAN—FISHING NETS.


in length, with the interior joints broken through ex-
cept the bottom one ; these are filled with fresh water
and are corked with a wisp of banana leaf wound
round a stone, which is pressed into a hole in the top
joint; they keep the water fresh and cool a long time.
They take as provisions baked yams and taro, also
some smoked fish. For carrying fire these natives
adopt a plan that I have seen elsewhere : they press
a quantity of the soft fibrous husk of the ripe cocoa-
nut into a cocoa-nut shell, and then place a red-hot
ember in the centre of it; this will smoulder for
three or four days, and from it they obtain a light
for their cooking fires at any place they may land
on the voyage. These natives have also a species of
tobacco which they roll up into a rough kind x of
cigar, and smoke by pressing one end against a
lighted fire stick, when they take a long pull,
swallowing the smoke and keeping it in the lungs
for a considerable time, gradually emitting it from
the nose; they seldom take more than one pull at a
time, but hand it on to the next man. The leaf
much resembles tobacco leaf, but is only allowed to
partially dry in the sun, and still retains a green
appearance when ready for use ; this when made up
has curiously the native name of “ Sogar. ”
Leaving Materbert Island we passed through a
narrow passage between a small reef and the main-
land, and shortly afterwards came to the island of
Matukanaputa ; this is also high, rocky, and thickly
populated. These natives are the pirates of the
western tribes, as they travel in their canoes along


the coast and make raids on the Byning people (who
are in reality bushmen, having no canoes and living
some distance inland). The Matukanaputa natives
are also great turtle fishers, of which they obtain
large quantities on the numerous reefs and sand-
banks which abound on this part of the coast. They
are very similar to the Materbert natives in their
habits, but have a stronger affinity to the north-
western tribes in their appearance.
These people bury their dead underneath the hut
which was lately inhabited by the deceased, after
which the relatives go for a long canoe journey,
staying away some months. This is done for sanitary
reasons evidently, as the bodies are buried so near
the surface that the smell would in all probability
make any one sleeping in the hut sick, but they
say it is because the spirit of the departed stays in
his late residence for some time after his death, and
eventually finding no one to torment goes away for
good; the surviving relatives then return and remain
there as formerly. No doubt, the coral acts in much
the same manner as quicklime, and disposes of the
decomposing portions of the dead body in a short
time.
Matukanaputa lies but a few miles from Byning
Bay, which is a considerable indentation in the coast,
having deep water almost entirely throughout, but
there is an anchorage for small vessels between a
reef and the eastern side of the bay. Our first
anchorage here was close in shore, on the western
side near the head of the bay, and it was in this


place that many of the Byning bushmen came
down to see us. They were very timid at first, but
by much persuasion we succeeded in getting one
man who was bolder than the rest to swim off, and
coming alongside I gave him some red cloth and
some beads, at the same time showing him a yam,
and saying, “ Yau gulia op ” ( “ I will pay for yams”).
He was evidently very much frightened, but finding
no harm was done him they eventually became more
venturesome, and many came off bringing yams.
On examining the bay in a boat I found that there
was an anchorage between the reef on the eastern
side and the mainland, that there was also a small
temporary village on shore at this spot. I therefore
moved the vessel round, and the next day there was
quite a crowd of natives occupying the village,
which before had been almost deserted. As women
and children were amongst them, I had no hesitation
in landing, and I was treated in consequence to a
quite (to me) novel dance, though such are evidently
the fashion among these bushmen. The women
and men both took part in it, and were dressed in
highly ornamental and coloured chasubles (I can
call them nothing else) made of tapa, and coming
down to a peak at the waist before and behind,
covering the breast, stomach, and back, having holes
for the head and arms ; in some cases only half a one
was worn, either before or behind, tied round the
neck and arms with a string. Some of these men
wore a waist wrapper, also highly ornamental and
stained different colours ; in both cases the predomina


ting colours being black, red, and white, whilst in
some few yellow was used; they danced in much the
same fashion as the Eastern New Britain natives,
with bunches of grass and ferns in their hands, and
their heads bound round with circles of coloured
grass.
The whole of the shore of this bay is thickly
covered with bushes and trees, as indeed is the whole
coast-line from it to Open Bay •, and appears to
be a belt of dense vegetation, which extends inland
a greater or less distance according to the lay of the
mountains, but as soon as the ground begins to rise
the land becomes more open, and grassy plains take
the place of thick bush.
I am of opinion that the coast from this bay to
Cape Gloucester, the western extremity of the island,
has never been visited by white men before. The
manner of the natives, the great discrepancies of
the existing charts, and scarcity of places named by
Europeans, are my reasons for coming to this con-
clusion. Those places that are so named have
evidently to my mind been seen in passing and
at a considerable distance off, by the extreme
vagueness with which they are delineated on the
charts. Thus, in leaving Byning Bay we felt that we
were entering upon a new world. No doubt, had
D’Entrecasteaux lived, more would have been known
of this very important island; the little that is
known of this northern part is due to him, indeed
it was the scene of his last labours.
On leaving Byning Bay the navigation along the


coast becomes intricate and dangerous in the highest
degree ; reefs and small covered patches are innumer-
able, whilst in the offing may be seen the breakers
heavily dashing on the barrier or outside reefs; the
curious effect of this tropical atmosphere making the
stones and breakers appear in mirage high up in the
RIVER SCENE IN NEW BRITAIN (BYNING).
burning, cloudless sky. Strange sights may be seen
as the sun rises and before the monsoon has come
up —perhaps a canoe being vigorously paddled upside
down some degrees above the horizon, trees also
grow up out of the ocean, and a fishing “ woop ” or
mark showing a fish-trap will appear, though miles
away, like a ship in full sail.
I am only sorry that I was not enabled to make
a more accurate acquaintance with the natives on


this coast, as time would not allow of it. I there-
fore had to content myself with making a survey
of the coast, and gaining what information I could
from the natives that I fell in with, rather than
by travelling much on shore; indeed Ido not
know that this would have been possible, or that the
natives themselves would have allowed it, as those
that we did meet (other than the Matukanaputa
men) were very timid and difficult to hold inter-
course with even in their canoes, except perhaps
those at E’Watto.
Cape Lambert is spoken of by the natives, I
believe, for it is difficult always to determine the
precise spot of which they speak, as Mutucorrangi;
it is a bold and rocky headland covered to the top
of its cliff’s with vegetation. About twelve miles to
the north-west of it lie a chain of reefs running in a
southerly direction, Wreck Reef being the most
northerly one we examined (it was called so from
our meeting with a sad accident there, of which
more hereafter); but the natives tell me the reefs
extend round outside the Scilly Islands and join
those to the eastward of Matukanaputa. The Scilly
Isles are small and rocky; there are six in all, but
are uninhabited, serving only as a place of call
for the Matukanaputa men in their raids on Byning
or in their turtle fishing. A little further on is a
point called Corroka; here there is a small village
of fishing huts used by Matukanaputa natives;
there is also a fine river, but the bar is very shallow,
and though there is no surf, it would prevent a


boat of any size entering. However, we pulled our
small dingy over, and ascended about three miles,
until stopped by driftwood and shallows.
The scenery was perfect, tropical verdure of the
most luxurious growth thrusting itself into the water
—dracoenas, crotans, and hibiscus, and ferns mixed
in the wildest profusion; overhead were stately
palms waving in the breeze that we could not
feel, whilst far ahead in the distance are to be
seen the glorious mountains of Byning towering
in rugged grandeur.
There are large quantities of fresh-water fish in
these rivers, and as they will take a fly I have had
some good sport, from either the shore or the boat,
with this kind of bait, using for a rod a long supple
piece of bamboo. Some of the fish resemble in
shape our pike, but the stripes on the back are yellow.
The largest, however, and those I caught most of,
were a kind of carp, with large black spots on their
tails and fins ; there were numerous other species,
but as I had no spirits to put them into I refrained
from catching more than would suffice for a meal.
Crocodiles swarm in these rivers, large, middle size,
and quite little fellows ; the latter are excellent food,
tasting much like chicken. The eggs Ido not care
for, they are too strong and fishy, but the natives
delight in them. At every turn in the river we saw
a colony of crocodiles of all sizes flop off the bank into
the water, where they had been previously lying
catching flies. They do it in this manner: they
take up a position on the hank, and remain perfectly


motionless with their mouths open; flies, attracted
by the peculiar musky smell of the saliva in their
mouths, settle by swarms inside the open jaws ; pre-
sently there is a sharp snap, and a hundred or
so of flies are entombed. I was not aware before 1
saw this that crocodiles were fly-catchers as well as
fish, flesh and fowl eaters.
We saw no traces of any natives except those few
huts at the mouth of the river, but the further we
went the more open the country grew, and the more
rocky grew the bed of the river. We had Eover
with us in the boat, and we soon determined never to
take him with us again on a river expedition, as the
crocodiles seemed to think he had been brought for
their special delectation, for they came up round the
boat, and would only leave when splashed at with
an oar; indeed, one fellow took hold of one of the
blades in his mouth and left the mark of his teeth in
it. Rover seemed particularly enraged at their want
of courtesy in staring so, and barked furiously at
them, which only made them worse. I was anxious
not to fire at them for fear of frightening away any
of the natives that might be camped on the river
bank, though we saw none. However, we got back
to the vessel without any accident and enjoyed our
fish much.
Leaving Corroka, the next point arrived at is
called Sulla; there a grand view is obtained of
Mount Fitzgerald, named after a gentleman in
Sydney who was most kind in assisting me in this
expedition. It is the highest peak in the Byning


range, and cannot be much less than five thousand
feet in height, though I was unable to obtain its
altitude. It is rocky and rugged, as are all these
mountains, looking as though piled together by a
race of giants. We constantly met canoes from
Matukanaputa either returning with turtle or
starting for “ Sem-si-gorro,” their chief station on
this coast. They were always willing to show us a
good place for anchorage, and we got much fish and
black-edged pearl-shell from them, as well as quan-
tities of the small shells, of which the New Britain
and Duke of York money is made, and which is
found in large quantities on the sand-flats in shallow
water here. These they take to Matukanaputa, and
from this place it gradually passes to the eastern
tribes, where I was told by the natives that they
did not know whence it came, though undoubtedly
many of the chiefs did.
To the eastern tribes this coast is known by the
general name of Nukani, which I fancy is the name
given to any place that they know nothing about.
Sollass-solla is the next point; here the reefs and
sandbanks are innumerable; indeed, it would be
impossible to have positioned them all with my small
staff of two men; however, I took cross bearings of
the principal in spite of being often up to our waists
in water and occasionally having to drive off a shark
or two who would flop on to the reefs, churning the
water with their tails like a small steamer in ballast.
The natives were very much frightened at the
compass and other instruments, which was perhaps a


good thing, as they kept a respectful distance in
their canoes whilst operations were going on.
The next place of importance is Sem-si-gorro.
This is the chief temporary fishing station of the
Matukanaputa natives. It is on a small island that
they have their huts built, where they are perched
on every available spot. The island itself is about
seventy or eighty feet high, rocky and covered with
vegetation, having a sand-spit running from it
towards the mainland. This being partly covered
with water at high tide, in it are sunk a great
number of forked stakes on which the canoes rest
when not in use, to keep them out of the water in
order that they may not be worm-eaten, as they
assuredly would if left stationary in it too long. The
mainland is here covered with mangrove swamps
and salt-water creeks, running inland a considerable
distance, which swarm with crocodiles. It was at
this place that I obtained three of these reptiles, with
the intention of trying how they might be tamed;
two were quite yoxmg, and the third was about four-
and-a-half feet long. The younger ones I found it
hard to feed, as they seemed to care for nothing hut
fresh fish, but the larger one would eat anything,
and the cook used to swear that Croaker, as he
was called, ate his napkins, but I never saw him do it,
though I have seen him put away a piece of sole-
leather. The two younger ones died, but Croaker
lived and became so tame he would come when
called. I had also two fine snakes (pythons) that
were excessively tame —one was twelve feet long, the


other a little under nine feet. In fact, what with
crocodiles, snakes, cuscus, wallaby, a native pig, dogs,
and a cat, with at one time a cassowary, I used to say
we could start a menagerie when we arrived in
Australia ; then we had a parrot as well that used to
talk New Britain language, but by degrees picked
up English, and would call the dogs so plainly that
they were quite taken in and appeared awfully
disgusted when they found it out; but he took
to laughing one day, and I think he laughed
for two hours without stopping and then fell down
dead.
In the event of its being too rough for these native
fishermen to go fishing, they remain on the island
either mending their nets or making fresh turtle
lassoes. The former are made and mended with a
bobbin very like ours, fashioned out of bamboo; the
nets are composed of fine twine, knotted in the same
way as ours, which consists of the fibre obtained
from a creeping vine or from the bark of a tree.
The turtle ropes are much rougher and made from
strips of bark twisted together, and are about ten to
twelve fathoms long, with a slip noose at one end;
this is thrown from the canoe over the head of the
turtle, or sometimes a man swims with it over his
arm, and seizing the turtle by one of the front fins
slips it over the head and fin, at the same time
pulling it tight, taking the other end to his canoe,
where the turtle is hauled in. They are very expert
at this method, and will often catch as many as six
large turtle in one day ; they also go on the sand


banks at night in the laying season, and turn the
turtle as they come up to lay their eggs. A man
will sometimes float with a log under his stomach
until he approaches close enough to the turtle to
spear it with a javelin which is fastened to the end
of this turtle rope ; but this is never done unless the
turtle is to be eaten at once, as when dead it soon
becomes unfit for food.
Should these natives be without fire they obtain it
by rubbing a sharpened piece of hard stick against
the inside of a piece of dried split bamboo. This has
a natural dust clinging to it on the inside that
ignites as soon as the necessary friction has been
given and smoulders until some dried grass be added,
when it is blown into a flame, by which means a fire
is soon started. They sometimes use a soft piece of
wood when bamboo is not easily procured, but it
takes longer to ignite.
When fishing is ended and each canoe is loaded
with turtle, the natives desert Sem-si-gorro and
return to Matukanaputa. There are certain times
when a man of this tribe may not go fishing, when
one of his women is enciente or during the full of the
moon; in either case the spirits of departed ancestors
are particularly vicious, and if one hears of a canoe
being capsized and a man drowned (which does occa-
sionally happen, though very seldom) that man must
have been fishing at full moon. In the former case
the man must stop at home to prevent the spirits
taking away the life of the expected baby, by
sucking its breath from it; if the child dies in spite


of all his precautions, they say he did not fight for it
enough with the spirits. When in want of women for
their young men to marry (as they may not marry
into their own tribe) they make a raid against the
bush tribes of Byning, and seize the young women,
eating the bodies of the men killed or taken
prisoners. The women soon become reconciled to
their new homes, as they will take part in similar
feasts on subsequent occasions.
As these natives appear to know the names of
all the different places on the coast beyond Sem-si-
gorro, I presume they travel along it as far as
Willaumez Island, though we did not meet any
more Matukanaputa canoes after leaving it.


CHAPTER IX.
Red patch at Rondo Luxuriant vegetation—Remarkable waterfall—
Father and Sons volcanoes —E’Watto —Cleverness of natives at signs—
Inquisitive women—Ill with fever—Craters of Father and Sons—
Duportail Island—Trading with natives—Uninteresting country —
Tearfulness of inhabitants off Jenkins Island—Terrific thunderstorm—
Willaumez Island—Mistrustfulness of natives—Low state of our crew—
Extraordinary volcanoes —Heavy sea —The native and the crucifix—
Threatening aspects of natives —Commence stoning us—Soon beat a
retreat —Carried away by current —Dashed on a reef—Take to the
boat—Critical state of affairs —Ruse of natives—Alarm in the night—
Friendly advice—Another ruse —Fire my swivel gun—Natives decamp
—Board my vessel and destroy everything—More deception—Almost
a crisis—Providential appearance of trader’s boat—Return to Sydney.
The next point is called Pondo, a tongue of land
running some little distance out from the main, on
the southern side of which is a cozy little anchorage
for a small vessel. On approaching this point a
remarkable red patch may be observed high up on
the side of one of the mountains, looking very like a
landslip. I should say it was probably very red
sandstone or red ochre, which seems to abound on
this coast. From this point may also be seen loom-
ing in the distance Torcoro, Unamungo, and Pucani-
cambula, the three huge volcanoes called on the chart
the Father and Sons ; indeed they may occasionally
be seen after rounding Sulla Point in clear weather.
One can quite appreciate the feeling that the old
explorers must have had when suddenly sighting
p
209


some unknown land in an unknown sea, the imagin-
ation strung to the uttermost, not knowing what the
next turn of the coast-line may bring them upon.
Even to us who know that the supernatural is im-
possible, it is full of intense and almost breathless
suspense and anticipation.
We next passed a small headland called Forrin,
after passing which may be seen a waterfall at the
head of the Unamula or Holmes Eiver. Seeing such
a waterfall high up on a mountain, where it appears
to fall over a cliff that drops sheer into the valley
below, led me to suppose that there must be a river
of considerable size running into the sea on this
coast not far off; indeed the natives at Sem-si-gorro
told me that such was the case, though I had my
doubts of it, from the closeness of the mountains to
the coast, for I supposed there was not room for a
large river to accumulate, and thought they must
have somewhat exaggerated the size. However, a
few miles further on we came to the mouth of a
large river, which, judging by the shoaling of the
water some miles from the coast, must carry with it
from inland large deposits of mud. I sailed as
close as I dared to go in the vessel, and then
launched the boat. After crossing the bar, which I
fear would prevent a vessel of any size from enter-
ing, being about one-and-a-half fathoms in the deepest
part, we entered the river, which is a grand one,
gradually widening from the mouth to about three-
quarters of a mile.
Seeing no sign of natives we went on ; the scene


WATERFALL OF HOLMES RIVER, OPEN BAY. To face page 211.




was grand and beautiful to the highest degree,
tropical vegetation in its wildest luxuriance covered
the banks, palms and ferns dipping their graceful
fronds in the water, whilst from other trees hung
creepers with flowers of the brightest hues; the
smaller shrubs seemed to have gone wild with colour.
Birds of all descriptions and shade darted in and out
amongst the trees; the white and blue kingfisher,
the little brilliant sun-bird, parrots of all colours
screamed at us from above, whilst further off we
could hear the shrill note of the magapode, and above
all would come the hoarse cry and the rushing sound
of the hornbill; flocks of pigeons wheeling round a
feeding tree, and cooing to each other, added a softer
note to swell the wonderful harmony. We went
straight on, fresh beauty meeting our eyes at each
turn; I felt as though I could not speak, but only
drink in the glorious sight with my eyes.
We met with no signs of any natives and advanced
about four miles, passing the mouths of several other
good-sized streams pouring their water into the
main river. Soon it began to get narrower and
eventually shallower. We continued advancing by
hauling the boat over the shallows and driftwood
which would impede our progress every now and
then. Presently we could distinguish that the
roaring we had heard for some time was the water-
fall ; in about half-an-hour we came in sight of it.
I cannot attempt to describe it, the illustration may
help to give the reader some little idea of it, but the
top seemed lost in mist, and indeed it would be
p 2
211
SPLENDID SCENERY—GRAND WATERFALL.


impossible to say how far it dropped, but I should
think a clear four hundred feet without seeming to
touch or be broken in its descent by anything; it
falls into a large pool, which has evidently been worn
away by the continued drop of the water and is of
considerable size. We did not go up to this pool in
the boat, but I landed and walked round to a spot
whence I could get a good view of the falls ;it is
evidently the head of the main river, although there
is another stream running round the foot of the
mountain into the pool, but its body of water is
small compared with that of the waterfall. I should
say that the fall was about twenty yards across as
far up as I could see and spreads a good deal at the
bottom, but it is so fringed with bushes and shrubs
that it is difficult to judge what the real width might
be. How I longed for a camera to take a photo-
graph of it. It was with reluctance that I left this
beautiful sight and returned to the boat, when it
took us but a comparatively short time to return to
the vessel, the stream carrying us down without
need of much assistance from the oars.
After rounding Sandy Point or Nologun we found
ourselves in deep water again, and entering Open
Bay we still continued to hug the coast, as indeed we
were obliged to by reason of the reefs surrounding
Turtle Island. Shortly afterwards we came to the
entrance of a beautiful little land-locked harbour, for
which I believe the native name to be “ Hemisocco,”
and which we named Port Powell. It has an entrance
about a quarter-of-a-mile wide, but extends on the


inside to tlie width of
one mile by one and
three-quarters in depth,
having an even muddy
bottom of fifteen fa-
thoms. The harbour
is well sheltered, the
banks are thickly
wooded, and fresh
water may be obtained
at a short distance
from the eastern shore.
This port when we
visited it was literally
swarming with turtles,
green, loggerhead, and
hawksbill of all sizes,
several of which we
caught without much
difficulty. At the north
end of the harbour is
a salt-water creek run-
ning into it, which was
full of fish as well as
young crocodiles. This
port would make a
capital place for a ves-
sel to lay up to refit in,
there being plenty of
wood to be obtained on
the surrounding shores.
OPEN BAY.
213
PORT PO WELL.


Turtle Island is evidently a spot that is visited
by the natives in their search for turtle, and judging
by the large number of turtle bones lying about on
it, they mnst find it a profitable hunting ground.
From this place we could obtain a fine view of the
Father and Sons volcanoes, which tower up in their
solitary grandeur about eighteen or twenty miles
distant. We could see at intervals clouds of smoke
bursting up from the summit of the stately Father as
though some huge pulse were at work deep down in the
bowels of the earth ; the volume, however, was always
greater at sunrise and sunset than at any other time.
The North Son from where we were appeared to be
an island, which I have little doubt was the cause
of the Le Danseur Island on the Admiralty charts.
There is a small island close under the North Son—
so small is it, in fact, that it would easily escape
notice if passed at any distance off.
On leaving Port Powell we passed a spot termed
Ullamorn, which lies a little further to the south-
ward.
At the head of Open Bay there is a slight bend
in the coast-line towards the east; the land is flat
and uninteresting, but mountains can be seen at
some distance inland. Further on comes a river
called Ulla, which I i'ancy must be the native name
here for a stream of fresh water.
E’Watto was the first place after leaving Sera-
si-gorro that we found natives, and they appeared
distinctly to remember having seen my vessel before,
in company with one that they expressed as “ puffing


and shrieking.” Their imitation was so graphic that
I at once concluded that they meant the Duke of York
mission steam-launch which had accompanied me to
Spacious Bay, and which lies immediately on the other
side of the island. This bay I afterwards found to
be separated from Open Bay only by a
isthmus of four or five miles in breadth, the isthmus
for the greater part being plain land, but inter-
MAN NATIVE, E’wATTO, OPEN BAY, NEW BRITAIN.
spersed here and there with volcanic upheavals.
These natives were very friendly towards us, and
brought us off some fresh water to fill our water-
casks, also yams. We bought a variety of orna-
ments and implements from them. I found them to
be identical with those that I had bought in Spacious
Bay. These natives have a very strong resemblance
to those of the north-east coast of New Guinea,
215
NATIVES OF EWATTO.


Their language is totally different from that of the
natives of the north and east coasts of Gfazelle
Peninsula; they do not appear to be afflicted to the
same extent with that disagreeable disease buckwar,
and are also of a much lighter shade of brown ; their
houses are far superior, though they have somewhat
the same beehive shape, but are higher. Their
canoes, although ornamented with great taste and
profusion, are, I am forced to admit, very inferior
to those of the more northern tribes, but perhaps
they have less occasion for them. They are
evidently a shore-going tribe, and described to
me by signs how the sun came up in the morning
when they started to go across the isthmus, and it
was about half-way down the other side before they
got to Spacious Bay, which they described by
stretching their hands out over Open Bay, and
then touching my vessel, making a puffing and
whistling noise, then pointing across the land in the
Spacious Bay direction. I find natives are exceed-
ingly clever at signs, and I have never had the least
difficulty in making them understand or in under-
standing them myself.
The coast after leaving E’Watto is broken up by
many embayments, but as they are very deep are
little use as harbours. At Corlaili we found more
natives, and again at Matlyu, which is just within
Hixson Bay, which I called after that courteous and
kind-hearted gentleman who is the President of the
Marine Board of New South Wales. They are all of
the same type as those at E’Watto, and were civil
216
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


and friendly. The whole of this part of the country
seems to be a field of obsidian, huge blocks of it
lying on the shores like lumps of glass; the natives
apply it to all manner of uses, for shaving their
heads, bleeding themselves, cutting and carving
wood, and also for circumcision, which is a general
habit amongst them here; they all wear a waist
covering of fowbash highly ornamented and stained
with different colours and patterns. At E’Watto,
where I landed, I was surrounded by a crowd of
women, who evidently were under the impression I
was merely painted white, as they rubbed my hands
and face with their fingers and then looked at them
to see if any of the white had come off. One ugly
old lady opened the front of my shirt in spite of
opposition, and was evidently giving the others a
lecture on the habits and customs of the white man.
She then rubbed and pinched my flesh until it was
red, on seeing which the others began to shout and
yell with astonishment. However, one of the men
came to my assistance, and drove them all off with
a stick. lam sorry to say I did not visit their town
as I was too ill with fever, and it required a con-
siderable climb to get up to it; so I had to content
myself with sitting on the beach and talking sign
language to the men. They, however, kindly pro-
vided me with four cocoa-nuts to drink, for which I
was very thankful; they appear a very intelligent
race of people, although they are undoubtedly can-
nibals.
After leaving Hixson Bay, which is wrongly spelt


on the charts, and which we did not examine very
closely, we passed Heath Island (the small island
I mentioned before as lying close under the foot
of the North Son), which has a very narrow
passage with huge cliffs on each side, between it and
the mainland, but bearing no comparison with the
Le Danseur Island of the old charts. We then came
to Cape Deschamp or Torcoro, though I do not feel
at all sure that this name applies to the point, or
only the mountain of the North Son; indeed Ido
not feel certain about either of the native names
of the points that are immediately beneath these
three mountains.
The Father is the highest of the three, and stands
between his two Sons ; the sketch will give a slight
idea of them. The Father and South Son are active
volcanoes, the Father being the most active of the
two; it throws up great volumes of smoke and a
substance which viewed from the foot of the volcano
looks like mud, though it may be ashes. The present
crater has so evidently grown up out of the ruins of
an older one, that I am inclined to think it must be
formed of something more than merely volcanic ashes,
though I do not think it can be lava. The South
Son does not eject such a volume of smoke, neither is
there apparently any solid substance thrown up
with it, though there is the same appearance as of an
old and new crater. Both these volcanoes are well
wooded up to the old craters, but the slopes of the
new ones are quite destitute of any vegetation.
The Father is about four thousand feet high, and the
218
WANDERINGS IN A WILD COUNTRY.


South Son about three
thousand feet ; the
North Son is much
lower than either of
the others, being only
one thousand three
hundred feet, and to
all appearance is an
extinct volcano; its
crater, however, has
the look of having
been very much shat-
tered at some former
time by a severe erup-
tion. Here some
natives brought off
great lumps of grey
obsidian. Long Point
is a long low point of
land immediately be-
low the Father Moun-
tain. Low Point is a
similar point immedi-
ately below the South
Son.
Duportail Island lies
four-and-a-half miles
due west from Loug
Point. It has two
mountains, one a coni-
cal peak and the other
THE FATHER AND SONS, FROM DUPORTAIL ISLAND.


a volcano with a very peculiar crater, much re-
sembling the mouth of a huge whale, as if indeed
the mountain had fallen in half at the summit. It
does not emit much smoke, except after rain, when
there is a much larger volume; it is well clothed
with vegetation on all sides of the crater, but is
quite bare between the two summits. The whole
HEAD-DRESS, NATIVE WAN, DUPORTAIL ISLAND, NEW BRITAIN.
island is thickly wooded and seemingly contains a
large population.
Many canoes started off for us, from the occupants
of which we obtained several ornaments ; they were
very timid about coming alongside, but came from
the shore with the evident intention of trading;


DUPORTAIL ISLAND, FROM EXPECTATION STRAITS, To face page 220.
DECEPTION POINT. Seepage 222,




but when they approached us I suppose their hearts
failed them, and it was with difficulty we persuaded
them to come alongside. They are the same aquiline-
featured people as those of Open Bay, but they wore
a head-dress that I had not seen before, though it
was frequent with the natives further to the west-
ward. This consisted of a number of rings made
of plaited cane and edged with the small shell that
is used in the North Peninsula as money, and are
worn pressed down tight above the ears, each ring
being smaller in width as they rise to the top of the
head. These are placed on the head of a man-child
when quite an infant, and are not removed until
they are fifteen or sixteen years of age, when
they are cut off and others of a larger size put on.
The consequence of this is that the men’s heads
are compressed just above the ears, though the
mark is hidden by the rings that they wear. I
was successful after a great deal of gesticulation in
obtaining a set from a youth who evidently had
not long had his second set put on, for they came
off comparatively easily; their hair stands up
above the rings in quite a tuft. I am under the
impression that they are worn to protect their heads
from the blow of a club, and that thus wearing
them early makes a ridge in the skull that prevents
their being struck or falling off.
There are two small islands to the south-west with
a particularly dangerous sunken reef lying between
them and Duportail Island; indeed we were nearly
on the top of it as in smooth weather it does not


break, and appears to be covered with some kind of
green sea-weed that prevented us seeing it until
quite close to it.
From Low Point to Hummock Head or Quass
the land is one vast tract of volcanic upheavals, that
are now apparently quiescent, but cannot have been
long so, as the country is covered with small craters
and rents. Their being covered with vegetation is,
I think, no argument against their having been in
action within recent years, as in this rich soil and
tropical climate a forest will spring up in a short
time where before was a barren waste of pumice.
Beyond Quass the land becomes low and flat and
uninteresting, indeed the only high land on the
coast at all is Chard, Yessy and MacDonald Islands,
named after three gentlemen who kindly interested
themselves in this expedition. Commodore Bay
appeared to be full of shoals, with Norton Island in
the centre, but we did not enter the bay as it looked
very uninviting, the banks on the south side and
west end being covered with mangrove swamps; so
we contented ourselves with observing that the high
land to the north was not an island but a peninsula
of no ordinary kind, having the most extraordinary
collection of mountains I have ever seen in so small
a space. It is not surprising that observers at a
distance should suppose it to be an island, as all the
land at the back is so low that it could not be seen
more than about ten miles off, and I feel convinced
that few if any European ships have been as close as
that to this strange peninsula. The sketch will


give the reader a better idea of it than a long
description, yet I cannot help mentioning Mount
Pyramid, which name it bears on account of its very
remarkable shape; in fact it is difficult to imagine
that so perfect a pyramid could have been formed
without human agency. All the mountains on this
peninsula are of volcanic formation, being mostly
entire volcanoes.
When off Jenkins Island (named after another kind
supporter of this expedition) we observed a number
of canoes that started from Island Point and came
over to the island, which I do not think is in-
habited, but merely a fishing station, as we could not
see any houses on it. They had evidently seen us,
and had come out to look at the strange monster as
our vessel must have appeared to them. We stood
in for Jenkins Island in order to try and persuade
them to trade with us, but as soon as they saw us
approaching they all left their canoes and bolted on
shore into the bush. I waved a green bough and
beckoned them to come to us, but it was of no use,
they were too much frightened, and hid themselves
amongst the scrub. Therefore, as there was no
convenient place for anchorage, I had to stand off'
again, and as soon as the natives saw this they came
back to their canoes, but although I shortened sail
and used every endeavour to get them to come up to
us, they kept about a mile off. At last I got some
half cocoa-nut husks, and filling them with some
beads and red cloth set them adrift over the stern.
When the canoes came up with them I could see with


my glasses how astonished and excited the natives
were. After some little time, which was given up to
examining the marvels they had just picked up, one
canoe advanced in front of the others, and a man
stood up in the bow and threw a cocoa-nut as far as
he could towards us. On seeing this evident act of
friendship I bouted ship and stood back for the cocoa-
nut, but as soon as they saw us coming for them
away they went as fast as they could paddle. This
was very provoking; however, we picked up the cocoa-
nut, and as I had no wish to stay all night amongst
the numerous reefs that surround this shore we had to
stand out for open water and towards Fitz Island.
I am not at all surprised at the natives behaving
in the way that they did, for it must be indeed a
marvellous sight to them; in fact if we could only
put ourselves in their place on such an occasion I do
not much think we should have the courage to go
after so strange an apparition at all.
It was a very lucky thing for us that I did not
remain any longer in the vicinity of the reefs, as
about eight o’clock p.m. a fearful thunderstorm came
up, the worst I have ever seen, with wind and rain ;
the lightning seemed to be all round us, and the
thunder was deafening. Whilst it was raging we
felt the vessel apparently strike heavily, and then roll
from side to side with much violence. We soon had
the lead over, but found no bottom at fifty fathoms.
It then occurred to me that it was the shock of an
earthquake we had felt. Two more followed, but
neither of them so severe as the first, I cannot


describe the sensation better than by saying it was
just as if we bad struck on a coral reef and then slid
off the other side; the vessel seemed to shake from
stem to stern and rolled a good deal.
Next morning we stood over towards Cape Camp-
bell : this is the north point of Willaumez Island,
and is a high precipitous foreland. It is called its
present name after a gentleman in the Mines
Department of New South Wales, who took an
active interest in the expedition. Du Faur Island
is also named after the chief instigator of this I
hope not altogether useless expedition: he is indeed
one who seldom allows a chance to escape him of
assisting geographical research.
On the western side of Willaumez Island we saw
several canoes coming out from the shore to have a
look at us, but they would not venture closer than
some three or four hundred yards or so. I was de-
termined to get these fellows alongside if it was
possible, so after waving my green branch (kept for
the special purpose) I wrapped a piece of red cloth
round a piece of wood and threw it towards them.
For some time they hesitated, but at last one canoe
ventured a little towards it, and then stopped again ;
but a young fine-looking fellow at length standing
up threw down his paddle as if to say (perhaps he
did actually say it), “ Here goes, I’ll chance it,” and
jumped from the canoe and began swimming
towards the red cloth, which he soon got hold of
and returned to the canoe. I immediately threw
another piece of wood with a string of beads, taking
Q


care that it should fall closer to the vessel than the
first; the same young man again ventured and
secured the prize. Their excitement had been great
on the return of the red cloth, but it was nothing to
that on the arrival of the beads: they shouted and
halloed, and no doubt would have danced had they
not been in a canoe. Each man tried it by putting
it round his neck and round his arm to see how it
would look as a necklace and armlet; they then
returned to the other canoes to show them. In the
meantime I got a piece of red cloth and waved it
over the side to show them I had lots more if they
would come and get it. However, I found that this
was useless, so had to resort to the old plan of
throwing sticks with red cloth or beads on it into
the water. This time two canoes started for the stick
and paddled slowly up to it, but on the bow of each
a man stood up with a spear in his hand all ready to
throw. As there was only one stick in the water I
threw another, only taking care it should drop even
closer to the ship; then the same young fellow
plunged overboard and got it; but seeing me hold
out some beads over the ship’s side he ventured to
come up and take them, but was evidently half sinking
with fright. However, he soon found that no harm
was intended, and went off with his beads delighted,
as he deserved to be, for I think it was the pluckiest
thing I had seen done whilst in these islands.
Not to weary you with continued repetition I may
as well state that after a great deal more persuasion
we got them alongside, but in each canoe was a man


standing up with a spear all ready at a moment’s
notice to take the defensive. However, as we took
no notice whatever of this, and finding that we had
no intention otherwise than trading with them for
ornaments, &c., they eventually laid them down and
NATIVE OF WILLAUMEZ ISLAND, NEW BRITAIN.
entered into the negotiations. If a sail flapped
or one of the men moved at all quickly along
the deck, they were up again in a moment; but I
cannot say that they presented a very warlike
appearance, for they were shaking all over with
Q 2


nervousness and fear. We bought a large collection
of necklaces, armlets, earrings, head-dresses, as well
as some spears, stone tomahawks, and clubs. The
spears were of the rudest description, as were the
tomahawks ; the clubs much resembled a policeman’s
staff but longer ; the ornaments were good, and some
of the armlets beautifully made. Almost everything
was ornamented with that same little shell that is
CLUBS, CAPE HOPKINS, NEW BRITAIN.
used so generally all over New Britain. They all
wore the same curious head-dress that I mentioned
before, and also had their loins covered with fow-
bash, slightly ornamented, but not so highly as those
of the men of EWatto. They are the same race


as the Open Bay men, having the same clearly cut
features. Of course we saw none of the women.
The lobes of their ears are not so extended as those
of the natives of Gazelle Peninsula, and they are
altogether a finer race of people than the former.
The Islands of Du Faur, Gicquel, Raoul, and
Willaumez are all volcanic, nearly all the mountains
having the appearance of being craters, although we
did not observe that any were in active eruption.
On leaving these islands the land appeared to be
low and uninviting, and to have little appearance of
any volcanoes, except one island that we did not
examine, and which in the distance appeared to be
all peaks and points, like a collection of huge
termites’ nests. Indeed I was really too ill with
fever to do any more work, and the two other men
were almost as bad. Aleck I had left behind with his
own people, and my cook had run away in Duke of
York, so that there were only three of us all told,
still that was quite enough to work the little vessel
had we been all able bodied, but this I am sorry to
say we were far from being. No sooner was one
able to crawl on deck than another would he struck
down with that terrible malady, which once having
got hold is not easily shaken off, and our provision
was getting scanty; I therefore determined to run
on to Cape Gloucester, where I hoped to be able to
get some pigs, or at all events some yams or taro.
We passed French Islands on our way, where we
endeavoured to get the natives off to us, but they
were too timid, therefore kept on our course for


Cape Gloucester. As we approached it we saw a
great volume of smoke hanging over the land which
obscured the tops of the mountains, and on approach-
ing closer found that it was caused by innumerable
volcanoes, small and large, all in violent eruption.
It was a most extraordinary sight; there must
have been some hundred or more all belching fire
and smokb, indeed the land seemed all on fire. We
anchored some distance off the shore at the end of a
reef, so as to be well away from the natives for the
night.
When night came on the sight was wonderful.
Flames seemed to cover the mountainous point of
land, and it would have been easy to read a book by
the light; the air was full of fine ashes covering and
making everything a light grey colour ; indeed it
was difficult to breathe comfortably. Tupinier
Island was in eruption also, and the noise made by
them all was like low continuous thunders.
In the morning we moved in closer to the shore,
but saw no signs of natives. This was very dis-
appointing, and I decided to try Book Island. We
therefore left this burning bay and tried to cross
Dampier Straits, but found it was blowing a heavy
gale of wind from the south-east, with the sea
running high. We beat backwards and forwards
trying to make Rook Island, but there was so strong
a current running through Dampier Straits, that we
could not make any way against it. We tried for
two days without success, and had to keep constantly
at the pumps, as the topsides of the vessel had become


so dry that in the heavy sea we experienced they
leaked badly. At last a big sea struck the rudder
and swept it away like a rotten stick. There was
now no chance of reaching Rook Island; so nearly
worn out, with the rudder gone and vessel leaking,
there was nothing for it but to run back ; and after
fixing a temporary rudder with some oars, &c., we
ran back to a small bay about twenty miles to the
eastward of Cape Gloucester.
After some little search we found a suitable sand-
bank about thirty yards from the beach on which to
ground the vessel, in order to fix a rudder sufficiently
durable to take us back to Duke of York, where we
might obtain wood to make a new one. The rise and
fall of the tide being about four feet, we laid an
anchor out ahead on the sandbank which was nearly
covered at high water. By this means we hove the
vessel to a spot where she would lay high and dry on
the fall of the tide.
As we were waiting this result, a canoe came
round a point not far away, making straight for us.
When they were at a short distance off they stopped,
■and an old man held up two or three small yams,
evidently offering them for sale. lat once intimated
that I would buy them, and he came alongside and I
gave him some beads for them. He showed me the
remains of an old crucifix, which he carried hung
round his neck, and which I tried to purchase from
him, but he would not part with it. I made signs to
him as to where it came from; he put his hands
together as if at prayer and said “ lotu.” This is


the common word used by all missionaries every-
where, I believe, to signify religion. He then
pointed towards Rook Island, at which place I after-
wards found out there had been a Roman Catholic
mission-station, the members of which had either
been killed or died—l do not know which, but at all
events it had been abandoned some years.
The old native examined the vessel very carefully
as well as the anchor that was on the sandbank, and
then left us, evidently promising to return with more
yams. Soon after the vessel took the ground, and
we began to place the temporary rudder, but I found
I could not work, as being so weak with fever I
could hardly stand upright ; so the other two went
to work at it, and I had to retire below. I had not
been below long when H shouted down the com-
panion that there were a crowd of natives coming
along the beach armed with spears, &c., and that
their intentions did not seem very pacific.
I must say I felt more inclined to let them come
just then than able to offer them any resistance if
they meant hostility, but it would hardly do to lay
down and die, no matter how bad I might feel; so I
got up on deck, and we soon had the muskets loaded,
some with rock salt, and the little swivels sponged
and loaded, and were determined to show a stout
resistance if necessary. I noticed that there were a
large number of men on the beach some distance off,
as well as several canoes full of men lying off the
shore. All the party were armed with slings, spears,
and stone tomahawks.


It presently occurred to me that Rover was on
shore, and that this would he a good method of
finding out their intentions, so we called him ; soon
he came bounding out of the bush, whereupon several
young men ran forward and threw their spears at
him, however without hitting him ; he was soon on
board. I then waved my green branch, but it was
received with a shout of derision. I could now see
that they meant mischief, so we waited quietly for them
to make the first move ; and as we were unable to get
off the sandbank until high water, all we could do was
to defend ourselves as well as possible. They soon
began the attack with a shower of stones from their
slings, at the same time coming steadily along the
beach towards us; the stones rattled nastily enough
amongst the rigging and against the ship’s side. I
now fired a bullet over their heads; this was again
received with a shout of derision, and they only came
faster towards us, the canoes going out to the sea-
ward side of us. I began to feel somewhat anxious
as to whether these men were afraid of firearms or
no, or whether their indifference arose from mere
ignorance of their deadly nature.
They were now near enough to use their spears,
and began throwing them with considerable pre-
cision. However, we reserved our fire until they
were near enough to feel the effects of the salt with
which I proposed to dose them first. Some of them,
about twenty, soon crossed the short channel of
water that lay between the sandbanks and the shore
and advanced with great confidence towards the


bows of the vessel. In the meantime we had sat
down under the bulwarks in order to be out of the
way of the stones, and therefore not seeing us
making any signs of defence they were led to
imagine that they would have an easy victory.
However, when they came close enough H and
I both jumped up and fired together right into the
midst of them. I never saw anything so ludicrous
as the scene that followed. As we had taken the
precaution to fire low the salt took effect on their
bodies; they seemed actually too frightened to
run away or feel the pain of the salt; however,
they soon found their legs and ran for their lives.
As they went we gave them another dose behind
to make it even; but by the time they had got
to the beach the salt began to take effect, and by
their antics as they ran off I should say that they
had had a lesson that they will be careful about
having repeated.
The other natives, as soon as they saw their
comrades run away, disappeared into the bush like
magic, and the canoes also seemed anxious to get
out of sight: amongst the former I had recognised
our old friend of the yams and the crucifix. He
had evidently learned one thing from the mission-
aries, and that was that white men’s vessels are good
plunder; but we have also perhaps taught them that
it is not so easy to do it as they imagined. It
certainly was a much more quickly gained victory
than I had hoped for, and also without any bloodshed.
We soon after got the temporary rudder finished,


and getting our anchor up we hauled off into deep
water and made sail on our return voyage to Duke
of York, but we were, alas, destined never to reach
that island in our brave little vessel.
We stood straight for Cape Lambert, and reached
it at the end of the second day. Wanting to anchor
I steered for a little bay just to the southward of it,
not wishing to be knocking about amongst the
innumerable shoals on the other side of the cape
at night-time with the vessel in a crippled state; but,
unfortunately, as we approached the land it fell calm,
and in spite of our sweeps the current carried us
away to the southward. As soon, however, as the
sun went down, but too late for us, a light breeze
sprang up, and all that we could do was to stand off
and on as near the shore as we dared to go in order
to keep clear of the reefs outside of us; there un-
fortunately was no moon that night.
We took the precaution to have a kedge anchor
hanging over the bows with ten fathoms of hawser
out; this was to bring us up if we got into shallow
water. We were all right up to two a.m., when a
heavy squall of wind and rain came drifting over
the land, quite obscuring it; and as we had to shorten
sail no doubt we drifted to the eastward much faster
than I was aware of. The squall was very heavy
whilst it lasted and soon put the sea up ; it was also
quite impossible to see anything for the rain which
poured in torrents. About half-past two I noticed
a line of phosphorescent light in the water right
under our lea, which I knew meant that there was a
235
BECALMED—.HE AVY SQUALL.


reef close to. I called to the others to put her about,
but she failed to answer the helm, and whilst making
a second trial a large sea caught the vessel and
lifted her with a crash on to the reef that knocked
us all off our feet. Here she lay hard and fast with
the sea breaking over the stern as though it would
dash her to pieces any minute, and which made her
thump heavily on the rocks.
Towards daybreak the vessel began to leak, so
we brought up everything we could out of the cabin
and hold to the forecastle, and shortly after sunrise,
the sea having much moderated, we placed the most
valuable articles in the boat, when I and one of the
men started off in it to a sandbank lying at some
distance to the southward, which was the nearest
place of safety to where the vessel was lying, in-
tending to return for a fresh load and to bring off as
many things as possible and place them there until
we could make a raft to carry them to Materbert.
However, on arriving at the sandbank to my
surprise it was covered with Matukanaputa natives,
who were there to catch turtle. As soon as they
caught sight of our boat they all ran to seize their
spears, clubs, and slings, apparently thinking that
we were going to fight with them ; so I went on shore
with my hands up over my head, which is a sign of
peaceable intentions, and told them my vessel was
on shore and that I wanted to land my goods there,
to which, after a considerable amount of talking, they
agreed, but deeming it necessary that some one
should stav there and look after them I sent back


the man for another load, which he brought towards
evening, and then returned again, as having but one
boat it was wiser to leave it by the vessel in case
she should break up during the night.
Thus left on the sandbank with fifty or sixty
natives, who were in anything but a friendly mood,
my first act was to see that my rifle and revolver
were in a proper condition for defence ; next I pulled
the boxes into a sort of protection for my back, and
then sat down to watch through the night, lest they
should steal anything. I could see by their talking
together in groups and their side glances at me that
they wanted very much to get hold of the boxes
which we had landed. At last some of them came
towards where I was sitting and began to sympa-
thise with me, saying how sorry they were that
my ship was ashore, and what a good man they
considered me; one villain even went so far as
to shed tears. All the while they were speaking
they were closing in around me. Too well used
to natives to be taken in by this ruse, I stood up
and told them in their own language to sit down
and talk if they had anything to say; for had I
allowed them to get close up they would have
rushed at me, knowing that I should not then have
had room to use my musket or time to draw my
revolver.
Being evidently taken by surprise, and perceiving
that their design was detected, they sat down round
me at a few yards’ distance, and again commenced
their protestations of friendship and sympathy; but


I fancied I heard one man say to another as they
moved away, “We shall not eat white men to-
night.” This put me still more on the qui vive; so
after listening to their protestations for some little
while I told them that if they were really my
friends they would go to Materbert and tell Tobrian
(the chief I have mentioned before) that I wanted
him to send me two or three of his largest canoes to
take away my goods, and that if they would not do
this (for which I offered to pay them handsomely),
and came any closer to me, I should have to fire.
At first they did not appear to like this idea at all,
until one of them, an old man, succeeded in persuad
ing them (as I afterwards discovered) to pretend to
go away and see if I should fall asleep ; they then
went down to their canoes and paddled out into the
darkness.
This did not satisfy me, for I know that these
gentlemen seldom give up a project of this kind to
which they have once made up their minds—besides,
they could not be sure the boat would not return,
when they would have had two instead of one to
contend with, and this might account for their
hesitation, for they will invariably use stratagem to
gain an end rather than open force, if necessary.
Indeed, when I think of the wretched state I was in
through sickness I marvel that 1 was enabled to do
what I did.
About one o’clock I fancied I heard a faint sound
of paddles close by, and luckily having my glasses
with me succeeded in making out three canoes


creeping up very quietly, in each of which a man
was standing up with a spear already poised trying
to see if I were awake. I immediately shouted to
them to go back if they did not wish me to fire,
whereupon they quickly paddled away, and the rest
of the canoes, which were only on the other side of
the bank, followed suit and made off also. They did
not trouble me again that night, and when morning
broke there was no sign of them.
But a fresh cause for alarm now arose—the boat did
not come off, and I began to fear that the two men on
board the vessel had gone to sleep and been murdered,
in which case there was no chance for me ; for even if
successful in keeping off the natives I had very little
water and nothing to eat. Towards eleven o’clock a
canoe appeared, and on nearing the sandbank a man
stood up in it and hailed me, saying that he was a
friend and wanted to speak to me. As he held his
hands over his head to show that he had no arms I
allowed him to land, when he commenced lamenting
the wreck of the vessel, but I soon stopped his talking
in that way, telling him it was all gammon, that the
men from Matukanaputa had said the same thing the
night before, and wanted to kill me afterwards by
way of showing their sympathy, and asked him if he
wished to do so also, “ No,” he said, “ I have come
to talk ; the Matukanaputa men are no good : it is a
good thing you did not sleep last night or they
would have killed and eaten you: do not go to sleep
to-night: look out for your boat, they will kill the
man in the boat, and then you have no water, and the


man on board has little water, and you cannot go to
him, and he cannot come to you, and they will catch
you when you sleep, and they say that there is plenty
of wood here to cook you, and that they do not know
how white men taste. I replied that he was my
friend for telling me all this, and that if he would go
to Tobrian and tell him I wanted some large canoes
to take away my things I would give him a big
present, but he said he could not do that as the
Byning men would kill him if they found it out; and
on my repeating the inducement he replied, “No,
no ; the present is no good to a dead man ; ” so I had
to let him go away, after giving him a piece or two
of tobacco. Soon after this another canoe came up
manned by Matukanaputa men. One of them
hailed me for leave to come ashore and talk. Not
wishing to appear afraid of them I told him he
might come, which he did, accompanied by two or
three others, and carrying a coil of rope in his hand,
such as they generally use for catching turtle. I was
standing with my back to the boxes waiting for him
to come up, conjecturing at once what the rope was for.
“ I have come,” he said, “ from Tobrian ; is this canoe
large enough? come and look at it.” Knowing
that he had not had time to go to Tobrian, and also
that he was a Matukanaputa man, I was on the look-
out for him. I asked him what he wanted with the
rope in his hand. He looked very much confused,
and said, “For turtle;” and I told him that turtle
were not caught in the day-time, and made him
give me the rope, adding that if I caught him


there again I would shoot him, and that he had
better go at once if he didn’t wish me to do so
then. If I hadn’t taken the rope from him, and
he could have got me to move from the boxes, one
of the other men would have rushed at me from
behind, and he then would have fastened me round
and round with the rope: they are very expert
at catching turtle in this manner. Just as he was
going off I caught sight of the boat returning; the
man told me that they had had great difficulty in
getting some of the cargo out of the hold, and that
this had prevented his reaching the sandbank earlier.
I sent back for the other man, thinking it best that
we should all be together for the night.
Early in the morning both men started off well
armed to the vessel again for another load. No
sooner had they left the sandbank (it being yet
dark) than I observed some fifteen or twenty canoes
coming straight for it. Now the boat had brought the
swivel gun the night before, so I quickly mounted if,
on a log and loaded it with a heavy charge and a
handful of bullets, and then lay down quietly and
waited for them to come up. Presently one of them
came quite close, nearer and nearer, very cautiously.
I clutched my firestick tightly, and laid the gun
straight for him. “But hold on,” I thought; “this
fellow has come close to see if I am awake, and if I
sham to be asleep he will go back and they will all
come up, and give me a better chance of hitting
some one.” So I waited on quietly, and it turned
out just as I had expected ; the single canoe carefully
R


reconnoitred, but as I was lying behind the stump of
a tree they must have concluded that I was asleep,
for they went back to the rest, and then all advanced
together without making any noise. They had
evidently watched for the boat to go away and
then thought to catch me asleep. On they came, my
fingers itched to apply the firestick to my gun ; “ but,
let them get a little closer,” I thought. I could see
a man in each canoe standing up to try and catch a
sight of me. “ A little closer, so that some of them
can’t escape.” As they came I levelled. “ A little
closer,” so, “ now for them ! ” and down went the
firestick—bang!—and then the most awful row I
ever heard proceeded from the canoes, and they
were off so quickly that I had no time to give
them another dose. Whether any were killed or
wounded I never discovered.
At daylight our boat returned, and the men
brought me news that the natives had been on
board the vessel and destroyed everything, breaking
up even the compasses and side-lights, and throwing
everything they did not want overboard, and had
killed poor old Rover and taken his body away to eat.
That day we were left in peace, and we built a
tent out of some of the sails that we had saved from
the wreck; but the following day, about eleven
o’clock, we saw a large number of canoes coming
from the mainland, and we accordingly prepared to
give battle. They came on, however, without any
hesitation until within about a hundred yards of the
sandbank, when one canoe advanced without any


arms, and one of the natives asked leave to come
on shore, calling out at the same time that it was
Talong, a young sub-chief, whom I knew belonged to
Tobrian ; so I allowed him to land, and he told me
that he had been sent by Tobrian to take myself and
my things to Materbert. I had some misgivings about
this message, as some of the men with him were
Matukanaputa men ; but I knew that Talong was to
be relied upon, and, as our boat could not carry half
the things, thought it best to chance it; so I left the
rifles with the two men, and told them to come on in
the boat as soon as they could load it, and after
distributing the greater part of the goods in the
canoes, took my revolver and started off in Talong’s
canoe. All went well until we got close in to the
mainland, when first one canoe made for the shore,
then another, and so on until they had nearly all
gone upon the beach. I turned round to Talong,
who was steering my canoe, and asked him, “ Why
don’t those men come on in their canoes ? ” He said
they were hungry, and that it was too hot; they
would go on again at night. “ That’s all gammon,”
I replied: “ tell them to come on at once.” He
went on shore to tell them this, and it was evident
that they were having a very excited discussion.
Presently he came back to the canoe and said, “ They
want you to go on shore, and have something to eat,”
and then he added in a whisper, “ Don’t go; they will
kill you; let us go to Materbert quick, and get some
big canoes, and come and fight these men and get
back your things.” Seeing that he was very much
R 2


excited, and trembling all over, and knowing there
was no time to be lost, I told him to jump in and
paddle as fast as be could for Cape Lambert. He was
not long in complying with my injunctions, his men
paddling as if for their lives. No sooner did the
others see that we were escaping, than ten canoes
started in pursuit, yelling like demons. On we went,
Talong’s men doing their utmost; but in spite of all
their exertions it became evident in about half-an-
hour that they were gaining upon us. Every now
and then a man in one or other of the pursuing
canoes would stand up, and then either a spear or a
stone would come with a whir or splash close
alongside us. However, I would not fire yet,
although Talong kept urging me to do so, for the
canoe was moving too much for me to get a steady
aim, and I had not any ammunition to throw away.
Nearer and nearer they came, and the stones from
their slings were coming unpleasantly close. I
raised the revolver, and resting it on my arm let fly
at the leader. One man dropped his arm and paddle
together, struck somewhere about the shoulder.
When our fellows saw this they raised a great shout
of triumph; but the others, not at all disconcerted,
pushed on with even more vigour than before. The
revolver went up again; this time they were con-
siderably nearer, and I had just covered the steerer
of the leading canoe, when Talong called out, “ Mr.
Powell, Mr. Powell, a big boat, look! ” Just as I
turned my head to look a stone passed within a few
inches of me, and struck the man behind me in the


back, knocking him over into the bottom of the canoe,
where he lay apparently badly hurt. Most provi-
dential then was the appearance of the boat upon
the scene. Our pursuers very soon caught sight of
it also, and made off as fast as they had come.
We were not long in reaching our deliverer, which
turned out to be one of Messrs. Grodefroy’s traders’
boats from a long way to the eastward. It had come
round Cape Lambert, the furthest point that a boat
has ever been in that direction, this one never having
been so far before, so that altogether it was a most
fortunate escape. I soon explained matters to the
white trader, and then we made sail and pulled after
the retreating canoes ; but on reaching the mainland
found only empty boxes and canoes, the natives
having taken away everything up into the bush with
them, and as it would be useless to try and follow
them without a strong party, we went off to look for
my boat. This we shortly came up with, and then
made sail for the traders’ station. Thus I lost
nearly everything of the anthropological collection
made in this side of the island—-I had but a few things
left—the large assortment of land and sea conchology
that I had been carefully getting together for Dr.
Cox, of Sydney, my tame animals, in fact everything
but my log sketches and field books, so that my
survey work was saved. Luckily I had sent a large
collection to Sydney, of clubs, spears, &c. However,
I am thankful that my life was spared.
I was not long in getting round to Nodup, and
from thence I crossed to Duke of York, where I


found the Renard man-of-war schooner, Lieut. Com-
mander Richards, who curiously happened to be
an old schoolfellow and shipmate of mine, and he
kindly promised me a passage to Sydney. In
respect to Lieutenant Richards and his sub. Tipping,
I cannot close this without saying how kind and
generous they were; indeed no words can express the
gratitude that I have for all they did for me.


APPENDIX.
NOTES ON NEW ITELAND.
(l.) Of New Ireland I had intended to speak more fully,
but when I came to condense what I know of this most
interesting place I found that in reality I know hut very
little about if, and even that little I am not at all sure in
my own mind is properly authenticated. However, there
are a few things that there can be no doubt about, and one
of these is, that they are cannibals. It is, of course, very
difficult to say positively what may have been the origin
of cannibalism, hut as far as I can judge, and the native
statements seem to hear it out, one of the causes of it is,
that at one time these islands were subject to a great
drought and famine, and it was then that, in order to
maintain life, cannibalism was resorted to: this sounds
plausible. Moreover, in New Guinea but very few tribes
are known to practise it, and those that do are, I believe,
only to he found on the Gulf of Papua, and are undoubtedly
the lowest races in New Guinea so far as known at present.
It is probable, therefore, that they may have learnt the
practice from the natives of the York Peninsula, North
Australia, with whom I have little doubt they at one time
had considerable intercourse —besides, it is very much
despised by other tribes.
It would be a very improbable thing that a drought
would affect the whole of New Guinea, and therefore the
247


natives in that part, affected by the famine, would be able
either to buy provisions from those not so afflicted, or to
go and pillage for it —at any rate they would he able to
sustain life without resorting to cannibalism. Of course
in Australia things are very different: there never is food
enough in one single place to support a tribe, therefore they
are nomads ; and should a drought occur in their district, all
the animals, on which they mainly depend for subsistence,
disappear from that part, and leave them no other means of
living but by cannibalism; or, again, in order to obtain the
necessary animal food, they have to travel until they find
some part unaffected by the drought. Here also other tribes
have assembled for the same cause; they immediately fight
for the right of hunting, and being famished with hunger
eat the bodies of their victims.
It no doubt originated also in some cases in the un-
governable hatred and feeling of revenge of one man
against another. Not content with tilling him, he proceeds
to eat his “ tongue and heart,” 1 and to smear himself with
the kidney fat. This may have been so in some few
instances, no doubt, but the former cause seems the most
likely.
It is not therefore improbable that in comparatively
small islands like New Britain and New Ireland drought
was the origin, and once having begun this terrible practice
revenge kept it up. Moreover, I can state, on the authority
of a cannibal chief, that having once indulged in the fright-
ful repast it is very difficult to leave it off. He explained
it by saying that “ Human flesh was better than pig, turtle,
fish, or fowls ; and that white men were fools and did not
know what was good.”
(2.) In New Ireland, on the death of any member of a
well-to-do family, one of the men of the same family goes to
the bush tribe that live in the Eossel Mountains, and obtains
a carved chalk figure, of either a man or a woman accord-
1 This expression is made use of in parts of Australia at the present
day, and would seem to mean that the heart was eaten to show contempt,
and the tongue because of the tilings spoken against the eater. The kidney
lat is to obtain the strength of the victim in addition to his own.


ing to the sex of the deceased, with which he returns to
his village and with great secrecy gives it to a chief whose
particular business it is to receive it. It is then placed in
a small “ mortuary chapel ” * (I hardly know what else to
call it) that is built inside another house, and is decorated
with all manner of variegated plants, in company with other
figures of the same description, where it remains (for how
long I do not know). This curious practice arises out of a
superstition with respect to the spirit of the departed, in
which they believe that the ghost must have some habita-
tion on earth, or it will haunt the survivors of its late
family, to work them some mischief; they therefore place
this figure for the spirit to go to, as its late tenement is
decomposed in the earth or sea, according to the place of
burial. Women are never allowed to go near or look upon
these figures, it being death for them to do so.
The chalk of which these figures are composed, and which
is found at the top of the Eossel Mountains, is, I believe, one
of the only, if not the sole deposit of chalk formed in the
South Pacific.
(8.) There is a very curious habit in New Ireland of
placing a young girl on her attaining a marriageable age
in a sort of cage built within the house where she is living,
wreaths of scented herbs being bound round her waist and
neck. The cage is generally built with two floors, and it is
on the upper one that the young lady resides. Being very
small there is only room for her to lie down or sit, hut not
sufficient to stand up in; the lower floor is occupied by
either an old woman or a little child. This lasts for about
a month, the young lady only being allowed out of her
somewhat uncomfortable dwelling at night time. It is
impossible to say what the meaning of this custom is.
Some have told me that it is to honour her attaining
womanhood, in the same sense that we make a feast, &c., on
a man attaining his majority. But he this as it may, lam of
opinion there is something else behind which I have never
been able to discover.
* See Frontispiece.


(4.) The New Ireland money is quite of a different
character to that of New Britain, as it is formed of a small
bivalve shell, of which a number are pierced and strung on
a piece of twine, being chipped until quite small, when they
are rubbed smooth and circular with pumice-stone; these
strings of money measure for one length from nipple to
nipple on a man’s breast, and are of a yellowy pink colour.
Ten lengths are the price of a fair-sized pig.
(5.) The women in New Ireland have a small dress
composed of grass, worn both before and behind, which is
stained a bright red colour and kept in place by a plaited
string round the waist, that is tied just above the hip on
one side. The men are naked, as in New Britain.
(6.) The implements of war in New Ireland are much the
same as those used in Duke of York, which have been
described.
(7.) There is little doubt in my own mind that the in-
habitants of New Ireland are the same race of people as
those of Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain, as their
language is somewhat similar, as will be seen by the
vocabulary at the end, but are not the same race as those
of Spacious Bay or those from Open Bay to the West. They
are also similar to the natives of the Solomon Islands.


(8.) When burying their dead the New Britain natives
generally place those of little note in a sitting posture on a
reef at low water, where they will on the tide rising be taken
away by the sharks, but often they are put into a canoe and
placed under ground. When a chief dies his body is laid
out in his canoe with scented herbs lying on him, his
nearest kin then make a great feast and invite all the
neighbouring chiefs and tribes, upon which occasion they
present to each visitor a fathom of taboo or shell money,
after which the body is covered with cocoa-nut mats and
raised up to its resting-place on the forked branches of two
trees; then the dancing begins, and is kept up with great
vigour all night by the light of blazing fires, and for several
nights in succession, drums being beaten in accompaniment
to the singing of the dancers. In “ singing ” they do not
use words, but merely sounds.
The talking man of the late chief goes round to each
visitor and proclaims his many virtues. The feasting and
dancing is generally terminated by something being thrown
violently out of the dead chief s canoe into the assembled
crowd; the one whom it hits is said to be sure to die soon.
After some time the canoe is taken down and buried, but in
some districts the succeeding chief, who is the eldest son of
the eldest sister of the deceased, takes the head, wrapped in
banana leaves, and places it in his hut.
(9.) New Britain wives are always held responsible for
anything that is lost or stolen from the house, not the
actual thief, as the natives say with some show of sense,
that they cannot have been looking out properly or it would
not have happened. Women are never entrusted with any
secret, as there is a proverb amongst them that “ a woman’s
tongue is hung with a double joint.”
251
Notes on New Britain.


(10.) Torches for fishing at night or travelling through
the bush are made of dried cocoa-nut leaves tied together.
(11.) In the villages of New Britain the strictest sani-
tary laws prevail. All offal is removed by the women, and
either thrown into the sea, or if in the bush buried some
distance away. All market places and cleared spaces in a
village are swept every day in order to clear them of dead
leaves, sticks, &c., which might hurt the feet of the dancers
or harbour insects.
(12.) In New Britain, Duke of York, as well as New
Ireland, there is a method of talking when they do not wish
to be understood by any stranger. It appears to be a different
dialect at each place, but it is common in this, that it is
chanted in a sort of falsetto voice, and is apparently cut up
into a rough kind of rhythm, in which all the smaller words
are left out, and is extremely difficult to understand.
(13.) The names of New Britain men are generally taken
from some animal or trees, such as “ Aukin,” a wallaby, or
“ Dewai,” wood —more generally they are called after some
relation or chief; but though the derivations of the names
are often difficult to trace, they are nearly always corrup-
tions of the name of something strong, active, or grand.
There are exceptions, as for instance the name of a chief at
Kubakadaie, “ Tor Long Long,” “ Tor ” signifying chief or
Mr., and “ Long Long ” fool, though I should have said he
was anything but that. I therefore surmise that there has
been very probably two meanings to “Long Long,” in the
same way that there is in the expression, “ Don’t make an
ass of yourself,” or “ Don’t be a goose,” but which second
meaning has been dropped, as in the case of our English
names “ Smith,” “ Whitehead; ” and here we do not expect
to see a blacksmith or any kind of smith in trade, neither
do we necessarily expect to see a gentleman with white hair
when Mr. Whitehead is announced. It is, as I said before,
difficult to discover the meaning or derivation of many


names, but there can be no doubt that they arose originally
from some act or thing associated with the man’s life.
Sometimes it is from some expression of the mother’s;
perhaps she says, “ He is as strong as a young tree,” or “ as
straight as a bamboo,” or, again, “as heavy as a stone.” He
will then be called either “ young tree,” “ hamhoo,” or
“stone.” In the case of the women the same arguments
apply, except that they are generally named after flowers,
birds, or butterflies.
(14.) The natives of New Britain, as well as those of Duke
of York and New Ireland, would put to shame most people
in Europe in their wonderful knowledge of natural history.
There is no beast, bird, reptile, fish, or insect of which
they do not know the distinctive name as well as that
applying to the class to which it belongs, having also a
general term for the whole species. For instance, take a
caterpillar; you ask a native what its name is, he will tell
you, “It is a caterpillar, changing to a moth, a tree-borer,
a cocoon spinner.” Or a beetle, that “It is a beetle, larva
eats offal, nymph buries in the earth.” He will give you all
this information as though it were one name. In the case
of an animal, say a flying squirrel—“ It is a Dirra-dirra”
(the sound it makes), “ lives on fruit, springs from tree to
tree at night, and brings forth its young.” Even the young
lads seem to know the name of the smallest insect ; but if
they should happen to he asked one that they do not know
they turn to the nearest man, who at once supplies the
information.
(15.) There is one kind of animal in New Britain that has
always baffled me—it is a creature that shows a most
brilliant phosphorescent light at night, and which is
generally to be found in an old tree. I have tried to
approach it, hut on coming within a few yards of it its
light disappears. I have hunted the spot where it was seen
without success; I have tried shooting it both with shot, as
well as a piece of chalk, to mark the exact spot, hut always
without success, and have had to give it up in despair. The
natives are very frightened of it, and call it “ Toheran-
253
APPENDIX.


quarburra.” I can only account for this curious phenomenon
by supposing it to be either a phosphorescent beetle or
lizard; the natives know nothing whatever as to its origin.
(16.) It is the custom in New Britain to blacken the
teeth ; this is done on a youth’s attaining man’s estate, and
although the teeth have already been much discoloured by
the process of chewing betel-nut, it is considered the correct
thing to stain them with the juice of a certain plant that
makes them perfectly black; this is not necessary for women,
but their teeth become black by chewing hetel-nut in
course of time. In fact the mouth of a New Britain man or
woman is not a pleasant sight at any time, for the juice of
the betel-nut always clings to their lips and gives an
appearance as of constantly spitting blood. It is, however, a
considerable breach of etiquette not to partake of it when
offered.
(17.) In the New Britain language there are some words
that bear a curious affinity to those of civilised or other
nations; for instance, take the native word “ a pup,”
meaning a dog. This would be easily accounted for were
dogs not indigenous to these islands, as for instance in the
Mortlock Islands, where they were introduced only a few
years ago. When the natives first saw dogs they heard the
sailors call them, saying, “ Come here! ” “ Come here! ” and
dogs in these islands have since gone by the name of a
“ Come-yere.” But dogs are as indigenous to New Britain as
dingoes are to Australia, there being but one breed common
to both New Ireland and New Britain, and they are unable
to bark; I cannot therefore account for it except as a curious
coincidence.
(18.) I have come to the conclusion that in these islands
one of the most primitive forms of language is to be found.
Protected as they are from the Malay Archipelago by the
great barrier of New Guinea, and far enough removed from
the Polynesian and Micronesian groups as to have been
practically inaccessible from them, they can therefore have
had little intercourse with any outsiders, save from the north


east coast of New Guinea on one side and the Solomon Islands
on the other, both of which are comparatively unknown and
equally primitive places, though not so inaccessible, owing
to their lying closer to the other islands of the Pacific, and
consequently not so likely to have retained in its purity the
language of their first ancestors. I therefore here take the
opportunity of comparing the method of counting in these
islands with some of the more ancient forms of figures
extant; I do not claim that their manner of counting is at
all peculiar to these people, for that would be absurd,
knowing as we do that all savage races make use of the
hands and feet for the purpose ; hut I do contend that here
it is their own, not introduced from elsewhere, and therefore
may he considered as primitive and not an improvement on
a still earlier form, the necessity to find a system for
counting having occurred, of which this was the immediate
and since unaltered result.
Let us now take the word “ five ”; it is in New Britain “ a
lima,” this being the word for a hand. Dr. Tylor tells us
in his Anthropology that this is also the case with the
Tamanacs of the Orinoco, as well as in other places in a less
direct manner. He also gives us the old Malay word (precisely
the same) “ lima,” which now is used as the word five, but
formerly meant hand. Moreover, the word is common to
the whole of Melanesia, still signifying five, though in
many cases the meaning “ hand ” has been dropped, as in
the case of the Malays, which would seem to suggest their
being of common descent. The New Britain counting
begins with the little finger of the left hand, and so on to
the thumb, calling each finger by name; this begins again
on the right hand, only each finger is called the pair of the
corresponding finger on the left hand, thus; left hand, tikai
(little finger), urua (third finger), otul (second finger), ivat
(first finger), a lima (thumb); right hand, lip tikai (little
finger), lov-urua (third finger), lov-otule (second finger',
(lov-ivat (first finger), tur a lim (thumb). Taking one
instance, the first finger of the left band, corresponding to
four with us, is “ivat,” and the same finger on the right
band, which would correspond to our nine, “lov-ivat,” is
simply the pair of four, which with us would he eight, but


is in reality nine; tur a lima—or short, tur a lim—means
ten separate articles (Fig. 1); ten in a bunch is ave nun, or
both hands together, the fingers interlaced. The word “ urua
tan-ivat,” the New Britain for twenty, is made up from
Fig 1.
NEW BRITAIN—TUR A LIM, SIGNIFYING TEN SEPARATE ARTICLES.
the elementary numbers two, four, and five, urua, ivat,
and a lim; the latter number being understood in ordinary
conversation. The composition of the word being “ two sets
Fig. 2.
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN TEN.
(of things, in which two sets, together there are) four
fives; ” so that the whole would read urua, two; tan, sets;
ivat, four ; a lim, five.
Dr. Tylor again, in his excellent little work, which I


might almost call the handbook of Anthropology, tells us
that there is ineffaceable proof that the numerals arose out
of the primitive counting on fingers and toes. Let us first take
two instances of characters which he gives in his hook—
Fig. 3.
ANCIENT ASSYRIAN TEN.
ancient Egyptian first. The ten here is in the form of a
Eoman arch (Figure 2); here one can surely trace two hands
together, the tips of the fingers touching, as may he seen at
the present time amongst some tribes of Melanesia when
Fig. 4.
ANCIENT ARABIC FIVE.
expressing ten. Again, take ancient Assyrian (Figure 3): this
also expresses ten. Here are the two hands again, as may be
seen in some tribes of Melanesia with the hands together,
fingers extended in front of the body. In ancient Arabic
five is represented thus (Figure 4). Here again, though
S


perhaps more obscure, is the closed fist of the left hand,
thumb extended, and it is from this numeral that our “ 5 ” is
obtained.
Fig. 5.
Fig. 6.
NEW BRITAIN—TIKAI.
ROMAN .... I.
NEW BRITAIN—URUA.
ROMAN .... II.
Take another instance, the old Eoman numerals, i., n., m.,
mi., y., yi., yii., yiii., Yim., x. (Figs. 5-14). Here may be seen
Fig. 7.
Fig, 8.
NEW BRITAIN—OTUL.
ROMAN .... III.
NEW BRITAIN—IVAT.
ROMAN .... IIII.
the whole of the fingers of each hand, “ one ” corresponding to
the little finger of the left hand, and so on until five, which
is represented as our “ v.,” and no doubt was taken from the
258
APPENDIX.


v shape of the thumb when extended with all the fingers
touching (Figure 9). The numerals were then continued by-
adding to the v on the left hand the fingers of the right
Fig. 9.
Fig. 10.
NEW BRITAIN A-LIMA.
ROMAN .... V.
NEW BRITAIN —LIP-TIKAI,
ROMAN .... VI.
in succession until ten is reached, when the two hands were
clasped together, fingers interlaced, from which arose the x
Fig. 11.
Fig. 12.
NEW BRITAIN—LOV-URUA,
ROMAN .... VII.
NEW BRITAIN —LOV-OTUL.
ROMAN .... VIII.
(Figure 14). This seems very conclusive, and I have little
doubt that in future times had these people of New Britain
been left to develop, unaffected by external influence, that
s 2


their numerals would have assumed a form similiar to these,
other tribes of the same race adopting other forms, but the
same fundamental method of numeration.
I cannot enter fully into the subject here, but I have little
doubt that the numbers of every ancient, and therefore
modern, nation may be traced to the one origin. No doubt
it is a subject that has been fully worked out before, but I
cannot help introducing it here, and by this means, in some
small degree, connecting the present with the ancient
savage.
In counting days or moons, or even numbers of bunches of
cocoa-nuts, &c., these natives always use a piece of twine or
Fig. 13.
Fig. 14
NEW BRITAIN—LOV-IVAT.
ROMAN .... VIIII.
NEW BRITAIN—AVE-NŬN.
ROMAN .... X.
bark, in which they place the requisite number of knots.
I observed an improvement on this at one place to the
westward, which was a necklace made with ten twine
pendants on which were worked a number of movable
Turk’s-head knots. If wishing to remember the number
of anything it was only necessary to slide the requisite
number of knots to the upper part of the pendant next the
throat, where they would be kept in place by a small slipknot
tied in the twine below them : this shows that advance of
culture is even now taking place amongst these islanders.
(19.) It is to my mind worthy of notice how phonetic the
260
APPENDIX.


language in these islands is—instance Rok-rok, a frog. This
is the exact imitation of the sound produced by the frog,
and when some thousands of them are all croaking together,
one can shut one’s eyes and fancy oneself in a boiler factory,
or on board a ship, where a large number of hands have
been turned on to caulk the deck.
Caka-ru-ku, a fowl, is also a good imitation of the cry
peculiar to that bird. There are also sounds of comparison,
if I may call them so; thus, ai-ap is New Britain for fire;
it also signifies quickness in movement; thus one would say,
“ Nakabea Ai-ap Ai-ap ” (“ Give me fire quickly ”). This is
undoubtedly taken from the rapidity with which fire moves,
although there is the word “ Alut,” also signifying quickness ;
they are sometimes used together, but Ai-ap is always used
as the superlative, thus: “ Nu-on-ati alut pumpum Ai-ap ”
literally, “ Come quick, quicker, quickest,” or corresponding
to our “ Come as quick as lightning.”
(20.) There are some curious laws about prostitution. Any
woman who has no relations living can become a prostitute,
but will not have to be avenged by her tribe in the case of
her being killed. If any man should afterwards take her
for a wife, she will then have equal rights with other
women. It is not considered degrading to a woman to be a
prostitute, except so far as her not having any one to care
for her. No woman that has a father or mother living can
become one unless by their consent, but this is often given.
If, however, she becomes one without their consent she is
liable to be killed by any of her relations, as she was
probably intended as a wife for a man in some particular-
family, or it may have been that she had been Sought as
wife for a chief. There is a drum beaten on certain nights
for all prostitutes to go out into the bush, where they are
chased by the young unmarried men. This is called “ Lu-
Lu,” a term applied to the women themselves, or to anything
connected with the custom. I believe, but am not certain,
that any children that may be the result of this are killed; I
cannot feel sure about it as I could never get any one to
tell me that I could rely upon, but I think their reticence
goes a considerable way towards proving this to be a fact, for
were it not so there would be no cause for silence.


(21.) With respect to the so much vexed question of the
murders of white men by natives in the South Sea Islands, I
not of opinion that it arises from two causes. First, though
am perhaps as much as some people state, by acts of
violence by white men on the natives, who retaliate, either
against the offender, or the next white man that comes to
the spot; and secondly, from the incontrollahle avarice of
the natives, augmented in many cases by returned labour
from Australia. In the first case I have little doubt, from
my own observations, substantiated by statements made by
natives themselves, and by careful inquiry amongst the
white traders as well as missionaries, that these abuses by
whites have been much exaggerated. lam not in any way
wishing to exonerate or shield those that are to blame, but
to give a fair and impartial view of the facts of the case.
Undoubtedly cases have occurred, and I fear that they have
been far from few, but are not to be compared in number with
those committed by natives on white men. Take the case
of Bishop Paterson or of Captain Goodenough; I take these
cases simply because they are better known. It has been
stated in each of these that they were murdered out of
retaliation for the depredations of some trader who had been
at the same places previously. When the authority of this
statement is examined it falls to the ground, as it appears
that no one can say in either case who or what trader it
w y as, and if they cannot tell this how can they say that such
was the case ?
Now let us take the character of natives as a rule, and
not only their character but their education. In character
they are avaricious to the last degree, they are also
treacherous, and the passion for killing is often so strong in
them that I have been told by natives themse.ves not to
walk in front of them when they were armed, lest this
feeling should get the better of them, and they might do
me an injury. Of course this is not so strong a feeling with
some as with others, but I believe it to be more or less
natural to all, especially the wilder and more savage tribes.
Moreover, from infancy they have been brought up to carry-
ing arms and to consider every stranger as an enemy, either
openly or covertly. A man without arms they despise and
262
APPENDIX.


look down upon as being no warrior, and if he be a stranger
all the more do their feelings rise against him. They know
no better, and the difficulty seems to be with civilized
people that they cannot place themselves in imagination in
the position of one of these natives; could they do this they
would understand their nature better, and there would be
less nonsense talked about, the poor ignorant savage, the
victim of the designing trader.
As for the trader himself the idea seems very general
that he goes from place to place carrying war and blood-
shed with him. Now, in the name of common sense, which
is the most likely to benefit the trader, to be always
imposing upon and cheating these people, and by this means
bringing about such strife and contention that it is not safe
for him to trade there any more, or by friendly and fair
means to obtain goods that anyhow he will make enormous
profit out of, and thus not risk his own life and the lives of
those with him, but continue to trade on friendly terms
wherever he goes? I am fully aware that many quarrels
arise from misunderstandings perhaps of the language, or a
mistake as to intention, but I maintain that in nine cases out of
ten it is the native who takes the aggressive, not the trader.
Again, there is in Australia what is called the labour
trade. Vessels go round the different islands having on
board a Government agent; they obtain a number of young
men by agreement with the chiefs or the men themselves to
come to Australia to work at the plantations for three years.
They go, and in three years’ time are returned to their
native island; they have been just long enough with whites
to learn a lot of roguery, and they also pick up a little
knowledge about ships from their return voyage. They are
paid off from their late employers with clothes, knives,
beads, and perhaps a musket, powder and shot; they land on
their island, and all their friends come round and see what
they have got ; then the explanation follows that white
men have plenty of these things in their ships; avarice is at
once aroused, and perhaps the next ship that calls at that
place is made the subject of an attack, the lately returned
labour (as they are called) giving advice as to how success
can be best obtained, for which their previous knowledge


duly qualifies them. Perhaps they succeed only too well,
and they attempt the same thing another time and
most likely succeed again; other tribes hear of it and are
equally anxious to try their hand. A man-of-war is sent
down, all the natives decamp into the bush inland, and a few
houses are burnt (which perhaps is rather a charity than
otherwise, for sanitary reasons). Possibly Johnny or Jacky,
who can talk a little English and knows a great deal of
roguery, is captured and tells a sad story of how the white
men carried off the women, &c. He knows enough of white
men and has heard sufficient of a man-of-war to know this
story will go down; he is rewarded by having a shirt and
tobacco given him, and is told to go and tell his people not to
attack white men’s vessels, and he goes off to his tribe laugh-
ing in his sleeve (if he had one) and thinking what fools
these white men are, which opinion is fully echoed by the
remainder of his tribe.
It often occurs that the women are used as decoys instead
of being carried off in the ruthless manner described by
some people. I know of a case that is well authenticated
where the chief offered the captain his daughter to be his
woman. The captain, no doubt thinking to augment his
friendly relations and increase his trade, accepted; a few
days afterwards he and nearly all his crew were brutally
murdered, a few escaping in a boat, the captain being struck
down by the very woman the chief had given him to wife.
I am not defending the morality of the captain’s proceeding ;
I merely wish to show that this was a preconcerted plan to
plunder the vessel.
Another case, that of a well-known man who was
murdered with his wife and child and the whole of his
crew simply for the sake of plundering the vessel. He had
been trading for many years in these seas, and was always
considered a most upright man and very friendly with all
natives with whom he had any dealings. When the news
of his death was brought to another island where he was
known, a chief came running to the missionary’s house to
know if it was true, and when he heard that it was, his
grief was ungovernable, he beat his head on the ground and
cried out that he wanted to go and fight the murderers and


eat them all up, asking if it was far off, and begging the
missionary to get a ship and take him and his fighting
men to the place, that they might avenge his death. This
would not seem to show that the trader was otherwise
than a friend to natives. I could tell of many other such
cases—hundreds I might almost say.
But, again, there have been and undoubtedly are had men
who trade in these islands, and who think very little of
committing any outrage on natives; hut these men, I am
glad to say, are getting fewer every year, and their acts of
violence are more often directed against other traders than
against the natives themselves (I shall give an instance of
this further on); but such acts in themselves set a terrible
example, that the natives are only too ready to profit by.
But, as I said before, such men as perpetrate these crimes
are getting scarce, thanks to the action of the Government
in sending men-of-war cruisers to these seas. Even in
the case of an outrage —carrying off a woman, or even kid-
napping a number of natives, which is almost impossible
now—l hope I shall not be misunderstood when I say
that the natives do not keep their resentment, or indeed
do not have so much resentment against the perpetrators
as we civilised people would be inclined to imagine. In
the first place, their lives are passed in one constant state
of defence against or aggression on other tribes; they lose
many men and women in their own wars, by ambush,
treachery, or open fighting; their lives are a continual
round of what we should consider the most horrible sights,
but to which they are accustomed; yet I hold that no
punishment is too severe for white men who take advantage
of these poor creatures’ misfortunes and barbarism to work
them harm, to say nothing of the unfortunates that they
kidnap, who may be benefited by the result, but most
likely are not. What I wish to explain by this statement
is, that the argument so often made use of to prove that a
murder was caused by an outrage formerly committed is
generally an exaggeration.
In a case where a quarrel arises over some trading
transaction, and when the natives and whites both get angry,
spears and bullets are exchanged, and it might be considered


unsafe for a man to venture on shore at this time; hut a
case of this sort has occurred to me, when I landed at the
very spot where a man had been shot in an affair of this
description, and they were actually holding the funeral
obsequies of the dead man at the time—though of this I was
not aware until I reached the village—yet no man lifted a
hand to do me any harm ; and, so far as I could learn from
the natives, the fray was owing to the duplicity of a chief
who had stolen some trade and had not payed for it in
copra. This led to a dispute, and the natives had thrown
spears, which had been answered by shots from the traders’
boat; and this man had unfortunately been shot, yet I did
not hear a word mentioned about revenge. I also am fully
persuaded that the chiefs care more for the trade that the
white men bring in the course of business than for the
death of a good many of their own people. Thus I have
come to these two conclusions: first, that the labour trade
is strongly to be condemned as far as the South Seas are
concerned, and also that the trader is more often sinned
against than sinning.
In saying this I allude more particularly to the New
Hebrides, Santa Cruz, Soloman, New Ireland and New
Britain, though I am glad to say the two latter have been
so far comparatively free from labour trade. Whilst
making these remarks on this subject I may state that my
observations extended over a period of nearly seven years ;
and I can conscientiously say that I have endeavoured to
get as near the right solution of this question as possible
without bias, and feel sure that if the natives were brought
to see that it was more to their interest to be friendly, by
receiving a swift punishment for the unprovoked attacks
on trading vessels, that in a short time no more outrages
would be heard of on their side; at the same time let there
be an equally swift punishment for any white man against
whom it can be proved that he has acted in an oppressive or
illegal manner against any natives ; but by all means let
their punishments be real, not fictitious, as they generally
have been. This might easily be accomplished had captains
of men-of-war cruising in these seas more power given them
to act on the spot.


“ Severity,” as Dr. Johnson said, “is the way to govern
men, yet is not the way to mend them ; ” but in this case
they require governing before it is possible to mend them.
There is one more thing I would urge : that the languages
spoken by these natives should be collected as far as possible,
and that a book in which they are collectively printed
should be placed at the disposal of the captains of men-of-
war cruising among these islands, in order that they may be
less at the mercy of a one-sided interpreter. This would
be an immense help to justice and trade, as well as of equal
value to the scientific world, and would not be so hard to
obtain as might be imagined.
I now will give a short account of a case that occurred
in these islands that came under my immediate knowledge,
but which I am very thankful to say was not enacted by
Englishmen. I omit names for obvious reasons.
A few years ago there was in Cambria, New Britain, a
trader whom we will call J . He was trading for a Ger-
man firm, having signed an agreement to do so with the firm’s
accredited agent in these parts, whose name shall be Captain
L . J had been trading in this spot but a short time
when he was foully murdered by the natives, but his wife (a
Samoan woman) was taken on board Captain L ’s vessel.
It was even then rumoured amongst the few whites who
were at that time near the place that Captain L had
something to do with the murder, as he took no notice of the
theft of a large quantity of trade goods which were stolen
from J ’s house at the time of his murder ; and, although
knowing well who the culprits were, never demanded their
restitution, or took any notice of the crime committed. A
year or so later one of Captain L ’s traders, a half-caste,
to be called in future K , murdered another trader of the
same firm in these islands, in a boat, by beating him to death
with the stone ballast, whilst in a state of intoxication ; but
for this K was not punished in any way by Captain
L , but was still employed as trader, for Captain L s
own purposes. A little later an English seaman that had been
on board Captain L ’s vessel was missing, Captain L
himself making all sorts of anxious inquiries about him
amongst the natives and other white men, missionaries, &c..


as to whether they had seen or heard anything of him. It
afterwards transpired from natives and others that this sea-
man had some earrings that Captain L ’s Samoan wife was
anxious to buy. On Christmas Eve it appears that Captain
L gave his men several bottles of spirits to keep Christ-
mas with, by which means the crew were rendered more or less
intoxicated. It was then that the before-mentioned seaman
went aft to Captain L -’s wife, and offered her the earrings
on condition that she consented to certain improper proposals
he made her; she told this to Captain L , who ran up and
knocked the man down with an iron belaying-pin; the sea-
man, on recovering his senses, drew an unloaded revolver,
and in his drunken state threatened to shoot Captain L ,
whereupon he was knocked down again from behind by one
of the mates. When he recovered the second time he was
told to go on shore, which he did, having been somewhat
sobered by the rough treatment he had received. As soon as
he was gone Captain L sent K with a message to
certain chiefs on shore that this seaman was to he murdered,
and that he would pay them when it was done. This, by their
own confession, these chiefs accomplished only too well,
taking the body out to sea in a canoe with a heavy stone
attached, and sinking it. After some months a man-of-war
schooner arrived at Duke of York, K having been in
the meantime placed on a new station in New Ireland; but,
coming over to Duke of York for some medicine from the
mission, and hearing that an English man-of-war was there,
he was frightened in consequence of his having murdered the
trader, as before stated, and turned back. Captain L how-
ever heard that he had been over, and also believing that he
had been to the man-of-war, came to his station and accused
him of it, saying, “ You have been carrying stories of me to
the man-of-war; ” and, when K said he had not, told him
he “ lied.” Captain L then said, “ I want to ask you a
question: what do you know about J ? K answered,
“I do not know much.” “ Then,” said Captain L , “ what
do you know about, the English seaman ? ” (mentioning his
name). K answered, getting angry, “ I know you paid the
natives to kill him.” “ Yery well,” said Captain L -, “ I will
stop your telling any more tales about me.” He then seized up


a loaded musket that was standing near, with the intention of
shooting K ; but K was too quick for him, and
wrenched it out of his hand ; and in the scuffle that ensued
Captain L pushed K out of the house, and shut the
door. K , haying the rifle in his hand, fired through the
door at Captain L , who was standing against it, and shot
him dead.
Some of this was gathered from the natives, and the rest
was told by K when a prisoner. I have met other captains
of the same firm, and never wish to meet more gentlemanly,
pleasant men. This account needs no comment; hut I am
thankful to say that such cases are very rare, yet where
they have existed the example to natives is a terrible one.
Though in this instance I am inclined to think that the
natives who took part in it were fully impressed by the
sequel, as also by the arrest of K ,to assist in any such
thing again.
(22.) There is a fact well worth mentioning with respect
to carrying dogs on board a vessel in these parts otherwise
than the mere fact of their use as a watch. It is that they
are very sensitive of an approach of land or reefs; and I
found that whenever our dogs began to sniff over the side
it was a sure sign of there being a reef not far off; and not
only that, hut they will continue to do this until the danger
is a long way off. They will detect the smell of a reef even
at night whilst asleep, and will awake and run to the side
of the vessel and whine, so that they are of as much use
as a lead is in other places, for many reefs here are so steep
to, that the lead is no guide.
[From the Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London,
June 15, 1880. J
‘ Field Notes on the Morroop (Casuarius bennetti) of New
Britain,’ by Willed Powell.
The interior of the northern peninsula of New Britain is
composed of high table-land and grassy plains of considerable


area. It is on these plains that the cassowary of this
island (Casuarius bennetti) is mostly to be found. These
birds are generally seen moving slowly along in the high
grass, with their heads just showing above it. The plains
appear to be their feeding ground, as they are rarely seen
in the bush during the day-time. They are gregarious in
their habits, travelling in flocks of three or four; I have
sometimes seen as many as seven in a flock together.
When in motion they always go in Indian file, with the cock
bird leading. They do not seem to advance over the
ground very quickly unless alarmed, when they travel with
marvellous rapidity, having a hounding motion, which is
not, in my estimation, very graceful. When they select a
place for their nests they do so usually in an open glade
that is well timbered, hut without underscrub. Here they
scrape the earth together into a slight heap, with a depres-
sion in the centre. The nest is circular in form, about five
feet in diameter, the outside being raised about six inches
from the ground level. Here they lay their eggs, which
are left to hatch by the heat of the sun. The natives, who
search for these nests, in order to obtain the eggs for food
(which they consider a great delicacy, though I cannot say
I like them myself, their flavour being too strong), assure
me that they seldom find more than three at a time in one
nest, and that when the bird has laid one egg, it leaves the
nest for some days before returning to lay another ; whether
they lay eggs elsewhere in the meanwhile I cannot say.
The egg is about five inches long by three inches wide at
the broadest part, and is thickly mottled with delicate little
green spots.
The cassowary’s food consists of lizards, frogs, fruits, nuts,
and it is also very fond of fish. Whilst in conversation
with a native one day, he told me that the pook-pook (or
crocodile) was very fond of cassowary’s flesh, and often eats
them. It puzzled me very much to understand how it was
that the crocodile, who is so unwieldy in his movements on
shore, could possibly catch a bird of such swiftness. It
chanced that afterwards I witnessed an interesting occur-
rence that may very possibly account for it. I was one day
some little distance up a river in New Britain, sitting in my


little dingy, fishing (the boat and myself being practically
hidden by bushes); I saw a morroop (cassowary) come down
to the water’s edge, and stand for some minutes apparently
watching the water carefully; it then stepped into the
river where the water was about three feet deep, and,
partially squatting down, spread its wings out, submerging
them, the feathers being spread and ruffled. The bird
remained perfectly motionless; I also noticed that the eyes
were closed as if asleep. It remained in this position for
fully a quarter of an hour, when, suddenly closing its wings
and straightening its feathers, it stepped out on to the bank,
where, shaking itself several times, a quantity of small
fishes fell from under the wings and from amidst the
feathers, which were immediately picked up and swallowed.
The fishes had evidently mistaken the feathers for a de-
scription of weed that grows in the water along the hanks
of the rivers in this island, and very much resembles the
feathers of the cassowary, and in which the smaller fish
hide to avoid the larger ones that prey on them. I think it
would have been very easy for a crocodile to seize the bird
yvhilst thus in the water. These birds generally go into the
thickest scrubs to sleep; and, although I have never myself
seen them, I heard from the natives that the hen birds
sleep with their heads under their wings, lying down, and
that the male bird lies with his head stretched out along
the ground, probably to guard against surprise.
The method the natives adopt to catch them is to light
fires in a large circle of about a mile in circumference in the
long grass on the plains, leaving one opening in the circle at
which are stationed several men armed with spears. The
fire is made to burn towards the centre of the circle by men
and women on the outside, who heat out with bushes all fire
likely to spread in any other direction; this drives the
cassowaries that are within the circle to the opening, where
they are speared by the men stationed there for that
purpose. Another method is to place a rope (made of the
bark of a tree), with a running noose at one end and a loop
at the other, round the nest, covering it with sand so as to
hide it. The native takes the other end (which has been
wound round his body) behind a tree, and waits for the bird


to come. When she is seated on the nest in the act of
laying an egg, he pulls the rope, and the noose catches the
legs of the cassowary; he then runs with the other end to a
tree, and takes a round turn, which holds the bird in its
struggle to escape until it is quite tired out and helpless;
he then despatches it with his spear. One man, when I was
in the Gloonun district (New Britain), met with his death in
the following peculiar manner, whilst waiting for a cassowary
to come to its nest. Haying his rope already laid, he fell
asleep; in the meanwhile the bird came to its nest and laid
its egg, but, when going away, got one of its legs entangled
in the noose. Thus the man who had the rope wound
round his body was dragged along the ground, and, I
suppose, struck against a tree, which stunned or killed him.
Both the body of the man and the bird were found dead
some days afterwards, still fastened together with the rope,
at some considerable distance from the nest.
The bones of the cassowary are used in many ways by
the natives, the leg-bones being prized to put on the butt
ends of spears to balance them ; others of the hones are used
for spatulas, knives, &c. The feathers are made into head-
dresses and brushes for driving flies away. The sharp-
pointed claws from the toe are in one part of New Britain
used for points of spears, and are fastened on with wax,
which when the spear is imbedded in the body melts, so
that when the wooden part of the spear is drawn out the
horn point remains in the flesh.
These birds become quite domesticated and tame if
kept about a house, and will follow like a dog and feed
out of the hand. They have a peculiar cry, beginning
high, and coming down the scale about five notes. The
natives have adopted this cry as their war cry. The young
one makes a whistling noise; also when feeding make a
chirping something like a chicken, only considerably
louder.
The young on leaving the egg is left to shift for itself,
and does not join a flock until it attains maturity; which,
the natives tell me, takes about five years. The young bird
is far from pretty, being covered with a light brown down,
which grows darker as the bird ages, until it reaches the


rich black of the full-grown bird. The wings are very
small in comparison to its size, having no pinion feathers,
but in their place four black spine quills, which the natives
prize to wear through the cartilage of the nose. The horny
comb on the head of the male bird is used by him for
pushing his way through the thick scrub, which is very
dense in some places, being often composed of prickly palm
or a creeping cane which is covered with sharp thorns, and
which would, were it not for the comb, tear the head of the
bird.
It is a curious fact that there are no cassowaries in New
Ireland, it only being distant from New Britain thirty
miles, with Duke of York Island lying between them, which
also has no cassowaries on it. I saw some fossil footprints on
a large flat rock near the shore in New Ireland which
appear to me - to be the marks of cassowaries feet, being those
of a large bird with only the three front toes, which, if
they should be cassowaries footprints, tend to show that
they must have been there at one time.
The flesh of the morroop is often eaten by the natives,
and the oil that is extracted from the fat is considered very
valuable as a remedy for rheumatism. Altogether the
cassowary is an extremely useful bird to the natives in
every way, and would form a most interesting study to the
naturalist.
These natives are excessively clever at catching sharks.
They do it in an altogether novel manner; on looking into a
fishing canoe that is prepared for an expedition one sees a
pair of half-cocoanut shells with plaited twine handles
fastened through two holes at the back; also a piece of strong
but light wood cut in the shape of a fish, about two feet six
inches long, by six inches broad in the widest place; a
strong rope of cane or twisted bark is fastened by a toggle
through a hole near the head, and passes again through a
hole near the tail of this wooden fish, leaving a loop that
may be made any depth by drawing the rope through the
second hole —the rope is perhaps two fathoms in length.
On arriving at the fishing ground a native slips his hand
through the loop at the back of the half-cocoanut shells
(as we should a pair of cymbals) ; these he strikes and rubs
T


together under the water alongside his canoe, whilst
another native holds the noose with the wooden fish in
readiness. The noise made hy the cocoanut shells attracts
any shark that may he near, and he comes up close along-
side the canoe to see what it is. The native with the noose
draws it out to the right size, and quickly slips it over the
head and fins, at the same time drawing it tight, and the
shark is a prisoner; hut it takes some time to tire him out,
and he often tows the canoe a long distance before he is
finally conquered and killed by spears. The natives say
COCOA-NUT SHELLS AND SLIP-NOOSE USED IN CATCHING SHARKS,
NEW BRITAIN.
that the noise made by the cocoamxt shells is exactly
similar to that made by bonita fish when springing out of
the water, and it is this attracts the shark ; and on coming
up he is so anxious and greedy after prey that he is easily
caught. Usually the natives are successful, and bring in
several sharks, of which they are particularly fond. On the
other hand, they often get a canoe broken or upset when
tackling a large one, if great skill is not used in its
management.
(28.) The legends of these natives are very absurd and
impossible as a rule, and one can generally detect a true
story from a false one by the absence of exaggeration in the
former. If a native wishes to invent a story he dresses it
up-with the most improbable adjuncts that he can possibly


command. One instance will be sufficient to illustrate this.
“ At one time a woman was delivered of a son, who had such
a big head that every one was surprised; he was able to
walk and talk as soon as he was born. One day, soon after,
his father killed a pig, part of which he hung up to the roof
of his house to keep it from the dogs whilst he and his wife
went out to work on a yam patch. On returning home he
found the piece of pig gone, and he asked his son where it
was. He said he didn’t know, as he had been asleep most of
the time that they had been away. The next day the
father hung up some turtle, and on returning this was also
gone; also other natives who had left their huts complained
of losing food. This went on for some time, people losing
fish, pork, fowls and all manner of food. At last one day the
father and another man determined to watch, so they hung
up a piece of pork in each house, and the others went away
to work at the yams; but the father and the other man hid
themselves where they could see all that was going on.
After the others had been gone a little time he saw his baby
son get up and shake himself; he then grew up to such a
size that his head touched the top of the house, when he seized
the piece of pork and swallowed it whole; he then changed
into a lizard, and ran to the other man’s dwelling, where he
again grew to the top of the house and ate the pork; then
he changed into a rat and went to another house; and so on.
The father and the other man having seen all this, ran to the
others and told them, whereupon it was decided to kill the
child, which they did, and burnt its body.”
Very different to the foregoing however are their stories
of a race of men with tails ; also a race of little men repre-
sented as being about three feet high—of these their
accounts do not vary, and are consistent with what one
might suppose to be facts. For instance, these people are not
attributed with any supernatural propensities or gifts, but
are described as men like other natives, building houses and
carrying spears, &c.; the only thing perhaps at all exagge-
rated about the story is that they make a hole in the ground
with a stick, when they sit down, for the tail to go into, because
the tails are unbendable, but even this seems to bear the stamp
of truth about it; for had a native invented the story, he


would in all probability have made it a flexible one, as the
only other tails that they have any knowledge of are those
of the dog, cuscus, wallaby, &c., which of course are
flexible; therefore had this been a mere creation of ima-
gination it would probably have taken some such form as
this: “ that they had tails which trailed on the ground
behind them, and which they swung round them when
fighting, like a club.” The fact of their tails being stiff
inclines me to believe that there has been a family with
such an appendage at one time amongst them: indeed it is a
well-known thing that there was such a family in Austria.
However, although on the coast the natives are quite
confident as to where these people are situated, on going to
search for them they are always reported to have moved
somewhere else.
This story is told word for word the same in New Guinea,
which is curious, to say -the least of it, though not by the
natives of the districts between Spacious and Open Bays, as
far as Cape Gloucester. It is confined to the Gazelle
Peninsula in New Britain, but is heard of again in New
Guinea, some two hundred miles distant. There is no such
story in New Ireland.
(24.) In the volcanic portions of New Britain that
wonderful builder the megapode (Megapodius Hueskeri)
dispenses with the huge mounds of vegetable matter and
earth that it usually accumulates to lay its eggs in—and
places them in the cracks and crevices on the sides of an
active volcano, where the pumice stone, being superheated
by steam and the fire below, supplies the place of the
warmth caused by the decaying vegetation.
(25.) It is curious to note how the active volcanoes of
New Britain seem to be entirely situated on the northern
side of the island. I will take them in rotation: first, “ The
Mother ” —extinct volcano, crater filled with fresh water,
two thousand four hundred and seventy feet high; active
volcano immediately below it, with two extinct craters and
hot-water spring, all situated on the Blanche Peninsula.
Second, New Island, ten feet in height, crater filled with hot


salt water; rose in one night during the eruption of the
active volcano on Blanche Peninsula (May 1878). Third,
Mount Beautemps Beaupre, one thousand eight hundred
feet high—extinct volcano situated in the centre of Gazelle
Peninsula. Fourth, Father and Sons —North Son, apparently
extinct, one thousand three hundred feet high; Father,
active, four thousand feet high; South Son, active, three
thousand feet high. Fifth, Duportail Island—active, one
thousand feet. Sixth, numerous small volcanic craters,
apparently extinct, along the coast between Low Point and
Hummock Head. Seventh, Island Point and Two Peak
Mountain—extinct. Eighth, Willaumez, Eaoul, Gicquel and
Du Faure Islands—apparently extinct; Cape Gloucester,
one mass of active craters, with several smaller craters along
the coast line from Cape Wilson to Cape Gloucester. Ninth,
Tupinier Island —active. Tenth, Book Island—extinct.
Thus making a total of ten actual groups of volcanoes, more
or less active, whilst on the south side there is hut one, Cape
Quoy; and it is very doubtful to me if that has ever been a
volcano, hut rather an upheaval. I have purposely omitted
the Byning Mountains, as there is no distinct crater to he
seen amongst them; their very rugged appearance would
lead me to imagine that they also were the result of some
mighty convulsion when the earth was in the throes of
conception. It is a fact worthy of note that there is no
appearance of volcanoes, active or extinct, on New Ireland.
(26.) Before closing these necessarily slight notes of
these most interesting islands I should like to express
my earnest hope that the day is not far distant when an
expedition will he fitted out to visit them. Ido not mean
an Admiralty expedition; for, although there are no men
on the face of the earth better able to carry one out than
our gallant naval officers, there are many reasons why such
an expedition as the one I hope to see should he compara-
tively a private one. The very mention of a man-of-war
in sight is enough to send the natives of some places off
to hide in the bush. The vessel I should propose would
be a small one—say one hundred tons —and built of wood,
with an auxiliary steam power, which is invaluable on ap


preaching a dangerous island or harbour, and also in calms.
She should have a small complement of steady men and
officers, with one to command who has considerable know-
ledge of natives, with the necessary scientific collectors;
and should be stored for two years. The smallness of the
vessel, with her auxiliary screw, would enable her to enter
every little hole and corner on a coast, making complete
anthropological, botanical, and zoological collections. The
commander should at all times be prepared to visit the
chiefs, and if necessary stay with them two or three days,
to enable the collectors to make a satisfactory collection,
at the same time acquiring what information he could as
to the habits and customs of the natives, as well as an exact
account of the uses they make of their various ornaments,
implements and weapons, &c. A slight outline survey of
places called at should also be made, and where practicable
dredging should be carried on; but it would also be
necessary to the success of the undertaking that all
scientists, as well as others, should be under the complete
control of the commander. The vessel should be fitted with
everything necessary for carrying out all the objects of the
expedition, and her furnaces should be so constructed that
she could burn wood when under steam.
Valuable time is being wasted; every year sees these
natives in a less primitive condition than the former one;
indeed in some places races are dying out before the
advance of civilisation, as is the case in some of the Line
Islands. The trade carried on with these islands is itself
a terrible destroyer of their primsevalism, supplying goods
from Europe that superseded their ancient and original
manufactures, and cause them in a few years to die out
and be lost. Instead of the stone tomahawk is used the
iron one, the musket instead of the spear, bow and arrow,
or sling, cloth for tapa, beads for shells, and even the
ancient head-dress has in some instances given way to hats
or bonnets. Thus the destruction of original peculiarities
is generally on the increase, spreading as the trade increases,
and will no doubt at some future date as irrevocably
destroy the ancient style and habits of these as _it has of
other nations; nor will this be at so distant a period as


some might think, for an island is not like a continent, but
is smaller, and the natives sooner succumb to the insidious
trader. Therefore if a record of these people in their
original state is to be handed down to posterity no further
time should be lost; what has been thrown away can never
be regained, but it is possible to prevent further loss of time
by immediate action, and it is my earnest and sincere hope
that these suggestions may be acted on, and that those
interested in the aborignal races of the Pacific may not
have to mourn the impossibility of obtaining such records
and information by putting off doing so till too late.


English.
Duke of York.
(Hewlett.)
New Britain.
(Kininigunun.)
New Ireland,
(Karlisle.)
Armlet ....
Axe
a
pem
a lili
a pem .
Bamboo ....
a
kauri .
a kauri . .
Banana ....
a
wudu .
a wudu
Basket
a
rat
a rat
Barter (y.)....
Beads
a
vinadewai.
lugara .
a piova
Beetle
Betel-nut ....
a
boa
a kua-ri
a hue .
Bird
a
pika .
a beyo .
Boy
a
nat
Bush (inland).
Butterfly ....
a
torto .
a rapapnpui
a bebi .
Cane . . . . .
a
kedda . ,
a kedda
Canoe (large) . . .)
(without outrigger) (
a
mwom
a mworn .
mworn
Canoe (small). . . j
(with outrigger) (
o-aga • •
o-aga
Caterpillar
a
auvi .
a oliva .
Crocodile ....
a
puk piik .
a puk piik .
Chrysalis ....
Cloth (native).
a
malu .
a babinum .
a malu .
Club (stone) .
Club (wood) .
Cocoa-nut (young)
a
terrip .
a ramuat .
a ram .
a terrip
a terris
Cocoa-nut (older) . .
a
kulau ,
a kulau .
a kulas
Cocoa-nut (not quite 1
ripe) . . . .(
a
kubika
a kubika .
a kubis
Cocoa-nut (old) .
a
alamai
a alamai .
a alamas
VOCABULARY OF WORDS.
(From the Italian .)
u
280


English.
Duke of York.
New Britain.
New Ireland.
(Mowlett.)
(Kininigunun.)
(Karlisle.)
Dance
a mulagin .
a mulagin .
Dead . ...
mat .
mat ....
Devil
a toheran
a toheran .
Dog (as in cut)
a pup
a pup .
pupa
Earring ....
..
a maritalaghina
Egg
a kiau .
a kiau .
Feather head-dress
a lukwar
a lukwar .
Fire (as in cut)
ungwin .
ai-ap
ai-a
Fish (Eng. ine) .
ain
a ain .
Fishing-net .
auhanang
aubin
Fishing-basket (or J
a up
trapl ("Eng. woop) . (
a long-long .
Fool
a long-long
Fowl
a karaki.
a kakaruka
Frog
a rok-rok
a rok-rok .
Give me (v.) .
,, ,,
a nakabea .
Girl
a garravafini .
Grass (long) .
a kunai .
a kunai
Haul (to pull) (v.) .
alia
a pal .
House
a ruma .
Husk (outside of old 1
cocoa-nut) . . . J
a palalamai .
a palalamai
a palalamas
Husk (outside of )
young cocoa-nut) . j
Jew’s Harp
a palakulau .
a palakulau
a palakulus
a ungap
Knife
a hurnam
a hurnam .
Leaf
a ghilai .
a bui .
a mapinai .
Let go (v.)
palai .
..
Look out (to look at )
jterua
that) . . . . j
..
(hoi-hoi .
Man |
a mwoana .)
a tira . . j
a tutuana .
Money
diwarra .
a tabu .
Make haste
a alut
ai-ap
Necklace ....
• • ..
kurakurua .
Necklace (of heads) .
unghid .
No
puta .
puta.....
Nose stick (horizon- )
..
a hilibago .
Nose stick (through )
ai buta .
nostril) ... .)
Paint (red earth) .
..
a tara .
Paint (blue earth)
a pepen
Pearl shell....
a kalhng
a kalagi
Pig . . .
boroi .
boroi
boroi
U
281
VOCABULARY OF WORDS.


English.
New Britain.
(Kininignmin.)
Duke of York,
(Mowlett.)
New Ireland,
(Karlisle.)
Pigeon
kurua .
balu....
Pipe (tobacco)
.. ..
piet-moa
Eain
a bata
a bata * . ,
Eat
a gal&ng.
a galling
Eeef (or big stone)
awat (or avat)
awftto (or avato)
Eope
we we .
raoa ....
Salt
. , ,,
a ta ...
Sand
a ragai
,,
Shell (sea) . . .
a vinaganoi
Shell (land) .
..
a kato .
Ship
a prao .
a prao .
Shore
a rualine
a rualine .
Sick
mulapang
mati
Skeleton ....
. • . .
bala-baluna .
Skull (or head)
a lorigne
a luna .
Sling
waiwi
Snake
a 6bi (or 6rbi)
a ovi (or ovri) .
Song
a kele-kele .
a kele-kele
Spear
a bele
a ruma
Stone axe ....
.. ..
barur
Stone (small) .
,,
a rum .
Sweet potato .
a mami .
a mami
Taro
a pa .
a pa ...
Tobacco ....
a sukr .
Turtle
a pun
a pun .
a pun
Turtle shell
pelapun .
pelapun
pelapun
Wallaby ....
a aukin .
a aukin
Water (fresh) .
a danim .
a ta va
Water (salt) .
a ta .
a tai
White (or lime) .
a kabang
a kabang .
Wind (N. W. mon-l
a tobarr .
a tobarr
a tobarr
Wind (S.B. monsoon).
a laberu .
a laberu
a laberu
Woman ....
a vafini .
a tabuan .
Wood or tree .
a dewai .
a dewai
Yam
a 6p .
a 6p ...
Yes
er


NUMBERS.
Gazelle Peninsula, New Britain.
1. Tikai.
2. Urua.
3. 0 Tul.
4. Ivat.
5. A-lima.
6. Lip tikai.
7. Lov-urua.
8. Lov-otul.
9. Lov-ivat.
10. Turalim (or tu-a-lim).
10. (together) Ave-nun.
20 i ” Ur-ave-nun.
( „ TJrua tanivat (alim).
30. „ Ot-ave-nun.
100. „ Amara.


LONDON :
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.
