

WAR MEMORIAL SINGING TOWER, BATHURST. N.S.W., AUSTRALIA




Foreword. . .
O those who |ave of their pounds and their
P^ llll *** B * their substance and services to fit*
tingly memorialise those brave men and
women of 1914*18 in grateful appreciation of hrave
deeds and nohle sacrifices and to uphold the honour
of a nohle city; this brochure is dedicated.
May the young people who built hricls upon brich,
without the experiences of those eventful years, live
long to enjoy the delightful melodies of their Singing
lower and be inspired to greater deeds of
communal service and sacrifice.


BATHURST
The City and District
Bathurst has been termed the Queen City of the West. To-day it is known
as the Carillon City of Australia.
Its delightful setting, its broad well-kept streets, its Cathedrals, Churches, edu-
cational institutions, public buildings, public utilities and arboreal features make it a place
in which it is a privilege to live and a pleasure to visit.
This delightful inheritance has been handed down as a contribution from the
early pioneers, who were men of vision of aesthetic tastes and with a due regard for
those who follow after.
Bathurst has traditions, it has an atmosphere, it is British and the present gene-
ration has not failed to uphold and perpetuate the worthwhile things for the uplift of the
community.
The memorial to its soldiers erected by the residents of City and District is
not the least amongst the big and honourable achievements of the past and present.


A GLIMPSE FROM MACHATTIE PARK
Photos by A. E. Cox, George-street, Bathurst


The Memorial
In the year 1920 Bathurst decided to build a memorial to her soldiers. A
design was submitted to cost approximately £B,OOO. For six years the people were
apathetic and the design did not appeal. The returned soldiers asked Bathurstians a
very pertinent question and the project was revived. Prior to this Mr. G. H. Hoskins
had visited England and saw and heard the Loughborough war memorial which took the
form of a campanile and carillon bells. Upon returning he suggested that a carillon
would be most suitable for Bathurst. He obtained the support of many citizens and
promises of contributions.
On August 26th, 1 926, a public meeting was called, the original design was
rejected, the carillon scheme adopted and a committee appointed.
Early in 1929 a carillon of 35 bells was purchased from John Taylor and Co.,
of Loughborough, England.


MEMORIAL PLACE, BATHURST, N.S.W.


The Tower
Owing to the site chosen for the tower being on a
bed of clay the foundations were costly. Four con-
crete piers 5 feet by 5 feet, were built 47 feet below
the surface and widened at their bases. Upon these
piers four reinforced concrete bearers sft. x 6ft. were
built, raising the foundations six feet above the
ground level. Around these a brick base was built pro-
viding steps to a platform surrounding the tower six
feet from the ground. Upon this foundation a tower
one hundred feet high made of Bathurst red brick, was
erected.
In describing the tower nothing could be more fit-
tingly written than the appreciation of Professor E. iv.
Holme of the Sydney University, the leading Austra-
lian authority upon carillons and campaniles. Extracts
are here given :
“Bathurst had the ambition and courage to aim at
a memorial entirely without utilitarian* character —a
‘Singing Tower’ —a pure work of art, musical and
architectural. The beautiful ‘City of the Plains’ had
to think of beauty in its war memorial to be true to
itself. The tower will harmonise with all about it as
well as with its own voice, and such dbuble harmony,
audible and visible, seems wholly intentional, for the
construction is a masterpiece of adaptation to place
and use. During the brilliance of a Bathurst noon-
tide, its straightness and clarity of form will, per-
haps, let it seem rather hard and sunburnt. But so
were the athletic young warriors that it exists to
honour. Such hardness will bring no false note into
its visible music. At other times it will vary with
the gradations of light, taking on softer and more
delicate shade and colours and losing some of its dis-
tinctness.
“Its architect, J. D. Moore, has the double quali-
fication of a returned soldier and an Australian artist,
and his design is worthy of it all.’’
The architect, in describing the tower, stated,
“That there was no other of this type in Australia; it
is essentially a bell tower. One of the main consid-
erations that the designers have kept in mind is to
give the bells in the tower their full value. With this
end in view the designing work has been done with
full co-operation from the bell founders, Messrs. Taylor
and Co., of Loughborough. Behind the memorial lies
the significance of its erection—it is purely a soldiers’
memorial and the designers have treated it as such.
Consequently they have striven to give it an expres-
sion of virile strength and vigor as typifying the pur-
pose for which it is erected. It is not covered with
frills or ornaments, but a simple straightforward ex-
pression of its significance. There are variations in
brickwork which give the tower an enhanced appear-
ance of strength and rugged resistance. The tower
is a striking landmark and a distinct addition to the
fine architecture which surrounds it. The colour of
the brick work is an arresting quality.”


MEMORIAL SITE


The Carillon
This unique musical instrument comprises thirty-
five bells, cast by the famous firm of bell founders,
John Taylor and Co., of Loughborough. The largest
weighs 31 cwt. and the smallest 18 lb.
The bells are arranged in three tiers within a
steel frame. The compass is one note short of three
octaves.
The largest bell is dedicated as the main me-
morial bell. The following inscription is cast upon
its— , J
sa%t|«l anb %qq surrmnibhig
mllagqs fyonumj mqii 0!} 1914-18.”
”3Nal utq IJargql.”
The second largest bell is allocated to the returned
soldiers in honour of their fallen comrades.
It bears the following inscription:—
% quqr glttnxrittmqmong ofi oiitj IJalfqu
qamrabqs.”
“©rqalqr louq l|all|iia mm| HjauHjb, lljaf l|q
Ifii| iboutii I|!a ltl]q ffarljis Piji^uha.”
The third bell is in honour of the nurses, and is
called the Red Cross Bell. The red cross emblem is
cast upon it.
The remaining bells have been allotted to the
various sub-districts in honour of their soldiers.
It is a magnificent musical instrument with con-
siderable range upon which can be played many
popular airs and classical music. It is essentially a
public instrument, public because it cannot be shut
within four walls. Its music is the most democratic
of all. It makes music for the masses.
The whole comprises a most fitting memorial in a
delightful setting.


THE CARILLON


View from the Tower
The tower set in the midst of the city commands
from its summit a magnificent panorama of city and
district. By looking towards the setting sun, the
higher residential areas of the city only can be seen,
the distant view precluded by the rising background, a
natural sounding board for the music of the bells.
By gazing north, east and south views of un-
exampled charm and beauty are apparent, ever chang-
ing with the varying moods of the environment, the
lights and shades changing continuously throughout
the hours of the day. The sunshine and the clouds,
the winds and rain, the sunrisings and sunsettings
vying with each other in producing effects most varied
and enchanting.
These phantom fairy prancings over Cathedral roof
and spire, on business buildings, parks, gardens, and
delightful trees bespangle the foreground, merging into
the rich alluvial areas of the Bathurst lowlands.
Through which the river, originally lined with the dark
hued casuarinas which have largely given place to the
more vivid greens and graceful lines of the weeping
willows from Napoleon’s grave in far distant St.
Helena; wends its way through cliff and gorge to be
lost ignominously in diverse runnels of the distant
reed beds, after a brave endeavour to make life out-
back a little easier for those whom it had nurtured
at its source.
Further afield the undulating uplands of the
Bathurst Plains, cleared by nature for man’s spade and
seed, reflect the bounty which they gave so lavishly to
those who “daring did’’ in those early days when
their reward was mostly “blazing trails.’’ The
browns of fallowed fields, the greens of luscious pas-
tures, and the gold of ripening wheat fields blend
delightfully in nature’s painted panorama, so 'fitly
framed by the blue and purple of the everlasting hills.
Above and over all the music of the bells is wafted
and for those with ears to hear, can be heard the
refrain of Kipling’s Recessional—
“ Jrorft ©oft ol{ fyosls, Itq unify ns
3lcs| uiq fyorgqfy bsJ uttj J}oi|gql,”
R. W. PEACOCK.


EVANS’S MEMORIAL AND PARTLY CONSTRUCTED TOWER


Bathurst War Memorial Singing Tower
Conception and Construction
(By MERRICK WEBB)
The last gun being silenced, and the peace
Restored ’twixt warring nations, home there came.
To their dear land Australia, once again.
The lads who had so faithfully upheld
Their country’s honour and their nation’s name.
Their Empire’s right, and freedom had retained
For loved home-folk, who waited their return.
But were they all homecoming—every man—
Upon the stately troopships o’er the strand?
No 1 Some, —their glory gained, their duty done
And some, still striving on in freedom’s cause,
Had left for Greater Glory where the blue
Of boundless skies reached forth to welcome them.
Returning to their own home city then.
Came happy, smiling lads, their fighting done.
But, laughter lulling, silence softly spoke
Of those who lay beneath a foreign mound;—
So, though they had but crossed the Great Divide
To reach a Brighter Land—a Higher Home—
We longed their memory to perpetuate
Where once their happy voices had been known.
Thus loving hearts conceived —where blossomed shrubs,
And swayed green elms, beneath a stately dome.
And moved townspeople on their daily round—-
A tow’r, of music sweet and mem’ry, built
In everlasting brick above the town.
A dream, it was —a dream which brought to birth
The true conception of a monument.
Appealing, not alone in that it reared
Its stately summit toward the arching blue
So far o’erhead—or that it reached such height
By stately lines, and skilful workmanship—
But also that it should release the peal
Of golden-voiced, sweet bells of memory.
So, stout hearts, filled with gratitude, rose up,
And swiftly dug, and laid foundations down.
And raised a strong, wide base, o’er which there
watched,
—\s father proud might watch o’er growing son—
The great Cathedral tow’r, and from its height,
—A glimpse of that expected of the son —
Pealed sweetly bells —and so the builders brought
Unto the City bells, by master hands
Cast, that their ringing might be sweet and true.


THE MEMORIAL BASE


But, when the builders would have bricked their way
To upper levels of the monument.
Financial stringency beset the land.
And smote, in common with our whole, wide State,
Our own home district—and the helping hands
Of willing friends were bound whilst months sped by
And grew to years. Yet skilful management
Of home affairs brought true reward at last,
And once again—financial help restored,
And effort much renewed on every hand—-
The ring of busy trowel on mounting brick
Rang forth across the City, and we saw
At last, the tower proper peep above
Its base, and start its movement toward the sky.
New life, new hope, and new endeavour rose
In every breast, for well beloved became.
Within the hearts; of townsfolk, every brick.
Each line, and every upward move observed
Within this work, which would commemorate
Each brave life, bravely given in the cause
Of right, and liberty, and love of land.
And so we saw, enshrined ’mid crooning pines,
And leafy elms, the stately portal rise.
Through which must pass the ringer of the bells
In hoped-for days, to waft soft music forth
Upon the wings of some sweet-scented breeze.
So hope leapt up, and hearts sang happily.
And Springtime found the birds, among the leaves.
All likewise happy—singing in their song.
And glad eyes feasted on the dull red brick.
Which rose, in graceful lines, high overhead.
Its terraces, and tiny eaves, and sills.
And buttresses, clear cut against the sky
In silhouette, imprisoning loveliness
Whose deep intrinsic value passed the eye.
And settled with the heart, which gladly felt
That here —if work of man could truly be
A monument to neverdying dead—•
There rose, in very truth, an edifice
Which said, —“We give our best, and gladly so!’’
So, o’er the flower beds, the rounded shrubs,
The dark green elms, and o’er the monuments
Erected in the square to him who came.
Long years ago, to seek our fertile plains,
—Surveyor Evans —and to those who strove,
’Mid Afric’s turmoil, in old Britain’s name—
And o’er surrounding buildings, rising up
To clothe four windows, looking north and south
And east and west, where slender grew its frame
To reach more swiftly towards the sunny blue.
Where sailed soft clouds as silken sails at sea.
Or where, bj night, within a velvet sky.
The slow moon rode in queen-like majesty—
The tow’r appeared, and glad was every eye
Which watched it, as it forged its upward way.


A VIEW FROM THE HEIGHTS


We saw, above the windows, rise a cross;
—A quiet, unobtrusive sign that we.
Who mourned our loss, remembered that the dead
Had scarcely died in vain, to lie as dust,
But sped to that Great Land, where, war unknown,
There gathered Troops of Light to burn their spears—
And so this cross, within our eyes, became
A sword, point downward, hilt toward Heaven raised.
Left there by brave hearts winging to the skies.
The sword was conquered—so above it rose
The arching vents through which the bells should peal—■
The structure’s speaking mouths, curved grandly up
That solemn, and yet sweet, its voice should seem.
Rejoicing hearts turned Heav’nward eyes, to gaze
Not only on the lofty monument,
But toward the Home where everlasting peace
Left battlefields a curse to be not borne.
So upward forged the dull red brick its way,
Fluted and bevelled, to at last attain
The longed-for summit and we saw upraised.
In majesty, the finished masterpiece—
Interpretation of a city’s wish
Construed by architect and builder thus.
It was our dream —a grand reality—
A solemn guardian o’er the City’s streets —
A monument of strength and dignity—
Of love, and hope, and honour of the Dead.
T So, gladly beat those grateful hearts who saw.
In dreams, in years gone by, this edifice.
The storm shrieked by, and beat upon its walls,
But builded ’twas to stand —to stand and be
An everlasting shrine of memory.
The tower, voiceless, held a strong appeal,
.—A gripping grandeur, seeping to the heart
With quiet, unwavering insistence through
The eye and mind —but men brought forth the bells.
To bless the structure with a singing voice,
And raised them to the upper tower, where,
In rows suspended, waiting for the hand
Of the carillonist to say—“ Sing, sing!
Send forth, oh, bells, those silver voices cast
Within your depths!’’—They hung in silent state.
So, when we hear the mighty tower sing.
Its soft voice mellow as an Autumn’s breath,
When coloured leaves, urged by a balmy breeze.
Move softly on, then shall we gladly say:—
“This monument, oh, fellow countrymen
Who left your homes to serve your Country’s name.
This voiceful tow’r which we have builded you,
Accept! An everlasting monument,
God willing.” So, with love, we dedicate
This realised dream to those who loved their land.


“Times” Print, 97-99 William Street, Bathurst
