

SIXPENCE
WAR FINANCE
NO PROBLEM..
CHARLES CARTER
AUTHOR’S NOTE.
The writer is aware that exception may be
taken to definition of terms, but invites
readers to confine themselves to the subject
matter, which, however inadequately
treated, is sufficiently plain for anyone
competent to understand the subject.
SYDNEY:
The People's Printery, 16 George Street West
PUBLISHED BY CHARLES CARTER


VGA Z £ TTE J>RE S S
Wff J'ekguson
IJI Xa tiox ai. Library" jjjj
an d should
:ities for the


I ' 1
■1 I
.
,
*
ERRATA
|
On page 5, line 22, an omission occurs, and should
read as follows :
“ commodities, instead of producing commodities for the
purpose of exchanging for money, and in this ”
J


[Copyrighted]
War Finance —No Problem
After all, the greatest calamity that the world has to face
is not the war, but the economic position into which we are
drifting. Undoubtedly the war with its attendant horrors will
appeal to the imagination for all time, but dying on the field
of battle, conscious that they are fighting for right and free-
dom, perhaps may be a happier fate than that of millions who
will suffer in the aftermath of war.
The problems that have to be considered are by no means
confined to defeating the Germanic armies in the field, or to
the occupation of enemy territories afterwards; the question
of returning the soldiers to their respective homes and occu-
pations, the filling up of the gaps in our population, and above
all the question of finance, are some of the problems that will
have to be faced by statesmen.
At present the expenditure of thousands of millions in
occupations that are unreproductive has the effect of making
money both plentiful and cheap, and of inducing people into
avenues of employment where money is easiest earned, and
when the war is ended, millions of people,, the whole world
in fact, will find that the source from which thev derived the
greater part of their present income has vanished, and in the
contraction of credit, the readjustment of values, the curtail-
ment of all classes of industry, and the resultant confusion,
we are more apt to meet our Armageddon than in the war
itself.
It is a saddening and noteworthy fact that in the last
hundred years, while other sciences have progressed by leaps
and bounds, the science of government, in the main essential,
has made no progress at all. and we are at nresent just as
liable to financial confusion as at any time :n our historv and
when the war is ended, even if we are whollv successful, we


are liable to defeat or disintegration by the burden of debt
that the war has created.
Quite apart from the indebtedness caused by the present
war, the conditions of either England or Australia could not
be considered ideal; a medley of right and mio-ht, of truth and
injustice, in theory, noble and grand; in practice, e\ery man
for himself and the devil for the hindmost; it is difficult to
see when the greater part of the national income is being
eaten up m interest, how the lot of the poorer classes can be
improved; more reasonable to suppose when firmer conditions
are considered, that entirely new methods wT have tc be em-
ployed, or the German will have the satisfaction, so dear to
savage natures, of knowing that the forces that destroyed
him, in turn destroyed his foes.
In Australia we present an example of national fatuity
in expecting people, who could not finance the country m
good times, without such specious borrowing or
paper money, to do so at present or in the future when some
financial ski 1 ! is required; and if we turn to other parties, who
would cheerfully assume the responsibilities of government,
we are forced to admit that their methods are practically the
same.
It is usual to look to what passes for the brilliant wits of
the community in crises like the present, but it is questionab 1 e
whether any country owes much to its brilliant men; for man
is always selfish, though perhaps unconsciously at times, and
sharp-witted men never strav into paths, unless bv accident,
wherein their own interests are immediately prejudiced, and
judging by the trend of events in Austraha of recent years,
there is nothing so brilliant as the manner in which sharp-
witted men have looked after themselves.
Though some anxietv has been felt during the last two
years concerning the possibility of a German invasion, it is
questionable whether we were at any time so much in danger
from the outside as we are at present from the internal forces
that have been created; and a casual or careful studv of the
long list of civilisations that have passed awav will reveal
the fact that internal weakness or decay has far oftener con-
tributed to the downfall of nations than any forces that have
been brought against them; and in the conditions created bv
the war, when millions are needed for interest and millions
more* for pensions, if we trust to the mightv intebects that
are responsible for the ante-war indebtedness, then, indeed, we
are undone.


My object in writing this treatise is to point out the simple
and obvious course to pursue. To my mind there is no
financial problem confronting Australia, and never was any,
war or no war, and only dense national stupidity prevents us
from paying our way; the prolbem that is confronting us. and
1 may add England also, is to get a government we ] versed
in the rudiments of finance and political economy.
I do not mean that we could start at once and pay our
way, considering the awful muddle in which the finances are,
but we could start at once and get into position to do so. and
in the course of one or two years, with good seasons, the
situation could be so handled that borrowing could be abolished
lor ever.
This may be a surprising statement to those who are,
and also to those who are not, acquainted with these matters,
but in the following pages I will point out to those who are
capable of understanding the subject that it is a matter of
starting in the right place and if that is done the problem
disappears.
Fhough my remedy for the existing state of affairs con-
sists principally of the proper settlement of the land question,
the production of wealth and the best method of handling and
conserving it, and the utilisation of land values, it is first
necessary to point out some of the errors of our present
methods of government, and also some of the fallacies that
exist concerning finance, which some people appear to think
can be settled by machinery.
Our financial position before the war cou 1 d scarcely be
considered anything but deplorable, particularly New South
Wales, where a hundred and fortv millions of borrowed money
lad been spent, ostensibly on public works, though a large
part has been wasted, and is engaged in spending more as
last as it can be borrowed ,and though providing the country
with rai ways little or no effort is being made to settle the
land the railways open up; which course had it been followed,
would itself have done away with the necessity of borrowing-
tor with the vast areas of uncultivated land merely waiting
to be utilised, a source of wealth is a’ways available. Unfor-
tunately for some inexplicable reason little or no is
shown to make use of it, the peculiar tendency of sharp-
minded men who occupy administrative Positions appears to
to drop the substance and grasp at the shadow, insofar
that borrowing is persisted in to the last extremity, while


production 'is to some extent accidental, and provision for
the future unknown. . „
Whatever reasons or excuses existed for public borrowing
in the past, its utter fallacy should be apparent to all at pre-
sent when the interest bill of New South W ales is equal to
three parts of the total amount she is able to borrow, and on y
a few more vears are necessary of our present methods ot
progress and the whole amount borrowed will be necessary
to pay interest. , .
When the fact is understood that when borrowing we
receive it in goods, and that we pay the interest in products,
and that so far as cash is concerned we are always using the
same it should be clear that increased production and less
wasteful expenditure is the principal manner m which we can
benefit ourselves. . ,
The rise is values of recent years is attributed by some
to the increased production of gold, but that idea is disproved
by the fact that in the latter eighties of last century the same
conditions prevailed in a low gold producing era, as t ose
existing previous to the war, so that we need to look elsewhere
for the causes of the fluctuation of values. Nor is the relative
quantity or scarcity of commodities the so e governing factor
for in 1893, when New South Wales produced less than alf
her own wheat supply, the price was the lowest on record,
while in recent years when three times her own requirements
was produced the price was more than doubled. 1 here, is no
doube that a surplus or scarcity of commodities will attect
their value, and money or credit is affected the same as any-
thing else, and the general rise in values of recent years can
most surely be traced to unsound financial methods, that is
either borrowing or issuing paper money or expending it
uneconomically. which is proved by the present boom m prices
owing to war expenditure, and we have little to tear
the fluctuation of values if we had nothmp- to contend with
but the production of gold: also, the expenditure of borrowed
money always has the same effect, it attracts people to where
ready money is easiest earned, and the legitimate production
of wealth is curtailed.
The rise and fall of values should be regarded as an
economic barometer, and being caused bv the surplus. or
scarcity of either cash or commodities, instead ot. being
regarded as uncontrolable, should in reality be of great value
to economists and statesmen as indicating the course they
should adopt or pursue. Though I maintain that gold has not


been produced in sufficient quantities of recent years to lower
its value, or if it has, the manner in which it is produced or
the ease with which it can be monopolised, has prevented it
from doing so, it is by considering the effect of a vast pro-
duction of gold that an opinion can be formed as to the cause
of the rise and fall of values. W'ere gold to be found m sufh-
cient quantities in all the different states to enable the workers
to obtain amounts varying from an ounce per day to an ounce
per week, few would care to follow other occupations, and
the natural result would be that production would dimmish
and ultimately the rise in the value of commodities would be
so great that they would find that the increase m their returns
would leave them but little better off than formerly, and those
that remained to produce commodities would perhaps be the^
wealthiest in the end.
As regards the issue of paper money without a gold cover-
ing this has the same result as borrowing,its tendency being
to make monev plentiful and cheap, or raise prices, which
latter could scarcely have been what its originators intended,
the mistake being that they started at the wrong end of the
economic scale, and produced money with which to purchase
commodities, instead of exchanging for money, and in this
connection it is necessary to remember two things concern-
ing finance. Ist, that only a very small proportion of a
country’s wealth is represented by cash. 2nd, that usually
only a small proportion of a country’s cash is used for
exchange purposes, that being its principal use it is difficult
to see the necessity for any additional money. Of course the
absence of direct interest is the attractive feature of a paper
issue, but it is doubtful if the advantage gamed is not dearly
paid for in the increased prices, and it is an example of that
strange fatuity that expects to create wealth out of nothing,
while its effect is equally as pernicious as borrowing.
In justice to that method of finance it may be said that
were it used solely for the purpose of creating other wealth
or capital which would enable the paper to be redeemed, some
benefit might be obtained, but following that rue would do
away with any necessity for it, while to issue it indiscrimin-
ately on the strength of national values which do not produce
enough revenue for current purposes is on the same level
as lessening the weight of gold coins and warrants the
severest condemnation. No doubt it sounds noble to hear
present-day governments assert that they will recognise the
value of the paper they issue, but other times and other gov-


cramcnt ß will find that they have been saddled with responsi-
bilities that they are unable to meet, no matter how good
their intentions, and then the fact that gold is an universally
recognised basis of value, and that paper money is paper only.
Will be made unpleasantly clear to us.
As we have never had anything approaching sound or
progressive finance in Australia, and as a large number of
people think that borrowing is the only method by which we
can progress, I will give the views of Mr, George E. Roberts,
Director of the Mint at Washington, who, in an ablv worded
address on “Overreaching Prosperity,” savs: “The average
man, intent unon his own affairs, familiar with local conditions
only, misled by ficticious profits, and influenced bv surround-
ing opinion as untrustworthy as his own, is carried out of
sight of all landmarks. He judges of what he may safely
do upon the assumption that surrounding conditions are nor-
mal and stable, and that others will keep their engagements
with him, and fails to allow for the cumulative effect of what
everybody is doing. The result is that liabiltiies are swollen
both at home and abroad, usually until adverse foreign
balances draw away the gold reserves, force a contraction of
credits, and bring about a general collapse. That is the way
inflation generally corrects itself.
“There could be no more striking illustration of all the
principles involved in the use of the discount rate than was
afforded in the United States and in Europe during the
American panic of 1907. When the American banks sus-
pended payments the European banks were put under an extra-
ordinary strain. Everything in the United States that could
be sold abroad for cash was offered at attractive prices, agri-
cultural products were crowded forward, standard securities
were sold at prices which, within a few months, yielded the
European buyers large profits, and American bankers and
business men bought gold as a manufacturer might buy coal
in a fuel famine to keep his factory running. The resources
of the United States are so great that when they are out to
buy gold regardless of* price, they are able to get it. The
stream was started; the next question was what would be the
effect upon European reverses.
The discount rate is not the only means by which a
banking organisation may defend its gold reserve. It can
do so by shifting its investments, and particularly by carry -
ing ordinarily a considerable amount of foreign bills. When
the exchanges turn unfavourably it can allow these bills to


run off, thus rep’enishing its foreign balances. This is a com-
mon practise, in every respect legitimate and wholesome,
tending to establish uniform credit conditions and a broad
international money market as a basis for the world’s indus-
tries. It is h ghly desirable that the United States, by its
banking organisation and its banking practises, shall enter
this international community, and by its resources and co-
operation contribute to universal, stability.
“It is desirable that our high class commercial paper shall
have a standing abroad, and that we shall accustom ourselves
to participation in their markets. A mingling and interchange
of investments both of short time paper and securities will
minimise the movement of gold, and tend to establish an
international equilibrium.
The foregoing represents the conditions brought about
by borrowing or unsound speculation, in that case principally
by private investors; the same thing is possible even if the
money is obtained by public taxation and expended unecon-
omically, and it illustrates the state of affairs that is in store
for us, when we have to sell our products in Competition with
the cheap labor of the world, and the position is aggravated
by the extent of our indebtedness.
To show that borrowing can be avoided even in times of
war provided a country is not invaded, and its resources are
intact,, I will give an extract from Napier’s “History of the
Peninsular War’’ concerning the methods of Napoleon Bona-
parte. “Where is the proof or even probability, of that great
man’s system of government being internally dependent upon
the most extensive corruption ever established in any country.
The annual expenditure of France was scarcely half that of
England, Napoleon rejected public loans, which are the very
life-blood of corruption. He left no debt. Under him no man
devoured the public substance in id'eness, because he was of
a privileged class.”
No doubt the present financial demands are much greater
than in Napoleon’s time, but is there any comparison to be
made between our national values and methods of production
and those that prevailed century ago. His method appears
to have been to make a practical science of political economy,
instead of an experimental one, and that is a l l lam proposing
to do at present.
The relative merit of state and private enterprise require
little consideration from the practical minded. Like payment
of members, in theory, state enterprise is sound, but in prac-


tise the result is so deplorable that it is questionable whether
the State should either pay or employ one more person than
it can possibly avoid.
The difficulty of getting suitable management is one of
the problems that confront it, and even if that is satisfac-
torily settled, he has to make the best use he can of the men
that he has no voice in choosing. In private enterprise the
pursuit of uneconomic methods will, sooner or later, bring
about its downfall, while a State enterprise can carry
on indefinitely, even if it never paid its way, the difference
being made up from taxation. The probability is that were
either relied on exclusively both would be found unsatisfac-
tory, and the practise of the State merely supplying its own
requirements is as far as it can advance in industrial matters
with safety.
It would be meaningless to attach the blame of our pre-
sent unsound position to any particular party; as all parties
may be said to have proved themselves uniformly useless, as
a matter of fact the resemblance betwee rival political parties
is so great that it would require remarkable acumen to find
any fundamental difference between them. Experiences of
over a quarter of a century have led me to the conclusion that
politicians as a class have no more ideas of than any
other section of the community; an eloquent method of string-
ing words together, or heaping contumely on their oppo-
nents, is the usual method of conducting an election campaign,
while progressive ideas or anything of permanent value to the
community are conscipuous by their absence. It is therefore
necessary to keep clear of all the party fads, which for the
most part, though well enough meant, are the offspring of
minds that were never capable of raising themselves our of the
rut in which they were moulded.
It is fortunate that economic laws are not so rigid as
the law of gravitation, were they, the human race would have
perished long ago, as a matter of fact mankind appears to
be able to exist under almost any conditions; at the same time
the nations that maintain the highest average of individual
comfort are usuallv the wealthiest, which suggests that the
better the status of the individual, the better the position of
the State, which in turn suggests that to better the position


of the individual is the best way to benefit the State, and it is
mv intention to point out, in the course of this treatise, how
it can be done.
The great evil that undermined other civilisations con-
fronts Australia at present, that is, the concentration of power
and popqlation in a few cities. Since civilisation (01 what
passes for it) began, the history of nations has been essentially
the same. Springing from humble conditions, they, as they
acquired power, centralised it by walling in and crowding into
their chief cities; sooner or later their governments became
corrupt or useless, and eventually perished.
Some excuse existed for crowding together both for
power and protection in an age of bows and arrows and bat-
tering rams, but though the human race has failed to notice
it, the age of crowded cities has passed away, and the
greatest protection that a people can enjoy from” the depre-
dations of modern armaments, the ravages of disease, or the
possibilities of famine, is to separate as far as they con-
veniently can. and avoid undue centralisation of either power
or wealth, which usually contributes to its. own undoing.
The causes that contribute to the decay of nations are
plainly discernable. As the cities increase in size and power
they produce a class of peop 1 e who, circumscribed in outlook,
imagine that their interests are paramount, and who will look
out for themselves first regardless of conseouence, and as the
unsound conditions usually press hardest on those that are
weakest, society is always crushing the poorest, and like an
overgrown tree is overtaxing or hiking the roots.
After a l l the elements that make for decay are for the
most part energies misapplied, man can usually see about
to the pent of his own nose, abstract benefits concern him
but little, something that apoeals directly to the senses that
which he can see. or feel, or taste, or possess attract him,
forces at the command of one man might destroy the world,
the same forces differently applied might convert it into a
garden of Eden, and at all times, errors of judgment will spoil
the best of intentions.
In the recent hostility displayed by politicians and others
against monopolies, the most surprising thing was the manner
in which land monopoly was overlooked, and when it. is con-


sidered that about a third of the national income is swallowed
up in rent, it leads to the conclusion that were some of the
energy that was displayed against producing concerns directed
against land monopoly, better results might be obtained.
If the same amount of energy that is expended in the
effort to establish bakers’ shops and the purchase of fishing
smacks was directed to the settlement of the land question,
some benefit could be expected, but the tendency on the oa.rt
of the people is to submit to the sharper wits of the com-
munity, who for the most part have nothing else to recom-
mend them, and whose sole ideas of politics is to bring for-
ward measures because of their popularity, but regardless of
their usefulness, such as the issue of paper money, in place of
our sound methods of finance, the establishment of State
industries which they are neither able to manage, nor posses's
sufficient discernment to know who is able to manage them,
and an apparent lack of knowledge of causes and effects, or
the startling point of our national economy which is the prin-
cipal cause of our trouble resulting in the largest debt per
head on earth.
The obiections to land monopoly are. ist. the check to
the production of foodstuffs and those commodities which
are the basis of manufacture, trade and commerce; 2nd the
check to the advancement of the individual, who if without
house or land is compelled to pay a large of his
earnings to the landowner, and the extent to which he is com-
nelled to pav tribute to the landowner decreases his ability
to'recompense himself or assist in the up keep of the State.
A recent estimate of our national wealth placed it at one
thousand seven hundred and fifty millions, the greater part
of which consist of land values, and it is to the increase and
utilisation of land values alone that we can look for the solu-
tion of our financial, social, and industrial troubles.
The manner in which the present state of affairs can be
remedied consists principally of the method in which the land
is settled, and it would be necessary for the governments con-
cerned to drop al 1 visionary schemes of finance and methods
of conducting industries that they know nothing about, and
wh’ch for the most part are merely sops for city constituencies,
and a.nplv themselves to the solution of the problem; in con-
nection with which it is imperative to remember that our large
national debt principally owned abroad, the interest of which
is paid for the greater part in primary products, makes it


doubly necessary to promote the production of exportable
commodities.
In normal times the settling of the land question need
have given no concern as regards finance to anyone com-
petent to deal with it. All that was necessary was to pur-
chase estates where ever land was required, and after settling
it closely, to keep the increased value with which to pav the
original cost. At present with money in the peculiar position
of being both cheap and dear at the same time, dear if bor-
rowed, cheap if bought with commodities, and an unknown
prospect in front of us, great care should be exercised in
any financial transactions that may affect the value of either
gold or commodities.
Now the proper method of settling the land is the ques-
tion that few understand; the present method is to give an
area to one person that would require the labor of at least
ten, sometimes a hundred, to work it to the best advantage,
while those whom circumstances compel to work for others
have none at all.
It should first of all be recognised as a fundamental right
and inserted in our constitution that every adult was entitled
to one acre of land, and as the majority of mankind hope or
expect to marry, two acres would be the minimum size of
home blocks, and for only very sound and serious reasons
could a person be shifted from his b’ock. and when found
necessary to do so the State to be still und'er an obligation
to provide a block elsewhere; land for agricultural purposes
to be apportioned according to quality and situation, but of
sufficient size for one man to work or thereabouts. There
would be no need to interfere with land under cultivation while
uncultivated land was available, the object being to bring as
much land under cultivation as possible, and were we cultivat-
ing twice as much as we are at present and employing our
workers, instead of borrowing money to do so. the financing
of the war would be within sight.
The reason for fixing on the large area
of two acres as the minimum size of blocks, is that owing
to the scarcity of population and the extraordinary liabilities
in the shape of public indebtedness that the public are saddled
with, it is absolutely necessary that all should have free scope
for their productivity, and that each should participate
in the benefits to be gained from the methods of finance made
possible by the scheme outlined.


As ways and means are usually the stumbling block to
many well-meant schemes, I must first direct attention to
those aspects of finance pfeviously mentioned. “That only a
small proportion of a country’s wealth is represented by coin,
and the amount of coin in circulation is only a small propor-
tion of the cash usually held by the financial institutions.
Keeping this in mind and also the fact that money is required
to finance industry, the best way to finance land purchase
schemes wou'd be to give credit for all estates resumed and
induce all persons with estates or credit to embark in the
various industries that need advancing. This in effect is
giving the landowner his money, but allowing - him no interest
till he reinvests it. which he probably would do without delay,
especially if the State gave a l l possible assistance to those
who were desirous of furthering industry; and if this method
of finance was followed; little, if .any more money would be
in circulation than there is at present.
One notable feature of this method of converting one
form of capital into another is that the most important point
is to see that the full va’ue of capital is created in the spend-
ing, much less important is the precise amount of credit given,
so that no special anxiety need be felt as to an odd half-crown
in the value of estates. Undoubtedly set values would have
to be adhered to, or sooner or later a very small amount of
land in some peoples hands wou 1 d be a very powerful lever
with which to obtain credit.
As land taxation must inevitably increase owing to the
war, there is no reason why credit should not be given up to
the value of their land to anyone desirous of embarking in
industry, regardless of whether they had more land than they
required for their own use or not. and by this means the State
could eventually become the owner of all the land again at
very little expense; and if the some process was followed as
regards our nat’onal debt both here and in England, and our
treasurers, instead of offering high rates of interest, which
they have no idea of how they are going to oav. made special
efforts to induce bond holders to accept credit and invest in
industry, where they minkt make a still larger rate of interest
it is quite possible that bv the time the war ended, provided
the drain on our manhood did not go far enough to cripple
us industrially to have exEngmshed the debt altogether.
Providing that the settlement of the land auestion and
by that means the improvement of the position of the
individual was kept in view, there is such a vast field for


increased trade and internal development in Australia (and
in any other country too, lor that matter), that the loss of
foreign trade need give no concern to anyone. A good deal
of national backwardness can be attributed to the propensity
of alleged statesmen for rivetting their attention on matters
that could be well left a one. Were they to concentrate their
vast intellects on questions that more immediately concern
the welfare of those whom they are supposed to represent,
little difficulty would be found in improving the lot of
humanity. / '
At first sight it would appear to be the especial duty ot
the State to finance this matter itself, but when the disastrous
results of politicians incursions into the domain of business
are considered the co-operation of the financial institutions
invites greater confidence.
The precise reason that the banks should be invited to
take part in the scheme is that as custodians of the peoples
cash, to some extent, they would prevent money being in-
vested in upsound ventures, as they largely represent the
business and administrative section of the community, the
class that is responsible for the conduct of trade and com-
merce, and who have the most to lose by unsound speculation;
were it left exclusively to the State to finance it. the danger
of corrupt practices, the joistmg of politicians friends into
lucrative billets regardless of their abilities, the opportunities
for peculation, and the usual incompetence of politicians
would seriously hamper any scheme however meritorious; also
if the State issued sufficient cash to finance the scheme inde-
pendent of that already in circulation, it would require a much
greater amount than would be necessary were it financed in
conjunction with the banks, and flooding the market with
money has a tendency to cheapen it or raise prices.
The question then arises as to what payment die banks
would be entitled to. a* « matter of fact they wpuld have very
little more cash out than formerly, or at any time very little
compared to the interests involved, then if the fact is con-
sidered that if nothing is done and we merely drift along as
we are at present, sooner or later they will be in the same
position as they were in ninety-three, there is no especial
reason for paying them to prevent their own downfa 1 !. at any
rate it is doubtful if anyone would get so much out of it as
the banks themselves.
It would, no doubt, be contended on the part of the banks
that as their money came to them in the course of business


that it was part of their necessary capital or income, and that
they were entitled to look to the State for the means of any
further outlay, more especially as the land would revert to
the State, and in itself this would be a sound contention, also
in a savage democracy that looks upon the capitalist as an
enemy of society, there is no reason why the said capitalist
should disturb himself for its benefit, except that he was
benefiting himself at the same time.
But the means at their disposal can be increased by a,l
least two methods: ist, the State could, without disturbing
industry or production, become the purchaser of all com-
modities produced, the business taking place through the
ordinary channels (really a matter, of . book-keeping), and
credit could be given in all cases possible so as to minimise
the amount of cash that was put into circulation, while the
return was accelerated by the second method, that is, the
dating of all notes and making them returnable in a given
time. This would have the effect of lessening the outgo and
increasing the income, a state of affairs that obviously could
not continue indefinitely, so that to keep up the normal
amount of cash in circulation the balance could be invested in
new industries.
This would seem to suggest that by the state monopoils-
ing banking and proceeding on these lines that the means for
financing this scheme could be obtained, the trouble is that
the basic principle, the establishment of all industry on ;■
sound business basis is rarely grasped by politicians, and
until that is attained or some method of measuring a man’s
mentality other than a tape or a two-foot rule is discovered the
State can never be expected to rise even to the level of private
banking.
This will, no doubt, be disputed by the admirers of State
banking and while competent to observe defect in private
banking methods I am aware that it has stood the test of
time and that it is based on individual capacity and integrity.
State banking is of recent development, and it may be said
that it has never been tested, though adherence to business
methods and freedom from political influence should enable it
to hold its own amongst the rest.
What I wish to make clear is that I am neither so much
in favour of private banks or opposed to those conducted by
the State as I am to ignoring them both or relegating them
to their proper perspective, either or both may be sound or


unsound but no one has any more right to look to a bank for
assistance than they have to look to anyone else.
If a bank, either State or private was to accept the advice
so freely tendered by politicians or would-be leaders and
advance money without security or interest, it would soon
cease to be a bank, and be nothing but a memory.
The mam trouble is, the tendency of the people to look
towards the banks as the source of wealth, the politicians are
no better, each and all overlook the fact that a bank is engaged
more in keeping accounts and regulating exchange than in
producing anything, and in sheer stupidity expect them to do
something towards the assistance of the public without any
guarantee of return.
It might appear that in .osing the freehold, that the Oanks
were losing their main security, more likely the vast increase
in business would more than compensate them; the difference
would be that instead of being purely financial institutions as
at present the banks would become more commercial in char-
acter, and instead of being to some extent a check on produc-
tion, they would find that their chief interest la- like the rest
of the community, in increased production.
As the settlement of the land question in the manner in-
dicated would give every individual in the community an oppor-
tunity of producing wealth or commodities it is a reasonable
inference that a surplus would sooner or later occur, but con-
sidering the lack of intelligence displayed at present concern-
ing a shortage, there is no reason for expecting that any me c
would be shown in handling a surplus, and to show the man-
ner in which it can be handled some further reference must
be made to methods of finance.
The tendency on the part of politicians and a large* sec r
tion of the public to favor issues of paper money is an illus-
tration of the old adage that the road to hell is paved with good
intentions. It could not be seriousiv contended that those
people contemplated injuring themselves or the community,
it is more reasonable to suppose that thev. like peoples of
bygone civilisations know not what they do, and in their
efforts to meet the requirements of the moment utterly fail
to grasp the possibilities of the future. To get to a proper
understanding of the matter, it is first necessary to know the
position that gold occupies in the world, and why it is undesir-
able to depart from a gold standard. From the remotest
antiquity it has been an accepted basis of value, fterhaps on
account of its scarcity or because a large value can be


contained in a small compass, it is possible also that it
possessed some attraction for primitive man that has been
entirely lost to view, the fact remains that all nations are
willing to accept it as a basis of value, and no purpose is
answered or benefit gained by substituting anything else;
also the principal use for monev is for exchange purposes and
the adjustment of values, and as under ordinary circum-
stances only a relatively small amount is required for that
purpose, little use exists for any other class of currency. The
reasons that a gold standard should be adhered to is that
owing to the difficulty of procuring it there is no danger ot
flooding the market with it. that the people who gave it a
standard price fixed a basis value for all time, that to do
away with that basis leaves the world of trade and commerce
without anything on which to value their products, that
eventually through the loss of that basis no one would possess
any idea of values except in their immediate surroundings, and
the utter chaos resulting would hamper or destroy inter-
national trade.
As regards a paper issue, its advocates are undoubtedly
right when they assert that paper can be used with equally
good results as gold, but they are prone to overlook the possi-
bility of danger, and its usefulness or danger is entirely in its
application; but provided that it has a substantial backing
that can be converted into cash within a reasonable or specified
time, and the value of that backing is never exceeded, there
is no reason why paper money should not be sound currency
it is were required; but to issue it against national values
on the promises of politicians, and to increase it at their
wish, and increase it again to meet the exigencies of the
moment, is an evidence of the over-development of a species
of political or financial genius that we would be much better
without.
At present we have the spectacle of all nations feverishly
endeavouring to increase their gold reserves; in normal times
England, perhaps the richest of them all, usually had a small
gold reserye, which seems to prove that gold is not the main
consideration, and suggests that we might seek some other
basis of value when necessary. * As the supply of gold is
limited so also is its usefulness, and no advantage is attached
in normal times to vast hoards of gold.
In seeking some other basis of value there is one lesson
that we might well learn from the ancients, and that is the
storage of food supplies. Various records exist of the fact


that it was customary for some of them to have several years
supply of foodstuffs on hand, we have also the authority of
the Bible for the fact that Joseph warned Pharoah .of the
danger of letting the lean years eat up the years of plenty,
and il consideration is given to the possibilities attached to
the storage of food supplies as the basis of a note issue it
will be found that as a backing for paper money it has a
greater value tha n gold. Present day methods appear to be
to put undue trust in either the weather or providence as no
provision for the future is even considered, instead some sec-
tions of the community appear to think that the primary
producer is an enemy that either requires closely watching or
taxing out of existence altogether.
ihe possibilities attached to the storage of foodstuffs
are varied, even if not required as the basis of a note issue,
they could be handled in bills or bonds and in the course of
time as they became known would obtain an international
value, for countries that are fully populated and who may
at any time be in danger of a shortage would soon see the
advantage of having a food reserve, and it would be found
that as a factor in preserving sound international relations
an abundant food supply would material y contribute.
Perhaps the best reason for the storage of food supplies is
the fact that man, like any other animal, is attracted to places
where food is more abundant, and following the proceedure in-
dicated would make employment plentiful and food reasonable,
and the certainty of land for all on which to build homes would
make Australia attractive to all people, while at present the
high price of food and the difficulty of procuring an adequate
supply would lead the uninitiated to think that we were being
blockaded. History tells us that war and famine are the
twin scourges of humanity, and at present the world is facing
a shortage of food, and it is quite possible that famine will
do more harm than the war. We have every means for the
production and storage of food stuffs and since the war started
could have got rich in the process, but supineness of govern-
ment, and neglect of opportunity, has allowed a state of
affairs to develop from which we may receive a rude awaken-
mg, for great crises like the present have in times gone by
so disturbed trade and commerce that the resultant shortage
and consequent famine has depopulated the world.
If Australia, in the greatness of its wisdom or stupidity
(however one chooses to view the matter) was able to learn
the lesson that every drought teaches, it would immediately


turn its attention to primary production, it would never rest
till it had every available acre under cultivation that
it had the labor to cultivate, it would never be satisfied
till it had food in store for every man for several years, and
at least one year’s supply for every beast it would rely
entirely on its own resources for the wealth necessary for its
own development, and instead of expecting miracles from its
political josses, who for the most part are exploiting it, it
would make an immediate demand for the proper division of
the source of all wealth, the land.
It can be easily understood that with our vast areas of
land suitable for cultivation that a surplus of wheat or other
foodstuffs is much easier obtained than an increase in the
production of gold and in reality it is of more value than
gold. •
I am justified in looking at matters in their most possible
aspect, apd assuming that the present drain on our gold
reserves will continue till they are exhausted, as there is no
intelligent effort being made to prevent it. and then paper
money will be unavoidable, and the only way of dealing with
the matter is to give it a sound backing, which can be done
as follows; ist, make the land available to all who wish to
go on to it. 2nd, stop all expenditure of loan money. 3rd,
close up all racecourses and other institutions that are living
on the community till the war is over, and give every encour-
agement to those who chose to engage in the production of
foodstuff's, and make every provision for the storage of a sur-
plus of anything that we can produce, and by those means
we should at least double our present production.
If it were possible to sell at once that would do away
with the necessity of exporting gold, but assuming that we
could not sell it and it is on our hands it is then merely
the method of finance, and paoer money, biffs or bonds could
be introduced as required. First it would be necessary to
value the surplus as low as possible, then to eive credit to the
owners at that valuation, and so far as possible insist that
the amount be used as capital; with the right to any additional
value that might be considered fair when sold.
If this method was adopted the result wou’d be that in a
very short time a surplus and a reserve would be created,
prices of foodstuffs would soon reach the normal and there
would be no reason to let them go below a fair price, and if at
any time the value was inclined to rise it could be regulated
by releasing the reserves, and gambling in foodstuffs could


be abolished for ever. At present producers resent having
the price fixed and reduced, thev see evervone else getting
as much as they can for their products and naturally thev
want to do the same, if there was any guarantee that the
price would not be allowed to fall below what was considered
a fair value, less resentments wou 1 d be felt if the price was
prevented from going too high.
It does not seem to have occurred to many that instead
of England lending us capital we are in a much better position
to lend it to England, and she has been willing to take all we
can produce for years, for with our unlimited areas suitable
for the production of raw material, wlm our alleged leaders
should persist in borrowing of using it is a mystery
that can only be explained bv supposing that they know
nothing about political economy.
The result of a policy of this kind would be, that as the
people were producing the capital for their individual require-
ments, trade of all kinds, would increase, the wealth that we
require either to prosecute the war or finance our own affairs
would materialise. No necessity would exist for the employ-
ment of a band of legal trash to fix prices boards or com-
missions enquiring into the scarcity of -axle grease or other
humbug could be abolished and instead of our half of the
citizens, periodically arming themseVes with collection boxes
and pursuing the other half we could bv our increased pro-
duction realise enough wealth to meet all our expenses.
A large amount of the trouble from which we suffer arises
from the fact that in national finance few people realises that
only a very small part is transacted in cash. They do not
understand that if we want a million its value in wheat or
wool is usually more acceptable to our creditors than gold;
thev have no idea that land, viewed as capital in the aggre-
gate, will give a much larger return than any other form of
capital; unless the average person knows that so much hard
/:ash is available he apparently has no knowledge of the value
of production and commerce; were the reverse the case no
community with sufficient intelligence to govern itself would
permit land monopoly for a moment. This seems to be the
reason that so many people favour sweeps and lotteries, totes
and other tommvrot. which so far as producing anything is
concerned are about as useful as taking money out of one
pocket and putting it into another.
The dating of notes and a percentage tax on diose over-
due, though vexatious to some, would have a good effect on


genuine trade and less easy money would be available for
those who gave the least return.
Though idle to speculate as to the amount that could be
made by this method, it is easily understood that
a large amount is always held uselessly by the people for no
other reason than that they are careless in the matter, and
five pounds are often carried when five shillings would meet
all of their requirements. The fault does not lie with the
average business man, whq for the most part banks fairly
regularly, but with the units of the community who, in times
like the present with money cheap see no obligation to bank
their money or pay their debts any faster than usual; while
a state of war which makes for quickened production, really
requires as a complement an equally quickened circulation and
return. and the lessening of the outgo in useless industries,
all of which could be controlled by the State only, would make
available an amount of money that would be sufficient for our
requirements.
The merits of conscription of either labor or anything
else depend entirely on its application; were all the economic
forces of Australia in charge of one man and he competent
to direct them, the financing of the war need concern no one.
but to give control of those forces to the people who at pre-
sent control its destinies would be conniving at our own
destruction. It is not in the seizing of wealth or the sending
away of men that our salvation lies, we do well to equip those
who are willing to go, but it is in the production of more wealth
sufficient to cover all wastage, that we can best assist our
side, and it is only by starting in the right place that we can
make any appreciable difference.
As regards the phrase “Uneconomic expenditure’’ its
definition may be said to vary according to circumstances
and it is always difficult to define it clearly. A few years
ago all military and naval expenditure would have been
classed as uneconomic, at present, had there been twice as
much spent for those purposes it would pass as sound
economy. For present purposes I will class all expenditure
as uneconomic except that which is used for the reproduction
of wealth and what is nearly the same thing, living expenses.
I submit that uneconomic expenditure is one the main causes
of the fluctuation of values. No matter bv what means monev
is acquired, whether by taxation, borrowing or paper money,


all are possible if effectively handled, but the merit or danger
lies in the manner in which it is spent. During the past ten
years vast sums of money have been spent in Europe for war
purposes. Some countries have borrowed in times of peace,
others, like England have met the expenses by taxation;
Australia has borrowed and spent it foolishly, that is without
regard to the return of interest sufficient to repay capital.
In addition many new industries have came into existence in
the last few years but which could not be classed as any-
thing but sound progressiveness, and which are attractive to
the workers and tend to draw them citywards and lessen the
population on the land.
Ihe result is in all cases the same, labor is attracted
to those places where money is easiest earned, and the
legitimate production of wealth or foodstuffs is curtailed,
and agriculture the basis of all manufacture trade and com-
merce, instead of taking the foremost place, is relegated to
the background.
Values will rise particularly in centres of population,
wages will rise in proportion to the demand for labor, money
will become plentiful and cheap, rent will increase and at
the same time decrease the wage of the worker, and a bogus
prosperity will ensue in which all lose sight of the cumulative
effect of what they are all doing, and ultimately those condi-
tions are brought about that have been so ably described by
Mr. Roberts in his address on Over-feaching Prosperity,
which I have already quoted.
Though uneconomic expenditure is one of the causes of
the fluctuation of values, the root cause is in reality the
obstacle to the production of wealth. We need no better
illustration of the fact than the present state of affairs, for
though producing more foodstuffs than we require, our in-
debtedness makes it necessary for us to export a 1! that we
can in the payment of interest; were the land available and all
could produce what they liked no shortage would occur, and
though uneconomic expenditure will inflate values, not so
much b’ame can be attached to that as to the obstacle to
the economic production of wealth, that is, land monopoly.
It is often claimed with a fair show of reason, that various
people, described as middlemen, capitalists, monopolists and
exploiters are responsible for the fluctuation and perhaps the
best expressed view of that aspect of the matter is in Gibbons’
great classic “The Dec’ine and fall of the Roman Empire.”
which says “The inclemency of the season had affected the


harvests of Syria; and the price of bread in the markets of
Antioch, had naturally risen in proportion to the scarcity of
corn. But the fair and reasonable proportion was soon
violated by the rapacious arts of monopoly. In this unequal
contest, in which the produce of the land is claimed by one
party, as his exclusive property, is used by another as a lucra-
tive object of trade; and is required by a third for the daily
and necessary support of life; all the profits of the inter-
mediate agents are accumulated in the head of the defenceless
consumers.”
Undoubtedly this is a strong indictment of the monopilist,
but it is less an evidence of any attempt or desire on his part
to injure anyone, than proof that he is on the same level as
the rest of humanity. In this matter the point that should not
be lost sight of is that man is always selfish, and that his
own interest is always uppermost, and were societv revolu-
tionised to-morrow and those at the bottom placed at the
top the same conditions would prevail, and though we may
rail and howl about the rapacious capitalist or monopolist,
whatever action we take against him is no remedy for any-
thing, and to make anv advancement we must get back to
the starting point of all things, the land.
The extent to which either England or Australia can
prosecute the war without injury to themselves as regards
finance depends on the amount of capital that can be safely
invested in either. It would occur to many at first that that
was an unlimited amount, but the danger of over capitalisa-
tion must not be lost sight of. But in the application of
plain business capacity to the utilisation of economic forces,
we can by svstems of credit convert interest bearing debts
into revenue producing assets, and if internal improvement
or the betterment of the position of the individual, by proper
land division, and the consequent increase of his spending
power is kept in sight there is little doubt that we can face
the nrospect with equanimitv.
T submit that war or wastage as regards material need
not trouble anyone, that the British Empire can produce all
that it requires, that it can pay for all that it can produce,
that the only danger we suffer from is the loss of man power,
and that the only ones that need suffer are those that loose
their loved ones.
I have carefully studied the possibilities attached to all
systems of government proposed or suggested by politicians
and reformers both here and elsewhere, and I unhesitatingly


say tliat land and finance are the two most important ques-
tions in any country, and on the proper handling of those
our progress depends, and though many industries* may be
satisfactorily hand cd by' the State, according to time and
circumstance, the nationalisation of industry is no remedy for
anything and would, if universally applied, in the end, destroy
itself.
The reason that all systems of collectivism are doomed
to ultimate failure does not lie in the fault of the systems
themselves, it lies in the weakness or corruptability of human
nature. Various hypothesis have been formed and advanced,
usually most flattering, concerning the possibilities of human
advancement, but in reality it is the impossibilities that
should be considered and when the imperfections of man are
understood and the fact considered that he has evolved from
chaos and in the revolutions of time wi.l return these again,
and in doing so will merely follow an universal law, the im-
possibility of perfect conditions should be clear to all. But
as there is reason to believe that the human race has existed
for at least a hundred thousand years, and there is no proof
that it will not continue to inhabit the earth for a similar
period, plenty of reasons exist for working out better social
and industrial conditions and the purpose of this treatise is
to point out the methods of finance and economy best suited
to our times.
Advice has been freely offered during the last two years
concerning domestic economy. And no doubt a good deal of
individual suffering has been caused by the wasteful expendi-
ture of money, but the manner in which the individual spends
his money can scarcely be controlled by the State, except by
cutting out or closing of useless industries during war time,
but whether the average man invests his money in the war
loan or spends it in beer or banasias makes little difference
to the result, and it is abundantly clear that the remedy
lies not in domestic, but in political economy. Now according
to my method of finance or scheme of things there is no ques-
tion of money in the matter, there is a limited amount used
for convenience, but we could use less and be better off than
we are at present. We have abundance of capital in our land,
we can produce wealth much cheaper than in other countries,
and all could have the opportunity of sharing it. all depends
on wise and careful expenditure and administration, of forces
soundly and economically applied, of p’acing the national
interest above the personal by our legislators, and in general


a policy of assisting instead of battening on one another.
As regards the obligations of capital or capitalists, a
good deal of advice has been recently offered. It is notice-
able that those who have the least themselves are the most
positive as to the obligations of capitalists. First and fore-
most it should be remembered that the chief function of capital
is to reproduce itself. A society in which capital deprives
labor of a just recompense may exist indefinitely, providing
its chief function is not lost to view, but a society in which
capital is prevented from reproducing itself, will, in a very
short time, collapse. Those that suggest that capital should
be lent without interest or confiscated for war purposes are
advocating a course that in the end would be even more
disastrous than if the rates of interest were doubled. It
would be just as much to the point to suggest that labor
should work for nothing. If we are unable to finance the war
on sound business lines then we are unable to finance it at
all. It is not as some people think the function of capitalists
to look after the rest of the community, that is the duty of
statesmen and philosophers, they are well occupied in doing
their own share of national duty, and if they succeed in
increasing capital at any time faster than formerly, it is
making the task of statesmen easier.
The constant bickerings of capital and labor .and the inept
efforts of legislators to reconcile the opposing forces, is attri-
butable to a lack of understanding as to what is the remedy.
First and foremost, labor, the producer, can see its earnings
rapidly diminishing with rising prices, and not understanding
the causes demands more from the employer, who in his turn
with intermediate agents passes the increased cost on to the
defenceless consumer, and as prices continue to lise as the
sequence of the actions of either, it should be abundantly
plain that the remedy is not in the raising of wages.
Perhaps the most important consideration in connection
with land settlement is the necessity of inducing women to
take up blocks and become householders. Even if at present,
conditions are more favourable to woman than at any time
in the course of ages, it could not be said that the future
held anything brilliant in store, and though according to
some, woman’s hour has come it would- be interesting to know
what she proposes to do, even if it has arrived. We are now
face to face with a phase in the evolution of man that will
completely upset all preconceived notions of progress and
conventions. With the present example of the manner in


wnich men will destroy one another, it is scarcely necessary
to speculate as to the reasons that made polygamy the custom
of antiquity, more reasonable to think the female (with the
irrepressible instinct of maternity, without which mankind
would perish), was. as anxious to share the males, as the
males was to monopolise the women. Our imperfect civilisa-
tion has produced two extreme types of female, the pure, the
virtuous and the chaste, the admiration of man and, perhaps,
the noblest work of God, but whom man has never been able
to realiy appreciate or he would have made greater effort to
place them all in an independent position, but instead has
unfeelingly watched the weaker being crushed without regard
to the welfare or morality of other women than his own. or
who if she has weathered the storms of life has little to thank
man for. Even before the war conditions in the British
Empire approximated those that obtained in the declining
age of Rome, of which Gibbon says, “The infrequency of
marriage, and the rum of agriculture, affected the principles
of population, and not only destroyed the strength of the
oresent, but intercepted the hope of future, generations.”
And if no more effort is made in the direction of progress
than is being made at present, the British will sooner or later
succumb to, perhaps less virtuous, but more virile civilisa-
tion.
As regards the unequal number of the sexes after the
war, and the impossibility of an equitable solution of the pro-
blem, it may be safely advanced that though monogamy is the
natural accompaniment of neace and reason, polygamv is
the logical sequence of devastating;- war. But it is not' that
which is natural or logical onlv that has to be considered, it
is also, what is most suitable, and though some women, like
very many men, are careless of their morals, the majority
would have no taste for living in a polygamous state and
though many would bear a child and keep it themselves, if
they were in a position to do so, they would not consent to
share a husband with anyone.
It has been noticed that the best of women are better
mothers than wives, which must occur to anyone as a wise
dispensation of either nature or providence, and frim which
can be deduced that though a child is absolutely essential to
their happiness, a husband is onlv occasionally necessary, and
if women are put in an independent position, or as near to
it as it is possible to put them, they would perhaps follow
their own inclinations and in the aftermath of the war, when


politicians who could not finance the country in good times,
are too much occupied in looking after their own interests,
to be able to attend to the battle scarred heroes who are
starving in the streets, hearts and arms will be open to them
at all times, by their best of all friends, the women.
There are many sound reasons why women should have
their own homes, quite apart from the disastrous condition in
which the world finds itself. It is the mother who for the
most part keeps the home together and has always stayed
there, while the husband went away to work or light, and
she would be in a much sounder position in society if she
owned something substantial than she ever wi 1 be with merely
the empty right to vote. It may be presumed that the pre-
sent social and industrial conditions, that encourage women
to wear high-heeled boots for a brief span, and then gives
all too many the option of the washtub or the brothel, could
easily be imnroved, and present day reformers, who pro-
fessedly seek ideal conditions, and at the same time pursue
a policy that will inevitably destroy them, should be invited
to a much needed rest to enjoy the wealth they have earned.
Though there has been agitations for thousands of years
for the proper division of the land, comparatively few under-
stand the question. Many think that they are expected to
take up land and immediately start growing fruit and vege-
tables. Such is not the case, all that is renuired is that all
people should own the block they live on and that they should
pay no rent to anyone but the State, and they could produce
what they pleased or nothing at all if it did not suit them to
do so, but tUey would be expected to make all provision for
themselves, and during their life could expend their surplus
energies on their land either for pleasure or profit, but it would
be expected that some reasonable effort would be expended
on it, so that as old age came on it would be capable of sup-
porting them, and instead of as at present an increasing num-
ber of indigent people leaning on the State, the tendency
would be to decrease them, and at the same time produce in
ever increasing quantities the wealth that is required to sup-
port themselves, their government, and advance civilisation.
At all times there has been a division of opinion as to
whether governments are as well able to look after the people,
as the people, given the opportunity, are to look after them-
selves. Given a ministry with a genius for governing little
trouble would be experienced in Australia in attaining ideal
conditions, for with our vast areas of land, suitable for any


kind of production, and a genial climate, wealth can be pro-
duced in almost unlimited quantities. Unfortunately a
genius for misgovernment appears to predominate, and the
remarkable tactics of our legislators suggests that little
wisdom was used in their selection, for instead of settling
people where they can produce wealth, every effort is made to
induce them to live in the already congested cities, and
instead of endeavouring to secure homes for the people, every
effort is made to secure houses and land for themselves,
instead of promoting measures calculated to insure national
prosperity, the wasting of public funds on a conservatorium
of music, suggests that Nero fiddling while Rome burned has
a modern counterpart in New South Wales learning to play
tin whistles while the whole world is ablaze.
lo anyone that really understands what political economy
is Australia’s persistence in borrowing is an enigma. That
a people who, on the whole, have fairly robust ideas of
domestic economy, should when it comes to the political
variety think that a complete reversal of methods is the correct
thing is one of those vagaries of the national mind that baffles
the understanding. Pursuing a policy that makes the increase
of primary production absolutely necessary, the whole
tendency of the governments is to encourage people to herd
in the cities and leave the land in the hands of less than twenty
per cent, of the people, the remainder possessing the glorious
privilege of paying rent and trusting to the backing of a horse
or something equally absurd to improve their position in
society. Were the reverse the case and eighty per cent,
owned their own homes, and land monopoly abolished there
would be no so-called problems in front of us to-day.
Though this is written principally for the purpose of
pointing out where our national economy begins and the best
manner of financing industry without resorting to specious
methods that sooner or later defeat the object that they are
intended to attain, it is not out of place to point out some of
the benefits to be derived by the community as a whole from
the policy outlined.
The war debt bogey would assume a less formidable shape,
it would only be a matter of time and energy for it to cease
from troubling us at all; our senseless borrowing policy could
be dropped at once, and sooner or later we would be able
to produce what we now import; we could increase our export
of products to any extent we desired, limited only by the
means of transport and demand; we could provide a home


and means of subsistence for the maimed and crippled who
have fought for us, at very little expense; we could abolish
poverty and unemployment, the existence of which in Australia
is the gravest reflection on our legislators; and give greater
freedom and better living to the majority of the people; and
the increased production of wealth would in turn be a greater
inducement to people to come and settle here; a greater en-
couragement to the individual to improve his surroundings,
and thereby increase their value and his own comfort; a recog-
tion of man and woman’s rights unrealised by the extension
of the franchise; less class consciousness and reasons for
quarrelling about wages; more reliance on self and less on
the State; and instead of social and economic conditions that
compel thousands to live in slums and alleys under conditions
which are little, if any, advance on the primitive cave
dwellers, all could enjoy the glorious privilege of making their
own destiny.
I will now quote some passages from history to show
that if I err in my estimate of the importance of agriculture
and its connection with progress I do so in good company.
The following passage is a report made by Napoleon’s minister
of the interior to the legislative body at the conclusion of the
Russian campaign. Gentlemen: Notwithstanding the immense
armies which a state of war, both maritime and continental,
has rendered indispensibly necessary the population of
France has continued to increase. French industry has
advanced. The soil was never better cultivated, nor our
manufactures more flourishing and at no period in our history
has wealth been more equally diffused amongst all classes of
society. The farmer now enjoys benefits to which he was
formerly a stranger. His food and clothing are better and
more abundant than heretofore, and his dwelling is more sub-
stantial and convenient.
Improvements in agriculture, manufactures, and the use-
ful arts are no longer rejected because they are new. Experi-
ments have been made in every branch of labor and the methods
proved the most useful have been adopted. Artificial meadows
have been multiplied, the system of fallows has been
abandoned, rotation of crops is better understood, and im-
proved plans of cultivation augment the produce of the soil,
cattle are multiplied, and the different breeds improved. This
great prosperity is attributable to the liberal laws by which


the Empire is governed, in the suppression of feudal tenures,
titles, mortmanns, and the monastic orders—measures which
set at liberty numerous estates and rendered them the free
patrimony' of families formerely in a state of pauperism.
Something is due also to the more equal distribution of wealth
consequent on the alteration and simplification of the laws
relating to freehold property, and to the prompt decision of
lawsuits, the number of which is now daily decreasing. Not-
withstanding the enormous wars in which Napoleon had been
engaged He had expended in works of public improvement a
sum of more than 1,000,000,000 francs.
Count Moule, the minister of France, concluded his report
with the fol’owing words:—lf a man of the age of Medici or
Louis XIV. were to revisit the earth, and, at the sight of so
many marvels ask how many ages of peace and glorious reigns
had been required to produce them, he would be answered:
“Twelve years of war and a single man,” Abbot’s “Life of
Napoleon Bonaparte,” c. LV., p. 418.
And Napoleon left no debt.
From Gibbon’s great classic “The Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire,” I extract the foflowing passages. “History
which undertakes to record the transaction of the past, for
the instruction of future ages, would ill deserve that honour-
able office if she condescended to plead the cause of tyrants
or to justify the maxims of persecution.” V. 1, C. 16, P. 350.
“Notwithstanding the prudence and success of Odoacer
his kingdom exhibited the sad prospect of misery and desola-
tion. Since the age of Tiberius, the decay of agriculture had
been felt in Italy; and it was a just subject of complaint that
the life of the Roman people depended on the accidents of the
winds and waves. In the division and decline of the Empire,
the tributary harvest of Egypt and Africa were withdrawn;
the number of the inhabitants continually diminished with the
means of subsistence, and the country was exhausted by the
irretrievable loss of war, famine, and pestilence. St. Ambrose
has deplored the ruin of a populous district which had been
once adorned with the flourishing cities of Bologna, Modena,
Regium, and Placastia. Pope Gelasius was a subject of
Odoacer, and he affirms, with strong exaggeration that in
Aemflia, Tuscany and the adjacent provinces, the human
species was almost extirpiated. The Plebians of Rome, who
were fed by the hand of their master, perished or disappeared
as soon as his liberality was suppressed; the declining of the
arts reduced the industrious mechanic to idleness and want;


a,nd the senators, who might support with patience the ruin
ot their country, bewailed their private loss of wealth and
luxury. One-third of their ample estates, to which the ruin of
Italy is originally imputed was extorted for the use of the
conqueror. Injuries were aggravated by insult the sense
of actual suffering was embittered by the fear of more dread-
ul evils, and as new lands were allotted to new swarms of
barbarians, each senator was apprehensive lest the arbitary
surveyors should approach his favourite villa or his most pro-
fitable form,” etc. V. i, C. 37, P. 984-985.
The calamities of the time had wasted the numbers and
the substance of the Greeks, the motives and the means of
agnculture were extirpated; and the most fertile lands were
left without cultivation or inhabitants. A portion of this
vacant property was occupied and improved bv the command
and for the benefit of the Emperor; a powerful hand and a
vigilant eye supplied and surpassed, by a skilful management,
the mmute di igence of a private farmer; the roval domain
became the garden and granary of Asia, and without the
people, the sovereign acquired a fund of innocent wealth.
According to the nature of the soil, his lands were sown with
corn or planted with vines; the pastures were filled with horses
or oxen, with sheep and hogs; and when Vatacis presented the
impress with a crown of diamonds and pearls, he informed
her with a smile, that this precious ornament arose from the
sale of the eegs of his innumerable poultry. The produce of
the domain was applied to the maintenance of his oalace and
hospitals, the calls of dignity and benevolence; the lesson was
still more useful than the revenue; the plough was restored
to its ancient security and honour; and the nobles were taught
to seek a sure and independent revenue from their estates
instead of adorning their splendid beggarv bv the oppression
ot the people or (what is almost the same) bv the favours of
the court. The superfluous stock of corn and cattle was
eagerly purchased by the Turks with whom Vataces preserved
a s.ncere and strict alliance; but he discouraged the importa-
tion of foreign manufactures, the costb' si’ks of the East and
the curious labours of the Italian looms. “The demand of
nature and necessity,” he was accustomed to say. “are
mdispensible but the influence of fashion may rise and sink
at the breath of a monarch,” and both his precept and
example recommended simplicity of manners and the use of
domestic industry. V. 2, C. 52, P. 804-805.
The authority of the prince,” said Ariaxerxes, “must


be defended by a military force; that force can only be main-
tained by taxes; all taxes must, at last, fall upon agriculture;
and agriculture can never flourish except under the protection
of justice and moderation.” V. i, C. T, P. 173.
Except in the singular institutions of Soarta, the wisest
[sharpest C.j legislators have disapproved of an aganan law
as a false and dangerous innovation. .
Among the Romans, the enormous disproportion of wealth
surmounted the ideal restraints of a doubtful tradition, and
an obsolete statute, a tradition that the poorest followers of
Romulus had been endowed with the perpetual inheritance of
two jugera; a statue which confined the richest citizen to the
measure of five hundred jugera. or three hundred and twelve
acres of land.” V. 2, C. 44. P. 206. . . ,
‘The lands of Italy which had been originally divided
among the families of free and indigent proprietors, were
insensibly purchased, or usurped by the avarice of the nobles,
and in the age which preceded the fall of the republic, it was
computed that only two thousand citizens were possessed of
any independent substance.” Vol. 1, C. 31, P. 836.
Anyone reading and understanding the foregoing pas-
sages will grasp the reasons that Rome and all other civilisa-
tions. including our own, decayed or are decaving. The bar-
barians that overran Rome wouM never have been a menace,
were it not for the barbarians that she bred within herself,
and we have ample evidence at present that barbarism is not
confined to the ignorant, but can dearly be imputed, to
educated men. which is seemingly proved bv another passage
bv the same illustrious writer, entitled “The New Platonists.
The declining age of learning and mankind is marked bv the
rise and rapid progress of the New P l atonists. The school
of Alexandria silenced those of Athens; the ancient sects
enrolled themselves under the banners of the more fashionable
teachers! who recommended their system bv the novelty of
their method and the austerity of their manners. Several
of these masters. Ammonius, Plotinus. Amehus and
Porohry, were men of profound thought and intense application,
but bv mistaking the true obiect of phi’osophv. their labours
contributed much less to improve than corrupt the human
understand ng. The knowledge that is suited to our situation
and powers, the who’e compass of moral, natural, and mathe-
matical science, was neglected bv the Npw Platonists, while
they exhausted their strength in the verbal disputes of meta-
physics, attempted to explore the secrets of the invjsib e


worid. and studied to reconci’e Aristotle with Plato on subjects
W the r 6 phllos °P h f rs were as ignorant as the
f® 8 * mankind. Consuming their reason in those deep but
unsubstantial meditations, their mmds were exposed to illu-
nS °iJ anCy - Th r ey - flattered themselves that they
nns S n e n SS nfl he M eC f et v' dlsen S a Z m 8 the sou 1 from its corporeal
prison claimed a familiar intercourse with demons and spirits
and, by a very singular revolution, converted the study of
philosophy into that of magic. The ancient sages had derided
t e popular superstition; after disguising its extravagance by
the thin pretense of allegory, the disciples of Plotinus and
Porphry became its most zealous defenders. As they agreed
1 5 9? nstians . ia a few mysterious points of faith they
“ d t r e remamder of their theological system with all
rW™ 7 of I clvll . war - , The new Platonists would scarcely
deserve a place in the history of science, but in that of the
church the mention of them will very frequently occur
History repeating itself; with apologies to Gibbon. The
declining age of civilisation and mankind is marked by the
rise and rapid progress of the Labourites. The schools of
Labour silenced those of Liberalism; and the older parties
disintegrating the fragments enrolled themselves under the
banners of the more fashionable teachers, who recommended
s 7 stem b V the novelty of their methods and the austerity
of their manners. Several of their masters. Fisherium Bilh-
coosemm, Holman a, and Magowanium. were associated with
the famous Griffithium, who claimed that bv a secret pro-
frrfrn' ° n V himself , that he could manufacture gold
Lorn petroleum. They were men of profound thought and
mtence application but by mistaking the true object' of phil-
osophy contributed much less to improve than to corrupt the
human understanding. The knowledge that is suited to our
pnp a^°?p and < - DO T erS ’ the whole com^as s of moral, natural.
in u a SCl( ; nc , e ’ was neglected bv the Labourites,
whilst they exhausted their strength in verba 1 disputes on
economics, attempted to explore the secrets of that, to them,
unknown world, and studied to reconcile Henry George with
nillieoose on questions of finance, a subject on which both
those philosophers were as ignorant as the rest of mankind
t ! le,r reason deep but unsubstantial meditations
such as the issue of paper money, in place of the production
of commodities the r minds were exposed to illusions of
fancy Ihey flattered themse’ves that they Possessed the
secret of disengaging the mind, from the contemplation of its


own sorrows, claimed to have discovered a method by which
all could grow rich, and by a very singular revolution con-
verted the science of finance into the study of humbug.
The older political parties had derived the popular super-
stition concerning paper money and overborrowmg; after dis-
guising its extravagance by the thin pretence of allegory, the
disciples of Holmama and Biliieooseium became its most
zealous defenders. Though fundamentally the same as the
Liberals, because they disagreed in a number of details, they
accused Liberalism of being the hand-maid of capitalism, and
attacked them with ail the fury of civil war; and though many
of them possessed a large share of ability, their outlook was
severely circumscribed and they knew nothing away from their
own particular callings, and thought that anything that bene-
fitted them must be beneficial to the rest of the community;
there was an utter absence of understanding concerning the
relations of causes and effects, their mighty intellects never
grasped the simple fact that borrowing and paper money,
by making money cheap, was the cause of high prices; they
had little or no idea of what was progress and what was retro-
gression, an evident intention to embrace the opportunities of
the moment, without consideration of the future, and an
utter inability to understand or utilise the forces at their
command, and instead of endeavouring to produce the neces-
saries of life, and the means of lowering prices, or making
provision for the future, their stupidity or cupidity urged them
to the brink of that abyss of oblivion, where the majority of
politicians terminate their inglorious careers. They seriously
believed that a lawyer would always make a legislator, and
that a man who issued paper money must be a financier,
and that an orator must surely be a statesman, and the whole
of their philosophy ended in confusion. The Labourites would
scarce deserve a place in the history of science or of progress,
but in considering the forces that tended. to destroy the
Empire their names will very frequently occur.
It is now necessary to consider some of the results
attained by this method of settling the land and financing
industry, and meeting our liabilities.
First of all vast areas of agricultural land that now return
to the State on an averoge less than a shilling per acre per
year, and not more than ten to the holder, would easily
increase the return to both tenfold; the amount of commodities
produced and either exported or manufactured would enable
the State to finance itself without borrowing; the necessity of


importing vast quantities of manufactured goods would rapidly
dimmish, and the railways, now run at a loss, would soon be-
come a valuable revenue producing asset, instead of an
increasing outlay on pensions and bonuses (a form of corrup-
tion) many worthy people, who are now forced to accept
them, would be wealth-producers themselves. Industry to the
value of fifty millions yearly, and for which no one seems able
to raise the capital to undertake, could be financed either by
the direct ho.ders of bond or land credits, or their nominees
and a sum equalling our present war indebtedness could soon
be invested on sound business lines, while landholders with-
out waiting for the crushing taxation that inevitably awaits
them, could start immediately to invest their land values
wherever the opportunity offered; the State for its own interest
o be under an obligation to see that it was soundly invested
By these means, providing our capital in the shape of
man power does not dimmish too greatly we can face any
length of time without financial inconvenience. I may add that
though I am entirely in favour of State ownership of land I
strongly object to savage methods of taxation to attain that
end. Society has recognised and encouraged private owner-
ship of land for thousands of years, and if we now find we
are wrong it is the duty of society to recompense those who
m good faith have invested their capital in land and by this
method it can be done, not only without hardship, but with
great benefit, to all.
Properly handled all the difference these methods would
make to the average individual is that instead of staying where
his services were of little value, he would be expected to work
where his labor would return the most to himself and to the
It would probably occur to some genius that all that was
necessary was to confiscate all land values and issue credit
as required without troubling to finance industry or produce
wealth. 1 have already mentioned that to flood the market
with money or credit will upset the economic balance, and
to lowing such a course would merely make money plentiful
higher still' C ° mmodlties ’ and the result wo uW be prices much
i j T Vu S n °u 50 much the revemi e directly obtained from the
land though an ever increasing quantity, as the amount of
wealth p io duced and circulated through the community that
would benefit the State, but as agriculture is the basis of all
manufacture, trade, and commerce, and owing to our


indebtedness we have not only to keep our own manufactures
going, but to contribute towards our creditors supply of
raw material also, it follows that agriculture is the starting
point of our national economy. It is not the gift of the
average person to see beyond his own requirements, and
though most people know that all wealth comes from the land
in the first place, the fact is so lost to view that the average
individual thinks that to get a share of the wealth someone
else possesses is a legitimate aim, and were the same effort
expended in producing wealth from the land in the first place
that is wasted in endeavouring to share other peoples, the
result would be beneficial to everybody.
A Sydney newspaper printed the following passage: “Yes
I have taken over £l6O worth of produce off my quarter acre
block,” said Mr. E. L. Strange, of Napier Street, Ballarat,
to an interviewer. “But that is not to say that everybody can
do the same. I *have been experimenting on that block for
some years past,” continued Mr. Strange, “and I have made
a close study of agricultural chemistry and bacteriology in
relation to land cultivation.” Then it is too much for the
average citizen to hope to do likewise. “I should say so,”
was the reply. “And what is more, I have my own secret
methods of obtaining such excellent results. These I have
adopted after much thought, study, and experimenting. Yes,
I have worked on purely scientific principles, but it must be
noted that my ground was about as poor in quality as one
could very well get. By treating the soil and manuring it
accordinging to my own particular ideas, and understanding
its particular needs in relation to the great variety of plants
that I have produced, I was enabled to take off £162 worth
of stock on the basis of the ordinary market valuation last
season. Substantial as that may seem, I expect to nearly
double that output in the coming season.” '
If this is correct, and it is apparently printed in good
faith, it would suit our government much better to employ
people like Mr. Strange, than a vast array of legal talent to
fix the price of things we do not produce.
It is a peculiar, and perhaps unfortunate fact, that no
matter how shrewd and progressive an individual may be,
twelve equally shrewd men would collectively make less pro-
gress, or in other words, though one genius may move moun-
tains a host of geniuses would be in each others road, or
though each may understand the true object of ohilosophv.
in its application they may vary to such an extent that they


make no progress at all, and in the end the savage who beats
his enemy’s brains out with a club is the haziest and most
peaceful. Statisticians and scientists have asked in connec-
tion with lunacy statistics, “Is the world ~oing mad,” the
query is a foolish one, for the world is mad and they might
well ask is the world going madder, for no matter in which
direction we look, one is trying to upbuild while one or more
is trying to destroy and occasionally all cease building and
combine to destroy the whole.
The tendencv of mankind to allow itself to be led or
misled has always been the same. Millions of people for
thousands of years have believed that the story of Adam and
Eve conveyed a spiritual lesson, while viewed in the right light
it appears more like an economic one, where Adam was
punished for eating the fruit of other peoples labour without
giving any return, and so well has the human race learned
the lesson that to-day Adam’s original sin is considered a
virtue and all eat the fruit of other peoples labour if they can,
and every effort is made to keep those out of the garden of
Eden whose sole object is to cultivate the ground. And
though a world of time has passed since Moses angered
with the children of Israel for worshipping the golden
calf, both Jew and Gentile are worshipping it to-day
more vigorously than ever. And though Samson killed his
thousands with the jawbone of an ass, the jawbone of an ass
is at the present time slaying men by millions and Samson is
straining at the pillars of civilisation and trying to destroy
the world.
Gibbon’s phrase “mistaking the true object of philosophv’’
is capable of a much wider application than he apparently
intended.
In the Greek legends the storv of Sisvohus rolling the
stone uphill is erroneously supposed to be a nunishment for
having been a robber; more reasonable to think that some
ancient Grecian sage in contemplating the futilitv of human
effort likened the labors of Sisyphus to the disasters of man-
kind and the legend is merelv a prophesv of what is now
hanoening, and if our civilisation has reached higher ur> the
hill than those of other davs, then so much treater is the
distance that we have to fall; or the storv of man in the
water up to his lips and who is perishing of thirst is the story
of the outcast ones who never had a horne, and the giant
stretched out prostrate on the ground with the vultures eating


his vitals is merely proof that the sharp-witted and unscrupul-
ous were always preying on humnaity. of
Without communing with the ancients there is plent
simple lessons to be learned from English fable or philosophy.
How many understand or apply the story of the wy
more nuts than he was able to draw from the iar. o .
not both individually and collectively m our stupid borrowm
policy like the dog grasping at the shad^, a p n^ 0 S r ° v °” f the
later we have nothing left to ourselves; and the story ot the
farmer who dying called his sons to his bedside and told
them there was a fortune buried somewhere two feet beneath
the ground and the sons after being disappointed in the
efforts to discover it, were overjoyed to find their fortune in
their increased return. , , , i • .*.
And instead of trying to understand the true object of
philosophy they have rose up m their thousands and posed
as reformers, one half of whom wanted to handle the Peoples
cash and the other half their souls. Peering back through
the dim light of history many weird and wondrous customs
mee t our gaze, from the savage Carthaginian who made the
human sacrifices to the. cheerful minded Tibetani who
prayed to his god by turning a handle, and at all times and
fn all ages thSre appears the fanatic who would setPe a
theological argument with a gun; but amongst the fads and
fetishes of time and yesterday, too numerous for anyo' <
count, we mav search in vain for a paralle of the
phenomenon of white men in a white man s land in the da
of the twentieth century, who have persuaded themselves <
their numerous supporters, that they can so ve financial an
economic problems with a printing press.
It should be the object of all governments to preserve
peace and promote prosperity. Perhaps o
have some ideas in that directom. the difficulty -
people sufficiently broad-minded to distinguish the different
between national and personal interest, or mtel igent enougi
to follow a course that would suit boll' _
Over twenty years ago the .great American republic was
stirred to its inmost depths bv a crusade of bimetallists, ha
it succeeded its effect would have been about enual to the
issue of paper money in Australia, a mere negation o
present when the British Empire is accumulating a
debt that will, if left in its various rulers hands, inevitably
destroy it, the great intellects that are contro ling its destinies,


eaVe Li aSld r e a asefal work (assuming of course that they are
capable of any) and concentrate their minds on what—a day-
S T Vm i? bl ’ T hlC r lr |. effect is about equal to the actions
ot the Irishman who finding his blankets were too short and
his feet cold, cut a foot off the top and sewed it on to the
bottom with the result that he got a cold in the head instead.
nd should some future Gibbon, in .the greatness of his
wisdom, while searching for the reason, that the British won
e war, point out with soundest logic, the reason showing
hou/ WaS W ° n by pollticians > who P ut on the clock an
There are very few instances of people entering the public
service at a loss to themselves, in fact the reverse is only
too apparent. With our modern ideas of education that
teaches mankind to appreciate the good things of the earth
a ™j!. a P°htical or social system that refuses to recognise his
rights to a share in the source of wealth, we present an
il ustration of the Grecian fable of the man up to his lips in
water, and perishing with thirst, and to continue in that illogi-
cal manner is to encompass our own destruction for the
educated barbarian is at all times more dangerous than the
uneducated one.
We have abundant evidence of the folly of expecting
any progressive measures from the minds of those who see
in politics a road to their own self-advancement, and the best
that can be hoped for is to give every individual scope for his
pfw P =lHr U ar f t i a ei ? tS b the State for its part to‘confine itself
a ter settling the land question, to the proner conduct of
finance, in all its varied aspects, which can be done if atten-
tion is paid to those who are best suited to the business.
. •, s J-° the national-sation of the means of oroduction,
know a U lV°fh and there are very few neople that
know all there is to know about any one industry, and if we
h fi^ a^ tU( ? e ° f our , stupidity choose to pick out
exnert Wh ° nothing about any industry and
- to run the whole, acocrdng to any -species of
t K t lam ac P ua ’nted with, we merely hasten the return
ot the human race to chaos.
And the mightv British people have risen in their wrath
and demanded the execution of all who connived at or abetted
he murder of the pure souled Edith Caved entirely over-
looking the fact that in the great and Morions British
nS r Fd>h° U h and l ° f b J eautifu] women, many equal to the
noble Edith, have been driven into brothels where their souls


have been destroyed, while the infamous Germans, by their
savage methods, have placed the lovely Edith, on a pedestal of
glory, that through succeeding ages, will ever be a beacon
for noble womankind.
It would suit our specious logic, or ideas of progress,
if when the war is ended, and we have the Kaiser on a chain,
to demand his execution, but in course of time renrieve him,
and in the end just gaol him, for spitting on the footpath cr
for walking on the grass.
We show our appreciation of the men who for us fought,
some of whom are cripp l bd and whose livelihood is gone, when
we demand in tones insistant, that they shall have Christmas
dinner, even if some others go without it. our souls would
quail with horror to think that thev had none; and as we arm
fresh legions, fair promises we’ll make them, that they will
be well fed and pensioned in the days_ that are to come and
in the near or distant future, when their homes are left behind
them, and they’re fighting stubborn battles, or are marching on
to glory, brave men who stay behind them, will boldly cheer
them on.
And mankind will ever onward, like Jason on his sandals,
or maybe an aeroplane, in search of fleeces "olden, thev will
turn the whole wor 1 d over, never dreaming it were simpler
to find it with a spade; and nations will encompass, their
ultimate destruction, as they concentrate their forces, to
satiate the lust of conquest, and the love of newer and gold;
for none have grasped the fact vet, that Paradise is for
those, who 'would know it if they found it, and mankind will
reach their heaven, when thev make it for themselves.
