

WAR LITERATURE SOCIETY.
ADDRESS BY
The Hon. W. A. HOLMAN
Premier of New South Wales
ENTITLED:
War Knowledge in Australia
DELIVERED AT
The Inaugural Meeting of the Society
on 23rd September, 1918.
SOME VICTIMS OF GERMAN MILITARISM.




WAR LITERATURE
SOCIETY
Patron:
The Hon. Sir William Cullen. K.C.M.G.
Chief Justice. Chancellor of the University of Sydney
President:
The Hon. George Earp, M.L.C.
Committee:
The Hon. the Premier, Mr. W. A. Holman, M.L.A.
Major-General G. L. Lee, C.M.G., D.S.O.
The State Commandant
His Honour Judge Backhouse
Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart
Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney
Colonel J. Lamrock, C. 8., V.D.
Camp Commandant, Liverpool
Colonel R. E. Roth, C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D.
The Hon. Sir Thos. Hughes, M.L.C.
Major J. H. Strong, V.D.
Captain Chaplain Colwell
Professor W. E. Cooke
Government Astronomer
Mr. John Sulman
Mr. William Gillanders, B.A.
Gen. Sec. Y. M.C. A.
Mrs. A. Holman
• Mrs. George Earp
Mrs. G. L. Lee
Mrs. William McMurray
Mrs. John Waugh
Captain H. G. Grace, V.D.
Mr. H. C. Macfie, F.C.P.A.
Hon. Secretary : Asssistant Sec.: •
Major J. H. Strong (Miss) M. E. Hannah
Atlas Buildings, Spring Street, Sydney




“WAR KNOWLEDGE IN
AUSTRALIA.”
Address by the Hon. W. A. HOLMAN, Premier
of New South Wales, to members of the
War Literature Society, at its inaugural
meeting, 23rd September, 1918.
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, —
I am very much flattered at being asked to give the opening
address of this Society. The enormous sphere of usefulness
which is before such a Society however can only be exploited
if the organisation is non-partisan and non-political. My appear-
ance on the platform is not to be taken as introducing any Party
aspect. I still feel that patriotism ought not to be the monopoly
of any party in politics. Although we may have in the course
of the work of the Society views to put forward, those views
will be the views of individuals and sections and not of any
official party.
I desire to go over a wide field to-night. I shall make no
apology for brevity on each point or abrupt transitions. When
a nation is at war its first need is unity. During the first year
or eighteen months of the war that unity was achieved. Those
of us who have been in politics well recollect there was political
discussion, and political dispute, but there was no discussion or
dispute about the war. It has been reserved for Australia to
realise in the later stages of the struggle that melancholy pheno-
menon, and it is a matter that should press heavily upon the
mind of every patriotic citizen.
Those of us who are strenuously urging the continuing of
the war are doing so because we believe it to be the cause of
justice, and there is a natural tendency to condemn those who
take an opposite view as lacking sympathy for the cause of
justice. It is very difficult to refrain from that conclusion some-
times. And yet, a very brief consideration will, I think, prove
that it is not just. I have no desire to mention an exciting case
at present occupying the public mind, other than by way of


illustration, but if you consider the measure of interest and
attention that have been aroused by the alleged miscarriage of
justice in the case of the I.W.W. men, it must be admitted, I
think, that a large number of those who have associated them-
selves with the agitation for a further enquiry must have been
animated by a genuine desire to see justice done. I know some
of the men personally, and I am satisfied that the great bulk of
the feeling excited over this case is a feeling in favour of justice
and a belief that, in these particular cases, justice has not been
achieved. The miscarriage of justice alleged in the I.W.W.
cases is perpetrated upon the bodies of twelve working men in
Australia. But there is at present being manifested at the other
end of the world a brutal indifference to the claims of justice-
in this case against many millions of working men. Working
men at the other end of the world are being deprived of their
liberty —not by being confined in institutions where their lives
and health will at least be safe—but by being subjected to treat-
ment, in comparison with which any injustice perpetrated against
any persons here dwindles into insignificance. Yet it is a re-
markable fact that the very men who are able to lash themselves
into a state of uncontrollable excitement over the cases I have
referred to regard with complete indifference the enormously
greater injustices that are being now perpetrated in Europe.
That is one of the problems whose solution presses upon those
who are anxious to see things go better in the future. _ The
explanation, I believe, is simple. The injustice alleged in the
case of the I.W.W. men is seen here —it appeals to the senses
and the experiences of young Australians. An injustice pei-
petrated at the other end of the world is not seen here and makes
no appeal to Australians —it has never been witnessed by us,
and when it is described to us it is described in terms that con-
jure up no corresponding conceptions, because the experiences
narrated have never been undergone in this country. As a
result the events that are occurring and have been occurring
since the war commenced are not visualised or realised here,
and are entirely ignored by vast masses of our fellow citizens.
If you ask why that should be so, I am afraid the answei
would involve a problem in psychology too complex for me to
enter upon to-night, even if I had the qualifications. But I
think the principal reason is that we have learned to depend
for our knowledge of what is going on in Europe almost wholly
upon the newspapers; and that the press of Australia, admirably
organised and very well managed for the task of presenting
Australian affairs, has entirely failed to give us an adequate pic-
ture of affairs as they stand at the other end of the world. We


get merely isolated incidents—we do not get a complete picture,
and I suppose it would be exceedingly difficult for any system
of journalism to give us one. We hear of a great battle, of the
gallant exploits of one division, or the retreat of another division,
we hear of lieutenant this, and captain that, of exciting incidents
such as the journalistic mind is qualified to seize upon and depict,
but these exciting incidents do not make up any complete picture
of what is going on. It is not merely that there are not enough
of such incidents, but it is that the real truth does not consist
in this kind of thing at all.
The essence of the thing is not to be found in the exploits
of individuals or of special bodies of men—it is to be found
from day to day and month to month in the relative power
developed by the belligerents in the two groups. Now that is a
point upon which the press has failed to convey to us any con-
ception of the real position. We hear of victories and occasion-
ally of reverses. We hear that we are going forward or that
we are going back. But we do not hear what is the actual
situation —whether the power being developed on our side is
equal to, or greater or less than that being developed by the
enemy. We do not hear what are the reserves or the munition
supplies; whether the momentary advances or reverses indicate a
permanent adjustment of the forces; or are merely the outcome
of some accident. 1 would venture to give you an experience
that has occurred to me several times lately during platform
campaigns. I took an active share in the two Referendum cam-
paigns and in the recruiting campaigns. And I found in the
midst of the most turbulent meetings that I could get an attentive
hearing whenever I attempted to tell my hearers something
about the actual facts of the situation. Whilst I talked party
talk I was subjected to interruptions; but, when I attempted
to talk about the facts of the situation, people listened. They
wanted to know, not whether we were going to advance or
retreat another five miles, or who had gained the last Military
Cross, but what was the actual state of affairs of the two bel-
ligerent groups. I found that no matter how disorderly might
be the meeting, any effort to deal with the question in that way
immediately elicited a measure of quite respectful attention. It
obviously fitted into a want making itself felt in the minds of
my hearers —a want which the existing methods of supplying
information had failed to satisfy. It seems to me that the whole
failure of Australia to take its full share in the struggle is
due primarily to this one cause —failure to visualise the struggle.
It is not due to any native lack of imagination—there are none
more keen than Australians to depict any familiar struggles,


like those of sport or politics, in their most vivid colours —it is
due to the circumstances that the actual facts of the war have
not found any place in the minds of our people. Ihe first
business of this Society, it seems to me, should be to try and
bring before our people these actual facts as distinguished from
the incidents —the exciting incidents —which make good reading
under scare headings in the newspapers. What we want to know
is the sum total of the facts of the position.
The first point I feel that the Society should devote itself to
is the position of those among us who describe themselves as
pacifists. Here there comes in the one theme which I can claim
to speak upon with some measure of qualification. I have been
for 20 years a pacifist. lam a pacifist to-day. Ido know some-
thing about the pacifist and his position. I will venture to put
a few things forward which must be taken into consideration
in dealing with his position. He is not looking forward to an
ultimate blending of the races of the world into one amalgam
the British are to continue to be British, the French are to con
tinue to be French, and so on. Ihe pacifist thinks nationally.
But he insists that instead of settling international disputes by
war they must be settled in another way—by forming treaties.
What is to be done if when a dispute has arisen and has been
dealt with by forming a treaty, the treaty is not observed ? That
is the problem which has confronted the pacifist from the very
beginning. It has been dealt with, for example, by Stuart Mill.
Clearly, if you are to have a pacifist world your international
relations must be governed by treaty. And you can only secure
the sanctity of treaties by an honest agreement amongst the
majority of a league of nations to stand loyally by each other
other and to punish any party to a treaty gnilty of its infringe-
ment. You must bring some form of punishment to bear. Able
thinkers like Mill have tried to devise forms of punishment which
would not actually involve going to war. It may be that in a
more advanced degree of civilisation we can devise a form of
punishment which will not necessitate a resort to arms. But, in
the present state of the world’s progress we cannot.
If a treaty is made and broken it is essential that the other
nations should unite to punish the wrongdoer. That is ap-
parently overlooked by the pacifists in Australia. The problem is
not the making of an agreement between England and Germany,
or between Belgium and Germany. That has been done long
ago. The problem is not that of entering upon negotiations
which will get us peace through the medium of a treaty. All
that has been done. The problem is to get the treaty kept when


made. The only question is what are we going to do when
it is made and wantonly broken.
The treaty was made in 1839, when five guaranteeing powers
undertook to protect the neutrality of Belgium. It was renewed
at the time of the Franco-Prussian War, and at the time of the
Hague Convention, in 1912, when it was agreed that the territory
of neutral powers should be held inviolable. The signatories
of these treaties included Germany. So that on three separate
occasions a treaty was made by Germany. Everyone of these
tieaties definitely bound Germany to abstain from any infringe-
ment of Belgian neutrality. So far as the aim of the pacifists
is concerned it was secured in this portion of Europe. Its fate
was provided for in accordance with the declared method of
the pacifist—the entry of adjoining powers into treaties with
each other. Then the treaty was broken immediately after the
war commenced.
It has always seemed to me that this phase of the question
presents a problem unanswerable by any pacifist. V\ hat are we
as pacifists going to do ? Are we going to stand by, with folded
arms, and see treaties broken and the wrongdoer escape without
punishment for his wrongful acts until finally he may break
whatever treaty he may have with us ? Or are we going to
support and protect the nations guaranteed under any treaty
we may make? Clearly we must devote ourselves to the pro-
mulgation of much greater knowledge of the diplomatic situa-
tion which preceded the war. It needs the application of force
to see that the law is observed and that the force is applied by
the civilised powers of the world. (Applause.) Now that is
the first point upon which there is room for greater general
knowledge.
The next point will be to present the actual military situation
as it is to-day. I speak without any pretence to any military
knowledge of that situation. I simply deal with it as we see
it on the map at the present time. There is a feeling abroad
that if the present success on the Western front continues, then
in a comparatively little while we may compel Germany to
evacuate Belgium and Northern France, compel her even to
withdraw from Alsace-Lorraine, and secure some advantage for
Italy on her northern frontier; and that having done these
things the purposes of the war will have been achieved, rendering
it wise to take some steps which will bring about an enduring
peace. This is, I believe, quite wrong—most dangerously so.
The essential fact about the present situation is the general
collapse of the Russian Empire. German diplomacy and arms


have carved out a series of principalities on Russia’s western
frontier which are, and will continue to be, independent States ;
and which are already drawn into the general orbit of Germany s
and Austria’s gravitational power. The putting forward of
ready-made German monarchs for these new principalities is in
rapid progress and in a comparatively short space of time we
shall see these western States of old Russia the admitted satellites
of the Central Powers. The total area which has been detached
from the Russian nation is about 430,000 square miles —roughly,
as large as Germany and Austria put together. The total popu-
lation of these detached parts of the Russian Empire is estimated
at about 55 millions.
It is difficult to get the exact figures of to-day, amidst the
prevailing chaos, but 1 understand 55 million is a conservative
estimate. This area is divided into five or six separate political
units and in each of them the power and influence of the Central
Powers are now supreme. If, therefore, by any arrangement
whatever Germany and Austria could escape from the present
struggle retaining their hold over this portion of what was once
Russia, they will leave the struggle with an enormous increase
in the military power with which they entered it. ihe popula-
tion of Germany and Austria is about 120,000,000. Adding
Turkey and Bulgaria we get a total of 145,000,000. If, when
the war is over, by the surrender of Alsace-Lorraine, and the
Trentino the total population were reduced by 5,000,000, but
Germany and Austria were able to draw in the Russian states,
the Central Powers would have a population of about 200,000,000,
which would soon become as efficient in industry and war as the
rest of the German trained population to-day—an efficiency
which we have known to our cost during the past 20 years. It
is quite evident that if that scheme succeeds and the present
dynasties remain in Germany and Austria, the peace of the
world would be confronted with an enormously greater danger
after the war than at the beginning of it. They would have
reserves of practically unlimited character. On this question 1
would quote you two passages. The first is from a witness not
subject to hysteria or to illusion. It is from President Wilson s
speech. He says ;
“The purpose (of the Central Powers) is undoubtedly to
make all the Slavic peoples, all the free and ambitious na-
tions of the Baltic Peninsula, all the lands that 1 urkey has
dominated and misruled, subject to their will and ambition,
and build upon that dominion an empire of force upon which
they fancy that they can then erect an empire of gain and


commercial supremacy —an empire as hostile to the Ameri-
cans as to the Europe which it will overawe —an empire*
which will ultimately master Persia, India, and the peoples
of the Far East’ In such a programme our ideals, the
ideals of justice and humanity and liberty, the principle
of the free self-determination of nations upon which all
the modern world insists, can play no part. I hey are ie-
jected for the ideals of power, for the principle that the
strong must rule the weak, that trade must follow the flag
whether those to whom it is taken welcome it or not, that
the peoples of the world are to be made subject to the
patronage and overlordship of those who have the power to
enforce it.
“That programme once carried out, America and all who
care or dare to stand with her must arm and prepare them-
selves to contest the mastery of the world, a mastery in
which the rights of common men, the rights of women, and of
all who are weak, must for the time being be trodden under-
foot and disregarded, and the old age-long struggle for
freedom and right begin again at its beginning. Everything
that America has lived for and loved and grown great to
vindicate and bring to a glorious realisation will have fallen
in utter ruin, and the gates of mercy be once more pitilessly
shut upon mankind.”
So far as I am capable of forming an independent opinion, my
own consideration of the position has led me to that view. I
accept the conclusions that President Wilson indicates there,
and I think that his conclusions should be made freely known.
But the obtaining of this vast area of Russia will not only
strengthen the military resources of Germany and Austria, but
will also strengthen them economically. In the North American
Review there recently appeared an article in which the author
points out the following: —
(1) Germany now controls both the oil-fields in Roumania
and at Baku, which seriously competed with American oil.
together with the finest deposit of manganese in the world.
(2) Germany now controls wheat lands among the richest
upon earth, wheat lands which, including southern Siberia,
vie even in area with our own wheat-growing zone.
(3) Germany now controls the one great untouched
timber-zone remaining in the world, stretching right across
Siberia.
(4) Germany controls the vast leather-producing area
which runs across Central Russia and Siberia.


(5) Germany now controls immensely valuable mining
zones, containing everything from iron to gold, running from
the Don Valley to Ussuria.
(6) Germany now controls, in the Urals, practically the
whole of the world’s supply of platinum, quite indispensable
to our electrical industries.
That is about where we stand, thanks to socialism and its
faithful support of German policies.
That is the position, and the minds of the Allies must be
attuned to the necessity of continuing the struggle not merely to
restore Belgium and Northern France and North Italy, but to
prevent our enemies leaving the war with these enormous
accessions of power. Knowledge of those points is practically
non-existent in the regions of which I am thinking—in the camps
of those who describe themselves as pacifists, who have failed to
take proper interest in the struggle going on to-day. Those
are the first two points to which I suggest we should direct our
efforts.
The next point, I think, is to explain to our people, and
particularly to our women, the nature of the war being carried
on by Germany at present and the methods upon which Germany
is relying. A veil has been drawn over these, necessarily, and
I am far from suggesting that it should be wholly lifted, but
I think it should be lifted sufficiently to convey to the minds
of our people some idea of what has been done. As an instance
of the need for this I might mention that recently in the House,
I heard a member of the Opposition—and one whom I respect
highly—say, in connection with some alleged grievance of a
tram conductor in connection with his employment, “Could any-
thing worse be done in Belgium ?” This gentleman was bringing
forward a case of apparently real hardship. Apparently he
thought that this type of hardship was the very worst that was
happening in Belgium to-day!
We have to-day the spectacle of a great military power which
avowedly commits itself to the use of military force to the
uttermost —without limit and without scruple. It is hard for us
to realise what is meant by the employment of military force
without limit and without scruple. It means a force against
which there is no protection of any kind for an invaded or sub-
jugated people, against the utmost excesses of cruelty or wrong,
except that which may be suggested by the interest of the con-
querors themselves. The whole matter was very accurately
summed up at the time of the Franco-German War by a British


observer, Sir Edward Hamley, who wrote a letter to the London
Times in 1871, in which he indicated what he took to be the
German position. He said:—
“The ‘laws of war,’ as promulgated by the Prussians, may
be condensed, in the case of invasion, into the general axiom
that the population of the invaded country lose their rights
of property and of personal security, while the persons and
effects of the invaders become absolutely sacred. In prac-
tice, this takes the two distinct forms of the law of re-
quisition and the law of penalty for resistance. Every
species of moveable property which any district held by the
invader contains, is subject to the demands of the commander
of the troops that occupy it. This property is liable to be
transported to particular points by the horses and vehicles
of the inhabitants, which always form an important item
in the booty. The penalty for non-compliance or tardy
compliance with a requisition, is a pecuniary fine. For the
payment of this, the chief inhabitants are seized as hostages.
The town or village, the inhabitants of which protect their
property, is to be burnt. The town or village, in which
invading troops have suffered themselves to be surprised
is to be burnt. The district in which damage is done to
bridges, roads, or railways, is to be fined or devastated.
The inhabitants who do the damage are to be put to death.
Everybody taken with arms and not a recognised
uniform is to be put to death. All these things, are they not
written in the orders issued by Prussian chiefs, and have
not these orders been punctually executed ?
“In ordinary cases, to confiscate property by force, to
burn buildings and stores, and to put people to death, for
reasons such as those quoted, are acts bearing names which
need not be mentioned. It is difficult to say why these acts
should lose their character if committed by invaders. And
it is to be observed that the enforcement of these laws of
war is not merely the annulling of ordinary law, but the
inversion of it. For whereas a man in all peaceful countries
is entitled and encouraged to defend his own property and
person, while he who assails them does so at his own proper
risk, in this case defence suddenly becomes a crime, to be
visited by the extremest penalties, and it is the aggres-
sor who is to be protected by laws of extraordinary
severity. . . . ” •
These are the observations of a very penetrating mind during
the Franco-Prussian War. These principles probably have been


developed and improved upon in the 40 years past and have
been applied with the. most convincing logic in the present war.
The attitude of the German official mind apparently is that as
ultimately Germany is bound to win, anybody who resists is
a criminal and an offender against mankind. lie is merely pro-
tracting the struggle, while any cruelty which shortens the
struggle is a service to the higher humanity; thus those who are
resisters lose all their rights. This is apparently the philosophy
upon which these things are based.
The French Government have, from time to time, issued
volumes in which have been collected the evidence of some of
the typical outrages that have been committed by the Germans
in their advance through the northern regions of France. Some
have been obtained after the evacuation. Others from fugitives
who have escaped from the occupied regions and got back to
the Allied lines. Similar reports have been issued in regard to
typical outrages in Belgium. We know only about a sma
portion of the territory. We do not know what is going on
behind the German lines. The bulk of the evidence is of a
character making it impossible to convey it in anything but
general terms to the public. . But I will read two or three
remarkable cases. In all of these cases the names of the
witnesses are given—except in the case of women witnesses
who have been victims—for obvious reasons the names of
womei) witnesses are not given. Ihe nature of the inquiries
made is disclosed and there are photographs. There can be no
doubt about the general accuracy of these statements.
Case No. 31, for instance, relates to a police report concerning
a murder and two outrages committed near ha Ferte-Gaugher
(Seine-et-Marne).
“On Sunday, the 6th instant, the Germans went to the
house of M. Q , owner of the Chateau de la ——,
Commune of La Ferte-Gaucher, where they lunched. In
the evening they returned intoxicated; they then violated
the young woman Y and Madam X , agriculturalist,
who had taken refuge at the Chateau. Seeing this, M, Q
tired a revolver at them, without hitting them, whereupon
they immediately shot him dead.
“I cannot give the details of this scene, as I was myself
taken prisoner by the Germans the evening before.
(Signed, Larieux.)
Then there are details of the outraging of the young women
and a further statement by Madam X.


Case 32 is a Police report concerning the murder of a young
girl of Esternay (Marne) by a German soldier.
“During the battle of Esternay, September 5, 1914, 1 had
taken refuge in the basement of my house, together with
Madam Lhomme, the widowed Madam Bouche and her two
daughters. About 11 p.m., after my house had been already
occupied for some time by the enemy, three German soldiers
came down into the basement. There they drank and took
all they chose, and finally they discovered us in a kind of
smaller cellar in which we had taken refuge.
“As this inner cellar was very small, Madam Bouche and
1, standing at the entrance, filled it up entirely. Madam
Lhomme and Madam Bouche’s two daughters were seated
behind us. One of the soldiers took me by the arm and
brought me out of the cellar, saying; “We won’t hurt grand-
mother.’’ The other two placed themselves at the entrance
of the cellar and ordered the other women, in bad French,
to take off their clothes. Seeing that no one stirred, one
of the soldiers pointed his gun at the women. Madam
Bouche, still standing at the entrance, threw up the muzzle
of the gun with her arm, but the soldier then put it under
Madam Bouche’s arm and fired.
“Madam Lhomme, wounded in the left elbow and Mile.
Bouche, wounded in the shoulder, screamed, and the sol-
diers then ran away. The one who was at the entrance of
the cellar but who had not fired went up last, walking
backwards and covering us with his revolver.
“Madam Lhomme’s wound has healed; Mile. Bouche died
on the following day. I do not know to which regiment
these soldiers belonged.”
Then there is corroborative evidence by other witnesses there,
whose statements are given. We then have a statement made
by a German prisoner whose name is suppressed, but whose
statement is authenticated.
“We broke into a house at Metten. Shots had been fired
from a house. We broke into a house, and we were ordered
to search the house, but we found nothing in the house
but two women and a child. But my comrades said that
the two women had fired, and we found some arms, too,
revolvers. But I did not see the women fire. But the
women were told nothing would be done to them, because
they were crying so bitterly. We brought the women out and
took them to the major, and then we were ordered to shoot
