

COPYRIGHT.
3d.
Stead’s
Book No. 2.
Compiled by
HENRY STEAD
Tells you
Just what you want to know about
ANTWERP and the SCHELDT. PRIZE COURTS
PRIZES. NAVAL ORDNANCE. SPIES,
BRITISH FORCES, RULES OF WAR,
GERMAN COLONIES.
SHIPS IN PACIFIC,
etc., etc.
Stead’s WAR Book No. I. tells about Armies, Fleets, Alliances, Neutrality,
Contraband, Trade, Food Supplies, Right of Capture, Non-Combatants,
Population, etc., etc.
Ir^BlueCovenSd


iMmi ' 1 i ': , 1 '/
‘ . \ ■' - s v; , : f ■ ~j; v , ,


WAR!
Points absai it® Fighting Powers.
A HANDY CATECHISM.
By HENRY STEAD.
This book, and Stead’s War Book No. i give much
information about the fighting powers, on many of the
points everyone wants to know. They are compiled
with the greatest care, and cover much not found in the
standard reference books. For facility of reference the
information is thrown into the form of question and
answer.
is file Scheldt a Dutch or a Belgian River?
It is a Dutch river. This is a most important point if the
Germans invest Antwerp, for it involves the neutrality of Hol-
land. To invest Antwerp thoroughly the Germans will have
to violate Dutch territory, to send reinforcements to Antwerp
by the only available route, the Scheldt, the Allies will have to
violate Dutch territorial waters. The Scheldt enters Holland
eleven miles after it leaves Antwerp, and runs for fifty miles
through Dutch territory to the sea. It is, therefore, Dutch
territorial waters, and although it is a trade-free river, its
neutrality must be respected.
What doss a Trade Free River Mean?
A river on which no tolls are charged, and which is entirely
free to the shipping of the world. Up to 1863 Holland had the
right to, and did, levy a toll of 3s. per ton on all ships using
the Scheldt to reach Antwerp. This absolutely throttled the
port, and after many attempts a conference of twenty-one
Powers and States, held at Brussels, was successful in arrang-
ing a treaty freeing the Scheldt. Belgium and the other inter-
ested Powers bought the toll right from Holland for
of which sum Belgium paid Since
then Antwerp has gone ahead by leaps and bounds, With
its suburbs it has a population of about 360,000. Of these
16,000 are Dutch, and 10,000 Germans.
Is Antwerp Fortified?
It is regarded as the strongest fortress in the world. Five
years ago it was decided to spend on remodelling




the forts, and providing new armaments. If these alterations
have been completed, the place must be impregnable, and could
only be starved out. For this there is not time. In addition to
the great protecting forts, the town is encircled by ramparts, and
completely surrounded by wide channels of water. Powerful
forts cover the Scheldt, which is also called the Escaut, until
it reaches the Dutch frontier. (For further particulars about
Belgian fortresses and the strengths of contending armies, see
Stead’s War Book, No. i.)
Is Antwerp the Greatest Sea Fort in the Whole World?
New York handled a couple hundred thousand more tons last
year, but for a long time Antwerp has been first. The recent
immense growth in tonnage of the transatlantic liners has given
New York her premier position
Entered. Cleared.
New York .. 13,763,765 13,549,138
Antwerp.. .. 13,233,677 13,272,665
Hamburg .. 11,830,949 11,945,239
Hong Kong .. 11,138,527 11,142,117
Rotterdam .. 10,624,499 10,609,814
London .. .. 10,800,716 8,748,008
Montevideo.. 8,244,375 8,121,543
The figures are interesting:
Entered. Cleared.
Marseilles .. 8,051,321 8,198.874
Singapore 7,737,785 7,717,691
Cardiff .. .. 6,236,944 9,168,115
Liverpool .. 7,253,016 7,446,873
Colombo .... 7,074,152 7,073,170
Bio de Janeiro 5,212,713 5,198,784
Shanghai .. 4,183,528 4,155,152
(Full particulars of our exports to and imports from Belgium
and other countries will be found in Stead’s War Book, No. i.)
How do Sidney and Melbourne Compare with these?
The total shipping entered and cleared to and from Sydney
was 6,136,332 tons; to and from Melbourne 4,859,545, as
against Antwerp’s total of 26,506,342.
How Big is Belgium?
11,373 square miles. Not half the size of Tasmania. Hol-
land is 12,628 square miles; Germany is 208,780 square miles,
two-thirds the size of New South Wales. Prussia is far the
largest and most important of the States composing the German
Empire; it is 134,616 square miles, and has a population of
over 40,000,000. The next largest is Bavaria, 29,000 square
miles, and 7,000,000 inhabitants. France is almost exactly the
same size as Germany, viz., 207,054. If she regains Alsace-Lor-
raine she will be larger than the Empire by 9000 square miles.
What Are the Distances in the European Battleground?
The total length of the German frontier from Holland to
Switzerland is only 250 miles. That is to say, as far as Mel-
bourne is from the South Australia border, or Sydney is from
Albury. The distance from Liege to Brussels is 55 miles, not
so far as from Melbourne to the Heads. The comparative
smallness of the area involved is shown by the following dis-
tances : —■
Miles.
Dover-Brussels 14°
Brussels-Cologme ... ... 115
Paris-Belgian Frontier... 115
Paris-German Frontier... 170
Dover-Calais 21
London-Wilhelmshafen 400
Strassburg--French Frontier 30
Berlin-Warsaw 330
Miles.
Berlin-St. Petersburg ... 1150
Berlin-Paris 550
Berlin-Munich 315
Munich-Paris 430
Munich-St. Petersburg - ... 1300
Munich-Venice 190
Munich-Vienna 230
Vienna-Belgrade 310
3


Horn? Are the Ships of the Various Powers Distributed in the
Pacific?
Last year the Great Powers had the following ships there:
Great Britain. Germany. France
Armoured Cruisers Minotaur Gneisnau Montcalm
Hampshire Scharnhorst Dupleix
Kleber
Light Cruisers
Yarmouth Leipzig
Newcastle Emden
Nurnberg
In addition, Great Britain has destroyers and submarines, five
protected cruisers in the East Indies, and odd gunboats in
China and on the Canadian coast. Holland has four small
cruisers and six destroyers, and two submarines, besides other
spiall vessels in the East Indies. The Australian Navy con-
sists of one battle-cruiser, four light cruisers, two submarines
and destroyers. New Zealand has three small cruisers. The
two German armoured cruisers are 11,420 tons, 23 knots, 4 to
6 in. armour belt, and 2 in. deck. They are armed with eight
8.2 in. guns and six 5.9 in., and twenty 3.4 in., and fourteen
smaller guns. The Minotaur, the largest British cruiser, is
14,600 tons, 23 knots, 6 in. armour belt, and has four 9.2 in.
guns, ten 7.5 in., twenty-two smaller guns, and eight machine
guns. The Hampshire is smaller, and is armed with 7.5 and
6 in. guns only. She is a 23-knotter also. The German light
cruisers are speedy boats of the type of the Amphion, sunk in
the North Sea. The French armoured cruisers are 8000-ton
boats, their main armament being 6.4 in. guns. There is a
Russian Squadron based at Vladivostock, but it is not a power-
ful one.
What about the Japanese and American Fleets?
The Americans keep only a few ships on their West Coast,
but since the completion of the Panama Canal their entire fleet
can speedily enter the Pacific. They have 31 battleships (twelve
being Dreadnoughts), 15 armoured cruisers, 14 protected
cruisers, 45 destroyers, and 35 submarines. The Japanese have
15 battleships (four Dreadnoughts), 5 battle-cruisers, 9 armoured
cruisers, t 6 protected criusers, 60 destroyers, and 13 subma-
rines. (Full particulars of the Fleets of the European Powers
are given in Stead’s War Book, No. 1.)
What is the Difference Between a Battleship, Battle Cruiser,
Armoured Cruiser, Protected Cruiser, and Unprotected
Cruiser?
A battleship is specially designed to give and take the hard
knocks in a fleet action. The Orion, one of the latest Super-
dreadnoughts, has a twelve-inch steel belt, and ten 13.5-inch
guns. Her speed is 23 knots, her tonnage 22,500, and she cost
to build. A battle-cruiser combines the swiftness
of a cruiser with the armament and protection of a Dreadnought.
The Lion, the latest of this type, is 26,350 tons, has a speed of
34.7 knots, carries eight great 13.5 inch guns, and has an
armour belt 9! inches thick; she cost no less than 100,000
to build. H.M.A.S. Australia is of this type, but much


smaller, 18,000 tons, 25 knots, and eight 12-inch guns. An ar
moured cruiser is a vessel of high speed, with vertical and exter-
nal armour. The latest of these are 14,600 tons, 23 knots, have
an armour belt six inches thick and an armoured deck one inch
thick; they are armed with four 9.2 in. guns, ten 7.5 in., 16
3-in., and machine guns. A protected cruiser has no armour
exceptiong to protect the guns, but has an armoured deck. The
iMelbourne and Sydney' are of this type, 544° tons, 25 knots,
nine 6-in guns, four three-pounders, and four machine guns.
The Encounter is 400 tons heavier, but can only do 21 knots.
She is, however, more heavily armed.
How Many Rounds Gan a Great Gun Firs Before ¥/easirsg Out?
Twelve inch guns, and those of still larger size, can fire ninety
full charges only. After that they are sent to the foundry,
where they have a new core inserted, and can fire a further
ninety rounds. By the time a gun has fired 180 rounds (in time
of peace), it is practically obsolete. Only eight full charges are
fired per annum, for practice half charges only are used. These
only wear out the gun one eighth as much as does a full charge,
or even less.
What WeigSit Projectile do Big Guns Fire?
Twelve-inch guns fire projectiles weighing about 850 lbs.,
fifteen-inch guns up to 2000 lbs., and the great 16.25 g uns & re
a missile weighing just about a ton !
is it Costly to Fire these Huge Guns?
The Iron Duke has ten 13.5 inch guns, and sixteen six-inch
guns. With all the guns in action she uses up powder and
shot to the value of a minute. The weight of her
broadside is 14,000 lbs., or more than six tons.
What Is the Penetrating Power of a Twelve-inch Gun?
It will send a projectile through three feet of wrought iron
at 5000 yards. The latest German i5-inch gun will perforate
42.5 inches of steel at its muzzle.
Will the Armour of Modern Dreadnoughts Protect Them?
All modern ships are perforable inside 8000 yards by 12-inch
armour piercing shell. This means that projectiles from the
Australia's great guns would smash through the heaviest armour
at present used, at a distance of four and a-half miles.
What Is Meant by Caliber?
The term in which the size of a gun is expressed. It is the
length of the gun divided by the diameter of the bore. Thus
a twelve-inch gun of 40 caliber is 40 feet long, a fifteen-inch
gun of 40 caliber is 50 feet long. British guns larger than 12
inches are usually of 45 caliber; many of those smaller are of
50 caliber.
What is a Gun-layer?
A man who trains and fires the gun. An annual practice,
called a gun layers’ test, is carried out on every ship to test the
efficiency of the individual gun-layers.


is a Knot She Same as a Mile?
No; it is 800 feet more; that is to say, six knots are about
seven miles, so that a 36-knot boat actually covers 42 miles in
an hour.
What is the Relative Rank ©f the Officers in the Nayy and Army?
Admirals of the Fleet rank with Field-Marshals; Admirals
with Generals; Vice-Admirals with Lieut.-Generals; Rear-
Admirals with Major-Generals; Commodores with Brigadier-
Generals; Captains with Colonels; Commanders with Lieut.-
Colonels; Lieutenants (eight years) with Majors; Lieutenants
(under eight years) with Captains; Sub-Lieutenants with Lieu-
tenants; Chief Gunners with Second Lieutenants. The Navy is,
of course, the senior service, and always takes precedence of
the Army.
Can Dreadnoughts Enter the Baltic?
As set forth in Stead’s War Book, No. 1, the British Dread-
noughts have too great a draught to manoeuvre there, as the sea
is very shallow. By keeping to the narrow channels our Dread-
noughts could reach St. Petersburg, but with the buoys re-
moved the Baltic would be a terribly dangerous place to enter,
let alone fight Dreadnoughts in.
How Long is the Kiel Canal?
Sixty-one miles, a few miles longer than that of Panama.
The Suez Canal is almost 100 miles long, and cost
to build. The shares the British Government purchased in 1875
for are now worth about The Suez
Canal was declared neutral in 1887, and can be used by war-
ships of any belligerent. The Panama Canal, fifty miles long,
cost
What was the Cost of the Resent Reconstruction off the Kiel
Canal?
The proper name of the canal is the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal.
Its original cost was 800,000. The reconstruction cost
1,000,000. It was 29J feet deep, but has now been deepened
and widened so that it can take the greatest Dreadnought afloat.
The sluices at the Baltic end are 1072 feet long, and 146 feet
wide, and are the largest in the world.
What Battleships has Greece?
During the last war, her armoured cruiser Giorgio Averoff,
the gift of the patriotic millionaire of that name, enabled her
to control the Aegean; 9956 tons, she has four 9.2 in. guns,
eight 7.5, and twenty-four quick-firers. Greece has just pur-
chased two six-year-old battleships from the United States—the
Idaho and Mississippi, of 14,000 tons, four 12-in. guns, eight
8-in., eight 7-in., and forty quick-firers.
How was it Possible for Great Britain, a Belligerent Power, to
Obtain Warships from Turkey, a Centra!?
Ships building in British shipyards are liable to purchase
by the Admiralty, there being a provision in the agreement to
that effect. Article 6of the neutrality in Naval War Conven-
tion states definitely that “ the supply on any ground whatever


either directly or indirectly by a neutral power to a belligerent
power of ships of war or munitions of war of any kind is for-
bidden.”
What Ships has Great Britain Actually Purchased?
Presumably the Dreadnought Rio de Janeiro , which Turkey
purchased from Brazil quite recently, and the Reshad-i-Hamiss.
Both these battleships are ready for service, or could quickly
be made so. The former is one of the most powerful ships
afloat; the latter smaller, 23,000- tons, with fewer guns, al-
though her biggest are larger than those of the Rio de Janeiro,
which has sixteen 12-inch.
Are there Other Battleships Building in England for Foreign
Powers?
Two huge Chilian Dreadnoughts are building at Newcastle.
One is to be ready this December, the other next March. A
protected cruiser is building for Siam, destroyers for Brazil and
Chili. Germany is building several submarines for the smaller
powers, which she will no doubt purchase for her own use;
she is also building a few destroyers.
What is the Use ©f Censoring News Here so Far from the Scene
of Operations?
The answer to that is “ wireless.” Before Marconi perfected
telegraphing without wires, the authorities could control every
avenue of communication between Australia and the rest of the
world. To-day it is quite possible for news to be sent from
here by a wireless plant erected far from village or city.
Wireless messages between ships could be picked up, and the
news transmitted to Germany by wireless.
How then Are the Naval instructions Not Picked up by the
Enemy?
They are of course all sent in code. If this is discovered they
can be read and the information used.
Are there German Wireless Stations Near Here?
There is a powerful one on one of the Caroline Islands. An-
other was to have been erected on Samoa, but the place was
found unsuitable, and the whole apparatus was, therefore, trans-
ferred to German New Guinea. But there also it was found
impossible to erect it.
What possessions Has Germany in the Pacific?
She has German New Guinea, which consists of Kaiser Wil-
helm Land, 70,000 square miles, situated on the Island of New
Guinea, immediately north of Papua; the Bismarck Archipe-
lago, including Neu Pommern (the headquarters of the Gover-
nor), the Caroline Islands, the Pelew Islands, the Marianne
Islands, the Solomon Islands, the Marshall Isands. Some
acquired in 1885, others purchased from Spain in 1899. The
native population is some 360,000; there are 1240 whites, of
whom 790 are German. In Samoa Germany has two islands
ceded her by Britain as compensation, it is generally understood
for the Kaiser’s refusal to join France and Russia in an anti-
British league during the Boer war. These islands, Savaii and


Upolu, have an area of 1000 square miles; 37,000 natives
live there, and 470 whites (270 Germans). Kia-Chau in
China was seized by the Germans in 1897, but was leased from
China for 99 years in 1899, about the time that Britain leased
Wei-hai-wei on the same peninsula. Its area is about 200
square miles; 33,000 Chinese live there, and 1848 Germans, in-
cluding the garrison of marines. It has a fine harbour.
What ©ther Possessions has Germany?
Togo, in Upper Guinea, between the British Gold Coast on
the west and the French Dahomy on the east. It is 33,700
square miles, and 300 Germans live there. The Cameroons,
between British Nigeria and French Congo, area 191,130
square miles; 1130 Germans live there. German South-West
Africa lies between Portuguese West Africa and Cape Colony.
Area, 322,450 square miles; 12,135 Germans live there. Ger-
man East Africa, 384,180 square miles, lies between British
East Africa and Portuguese East Africa; has a population of
7,500,000 native and 3580 Germans. All the German colonial
possessions together have a total area of 1,000,000 square miles,
and a population of 14,000,000. Of the whites, some 25,000
in all, 20,750 are Germans. This does not include the military
forces, which number about 4500 Germans and 3825 natives.
Are these Colorsles a Good Investment?
They will no doubt be in time. At present they cost Germany
in administration and special grants about annually.
Many Germans regard German colonial expansion in these
tropical lands as mere waste of money. It is actually costing
about each per annum for every German living in these
colonies.
What Happens to the Mails on a Captured Mali Boat?
The postal correspondence of neutrals or belligerants, what
ever its official or private character may be, found on the high
seas on board neutral or enemy ships, is inviolable. If the ship
is detained, the correspondence is forwarded by the captor with
the least possible delay. This does not, however, apply to
blockade runners taking mail from or to a blockaded port.
What is Meant by Continuous Voyage?
If the ultimate destination of the goods, though shipped to
a neutral port, is enemy’s territory, this is regarded as a con-
tinuous voyage, and the goods may be treated as if shipped
direct to the enemy’s territory.
Who is to Determine Whether Supplies Are for a Neuiira! or
Actually for the Enemy?
The Prize Court. The Institute of International law states
that “ Destination to the enemy is presumed when the shipment
is to a neutral port if it is unquestionably proved by the facts
that the neutral port was only a stage en route to the enemy.”
The same statement is made in the Declaration of London. In
actual practice, of course, warships will arrest vessels on sus-
picion and leave the Prize Court to settle things afterwards.


Has a Case of Arrest of Goods on the Ground of Continuous
Voyage Ewer Been Made?
There has been only one case recorded when a Prize Court
condemned a vessel on this ground. It was during the wai
between Italy and Abyssinia. A Dutch ship was seized, al-
though bound for a French colonial port, as she had on board
rifles which had long gone out of use in Europe, and which were
clearly destined for King Menelik of Abyssinia.
Can Foodstuffs Consigned to neutrals be Taken by the Warships
of Fighting Powers?
Certainly not, unless it can be proved that these supplies are
really destined for a belligerent, and are merely passing through
the neutral country. Holland in this war is certain to have
great trouble over this. She could become a conduit pipe for
supplying Germany, and the Allied Powers will insist that she
prevents this, however difficult it may be.
What Is a Prize Court?
It is a Court appointed by the King as Admiral of the Fleet,
in the Dominions by the Governors as Vice-Admirals, “ to take
cognisance of and judicially proceed upon all manner of cap-
tures, recaptures, prizes, vessels and goods and all other matters
of prize falling within its jurisdiction.” The judges appointed
are always those of high standing, and they usually have Admir-
alty experience.
Are the Decisions of the Prize Court Final?
Great Britain allows appeals from her national prize courts
to the Privy Council. The signatories to the London Declara-
tion —(see Stead’s War Book, No. i) —allow appeal to an inter-
national Prize Court established by the last Hague Conference.
This International Court is composed of fifteen members. The
eight Great Powers (including Japan) appoint one member each,
the remaining seven are appointed by the smaller Powers.
What Happens Ultimately to the German Merchantmen that Eng-
land lias Captured?
That is decided by the prize courts. There is a general un-
derstanding that those vessels captured in port on the declara-
tion of war and those taken at sea, who were not aware that a
state of war existed, are merely detained, not condemned. At
the end of the war they are returned to their owners. It de-
pends, however, upon the treatment accorded by the enemy to
our ships in similar cases.
To Whom do the Prizes Belong?
Those captured during war time belong to the nation that
captured them. The general custom has been for the crew of
the vessel which captures a ship to receive a share of the prize
money, but that, too, is a matter for the Prize Court.
Do the Ships Taken Here Belong to Australia or Great Britain?
It is generally understood that they belong to Great Britain,
but a case of a Dominion which captures ships with its own
fleet has never been known before. It is a matter wihch will no
doubt be decided without reference to the Prize Court. Here


would seem to be a chance to start a State-owned line of steam-
ships on the cheap !
What Happens to the Crew of a Captured Ship?
Under a special convention, to which both Great Britain
and Germany are parties, they are liberated on parole. Their
names are sent to their Government through the proper channel,
and when they reach their native land they will not be employed
in the war. Neutral sailors found on an enemy ship are libe-
rated, but must fend for themselves.
is the Owner of a Neutral Ship Compensated for Delay if
Captured?
If his ship is found by the Prize Court not to be “a good
prize,” he would receive compensation. If, however, contra-
band is found on board, it is confiscated, but the vessel goes
free, unless the contraband exceeds half the entire cargo. If
it does, his ship can be condemned, and, of course, he would
get no compensation at all.
If a neutral Supplies War Materia! ®r other Contraband to
Belligerent is His State Held Responsible?
Certainly not. Individuals may do what they like, but at
their own risk. They cannot claim the protection of their
country if caught breaking international laws.
Might a German Furshass Rifles, Let Us Say, in Sweden Without
Let or Hindrance?
The laws of neutrality permit this to be done without any
interference on the part of the Swedish Government. French
agents bought revolvers, etc., in Great Britain during the
Franco-German war, and the British Government answered the
German protests with the statement that no purely mercantile
transactions could be considered a violation of neutrality.
What is the Fate of a Non-Combatant Who is Found with Arms
in His Hands?
The rules of war allow of his being shot without mercy. His
positon is a little better now than it was before the Hague Con-
ference of 1907. It was agreed there that if he carries arms
openly and respects the laws and customs of war, he must be
regarded as a belligerent. He must, however, wear some sort
of a uniform or a badge, which can be recognised at a distance,
and which cannot be removed at will. This was urged by Eng-
land and France, who desired to legalise the position of volun-
teers and irregulars, who previously were only entitled to be
regarded as belligerents by the courtesy of their foe.
But if a Civilian, to Defend his Home or His Wife’s Honour
takes up a Rifle, would he be Shot if Captured?
Certainly he would.
But is that Not Murder?
War, says General Sherman, is hell. But the shooting of
civilians who resort to arms is absolutely necessary for the pro-
tection of all non-combatants. If a civilian who fought were
treated as a soldier no troops would venture to enter a village


or town until they had killed or driven out everyone in it.
The troops alone must carry on war; the rest of the nation must
remain at peace.
Who were the Franc-Tlreurs?
They were irregular bands of Frenchmen who waged a
guerilla warfare against the German invaders in 1871. The
Germans did not recognise them as belligerents unless they wore
a uniform. When caught without they were summarily shot.
The shooting of non-combatants who have taken up arms gives
rise to the wildest stories of cold-blooded murder in all wars,
but it is a very necessary provision to protect, in the long run,
all the civilian population of an invaded country. War is hell !
What Is a Spy?
A spy is officially described as one who, “ acting clandes-
tinely, obtains or seeks to obtain, information in the of
operations of a belligerent with the intention of communicating
it to the hostile party.” This means that a soldier, not in dis-
guise, who penetrates into the zone of the operations of the
hostile army for information is not a spy so long as he is in his
uniform. If he has not got it on he is so regarded. Civilians
are of course regarded as spies if found seeking or carrying in-
formation. Thus a boy or a woman who gives information
about the movements of hostile troops is a spy, and may be
treated as such.
What is a Spy’s Fate?
He must first be tried by a court-martial —a very rapid affair
usually. If found guilty he or she is probably shot at once.
Are the Rules of War Likely to be Respected?
Little confidence should be placed in the faithful carrying
out of the regulations in a very fierce struggle, but there are
certain fundamental principles which are always respected.
Public opinion serves as a restraint upon the commission of
atrocities amongst civilised peoples. When public opinion can-
not be felt, even the most civilised troops relapse into a state
of barbarism. That was shown during the Chinese expedition
at the time of the Boxer rising, when atrocities were committed,
by the international troops, which appalled British corre-
spondents and officers. We know now that the fearful charges
of atrocities made against the Balkan soldiers were only too
true. Fortunately, in the western theatre of war all the nations
engaged will in the main respect the rules of war.
Does the 162,000 Mentioned in Stead’s War Book Mo. 1 as the
Professional Army of Creat Britain include the Troops in
India?
No; the British soldiers in India number 77,300 which
brings the total establishment up to 244,000.
How Are the British Forces Distributed at Normal Times?
127,400 in the United Kingdom; 77,300 in India; 12,500
in Ceylon and China; 11,850 in South Africa; 6500 in Egypt
and Cyprus ) 7500 in Malta; 4120 in Gibraltar; and 66 00


variously scattered en route to stations and in the Crown
Colonies.
What Troops has Great Britain In India?
Besides the British regiments, there are 162,000 native troops,
28,500 military police, 96,400 volunteers, reserves, etc.
What Are the Territorials?
The “ Terriers,” as they are called, took the place of the
old Volunteers. Members of this force must enlist for three
years, and during that time are liable to be called upon for
active service at home. Like our citizen army, they may only be
sent abroad if they volunteer.
Are the “Terriers” Well Trained?
They are probably better trained than our citizen forces, be-
cause not only have they more compulsory drills, but, unlike our
men, the majority of them put in fifteen days instead of eight
in camp. In addition they have the advantage ofi army ser-
geants and other retired military men to drill them. They have,
too, the immense advantage of carrying out manoeuvres in con-
junction with regular troops.
How Many of Them Are There?
In April, 1913, there were 263,000. That is 50,000 less than
establishment. Recruiting was, however, brisk during 1913,
and this deficiency was considerably reduced.
Are the “ Terriers” Fit for War?
Many critics, who object to the force because it is raised on
a voluntary instead of a compulsory basis, state that it could not
be used at all for six months. Sir lan Hamilton, comparing
them with our citizen soldiers, states that they could be efficient
in far less time than that.
What then is Groat Britain’s Total Effective Force?
596,000, made up as follows:—Regiments in United King-
dom, 127,400; Army reserves, 142,000; special reserves,
61,000; Territorials, 263,0003 and 3000 more or less unat-
tached. If, however, the British troops in India and oversea
be included, and also the Indian army, Great Britain has a total
strength of just under a million men. (For totals of armies of
Great Powers, see Stead’s War Book, No. 1.)
Wiiat Forces were Engaged m the Balkan War, and what were
the Losses?
The exact numbers are not known. The Allies took the field
with 655,000 men, the Turks with 368,000, but far more men
were engaged as the war went on. The total loss in the two
Wars is estimated at 348,000 killed and wounded; the cost was
How Many Mars were Engaged at the Great Battle off Waterloo?
It occurred on June 16, 1815, between Napoleon, with 72,000
men (246 guns), and Wellington, with 67,700 allies (156 guns).
Later Bliicher, with 50,000 Prussians (104 guns), arrived. The
British, who only numbered 24,000, lost 2000 killed and 5000
wounded. The Allies lost altogether, including these, 4200


killed, 14,500 wounded, and 4230 missing. The French loss
was over 40,000 in killed, wounded and prisoners, but accurate
details have never been obtained.
What Weapons did the Soldiers Use During Recent Wars?
At Waterloo the British used the old Brown Bess flint fire-
lock; at the Crimea they had the same gun converted to use
caps. Mauser rifles are now most generally used; in fact, the
French Army is the only one which has stuck to the far less
convenient tube magazine. The French Lebel magazine rifle is
an excellent weapon, but the mechanism is more liable to get out
of order than that of the more simple Mauser. The Mann-
licher rifle is used by the Austrians, the Italians, the Greeks, the
Bulgarians and the Dutch. The Mauser is used by the Ger-
mans, the Belgians, the Spanish, the Portuguese and the Turks.
The British Lee-Enfield, the Russians the Nagant, the
Americans the Winchester, the original repeating rifle.
When was a Breechloading Rifle used for the First Time in War?
In the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, the Prussians using
what was called a Zundnadel Gewehr. They used the same gun
in the Franco-German War of 1870-71, but the French had a
better weapon, the chasse-pot. The German artillery w T as, how-
ever, better than the French, but the latter had the Mittraileuse,
the forerunner of all quick-firing guns of the Maxim type.
Are Many Weapons Manufactured at Liege?
There are nearly 200 factories of arms there. Some 40,000
of the inhabitants are engaged in the work. As, however, they
all work at their own homes on piecework, the Germans will not
get any benefit from the factories unless the workmen agree to
carry on their trade.
What is it Reckoned the Present War is Costing?
Various estimates have been made. It is reckoned roughly
that it costs at least 6s. a day per man, apart altogether from war
material. There will be probably some 5,000,000 soldiers under
arms, not to mention neutrals, who have to prepare for even-
tualities. Probably keep alone would amount to £2,000,000
per day. If we take into account the immense expenditure of
ammunition, the inevitable destruction of property, and the loss
due to the standstill of business, it would be difficult to keep
the figure below per day. If that figure be
accurate the war will already have cost over If it
lasts the eighteen months anticipated by Lord Kitchener, the
total cost would be not less than a total equal
to the whole amount of Europe’s old war debts. These colossal
figures indicate that the war must come to an end soon, other-
wise Europe will be bankrupt, and totally ruined.
What is the Gravest Defect of the Germany Army?
Its rigidity. The soldiers have been taught to do everything
by rule, every emergency has been provided for with absolute
precision, but when an unforeseen one comes along the German
soldier is lost. Initiative, the great necessity in modern war,
has been stamped out of him by the methods of the unteroffizier.


Another weakness is that this unteroffizier is the backbone of the
cast-iron army. He is the connecting link between officers and
men. The former hardly know the latter at all. Therein they
differ greatly from the French, who have probably been through
the mill, and lived at the same barracks as those they command.
The Germans showed that they could not adapt themselves to
new conditions when they struggled for years to defeat the Her-
reros in German West Africa. It was only when these natives
were driven across the border and were rounded up by the Cape
Mounted Police that the war ended.
WHS Germany Starve?
That was answered fully in Stead’s War Book, No- i. There
is one thing not mentioned there, however. It has long been
the custom both in Germany and Austria to carry large stocks
of the bread on which the soldiers live when at war or on
manoeuvres. This bread contains a good deal of meat, and its
composition is a secret. It is not ready to be eaten for three
or four months after being made, and it will keep for many
months afterwards. Huge storehouses have been erected to keep
this bread in, and it is probable that there is enough of it for
the army for a year or more. Stocks for nine months or so are
generally understood to be carried, but, during the wild alarums
which convulsed Europe over the Balkan crises, it is pretty
certain that large supplies would have been laid in for possible
contingencies.
Was ASsace Lorraine Always French Until 1871?
No; the Germans used to own the provinces at one time, and,
in fact, looked on them before 1871 pretty much as the Prench
have since. Louis XIV. was at peace with the German states in
1681, but he suddenly embarked on what is known as the
Robber War (Raubkrieg), and annexed the two provinces to
France. The names of the towns indicate that the Germans
originally settled Strassburg, Metz, etc. The French annexa-
tion took place so long ago, however, that the provinces became
entirely French, and the people took on the language, customs
and habits of the French —became French, in fact.
Have Ail the Railways in Europe the Same Gauge?
All have the standard 4 ft. 8J inches gauge except Russia.
There the gauge is no less than 5 ft. 6 inches (three inches
wider than the Victorian). There are very few railways run-
ning to the Russo-German frontier, which makes a rapid con-
centration of Russian troops there impossible. Once they cross
the frontier the Russian rolling stock is useless to assist the
invaders.
H®w wii! the War Affect Australia?
In many ways little thought of as yet. For instance, there
will be a great shortage of dolls for the Christmas season.
Paper will be very scarce, as no supplies can come from Ger-
many. We will soon begin to miss many things we have become
accustomed to, and of course many large importing firms will be
shrewdly hit. These, though, are small matters compared to


the serious position some of the States will soon be in. Certain
States have been indulging in a carnival of borrowing. _ They
have spent borrowed money lavishly; they plan to continue so
doing. They will find it impossible now to get a cent from
England. What are they going to do? Small loans may be
raised in this country, but the large loans wanted will not be
forthcoming. This means terrible distress before long.
What Relation is the Emperor ©f Germany to King George?
He is his cousin. His mother was the eldest daughter of
Queen Victoria, and sister of Edward VII. He is, in
much English as King George, whose mother was a Danish
Princess.
How Are Other Rulers of Europe Related?
King George is first cousin of the Tsar and also of the
Tsarina. He is nephew of the King of Denmark, brother of
the Queen of Norway, first cousin of the Queen of Spain, of
the King of Greece, of the Duke of Brunswick (who married
the Kaiser’s daughter last year), of the Duke of Coburg, and is
related to many other reigning princes of Germany, now in the
field. The King of Italy and the King of Servia both married
daughters of the King of Montenegro, other daughters of that
monarch marrying German and Russian princes. F erdinand
of Bulgaria is a nephew of Prince Albert, King George’s grand-
father. King Albert of Belgium is closely related to the Hohen-
zollerns, and Saxe-Coburgs, and the Bavarian Royal Plouse.
The Queen of Holland is a Princess of Nassau, and married
Prince Henry of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, whose niece married
the Crown Prince of Germany. Her sister married the Crown
Prince of Denmark. The King of Sweden is a grandson of
Napoleon’s Marshal, Bernadette, and married the daughter of
the Grand Duke of Baden. The Emperor of Austria is the
head of the House of Plapsburg, with relatives in every Court
in Europe. The King of Spain belongs to that House.
What Revenue do She Sovereigns Receive from the State Apart
from their Private Incomes?
Each has a civil list, out of which they have to pay for their
various establishments, and make allowances to sons, daughters
and other members of their families. Most of them have large
private revenues from land, acquired by their ancestors by mar-
riage and confiscation. The Tsar of Russia gets the immense
revenue from the Crown lands. The Emperor of Austria is
probably the wealthiest ruler in Europe. King George has also
a very large private income. The civil lists are as follows: —-
German Emperor, £770,000.
Tsar of Russia, ,£1,600,000.
King George, ,£616,000.
Emperor of Austria, £942,000.
King of Italy, £600,000.
King of Denmark, £55,000.
King of Sweden, £78,250.
King of Roumania, £47,400.
Tsar of Bulgaria, £BO,OOO.
King of Belgium, £132,000.
King of Greece, £BO,OOO.
King of Norway, £38,900.
Queen of Holland, £BO,OOO.
King of Servia, £48,000.


How Are the Various Honours a Man has had Gwen Him Shown
after His Name?
A few of the most usual are abbreviated as follows: — O.M.
signifies Order of Merit, and is the only honour conferred with-
out the recipient’s consent having first been obtained; K.G.,
Knight of the Garter; K.T., Knight of the Thistle; K.P.,
Knight of St. Patrick; K.C.8., Knight Commander of the
Bath; G.C.8., Knight Grand Cross of the Bath; C. 8., Com-
panion of the Bath; K.C.5.1., Knight Grand Commander of
the Star of India; C. 5.1., Companion of the Star of India;
G.C.M.G., and K.C.M.G., Knight Grand Cross and
Knight Commander respectively of St. Michael and St.
George; C.M.G., Companion of that Order; G.C.1.E., and
K.C.1.E., Knight Grand Cross and Knight Commander of the
Indian Empire; C.Y.0., Commander of the Victorian Order;
D. 5.0., Distinguished Service Order. The above are set out
in order of precedence. Other letters used are:— P.C., Privy
Councillor; V.C., Victoria Cross; L.H., Legion of Honour.
What is the Chief Value of the Aeroplane an War?
As a scout only. They are not sufficiently developed to be
more than the eyes of the army. By enabling the commander
to know just where his foes are they have entirely revolutionised
modern war. In the Franc-German War the Germans were
quite ignorant of the whereabouts of the French forces in all
the first engagements. They won by hastening to the “ cannon
thunder” regardless of tactics, and because they hastened so
speedily they got there first and. won the battle. That sort of
thing would not happen now; the aeroplane has prevented it.
In compiling- these booklets, I have to acknowledge the help I
have received from the Statesman’s Year Book, Hazell’s Annual,
the Encyclopaedia Britannica, the Navy League Annual, Haydn’s
Dictionary of Dates, the Modern Encyclopaedia, Dod’s Peerage,
the Commonwealth Year Book, the German Year Book, Baedeker,
the Courier de la Conference, the Review of Reviews, Whitaker’s
Almanack, the Story of the Nations, Nelson’s Encyclopaedic
Library and Harbottle’s Dictionary of Battles. —H.S.
Review of Reviews, Swanston Street, Melbourne.




THE AUGUST
Review of Reviews
Containing Mr, Stead’s article on the war,
WAS COMPLETELY SOLD OUT!
Order the September number NOW I
It will be different from all other magazines
and weeklies, for it will contain special articles
and information you will find nowhere else. It
will tell briefly and lucidly just what you want
to know about previous great wars. It will in-
dicate how the Germans must regard the situa-
tion, as well as discuss it from the British point
of view. It will deal with European politics, with
inside knowledge.
Special maps of Europe 50, 100, 200 and 300
years ago, and maps showing possible future
arrangement of the States will be a strong fea-
ture.
An absorbingly interesting illustrated article
on Red Cross work compares present-day
methods with those Florence Nightingale had to
employ.
All the usual interesting features will be given
a’s well.
Price 6d. All Newsagents. 6|d. post free.
Prom T. €\ fl. Building, Melbourne (Annual Subscription, 65.)
ORDER NOW, OR YOU WILL BE TOO LATE 1
Ready in a Few Days.
