

WAR
CENSUS
Handbook
for
Public Guidance
in
Filling up
War Census
Cards
Compiled from information issued by
BUREAU OF CENSUS AND STATISTICS
MELVILLE & MULLEN Pty. Ltd.
262-264 COLLINS STREET, MELBOU^Ng,-




WAR
CENSUS
Handbook
for
Public Guidance
in
Filling up
War Census
Cards
Compiled from information issued by
BUREAU OF CENSUS AND STATISTICS
MELVILLE & MULLEN PTY. LTD.
262-264 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE


Complete Cards must be posted
to the COMMONWEALTH STA-
TISTICIAN as early as possible
and not later than 15th Sep-
tember, 1915.
No Postage is required


FOREWORD
This handbook is issued in the hope that it will give the
necessary information required for the proper completion of
the returns required under the Commonwealth War Census
Act.
The several notices in large type are reprinted from posters
which have been, or are to be, sent out for display in public
places, but as many will not have the opportunity of reading
them they are included here so that all may read them at
leisure.
SPECIMEN FORMS showing the Personal Card and the
Wealth and Income Tax Card are shown in fac-simile to
facilitate reference.
Directions are given in detail to each question in the same
numerical order in which they appear in the separate cards.
The instructions are those issued in response to queries which
have been answered and published by the Commonwealth
Statistician.
All instructions and information is reproduced from pub-
lications issued from the War Census Office, and may be taken
as correct.


The Attorney-General's Appeal
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
WAR CENSUS.
Attorney-General’s Department,
Melbourne, 12th August, 1915.
Dear Sir,
The War Census Act having been passed and the Schedules
thereto approved, the proclamation fixing the date for taking
the Census will shortly be issued.
The matter is one of supreme national importance. The
gravity of the present crisis needs no emphasis. It calls for
the utmost effort of which each individual citizen is capable;
the utilisation of every resource at the disposal of the com-
munity. And this cannot be done without organisation. It is
now, unhappily, only too probable that this dreadful war will
continue for at least another year. It may be for much longer.
What the future has in store for us all no man can say. But
two things are certain—one, that we must continue to fight
with every ounce of energy we possess; the other, that we can
do this only by a complete organisation of all our resources.
By no other means can we continue this life-and-death
struggle. For this war has at one stroke enormously increased
our expenditure and deprived us of that financial assistance
from oversea loans upon which Australia has hitherto largely
depended. The problem we must solve then is to finance the
war; to keep the wheels of industry moving whether in old
or new channels; to produce more wealth than ever we have
done; and yet to permit a sufficient number of volunteers for
the front to leave the country. There is clearly only one solu-
tion. Every pair of hands must be occupied; every resource
must be developed; every citizen must give to the country in


labour and money to the utmost of his capacity. There must
be no shirking of responsibilities by either wealth or labour.
This involves organisation of men, of land, of material, of
wealth in every form. And the first step in this great scheme
of organisation is to ascertain precisely what our resources are.
It is for this purpose the War Census Act has been passed. It
imposes upon every citizen a duty which in normal times might
have been thought too heavy. But in great emergencies men
do gladly that which in ordinary times they would not do at
all. And it is with the utmost confidence, therefore, that the
Government calls upon the citizens of the Commonwealth to
perform their duties under the Act.
As the necessity for the War Census is most urgent, the
routine adopted for the taking of the ordinary decennial Census
is out of the question. The information required must be made
available without delay, and this can only be done with the
active and enthusiastic co-operation of every citizen. There is
no doubt whatever that the people are ready to help their
country in any and every way in this great crisis, and only
need to be informed how they can best do so. In order to
organise the voluntary assistance which the people are so
keenly desirous of giving, the Government earnestly requests
your aid. It asks that you will give the utmost publicity to
the dates on which the Census is to be taken and purpose for
which the information sought is required. That you will use
your best endeavours to form committees for the purpose of
ensuring that every person required to fill in and transmit a
card shall do so; for instructing citizens how to fill in their
cards; and to supply such other information and do such other
things as may be necessary to ensure accuracy in supplying the
information and expedition in returning the cards to the
Bureau of Census and Statistics, Melbourne.
Yours truly,
W. M. HUGHES,
Attorney-General.


Voluntary Assistance
The Commonwealth Statistician (Mr. G. H. Knibbs) has
received a large number of offers of voluntary assistance in
connection with the War Census, and desires to express on
behalf of the Government his most cordial thanks for these
patriotic offers. In order to utilise to the best advantage the
voluntary assistance which the people are so keenly desirous
of giving, the Government is asking for the co-operation of all
municipal and similar bodies in organising local committees—
(i.) For the purpose of ensuring that every person required
by the Act to fill in and transmit a card shall do so;
(ii.) For instructing citizens how to fill in their cards; and
(iii.) For helping them in every way that will facilitate the
giving of accurate information and the prompt
return of the cards to this Bureau.
It is suggested, therefore, that if such persons who are
offering assistance will very kindly get into communication
with the municipal heads of districts with a view to being
enrolled on one of such committees, or to rendering some
similar service, the punctual and efficient discharge of the duty
of properly filling in the War Census cards would be greatly
facilitated.
The public generally do not yet appear to realise that
practically every person has either to make a return or to
have a return made on his or her behalf. Everybody in receipt
of income or its equivalent, or possessing any property must
appear in the returns.
Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics,
Melbourne, 4th September, 1915.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
WAR CENSUS
IMPORTANT "PUBLIC NOTICE
A PERSONAL CARD must be filled in by every male
aged 18 and under 60.
A WEALTH AND INCOME CARD must be filled in by
every person aged 18 or upwards possessed of property or
holding property on trust, or in reecipt of income, and by the
representatives of companies and associations, unions, clubs,
societies, institutions, religious bodies, absentees, &c., &c.
Where a person has property and income of his own and is also
required to furnish a return as a trustee or as a representative
of a company or association, &c., A SEPARATE CARD must
be supplied by him in each capacity.
Cards and addressed envelopes for transmission ARE
AVAILABLE AT ALL POST OFFICES throughout Australia.
The completed Cards must be posted to the Commonwealth
Statistician as early as possible and
NOT LATER THAN 15th SEPTEMBER, 1915.
except in cases where supply has not reached the local post
office before 6th September, 1915. In such cases, CARDS
MUST BE POSTED NOT MORE THAN 10 DAYS after supply
reaches local post office.
No Postage is Required on the envelope containing war
census cards addressed to the Commonwealth Statistician.
Every person required by the Act to furnish a return or
returns must obtain a card or cards from a post office and must
duly fill in, sign, and post the same to the Commonwealth
Statistician within the time specified above.
Every person filling in a card, must, to the best of his
ability, do so accurately.
Failure to furnish a return, or wilful inaccuracy in any
return, renders the person concerned liable to a Penalty of £5O,
or three months’ imprisonment, or both, if prosecuted sum-
marily, or a Penalty of £5OO, or one year’s imprisonment, or
both, if prosecuted on indictment.
Every person arriving in Australia on or after the 6th
September, who, if he had been resident in Australia before
that date would have been required to furnish a return, must
furnish such return within fourteen days of his arrival in
Australia.
Detailed Instructions for filling in War Census Cards may
be seen at all post offices.


WAR CENSUS.
NOTICE
To all Interned Persons and to
Enemy-Subjects generally.
Every interned person, and every enemy-
subject in the Australian Commonwealth whether
released on parole or otherwise, is required to fill
in the answers to the inquiries on two cards, viz ;
1. A “Personal Card” (Whitish)
2. A “Wealth and Income Card” (Pink)
These returns are to be enclosed in the
proper envelope and are to be handed to the
Commandant of the Internment Camp, or to his
representative, or are to be posted to the Com-
monwealth Statistician, not later than 15th Sep-
tember, 1915.
Any person failing to furnish a card duly
filled in is liable to a maximum penalty Of
£5OO, together with one year’s imprison-
ment.
See Handbill for directions and suggestions
in regard to filling in the cards.
G. H. KNIBBS,
Government Statistician.
Ist September, 1915.


,2snt (Seufus.
'Bdnimtmudiimp an alle
iutcimcrtcn
unb
an aUt anicxn Untcrtfjanen
i>cr fcinMidjcn Stouten,
3cbe intcrnicrte -Perron, unb |cber llntcrtljan set fcinftfidjcn Staotcn
im Stuftral'iCdjcn Sunbe 06 auf fteigcfo(Ten obcr nidjt, r|i oerptKdjtct,
bie auf ben fofgenbcn 3aljlftarten geftcfftcu Jtagcu burdj ftnefuffung
bcs fecrcn -Ranincs ,ju bcanttoortcn, nomfidj:
(1) auf elm perfonfidjen Baljflinrlf
(mcijjlldjro Lanier),
(2) auf etnn unb (Sinfiommenefiarle
(rdtlidjcd Wavier).
Die ousgcfulTten Siartcn |tnb in bem ba,ju bcftiminten slmfdjfoge
etnsnfdjficften, unb entroebcr bent bcs Jntcrntcrungsfagcrs obcr
beflcn StelToertretcr cinjuljoubigen, obcr burdj bie SPofl an ben “(Sommonroeoftl)
Statistician” <ju fcnbcn, unb .jmar aid)! fpcikr afe am 15.
1915.
—— ?
iff is unterlait, fine ddjti§ ausoefiilitE forte einiuffnßcn, dnnn mit
Bis auf £5OO fttcrfiiifl, lufammen mit dncm gapt
lifEmft IUfIM
unb {Srfefarmtflgn pm jlnsfitlTin bcr Karlen
ftnUen |ldj in Ben angfidjlafifiifii febannimodjunaeii.
1. September, 1915 (Sommonmeoftlj Statistician.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
WAR CENSUS
Important Public Notice to
PERSONS ARRIVING IN AUSTRALIA
And to Persons in Australia reaching
the Age of 18 Years
Bv the War Census Act, 1915, A PERSONAL CARD must
hp filled in by every male aged 18 and under 60, and
A WEALTH AND ‘INCOME CARD must be filled in
by every person (male or female) aged 18 or upwards
possessed of property or holding property on trust, or
in receipt of income, and by the representatives of companies
and associations, unions, clubs, societies, institutions, religious
bodies, absentees, &c. Where a person has property or income
of his own and is also required to furnish a return as a trustee
or as a representative of a company or association, &c A
SEPARATE CARD must be supplied by him in each capamty.
Cards and addressed envelopes for transmission MAY Bh,
OBTAINED AT ANY POST OFFICE in Australia.
The completed Cards must be posted to the Commonwealth
Statistician as early as possible and .
Not Later than Fourteen Days after Arrival in the Common-
wealth, or after attaining the Age of 18, as the Case may be.
No Postage is Required on the envelope containing war
census cards addressed to the Commonwealth Statistician.
Every person required by the Act to furnish a return or
returns must obtain a card or cards from a Post Office and must
duly fill in, sign, and post the same to the Commonwealth
Statistician within the time specified above .
Every person filling in a card, must, to the best ot his
ability do so accurately.
Failure to furnish a return, dr wilful inaccuracy m any
return, renders the person concerned liable to a Penalty of £5O,
or three months’ imprisonment, or both, if prosecuted sum-
marily, or a Penalty of £5OO, or one year’s imprisonment, or
both, if prosecuted on indictment. ,
Detailed Instructions for filling in War Census Cards may
be seen at all post &
Commonwealth Statistician,
Ist September, 1915.
Bureau of Census and Statistics,
The “Rialto,” Collins-street, Melbourne.


Specimen Only.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
WAR CENSUS .—lst Schedule.
WRITE CLEARLY. PERSONAL CARD,
To be filled in by all MALES aged 18 and under 60.
1. Name in Full
(Underline Surname.)
2. Full usual Postal Address (including State) —
(If away from usual residence when filling in card the postal
address to be given here is that of your usual residence.)
3. Date of Birth: —Day Month Year
State Age last Birthday years.
4. State whether Married (M), Widower (W), or Single (S)
5. State Number and Relation of Dependant Relatives (if any)
6. State whether your General Health is Good, Bad, or Indifferent
7. If suffering from Blindness, Deafness, or Loss of a Limb, give parti-
culars ...
8. What is your present Occupation?
Ba. State Grade of Occupation
(If employing labour other than domestic, insert E; if work-
ing on own account but not employing labour, insert O; if assist-
ing but not receiving salary or wages, insert A; if in receipt of
salary or wages, insert W; if out of work for more than the week
prior to 30th June, 1915, insert N.)
Bb. If you are an Employee, what is the Occupation of your
Employer?
9. What other Occupation (if any) could you undertake?
10. What Military Training (if any) have you had?.
11. State number and description of firearms, and quantity of ammunition
you possess
12. State Country of Birth of: —
(i.) Yourself
(ii.) Your Father
(iii.) Your Mother
13. If born in a Foreign Country of Foreign Parentage, are you a
Naturalized British Subject?
14. If so, when and where was Naturalization effected?
Date Signature.
C. 10702.


Specimen Only
" " ' COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
WRITE CLEARLY.
WAR CENSUS , —2nd Schedule.
Wealth and Income Card.
To he filled in by all persons aged 18 or upwards possessed of property, or
holding property on trust, or in receipt of income, and by other persons,
companies, corporations, associations corporate or unincorporate, institutions,
or other bodies specified in any proclamation under the War Census Act.
1. Name in full of person, &c., to whom this return applies; state if (Mr., Mrs.,
Master, or Miss)
(Underline Surname.)
2. Full usual Postal Address (including State) of person to whom the return
applies*
* If away from usual residence when filling in card, the postal address to be
given here is that of your usual residence. (Use N.S.W., Vic., Qu., S.A.,
W.A., Tas., N.T., or F.T. for name of State.)
3. If you own Motor Cars, Motor Cycles, other Motor Vehicles, or Traction-
engines, state how many and the horse-power of each, and for what pur-
pose used; also the kind and number of any other Vehicles owned by you.
4. Income.—What was the amount of Income received by you during the twelve
months ended 30th June, 1915, from sources mentioned below: —
(B)—On Ac-
(lf this Return relates to your own income fill in column (A) but not (A)—On Own count of Other
column (B). If it relates to a trustee-income, or income of a Account Persons,
company, &c„ fill in column (B) but not column (A). Companies &c
(i.) Stipend, Salary, or Wages
(ii.) Profession, Trade, Business, or Industry car
ried on by you
(iii.) Fees and Commissions
(iv.) Superannuation, Pension (not being Common
wealth Old-age or Invalid Pension) and
Annual Retiring Allowance.-}-
(v.) Quarters, Board, &c., allowed by Employer
(vi.) Rent •. • •
(vii.) Interest and Dividends .. • •
(viii.) Annuities, Royalties, Tributes, Licences, &c.
(ix.) Income as Beneficiary from Trust Estate
(x.) All other sources
(xi.) Add 5 per cent, on Capital Value of your own
land and Improvements used by yourself for
purpose of residence or enjoyment
Total £
LeS (i.) Amount actually paid by you for Fidelity
Guarantee on yourself
(ii.) Interest actually paid on Borrowed Money • •
(iii.) Repairs and Maintenance of Property actually
paid for .. .• •• •• . • • • •
(iv.) Life, Fire, or other Insurance Premiums paid .
(v!) Contributions to Pension or Superannuation
Fund .. . • • • • • • •
(vi.) Rent of premises for purposes other than pur-
poses of residence or enjoyment
(vii.) Rates and Taxes paid
Total Deductions .. .. *
Net Income .. £
fßut not including any retiring gratuity, or allowance paid in one amount.
C 10605. See other side of Card.


See other side of Card.
5. Property. —What was the approximate value of Real and Personal Property
owned or held by you in Australia at 30th June, 1915, comprising;—
If Return is made in respect of ! iyounown property fill m column
(A) but not column (B). If Return is made in respect of
■ trustee-property or property of a company, &c„ fill in column
(B) but not column (A).
Assets on 30th June, 1915
(i.) Cash in hand
(ii.) Money at current account in Banks, &c.
(iii.) Fixed deposits in Banks, Building Societies, &c.
(iv.) (a) Government and other Public Debentures,
&c.
(6) Shares and Debentures in Companies . .
(v.) Debts due to you — (a) Motgages on Land
(6) Other Debts . . . . .
(vi.) Value of Stock-in-Trade . . . . .. • • •
(vii.) Value of Live Stock .. .. . . •• |
(viii.) Plant, including Machinery, Tools, Implements, j
Rolling Stock, used for trade purposes .. j
(ix.) Furniture and Fittings used for trade purposes
(x.) Estimated Value of Goodwill of Business
(xi.) (a) Value of your Land inclusive of Improve-
ments . . .. • • • • • • • •
(ft) Value, exclusive of Improvements (£ )
(c) If not Sole Owner, value of your Interest
(xii.) ( a ) Value of your Leases from Private Persons
(ft) Value of your Leases from the Crown
(xiii.) Value of Share of Net Assets in Partnership
or Syndicate undertakings
(xiv.) Household Furniture and Effects and Personal
(including Vehicles and Plant used for other
purposes than trade or occupation)
(xv.) Value of Interests as a Beneficiary in Trust
Estates . . . . . - • • • • # -
(xvi.) Property not enumerated above, exclusive of
Life Assurance and Friendly Society Policies .
Total Assets .. .. £ .
Liabilities on 30th June, 1915 — ,
(i.) Bank Overdraft • • • • • • .
(ii.) Amounts owing by you (other than Mort-
gages on Land) . . . . • • • • •• •
(iii.) Amounts owing by you on Mortgages on
Land
♦No entry to be made here. Total Liabilities .. £
Difference between Assets and Liabilities .. .. £
Note. —With respect to Trade Assets and Liabilities only, the particulars
as per the latest balancing date since the 30th June, 1914, and prior to 23rd
July, 1915, may be used for the purposes of this Schedule.
6. State number f owned by you of the following:—
f Note. —The above are to be apportioned in the case of partner ownerships.
Signature and Address of the Person required to make the Return: —
Signature
Date Address.


Information for Public Guidance
in Filling up War Census Cards
WAR CENSUS OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF
AUSTRALIA
QUERY No. 1,2, etc., refers to the number of question on
the respective Census Card, of which specimens are shown on
pages 11, 12, 13.
NAME IN FULL.
QUERY 1. —The name in full should be written thus: —
John James Smith.
John in the above ease should be written first, and the surname
(Smith, in the example) should be written last, and should
be underlined as shewn.
POSTAL ADDRESS.
QUERY 2, —The full postal address should be given, say
as follows: —
“ Braemar,” 38 Kooyong Street, Geelong, Victoria.
the name of the State being given last and underlined as
shewn. In giving the address be as definite as possible. Thus
in the example given it indicates the place where John James
Smith usually resides, and is therefore the address which will
most readily find him.
NOTE. —You are required by the War Census Act,
Sections 15 (1) and (2), to notify the Commonwealth Statis-
tician, Melbourne, of any change of address within three (3)
days of changing your address, and are liable to very heavy
penalties for neglect to do so.
DATE OF BIRTH.
QUERY 3. —The date of birth is to be given as follows: —
Write the day of the month in which you were born after
the word “Day,” the month itself after the word “Month,”
and the year of your birth after the word “Year,” thus, if


JOHN JAMES SMITH had been born on 13th December, 1870,
the card would be filled in thus: —
“Day, 13; Month, December; Year, 1870.”
It would follow from these dates that the age last birthday
would be entered as 44 years, but if the date of birth were,
say, 13th April, 1870, the age last birthday would be 45 years,
since the date of filling in the card in this latter instance would
be later in the year than the date of birth. Those who do not
know the exact date of their birth must endeavour to ascertain
it. If that be found impossible, then THE AGE LAST BIRTH-
DAY SHOULD BE GIVEN AS ACCURATELY AS POSSIBLE.
MARRIED OR SINGLE.
QUERY 4.—A married man whose wife is living should
write “M.” A widower should write “W,” and a single man
should write “S” at the end of the line.
DEPENDENT RELATIVES.
QUERY s.—The relationship of any person or persons
dependent on the person filling in the card should be stated
as clearly as possible, for example in the following manner:
“ Father, Wife and one Child wholly dependent, and
two children partly dependent.”
This would imply in the example given that John James Smith
was wholly supporting his father, his wife, and one child, and
had also two other children who were partly dependent upon
him. Similarly in regard to any other case. Thus:
“ Wife and Three Children wholly dependent; Mother
partly dependent,”
would be entered if the wife and the three children were wholly
dependent on the person filling in the card, and if contributions
towards the support of the mother were being made by him.
GENERAL HEALTH.
QUERY 6. —“Good” is to be written as the answer to this
query if your health is usually satisfactory. If you are suffering
from an acute illness or a chronic complaint write “Bad.” Write
“Indifferent” if your health is usually not good, but is not as
bad as just indicated. “Indifferent” means that the person’s
health is usually not at all satisfactory, although he may not
be in a grave condition of health.


PARTICULARS OF ANY INFIRMITY.
QUERY 7.—The answer should indicate the exact nature
of the defect thus: —Blind in right eye, or left eye, or both
eyes, as the case may be. Totally deaf, partially deaf, or
slightly deaf, as the case may be. Have lost both legs, both
arms, right (or left) arm or right arm and right leg, etc., etc.,
as the case may be.
OCCUPATION.
QUERY B.—Give your answer in such a way that the
exact nature of your occupation is evident. Take special care,
for example, if your occupation is one known by a name
common to several industries, or else your reply may be
ambiguous; thus to write “Fitter” would be unsatisfactory
as it might mean an engine fitter, gasfitter, etc. In such an
instance the occupation must be stated as follows: —“Engine
fitter,” Gasfitter,” etc., as the case may be. Similarly if your
work is repairing in some form, it would be entered as
“Repairer of motors and cycles,” or “Repairer of typing
machines and fine mechanism,” or “Watch Repairer, etc.
When you have framed your answer and before writing it, ask
yourself if your answer makes quite clear the exact nature of
your occupation , if not add to it until it is adequately
described.
GRADE OF OCCUPATION.
QUERY Ba.—The note given will explain how you are to
make your answer to this query. E denotes you are
an employer; “0” that you are your own employer; “A” that
you are an assistant but are not in receipt of salary or wages;
“W” that you are in receipt of salary or wages; and “N”
denotes that you were out of work during the period from 23rd
to 30th June at least. If you were in work during this period,
“N” should not be inserted. If you do not remember whether
you were employed or not during this period, write N if
you were out of work for more than seven days immediately
preceding the signing of the card.
OCCUPATION OF EMPLOYER.
QUERY Bb.—Stating the occupation of your employer will
make it more clear what your occupation really is, and will
also shew whether you are normally occupied at the time of
making the return. For example, if Query 8 has been answered
“Labourer,” and the employer is stated in Query 8b to be a


“Builder,” it is then evident that a “Builder’s Labourer” was
intended, a very different occupation, for example, to that of
“Wharf Labourer.”
WHAT OTHER OCCUPATION COULD YOU UNDERTAKE?
QUERY 9.—The answer to this should be made with the
same care as the answer to Query 8, and will shew in what
occupation or occupations, other than that on which you are
engaged, you could render effective service in case of need.
MILITARY TRAINING.
QUERY 10.—If you have been in the Australian forces,
permanent, citizen, militia, volunteer, or cadet, or have served
in any military force IN ANY COUNTRY, STATE WHERE.
WHEN, AND FOR HOW LONG. STATE YOUR RANK ON
LEAVING SUCH SERVICE, and the arm of the service, that
is, whether infantry, mounted infantry, cavalry, field, garrison
or siege artillery, or field, signal, electric, or submarine engineer,
or in any branch of the army service corps, any medical corps,
transport or commissariat, veterinary ordnance or pay depart-
ments. In case of service in a foreign service give the name
of the arm of the service, and of the rank as described in the
country where your service was rendered. If you have served
in any navy, state in what navy and describe your service.
FIRE ARMS AND AMMUNITION.
f
QUERY 11. —Give particulars of ALL FIREARMS AND
AMMUNITION IN YOUR POSSESSION, whether such are
for purposes of sport, business, or defence. If you have,
acting on your own behalf or in concert with others, secreted
firearms or ammunition in any place whatsoever they will be
deemed to be in your possession, and are to be declared; and
failure to declare them will render you subject to the penalties
of the War Census Act irrespective of any other penalty to
which you may be liable.
COUNTRY OF BIRTH, Etc.
QUERY 12, SUBSECTIONS (I.), (II.), and (III.).—In
each case give the name of the Empire, or Kingdom, or Country
in which you, your father and your mother were born, and
underline this. Then follow this by stating, when possible,
the smaller division of that country, but do not give the name


of the county, city, town, or village, etc., in which you, or
your father or mother were born. Thus, if you happen to have
been born in the city of Prague, the proper answer would be,
for example:—
Austria, Bohemia.
“Prague,” however, would NOT be entered.
BORN IN FOREIGN COUNTRY.
QUERY 13.—1 f you were born in a Foreign country of
Foreign parentage, that is to say if you were born the subject
of a foreign power, state whether or not you are now a British
subject by naturalisation.
WHERE NATURALIZED.
QUERY 14.—1 f you are a naturalised British subject, give,
if possible, the exact date on which you were naturalised, and
state the place at which the naturalisation was effected. This
must be fully stated so that your claim to have been naturalised
can be readily verified.


Persons required to fill in the
Cards
Every person, male or female, aged 18 years and upwards,
is required to fill in WEALTH AND INCOME CARD. Special
attention is drawn to the fact, that no person is exempt.
1. Every person aged 18 years and upwards with respect
to his own Wealth and Income.
2. In his representative capacity as Agent, Attorney,
Trustee, etc,
(A separate card is to be filled up for every person
represented as follows:
(a) The trustee of any Trust Estate with respect to
the Wealth and Income of the Estate.
(b) The representative of any Company, Associa-
tion, Union, Club, Society, Institution, Religious
body or Charitable Organisation.
(e) The senior partner in a partnership with respect
to the Wealth and Income of the partnership.
(d) The representative member of any syndicate or
venture.
(e) The agent or attorney or representative of any
person permanently or temporarily absent from
the Commonwealth.
(f) The legal representative of any person under 18
years, or any person of 18 years of age or
upwards, who is under legal disability.
3. Any other person required by the Commonwealth
Statistician to furnish a card whether on his own account or
on account of other persons.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.
A SEPARATE CARD must be used for each indi-
vidual, and for each company, etc., required by the War
Census Act or regulations thereunder, to make a return. A
MANAGER, SECRETARY, OR OTHER OFFICIAL of a


company, an AGENT, ATTORNEY, OR REPRESENTATIVE
OP ANY ABSENTEE from the Commonwealth, and a LMjAii
■REPRESENTATIVE of any person under 18 years of age, or
of any person 18 years of age or upwards who is under legal
disabilty is required to furnish both his personal card and a
separate’card for each company or person (as the case may
be) he represents. Care must be taken to make all replies
as clear and accurate as possible, and they should be LEGIBiA
WRITTEN Attention to the following directions will taciii-
tate the giving of the replies in the form required. Care is
lo he exe g rcsed so as to avoid ALL DUPLICATION of items
in the returns. Thus, if deductions have already been made
with respect to any item of income, they must not appear
again in the list of deductions set out in the card.
NAME IN FULL.
QUERY 1 —lnsert the NAME IN FULL OF THE
PERSON COMPANY, PARTNERSHIP, ESTATE, ASSOCIA-
TION etc., to which the return applies, that is, the name ot the
person, etc., whose income, or whose property or both are
detailed on the card. If, for example,
is filling in his own return, his name in full will appear in
the reply to Query 1, thus:
James Thomson.
James Thomson’s signature will he given at the end of the
return If however, James Thomson is filling in the return
2 say, THE REPRESENTATIVE OF JOHN GRAY, the
name to be inserted in the reply to Query 1 will be that of
John Gray, as, for example:—
John Gray.
While James Thomson’s signature will appear at the e . nd s*f
the return as representative. Similarly, if he is filling in
return as representative of a company etc., the name of the
company, etc., must be inserted in reply to Query
owns! mature and THE CAPACITY IN VIRTUE OF WHICH
HE RENDERS THE RETURN MUST APPEAR AT THE
END OF THE RETURN. THIS SIGNATURE MUST BE
LEGIBLY WRITTEN.
Again, if James Thomson is filling in the return as, say,
trustee for a trust estate (under a will or other instrument),


the NAME OF THE ESTATE is to be inserted in reply to
Query 1, as, for example:—
Estate of James Edward Gray, deceased.
In the case of a partnership, the name of the partnership
should be stated in reply to Query 1, thus:—
Partnership of John Brown and William Smith.
POSTAL ADDRESS.
QUERY 2.—The reply to this query must be sufficiently
full to ensure that the person (or company, etc.) specified in
the reply to Query 1 may be readily reached by post if neces-
sary. The same remark applies to the address following the
signature at the end of the card.
MOTOR AND OTHER VEHICLES.
QUERY 3.—The reply must shew all motor vehicles, trac-
tion engines, and also other kinds of vehicles, etc., in your
possession, and if these are capable of serving as a means of
transport or communication the letter T should follow. Thus:
3 Motors, 30 H.P., 40 H.P., T., 60 H.P., T.,
would imply that the three motors were of 30, 40, and 60 horse
power, respectively, the two latter being satisfactory from the
standpoint of transport and communication. The uses to which
they are applied must also be stated. If the room provided is
insufficient, furnish additional information an a slip of paper
pinned to the card, taking care to mark the slip “Query 3,”
and to REPEAT THEREON THE NAME GIVEN IN REPLY
TO QUERY 1.
INCOME.
QUERY 4.—General in regard to this Query.—This state-
ment should shew clearly the income received by or received
on behalf of the person, etc., whose name appears in the reply
to Query 1 during the twelve months ended 30th June, 1915.
If the person whose duty it is to fill in the return is identical
with the person whose name appears in the reply to Query 1,
the column headed “ (A) on Own Account ” must be used, but
not the column (B). This provision will cover the majority
of cases. In the cases, however, in which the person whose
duty it is to fill in the return is not identical with the person
whose name appears in the reply to Query 1, the column headed
“(B) On account of other persons, companies, etc.,” must be
used. In the case, therefore, of a person whose receives income
on his own account, and also in respect of one or more persons


under 18 years of age, it will be necessary for him to furnish
a return filled up in column (A) for his own income, and also
a separate return filled up in column (B) for each of such
persons. Where there are two or more co-trustees in connec-
tion with any estate, a return must NOT be given by each
of the co-trustees, but a return must be made and signed by
ONE of such trustees on behalf of himself and his co-trustees.
The particulars to be shown under each heading are those in
respect of the twelve months ended 30th June, 1915, that is
to say, the return must shew the salary, wages, rent, interest,
etc., actually received during the twelve months from Ist July,
1914, to 30th June, 1915, inclusive.
NOTE. —With regard to item (ii.) hereunder, where a
yearly profit and loss account is taken out, the particulars as
per the latest balancing date since the 30th June, 1914, and
prior to 23rd July, 1915, may be used.
RECEIPTS.
Shillings and Pence are to be omitted throughout.
STIPEND, SALARY, OR WAGES.
(i.) Stipend, Salary or Wages.—All amounts received in
currency (i.e., coin, notes or cheques) in respect of
stipend, salary or wages are to be shewn on this
line. Payments for services made by means of
free quarters or board, or made in kind, are to
be shewn below on line 4 (v.). Persons in receipt
of wages or salary per day, per week or per
month must ascertain the total actually received
during the twelve months from the Ist July, 1914,
to the 30th June, 1915, inclusive. Thus the
answer must NOT be 15/- per week, but (suppos-
ing it to have been earned for each of the 52
weeks), £39.
PROFESSION, TRADE.
(ii.) Profession, Trade, &c. —The amount of income
arising from any Profession, Trade, Business or
industry is required to be inserted on this line,
including the share of income from all partner-
ships, syndicates, or other undertakings. In
arriving at the amount to be set out, only expen-
diture, which is not included in items (i.) to (vii.)
of the deductions hereunder, is to be subtracted
from the gross amount received, but no expen-
diture of a private or domestic character to be


deducted. (See NOTE to instruction re Query 4).
The receipts of persons paid ordinarily by fees, as
accountants, barristers, dentists, medical men,
solicitors, etc., should be entered on this line and
not on line (iii.).
FEES AND COMMISSIONS.
(iii.) Fees and Commissions. —Only fees and' commis-
sions not included in the Income under (ii.)
should be entered on this line of the card, but an
estimate of the value of gratuities (“tips,” etc.),
other than those referred to in item (iv.) here-
under, received in the twelve months should be
included.
SUPERANNUATION, PENSIONS, Etc.
(iv.) Against Superannuation, Pension, and Annual
Retiring Allowance should be entered everything
in the nature of regular superannuation or pen-
sion payments, excepting any retiring gratuity or
payment, and any payments in respect of Com-
monwealth Old Age or Invalid Pensions.
QUARTERS, BOARD, Etc.
(v.) For Quarters, Board, etc., Allowed by Employer.—
In the case of workmen, apprentices, and domestic
servants, etc., who are housed and fed by their
employers, this should be the fair value of their
board and lodging. In the case of domestic
employees, the value of food may GENERALLY
be taken as ranging between say Bs. and 16s. per
week, and of lodging one-half of this amount; or
for food and lodging as between 12s. and 245. per
week, according to the grade of living and the
character of the house. It will sometimes, of course,
be either more or less than this; in all eases the
fair value must be given. Any other payments
for services not received in currency should be
estimated end the value inserted on this line.
RENT.
(vi.) Rent. —The amount to be shewn should be the net
rent received after deducting repairs, rates, taxes,
fire insurance, and agents’ commission.


INTEREST AND DIVIDENDS.
(vii.) Against Interest and Dividends should be entered
all moneys received as interest from banks, from
loans on mortgage, or otherwise, and dividends
of all kinds.
ANNUITIES, ROYALTIES, Etc.
(viii.) Payments received as Annuities, Royalties, Trib-
utes, and Licences should be shewn on this line.
INCOME FROM TRUST ESTATE.
(ix.) Income as Beneficiary from Trust Estate.—The
income to which a beneficiary is entitled, whether
actually received or not, is to be entered on this
line,
OTHER SOURCES.
(x.) All income received from any sources not specified
above is to be entered against this line, viz., as All
other sources.
RESIDENCES.
(xi.) Where premises belonging feo you are occupied by
yourself for purposes of residence or of enjoy-
ment, or where property belonging to you is used
as a residence or for purposes of enjoyment, the
capital value of the premises or property so occu-
pied must be ascertained, and 5 per cent (one-
twentieth) of this must be included in the income
return.


General Instructions
Deductions
GENERAL.—
Deductions which have already been made with respect
to any item of income shown above, must not appear again
in the following items, hut no expenditure of a private or
domestic character to be deducted.
FIDELITY GUARANTEE.
(i.) Enter against line (i.) the Amount actually paid
by you for Fidelity Guarantee on yourself, if any.
INTEREST.
(ii.) The Interest Actually Paid on Borrowed Money
must include interest on bank-overdrafts, and on
loans on mortgages, etc., but must not include
any amount already deducted in ascertaining the
income in ITEMS (II.) and (III.) of “RE-
CEIPTS.”
REPAIRS.
(hi.) Repairs and Maintenance of Property actually
paid for.—Enter on this line only amount PAID
on property owned and used by you as a residence
or for the purpose of enjoyment.
INSURANCE.
(iv.) Give on this line the whole of the premiums actually
paid by you for all Life and Fire and other
Insurance Premiums not already deducted in
arriving at the income shewn from items (ii.),
(hi.), (vi.) (vih.), and (x.) of “Receipts,” but
do not include any Fidelity Guarantee Premiums
which appear under item (i.) above. Include all
contributions paid to Friendly, Accident and In-
validity Societies.
PENSION FUNDS.
(v.) Where you are paying into any Pension, or Super-
annuation Fund the amount so paid during the
year ended 30th June, 1915, should be entered on
this line.


RENT.
(vi.) Rent.—Enter upon this line, but do not include any
sum that has already been deducted in arriving
at the income shewn under ITEMS (II.), (III.),
(VIII.), AND (X.) of “RECEIPTS.”
RATES AND TAXES.
(vii.) Rates and Taxes Paid.—Enter on this line only
Rates and Taxes paid, which have not already
been deducted in arriving at the income shewn
form ITEMS (II.), (III.), (VI.), (VIII.), AND
(X.) OF “RECEIPTS.”
PROPERTY.
QUERY s.—Property.—The value of your property, real
and personal, is to be stated NOT AS AT THE DATE OF
YOUR MAKING THE RETURN, but as at 30th June last
(1915).
CASH IN HAND.
ASSETS.
(i.) Cash in Hand is to include all money in your per-
sonal possession, such as your pocket money, till-
money, money in any safe, safe-deposit, or
deposited in any way in your own custody. If
not known as at 30th June it may be stated as at
the day of making the return. The answer “Not
Known,” will not be accepted.
MONEY IN BANK.
(ii.) Money at Current Account in Banks and other
undertakings can be ascertained by you from your
pass-books, etc. This should include money in
Savings Banks.
FIXED DEPOSITS, Etc.
(hi.) The aggregate of all your Fixed Deposits in Banks,
Building Societies and other undertakings is to be
stated on this line.
DEBENTURES, Etc.
(iv.) (a) The market value as at 30th June, 1915, of the
aggregate of all Government Stocks, Debentures,
etc., and Municipal and other Public Debentures,
is to be given on this line.


SHARES.
(iv.) (b) The market value as at 30th June, 1915, of the
aggregate of all Shares and Debentures in Com-
panies of all kinds is to be given on this line.
MORTGAGES.
(v.) (a) The aggregate of all moneys owing to you on Mort-
gages of Land is to be stated on this line, but
other debts are NOT to be given on this line.
DEBTS DUE.
(v.) (b) The aggregate of Other Debts Due to You, whether
secured or unsecured, is to be given on this line.
STOCK IN TRADE.
(vi.) It may not be possible to give the Value of your
Stock-in-trade as at 30th June. If not you may
give it for the latest balancing date prior to 23rd
July, 1915, provided it be not earlier than 30th
June, 1914. If you have no balance between the
dates mentioned you must make an estimate.
Stock-in-trade must include any stock in transit,
goods afloat, etc.
VALUE OF LIVE STOCK.
(vii.) The value of Live Stock will be that of all Stock,
viz., of all Animals of Economic Value belonging
to you personally, or your share as part owner of
same. Animals of economic value will include
such as those enumerated below in Query 6, and
also, for example, poultry, ostriches, Angora
goats, or other animals of value.
PLANT AND MACHINERY, Etc.
(viii.) The value of all Plant, including Machinery, Tools,
Implements, Rolling Stock, -etc., used for trade
purposes shall be the estimated value as at the
30th June, 1915.
FURNITURE AND FITTINGS.
(ix.) The value of Furniture and Fittings Used for Trade
Purposes shall also be the estimated value as at
30th June, 1915.


GOODWILL (see special article on pages 30-32).
(x.) Estimated value of Goodwill of Business is the
amount you would ask for your business, as a
going concern, over and above the value of im-
provements, plant, stock-in-trade, etc., all con-
siderations of liabilities and assets being excluded.
VALUE OF LAND.
(xi.) (a) The Value of Your Land, inclusive of Improvements,
is the aggregate value of your land and all im-
provements thereon not already enumerated in
(viii.) and (ix.). The value is not to be entered
on this line unless you are sole owner,
UNIMPROVED VALUE.
(xi.) (b) The Value Exclusive of Improvements, or unim-
proved value of the land is to be taken as the
total value less the value of all improvements
thereon. In no case is this to be entered in the
ruled columns, but is to be entered in the place
indicated, viz. (£ ).
VALUE OF YOUR INTEREST.
(xi.) (e) Where you are Not the Sole Owner of any land,
you are to state the Value of Your Interest only,
including, of course, all improvements not already
included in (viii.) and (ix.). The value of any
land owned solely by you, or in which you have
any interest apart from your interest as a bene-
ficiary in a trust estate, as set out in item (xv.)
below, must therefore be included either in (xi.)
(a) or in (xi.) (c).
VALUE OF LEASES.
(xii.) (a) The Value of your Leases from Private Pergbns is
to be taken as the estimated amount that would
be received if the right to the lease for the unex-
pired term were sold to the highest bidder,
(xii.) (b) The Value of your Leases from the Crown is to be
taken as the market value of your lease, less any
payments due to the Crown.
SYNDICATES.
(xiii.) If you have an interest in any partnership or syn-
dicate undertakings, the value of your Share of
Net Assets in such undertakings should be inserted
here.


HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE.
(xiv.) On this line should be inserted the estimated value
of your Household Furniture and Effects and
Personal Effects, including therein the estimated
value of any vehicles and plant used for purposes
other than trade or occupation.
TRUST ESTATES.
(xv.) If you have any Pecuniary Interests as a Beneficiary
in Trust Estates, whether as life-tenant, rever-
sioner, or otherwise, the estimated value of such
interests must be inserted on this line.
OTHER PROPERTY.
(xvi.) All other property, exclusive of Life Assurance and
Friendly Society Policies, is to be valued, and the
value inserted on this line.
LIABILITIES.
(i.) Bank Overdraft, if any, at 30th June, 1915, is to be
inserted on this line.
(ii.) Amounts owing by You (other than those secured
by Mortgages on Land) should be shewn on this
line.
(iii.) Amount Owing by You on the security of mort-
gages on land are to be shewn on this line.
TRADE ASSETS AND LIABILITIES.
NOTE.—WITH RESPECT TO TRADE ASSETS AND
LIABILITIES ONLY, the particulars at the latest balancing
date prior to 23rd July, 1915, and not earlier than 30th June,
1914, may be used for the purpose of this schedule.
LIVE STOCK.
QUERY 6.—The number of each class of stock at the date
of making the return should be inserted; and the several classes
of horses and cattle specified on the card should be distin-
guished. Where in any case live stock is the property of a
partnership an approximate apportionment of the numbers
amongst the partners must be made for the purposes of the
return, which should shew the total for any owner, inclusive of
such apportionment. For example, if John Smith is sole owner
of 10,000 sheep, and is interested in two partnerships, in one
of which his share is estimated at 5000 sheep, and in the other
at 8000 sheep, John Smith’s card should shew 23,000 sheep.
If this is done it is not necessary to mention some are owned
solely by him and some in connection with partnership.


Estimation of Goodwill
The correct estimation for the War Census returns of the
value of the goodwill of their businesses is regarded as a
matter of difficulty by many people. The Commonwealth
Statistician, Mr. G. H. Knibbs, makes the following observa-
tions on the matter for general guidance.
That goodwill is an item of actual wealth is readily enough
seen when any one wants to buy any well-established business.
A business or trade connection of any kind; an established
dental, medical, accountancy, engineering, architectural, or
other professional practice has, as a rule, been steadily built
up by effort, involving initially either actual loss, or an inade-
quate rate of remuneration for labour and capital expended.
As the connection or the “practice” becomes well-established
its value tends to become more definitely fixed. The value of
medical and dental “practices” is fairly well known to medical
and dental practitioners, and can be ascertained with some
precision. The value may be taken as midway between what
a reluctant seller and reluctant buyer would place it at. The
values of accountancy, architectural, engineering, surveying,
and similar “practices,” though perhaps more difficult to esti-
mate, are nevertheless also fairly well defined, and may be
ascertained in a similar way. The value in the case of retail
trade businesses may perhaps be a little more difficult of ascer-
tainment. Let the owner of any such business say to himself,
first: “If I were not anxious but nevertheless were willing to
sell, what would I take?” and, secondly: “What is the lowest
sum that a buyer wanting the business would reasonably
offer?” The value may be taken as the mean of these two
values thus indicated. In each case the value so ascertained
is what may be called the fair market value conservatively
estimated. In the case of large businesses it may be more
difficult, but it is by no means impracticable to fix upon a fair
estimate. It has been suggested by able business men that
the value inheres in their personality and not in the business
itself; that without them the business would be worth rela-
tively little or nothing at all. This is only in part true, just
as it is true that a medical practice has no direct value to any
one not entitled to practice: yet the business has a goodwill as
certainly as a medical practice has one.
The way any business is managed is of course an element
in its success, and in many cases is the main element. The
goodwill, however, is to be estimated for the business as it is


and as worked by a man approximately of equal ability
to the possessor. The principle above enunciated, viz., adopt
the mean of the values which would be attributed by a reluc-
tant buyer and reluctant seller is the real value of the goodwill:
and this must be estimated by the owner. THE QUESTION
MUST BE ANSWERED. The difficulty imagined by some
lies in the fact that people are not much in the habit of con-
sidering any cases except those which actually present them-
selves : it does not lie in the impossibility of ascertaining the
goodwill. That is to say, the difficulty is rather one of reluc-
tance to charge oneself with the trouble of making up one’s
mind to the ascertainment of a supposed difficult case than in
the thing itself. If the owner of a business was, however,
dispossessed, say, by an act of war or an act of government,
or by the fraud or tort of any individual and subsequent events
enabled the aggrieved party to claim, he would soon have a
very definite opinion of the measure of his claim. Suppose
this claim were to be arbitrated upon, the mean of the values
presumably assigned by arbitrators acting? for both parties
is THE FAIR VALUE OF THE GOODW. _L.
It has been objected by some who have given the matter
inadequate consideration, that goodwill being an intangible
thing has no real value. The complete answer to this is too
lengthy for statement here. It may be pointed out, however,
that to establish a business so that it has a goodwill always
means outlay; for example, for advertising and pushing the
business (or connection) ; getting reputation for quality, etc.
Thus it is seen that the cost of reaching a given development
in any business gives a market value to it as a going concern.
Accidental circumstances may, however, co-operate with or
work against its possessor; hence ultimately the goodwill is not
to be measured by its cost in the sense indicated, but by the
actual economic value. This can be measured by the capital
invested. Suppose, then, that £IOO,OOO be approximately the
value of plant, fixtures, stock, etc., in a business, the annual
net profits of which are £IO,OOO, and that the rate of interest
for first-class securities is, say, 4| per cent., which on £IOO,OOO
represents £4,500, then £IO,OOO less £4,500, or £5,500, is the
annual value accruing in virtue of the activity of the pro-
prietor operating on the business concern with its connection.
Let us further suppose the salary of an efficient manager of
such a concern would be £1,500, and that no deduction has
already been made for the proprietor’s services in deducing
the net profit, viz., £10,000; then £4,000 annually is the primary
BASIS of an estimate of goodwill. This, however, must not
be capitalised in the usual way, for, first of all, part of this
£4,000 depends in part upon the personality of the possessor,


and the part is not transferable by the vendor; and, secondly,
the profits of any business run some risk of diminution or even
extinction through the effective competition of rivals and
other causes. This jeopardy or risk affects the capitalised
value, which may be roughly estimated on the basis of so many
“years’ purchase.” Let us suppose that in the case considered
this is 5 years. Then the goodwill is £20,000, or perhaps more
strictly the present value of £4,000 payable annually for 5
years at 4£ per cent., viz., in the case supposed, £17,560.
It may be pointed out that in a professional practice the
non-transferable or personal element is relatively large as
compared with a trading concern; since in the successful con-
duct of a professional business personality is likely to be of
paramount importance. All persons required to make returns
are asked to remember that failure to accurately answer the
questions on the card, or attempts to evade the answering,
render them liable to prosecution under the Act. The questions
are not lightly asked, and may not be set aside.
