

THE UNIVERSITY OF DELAIDE.
War Finance: Loans, Paper
Money, and Taxation
THE JOSEPH FISHER LECTURE IN
COMMERCE
DELIVERED IN ADELAIDE
5th JUNE,1917,
BY
R. F. IRVINE, M.A.,
Professor of Economics, University of Sydney.
ADELAIDE:
W, K THOMAS & Co. PRINTERS GRENFELL STREET
1917.


War Finance: Loans, Paper
Money, and Taxation.


THE UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE .
War Finance: Loans, Paper
Money, and Taxation
THE JOSEPH FISHER LECTURE IN
COMMERCE
DELIVERED IN ADELAIDE
sth June, 1917,
BY
R. F. IRVINE, M.A.,
Professor of Economics, University of Sydney.
ADELAIDE :
w, k Thomas <fe Co. Printers Grenfell Street.
1917.


WAR FINANCE:
Loans, Paper Money, and Taxation.
IN a paper read before the Actuarial Society of New
South Wales 1 last year I tried to clear up my own ideas
about the nature of modern money, of loanable capital,
and especially of the huge War Loans and Debts, swelling
now to figures which three years ago would have been
considered incredible and impossible. I reached certain
conclusions which were obviously not in accord with those
commonly held by economists and practical financiers.
This was, no doubt, very presumptuous on my part. At
any rate, a good many people have thought it their duty to
tell me it was, and at the same time to hint at retribution
to come for me and any misguided people who might agree
with my heresies.
Naturally, therefore, I approach ray task to-night with
some fear and trembling, for it may be that I shall
have once more to say things which will call down the
wrath of the stern deities of Finance. On this account, and
also because the subject is naturally difficult and technical,
I shall need all your patience and forbearance.
As this lecture is a continuation of the paper referred to,
it seemed desirable to recapitulate the principal arguments
and conclusions of the latter. It is impossible to deal
intelligibly with Loans, Paper Money, and Taxation without
some clear conception of what modern money and loanable
capital really are. I found, however, after various trials,
that the recapitulation I had first in mind would of itself
make a whole lecture. I am obliged, therefore, to content
myself with a brief re-statement of my views as to the nature
of money and loanable capital.
1 The Veil of Money, paper read before the Actuarial Society of
New South Wales, October 36, 1916.


Some time ago I heard a well-known politician speak of
the grand total of British War Loans as “four thousand
million golden sovereigns.” He even amused and interested
his audience by calculating how long it would take a single
person to count this golden pile ! When it was suggested
to him that all the gold in the British Empire probably did
not amount to more than 5 per cent., or at the outside
JO per cent., of this vast total, he explained that he did not
mean what he said ; but he did not explain what he really
did mean.
It was the delusion to which such language gives rise that
I attacked in my paper —the idea that for every note, for
every cheque and bill of exchange, and for all the loans,
public and private, there is somewhere an equal amount of
golden sovereigns; or the little less crude, but equally
superstitious idea, that although it is not possible to match
every pound of money with a golden sovereign, the whole of
the immense superstructure of “money,” “credit,” and
“loanable capital ” is nevertheless based on the stock of
sovereigns or bullion which the Banks hold in their
strong-rooms. It seemed to me that money was something
quite different both from what the “ man in the street ” and
the practical banker often conceived it to be. The problem
is this : the Banks hold, let us say, of gold in
reserve, but nevertheless are able to provide ten times that
amount of the thing we call “ money.” What does the
consist of? At the same time the country is
able to raise a War Loan of What does
this huge sum stand for ? Is it, too, based on the hundred
million sovereigns ?


I.
In the Veil of Money I defined Money as simply a
collective name for all the devices used to enable us to
exchange goods. With this definition, it is meaningless to
talk of money being a standard of value. By this, of course,
I do not mean to say that the monetary system does not
need a standard or unit of value, in which the value of
goods may be stated. For modern systems the unit is a
given quantity of the commodity, gold. But because gold
is the recognised unit of value, it would be illogical to
assume either
(a) that the standard, in the shape of coined money,
must necessarily form any but a fractional part
of money defined as means of exchange; or
(h) that the quantity of money, so defined, functioning
at any particular moment, is based solely or even
to a large extent on the amount of gold held in
reserves.
Against these assumptions I put two facts :
(a) By far the greater part of the exchanging done in
civilised communities and in international trade,
is performed without any use of the unit-of-value
material.
(h) The greater part of what is variously known as
“bank money,’’ or “bank credit,” is certainly—
one may even say obviously—not based on actual
holdings of gold.


11.
The first statement cannot be denied : the circulating
medium of to-day is not gold but credit. The second,
however, is strenuously opposed by those who desire to keep
the Golden Calf on its old pedestal.
In my previous paper 1 had argued that credit, which
forms the greater part of modern money, is based not on
gold, but on “claims to vendible property” or wealth either
existing or in course of production ; and I explained the
process by which Banks, through their loan and discount
operations, converted such claims into money or currency.
Let me put the basic facts in as simple a setting as
possible.
Suppose you put 200 sovereigns in the Bank on fixed
deposit, with interest at the rate of, say, per cent.
The Bank may lend this, or rather its equivalent in
“ bank money,” at 5 per cent. But if the Bank treated
all its deposits in this simple fashion, it could hardly
cover its expenses, and would be failing to render its most
valuable services to the community. Without any waving
of a magic wand, or any departure from sound principles of
banking, it can seemingly convert your 200 sovereigns into
perhaps ,£2,000 worth of money, purchasing power, or
liquid capital. It can lend not .£2OO, but ,£2,000. To the
uninitiated this appears to be a creation of something out of
nothing, and the popular use of the words “credit” and
“ bank credit ” gives colour to this supposition. Hence the
fiction that the whole ,£2,000 is, in some mysterious way,
based on your deposit of 200 sovereigns, the additional
,£I,BOO being an intangible and rather doubtful something
called “credit.” But the explanation and its implications
are almost wholly false. Those who borrowed from the
Bank, where there was any doubt of their solvency, left
securities, usually gilt-edged, in pledge for the loan, and the
Bank took good care to insist on a margin of safety
sufficient for any probable fluctuations in the value of the
securities. The latter are called collateral. They are, how


ever, the real and the only basis for the additional bank
money, the ,£I,BOO for which the Bank holds no gold at all.
Clearly, what the Bank has done is to liquefy or convert into
general purchasing power £I,BOO worth of the borrowers’
“ vendible property.” And the £I,BOO has just as
pemanently substantial a basis as, say, 200 one pound notes
issued on the security of your 200 sovereigns, because it
rests usually on forms of wealth indispensable to the
satisfaction of human wants.
But, it may be replied, it was the reserve of 200 sovereigns
that enabled the Bank to venture on this process of
converting or liquefying claims to specific wealth into
general purchasing power. Experience, it is alleged, has
taught the Bank that it must keep a certain proportion of
gold to its liabilities, and therefore the amount of the reserve
of gold (or legal tender) certainly limits the amount of
loans that may safely be made. If this be so, is it not
reasonable to say that the £I,BOO is based on the 200
sovereigns ? I agree that under existing conditions and
presuppositions the Bank's capacity to loan, or what
amounts to the same thing, its power to liquefy specific
forms of wealth, is to some extent artificially restricted by
its legal-tender reserve. The minimum amount of the
reserve may be determined by law, but more often it is
merely a matter of custom. But even granting the limiting
effect of the reserve, it is none the less a very misleading use
of words to talk of this relatively small reserve as the basis
of the additional money created by the Bank on the security
of, and in proportion to, the claims to wealth left in pledge
with it by borrowers. Until this is admitted, I see no hope
of ever establishing a scientific theory of banking or
money.
Into what absurdities this misuse of words had got us,
will be apparent from a consideration of the proportion of
gold or legal-tender reserve it is considered necessary to
keep. What is the right proportion ? What is the practical
or theoretic line of safety ? On these questions there is no
agreement either in the practice or in the theory of the


practical man. All that we find is a vague statement that,
as the Banks are supposed by law to repay deposits in gold
—and this is, after all, an elaborate make-believe, for nobody
expects them to do what is patently impossible, or, if
possible, would be extremely stupid, viz., to hold gold
sufficient to liquidate all liabilities —they will come to smash
if they do not keep an “ adequate ” reserve. But this does
not help us at all to define “ adequate.” Is it 15 per cent.,
or 20 per cent., or 30 per cent., or what? The Bank of
England returns may show a reserve of 30 per cent, or 40
per cent, against its own liabilities; but if we include, as we
ought, the liabilities of all the other Banks whose final
reserve is that of the central institution, these percentages
may shrink to 3 per cent, or 4 per cent, or 5 per cent. And
yet, in spite of the pessimists, this relatively small amount
of gold, with its accompanying legal-tender paper, has
proved sufficient for the monetary needs of a world Empire.
The reason surely is that our practical banking is far ahead
of the theories which the practical banker himself often
thinks he is following, but which he dodges, where possible,
by extremely ingenious and useful devices.
The anxiety to keep an “adequate” gold reserve is
explained on the ground that this reserve is necessary in
order to avert panic and save us when once the panic
has arrived. But, as has been pointed out by a recent
writer, 1 panics are psychological phenomena which have
but the smallest relation to nice questions of mathematical
proportions. If once John Bull (who, however, is neither
the fool nor the nervous person we sometimes suppose him
to be) has thoroughly lost confidence in the soundness of
his banking institutions, will he be satisfied if you tell him
that the Bank can give him in gold only ;£ls of his ,£IOO
deposit ? If it can give him ,£4O or ,£6O, or even ,£BO, will
he be satisfied ? Will he not want to know what has
become of the balance ? There is no use burking the truth :
it is impossible to say what reserve will be of any use if
people are determined to go mad. But people are not
1 Walter William Wall; The War and Our Financial Fabric.


nowadays so ready to run amuck as they were a century or
half a century ago. It had long been predicted that the
outbreak of a war such as this would lead to universal panic
and financial breakdown. Yet when it came, when all the
-world plunged into the greatest war of history, nothing in
the nature of real financial panic occurred, and the War has
lasted three years without the financial breakdown which
was to have come at the end of a few months.
With their accepted theory of reserves and proportions,
bankers, in a time of crisis, find themselves involved in
hopeless mental confusions. They are warned by one set of
advisers to keep high reserves, and by another to loan
freely when the panic comes, so as to avert general disaster
to the business community. But how, on these principles,
can they do so ? It is impossible for them at the same time
both to lend freely and yet to maintain high reserves. In
England they get over this difficulty by acting as if the
opposite of their theory were the correct one r 1 that is, with
the sanction of their Government they replenish their
reserves with legal-tender paper based on public securities.
It may indeed be laid down as an incontrovertible truth that
no financial crisis was ever met simply by heaping up gold,
but rather by an extension, usually through State guarantee,
of credit, i.e., of the ordinary machinery for the liquefying
of the wealth of the nation into means of payment.
Well, then, to sum up this part of the argument, we may
say, I think : (1) that the greater part of modern money is
not gold, nor based on gold, but simply claims to the
community’s wealth which have been converted into general
purchasing power; in other words, it is the value, in terms
of the gold unit, of a part of the community’s wealth ; and
(2) that, in spite of current doctrines, we have long been
advancing in the direction of almost eliminating gold from
domestic currencies and economizing its use even in
reserves.
The experience of the War shows what indeed has long
been evident —that we do not need an expensive gold
1 Hartley Withers : The War and Lombard Street, p. 103.


currency when cheques, notes, and other means of settling
indebtedness will serve the purpose at least equally well.
So the drift of experience for many years, especially in times
of crisis, is compelling us to admit that we have over-rated
the importance of gold reserves, and that, so far as they are
economically unnecessary, they form a heavy tax on, and
sometimes a danger to, the community.
The attempt to keep modern currencies in a definite
relation to supplies of gold accumulated in reserves of Banks
or Treasuries has constantly broken down in practice just
as in right theory we should expect it to do. For, with the
wealth of the world doubling, trebling, and quadrupling
itself in a single generation and requiring a corresponding
increase of currency and liquid capital, it is surely absurd to
expect the currency and the capital to be limited by the
supply of a single item of wealth, a supply which may in
time be exhausted and is subject to changes which do not
always synchronise with changes in the general growth of
wealth. Fortunately, our practice is better than the theory
which is supposed to guide us; and, as I have said elsewhere,
business, with the aid of the Banks, has to a large extent
created its own currency. This being so, I believe it to be
of the utmost importance to give up the old theory and
frankly to ‘ ‘ teach the people that the currency of the
country is in reality based upon the wealth of the country,
and not upon an extraneous thing like the capricious
production of gold”; 1 in other words, that money is a
function, not of gold, but of the general wealth of the
community. Had we realised this truth, prophecies made
before the War as to the rapid collapse of the national
finances would never have been made. *bo in the future we
may hope that the criterion of sound banking will no longer
be the obstinacy with w r hich bankers sit on their hoard of
gold, but the judgment they show in the conversion of real
w r ealth into liquid form or currency, always, of course, in
terms of the accepted unit of value (gold).
a Wall, op. cit., p. 177.


It is, no doubt, important to keep the actual currency of
the modern world —cheques, notes, bills, drafts, etc —at
parity with the standard or unit of value, that is, with gold.
This can only be done by frequently testing the one against
the other in open market. It is in this testing that we find
the real function of gold in the monetary system ; for in
English-speaking countries, at any rate, its use as a medium
of exchange has practically ceased. The circulating medium
of to-day is credit, and this, as I have shown elsewhere, is
so far as it is legitimate, primarily based on the mass of
goods being continually produced, exchanged, and
consumed. The adoption of this system has meant an
enormous economizing of gold. The necessity of testing it
so as to preserve a single standard of value does not require
a great hoard of gold, but only an open market for the
commodity gold.
We must thus conceive of modern money, not as a pile of
golden coins and bullion or even as notes representing the
coin and bullion, but as Bank deposits, representing general
wealth and operated by cheques or other orders. These
deposits are of two kinds: (a) claims to wealth left or
deposited in the Banks by customers, and ( h ) advances made
by the Banks to customers who can furnish adequate
security. In each case a “deposit ”is created on which the
customer can operate. But in neither case is the deposit
necessarily a gold deposit. When “A ’’ gets an advance
of £lOO from the Bank and gives a cheque for this amount
to “JB” and “ H" lodges the cheque to his account, a
deposit of the first kind has been created out of what
originally was a loan deposit.
If a banking system works on a gold reserve of
£100,000,000 and has deposits amounting to ten times
that sum, the difference between the two has no metallic
support. What then does it represent ? If my theory is
correct, the greater part of it represents marketable
securities or titles to wealth in process of production, and,
on the whole, it can have no better basis, if the banker has
shown judgment in estimating the values of the property
and the kind of property he converts into money.


Loanable capital is nothing more than unexpended
purchasing power credited, to customers in the Bank’s books
and not required by them for immediate use. In war time
the fund of loan capital may be increased by extended
conversion of securities or valid claims to marketable wealth
into Bank deposits. So far as this process keeps well within
the limits of actual values, no harm is likely to result. But
as we shall see, the necessity of War has tempted most of
the belligerents to exceed these limits.
The point I wish to make is that both the “money”
and “ loanable capital” of a community are not dependent
on the available reserves of gold; but that they are in
mathematical language, a function of its wealth in general.
A country which has abundant resources, technical
knowledge and skill, and plenty of fighting men need not
worry much about its capacity to finance a war : nor need it
worry about its power to get gold if it wants to get more
than it has. Gold can always be bought if one has the
commodities to exchange for it.


111.
With this introduction, we may now proceed to consider
the realsubject of the present lecture : “ WAR FINANCE :
Loans, Paper Money, and Taxation,” as illustrated by the
methods followed by the three greatest belligerents,
Germany, France, and the United Kingdom. I omit
reference to the United States because her entry into the
Great War is so recent. An analysis and comparison of
these methods will cast a good deal of light on the questions
already discussed and reveal other problems of a very
important character.
A modern government, when faced with war, does not
venture to commandeer the materials and services it requires.
It may compel men of military age to join the colours; but
it adopts another method to bring about the reorganization
of the civil population that war renders necessary. It acts
in the customary commercial way. It persuades people to
do what is required by offering them general purchasing
power in return for goods and services. In order to do this,
it must itself have command of general purchasing power or
money. But clearly the money is only a convenient
intermediary to the ‘‘real stuff” —the men, munitions,
food, clothes, ships, and so on.
The sources from which a government may draw are the
following:
1. War chest, established for such an emergency.
2. Borrowing or issuing loans.
3. Taxation.
4. Debasing the coinage.
5. Issuing paper money.
6. Other forced loans.
7. Tributes and indemnities,
8. Government business undertakings.
An economist of some distinction has recently reduced
these to four :
1. Issuing loans.
2. Taxation.
3. Paper money.
4. More paper money.


It is perhaps necessary to add that he was not trying to be
facetious, but was merely admitting and recording the
facts of actual war finance.
Of these four ways, we may say at once (1) that no great
war is likely to be financed by the proceeds of increased
taxation alone, for this would involve too sudden a
dislocation of existing economic life, and (2) that the issue
of inconvertible paper money is almost universally
condemned by economists and financial authorities. Of
the first point I shall speak later. As to the last, it is
desirable to point out that nearly all the belligerents in
the present War have had recourse to the device of
inconvertible legal-tender paper. Either, therefore, necessity
has compelled them to adopt a desperate kind of financiering
or their advisers have come to the conclusion that the
method is not so bad as it is painted, or that it can be used
in a new and less dangerous way. Further consideration,
moreover, may suggest that the loan policies of most of the
nations are likely to have, after all, many of the evil results
attributed to the issue of paper money.
In the analysis which follows of the War Finance of the
countries chosen for consideration, I shall give most attention
to Germany, because her methods are not so well known
and also because they best illustrate good and bad principles
of finance.
( a ) Germany.
It is evident that the German Government and the
officials of the Reichsbank had for years been maturing plans
for financing a war which was to give Germany the first
place among nations. Details of measures to be taken “had
long been decided upon. It would be an insult to the
Imperial officials to believe otherwise.’’ 1
So far as can be ascertained, these plans “ hinged on a
credit system of such elasticity that it could cope with the
suddenly increased call for credit which would mark the
i Dr. Stroll, Bank-Archiv, 111. No. 2.. p. 18, Oct. 15, 1913.


beginning of a war. The Reichsbank, through its power to
issue notes, was to provide the means of payment to cover
the expenses of mobilization and also to quiet the panic and
tide industrial life over the disturbances incidental to a war.
There was much discussion as to whether or no the
regulation requiring the redemption of bank notes in gold
should be suspended. The general opinion of financial
writers was that a war should be carried on with irredeemable
paper money. Provision was to be made for institutions
which should grant loans on security and relieve the
Reichsbank of such business. [Public] loans were to be relied
upon to meet the actual war expenses after mobilization.” 1
In preparation for the plan to issue large quantities
of notes, a process of gold concentration was begun,
ostensibly as a final reserve for the paper money.
With the object of accustoming the people to a paper
currency, the note issues were gradually increased
and in smaller denominations than formerly. The other
Banks were encouraged to keep larger balances at the
Reichsbank. Thus when War actually came, the latter
institution found itself practically the sole holder of the
metallic reserve of the country. The War Treasure in the
Julius Tower at Spandau which had been increased to 205
million marks, was shortly after the outbreak of hostilities
transferred to the Reichsbank.
Now let us see how these schemes worked out in practice.
During the month of July, 1914, when the likelihood of war
gradually increased, there was much disturbance in the
business world and heavy falls took place in stock exchange
quotations. Many were anxious to sell goods and securities,
but few were willing to buy. Depositors began to withdraw
” hard ” money from the Banks. On the 28th July the
private Banks ceased to pay out gold and there followed a
rush to the Reichsbank to get its notes redeemed in gold.
On August Ist the Reichsbank ceased to redeem its notes in
gold —a step afterwards legalised.
1 M. Chase Going, “ German War Finance,” Journal of Political Economy,
June, 1916.


The hoarding of gold, together with the greatly increased
demand for currency usual on the outbreak of war, led to a
currency stringency and there was considerable difficulty in
supplying the small change needed in business. The
Government put into circulation some millions of marks in
silver, a large amount of token money, and 35 million marks
of Treasury Notes, in denomination of 10 marks. But for
a time the stringency was so great that some municipalities
issued 50 pf. and one-mark notes and factories issued their
own promises to pay.
When the Reichstag met on August 4th, 1914, it
formally legalised the measures long since decided upon.
(1) It annulled the Reichsbank’s obligation to redeem its
notes in gold or anything else, its notes still
retaining legal-tender power.
(2) It made the notes of other Banks of issue redeemable
in Reichsbank notes,
(3) It made Imperial Treasury Notes irredeemable and
legal tender.
(4) It authorised a vastly extended use of the loan
bureaux or Darlehnskassen. These institutions
were multiplied and permitted to issue notes by
way of loans on the security of various types of
property. The notes were irredeemable, and
though not endowed with legal-tender power,
were nevertheless taken at their face value by all
Imperial and State offices.
Technically, the Bank Act requirement of a one-third cash
reserve still remained in force ; but the constitution of this
“cash” reserve was entirely changed, since it now included
large quantities of Darlehnskassen notes. The “ commercial
paper” by which the other two-thirds of the notes were
required to be covered, was now made to include Imperial
Treasury Notes and Imperial bonds falling due within three
months.
The Darlehnskassen were intended to help those who wished
to raise money on stocks of merchandise or securities ; but


they did not help the small tradesmen or the landowner or
the man who had only his own personal security to offer.
Other institutions were provided for these purposes. Rand
mortgage Banks were institutions of long standing in
Germany. In addition, there were now created a number
of Kriegs-lcredit Banks, which have no power to issue notes,
but discount bills and grant book credits. They will also
lend on promissory notes, if the borrower can get two well-
known sureties.
With this close-knit and elaborate system of credit or,
rather, machinery for liquefying general wealth, the
Government was easily able to finance itself during the first
months of the War. During the first six days, the Reichsbank
advanced 750 million marks largely by the discounting of
Imperial Treasury bills. These loans were made mainly in
notes, large quantities of which were soon in circulation.
By February 29th, 1916, 6,55+ million marks had been
issued.
But in the meantime the gold reserve of the Reichsbank
was steadily increasing, as a result of the transfer of the
War Treasure and a vigorous campaign to get possession of
hoarded gold. It is probable, however, that the figures ( 2 )
given are to some extent delusive. There is reason to
suppose that much of the gold hoard has been drained away
secretly to assist Germany’s Allies nad to pay those
countries with which Germany still remained in trade
relations. ( 2 ) But so long as the people believe it is there,
their minds, it is thought, will be at ease and internal
exchange will in no way be hampered.
It must be evident from these facts that a totally new
currency situation had been produced. Gold had disappeared
from circulation, and, so far as it was not hoarded, was now
piled up in the vaults of the Reichsbank, from which much
of it, however, may have flowed away secretly to other
1 See Table “ Gold Held by Belligerent Nations.”
' J. M. Keynes, “ The Economics of War in Germany,” The Economic
Journal, Sept , 1915.


countries. Whatever amount may be held, it is not a
reserve in the usual sense, since the whole system of currency
is inconvertible. Its sole uses are (1) to give a psychological
impression of financial strength and safety, (2) to make
payments abroad for imports which cannot be balanced by
exports, and (3) to provide a fund for helping to re-establish
credit and trade at the end of the War.
Summing up, we may say : (1) “ that a more whole-
hearted resort to irredeemable legal tender paper than
Germany’s can hardly be imagined,” 1 and (2) that in
mobilising her wealth Germany has used to the full and
probably beyond its extreme limit, the principle of converting
actual wealth into means of payment.
When I have described the measures of the other countries
selected for consideration, I shall have something to say
as to the effects of the general issue of legal-tender paper.
The second point mentioned above may be illustrated by
some of the measures taken to facilitate the raising of War
Loans ; from which it will be seen that what practically
amounts to a wholesale pledging of the people’s possessions
has taken place. Almost every form of property has been
mortgaged up to 40 per cent., 50 per cent, and 60 per
cent, of its estimated value. In this way the Reichsbank and
the various credit institutions have given every aid to persons
subscribing to War Loans. But financial ingenuity has not
stopped here. It is clear now that the principle of
“pyramiding” has been used to a large extent. That is,
the scrip of one Loan is made the basis of a private loan and
then of further purchase of War scrip. This is the method
of the “inflation loan ” described in my previous paper.
No doubt the same method has been used by individuals
in France and the United Kingdom, ( 2 ) but it has not received
the same stamp of public approval as a legitimate financial
1 A. C. Whitaker, “ Currency Depreciation in Time of War,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, February. 1916.
a According to Mr. Withers the Bank of England undertook to advance
money to cus omers on the ecurity of scrip of a former War Loan, bee
The War and Lombard Street, p. 131.


device. It is evident that so far as this principle is put into
practice, it creates a mass of credit money which has no
basis in actual specific wealth. It does not differ much,
therefore, from an issue of inconvertible paper money,
the only basis of which is the confidence the people have in
their own government and in their own capacity to produce
wealth in the future.
( h ) France.
In France the notes of the Bank of France were made
irredeemable and given full legal-tender power, The limit
upon the issue was raised through several steps from 6,800
million francs to 15,000 million francs. At the same time
gold export was prohibited, by private persons at any rate.
As a result of the first measure, gold disappeared from
circulation, its place being taken by paper, five-franc silver
coins and subsidiary tokens of nickel. As in Germany,
considerable quantities of gold were hoarded at the beginning
of the War ; but appeals to the patriotism of the people have
succeeded in getting a large part of these private hoards
transferred to the central reservoir. As M. Ribot says:
“ Week by week the bullion account of the bank was swollen,
in spite of the fact that the bank bad to export large
quantities, on account of purchases made for military
purposes, both to the United Kingdom and the United
States.”
In the initial stages the Bank of France financed the
Government by making advances, “ creating notes for that
purpose. As the notes are pledged by a debt which is not
repayable before the end of the War, the Bank would not
be able to collect gold enough to have these fresh notes
redeemed at once, should these be presented at its counters.
As no distinction is made between them and those which
are created for commercial purposes, the unavoidable outcome
is that legal tender quality must be given by law to all the
notes.” 1
1 Itaphael-Georges Levy, “ French Money, Banting, and Finance During
the Great War," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 1915.


For a considerable period France, unlike the other
belligerents, did not resort to Loans. It financed the War
mainly by short-time Treasury Bills, redeemed presumably
by issue of paper money and new Treasury scrip. Towards
the end of 1915, however, the first Loan was floated. It
brought in over a thousand million sterling, but on terms
more costly than the Loans of the other great belligerent
States. It was issued at SS, giving a return to the investor
of almost 6 percent. This Loan enabled the Government to
pay off most of its floating indebtedness and to resume the
issue of Treasury bills.
(c) United Kingdom.
The only direct currency changes made by the British
Government on the outbreak of War were the issue of
Currency Notes of the denominations of £1 and 10s., and
the endowment of postal notes with full legal tender. The
Bank of Bmgland was also permitted, so far as temporarily
authorised by the Treasury, to issue its own notes “in
excess of any limit fixed by law : ” a permission, however,
of which it does not appear to have availed itself.
The Currency Notes were intended to supplement the
note issues of the Bank of England and the cheque currency
which, in England, does the greater part of the money work.
These measures were more than sufficient to provide tor the
additional currency that war always requires. The notes
were redeemable in gold at the Bank of England ; but it is
doubtful whether as a matter of fact this privilege is being
exercised. Certainly, any attempt at wholesale redemption
would probably lead to actual suspension of the Bank Act.
The Currency Notes, it is evident, were also intended to
discharge reserve functions. To quote Sir Edward Holden,
they “area most important part of our finance, because they
play the same part as gold and Bank of England notes,
inasmuch as they form a portion of our reserves upon which
loans are granted and credits created, and, in our reserves,
they assist in the protection of our credits.” 1
“Great Britain's Financial Strength, ’ an address delivered on January
26, 1917.


Bank of England Notes
39,000,000
Currency Notes
150,000,000
Notes of Private and Joint
Stock Banks
34,000,000
The corresponding figures for G
ermany were : —
Reiclisbank Notes
403,000,000
Darlehnskassen Notes ...
170,000,000
Reichskassenscheine
18,000,000
There is no restriction upon their issue except the
provision for redemption in gold, for which a sum of
has been set aside. Critics, it may be said,
regard the redemption clause as little more than nominal.
According to Sir Edward Holden, the notes outstanding in
England at the end of 1916 were as follows :
Apart from direct currency measures, Great Britain is
financing the War by :
(1) The issue of short-time paper, i.e.,
Treasury Bills and Exchequer Bonds.
(2) The issue of Loans, mainly for the purpose of
consolidating the floating debts.
(3) Increased taxation, to which I shall refer later.
It is not my intention to go into details with regard to the
Loans issued by the British Government. Later I shall go
into the question whether its loan policy has resulted in
inflation.


IV.
It is thus clear that the three belligerents whose finances
I have discussed have each resorted to the issue of legal-
tender paper money. In Germany and France it is frankly
inconvertible ; in Great Britain it is nominally convertible
on presentation at the Bank of England, but the under-
standing evidently is that gold is released only at the
pleasure and discretion of the Bank of England. Compared
with the vast issues of Germany and France, and of other
belligerents like Russia (^340,000,C00 in 1916 alone), the
United Kingdom has made but a sparing use of this device.
The explanation lies mainly in this fact —that the United
Kingdom has relatively little need of an enlarged special
currency, the cheque and deposit currency, universal in
English-speaking countries, being sufficiently elastic to pro-
vide for all but small payments.
But in each country more notes have been issued than are
actually required for currency. What are not needed by
the public will not continue to circulate, but will find their
way to the Banks, whose assets are thus diluted by the
large holdings of inconvertible, non-interest-bearing paper.
The Banks would, no doubt, prefer to hold interest-bearing
securities, which make profits in two ways, whereas notes
can only increase dividends by enabling the Bank to loan
more freely.
There are two modes of issue of such paper: (a) the
government may print its own notes and pay with them
for goods and services ; or ( h ) it may throw the onus of
issuing the notes upon the Banks.
In the latter case the Banks undertake to discount short-
time government paper, like treasury bills, and to issue
notes or give credit equal to the discounted value of
the securities. The government bills are put in the
same category as bills of exchange and promissory notes.
It is held, however, they are not the same as commercial
paper, which is based upon, and limited by, specific wealth
already existing or reasonably certain to be produced in the


near future. There is no restriction upon the issue of
government short-time paper or of the notes arising
therefrom, or upon direct issue of notes; and there is,
therefore, no clearly definable relation between them and
the actual productivity of the nation.
Whilst this distinction is valid in the main, it is possible
to give too much weight to it. As suggested elsewhere, a
country at war may and frequently does increase enormously
its total production (including in this, as I think we must,
its war production). Much of the new wealth is the direct
product of governmental activities and monopolies. It has
been estimated that nearly half the working classes of
Germany are now working for the Government. In
England probably 3,000,000 men and women are engaged in
the many War establishments. Whole industries, like
transportation, have been taken over. It is thus evident
that a modern government at war takes on the semblance of
a vast industrial company for the production and continuous
supply of all the requirements of war and even of many of
the requirements of the civil population. Does not all this
productivity form as valid a basis for the issue of credits as
the productivity of private enterprise ?
Though the second method is probably preferable to the
first, there is little, if any, practical difference in the results.
In either case the currency is temporarily increased, and
this additional currency is based on the general credit
of the nation. In the past, knowledge of this fact has not
sufficed to prevent depreciation of the whole system, in so
far as it was inconvertible. Now, I am one of those who
believe that the last word has not been said on this question.
There are several considerations which lead me to discount
the importance of the precedents: (1) During the last
century public credit has progressively increased in strength
and reliability, partly as a result of the growth of
stable and responsible government, and partly as a
result of the enormous power of production, and hence of
taxable capacity possessed by a great modern nation.
(2) The public credit, so far from being negligible and


unsubstantial, has become the final support of the Banks
and the monetary system in times of stress. When the
English accept a Currency Note for one pound as in no way
inferior to a sovereign, they do so not because they believe
that every such note can be converted into gold, but because
they have faith in the wealth and power of their country —
in themselves as a nation. Could there be any sounder
basis ? If that fails them, is there any other to which they
may have recourse ?
At the same time it must be granted that a reckless use
of this device may lead to the depreciation of the paper in
comparison with gold and a corresponding rise in paper
prices. These results are the more likely to follow when
the issue has been very large, when no guarantee of early
redemption has been given, and when the political situation
is insecure. I shall inquire in another section whether the
paper money of Germany, France, and Great Britain shows
signs of depreciation.
It is also true that an increase in the quantity of money
in circulation, the money work remaining the same, involves
an increase of prices. This is true both of gold and paper
money (convertible or inconvertible). If gold be the only
medium of exchange in use, doubling the quantity of it in
circulation will merely halve its value ; unless, of course, a
proportionate increase has taken place in the exchanging to
be done. Multiplying money without multiplying the
production and exchanging of goods can have no effect
beyond altering the level of prices.
On the other hand, it must be remembered that the
condition of war greatly increases the money work and
therefore the demand for currency. This may be so even if
the production of wealth remains the same as before or even
if it is diminished. The experience of the past three years,
however, has proved that production may increase
enormously during war and justify a corresponding increase
of money or means of exchange.
It may be added that a really redundant currency—more
than is required for the money work—is not so easy to bring


about as is commonly supposed. People are not now likely
to keep in circulation or to hoard any large supply of notes
not required for business purposes. T.he surplus finds its
way into the Banks, and must be held by the Banks as part
of their reserves, along with any supply they hold of gold
or of interest-bearing securities. The money in circulation
is usually increased in an indirect way. The Banks having
large reserves, are anxious to lend freely. 1 heir customers
use the loans as a demand for labour and materials, the
prices of which will rise in consequence. Ihe same result
will follow whether the reserves are full of gold or of paper.
As already stated, the Banks do not like them, not because,
under modern conditions, they are afraid that the government
will fail to redeem them, but because they are less profitable
than interest-bearing securities. They also know that for
some purposes— e.y., for payments abroad —notes, whether
convertible or inconvertible, are useless. Hence, if they have
to hold a non-interest-bearing asset, they prefer gold, and
this preference in itself constitutes at least a mental deprecia-
tion of the value of the notes. There is no reason, however,
why actual depreciation arising from this cause should
exceed the small percentage required to put the notes on a
par with interest-bearing public securities.


V.
Postponing for the moment the question whether the
inconvertible notes of belligerent countries are actually
showing signs of depreciation, let us attack the cognate
problem of the possible inflation of credit arising out of
certain of the Loan policies adopted.
First of all, it is clear that when Bank depositors use their
real, as opposed to loan deposits, to subscribe for War
Loans, new credit is not created. All that happens is “a
transfer from the subscriber to the Government, from the
Government to the contractors, and from the contractors to
the Banks. The same deposit is capable of being driven
around the wheel continuously, so long as its different
owners are willing to take up Government loans.” 1
But new credit is created when the Banks make advances
to their customers to enable them to subscribe to War
Loans. New credit is also created when the Banks take up
Loans on their own account. Every purchase by the Banks
of Treasury Bills or other short-time paper, means the
creation of deposit credits to that amount. Many authorities
regard the credits arising in these two ways as tantamount
to an inflation of the currency.
It seems to me, however, that there is a clear distinction
between them. When, on the security of some marketable
property, the Bank advances ,£IOO to “A,” it has not really
increased his potential purchasing power. It has merely,
for a consideration, given him general purchasing power in
exchange for the title to specific wealth. Such transactions
are among the most characteristic of the normal functions
of Banks. Credits so created for the most part cancel each
other. They are no more likely to affect prices than
bartering cows for horses would.
When a Bank purchases Treasury Bills it merely gives the
government the right to draw up to the discounted value of
the Bills. In return for this privilege the Bank receives a
1 Sir Edward Holden, op. cit.


government security, which during the war can only be
liquidated by renewing it, or exchanging it for some other
government security. Government bonds are thus, in effect,
being made to serve as currency. The net result is very much
the same as an issue of paper money, except that interest has
to be paid on *he bonds and not on the paper money. Still
more remote from actual productivity is the German device
of advancing money for subscription to a War Loan.
A considerable part of the German Loans appears to be
based on fictitious credit, or rather upon obligations which
individual lenders cannot possibly meet at present or in tbe
near future. A man who has subscribed 1,000 m. to the
first Loan was able to do so because he had valid claims to
existing wealth to that amount. But if, when the second
Loan is issued, he finds that his claims to real wealth are
exhausted, what more can he do ? The Germans have
found a way out of this difficulty ! All that he need do is
to take the certificate of his stock to a Bank, which will
then advance him 750 m. for investment in the second Loan.
According to the Kolnische Zeitung (2nd September, 1915),
he can even subscribe four times this amount, if he leaves
with the Bank the new scrip. An obvious effect of this
process of “ pyramiding” will be the financial enslavement
of many Germans to the Banks. Further, it is evident that
whether such Loans result in the creation of inconvertible
notes or not, they must inevitably increase the amount of
money or purchasing power put into circulation having no
basis in actual wealth. This “ fictitious ” purchasing power
has the same influence in the market as “ real ” purchasing
power. It artificially increases the amount of money offered
for goods, and unless there is a proportionate increase in
production, the result will be an increase in the prices of
commodities.


VI.
It is now necessary to inquire whether the issue of
inconvertible notes and the “ pyramiding ” process in the
raising of Loans have actually led to currency depreciation in
Germany, France, and the United Kingdom.
Various meanings may be assigned to the word “ depre-
ciation.” It may, for example,'denote : 1
(1) A decline in the exchange value of a given
currency unit in terras of some other currency
unit of the same country : as when a pound note
is found to have less purchasing power than a
sovereign.
(2) A decline in the value of a money unit of one
country in terms of the money unit of another :
like the recent fall in the value of pounds
sterling, marks, and francs in terms of American
dollars.
(3) A decline in the general exchange value of a given
money unit, like tbe decline in the purchasing
power of the sovereign or dollar since 1897.
Corresponding to these different meanings are three tests
which economists have been in the habit of applying to
currency :
(1) The existence of a premium on gold.
(2) A dislocation in foreign exchange rates.
(3) A rise in the index number for the general price
level.
The first, the existence of a premium on gold, is the most
satisfactory test for ascertaining whether a country’s paper
money is depreciated in relation to the universal unit of
value (gold).
If we are to rely on precedents, we might expect that the
large issues of notes in Germany and France, to say nothing
1 A. C. Whitaker, “Currency Depreciation in Time of War.’ 1 Quarterly
Journal of Economics, February, 1916.


of “inflation loans,” would be followed by depreciation ;
but if it exists the direct evidence is insufficient to prove the
fact. An attempt by speculators in Germany to get gold
by offering a small premium was nipped in the bud, and
the practice sternly forbidden American travellers desiring
to leave Germany and France have offered fantastic
premiums ; but this fact, explainable on the ground that
gold exports from these countries has been prohibited, does
not prove depreciation, nor justify the statement so often
made —that gold is at a premium throughout Western
Europe. It is even more difficult to find direct evidence of
depreciation in England, which still maintains an open
market for gold.
The second test, derangement of the foreign exchanges,
is hardly more conclusive, Pounds sterling, francs, and
marks have undoubtedly depreciated, in varying degrees,
as compared with the American dollar. During the first
months of the War, pounds were at a considerable premium,
and for the simple reason that during these months America
owed a great deal of money to the United Kingdom, and
the competition of bidders for bills or drafts sent exchange
soaring to a 44 per cent, premium in favour of the United
Kingdom. This means that it took about seven dollars in
New York to liquidate a debt of one pound in Eondon.
The rates, however, gradually fell as confidence returned in
the general situation, and particularly in the ability of the
British Fleet to hold the sea safe for traffic, and in December
the rate was at par. Since then it has been in favour of the
United States, though rarely exceeding 5 per cent. A
similar story may be told of the fluctuations of franc and
dollar exchange, except that during 1915 the discount on
the franc rose rapidly to 14 per cent., standing at the end of
the year at 11'6 per cent. The German mark, during the
same period, showed a rapidly increasing depreciation, in
terms of dollars, in December, 1915 being at a discount of
20’7 per cent.
Now facts like these are commonly interpreted to mean
that the paper currencies of Germany, France, and the


United Kingdom have depreciated in terras of their own
gold unit of value. But such an interpretation cannot be
accepted. The fact that American business men had, at the
beginning of the War, to pay seven dollars in New York for
one pound in Eondon, certainly did not mean that there was
a monetary inflation in the United States. Nor does the
swing in the opposite direction prove that the money systems
of the United Kingdom, France, and Germany were
suffering internal depreciation as compared with gold. If we
take Germany as an illustration, what meaning are we to
ascribe to the 20 per cent, depreciation of the mark as
compared with the American dollar ? In the first place, it
must be remembered that German exports to America were
soon reduced to small proportions, and that American
exports to Germany continued to be carried on through
neutrals. Germany, therefore, could not pay for imports by
exports ; she could pay only by gold or by selling securities.
The selling of securities for a time arrested the decline of
the exchange rates against her ; but the relief was only
temporary. When securities were used up, there remained
only the export of gold ; and this, besides being illegal,
could only be effected with great difficulty and at great risk.
The adverse rates measure :
(1) The difficulty experienced by Americans in getting
payments from their German customers.
(2) Possibly a growing lack of confidence in the issue
of Germany’s scheme of aggrandisement.
They cannot be taken as an accurate measure of
monetary inflation in Germany itself.
Nor is the third test any more conclusive. Prices of
commodities in these countries have undoubtedly risen by
leaps and bounds. From July, 1914, to the end of October,
1915, English prices rose 30 percent, to 35 per cent. If we
trust to somewhat scanty data, prices in France rose, during
the same period, about 50 per cent. In Germany there was
a rise of from 75 per cent, to 80 per cent. From the end of
1915 onward prices have been rising in all three countries.
The increase in England is now computed at 97% per cent.


Now these rising price levels are undoubtedly equivalent
to a fall in the purchasing power of the currency unit.
But does this prove that the actual currencies (mostly
paper of one kind or another) have suffered depreciation in
terms of gold? Might not the same phenomena have
appeared had these currencies been freely convertible, or
had the various governments refrained from issuing large
quantities of inconvertible notes, or from doubtful methods
of I,oan finance ? Some part —probably a large part —of the
general rise in price levels is obviously due to general
scarcity in the supply of commodities: a conclusion con-
firmed by the fact that Germany, which is most cut off from
foreign supplies, has suffered the greatest rise in prices.
On the whole, it may be said that the available evidence is
insufficient to prove that depreciation as compared with gold
has taken place, or that the rising prices are due solely to cur-
rency inflation. All that we can say is that it is probably true
that some depreciation has taken place, and that it is due not
merely to the issue of inconvertible notes, but also to the
illegitimate expansion of credit in the raising of War Loans.
When the War is over, the problem of preventing a still
greater depreciation will tax to the uttermost the financial
ability of most of the countries concerned. But the problem
is not insoluble. So far as inconvertible notes are concerned,
they can be converted into Loan stock, and this will remove
any anxiety alarmists may have felt. In the meantime,
they have served a very useful —and probably necessary—
purpose.


Vll.
But with Europe organized financially on the basis of
paper money, what has been happening to the world supply
of gold ? Europe, it has been said, has now all the paper
and America all the gold. An exaggeration, of course, for
Europe has still considerable reserves ; but nevertheless the
War has “ caused an international shift of gold of immense
proportions.” 1 The United States of America has received
£200,000,000, an increase of nearly 50 per cent, over previous
holdings. Sweden, Denmark, Holland, Switzerland, and
Spain have gained £80,000,000, or 107 per cent, more than
they had before the War began. The Argentine has netted
£20,000,000. According to a recent cable Japan has
£70,000,000 of new gold.
The fact is that Europe just now cannot afford the luxury
of decorative gold supplies. Wheat, wool, meat, iron, guns,
shells, are of far more importance to her than gold. She
has ransacked private hoards and melted dow r n plate and
jewellery to the extent of £200,000,000 and has gladly
parted with this and more for munitions and food. Eife is
too serious in the great European nations for indulgence in
monetary “sw 7 ank.” It is, no doubt, fortunate that they
were able to lay their hands on large supplies of gold ; but
they would have been in just as good a position if an equal
amount of gold (or its equivalent) had been previously
invested in neutral securities.
Neutral countries have been inundated with a golden
flood. Strange to say, they have not regarded it as an
unmixed blessing. Most of them would have preferred
food, clothes, coal, and other commodities needed for daily
consumption. Indeed, the gold has created something of a
panic, and we have the spectacle of the Scandinavian
countries passing legislation to exclude the “ yellow peril.”
Holland, also, is taking its trade balance against England in
British Treasury Bills. She w 7 ants no more gold. What all
1 6. E. Koberts, “ The Situation of the United States at the Close of the
European War; with special reference to the Gold Supply.” American
Economic Reoiem Supplement , March. 1917.


these countries fear is that too much gold will have the same
effect as too much paper, viz., a rise in the general level of
commodity prices. Their remedy is to invest balances
abroad.
In the United States the same misgivings have frequently
found expression. Even the most confirmed worshippers of
the Golden Calf have begun to realise that vast accretions
of gold cannot remain dead in reserves. They must be used.
It is not in the human nature of bankers to see an idle stock
of gold without attempting to make a profit on it. It can
be used only by means of loaning, and loaning in the freest
possible manner. In such a situation, “ every borrower is
a benefactor.” But, as Mr. Roberts and others have
shown, there are limits to the healthy expansion of loans.
Industries in the United States are already working to their
maximum capacity. Labour is fully occupied. New
industries, started on the strength of cheap money, can get
labour only by paying more for it. The effects are to raise
wages and prices all round, and incidentally to give
encouragement to all sorts of “wild cat” schemes which
aim at “profiteering ” rather than production.
America, too, has more gold than she wants, and most of
the financial experts advise the Scandinavian and Dutch
remedy, investment abroad, as a means of stopping the flow
and getting rid of some of the present surplus. Probably,
indeed, it would have been wiser to have adopted this policy
at an earlier date.
It may be mentioned here that fears are entertained by
some in America that Europe, after the war, will
demonetize gold. There does not appear to be any real
ground for this apprehension ; but it is tolerably safe to
assume that Europe has now fewer illusions than she had
about the monetary importance of gold.


VIII.
There remains still to be considered the second source
from which a government at war may obtain money. I
mean the increase of taxation. In this paper it will be
impossible to deal adequately with the question. I shall
have to content myself with (1) an explanation of how
taxation differs from other financial devices, and (2) a very
brief discussion of the question how far a government
should finance war by taxes or by loans.
A loan is a voluntary contribution to the expenses of
government in return for the payment of a stipulated rate of
interest. It is, therefore, simply an investment. Investors
may, of course, be actuated by patriotism in deciding to put
money into war loans rather than into other securities.
They may lose a small percentage of gain by so doing; but,
on the whole, investment in war loans is a business
transaction, and sometimes extremely profitable.
A tax, on the other hand, is a compulsory withdrawal,
for public purposes, of some portion of an individual’s
wealth, on the clear understanding that it will not be
returned, and that no direct compensation will be made
for its use. So far as individuals are concerned, it is
confiscation ; and the fact that the whole society, including
the taxpayers, may benefit by the public use of confiscated
property, is not usually regarded as completely consoling for
the loss of part of their wealth. The average “economic ’’
man has no love for taxation. It is not merely that it
may compel him to cut down his accepted standard of
expenditure; this result may be necessary and beneficial in
times such as these ; but it also limits the amount of income
he may devote to gainful pursuits, such as investing in war
loans or in shares in the stock of companies providing the
necessaries of war, or in businesses that cater only for the
wants of a nation at peace.
For a long time Germany boasted that in her case
increased taxation was unnecessary. Dr. Helfferich, in fact
claimed that he had been aide to meet the ordinary expenses


of Government from current revenue without levying
additional taxation. This is all the more remarkable seeing
that the revenue has necessarily fallen off. The tariff, which
usually accounted for 40 per cent, of the German revenue,
now brings in comparatively little. Income from other
sources, like railways, has also decreased. It is difficult,
therefore, to understand how* the normal expenses of the
Government could be met out of a greatly diminished
income. Possibly, however, Germany had decided that it
was unnecessary to bleed the people in two ways at the same
time. They could not raise Loans up to the limit of their
actual means and credit, and at the same time find the
wherewithal to pay increased taxes. But more recently the
Government has instituted heavy taxation on war profits.
France has naturally suffered a loss of normal revenue
owing to the occupation of part of her territory by the
enemy, and partly on that account she delayed levying
increased taxation ; but as the situation improved she found
it practicable to raise considerable sums through taxation.
In the United Kingdom there has been a tremendous
increase in taxation, particularly on war profits. Recent
returns show that about 25 per cent, of the British War costs
has been paid out of taxation.
The second question —How far a Government should
finance a war by taxes, rather than by loans ? —is one on
which opinions greatly differ. There are some who prefer
taxation to borrowing. They believe in the policy of “pay
as you go,” and they give the following reasons for their
belief :
(1) Financing by taxation does not, they allege, throw
a burden on the future.
(2) It avoids the rise of prices commonly ascribed to
financing by loans and paper money.
(3) It compels an immediate reduction of unnecessary
and wasteful consumption.
(4) If conscription of persons be decided on, then
conscription of wealth should also be adopted,
and this can only be brought about by taxation.


On tbe other side, the following considerations are put
forward:
(1) The whole drift of modern finance has been in the
opposite direction for more than a hundred years.
Wars have, as a matter of fact, been financed
mainly by loans and paper money. This does
not, of course, prove the case against the
taxation method. It merely draws attention to
an actual evolution in finance.
(2) Loans, the first school asserts, throw a burden on
the future. I shall give reasons presently for
believing that this idea is grossly exaggerated.
The argument is that loans limit the amount of
capital which may be invested outside of war
industries. Established peace industries suffer
through depreciation of concrete capital, and
during the war there is neither labour nor capital
for the laying down of new plants. When peace
comes the community is less well equipped than
it might have been had no war taken place. So
far as this reasoning is sound, it applies with
equal force to taxation, which not only restricts
consumption, but limits the extent of private
investments.
(3) The second argument referred to above for a
confiscatory policy, depends on the correct-
ness of the assumption that rising prices are
solely or mostly due to expansion of credit.
This, as I have suggested, is putting excessive
emphasis on the monetary factors in the deter-
mination of price. The truth is, that price
advance will take place under war conditions
even if no expansion of credit exists.
“ Whether public borrowing will lead to an
inflation of prices depends largely on the
conditions on which loans are contracted. If
the subscriptions to the loan are defrayed by
borrowing from the banks, such a result would


undoubtedly ensue, at least to the extent that
analogous subscriptions might not have been
made to ordinary industrial enterprises. But if,
on the contrary, there is a large loan fund in
existence —if in other words, the accumulated
profits of recent years have not yet been invested,
or if the subscriptions to the loan involve simply
a change of investment from private enterprise
to government service, there will be no such
resort to credit and there will be no such
inflation of prices.”^)
(4) “ Conscription of Wealth ” or income advocated as
the logical accompaniment of “conscription of
persons ” is probably neither just nor feasible.
“Is it proposed to draft for personal service only
the poor of purse ? Will not the wealthy be
called upon to make sacrifices of service ? The
proposal to permit able-bodied men of wealth to
purchase exemption from military duty by
surrender of their property would certainly not
appeal to anyone. When war begins to reap its
harvest, there will doubtless be a full measure of
distress among the wealthy. Moreover, does
not this argument appear to rest to some
extent upon a desire to punish and to cause
suffering ? Paraphrased, it would read as
follows : The poor will have to suffer by render-
ing personal service ; let us make the rich
suffer also be compelling them to surrender their
incomes. There will be personal service rendered
by both rich and poor, and if the war continues
for a long time great suffering will ensue. The
sacrifices of the poorer classes certainly must not
be increased by the addition of heavy economic
burdens. Wherever the expenditure of money
will further the purposes of the war, will prevent
Edwin K. A. S3ligman and Robert Murray Haig : “ How to Finance the
War,” Columbia War Papers, Series I, Number 7 (Columbia University,
1917)’, p. 10.


suffering and save life, the money must be spent.
The financial burden of this must indeed be
borne by those who have a surplus, and there is
every indication that they will accept the burden
willingly.” (*)
(5) Finally, there is the “ practical expediency ”
argument. Drastic confiscation of income as it
accrues is a policy that no ministry would be
likely to face. Even if its ultimate economic
effect could be proved to be less harmful than
borrowing, it ignores the “psychological factor.”
In all probability it would result in discontent
and disunion at a time when harmonious
co-operation is essential.
But although the arguments for raising war funds mainly
or wholly through taxation are inconclusive, there are
several reasons for the adoption of a policy of increased
taxation.
In the first place, combined loans and taxation tap income
and property which a loan policy by itself fails to tap. In
the second place, as already stated, it limits unnecessary or
wasteful consumption, and thereby saves labour for more
urgent purposes. Finally, there is a reason connected with
the question of wealth distribution. It may be true, as
Pigou holds, that if everybody in a community had the
same amount of wealth, there would be little to choose
between borrowing and taxation. But wealth is far from
being equally divided. Under the prevailing conditions of
inequality and “ as regards aggregate effects, there is a very
great difference. Under the tax method, the rich and
moderately rich shoulder the whole burden of the charge
that is laid upon them,” though this is true only so far as
they are unable to shift the taxes. “ Under the loan
method they do not do this ; because they are compensated
afterwards through taxes laid for that purpose partly on
themselves, but partly also on other and poorer sections of
1 Ibid., pp. 11-12.


the community.” 1 Indeed, if indirect taxation is used to
any great extent, the poor will bear a large part of the
burden.
The exemption of loans from taxation, though it may at
times be unavoidable, is a violation of the principle of
equity of taxation, since it gives a permanent advantage to
one class of investor in comparison with other investors
whose services to the community may be equally important.
It also gives added importance to the element of unearned
income.
So also it may be that the poor suffer most heavily from
such inflation of currency as possibly results from incon-
vertible issues and some of the loan methods I have described.
Their wages do not rise as rapidly as prices, and their
money incomes do not purchase as much as before. “ This
means that, in effect, a part of what the rich hand over to
the State in their War Loan subscriptions is really exacted
without interest from the poor.” 2
On the whole, it is probably true that the taxation
method, so far as it is practicable, has a less harmful effect
upon the distribution of wealth than borrowing is likely to
have.
1 Pigou, “ The Economics and Finance of War.” Proceedings of Section 10
of British Association for the Advancement of Science, 1916.
2 Ibid.


IX.
This leads to consideration of two related problems
to the first of which I offered a tentative solution in the
Veil of Money. They are ;
(1) In accumulating these vast War debts, are the
people of to-day transmitting a burden to the
future ?
(2) Will the distribution of wealth in the immediate
future be affected by War Finance to the
disadvantage of the poor?
The answer to the first seemed to be that the war could
be carried on only by the present use of men and resources.
War Finance, whatever else it meant, was merely a method
of organizing men to use existing resources in a special way.
So far, then, as the nation is indebted only to its own
citizens, the burden is not transferred to the future.
Since writing the first paper, I have read an interesting
address by Mr. G. K. Roberts, one of the ablest of
American bankers. I cannot do better than quote what he
says on this point:
“But what about the debt? Is it true that
these countries are drawing on the future, that
they are expending capital before it is created,
and heaping up burdens upon generations yet
unborn ? There is very great exaggeration
about that. If you say that they are wasting
capital which should be passed down to the
future, and that the progress of the world is
retarded, I will agree, but this is a different
thing.
“ In the first place, there is no such thing as
expending capital before it is created. Capital
must exist in tangible form. There are no
economic losses except in tangible things. The
war, as we have seen, is carried on with tangible
things —-with equipment and supplies—and these
must be furnished now, not after the war is


over. The armies are not being fed this year
from next year’s crops, nor are they using
supplies of next year’s make. Whatever else
may be obscure about the incidence and effects of
this body of indebtedness, one thing is clear,
viz. : that all the production of the future will
belong to the future, and none of it will belong
to the past. * A popular speaker is quoted as
sa5 r ing that 500 years after the war is over
the people will be toiling to pay the interest
on these loans. That may be so, but if it is, it
is certain that the payments will be made to
people then living, and that their use of the capital
will react upon the entire community.” ( L )
But though this reply is conclusive as far as it goes, it
may not appear to dispose of the whole difficulty. Is not
the obligation to pay interest, and ultimately to redeem
War Loans, a burden which we are transferring to the
future? My tentative reply took this form :
(а) The transfer by individuals of rights of action or
titles to property to the State, does not alter the
material economic situation, though it leads to a
diversion of economic energy. If those rights
had not been transferred, they would be function-
ing as ordinary commercial capital, and would
exact a return for their services. Is there any
essential difference between the two forms of
burden ?
(б) If it be said that there is a radical difference,
because in one case the loaned capital creates
assets which have no value for peace, and in the
other brings into existence more or less per-
manent instruments of production, the reply is
that the war expenditure on equipment and
supplies is as economically necessary as any of
the economic activities of a nation at peace.
1 Business After the War . an address given on June 13, 1916.


I did not, of course, argue that war did not involve an
economic loss, but only that the principal loss “occurred
when the proceeds of the loans were expended.’’ That
loss takes the form of the destruction or maiming of human
life, the destruction or letting down of concrete capital
employed for peace purposes, the comparative neglect of
some industries important in times of peace, and the
difficulty of reconverting plant and re-establishing industries
at the close of the war.
I insisted, and still insist, that economic laws are not
suspended during war. The wealth produced for war is just
as much wealth as that which is produced for peaceful
consumption. The enormous consumption of war must have
an equally enormous production. The waste of war has,
unfortunately, its counterpart in the wastes of peace ; and
the state of war has often this advantage—that it compels a
degree of organization seldom realized in the careless and
slovenly, even if “piping,” times of peace. And as
production may be actually increased in war-time, it follows
that the supply of loanable capital may also be increased.
This capital is just as real and legitimate as the capital that
arises out of the normal production and consumption of
goods in peace time. Failure to appreciate this, and the fact
that much of this war wealth is the direct product of the
State’s action, have led to some doubtful conclusions. For
example, take the following statement by a thoughtful
Australian banker, 1 one who has nevertheless grasped the
true meaning of modern money. He is criticizing severely
—with wffiat justice I need not here consider —the issue of
Australian notes for the purpose of financing the War. He
considers that this issue has resulted in the creation of
fictitious credit or purchasing power, and goes on to remark :
“The Government, with the further pur-
chasing power placed at its disposal, purchases
with it further goods and services for destructive
purposes. Thus, with each increase of credit
there is no corresponding increase of material
wealth ; rather the reverse, an actual decrease.”
1 J. H. Butcliart, Money, Credit, and Banking.


But surely, if the goods and services are forthcoming at the
requisition of the Government, there must be so far an actual
increase of wealth. To say that it is produced for
“ destructive purposes ” does not rule it out as an economic
quantity on which credit may be legitimately based. 1
With respect to the second problem, I believe with
Mr. Pethick Lawrence, 2 that the rich, who are the principal
lenders to War Loans, will be on that account in a stronger
economic position after than before the War. A great deal of
property held by people of moderate means will, before the
end of the War, have passed into the hands of the rich. As
already suggested, also, a good deal of the interest on War
Loans will come out of tbe incomes of the poorer classes ;
and if it should turn out that paper currencies cannot be
saved from depreciation, the poor will suffer dispro-
portionately on this account. I do not, however, believe
that considerable depreciation is inevitable or even likely.
Nevertheless, there is a grave danger that distribution of
wealth after the War will be more lopsided than ever.
So far as that danger cannot be avoided, the economic
condition of the poorer classes will be worse in the
immediate future.
The danger will be greatly increased by the failure of the
capitalist and labour interests to co-operate more harmo-
niously than in the past. The adoption of a reactionary policy
by the former may bring us face to face with the “longest,
fiercest, and most widespread industrial strife” 3 society has
ever experienced. But such a crisis may be equally well
precipitated by unreasonable demands or methods on the part
of working men. One cannot but hope, however, that the War
has taught the people of the United Kingdom, and perhaps
the people of Australia, the enormous advantage of
rational organization and co-operation. If we are to fail to
accomplish in peace-time what we have so nearly accom-
plished with tbe enemy at the gate, then I do not see what
1 I am rot here, of course, questioning his criticism of the issue of
Australian notes.
2 The Economist, September 20, 1916.
* The New Statesman.


hope there is for the world. But I do not believe that we
are going to throw away the lessons of the War so readily.
On the whole, as will have become apparent, my views
about the effects of the War Finance of to-day are less
pessimistic than those commonly put forward. And I
think that anyone who refuses to be hypnotized by figures
and symbols, and honestly tries to get at the reality behind
the figures and symbols, will be disposed to share my
optimism. In particular, it has seemed to me desirable to
get away from the purely monetary expression of the
problem of War Finance.
A Roman, it has been said, was asked which be would
prefer, a lump of iron or a lump of gold. He said, ‘ I will
take the iron, as I can then get the gold also.’ The iron
of war is men and munitions, money is but the medium
through which, for convenience, we can get them. Given
men and munitions, money can be had for the asking. This
is the whole philosophy of War Finance.” 1
Carl C. Plehn, University of California Chronicle, July, 1916.


LAST PEE-WAE EETUEN. *
LATEST EETURN. •
Gold.
Note
Circulation,
Propor-
tion.
Gold.
Note
Circulation.
Propor-
ti >n.
! Gold,
Note,
Germany ..
£
67,843,000
£
94,545,000
°/
/ o
71.8
£
123,259,000(«)
£
331,707,000
°/
/ 0
37.1
°l
/ o
+81.7
°/ o
+250.9
England ...
38,131,000
29,706,000
128.4
89,880,000 W
157,998,000^
56.9
+ 135.8
+432.0
Russia
174,509,000
163,411,000
106.8
303,360,000
637,953,000
47.5
+ 73.8
+ 290.4
France
165,654,000
267,327,000
61.9
190,530,000
632,226,000
30.1
+ 15.1
+ 136.5
Italy
48,456,000
69,204,000
70.0
39,657,000
129,249,000
32.9
1—18.2
+ 73.7
Entente ....
426,750,000
529,648,000
80.6
613,427,000
1,548,426,000
40.2
+46.1
+ 192.3
Appendix A.
GOLD HELD BY BELLIGERENT COUNTRIES.
* Dates not given.
U) The Statist, July 1, 1916, p. 17.
(а) Good reason to believe all gold of Germany included in this.
(б) Includes £28.500 000 gold lield against Treasury Notes.
(c) Includes £122,099,000 Treasury Notes outstanding.
