

NEW ZEALAND.
WAR REGULATIONS.
WAR REGULATIONS ACTS, 1914-1918,
AND REGULATIONS MADE THEREUNDER.
FIFTH EDITION.
To 23rd June, 1919.
WELLINGTON, N.Z.
BY AUTHORTIY: MARCUS F. MARKS, GOVERNMENR PRINTER.
1919.




NEW ZEALAND.
WAR REGULATIONS.
WAR REGULATIONS ACTS, 1914-1918,
AND REGULATIONS MADE THEREUNDER.
FIFTH EDITION.
To 23rd June, 1919.
WELLINGTON, N.Z.
By Authority: Marcus F. Marks, Government Printer.
1919.




(e.) Every license issued by a competent authority under this regula-
tion may be issued on such terms and conditions as that authority thinks
fit, and shall be revocable at the will of the same or any other competent
authority.
4. A constable or an officer of Customs may question any person
engaged or about to be engaged in the work of lading or unlading a
ship, or in any manner of work on or about a wharf or ship, or
any person found upon a wharf or ship, as to his identity and present
or former nationality, and any person who refuses or neglects to answer
any question so put to him, or who answers any such question in a false
or misleading manner, shall be guilty of an offence against these regula-
tions, and shall be liable accordingly.
5. (a.) Any constable or officer of Customs may search and detain for
the purpose of search any person, conveyance, package, or receptacle of
any description found on or about any wharf or ship, and may for this
purpose enter upon any wharf or ship.
(b.) Every person who resists, obstructs, or deceives any constable or
officer of Customs in the exercise of this right of search or detention
shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable
accordingly.
6. (a.) When a competent authority is satisfied that the conduct or
character of any person is such that his exclusion from wharves and
shipping is advisable in the interests of the public safety, such competent
authority may by order in writing warn that person off all wharves and
ships.
(b.) Every such order shall take effect so soon as the making thereof
has been brought in any manner to the knowledge of the person against
whom it is made.
( c .) If while any such order remains in force the person against whom
it is made enters or remains upon any wharf or ship or loiters in the
vicinity of any entrance to a wharf, he shall be guilty of an offence
against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
( d.) Every such order made by a competent authority may by order
in writing be revoked by the same or any other competent authority.
7. These regulations shall be deemed part of and shall be read to-
gether with the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
F. D. THOMSON,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 15th October, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations for the Cook Islands made by Order in
Council dated the 15th October, 1917.
His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion of New Zealand,
in pursuance of the authority conferred upon him by the War Regula-
tions Act, 1914, and its amendments, and acting by and with the advice


PREFATORY NOTE.
In this the Fifth Edition of the War Regulations Manual all
War Regulations now in force have been inserted, omitting only
those regulations and parts of regulations which have been revoked.
Where any regulation has been amended a reference is made
to the amendment.
The regulations are arranged in chronological order, and, so as
to save space, where the headings to the Orders in Council are
formal they have been omitted.
An index to the contents will be found at the end of the com-
pilation.
E. Y. REDWARD.
Crown Law Office,
23rd June, 1919.
I*—War Regs.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
War Regulations Act, 1914 .. .. • • 5
War Regulations Amendment Act, 1915 .. • • 7
War Regulations Amendment Act (No. 2), 1915 .. 8
War Regulations Amendment Act, 1916 .. ..11
War Legislation Amendment Act, 1916, Section 41 .. 16
War Legislation Act, 1917, Sections 26, 34, and 35 .. .17
Finance Act, 1918, Section 25 .. .. ..19
War Legislation and Statute Law Amendment Act,
1918, Sections 24, 26, 29, and 30 .. .. .. 20
War Regulations .. .. .. ■ • .. 22
Index .. .. •• •• •• 207


WAR REGULATIONS.
WAR REGULATIONS ACT, 1914.
ANALYSIS.
Title.
1. Short Title. 5. Validity of regulations.
2- Regulations as to powers and duties 6. Procedure in prosecutions under this
of Defence Forces, &c. ' Act.
3. Regulations prohibiting acts injurious 7. Penal provisions of other Acts not
to the public safety. affected.
4. Liability for breach of regulations. 8. Duration of Act.
1914, No. 38.
Title.
An Act to confer on the Governor in Council Power to make Better
Provision for the Public Safety during the Present War.
[2nd November , 1914.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of New Zealand in Parlia-
ment assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :
Short Title.
1. This Act may be cited as the War Regulations Act, 1914.
Regulations as to powers and duties of Defence Forces, &c.
2. For the purpose of better securing the public safety, the defence
of New Zealand, and the effective conduct of the military or naval
operations of His Majesty during the present war the Governor in
Council may make such regulations as he thinks necessary in that
behalf as to the powers and duties of the members of the Defence
Forces or the Police Force, or of other persons acting on His Majesty’s
behalf.


Regulations prohibiting acts injurious to the public safety.
3. The Governor in Council may make such regulations as he
thinks necessary for the prohibition of any acts which in his opinion
are injurious to the public safety, the defence of New Zealand, or the
effective conduct of the military or naval operations of His Majesty
during the present war. (See section 4. Page 7.)
Liability for breach of regulations.
4. Any person who commits, or attempts to commit, or does any
act with intent to commit, or counsels, procures, aids, abets, or incites
any other person to commit, or conspires with any other person
(whether in New Zealand or elsewhere) to commit, any offence
against a regulation made under this Act shall be liable on summary
conviction before a Magistrate to imprisonment for a term not exceed-
ing twelve months or to a fine not exceeding one hundred pounds.
(As amended see section 12. Page 10.)
Validity of regulations.
5. No regulation under this Act shall be deemed invalid because
it deals with any matter already provided for by any Act in that
behalf, or because of any repugnancy to any such Act.
Procedure in prosecutions under this Act.
6. In any prosecution under this Act —
(a.) The Magistrate shall take judicial notice of the existence or
termination of a state of war:
(6.) The burden of proving that the accused is not an alien shall
lie upon the accused :
(c.) The prosecution shall take place by way of summary pro
ceedings and not by way of indictment, notwithstanding
the provisions of any other Act to the contrary:
(i d .) No person convicted shall be released from custody by reason
of and during the pendency of an appeal from the con-
viction, and warrants may be issued in execution of the
conviction in the same manner as if no appeal had been
instituted, anything in any other Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.
Penal provisions of other Acts not affected.
7. Nothing in this Act shall be so construed or shall so operate
as to take away or restrict the liability of any person for any offence
punishable independently of this Act.
Duration of Act.
8. Repealed (see section 7 of Amendment Act, 1916).


WAR REGULATIONS AMENDMENT ACT, 1915.
ANALYSIS.
Title. 3. Evidence.
1. Short Title. 4. Interpretation.
2. Validation of regulations. 5. Repeal. Duration of Act.
1915, No. 5.
Title.
An Act to amend the War Regulations Act, 1914, and to continue
the Operation thereof. [ 3rd July, 1915.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of New Zealand in Parlia-
ment assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :
Short Title.
1. This Act may be cited as the War Regulations Amendment
Act, 1915, and shall be read together with and deemed part of the
War Regulations Act, 1914 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act).
Validation of regulations.
2. All regulations heretofore made by the Governor in Council
under the principal Act shall for all purposes whatever be deemed
as from the making thereof to have been made with full power
and authority, and to be and to have been valid and of full effect
accordingly.
Evidence.
3. In any prosecution under the principal Act the Court may
admit such evidence as it thinks fit, whether such evidence is legally
admissible in other proceedings or not.
Interpretation.
4. The term “ acts ” as used in section three of the principal Act
includes acts of omission as well as acts of commission.
Repeal. Duration of Act.
5. Repealed (see section 7 of Amendment Act, 1916).


WAR REGULATIONS AMENDMENT ACT (No. 2),
1915.
ANALYSIS.
Title.
1. Short Title.
2. Interpretation.
3. Minister of Defence may requisition
military supplies.
4. Requisition to be deemed a con-
tract.
5. Price to be determined by arbitra-
tion.
6. Penalty for failure to comply with
requisition.
7. On failure to comply with requisi-
tion Minister may take possession.
8. Penalty for obstruction.
9. Requisition to be a defence to
actions for breach of contract.
10. Requisition not to affect contracts
with the Crown.
11. Cancellation of requisitions.
12. Section 4 of principal Act amended.
13. Validation of regulations.
14. Duration of Act.
1915, No. GG.
Title.
An Act to further amend the War Regulations Act, 1914.
[ llth October, 1915.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of New Zealand in Parlia-
ment assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows: —
Short Title.
1. This Act may be cited as the War Regulations Amendment
Act, 1915 (No. 2), and shall be read together with and deemed part
of the War Regulations Act, 1914 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act).
Interpretation.
2. In this Act the term “ military supplies ” means all goods,
wares, or merchandise which the Minister of Defence thinks re-
quisite for the use of His Majesty for any purpose in connection
with the present war, or for the purposes of an Expeditionary Force,
whether during or after the present war. (As amended see section 29.
Page 21.)
Minister of Defence may requisition military supplies.
3. The Minister of Defence may by notice in writing, herein-
after termed a requisition, demand on behalf of His Majesty any
military supplies from the owner or occupier of any factory or
workshop which is adapted, or which may by reasonable expendi-
ture be adapted, for the manufacture or production of the military
supplies so demanded.


Requisition to be deemed a contract.
4. The delivery of any such requisition shall be deemed to con-
stitute a contract between the Crown and the or occupier to
whom it has been so delivered, and the owner or occupier shall be
bound accordingly to manufacture or produce and sell and deliver
to the Minister of Defence on behalf of the Crown the military
supplies so demanded, in accordance in all respects as to quantity,
quality, time, and place of delivery and otherwise, with the tenor
of the requisition.
Price to be determined by arbitration.
5. The price payable by the Crown for the supplies so.requisi-
tioned shall, in default of agreement between the seller and the
Minister of Defence, be determined by the arbitration of a Judge of
the Supreme Court, and the Governor may by Order in Council
make such regulations as he deems necessary with respect to the
procedure on such arbitration.
Penalty for failure to comply with requisition.
6. Every owner or occupier of a factory or workshop who
wilfully refuses or fails to perform his obligations under any such
requisition of military supplies, and every person who wilfully
counsels, procures, aids, abets, or incites any such owner or occupier
so to refuse or fail to fulfil his obligations, or who wilfully pre-
vents or obstructs the fulfilment of such obligations, shall be
severally liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding two
hundred pounds.
On failure to comply with requisition Minister may take possession.
7. If the owner or occupier of a factory or workshop refuses
or fails to fulfil his obligations under any such requisition the
Minister of Defence may take possession of that factory or work-
shop, and may use the same as the agent of the owner or occupier
for the purpose of manufacturing or producing the military sup-
plies to which the requisition relates.
Penalty for obstruction.
8. Any person who wilfully obstructs the Minister of Defence
or any servant of the Crown in the exercise of the right hereby
conferred of taking possession of and using any factory or work-
shop shall on summary conviction be liable to the same punishment
as if he had committed an offence against the regulations made
under the principal Act.
Requisition to be a defence to actions for breach of contract.
9. If and so far as the fulfilment of the obligations imposed by
any such requisition prevents the owner or occupier of any factory
or workshop from fulfilling any contract made by him before the


making: of the requisition, the owner or occupier shall be entitled
to plead the requisition as a defence to any claim made against
him for the breach of that contract.
Requisition not to affect contracts with the Crown.
10. No requisition under this Act shall have the effect of
cancelling or altering any contract made between the Crown and
the owner or occupier of the factory or workshop prior to the
making of the requisition.
Cancellation of requisitions.
11. Any requisition under this Act may be at any time can-
celled by the Minister of Defence, either by agreement with the
owner or occupier, or on any ground on which it might have been
cancelled had it been a contract between the Crown and the owner
or occupier.
Section 4 of principal Act amended.
12. Section four of the principal Act is hereby amended by
omitting the words “ when the accused is an alien, or three months
in any other case.”
Validation of regulations.
13. All regulations heretofore made by the Governor in Council
under the principal Act shall for all purposes whatever be deemed
as from the making thereof to have been made with full power and
authority and to be and to have been valid and of full effect, and
the powers, rights, duties, and liabilities of all persons in respect
of all things done or suffered, whether before or after the passing
of this Act, shall be determined accordingly.
Duration of Act.
14. Re-pealed (see section 7 of Amendment Act, 1916).


WAR REGULATIONS AMENDMENT ACT, 1916.
ANALYSIS.
Title.
1. Short Title.
2. Validation of regulations.
3. Power to make further regula
tions.
4. Power to make regulations for can-
cellation of publicans’ licenses in
certain cases.
5. Publication in Gazette to be notice to
all persons concerned.
6. Act extended to Cook Islands.
7. Repeal. Duration of Act.
1916, No. 9.
Title.
An Act to amend the War Regulations Act, 1914.
[7th August, 1916.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of New Zealand in Parlia-
ment assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :
Short Title.
1. This Act may be cited as the War Regulations Amendment
Act, 1916, and shall be read together with and deemed part of the
War Regulations Act, 1914 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act).
Validation of regulations.
2. All regulations heretofore made by the Governor in Council
under the principal Act or its amendments shall for all purposes
whatever be deemed, as from the making thereof, to have been made
with full power and authority, and to be and to have been valid and
of full effect; and the powers, rights, duties, and liabilities of all
persons in respect of all things done or suffered, whether before or
after the passing of this Act, shall be determined accordingly.
Power to make further regulations.
3. (1.) In addition to, and without in any manner restricting,
the powers conferred by the principal Act and its amendments, the
Governor in Council may by regulations make —
(a.) Such provisions as he thinks necessary for the suppres-
sion, restriction, or control of enemy trade:
(6.) Such provisions as he thinks advisable with respect to enemy
property:


(c.) Such provisions as he thinks advisable for enabling an attorney,,
agent, trustee, executor, or administrator, while out of New
Zealand, to exercise and perform his powers, functions, and
duties as such in New Zealand through the agency of the
Public Trustee or any other attorney, delegate, or substi-
tute, and for determining the rights and liabilities resulting
from any such delegation of authority :
(d.) Such provisions as he thinks advisable providing that any
power of attorney or other authority heretofore or here-
after granted by a member of an Expeditionary Force
raised under the Expeditionary Forces Act, 1915, shall
continue in force for all purposes, notwithstanding any
notice of the death or any incapacity of the donor of such
power of attorney or authority, until the donee of such
power of attorney or authority shall receive express notice
in writing signed by the donor of the revocation by the
donor of such power or authority, or until probate of the
will or administration of the estate of the donor shall have
been granted by the Supreme Court of New Zealand ; and
if probate of the will or letters of administration of the
estate of the donor shall have been first granted by any
other Court, then until such probate or letters of adminis-
tration shall have been resealed in the Supreme Court of
New Zealand :
(e.) Such provisions as he thinks advisable empowering minors
who may be members of any such Expeditionary Force
to execute and grant valid powers of attorney and other
authorities:
(/.) Such provisions as he thinks advisable modifying or altering,
in the case of powers of attorney granted by members of
any such Expeditionary Force, all or any of the provisions
of sections one hundred to one hundred and three of the
Property Law Act, 1908 :
( g .) Such provisions as he thinks advisable modifying or altering
the provisions of section one hundred and nineteen of the
Property Law Act, 1908, and of section one hundred and
seventy-six of the Land Transfer Act, 1915 (relating to the
verification of instruments executed out of New Zealand),
in the case of instruments executed out of New Zealand by
members of any such Expeditionary Force or by persons
serving with any other portion of His Majesty’s Naval or
Military Forces :
(h.) Such provisions as, having regard to the exigencies of the
present war or the conditions created thereby, he thinks
advisable for all or any of the following purposes, namely :
(i.) For the prevention of the sale of intoxicating liquor
by any person not being the holder of a license under the
Licensing Act, 1908;


(li.) For the prevention of the sale of intoxicating
liquor by the holders of licenses under the last-mentioned
Act otherwise than in conformity with the terms of such
licenses;
(iii.) For the regulation of the sale of intoxicating liquor
to women ;
(iv.) For the suppression or regulation of the practice
of treating, as hereinafter defined ;
(v.) For the suppression of prostitution, or for the
prevention of venereal disease ; and
(vi.) For the maintenance of industries essential for the
public welfare.
(2.) For the purposes of this Act the term “ treating ” includes
the act of any person who, directly or indirectly, —
{a.) Pays, or undertakes or offers to pay ; or
(6.) Gives or lends, or offers or undertakes to give or lend, money
with which to pay —
for any intoxicating liquor sold or to be sold on licensed premises
within the meaning of the Licensing Act, 1908, for consumption on
those premises by any person other than the person first mentioned,
and also includes any other act that the Governor may by Order in
Council declare to be treating.
(3.) All such regulations shall have the force of law as if enacted
in this Act, anything to the contrary in any other Act notwithstanding,
and all the provisions of the principal Act or its amendments with
respect to regulations made by the Governor in Council shall extend
and apply to regulations made under the authority of this section.
(4.) In addition to, and without in any manner restricting, the
powers conferred by the principal Act or its amendments, regulations
so made in relation to enemy trade or enemy property may confer
upon the Supreme Court such civil jurisdiction as is thought necessary,
and may regulate the procedure of the Court in the exercise of such
jurisdiction, and may create, determine, and affect civil rights, obliga-
tions, and liabilities.
(5.) In this section —
(a.) “ Enemy trade ” means any trade, business, undertaking, or
transaction which is carried on or entered into by or for the
benefit of or under the control of persons or companies of
enemy nationality, descent, origin, residence, connections
or associations (whether present or past), or which may be
to the advantage of an enemy State or of the subjects or
inhabitants thereof, whether during or after the present
war:
(&.) “ Enemy property ” means property of any kind whatever
which belongs or at any time since the commencement of
the present war with Germany has belonged to any person
or company of enemy nationality, descent, origin, residence.


connections, or associations (whether present or past), or to
an enemy State, or in which any such person, company, or
State has or at any such time has had any interest.
Power to make regulations for cancellation of publicans’ licenses in certain eases.
4. (1.) In addition to the powers conferred by the last preceding
section, the Governor in Council may from time to time by regula-
tions make such provisions as he thinks advisable—
(a.) Conferring authority on any Superintendent or Inspector of
Police, with the approval of the Commissioner of Police,
to apply to the Licensing Committee of a licensing district
for the cancellation of any publican’s license issued under
the Licensing Act, 1908, and in force within that district,
and to call upon the holder of such license to appear before
the Licensing Committee to show cause why his license
should not be cancelled on any of the grounds following,
namely:—
(i.) That he has committed any breach of the Licensing
Act, 1908, or of the regulations under the foregoing provi-
sions of this Act relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor,
or that he has committed a breach of the conditions of his
license; or
(ii.) That he has permitted the licensed premises to be
frequented by disorderly or disreputable persons ; or
(hi.) That he has failed to conduct the licensed premises
• in an orderly manner ; or
(iv.) That for any other reason he is not a fit and proper
person to be the holder of such license :
(6.) Conferring jurisdiction on the Licensing Committee of any
district to hear and determine any application for the
cancellation of a license pursuant to regulations under this
section, and to cancel such license if, in its opinion, it is
advisable so to do in the public interest:
(c.) Conferring upon the Licensing Committee, or upon any other
persons, such powers as may be necessary to compel a
licensee whose license has been cancelled (whether under
the Licensing Act, 1908, or under regulations pursuant to
this Act) to vacate the licensed premises :
(d.) Conferring upon the Chairman of the Licensing Committee
authority to execute any transfer or assignment of a lease
or other instrument of title, or to execute any other docu-
ment that may be necessary for the purpose of enabling
a new licensee to enter into possession of the licensed
premises:
( e .) Conferring upon the Licensing Committee such other powers,
and making all such other provisions, as may be necessary
for the effective carrying-out of any regulations that may
be made under this section.


(2.) The powers that may be conferred on a Licensing Committee
by regulations under this section shall not be exercised at any meet-
ing of the Committee unless the Magistrate who is for the time being
a member of the Committee is present thereat.
(3.) On the cancellation of a license pursuant to regulations under
this section the Licensing Committee shall, with the approval of the
owner of the licensed premises and of the Superintendent or Inspector
of Police, grant a license in respect of such premises to some fit and
proper person, to hold the same until the next succeeding quarterly
meeting of the Committee ; and at that meeting, or as soon as possible
thereafter, the Committee shall consider and dispose of the applica-
tions (if any) for a new license in respect of the said premises, and
shall not fail to grant a new license in respect thereof if any applicant
therefor is approved for the purpose by the owner of the premises
and the Superintendent or Inspector of Police.
Publication in Gazette to be notice to all persons concerned.
5. The publication in the Gazette, whether before or after the
passing of this Act, of any Order in Council, Proclamation, regulation,
notice, warrant, license, or other act of authority under the principal
Act or any amendment thereof, including this Act, shall for all pur-
poses be deemed to be notice thereof to all persons concerned, and in
any prosecution under any such Act the liability of the accused shall
be determined accordingly.
Act extended to Cook Islands.
6. (1.) The principal Act and all amendments thereof, including
this Act, shall be in force in the Cook Islands.
(2.) Regulations made under those Acts, whether before or after
the passing of this Act, shall not be in force in the Cook Islands
except so far as expressly extended thereto.
Repeal.
7. (1.) Section five of the War Regulations Amendment Act, 1915,
and section fourteen of the War Regulations Amendment Act, 1915
(No. 2), are hereby repealed.
Duration of Act.
(2.) The principal Act and all amendments thereof, including this
Act and all regulations heretofore made or hereafter to be made
thereunder, shall, unless sooner repealed or revoked, remain in opera-
tion duripg the present war with Germany and for one year there-
after or for such shorter period thereafter as the Governor may by
Proclamation made after the end of that war determine, and on the
expiration of such period shall be deemed to be repealed or revoked.
In the application of the said Acts and regulations after the end of
the war every State with which His Majesty is now at war shall be
deemed to continue to be an enemy State at war with His Majesty
so long as those Acts remain in force.


WAR LEGISLATION AMENDMENT ACT, 1916.
Contracts for military supplies may be cancelled.
41. (1.) Where any person has, either before or after the pass-
ing of this Act, entered into a contract for the supply to the Crown
of any goods, wares, or merchandise required in connection with
the present war, the Minister of Defence may, by notice in writing
under his hand, cancel such contract if —
(a.) Any such goods, wares, or merchandise that may have been
delivered under the contract (whether before or after the
passing of this Act) are not in accordance with the terms
of the contract; and
(b.) The contractor, by reason of his failure to supply such
goods, wares, or merchandise in accordance with the
terras of the contract, has (whether before or after the
passing of this Act) wilfully committed a breach of such
contract.
(2.) No person shall be entitled to recover from the Crown any
moneys by way of damages or compensation by reason of the can-
cellation of any contract under this section.
(3.) The cancellation of a contract under this section shall not
relieve the contractor from any liability for damages in respect
of any breach of that contract prior to its cancellation.


WAR LEGISLATION ACT, 1917.
Permits to leave Neio Zealand.
Minister of Internal Affairs may require security to be given before issuing permit to
any person to leave New Zealand.
26. Whereas by certain regulations made under the War Regulations
Act, 1914, provision is made for the issue of permits to leave New
Zealand to persons desirous of leaving New Zealand for any place beyond
the seas: And whereas, as a condition precedent to the issue of §uch
permits, security by way of bond for the due return to New Zealand of
the persons to whom such permits have been issued has in certain cases
been required to be given: And whereas no legal authority has existed
for the requirement of such security, and it is desirable to confer such
authority and to validate all bonds heretofore given as aforesaid: Be it
therefore enacted as follows :
(1.) All bonds executed before the passing of this Act and given, or
purporting to be given, as security for the return to New Zealand of any
person to whom a permit to leave New Zealand has been issued as afore-
said are hereby declared to be, and at all times heretofore to have been,
•of full effect and virtue according to the tenor thereof as if the same had
been executed and given pursuant to statutory authority or requirement
in that behalf.
(2.) Before the issue of any permit to leave New Zealand under the
regulations hereinbefore referred to the Minister of Internal Affairs may
require such security as he thinks fit by way of bond or otherwise to be
given for the due return to New Zealand of the person to whom such
permit is proposed to be issued.
■
War Regulations.
Validation of War Regulations.
34. All regulations heretofore made under the War Regulations Act,
1914, and its amendments, shall for all purposes whatever be deemed,
as from the making thereof, to have been made with full power and
authority, and to be and to have been valid and of full effect; and
the powers, rights, duties, and liabilities of all persons in respect of
all things done or suffered, whether before or after the passing of this
Act, shall be determined accordingly.
Power to make further regulations.
35. (1.) In addition to, and without in any manner restricting, the
powers conferred by the last-mentioned Act and its amendments, the


Governor-General in Council may, by regulations under that Act, make
such provisions as, having regard to the exigencies of the present war
or the conditions created thereby, he thinks advisable for all or any of
the following purposes, namely :
(a.) For prohibiting or restricting the use of labour or capital in or
in connection with or for the purposes of any industry, under-
taking, or purpose that may be deemed by the Governor-
General to be not essential or to be only partially essential for
the public welfare :
(. b .) For prohibiting or restricting the registration in New Zealand
of companies proposing to carry on business in New Zealand,
and for prohibiting or restricting the issue of shares or
debentures by any company registered in New Zealand :
(c.) For prohibiting the commencement of business in New Zealand
by any foreign company, or for imposing such restrictions and
conditions as may be deemed advisable on any such company
proposing to commence business in New Zealand, or on any
foreign company carrying on business in New Zealand :
(d.) For regulating and controlling the delivery of goods in cities or
boroughs with a view to effecting a saving of labour :
(e.) For regulating, controlling, and enforcing the labour of alien
enemies :
(/.) For requiring any person or persons, whether aliens or not, who
are not employed or engaged in some industry, undertaking,
or occupation deemed to be essential or partially essential for
the public welfare to become so employed or engaged, or to
take reasonable steps to become so employed or engaged, or to
show cause before a Stipendiary Magistrate why they should
not be required to become so employed or engaged:
(a) For the maintenance, control, regulation, and management of
any industry, business, or undertaking that may be regarded
by the Governor-General as essential for or affecting the public
W6lf *
(h ) For authorizing the employment, subject to such conditions as
may be prescribed, of women or girls in any capacity in any
industry or occupation in lieu of men, notwithstanding any-
thing in any Act to the contrary, if, in the opinion of the
Governor-General in Council, such employment of women or
girls in lieu of men will not be a source of danger to the safety
of any person or persons.
(2 ) Regulations made under this section for the purposes mentioned
in paragraph (d) hereof may confer powers on the Council of any city
or borough or generally on all such Councils, to make by-laws regulating
and Soiling the delivery of goods within the city or Every
person who commits a breach of any such by-law may be proceeded against
as for the breach of a by-law made under the Municipal Corporations
Act, 1908.


FINANCE ACT, 1918.
Additional power to make War Regulations with respect to national service.
20. (1.) In addition to and without in any manner restricting the
powers conferred by the War Regulations Act, 19U, and its amend-
ments, the Governor-General in Council may, by regulations under that
Act, make such provisions as, having regard to the exigencies of the
present war or the conditions created thereby, he thinks advisable for
any ot the following purposes:
(a.) Procuring, exacting, enforcing, controlling, and regulating
national service, as hereinafter defined, in New Zealand during
the present war : 6
(6.) Prohibiting or restricting any service, employment, occupation,
business, work, or industry ;
(c.) Regulating the remuneration of national service, subject, how-
ever, to the provisions of the Industrial Conciliation and Arbi-
tration Act, 1908, and of any awards or industrial agreements in
force for the time being under that Act.
(2.) The expression “ national service ” means all service, employ-
ment, occupation, business, work, or industry (whether under the Crown
or under any other employer or independent of any employer) which
is deemed by the Governor-General in Council or by any authority ap-
pointed in that behalf under any such regulations to be essential to the
public welfare, and includes not merely personal service but also the
use of any factory, workshop, business premises, machinery, plant, or
appliances for any purpose deemed as aforesaid to be essential to the
public welfare, but does not include military service as a member of an
Expeditionary Force under the Expeditionary Forces Act, 1915.
(3.) All regulations made by the Governor-General in Council and
purporting to be made in pursuance of this section of this Act shall have
the like authority and validity as if they had been enacted in this Act.
(4.) All regulations under this section shall be laid before both Houses
of Parliament within fourteen days after the making thereof if Parlia-
ment is then in session, and if not, then within fourteen days after
the commencement of the next ensuing session.
(5.) If the House of Representatives by resolution declares that it
does not assent to such regulations or to any such regulation, such regu-
lations or regulation shall cease to have any force or effect as from the
date of the passing of such resolution, or as from such later date as
may be specified in the resolution.


WAR LEGISLATION AND STATUTE LAW AMEND-
MENT ACT, 1918.
Duration and Termination of War defined.
References in Acts to the duration of the war or the termination of the war
explained.
24. (1.) Wherever in any Act passed since the fourth day of
August, nineteen hundred and fourteen, the war, or the duration of
the war, or the termination of the war, is referred to, or any
equivalent expression is used, every such reference or expression
shall be interpreted by the following rules: —
(a.) The war is the war with Germany :
( b .) The war shall be deemed to be existent until a date to be
named as the date of the termination of the war in a
Proclamation by the Governor-General published in the
Gazette ;
(c.) The date to be named in such Proclamation as the date of
the termination of the war shall be the date of such ter-
mination for the purpose of every such Act, and the war
shall tor such purpose he deemed to continue and to be
existent until such date.
(2.) The judicial cognizance by the Courts required by any
Act of the existence of or termination of a state of war shall be
governed by this section.
* * * * * *
Further Protection of Soldiers.
Additional provisions for protection of soldiers and discharged soldiers from
judicial process.
26. (1.) In addition to and without in any manner restricting
the powers conferred by the War Eegulations Act, 1914, and its
amendments, the Governor-General in Council may, by regulations
under that Act, make such provisions as he deems just and
necessary for the protection of soldiers or discharged soldiers from
the execution of civil judgments or process, proceedings in bank-
ruptcy, forfeitures, the exercise of rights of distress or re-entry, the
exercise of rights of sale or entry into possession in pursuance of
any mortgage or other security, or the enforcement in any other
manner of the civil obligations or liabilities of soldiers or discharged
soldiers.
(2.) In this section “soldier” means a member of an Expedi-
tionary Force under the Expeditionary Forces Act, 1915, and


“discharged soldier” means a person who has in any manner
ceased to be a member of an Expeditionary Force after military
service as such beyond the seas.
* * * * * *
War Regulations.
Section 2 of War Regulations Amendment Act, 1915 (No. 2), (relative to the
requisition of military supplies) extended.
29. Section two of the War Regulations Amendment,Act, 1915
(No. 2), is hereby amended by adding thereto, after the words “ the
present war,” the words “or for the purposes of an Expeditionary
Force, whether during or after the present war.”
Validation of war regulations.
30. All regulations heretofore made under the War Regulations
Act, 1914, and its amendments, shall for all purposes whatever be
deemed, as from the making thereof, to have been made w T ith full
power and authority, and to be and to have been valid and of full
effect; and the powers, rights, duties, and liabilities of all persons
in respect of all things done or suffered, whether before or after the
passing of this Act, shall be determined accordingly.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 10th November, 1914.]
REGULATIONS UNDER THE WAR REGULATIONS
ACT, 1914.
LIVERPOOL, Governor.
ORDER IN COUNCIL.
At the Government House at Wellington, this tenth day of
November, 1914.
Present :
His Excellency the Governor in Council.
Whereas by the War Regulations Act, 1914, the Governor in Council
may, for the purpose of better securing the public safety, the defence
of New Zealand, and the effective conduct of the military or naval
operations of His Majesty during the present war, make regulations
as to the powers and duties of the members of the Defence Forces,
or of the Police Force, or of other persons acting on His Majesty’s
behalf: And whereas by the said Act the Governor in Council may
make regulations prohibiting any acts which, in his opinion,
are injurious to the public safety, the defence of New Zealand, or the
effective conduct of the military or naval operations of His Majesty
during the present war :
Now, therefore, I, Arthur William de Brito Savile, Earl of
Liverpool, Governor of the Dominion of New Zealand, acting by
and with the advice and consent of the Executive Council of the
said Dominion, do hereby, in pursuance of the War Regulations
Act, 1914, and of all other powers and authorities enabling me in
that behalf, make the following regulations ; and do, with the like
advice and consent, declare that the said regulations shall come into
force on the publication thereof in the New Zealand Gazette.
REGULATIONS.
L I N these regulations, unless a different intention appears,—
[“ Alien enemy ” means for the purposes of the War Regula-
tions (except in clause 26 of the War Regulations of the
10th November, 1914) every person who is or has at any
time been a subject of any State with which His Majesty
is now at war, notwithstanding the fact that such person
may be also by birth, naturalization, or otherwise a
British subject, or may have in any manner ceased to be
a subject of any such State, and also includes the wife
of an alien enemy. (See clause 3of the 19th July, 1915;
clause 7of the 22nd February, 1916; clause 12 of the
2nd May, 1916; and clause 24 of the 24th July, 1916
Pages 33, U, 67, 63.):]


“ Defended harbour ” means any port or harbour defended
by any fort or battery :
Military authority means any military officer appointed by
the Minister of Defence, by warrant signed by him and
gazetted, as a military authority for the purpose of these
regulations, whether generally or in respect of any par-
ticular place or part, of New Zealand ;
“ Military officer” means a commissioned officer of the Defence
Forces under the Defence Act, 1909, and includes any
person who in fact holds office, whether permanently or
temporarily, as such a commissioned officer, notwithstanding
any irregularity or invalidity in his appointment or in the
tenure of his office :
[“ Naval authority ” means any officer of His Majesty’s Naval
Forces, whether of the United Kingdom or of New Zea-
land, appointed by the Minister of Defence, by warrant
signed by him and gazetted, as a naval authority for the
purpose of the regulations made under the War Regula-
tions Act, 1914, and its amendments. (See clause 2of
War Regulations of 3rd September, 1917. Page 119.) :]
“ Night ” means any time after sunset and before sunrise :
“ Officer ” means a military officer or a constable :
[“ Person ” includes a body corporate so far as the War Re-
gulations are capable of application to bodies corporate.
(See clause 30 of War Regulations oj 3rd April, 1916.
Page 52.) : ]
“ Prisoner of war ” means any person detained under the
authority of these regulations, and any alien enemy detained
whether under these regulations or otherwise.
2. An officer or any person authorized for that purpose by a
military authority may arrest without warrant any person who is
reasonably suspected of having committed or of being about to
commit any breach of these regulations, or of having acted or being
about to act in a manner injurious to the public safety or the interests
of His Majesty in respect of the present war.
3. Any person so arrested (other than an alien enemy) shall be
forthwith brought before a Magistrate or Justice of the Peace to be
dealt with in due course of law in respect of any offence of which he
may be accused.
4. Any alien enemy so arrested may be brought before a Magis-
trate or Justice of the Peace to be dealt with in due course of law as
aforesaid, or may be detained in such place and manner as a military
authority directs and during his pleasure, unless discharged by the
Minister of Defence.
5. By the orders or with the authority of a military authority
any alien enemy may be arrested by an officer or any other person
and detained in such place and manner as the military authority


thinks fit, and during his pleasure, unless discharged by the Minister
of Defence.
6. If a military authority has reason to suspect that any house,
building, land, ship, or other premises are being used for any purpose
or in any manner injurious to the public safety or the interests of
His Majesty in respect of the present war, or contrary to these regu-
lations, or that there is in any house, building, land, ship, or other
premises any document, instrument, or other thing whatsoever
which may be evidence of any such purpose, or which has been or
is about to be used for any such purpose, the military authority,
or any officer or other person authorized by him, may enter, if need
be by force, the house, building, land, ship, or premises at any time
of the day or night, and examine, search, and inspect the same or
any part thereof, and may seize any such document, instrument, or
other thing as aforesaid which may be found therein. [ Detention of
things seized. Clauses 5 and 6of War Regulations of 22nd February,
1916. Page 44.]
7. If any ship or boat approaches, enters, leaves, or passes inwards
or outwards through any defended harbour, or is reasonably suspected
of being about to do so, in disregard of any rules established for that
harbour by a military authority and published in the New Zealand
Gazette, or in disregard of any warning received from any fort or
battery by which the harbour is defended, any officer or other person
stationed or lawfully being in the fort or battery may fire upon that
ship or boat. At night any ship or boat the identity of which is
unknown, and which approaches, enters, leaves, or passes inwards
or outwards through any defended harbour, may be so fired at
without warning.
8. For the purpose of securing the public safety in respect of the
present war a military authority may station an armed guard at
any building, ship, or place whatsoever, whether public or private.
Such guard may fire upon or otherwise attack any person who by
day or night, in disregard of a warning received from the guard,
approaches, enters, or leaves, or attempts to approach, en ter, or leave,
the building, ship, or place so guarded. All members of the Defence
Forces stationed at any fort, battery, ship, or camp shall be deemed
for the purposes of these regulations to be an armed guard there
stationed by a military authority. ,
9. The Attorney-General may lay before the Governor an infor-
mation charging an alien enemy with having done, or attempted or
conspired to do, or with having incited any other person to do, any
act with intent to assist His Majesty’s enemies or to interfere with
the effective conduct of the military or naval operations of His Majesty
during the present war, and the Governor may thereupon appoint
any three or more military officers as a Court-martial with power
to try such alien enemy on the said charge, and on conviction he
shall be liable to suffer death. The procedure on any such trial shall


be such as may be prescribed by rules made in that behalf by the?
Minister of Defence ; and in default of any such rules, and so far as
they do not extend, the procedure shall be such as appears to the
Court to be most consistent with natural justice.
10. No person shall assist or connive at the escape of any prisoner
of war, or knowingly harbour or assist any prisoner of war who has
escaped.
11. No person shall obstruct, interfere with, or mislead any officer
or other person who is carrying out the orders of a military authority,
or who is otherwise acting in accordance with his powers or duties
under these regulations,
12. No person having in his possession any information which
may be of use to an officer in the execution of his powers or duties
under these regulations shall withhold such information from the
officer when reasonably required by him to give the same.
13. No person shall trespass on any building or ship in the pos-
session or use of the Crown, or on any land appurtenant to any such
building, or on any fort, battery, camp, or other place used by the
Crown for any military or naval purposes, or on any land or building
used for telegraphic purposes (whether in the possession or use of
the Crown or not), or on any land or building in the possession of
a Harbour Board, or on any railway.
14. Revoked , and fresh regulation substituted by Order in Council
made on 22nd February, 1915. Page 32.
15. No person shall harbour any person whom he knows or has
reasonable • grounds for supposing to have acted in contravention of
these regulations.
16. No person shall, save in pursuance of a license issued under
the Post and Telegraph Act, 1908, or with the permission in writing
of a military authority, have in his possession any instrument or
apparatus capable of or . constructed or adapted for receiving or trans-
mitting messages by wireless telegraphy, or any portion of any such
instrument or apparatus, or any materials, instrument, or apparatus
intended by him to be used or adapted for such a purpose.
17. No person having the possession, control, or use of any
apparatus for the transmission or reception of messages by wireless
telegraphy shall use the same or permit the same to be used in any
manner contrary to instructions received from a military authority,
or contrary to the terms of any license or regulations by which the
equipment or use of such apparatus is authorized or regulated.
18. No master or officer of a ship, or person in charge of or having
the control of any boat, shall cause of permit such ship or boat to
enter or leave a defended harbour, or proceed inwards or outwards
through a defended harbour, in disregard of any rules made in that


behalf by a military authority and published in the New Zealand
Gazette, or in disregard of any warning received from any fort or
battery by which the harbour is defended, or from any ship or boat,
stationed in or about such harbour by a military authority.
19. Revoked, and fresh regulation substituted by Order in Council
made on 22nd February, 1915. Page 32.
20. No person other than a military or naval officer in the
execution of his duty shall publish or communicate, or permit to
be published or communicated, any information relative to any
military or naval matters as to which secrecy is enjoined by the
Minister of Defence by notice published in the New Zealand
Gazette.
21. No person shall, except through the Post Office, communicate
with any prisoner of war without the permission of a military authority.
22. No person shall by day or night show any light, or do any
other act whatever, which is intended as or may reasonably be
suspected to be a signal to or a communication with the enemy or
any prisoner of war.
23. No person without lawful authority shall injure or interfere
with any wire or other apparatus for transmitting telegraphic or
telephonic messages, or any apparatus or contrivance intended for
or capable of being used for a signalling-apparatus, either visual or
otherwise, or prevent, obstruct, or in any manner whatever interfere
with the sending, conveyance, or delivery of any communication by
means of telegraph, telephone, or otherwise.
24. When an armed guard has been stationed in pursuance of
these regulations at any building, ship, or place, no person shall, in
disregard of a warning received from the guard, approach, enter, or
leave the building, ship, or place so guarded.
25. No person shall act as an intermediary in communications
through the Post Office between alien enemies or between an alien
enemy and any other person.
26. Nothing in these regulations shall be so construed or shall
so operate as to confer any rights upon an alien enemy or in any
manner to take away or restrict the absolute right of His Majesty
to do with all such persons according to his good pleasure.
27. The powers conferred by these regulations are in addition
to and not in derogation of any powers exercisable by members of
the Defence Forces, or the Police Force, and all other persons to take
such measures as may be necessary for. securing the public safety,
or the liability of any person to trial and punishment for any offence
otherwise than in pursuance of these regulations.
J. F. ANDREWS,
' -
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 17th December, 1914.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
17th December, 1914.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations shall be read together with and shall be deemed
part of the regulations made under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
by Order in Council of the 10th day of November, 1914, and pub-
lished in the New Zealand Gazette on the same day.
* 2, If the Postmaster-General has at any time reasonable ground
to suppose that any person, firm, or company in New Zealand or
elsewhere is engaged in any business, undertaking, correspondence,
or communications of a nature injurious to the public safety or the
effective conduct of the military or naval operations of His Majesty
during the present war, the Postmaster-General may, by notice
under his hand in the Gazette , order that no postal packet or telegram
addressed to or intended for that person, firm, or company shall
be forwarded or delivered by the Post Office or transmitted by
telegraph.
3. Until such order is in like manner revoked no such postal
packet or telegram shall be forwarded, delivered, or transmitted,
nor shall any money-order be issued in favour of or paid to such
person, firm, or company.
4. While any such order remains in force all postal packets and
telegraphic messages received by the Post Office or Telegraph Office
for transmission to such person, firm, or company shall be delivered
by the Postmaster-General to a military authority.
5. While any such order remains in force no person shall com-
municate or attempt to communicate by post or telegraph, and
whether directly or indirectly through any other person, firm, or
company in New Zealand or elsewhere, with the person, firm, or
company to whom or to which the order relates, and no person shall
act as an intermediary or be otherwise knowingly concerned in any
such communication or attempted communication.
6. While any such order remains in force no person shall remit
or attempt to remit from New Zealand, whether directly or indirectly,
any money to or for the benefit of or on behalf of the person, firm,
or company to whom or to which the order relates, or be in any manner
knowingly concerned in any such remission or attempted remission.
7. While any such order remains in force no person shall make
or offer to make any contract with the person, firm, or company to
whom or to which the order relates, or be in any manner knowingly
concerned in the making or offering of any such contract.
* All notices revoked.


8. (1.) Aii alien enemy shall not after the 22nd day of December,
1914, for any purpose assume or use, or purport to assume or use,
or continue the assumption or use of any name other than that by
which he was originally known at the date of the commencement
of the present war with Germany.
(2.) Where an alien enemy carries on or purports or continues
to carry on, or is a member of a partnership or firm which carries
on or purports or continues to carry on, any trade or business under
any name other than that under which the trade or business was
carried on at the date of the commencement of the present war with
Germany, he shall for the purposes of this regulation be deemed to
be using or purporting or continuing to use a name other than that
by which he was originally known at the date of the commencement
of the present war with Germany.
(3.) Nothing in this regulation shall affect the right of a woman
who, after the commencement of the present war with Germany,
has married an alien enemy to use the name which she has acquired
on her marriage.
(4.) The Minister of Internal Affairs may, if it appears desirable
in any particular case, grant an exemption from the provisions of
this regulation.
9. (1.) No person shall communicate or attempt to communicate,
whether by letter, telegram, or in any other manner whatever, and
whether directly or indirectly through any intermediary in New
Zealand or elsewhere, with any person, firm, or company being or
carrying on business in the territory of any State at war with His
Majesty.
(2.) No person shall in any manner act as an intermediary in
any such communication or attempted communication, or be in any
manner knowingly concerned therein.
(3.) Nothing in this regulation shall apply to enemy territory in
the military occupation of His Majesty’s Forces.
(4.) The Minister of Internal Affairs may, if it appears desirable
in any particular case, grant an exemption from the provisions of
this regulation.
10. (1.) No person shall do any act with intent to evade, obstruct,
or interfere with the effective censorship of telegrams, letters, or
other postal packets, whether in New Zealand or elsewhere.
(2.) No person shall, otherwise than through the Post Office,
send or cause to be sent out of New Zealand, or bring or cause to
be brought into. New Zealand, any letter or other written communi-
cation of such a nature that in the ordinary course of correspondence
or business it would be transmitted from or into New Zealand through
the Post Office.
11. (1.) An officer or any person authorized for that purpose by
a military authority may arrest, without warrant, any person found
in New Zealand who is reasonably suspected of having committed


in enemy territory in the military occupation of His Majesty’s Forces
an offence against any rules or orders there established by the military
Government thereof, or of having there acted in a manner injurious
to the public safety or to the interests of His Majesty in respect of
the present war.
(2.) Unless the person so arrested is an alien enemy he shall,
unless discharged by the Minister of Defence, be sent in custody at
the first suitable opportunity to the territory aforesaid, and shall be
there delivered to the military Government thereof.
(3.) If the person so arrested is an alien enemy, he shall be either
dealt with as hereinbefore provided or shall be detained in New Zea-
land in such place and manner as a military authority directs, and
during his pleasure, unless discharged by the Minister of Defence.
12. Any person who has been sentenced to any term of imprison-
ment by any Court or judicial authority constituted in enemy terri-
tory in the military occupation of His Majesty’s Forces may, if found
in New Zealand, be arrested and detained by order of a military
authority in such place and manner as that military authority thinks
fit, and during his pleasure, unless discharged by the Minister of
Defence, but not for any longer period than the unexpired term of
his sentence of imprisonment. For the purpose of this regulation
such term shall be deemed to have commenced on the day on which
the sentence of imprisonment was pronounced.
J. F. ANDREWS,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 26th January, 1915.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
26th January ; 1915.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed part
of the regulations made by Order in Council under the War Regula-
tions Act, 1914, on the 10th day of November, 1914, and published
in the New Zealand Gazette on the same day.
Declarations of Ultimate Destination.
2. No goods shall be exported from New Zealand, or shipped for
export from New Zealand, to any place other than British territory
until a statutory Declaration of Ultimate Destination has been made
in respect thereof in accordance with these regulations.
3. Such Declaration of Ultimate Destination shall be in the form
set out in the First Schedule hereto or to the like effect, and shall be
made by the actual exporter, or by some responsible representative


of the actual exporter having personal knowledge of the inquiries
made and of the facts stated in the declaration. Carrying and Customs
agents are not competent to make such declarations.
4. Collectors and other officers of Customs shall not permit any
goods to be laden on board any exporting ship until the requisite
Declaration of Ultimate Destination has been duly made and de-
livered to the Collector of Customs at the port of shipment, or if such
officer has any reason to believe or suspect that the declaration made
in respect thereof is untrue.
5. The master of a ship shall not permit to be laden in that ship
any goods in respect of which a Declaration of Ultimate Destination
is required under these regulations until and unless a permit for the
lading thereof has been issued by a Collector of Customs.
6. Collectors of Customs shall withhold the clearance of any ship
so long as there are on board thereof any goods as to which the re-
quisite Declaration of Ultimate Destination has not been made or is
believed or suspected to be untrue.
7. The term Collector of Customs ”as used in these regulations
has the same meaning as in the Customs Act, 1913.
8. The foregoing regulations shall not apply to goods already
shipped on an exporting ship before the coming into operation of these
regulations.
9. The Minister of Customs may from time to time, by notice in
the New Zealand Gazette, grant such exemptions from the require-
ments of the foregoing regulations as appear to him to be necessary
or expedient, and may at any time in like manner withdraw any such
exemption.
10. Territory in the military occupation of His Majesty shall be
deemed to be British territory within the meaning of these regulations.
Certificates of Origin.
11 to 15. Revoked by clause. 12 (I) of 13th October, 1916. Page 81.
16. The decision of the Comptroller of Customs as to the country
from which any goods have been imported into New Zealand, or as
to the place of destination of any goods exported or to be exported .
irom !New Zealand, shall for the purpose of these regulations be final
and conclusive.
17. All declarations under these regulations shall be exempt from
stamp duty.
18. Revoked by clause 12 (1) of 13th October, 1916. Page 81.
First Schedule.
Form of Declaration of Ultimate Destination.
I> , do solemnly and sincerely declare—
1. That I am the exporter [or a responsible representative of the
exporter] of the goods particulars of which are set out in the sche-
dule below, to be exported on board to and consigned
to of 6


SCHEDULE.
Number and Description
of Cases, &c.
Marks.
Numbers.
Weight or
Quantity.
Total Value.
Contents.
2. I have made all necessary inquiries to satisfy myself as to the
ultimate destination of the said goods.
3. To the best of my knowledge and belief none of such goods are
intended for consumption in or for transit to or through any State
at present at war with His Majesty.
[4. The said goods are being exported for ultimate delivery to
[Here set out the name and address of the real purchaser or other person
for whom the goods are intended hy the exporter]. (Added hy clause 22
of 3rd April, 1916. Page 50.) ]
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the
same to be true, and by virtue of the Justices of the Peace Act, 1908.
Declared at this day of , 1915, before me—
Justice of the Peace [or Solicitor, or Notary Public].
Second Schedule.
Revoked hy clause 12(1) of 13th October, 1916. Page 81.
J. F. ANDREWS,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
Notice.
Exported Goods exempted from Requirement of Declaration of Ultimate
Destination.
Whereas by regulations made under the War Regulations Act, 1914
on the 26th day of January, 1915, it is provided that Declarations of
Ultimate Destination are required in respect of goods exported from
New Zealand to any place other than British territory, except so far
as exemption from this requirement may be allowed by the Minister
of Customs :
Now, therefore, I, William Herbert Herries, acting in the place
of the Minister of Customs for the Dominion of New Zealand, do
hereby notify that Declarations of Ultimate Destination under the
said regulations are not required in respect of goods exported to the
French territory of Tahiti.
Dated this 26th day of January, 1915.
W. H. HERRIES,
Acting in the place of the Minister of Customs.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 18th February, 1915.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the-
16th February, 1915.
REGULATIONS.
1. No person shall sell any intoxicating liquor to any member of
the Defence Forces, or to any member of the Expeditionary Forces,
when in uniform, for consumption elsewhere than on the premises
where it is sold.
2. No person shall give or supply or act as agent for the purchase
of any intoxicating liquor for any member of the Defence Forces,
when in uniform, for consumption elsewhere than on the premises-
where it is given, supplied, or purchased.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 25th February, 1915.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
22nd February, 1915, revoking Regulations 14 and 19 of 10th
November, 1914.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations shall be read together with and shall be deemed
part of the regulations made under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
by Order in Council dated the 10th day of November, 1914, and
gazetted on the same day.
2. No person shall publish or communicate, or permit to be pub-
lished or communicated, any information with respect to—
(i.) Forecasts or plans of future naval and military operations;
(ii.) The organization, strength, movements, armaments, con-
dition, disposition, or distribution of the naval or
military Forces of His Majesty or of His Majesty’s
Allies;
(iii.) The condition of the warships of His Majesty or of His
Majesty’s Allies, or the transport, supply, or other
services;


(iv.) The situation, armaments, oi state of defensive works,
whether in New Zealand or elsewhere in the British
dominions, or in territory belonging to His Majesty’s
Allies;
[(v.) The armament of any merchant ship. (Added by clause 10
oj 22nd February, 1916. Page 45.)]
unless —
(a.) The information is received by cable passed by the ap-
pointed Censors over British cables ; or
( b .) The information has already appeared in newspapers
received by mail in New Zealand from some other
portion of the British dominions ; or
(c.) The information has been passed for publication by the
Chief of the General Staff, New Zealand Military Forces,
Wellington.
3. Revoked by clause 4 (3) of 19th July, 1915. Page 34.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 19th July, 1915.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
19th July, 1915.
REGULATIONS.
1. All regulations heretofore made or hereafter to be made under
the War Regulations Act, 1914 (including these present regulations),
are herein referred to and may hereafter be referred to as the War
Regulations.
2. These regulations shall be read together with and shall be
deemed part of the War Regulations made on the 10th day of No-
vember, 1914.
3. (1.) For the purposes of the War Regulations (except clause 26
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914) every
person shall be deemed to be an alien enemy who is or has at any
time been a subject of any State with which His Majesty is now
at war, notwithstanding the fact that such person may be also by
birth, naturalization, or otherwise a British subject, or may have
in any manner ceased to be a subject of any such State. (Definition
oj “ alien enemy ” extended by clause 7 of 22nd February, 1916;
clause 12 of 2nd May, 1916; and clause 24 oj 24th July, 1916. Pages
44. 57, 63.)
2 —War Regs.


(2.) The definition of alien enemy in clause 1 of the War Re-
gulations made on the 10th day of November, 1914, is hereby
repealed.
4. (1.) No person shall publish, or cause or permit to be pub-
lished, any statement or matter likely to interfere with the recruiting,
training, discipline, or administration of His Majesty’s Forces, whether
by sea or land, or with the effective conduct of the military or naval
operations of His Majesty or his Allies in the present war, or likely
to be injurious to the public safety in the present war, or to prejudice
His Majesty’s relations with foreign Powers, or any false reports
relative to the present war and likely to cause alarm, or any statement
or matter which in any manner indicates disloyalty or disaffection
in respect to the present war.
(2.) In this regulation the term “ publish ” means to make known
either to individuals or to the public at large, and the term “ His
Majesty’s Forces ” includes the New Zealand and all other military
or naval Forces raised by the Government of any British possession.
(3.) Clause 3 of the War Regulations made on the 22nd day of
February, 1915, is hereby revoked.
5. A Collector of Customs may, on the receipt of a warrant or
telegraphic instructions from a military authority in that behalf,
refuse the clearance of any ship.
6. If any goods the exportation of which is subject to any pro-
hibition or restriction are shipped as stores on board any ship, a
Collector of Customs may refuse the clearance of that ship so long
as such goods remain on board, unless he is satisfied that the goods
have been laden in good faith as stores and not for exportation
contrary to any such prohibition or restriction.
7. (1.) No person shall commit any breach of a contract to serve
His Majesty in any capacity on board a transport.
(2.) No person shall incite or attempt to incite any other person
to break any such contract or to refuse to enter into any such
contract.
(3.) In this regulation the term “ transport ” means any ship
belonging to or in the possession of or chartered by or on behalf of
His Majesty for any purpose in connection with the present war.
8. (1.) No alien enemy shall, without the consent in writing of
the Minister of Defence, leave or attempt to leave, or do any act
with intent to leave, New Zealand.
(2.) No owner, charterer, or master of a ship shall knowingly
receive on board that ship for carriage from New Zealand any person
whom he knows or has ground for suspecting to be an alien enemy,
unless that person has the written permission of the Minister of
Defence to leave New Zealand.
(3.) Nothing in this regulation shall apply to any alien enemy
who has arrived in New Zealand as a member of the crew of any


ship and who leaves New Zealand as a member of the crew of the
same ship.
9. All powers of arrest and detention of alien enemies conferred
upon military authorities or other persons by the War Regulations
may be exercised against all persons reasonably suspected of being
alien enemies.
10. No sentence passed by a Court-martial under the War
Regulations made on the 10th day of November, 1914, shall have
effect until confirmed by the Governor, and the Governor may in
confirming any such sentence commute it to a sentence of imprison-
ment with hard labour for such term as he thinks fit.
11. No British subject shall be tried by Court-martial under the
War Regulations.
12. Any person authorized in that behalf by a military authority
may, with all necessary assistants, enter into and search any ship
and all cargo, stores, or goods therein, and may for that purpose
open all packages and receptacles, or remove the same for opening
and examination elsewhere.
13. Any Postmaster or other officer of the Post Office may detain
any postal packet having attached thereto or appearing thereon
any seal, stamp, mark, or other device which purports, appears, or
is believed by such officer to have been issued, made, or used in New
Zealand for the purpose of or in connection with any scheme (whether
established in New Zealand or elsewhere) for the raising of moneys
for any purpose relative to the present war.
14. For all the purposes of the War Regulations territory in the
military occupation of any State at war with His Majesty shall be
deemed to be the territory of that State.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 9th August, 1915.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
9th August, 1915.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations shall be read together with and shall be deemed
part of the War Regulations made on the 10th day of November,
1914.
2. If the Attorney-General is satisfied, in respect of any company,
firm, or person carrying on business in New Zealand, that any alien
enemy, whether resident in New Zealand or elsewhere, is interested
2*—War Regs.


in that business, and that the company, firm, or person is carrying
on business under any name, description, or representation calculated
to mislead the public as to the persons interested in that business,
or as to the nature of that business, or as to the relationship between
that company, firm, or person and alien enemies, the Attorney-
General may by notice in the Gazette prohibit that company, firm, or
person from continuing to carry on business in New Zealand under
the said name, description, or representation after a date to be specified
in the notice.
3. After the date specified in such notice the company, firm, or
person therein referred to shall not carry on business in New Zealand
under the name, description, or representation so specified in the
notice, or under any other name, description, or representation which
is a colourable imitation thereof or is otherwise equivalent thereto ;
and no person shall act as the agent or servant of that company, firm,
or person, or as a partner in that firm, in respect of the carrying-on
of business in manner aforesaid.
4. Acts done merely for the purpose of winding up or discontinuing
the business of the company, firm, or person shall not be deemed
to be the carrying-on of business within the meaning of the foregoing
regulations.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extrac t from New Zealand Gazette , 20th September, 1915.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
20th September, 1915.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations shall be read together with and shall be deemed
part of the War Regulations made on the 10th day of November,
1914.
2. By the order of a military authority any alien who is reasonably
suspected by that military authority of being disaffected and dangerous
may be arrested by an officer or any other person and detained in such
place and manner as the military authority thinks fit, and during his
pleasure, unless discharged by the Minister of Defence. (See also
clause 6of sth February, 1917. Page 92.)
3. No person shall by words, writing, or otherwise incite,
encourage, advise, or advocate violence, lawlessness, or disorder, or
express any seditious intention.


4. No person shall print, publish, sell, distribute, have in his
possession for sale or distribution, or bring or cause to be brought
or sent into New Zealand any document which incites, encourages,
advises, or advocates violence, lawlessness, or disorder, or expresses
any seditious intention.
5. (a.) No person shall, whether as principal or agent, sell,
transfer, or supply to or procure for any other person any firearm
or ammunition [or explosive] save in pursuance of a permit issued
under this regulation. (As amended 2nd April, 1918. Page 141.)
(6.) No person shall, whether as principal or agent, purchase or
otherwise procure any firearm or ammunition [or explosive] save
in pursuance of a permit issued under this regulation.
(c.) Every such permit shall be signed and issued by a Superin-
tendent or Inspector of Police [or sergeant of police, clause 3 of
29th November, 1915, or constable in charge of a country station,
clause 27 of 24th July, 1916 ], and shall specify the nature, number,
or amount of the firearms or ammunition [or explosive] so authorized
to be sold, purchased, transferred, supplied, or procured, and the
names, residences, and occupations of the parties to the trans-
action so authorized, and shall be dated as of the day of the
signature thereof.
( d.) Every such permit shall remain in force for six days after
the day of the date thereof, and shall then become void.
6. (a.) No person shall bring or cause to be brought or sent into
New Zealand any firearm or ammunition [or explosive] save in
pursuance of a permit issued in that behalf under this regulation
by a Superintendent or Inspector of Police. (As amended 2nd April,
1918. Page 141.)
(b.) Any such permit may be at any time revoked by a Superin-
tendent or Inspector of Police.
7. (a.) The Minister of Defence may from time to time, by a
notice signed by him and published in the Gazette, declare that any
area specified in that notice is an area in which the possession of
firearms or ammunition [or explosives] without a permit is pro-
hibited, and may, by a similar notice published in the Gazette,
cancel any such notice with respect to the whole or any part or
parts of the area so specified. (As amended 2nd April, 1918, Page
142.)
[b.) Any area so specified shall, while and so far as the notice
specifying the same remains in force, be deemed to be a prescribed
area within the meaning and for the purposes of this regulation.
(c.) No person resident or being in any prescribed area shall,
save in pursuance of a permit issued to him by a Superintendent or
Inspector of Police, have in his possession or custody in that area
any firearm or ammunition [or explosive] at any time later than two
clear days after the date of the gazetting of the notice by which
such area has been prescribed.
(d.) No person shall bring or send, or cause to be brought or
sent, into a prescribed area any firearm or ammunition [or ex


plosive] save in pursuance of a permit issued to him by a Super-
intendent or Inspector of Police.
(g.) Any such permit as is referred to in this regulation may
be at any time revoked by any Superintendent or Inspector of
Police by notice in writing delivered to or otherwise brought to the
knowledge of the person to whom it was issued.
8. No person shall carry a firearm or other dangerous weapon
except for some lawful, proper, and sufficient purpose, and the
burden of proving the existence of such purpose shall lie upon the
accused.
9. No person shall by the discharge of firearms or in any other
manner whatever endanger the safety of any member of the Police
Force or of the Defence Forces, or of any person acting in aid of
the Police Force or of the Defence Forces.
10. No person without the written permission of a Superinten-
dent or Inspector of Police shall on or in the vicinity of any
railway, dock, wharf, harbour, or ship have in his possession or
custody any explosive substance or highly inflammable liquid in
quantities exceeding the immediate requirements of his business or
occupation.
11. Any constable may search any person for any firearms, am-
munition, explosives, or dangerous weapons which may be carried
by him, and may detain him for the purposes of such search.
12. In these regulations the terms “ firearms ” and “ ammu-
nition ” shall not include—
(a.) Shot-guns of a kind ordinarily used in New Zealand for
sporting purposes;
(6.) Ammunition of a kind ordinarily used for such shot-guns;
(c.) Firearms or ammunition belonging to or supplied by any
Department of the Executive Government, and lawfully
in the possession or custody of any member of the
Defence Forces or of the Police Force or any other
person.
[ln these regulations the word “ explosive ” shall, without re-
stricting the generality of its meaning, include all detonating sub-
stances or appliances, and all articles, appliances, and substances
of which an explosive forms part; but does not include —
(a.) “ Ammunition ” within the meaning of the said War Regu-
lations ;
(b.) Cartridges for shot-guns of a kind ordinarily used in New
Zealand for sporting purposes;
(c.) Explosives belonging to or supplied by any Department of
the Executive Government, and lawfully in the possession
or custody of any member of the Defence Forces or the
Police Force, or of any other person;
( d.) Fireworks, as defined in Class 7of the regulations under
the Explosive and Dangerous Goods Act, 1908, dated the
27th day of July, 1914. (See clause 3of 2nd April,
1918. Page U2.J]


13. (a.) The Minister of Defence may, by a notice signed by
him and published in the Gazette, declare that any highway ad-
joining or intersecting any camp of military training or exercise
is closed for traffic except with the consent of the military
authorities."
(b.) So long as any such notice remains unrevoked the highway
to which it relates shall for the purposes of the War Regulations be
deemed to be no longer a highway, but to be part of the camp
which it so adjoins or intersects.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 11th October, 1915.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
11th October, 1915.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations shall be read together with and shall be
deemed part of the War Regulations made on the 10th day of
November, 1914.
2. (a.) The Attorney-General may by notice gazetted prohibit
the sale of any book or other publication the sale of which he deems
injurious to the public interest in respect of the present war, and so
long as any such notice remains unrevoked the book or publication
to which it relates shall be a prohibited publication within the
meaning of this regulation. (As amended 18th June, 1918. Page
160.)
(b.) If any such notice relates to a periodical publication each
issue of that publication shall be a prohibited publication within the
meaning of this regulation.
( c .) No person shall sell, or offer for sale, or have in his posses-
sion for sale, or procure or attempt to procure possession of, a
prohibited publication.
( d .) Revoked by clause 14 of 23rd July, 1918. Page 162.
[(e.) No person shall print a prohibited publication.
(/.) No person shall deliver a prohibited publication to any other
person, or have in his possession a prohibited publication for the
purpose of such delivery.
(i g .) No act done in good faith by an officer of police or other
servant of the Crown in the execution of his office shall constitute
an offence against this regulation.
( h .) Every abridgment or extract from or abstract of a prohibited
publication shall be itself a prohibited publication.
(i.) Every periodical publication which is published in succession
to or in substitution for a prohibited periodical publication, and
* Highway adjoining Trentham Camp clo-ed (see Gazette of 7th October,
1915, p. 3462). Highway at Featherston Camp closed (see Gazette of 13th April,
1916, p. 1053).


which has the same proprietor, publisher, editor, or printer, shall be
itself a prohibited publication. (Added by clause 14 of 23rd July,
1918. Page 162.)] J. Andrews,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
Note. —The Minister of Defence and Attorney-General have pro-
hibited the sale of any of the following books or publications:—
Gazette, 29th November, 1915
Jane’s “ Fighting Ships.”
Jane’s “The World’s Warships.”
Jane’s “ Warships at a Glance.”
Jane’s “ Naval Recognition Book ” (British Ships).
(All published by Sampson, Low, Marston, and Co.,
Limited.)
“ Fleets of the World ” (published by Eveleigh Nash).
“ The Naval Pocketbook ” (published by Thacker and Co.).
Gazette, 9th March, 1910.
The International Socialist Review.
The Fatherland.
Issues and Events.
Newspapers or other periodicals printed wholly or partly in the
German language, and published or purporting to be published
in the United States of America.
Gazette, 4th December, 1917.
Direct Action.
Solidarity.
All other printed matter published or printed, or purporting to be
published or printed, by or on behalf of the society known as “ The
Industrial Workers of the World.”
Gazette, 4th July, 1918.
Black Prophet.
Green Ray.
Gazette, 25th July, 1918.
Gold for Iron.
Gazette, 6th June, 1919.
Novi Svijet (New World).
[Extract from Neio Zealand Gazette, 15th November, 1915.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
15th November, 1915.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations shall be read together with and shall be deemed
part of the War Regulations made on the 10th day of November, 1914


2. No person over the age of fifteen years shall leave New Zealand
for any place beyond the seas save in pursuance of a written permit
issued to him by the Minister or Under-Secretary of Internal Affairs
and still in force. (See clause 4of 29th November, 1915, and clause 1
of 21st August, 1916. Pages 42, 70.)
3. Every such permit shall cease to be in force on the expiration
of one calendar month after the date thereof. [To be returned to
Minister or Under-Secretary of Internal Affairs upon expiration,
revocation, or other determination thereof. (See clause 1 of Ist
October, 1917. Page 119.)]
4. Every such permit may be at any time revoked by the said
Minister or Under-Secretary by notice in writing to the person to
whom it was issued. (See clause 4of 29th November, 1915. Page 42.)
5. Revoked by clause 1 of 13th December, 1915.
6. (1.) No such permit shall be required in the case of any
person —
(a.) Who leaves New Zealand in the King’s service; or
(h.) Who leaves New Zealand as a bona fide member of the crew
of any ship ; or
(c.) Who arrives in and leaves New Zealand in the course of the
same voyage of any ship [other than a ship arriving from
a port in the Commonwealth of Australia (added by clause 2
of 13th December, 1915. Page 43)].
(2.) No person shall be deemed to be a bona fide member of the
crew of a ship within the meaning of this regulation unless he has
been engaged at the full current rate of pay and in the ordinary
course of the shipowner’s or charterer’s business.
7. The owner, charterer, and master of every ship shall take all
reasonable care not to carry out of New Zealand any person whose
departure from New Zealand would be a breach of these reeula
tions.
8. Every person found on board any ship which is about to leave
any port in New Zealand shall, on being questioned by any officer of
Police or Customs or by the master or any officer of the ship, state
whether he has received a permit under the War Regulations to
leave New Zealand, and produce for inspection by such officer or
master any permit so received by him.
9. No person who has received a permit under these regulations
shall go or be on board any ship which is about to leave a port in
New Zealand without having such permit in his possession.
10. No person shall by any false statement or representation
obtain or attempt to obtain a permit under these regulations either
for himself or for any other person.
11. Nothing in the foregoing regulations shall affect the operation
of clause 8 of the War Regulations of the 19th day of July, 1915,
relative to alien enemies.
12. No person shall wilfully break any contract made with the
Crown in respect or for the purposes of the present war.


13. No person shall incite any other person—
(a.) To break any contract made with the Crown in respect or
for the purposes of the present war ; or
(6.) To discontinue his service under the Crown in any capacity what-
ever in respect or for the purposes of the present war; or
(c.) To refuse or fail to offer or render any such service under
the Crown.
14. (1.) No person shall bring or cause to be brought any in-
toxicating liquor upon a troop-train, or have in his possession any
intoxicating liquor upon a troop-train, or supply any intoxicating
liquor to any person being carried in a troop-train
(2.) In this regulation the term “ troop-train ” means any railway-
train or railway-carriage which for the time being has been set apart
for the exclusive use of the Defence Forces, or which is for the time
being exclusively or chiefly occupied or used by members of those
Forces.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 29th November, 1915.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
29 th November, 1915.
REGULATIONS.
These regulations shall be read together with and shall be deemed
part of the War Regulations made on the 10th day of November,
1914.
2. {a.) No person shall bring or send, or cause to be brought or
sent, any intoxicating liquor into a camp, or have any intoxicating
liquor in his possession in a camp.
(6.) Any military officer or constable may seize and destroy any
intoxicating liquor which he finds in a camp.
(c.) The term “ camp ” means any land occupied or used, or in
course of preparation for occupation or use, as a place for the training
or exercise of members of an expeditionary force under the Expedi-
tionary Forces Act, 1915.
3. The permit required under clause 5 of the War Regulations
of the 20th day of September, 1915 (relative to the sale, transfer,
supply, or procurement of firearms or ammunition), may be granted
by a sergeant of police.
4. The permit required under clause 2 of the War Regulations of
the 15th day of November, 1915 (relative to persons leaving New
Zealand for any place beyond the seas), may be granted by any person
authorized in that behalf by the Minister of Internal Affairs, whether
generally or with respect to any particular persons or classes of persons.
A permit granted by any person so authorized may be revoked either
by himself or by the Minister or Under-Secretary of Internal Affairs.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 13th December, 1915.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
13th December, 1915.
REGULATIONS.
1. The War Regulations of the 15th day of November, 1915 (relat-
ing to the permits required by persons leaving New Zealand), are
hereby amended by revoking clause 5 thereof.
2. The said War Regulations are further amended by adding to
paragraph (c) of clause 6 thereof the words “ other than a ship
arriving from a port in the Commonwealth of Australia.”
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, I9th January, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
17th January, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations shall be read together with and shall be deemed
part of the War Regulations made on the 10th day of November,
1914.
2. The Minister of Defence may requisition for use as a transport
any British ship being in any port in New Zealand, whether registered
in New Zealand or elsewhere, and every such requisition shall take
effect upon notice of requisition being given as hereinafter provided.
3. Every such notice of requisition shall be signed by the Minister
of Defence, and shall be addressed to the owner, charterer, agent, or
master of the ship, and shall be either delivered to the person to whom
it is so addressed or left at his place of business or upon the ship.
4. On the taking-effect of any such notice of requisition it shall be
lawful for the Minister of Defence to take possession of the ship on
behalf of the Crown, and to retain such possession for such period as
he thinks necessary in the public interest, and to use the ship as a
transport for the carriage of troops, horses, stores, and cargo, and for
all such other purposes as he thinks necessary in respect of the military
and naval operations of His Majesty, the effective conduct of the
present war, and the public safety.
5. No person shall in any manner obstruct the Minister of Defence
in the exercise by him of the powers and authorities conferred by these
regulations.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 23rd February, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
22nd February, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations shall be read together with and shall be deemed
part of the War Regulations made on the 10th day of November,
1914.
2. Save with the consent of the Attorney-General, no person
shall, whether on his own behalf or on behalf of any other person,
make or be concerned in making any application to the Supreme
Court for probate of the will or for letters of administration of the
estate of any person who on his death was an alien enemy, wherever
resident, or for the resealing in New Zealand of any such probate or
letters of administration granted elsewhere.
3. Save with the consent of the Attorney-General, no alien
enemy, wherever resident, and no person on behalf of an alien
enemy, wherever resident, shall make or be concerned in making
any application to the Supreme Court for probate of the will or for
letters of administration of the estate of any person deceased, or
for the resealing in New Zealand of any such probate or letters of
administration granted elsewhere.
4. No executor, administrator, or trustee of the estate of any
deceased person shall, without the consent of the Attorney-General,
distribute or pay any part of the assets or proceeds of that estate
to any beneficiary or creditor who is an alien enemy, wherever resident,
or to any other person on his behalf.
5. All documents, instruments, and other things seized in pur-
suance of the powers conferred upon a military authority by clause 6
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914, shall
be detained until -a military authority or the Attorney-General
directs or authorizes their return to the person entitled thereto.
6. The last preceding regulation shall extend and apply to all
documents, instruments, and other things so seized before the
coming into operation of these regulations and not already returned
to the person entitled thereto.
7. The definition of “ alien enemy ” in clause 3 of the War Regula-
tions of the 19th day of July, 1915, is hereby amended so as to include
all persons who are or at any time have been subjects of the State of
Bulgaria.
8. No person shall, without the written consent of a military
authority, publish, or cause or permit to be published, in a news-
paper any statement as to the cargo laden or about to be laden on
any ship which is about to leave New Zealand for the United


Kingdom or any other place north of the Equator, or which is in
the course of its voyage from New Zealand to the United Kingdom
or any such place as aforesaid, or any statement as to the use or
intended use of any such ship for the carriage of troops or otherwise
in the service of the Crown in respect of the present war.
9. No person shall, except in the course of his lawful business
in relation to any such ship or cargo as is mentioned in the last pre-
ceding regulation, send or cause to be sent out of New Zealand by
means of any telegram, letter, or otherwise howsoever any information
as to the cargo laden or about to be laden in any such ship 'or as to
the use or intended use of any such ship for the carriage of troops or
otherwise in the service of the Crown in respect of the present war.
10. Clause 2of the War Regulations of the 22nd day of February,
1915, prohibiting the publication of information with respect to
certain matters therein specified, is hereby amended by inserting after
paragraph (iv) thereof the following paragraph :
“ (v.) The armament of any merchant ship.”
11. (a.) No person shall publish, or cause or permit to be
published, any confidential communication received by himself or
any other person from a military authority.
( b .) For the purpose of this regulation a communication shall
be deemed to be published if the whole or any part thereof is
published, or if any reference to the receipt or nature thereof is
published.
(c.) For the purpose of this regulation the term “ confidential
communication ” means any communication or statement in writing
purporting to be confidential or secret and in any manner relating
to the present war.
12. (a.) No person shall publish or permit to be published any
matter or statement which in any manner indicates or may be rea-
sonably supposed to indicate the existence therein of any omission,
alteration, or addition due to censorship.
(b.) Censorship means the act, direction, or request of any officer
or other person exercising or purporting to exercise, whether in New
Zealand or elsewhere, control over the transmission or publication of
matter relative to the present war.
13. (a.) A military authority may, by notice signed by him and
delivered or transmitted by post or telegraph to the proprietor,
publisher, or printer of any newspaper or other periodical publication,
prohibit the publication of any matter or kind of matter relative to
the present war.
(6.) After the receipt of such notice by the proprietor, publisher,
or printer of any newspaper or other periodical publication neither
he nor any other person shall publish, or cause or permit to be pub-
lished, therein or in connection therewith any matter in breach of such
prohibition.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, Ist March, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
Ist March, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. The Minister of Defence may, by order signed by him and delivered
to the Commissioner of Police, prohibit the exhibition of any cine-
matograph or moving picture which represents or purports to repre-
sent, or may be reasonably supposed to represent, any event in the
course of the present war, or which otherwise relates or purports to
relate, or may be reasonably supposed to relate, to that war.
2. After any such order of prohibition has been so delivered to the
Commissioner of Police he or any other officer of police may give
written notice of such prohibition to any person or persons concerned
in the exhibition or intended exhibition of the said cinematograph or
moving picture, or to the owner or occupier of any premises used for
the purpose of exhibiting cinematographs or moving pictures. Such
notice to the owner or occupier of any premises may be delivered by
leaving the same upon the premises.
3. No person shall, after the delivery to him of any such notice,
exhibit or cause to be exhibited, whether in whole or in part, the
cinematograph or moving picture to which the prohibition relates,
or any colourable imitation thereof, or be in any manner knowingly
concerned in any such exhibition.
4. The owner or occupier of any premises to whom any such
notice has been delivered shall not permit the premises to be used
for the exhibition, whether in whole or in part, of the cinematograph
or moving picture to which the prohibition relates, or any colourable
imitation thereof.
5. If the Minister of Defence is satisfied, after the issue of any
such order of prohibition, that the cinematograph or moving picture
to which it relates has been so altered as to be unobjectionable, he
may by notice to the Commissioner of Police permit the exhibition
thereof in its altered form.
6. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed part
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 4th April, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the 3rd
April, 1916; came into operation on the 16th April, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. In the following regulations —
“ Enemy ” means any person, firm, or company with whom or
with which trading or correspondence is prohibited by or
under the Trading with the Enemy Act, 1914, or its amend-
ments, or the War Kegulations ; and includes any person,
firm, or company declared to be an enemy under these
regulations :
“ Enemy property ” means all property, real or personal, which
belongs to an enemy or in which an enemy has any interest,
and includes all money owing or payable to an enemy or
to any person on behalf of an enemy :
“ Enemy company ” means a company which is incorporated
in enemy territory, or in or over which any enemy or any
other enemy company or any alien enemy (other than one
who is also a natural-born British subject) possesses or
exercises any substantial interest or control.
2. For the purposes of the following regulations, when any person,
firm, or company by means of an agent or servant in New Zealand
solicits or receives offers for the sale, purchase, or consignment of goods,
such person, firm, or company shall be deemed to carry on business in
New Zealand, whether such offers are received or accepted m New
Zealand or elsewhere.
Enemy Property.
3. The Public Trustee shall act as the Custodian of Enemy
Property under these regulations.
4. On or before the Ist day of May, 1916, every person who on the
coming into operation of these regulations holds, or has the possession,
management, or control of, any enemy property shah by notice in
writing communicate the fact, together with full particiffars of such
property, to the Custodian of Enemy Property at the Public Trust
Office at Wellington, and every such person shall thereafter from time
to time give to the Custodian such further information relative to that
property as he may require.
5 Every person shall, within fourteen days after he begins to hold,
possess, manage, or control any enemy property, or after any property
held, possessed, managed, or controlled by him becomes enemy pro-
petty, communicate the fact by notice m writing to the Custodian of
Enemy Property at the Public Trust Office at Wellington, together


with full particulars of that property, and shall from time to time
thereafter give to the Custodian such further information relative to
that property as he may require.
6. All notifications of enemy property under the two last preceding
regulations shall be made in accordance with the Schedule hereto dnd
under the several headings specified in that Schedule.
7. Money owing or payable to an enemy or to any person on behalf
of an enemy shall be deemed to be enemy property held by the person
by whom it is owing or payable, and also by the agent, attorney, or
representative of that person in New Zealand.
8. Shares owned by or on behalf of an enemy in any company
incorporated in New Zealand or carrying on business in New Zealand
shall be deemed to be enemy property held by the company, and also
by the attorney or manager of that company in New Zealand.
9. Property owned jointly or in common by an enemy and by any
person in New Zealand shall be deemed to be enemy property held by
such person in New Zealand.
10. No person shall by any false, misleading, or incomplete state-
ment deceive or attempt to deceive the Custodian in any matter relative
to enemy property.
11. (a.) All rents, dividends, interest, shares of profits, and other
income owing or payable to an enemy or to any person on behalf of
an enemy by any person in New Zealand shall be paid by such
last-mentioned person to the Custodian of Enemy Property.
(b.) Every such payment shall be made on or before the Ist day
of May, 1916, in the case of moneys already so due and payable at the
date of the coming into operation of these regulations ; and in all
other cases such payment shall be made within fourteen days after
the day on which such moneys become due and payable, or after any
later day on which the person to or on behalf of whom they are due
and payable becomes an enemy.
12. In the case of all moneys due and payable to an enemy or
to any person on behalf of an enemy (other than rents, dividends,
interest, shares of profits, and income as aforesaid) the Custodian of
Enemy Property may, if he thinks it expedient in the public interest,
demand payment of such moneys from the person by whom they are
so payable ; and the person on whom such demand is made shall
forthwith, or so soon as may be reasonably practicable, pay such
moneys to the Custodian accordingly.
13. All bank balances and other sums payable on demand shall be
deemed to become or to have become due and payable at any time
at which such demand might lawfully have been made if a state of
war had not existed.
14. All moneys received by the Public Trustee as the Custodian
of Enemy Property shall be invested in accordance with the direc-
tion of the Minister of Finance, and subject to or in default of such
direction shall form part of the common fund of the Public Trustee,
but no interest shall be payable thereon.


15. When, by any assignment or transfer or otherwise howsoever,
any property or any interest therein passes or at any time has passed
from an enemy to any person who is not an enemy, such property
shall nevertheless be deemed still to remain or to have remained enemy
property, and the income or proceeds thereof shall be deemed to be
payable to an enemy.
16. No person shall without the permission of the Attorney -
General pay to the assignee of an enemy, or to any person claiming
through an enemy, any money which he could not lawfully pay to
the enemy himself, whether the title of such assignee or person claim-
ing through an enemy has accrued before or after the coming into
operation of these regulations.
17. No person shall, without the permission of the Attorney-
General, be in any manner concerned in the transfer of any enemy
property from an enemy to any other person, or in the acquisition
by any person of any charge or other interest in or over any enemy
property, or in the registration or recording of any such transfer or
acquisition.
18. No person shall, without the permission of the Attorney-
General, acquire or be concerned in the acquisition of the undertaking
or business, or of any part of the undertaking or business, of an enemy,
or carry on or profess to carry on business as the successor of an
enemy.
Trading with the Enemy.
19. Revoked by regulation of 10th September, 1917.
20. (a.) If the Attorney-General is satisfied that any company,
firm, or person carrying on business in any place, whether in or out
of New Zealand, is carrying on such business exclusively or to a sub
stantial extent for the benefit or under the control of alien enemies
resident out of New Zealand or of an enemy company, or is engaged
in any business, communications, or undertaking injurious to the
interests of His Majesty in respect of the present war, he may by notice
in the Gazette declare such first-mentioned company, firm, or person
to be an enemy*
(6.) If the Attorney-General is satisfied that any person resident
out of New Zealand is an alien enemy and is carrying on business in
New Zealand, he may by notice in the Gazette declare such person to
be an enemy.*
( bh .) (Add from clause 16 of 24th July, 1916. Page 61.)
(c.) Any such declaration as aforesaid may be at any time in like
manner revoked by the Attorney-General.
{d.) So long as any such declaration remains unrevoked no person
shall trade with the company, firm, or person so declared to be an
enemy.
* All lists revoked.


(e.) So long as any such declaration remains unrevoked no
person shall act as an agent or servant or otherwise on behalf of the
person, firm, or company so declared to be an enemy, or as a partner
of such person or in such firm.
(J.) In this regulation trading with a company, firm, or person
means the doing of any act which would be an offence against the
Trading with the Enemy Act, 1914, or its amendments, if that com-
pany, firm, or person was resident and carrying on business exclusively
in enemy territory.
(g.) Nothing in this regulation shall be deemed to prohibit any
act which is permitted by a license issued by the Attorney-General,
and the Attorney-General is hereby empowered to issue such licenses
accordingly.
21. (a.) If the Minister of Customs, in the case of any goods shipped
or about to be shipped for exportation to any place not being within
the British dominions, has reason to suspect that the consignee is an
enemy or a person engaged in any business, undertaking, or communi-
cations injurious to the interests of His Majesty in respect of the present
war, he may prohibit the exportation of those goods.
(6.) No person having knowledge of such prohibition shall be con-
cerned in the exportation or attempted exportation of such goods in
breach of the prohibition.
(c.) In this regulation the term “ consignee ” includes any person
for whom goods are destined, whether immediately or ultimately.
22. The First Schedule to the War Regulations of the 26th day of
January, 1915, containing a form of Declaration of Ultimate Desti-
nation of goods exported to places other than British territory, is
hereby amended by inserting after paragraph 3 of that declaration
the following paragraph :
“ 4. The said goods are being exported for ultimate delivery to
[Here set out the name and address of the real 'purchaser or other person
for whom the goods are intended hy the exporter].”
23. (a.) If the Attorney-General is satisfied that any person is
carrying on business in New Zealand in the name of an enemy, or
otherwise uses in connection with his business any name, style, desig-
nation, or description calculated to lead the public to believe that the
business is that of an enemy or that an enemy has any interest therein
or any connection therewith, the Attorney-General may by notice to
that person prohibit the use in connection with his business of such
name, style, designation, or description.
(6.) No person shall in breach of such prohibition use in connection
with his business the name, style, designation, or description so pro-
hibited.
24. It shall not be lawful for the Registrar of Companies or for
any Assistant Registrar of Companies to issue a certificate of the in-
corporation of any company under the Companies Act, 1908, until
and unless the Attorney-General, being satisfied that no enemy, and


no enemy company, and no alien enemy (other than one who is also
a natural-born British subject), possesses or is about to acquire any
interest, whether legal or equitable, in that company, authorizes the
issue of such certificate. (See also clause 5 of 30th April, 1918.
Page 145.)
25. It shall not be lawful for any company incorporated else-
where than in New Zealand, and not lawfully carrying on business
in New Zealand at the date of the coming into operation of these regu-
lations, to commence to carry on business in New Zealand until and
unless the Attorney-General, being satisfied that no enemy, and no
enemy company, and no alien enemy (other than one who is also a
natural-born British subject), possesses or exercises, or is about to
possess or exercise, any substantial interest or control in or over that
company, issues to that company a license to carry on business in New
Zealand. (See also clause 6of 30th April, 1918. Page 145.)
26. (a.) It shall not be lawful for any alien enemy (other than
one who is also a natural-born British subject) to carry on business in
New Zealand, unless he is already resident or carrying on business
in New Zealand at the date of the coming into operation of these
regulations. (Amended by clause 2 of 20th August, 1917.
Page 116.)
( h .) It shall not be lawful for any person to act as the agent, servant,
partner, or otherwise on behalf of an alien enemy (other than one who
is also a natural-born British subject) in respect of any business carried
on by him in New Zealand, unless that alien enemy was resident or
carrying on business in New Zealand at the date of the coming into
operation of these regulations.
27. It shall not be lawful for any enemy or for any alien enemy
(other than one who is also a natural-born British subject) to acquire,
whether at law or in equity, any shares, debentures, or debenture
stock in any company incorporated in New Zealand, nor shall it be
lawful for any such company or for any officer thereof to register,
record, recognize, or be otherwise concerned in the acquisition,
whether in New Zealand or elsewhere, of any such shares, debentures,
or debenture stock by any such enemy or alien enemy ; provided that
nothing in this regulation shall extend to any acquisition by way of
testamentary or intestate succession.
28. (a.) When the Attorney-General is satisfied, with respect to
any business carried on in New Zealand, that it is being carried on
wholly or partially by or on behalf of or under the control or manage-
ment of an enemy, or an enemy company, or an alien enemy, the
Attorney-General may by notice to any person by whom such busi-
ness is being carried on or managed in New Zealand, or to the agent,
attorney, or representative in New Zealand of any such person, impose
such restrictions as he thinks fit upon the scope or nature of that
business or upon the mode of carrying it on.
(6.) Any such restrictions may be in like manner removed or varied
by the Attorney-General.


(c.) No person shall carry on, or be in any manner concerned in
the carrying-on of, any such business in breach of the restrictions so
imposed and for the time being in force.
29. Revoked by clause 11 of 11th May, 1916. Paye 60.
Miscellaneous.
30. In these regulations, and in all other War Regulations, the
term “ person ” includes a body corporate so far as such regulations
are capable of application to bodies corporate.
31. (a.) Every alien enemy shall, if so required by the Custodian
of Enemy Property, within fourteen days after being - so required, give
to the Custodian such particulars as he requires as to all property
of the value of £5O or upwards, whether situated in New Zealand
or elsewhere, which belongs to that alien enemy or in which he is
interested.
(6.) Such particulars shall be in writing verified by the statutory
declaration of the alien enemy by whom the same are given.
(c.) The term “ property ” includes all money owing or payable to
an alien enemy or to any person on his behalf.
32. No owner of a British ship registered in New Zealand, or of
any share in such a ship, shall transfer the ship or any share therein
to any person not qualified to own a British ship. (Transfers further
restricted by regulations of 18th December, 1916, and 11th June, 1917.
Pages 87, 109.)
33. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed
part of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
Schedule.
A.
Returns of Property held, possessed, managed, or controlled on behalf
of Enemies resident or carrying on Business in Enemy Territory.
Such returns shall be made under the following heads :
(1.) Dividends or interest in respect of any shares, stock, deben-
tures, debenture stock, or other obligations of any company incor-
porated in New Zealand, and any profits or share of profits of any
business, and any interest on money lent other than interest on the
securities mentioned under the next following head.
(2.) Sums payable in New Zealand in respect of interest or securities
issued by the Government of any part of the British dominions, or in
respect of securities issued by any municipal or Other public or local
authority, and also all principal sums which become or have become
due and repayable in respect of such securities.
(3.) Shares, stocks, debentures, debenture stock, and other obliga-
tions of companies incorporated in New Zealand, and interests held in
partnerships carrying on business in New Zealand.
(4.) All real and personal property not otherwise referred to in this
Schedule.


(5.) Property held in New Zealand for safe custody, such as securi-
ties, deeds, personal belongings, jewellery, or cash.
(6.) All income not otherwise referred to in this Schedule.
(7.) Debts, bank deposits, and bank balances.
B.
Returns of Property held, possessed, managed, or controlled on hehalf of
Enemies resident or carrying on Business elsewhere than in Enemy
Territory.
Such returns shall be made in the same manner as returns under
Part A of this Schedule, but separately therefrom.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 2nd May, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
2nd May, 1916.
KEGULATIONS.
Alien Enemies engaged in Foreign Trade,
1. (1.) No alien enemy, other than one who is also a British subject,
shall be engaged in foreign trade. (Amended hy regulations of
20th August, 1917. Page 116.)
(2.) Every person shall be deemed for the purposes of this regula-
tion to be engaged in foreign trade who, whether as principal or agent,
imports, or procures the importation of, or is in any manner concerned
in the importation of goods into New Zealand from any other country,
whether within the British dominions or not, or exports, or procures
the exportation of, or is in any manner concerned in the exportation
of goods from New Zealand to any other country, whether within
the British dominions or not.
(3.) Without in any way limiting the generality of the foregoing
provisions, every person shall for the purposes of this regulation be
deemed to be engaged in foreign trade who acts as the agent of any
person, firm, or company, whether in New Zealand or elsewhere, in
respect of the purchase or sale of goods to be imported into or exported
from New Zealand by or on behalf of the purchaser or seller, or in
respect of the purchase or sale of goods consigned to or from New
Zealand for sale, or in respect of the solicitation, receipt, making,
acceptance, or transmission of offers for any such purchase, sale, oj
consignment.


(4.) The Attorney-General may, by notice in the Gazette, extend
the provisions of- this regulation to any specified alien enemy not-
withstanding that he is a British subject, and on and after the day
named in that behalf in such notice this regulation shall extend and
apply to the alien enemy so specified in the same manner as if he was
not a British subject.
(5.) No person shall be engaged in foreign trade who is carrying
on business in partnership with any alien enemy who is himself
prohibited by or under this regulation from being engaged in foreign
trade,
(6.) Nothing in this regulation shall prevent the importation or
exportation by any person of goods for his own use unconnected with
any business carried on by him.
(7.) Nothing in this regulation shall prevent the importation of
goods which have already left the country of exportation before the
date of coming into operation of these regulations, or the completion
(with the license of the Attorney-General) of any contract entered
into before that date.
2. (1.) When any alien enemy who has theretofore been engaged
in foreign trade within the meaning of the last preceding regulation
has become, by reason of that regulation or of any notice issued by
the Attorney-General thereunder, unable lawfully to continue to be
so engaged, it shall not be lawful for any other person, firm, or com-
pany at any time thereafter to carry on any business as the successor
of that alien enemy.
(2.) Any person, firm, or company shall be deemed for the purposes
of this regulation to carry on business as the successor of an alien
enemy if that person, firm, or company—
S. i a -) Purchases or otherwise acquires the business or any part of
the business of the alien enemy ; or
(b.) Carries on business under any name, style, description, or
representation which in any manner indicates or may be
supposed to indicate that the business is that of the alien
enemy, or is in any way connected therewith by succession,
amalgamation, or otherwise ; or
(c.) Enters into any agreement, arrangement, or understanding
with the alien enemy by which the benefit of the goodwill
of his business or any part thereof may directly or indirectly
pass to or be acquired by such person, firm, or company,
or by which such person, firm, or company may be enabled
to continue that business or any part thereof.
Enemy Shareholders.
3. (1.) In this regulation—
“ New Zealand company ” means any body corporate which
has a capital divided into shares and is incorporated in New
Zealand :


“ Enemy company ” means a body corporate which is incor-
porated in enemy territory, or in or over which any enemy
or any other enemy company or any alien enemy (other than
one who is also a natural-born British subject) possesses or
exercises any substantial interest or control:
“ Enemy ” means any person or body corporate with whom
or with which trading is prohibited under the Trading with
the Enemy Act, 1914, or its amendments, or the War
Regulations.
(2.) If the Attorney-General is satisfied that any share in a New
Zealand company belongs, or at any time since the commencement
of the present war with Germany has belonged, in law or in equity,
to an enemy, or to an enemy company, or to an alien enemy other
than a natural-born British subject, or that any enemy or any enemy
company or any such alien enemy possesses, or at any time since the
commencement of the present war with Germany has possessed, any
interest, whether legal or equitable, in any such share or in the income
thereof or in the proceeds of the sale thereof, the Attorney-General
may, by an order signed by him and published in the Gazette, order and
declare that such share shall be vested in the Custodian of Enemy
Property.
4. On the gazetting of any such order all shares to which it relates
shall thereupon vest at law in the Public Trustee, as the Custodian of
Enemy Property, in trust to sell the same and to hold the same and
the income thereof and the proceeds of the sale thereof in trust for
all persons having any interest in such shares, income, or proceeds in
accordance with their respective interests; save and except that
where the shares were vested in any trustee with power of sale the
Public Trustee shall hold the same, and the proceeds and income
thereof, in trust for such trustee, without prejudice, however, to all
trusts and equities affecting the same in the hands of the trustee.
5. (1.) Every such New Zealand company, any shares in which
are so vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property, shall forthwith,
on the request of the Custodian, register the Public Trustee, in his
capacity as Custodian of Enemy Property, as the owner of those
shares,' whether they are registered in New Zealand or in any other
register of the company elsewhere.
(2.) Nothing in the regulations or constitution of any such com-
pany shall in any manner take away or restrict the obligation of the
company so to register the Public Trustee as the owner of the shares.
(3.) If any such New Zealand company makes default in so regis-
tering the Public Trustee as the owner of any shares, each director,
manager, or secretary of that company shall be guilty of an offence
against the War Regulations, and the company may be declared by
the Attorney-General # to be an enemy in the same manner and with
the same consequences as if such declaration had been made under
clause 20 of the War Regulations of the 3rd day of April, 1916.


6. It shall be the duty of the Custodian of Enemy Property, as
soon as reasonably practicable after the vesting in him of any "such
shares, to sell the same in such manner as he thinks fit; and on his
executing a transfer thereof, in such form and manner as he thinks
fit, to the purchaser, and requesting registration of the transfer, it
shall be the duty of the company, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in the regulations or constitution of the company, to register
the purchaser as the owner of the shares so transferred :
[Provided that no such sale shall take place without the consent
of the Attorney-General (added by clause 1 of 28th Auqust, 1916
Page 73).] y
Xl' S he P roceeds of an 7 su ch sale of shares by the Custodian
of Enemy Property shall be disposed of in accordance with the trusts
affecting the same in his hands, save that no moneys shall be paid by
him to an enemy. r J
(2.) All moneys for the time being unexpended by the Custodian
shall be invested by him in accordance with the directions of the
Minister of Finance; and in default of such directions, then in the
common fund of the Public Trust Office, but so far as owing to an
enemy such moneys shall bear no interest.
8. The Custodian of Enemy Property shall pay out of the proceeds
or income of any shares so vested in him all calls becoming payable
on those shares, but shall not be otherwise liable for such calls.
9. So long as the Custodian of Enemy Property acts in good faith
m the execution of the powers, duties, and trusts conferred or imposed
upon him under these regulations, or under any other War Regula-
tions, he shall be under no civil liability to any person whatever for
any error, act, or default.
Enemy Companies in New Zealand.
10. (1.) If the Attorney-General is satisfied, with respect to any
company incorporated in New Zealand, that any enemy, or any enemy
company or any alien enemy (other than one who is also a natural-
born -British subject) possesses or exercises any substantia] interest or
control in or over that company, the Attorney-General may by notice
in the Gazette declare such first-mentioned company to be an enemy
revoked Any declaratlon be at an 7 time in like manner
(3.) Every such declaration shall have with respect to the company
so declared to be an enemy the same effect as if the company had been
“d!°y OfXiUM6 Under daUSe 20 0i the War ******* of
(4.) The terms “ enemy ” and “ enemy company ” have the same
meaning as in clause 3 of the present regulations.
Return of Foreign Correspondents.
11. (I.) Every person, firm, or company carrying on business in
New Zealand in respect of the purchase, sale, exportation or im“


portation of goods, and having any foreign correspondent or having
had since the commencement of the present war with Germany any
foreign correspondent in respect of that business or any part thereof,
shall before the 14th day of May, 1916, make and deliver to the
Attorney - General a return in writing of the name and place of
business of every such foreign correspondent.
(2.) " Correspondent ’ means any person, firm, or company be-
tween whom and the person, firm, or company making the return
there exists or has existed the relation of principal and agent or of
vendor and purchaser in respect of the purchase, sale, importation,
or exportation of goods.
(3.) “ Foreign correspondent ” means any correspondent having
a head office or chief place of business elsewhere than in the United
Kingdom or a British possession or British protectorate or territory
in the military occupation of His Majesty.
(4.) Every-such return shall specify the nature of the business of
the foreign correspondent, and every place in which to the knowledge
or belief of the person, firm, or company making the return the foreign
correspondent has any office, factory, warehouse, branch, or other
place of business.
(5.) Failure to make any such return within the time aforesaid,
or making any return which is knowingly incomplete or misleading,
shall be an offence against the War Regulations on the part of every
person concerned in the management of the business in respect of
which the return is or ought to have been made.
Miscellaneous.
12. For the purposes of these regulations and of all other War Regu-
lations the term “ alien enemy ” includes the wife of an alien enemy.
(See also clause 24 of 24th Jidy, 1916. Page 63.)
13. Revoked hy clause 11 of 13th October, 1916.
14. In all prosecutions for any breach of the War Regulations
in which the liability of the accused depends on his being an alien
enemy he shall be presumed to be an alien enemy unless he produces
sufficient evidence to the contrary.
15. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed part
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. Andrews,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
Note. —The returns of foreign correspondents required by the
foregoing regulations are not intended for publication, but will be
treated as strictly confidential, save so far as the disclosure of any
information so received may become necessary in the course of legal
proceedings in any Court of Justice,


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 11th May, 1916. J
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
11th May, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. When any company, firm, or person carrying on business in New
Zealand is or has been, whether before or after the coming into
operation of these regulations, declared to be an enemy by the
Attorney-General in the exercise of the authority conferred upon him
by the War Regulations, the Attorney-General may at the same
time, or at any time thereafter while the declaration remains in force,
by warrant published in the Gazette, appoint the Public Trustee as
the Controller of the business of the company, firm, or person so
declared to be an enemy.* Any such appointment may be at any
time revoked in like manner.
2. The Controller so appointed shall have the following powers
in respect of the business of the company, firm, or person so declared
to be an enemy :
{a.) To take and retain possession of all property whatever then
or thereafter belonging to that company, firm, or person
in respect of the business so controlled ;
(b.) To collect, receive, and retain all moneys payable to that
company, firm, or person in respect of the business so
controlled :
(c.) Out of any moneys received by him as Controller to and
discharge any debts or liabilities of that company, firm, or
person on such evidence as seems to the Controller sufficient:
(d.) To sell the stock-in-trade and other chattels belonging to
that company, firm, or person in respect of the business so
controlled, whether by sale in the usual course of that
business, or by tender, public auction, or otherwise as the
Controller thinks fit:
( e ■) To carry on or permit to be carried on the business of that
company, firm, or person so far as the Controller deems
necessary for the winding-up of that business and the
realization of the assets thereof :
(/•) To exercise in the name and on behalf of that company, firm,
or person all rights of action vested therein in respect of
such business :
(g.) To cancel and determine any contract which has been entered
into by that company, firm, or person in the course of
such business before being declared an enemy, and the
performance of which may remain lawful notwithstanding
such declaration :
* See Gazette of loth Maj", 1916, p. 1725.


( h .) To exercise any power vested in that company, firm, or
person of determining or surrendering any leasehold interest
possessed by that company, firm, or person in respect of
such business, and to give or execute in the name of the
company, firm, or person all notices or instruments required
in that behalf:
(i.) To make application to the Supreme Court for an order for the
winding-up of any company so declared to be an enemy and
placed under his control:
(j.) To require and authorize the delivery to him from the Post
Office of all postal packets and telegrams addressed to or
intended for that company, firm, or person in. respect of
such business.
3. While the Controller remains in office in respect of any business
it shall not be lawful for any person to be engaged in the management
or conduct of that business, or to act in respect of that business as
an agent or servant of the company, firm, or person so declared to be
an enemy, save with the permission of the Controller and so far as
such permission extends.
4. No person shall in any manner obstruct or deceive the Con-
troller, or any agent, servant, or representative of the Controller,
in the exercise or performance of any of his powers, duties, or autho-
rities as such.
5. No director, manager, agent, servant, partner, or other person
who is for the time being engaged in the management oP conduct of
any business under the control of the Controller, or who has at any time
during the present war been so engaged, shall withhold from the
Controller any information relating to such business on being required
by the Controller to supply such information.
6. All powers conferred upon the Controller by these regulations
may be exercised by him either personally or through such agent,
servant, or representative as he may think fit to appoint in that
behalf.
7. All expenses incurred by the Controller in the exercise of his
powers in respect of any business shall be payable out of the moneys
received by him as Controller of that business.
8. All moneys received by the Controller in respect of any busi-
ness so under his control shall form part of the common fund of the
Public Trust Office, and shall, subject to the powers of the Controller
to pay debts, expenses, and other sums of money thereout, be held
on account of the company, firm, or person entitled thereto, but
shall bear no interest.
9. While the Controller remains in office in respect of the business
of any company, firm, or person it shall not be lawful, without the
consent of the Controller or the Attorney-General, to present any
bankruptcy petition in respect of that firm or person or any petition
for the winding-up of that company, or to pass any resolution for


the winding-up of that company, or to take any steps for the Enforce-
ment of the rights of any creditors of that person, firm, or company
save that on the application of the Controller the Supreme Court
may make an order for the winding-up of that company under the
Companies Act, 1908, on the ground that it has been declared an
enemy,
10. The appointment of the Public Trustee as the Controller of
any business under the present regulations shall be deemed to be and
shall operate as a license by the Attorney-General under clause 20
of the War Regulations of the 3rd day of April, 1916, in respect of
all matters authorized by the present regulations.
11. The War Regulations of the 25th day of November, 1914, and
clause 29 of the War Regulations of the 3rd day of April, 1916 (relative
to the powers of the Public Trustee as the Controller of companies
and firms), are hereby revoked.
12. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed part
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 24th July, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
24th July, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
Licenses for the Importation of Goods.
1 to 10. Revoked by clause 2 of 20th November, 1916.
Enemy Trade.
11. {a.) Where any person is or has at any time been, whether
before or after the making of these regulations, a servant or partner
of an alien enemy or of a person declared to be an enemy under the
War Regulations, or a servant or member of a company or firm so
declared to be an enemy, the Attorney-General may from time to
time by notice given to that person impose such restrictions as he
thinks fit upon the scope or nature of any business carried on or to
be carried on by him, or upon the mode of carrying on any such
business.
(6.) No such restrictions on the business of any person shall be
so imposed or shall remain in force at any time later than six months
after that person has ceased to be a servant or partner of an enemy
or of an alien enemy, or a servant or member of an enemy firm or
company as aforesaid.


(c.) Bo long as any such restrictions remain in force no person
shall carry on or be in any manner concerned in carrying on any
business in breach of those restrictions.
(d.) This regulation shall extend and apply to a person, firm,
or company declared to be an enemy before the making of these
regulations.
12. Revoked by regulation of 10th September, 1917.
13. Revoked by clause 15 of 13th October, 1910.
14. When any person, firm, or company has been declared to be
an enemy under the War Regulations (whether before or after the
date of the present regulations), and while such declaration remains
in force, it shall not be lawful to publish in any newspaper any ad-
vertisement of the goods or merchandise manufactured, produced, or
sold by that enemy or of the business carried on by that enemy ;
provided that nothing in this regulation shall apply to the Public
Trustee in his capacity as Controller of any business under the War
Regulations.
15. When shares in a company have been vested in the Cus-
todian of Enemy Property under clause 3 of the War Regulations
of the 2nd day of May, 1916, it shall be lawful for the company
to buy those shares and to become registered as the owner thereof,
and to resell the shares so purchased by it, anything in any Act
or in the constitution or regulations of the company to the contrary
notwithstanding.
16. Clause 20 of the War Regulations of the 3rd day of April,
1916, is hereby amended by inserting therein the following sub-
clause after subclause (6) thereof :
“ ( bb .) If the Attorney-General is satisfied that any person
resident out of New Zealand is an alien enemy and is carrying on
business with persons, firms, or companies in New Zealand he may,
by notice in the Gazette, declare such first-mentioned person to be
an enemy.”
17. (1.) When the Attorney-General is satisfied that any goods
or merchandise are enemy property within the meaning of clause 1
of the War Regulations of the 3rd day of April, 1916, he may
authorize the Public Trustee, as the Custodian of Enemy Property,
to take possession of such goods or merchandise and to sell the
same, and every such authority shall have effect according to the
tenor thereof.
(2.) All moneys received by the Custodian of Enemy Property
from the sale of any such goods and merchandise shall, after pay-
ment thereout of all sums lawfully payable in respect of such goods
or merchandise to any person other than an enemy, be invested and
dealt with in accordance with clause 14 of the War Regulations of
the 3rd day of April, 1916.
Property of Prisoners of War.
18. In the following regulations “ prisoner of war ” means any
person detained in New Zealand under the order of a military


authority, or otherwise detained as a prisoner of war [and includes
any alien enemy whose arrest has been authorized by a military
authority under the War Regulations, although he has not yet been
actually arrested. (As amended by clause 2of 12th May, 1919.
Page 203.)]
19. (1.) The Public Trustee may be appointed as the custodian
of the property of any prisoner of war—
(a.) By that prisoner of war ; or
(b.) By the Attorney-General in any case where he considers it
necessary that a custodian should be appointed.
(2.) Any such appointment shall be in writing, and may be
revoked at any time by the Attorney-General by notice in writing
to the Public Trustee. (Amended by clause lof 12th May, 1919.
Page 203.)
20. The Public Trustee, when so appointed, shall have the fol-
lowing powers in respect of the property of that prisoner of war :• —
(a.) To take and retain possession of all property whatever
belonging to that prisoner of war;
(b.) To collect, receive, and retain all moneys payable to that
prisoner of war;
(c.) To sue in his official name for all debts due and moneys
payable to that prisoner of war;
(d-) Out of any moneys received by him as Custodian to pay and
discharge any debts or liabilities of that prisoner of war,
and to pay such reasonable sums as he considers necessary
for the maintenance of the wife and children (if any) of
that prisoner of war ;
(e.) Where the moneys received by him are not sufficient to pay
all debts and liabilities of that prisoner of war, to sell any
personal property of that prisoner of war for that purpose ;
(/•) To manage and carry on or permit to be carried on the
business of that prisoner of war as a going concern, and
for that purpose to appoint such agents or servants as he
considers necessary, and pay them such remuneration as
he thinks fit;
[(<7-) I* l the case of a prisoner of war who is no longer in New
Zealand, to sell the whole or any part of the real or
personal property of that prisoner in New Zealand, and
to execute in his name and on his behalf all proper
instruments of assurance;
(h.) To exercise in respect of the property of the prisoner of war
any other powers which may be expressly conferred
upon the Public Trustee by that prisoner in the instru-
ment or appointment executed by him. (Added by
clause 3of 12th May, 1919. Page 203.)]
21. All powers conferred upon the Custodian by these regula-
tions may be exercised by him either personally or through such
representative as he may think fit to appoint in that behalf.


22. All expenses incurred by the Custodian (including such
reasonable charges as he thinks fit to make for his services) in the
exercise of his powers in respect of the property of any prisoner of
war shall be payable out of the moneys received by him as Custodian
of that property.
23. The balance of the moneys received by the Custodian in
respect of the property of any prisoner of war, after making all
payments hereinbefore authorized, shall form part of the common
fund of the Public Trust Office, and shall be held on account of that
prisoner of war, and there may be paid thereout to the prisoner of
war such reasonable sums as the Custodian thinks fit.
Miscellaneous.
24. For the purposes of this and all other War Eegulations,
whether made before or after the making of the present regula-
tions, —
(a.) The wife of an alien enemy shall be deemed to be an alien
enemy ;
(6.) The wife of an alien enemy, who is not himself a natural-born
British subject, shall be deemed to be an alien enemy who
is not a natural-born British subject.
25. No male person over the age of fifteen years (as amended hy
clause 2 of 21st August, 1916, page 70) shall be shipped as a member
of the crew of an oversea vessel unless he produces to the Superin-
tendent of Mercantile Marine—
(a.) A certificate of discharge in New Zealand from an oversea
vessel within the immediately preceding twelve months, or
discharges for at least twelve months’ service in vessels in
the coasting trade of New Zealand [or such other discharges
as the Superintendent of Mercantile Marine may deem
satisfactory (added hy regulation of 11th September, 1916,
page 75)] ; or
(b.) A permit to leave New Zealand issued under the War
Eegulations of the 15th day of November, 1915, and still
in force.
26. (a.) Where the Attorney-General is satisfied that any person
is not ordinarily resident in New Zealand and is disaffected, disloyal,
or likely to be a source of danger to the peace, order, and good go-
vernment of that Dominion, the Attorney-General may at any time
within six months after that person has arrived in New Zealand,
whether before or after the date of this regulation, order him to leave
New Zealand.
(b.) If that order is not complied with within seven days from
the date of the service thereof, any officer may without warrant
arrest that person and place him on board any vessel about to leave
New Zealand for the country from which he came to New Zealand,
and detain him on board that vessel until it has left New Zealand.


(c.) Such sum as the Attorney-General considers reasonable may
be paid to the owner or master of any such vessel on account of the
carriage of any person so ordered to leave New Zealand and arrested,
and after payment or tender of that sum the owner or master of that
vessel shall not refuse to receive or retain on board thereof the person
so arrested or the officer in whose custody he is.
{d.) No person so ordered to leave New Zealand shall at any time
after compliance with the order, or after having been so placed on
board any vessel, return to or land in New Zealand.
(Clause 26 extended by clause 9of 4th December, 1916. Page 86.)
27. The permit required under clause 5 of the War Regulations
of the 20th day of September, 1915 (relative to the sale, transfer,
supply, or procurement of firearms or ammunition), may be signed
and issued by a constable in charge of a country station.
28. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed
part of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from Neiv Zealand Gazette, 21st August, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
21st August, 1916; came into operation 28th August, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
Relating to the Sale of Intoxicating Liquor.
1. In these regulations—
“ Licensed premises ” means premises in respect of which a
publican’s or an accommodation license [or a New Zea-
land wine license (added by clause 3 of 28th August,
1916, page 7Jf)\ is in force under the Licensing Act, 1908;
and includes the premises of a chartered club under that
Act, and also any place in which intoxicating liquor may
be sold in pursuance of a conditional license under that
Act:
rf ‘ Licensee ” means the holder of any such license, and in-
cludes the secretary of any such chartered club :
“ Bar ” means a public or private bar on licensed pre-
mises; and includes any part of such premises which is
principally or exclusively used for the sale, supply, or
consumption of intoxicating liquor :
“Bar-attendant” means any person employed or serving
in any capacity in a bar, other than the licensee.


2. The following acts are hereby declared to amount to treating
(1.) The act of any person who directly or indirectly
/a \ n^ S ’ ° r un(^er^a^es or offers to pay; or
(6.) Gives or lends, or offers or undertakes to give or
lend, money with which to pay
tor any intoxicating liquor sold or to be sold on licensed
premises for consumption on or about those premises bv
/0 V rr. any P er ® on other than the person first mentioned :
(.) L he act of any person who purchases intoxicating liquor
on licensed premises, and invites or permits-an v other
/«) v P erS ° n \° consume that liquor on or about those premises :
{6.) the act of any person who on licensed premises purchases
?, r n nu 0 P urchase intoxicating liquor with intent that
it shall be consumed on or about those premises by any
other person : J J
(4.) Any other act done by any person with intent that any
other person shall consume on or about licensed premises
any mtoxicating liquor other than liquor purchased and
paid for by the consumer with his own money. Money
ent or given to any person upon licensed premises, or
lent or given to him elsewhere with intent that it shall
be spent in the purchase of intoxicating liquor, shall,
for the purposes of these regulations, be deemed not to
be his own money.
3. Every person who does any act which amounts to treating
commits an offence against these regulations. (See clause 16 of
Vlst December , 1916. Page 90.)
4. Every person who on or about licensed premises receives or
consumes intoxicating liquor in respect of which an offence against
these regulations has been committed by any other person shall
himself be guilty of an offence against these regulations.
5. Every licensee, bar-attendant, or servant of a licensee who
knowingly sells, supplies, or receives payment for any intoxicating
liquor in respect of which an offence against these regulations has
been or is intended to be committed by any other person shall
himself be guilty of an offence against these regulations.
6 Every licensee or bar-attendant who permits the commission
on the licensed premises of any offence against these regulations
shall himself be guilty of an offence against these regulations.
. '• Every licensee on whose licensed premises any offence is com-
mitted against these regulations shall be deemed to have permitted
that offence, and shah be liable accordingly, unless he proves that
it was committed without his knowledge, acquiescence, or con-
nivance, and that he took all reasonably practical measures by way
of personal supervision or otherwise to prevent the commission of
offences against these regulations.
8. (1.) Every bar-attendant, other than a member of the family
of the licensee, who is convicted of an offence against these regula-
3—War Eegs.


tions shall be disqualified for the period of six months thereafter
from being employed or serving in any capacity in or about the
same or any other licensed premises. [Magistrate may remove or
vary disqualification. (See regulation of 2nd April, 1918. Page 143.)]
(2.) If any person while so disqualified is employed or serves
in any capacity in or about any licensed premises he shall be guilty
of an offence against these regulations.
9. If in anv prosecution for an offence against these regulations
the evidence produced by the informant or the facts as admitted
are sufficient to constitute a reasonable cause of suspicion that the
defendant is guilty of the offence charged, the burden of proving
that the offence was not committed shall lie upon the defendant.
10. For the purposes of these regulations the supply of intoxi-
cating liquor for a pecuniary consideration on the premises of a
chartered club under the Licensing Act, 1908, shall be deemed to
be a sale of such liquor. #
11. (1.) Nothing in the foregoing regulations shall apply to
the supply or consumption of intoxicating liquor as part of a meal
served and consumed upon the licensed premises elsewhere than in
a bar thereof.
(2.) “ Meal ” means a meal served not earlier than noon and
not less substantial than an ordinary midday meal.
12. Nothing in the foregoing regulations shall apply to any
act of treating on licensed premises (elsewhere than in a bar
thereof) by a boarder or other person bona -fide resident on those
premises.
13. No woman (other than the licensee, or a servant of the
licensee, or a member of the licensee’s family) shall at any time
after six o’clock in the evening enter or remain in the bar of any
licensed premises or loiter about the entrance to any such bar.
14. (1.) Every constable may at all times by day or night, and
on any day of the week, enter without warrant—
(a.) Any licensed premises; or
( b .) Any premises on which he reasonably suspects that any
offence against these regulations or against the provisions
of the Licensing Act, 1908, relative to the sale of intoxi-
cating liquor by unlicensed persons, has been or is about
to be committed —
and may search the said premises and every part thereof, and may
seize any intoxicating liquor found on any premises so entered,
other than licensed premises.
(2.) Every person who resists or obstructs a constable in the
exercise of the powers so conferred upon him, or who fails or
refuses to afford to a constable immediate entrance to any such
premises or to any part thereof, shall be guilty of an offence against
these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
15. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed
part of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 21st August, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
~lst August, mb; came into operation 28th August, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
Relating to Houses of 111-fame.
1. (1.) In these regulations—
House of ill-fame ” means any premises used for the
purposes of prostitution, whether by one woman or bv
more than one ; J
Public place ” has the same meaning as in Part II of the
Police Offences Act, 1908.
(2.) When different parts of a building are in separate occupa-
tion, each such part shall be deemed to be separate premises within
the meaning of these regulations.
2. (1.) The following persons shall be guilty of offences against
these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly :
(a.) Every person who keeps, manages, occupies, or resides in
a house of ill-fame or who acts or assists in the keeping
or management of any such house;
(6.) Every person who permits any premises to be used as a
house of ill-fame;
(c.) Every person who, being the lessor or landlord of any
premises or the agent of such lessor or landlord, lets the
same or any part thereof knowing or having reason-
able grounds of suspicion that the same or any part
tliei eof is to be used as a house of ill-fame, or permits
the continued occupation of any premises knowing or
having reasonable grounds of suspicion that the same
or any part thereof is used as a house of ill-fame;
(d.) Every woman who loiters in a public place for the pur-
poses of prostitution ;
(e.) Every male person over the age of fifteen years who lives,
whether wholly or in part, upon the' earnings of a
prostitute.
(2.) Every male person over the age of fifteen years who
habitually lives or consorts with a prostitute shall be deemed to
be living upon the earnings of that prostitute unless he proves
the contrary.
3. (1.) A Justice of the Peace, if satisfied that there are reason-
able grounds for suspecting that any building or part of a building
is a house of ill-fame, may issue a warrant authorizing an officer
of police named in the warrant and not below the rank of sergeant
to enter that building and search the same and every part thereof.
(2.) The officer to whom such a warrant has been issued may at
any time, whether by day or night, and on any day of the week,
3*—War Regs.


if accompanied by another officer of police, enter the building to
which the warrant relates and search the same and every part
thereof.
(3.) Every person who obstructs or resists an officer of police
while acting or assisting in the execution of any such warrant, or
who fails or refuses to afford to any such officer of police immediate
entrance to the building in respect of which the warrant has been
issued or to any part of that building, shall be guilty of an offence
against these regulations and shall be liable accordingly, and in
case of any such obstruction, resistance, failure, or refusal the
warrant may be executed by force.
(4.) Nothing in this regulation shall be so construed as to
restrict, affect, or take away the general power of entry and search
in pursuance of the warrant of a military authority which is con-
ferred by the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
4. (1.) When any person is convicted of an offence against
clause 2 of these regulations, the Commissioner of Police may at
any time thereafter make an order in writing prohibiting that
person from residing or being present, at any time within six
months after the date of the conviction, within fifty miles of a place
to be specified in the order.
(2.) Every such order shall take effect on the expiration of
seven days after the day on which the order has been served on
or otherwise brought to the knowledge of the person against whom
it is made.
(3.) Every person who disobeys any order so made by the Com-
missioner of Police shall be guilty of an offence against these
regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
(4.) The pendency of an appeal from any such conviction shall
not suspend the operation of any such order, except so far as the
Commissioner of Police or a Magistrate may otherwise from time
to time direct.
5. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed
part of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 21st August, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
21st August, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
Relating to Military Service Notices.
1. In these regulations “ military service notice ” means any notice
or advertisement relating in any manner to the Military Service


Act, 1916, and approved by the Minister of Defence for publica-
tion under these regulations.
2. (1 ) The Minister of Defence, or any person authorized bv
him in that behalf, may supply or cause to be supplied copies of
any militaiy service notice to the owner or occupier of any shop
factory, office, wharf, hotel, or boardinghouse, or to the owner or
occupier of any other premises which are frequented by the public
whether as of right or otherwise.
(2.) Copies delivered by post or otherwise upon any such pre-
mises shall be deemed to have been supplied to the owner or
occupier of those premises within the meaning of this regulation.
(3.) It shall be the duty of every person to whom such copies
have been so supplied forthwith to exhibit the same in a con-
spicuous place and manner upon the premises so owned or occupied
by him, and to conform to such directions (if any) as may be given
or caused to be given to him by the Minister of Defence as to the
place and manner of such exhibition, and to keep all such copies
so exhibited for a period of one calendar month or for such longer
period as may be required by the Minister of Defence.
3. The Minister of Defence, or any person authorized by him
in that behalf, may supply or cause to be supplied to the owner,
occupier, or manager of any theatre or other premises used for the
purpose of cinematograph exhibitions, or to any person who uses
any premises for that purpose, lantern slides containing copies of
any military service notices, and may direct the person to whom
such lantern slides are so supplied to exhibit such notices on the
cinematograph screen in such manner and on such occasions as the
Minister or the person so authorized by him thinks fit, and it shall
be the duty of every person to whom such lantern slides are so
supplied to exhibit such notices in accordance with the directions so
received.
4. The Minister of Defence, or any person authorized by him,
may supply or cause to be supplied to any local authority, com-
pany, or public body having the control or management of a
tramway copies of any military service notice, and may require such
local authority, company, or public body to exhibit such notices
in or upon the tram-cars used upon such tramway in such manner
and during such period as the Minister or the person so authorized
by him thinks fit, and it shall be the duty of every such local
authority, company, or public body to exhibit such notices in
accordance with the directions so received.
5. The Minister of Defence, or any person authorized by him,
may supply or cause to be supplied to the owner or charterer of
any passenger-ship copies of any military service notice, and may
require the owner or charterer to exhibit such notices upon the ship
in such manner and during such period as the Minister or the
person so authorized by him thinks fit, and it shall be the duty
of the owner or charterer to exhibit such notices in accordance
with the directions so received.


6. The Minister of Defence, or any person authorized by him,
may exhibit or cause to be exhibited any military service notice
in or within the view of any road, street, railway-station, railway-
carriage, or other public place (other than upon private property),
and no person shall obstruct, prevent, or interfere with any such
exhibition.
7. Every person who fails or refuses to fulfil any duty imposed
upon him by these regulations, or who without lawful authority
destroys, defaces, obscures, removes, or otherwise interferes with
any military service notice exhibited in pursuance of these regula-
tions, shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and
shall be liable accordingly.
8. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed
part of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 21st August, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
21st August, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
Permits and Passports,
1. Clause 2 of the War Regulations of the 15th day of November,
1915 (relating to permits to leave New Zealand), is hereby amended
by substituting the words “ No person over the age of fifteen years ”
for the words “ No male person over the age of eighteen years.”
2. Clause 25 of the War Regulations of the 24th day of July,
1916, is hereby amended by substituting the words “ fifteen years ”
for the words “eighteen years.”
3. In the following regulations “ passport ” means a passport
which has been issued by the Government of the country of which
the person to whom it relates is a subject or citizen, and which is
still in force, or some other document satisfactorily establishing the
nationality or identity of the person to whom it relates, to which
passport or document there is attached a photograph of the person
to whom it relates.
4. After the first day of October, 1916, no person whose age
exceeds fifteen years shall land at any place in New Zealand from
any place beyond the seas unless he has in his possession a passport
which has been issued to him not more than two years before his
arrival in New Zealand, and which, in the case of a person coming


from a foreign country, has been issued or vised by the British
Ambassador or a British Consul in that country, and in the case
of a person coming from any part of the British dominions has
been issued or vised by some public official thereof duly authorized
in that behalf.
5. (1.) The last preceding regulation shall not apply to—
{a.) Any person returning from the Commonwealth of Australia,
if he is in possession of a permit to visit the Common-
wealth issued to him under the authority of the War
Regulations relating to such permits :
<5.) Any person visiting New Zealand from the Commonwealth
of Australia, if he is in possession of a permit to visit
New Zealand issued to him by or under the authority
of the Department of External Affairs of the Common-
wealth :
(c.) Any person visiting New Zealand from the Cook Islands
or that part of Samoa in the military occupation of His
Majesty, if he is in possession of a permit to visit New
Zealand issued to him by a Resident Commissioner of the
Cook Islands or by the Administrator of Samoa, as the
case may be :
(d.) Any person resident in New Zealand returning to New
Zealand on a return ticket issued to him in New Zea-
land :
(e.) Any member of the naval or military Forces of any part of
the British dominions entering New Zealand on duty :
(/.) Any person arriving in New Zealand as the master "or a
member of the crew of the vessel in which he arrives.
(2.) The Minister of Internal Affairs, or any person authorized
by him to grant exemptions, may exempt any person from any or
all of the provisions of the last preceding regulation. If such
exemption is granted subject to any condition, and the person to
whom it is granted fails to comply with that condition, he shall
be guilty of an offence against these regulations.
6. Any officer and any Collector of Customs may take possession
of any passport in the possession of any person entering New
Zealand.
7. (1.) An alien, being the master or a member of the crew of
a vessel arriving at any port in New Zealand after the Ist day of
October, 1916, shall not land at that port unless he has in his
possession a passport issued to him not more than two years before
his arrival.
(2.) Where an alien is under the provisions of this regulation
prohibited from landing at any port the Collector of Customs may
nevertheless grant him temporary permission to land for such pur-
poses and subject to such conditions as the Collector thinks fit, and
if he fails to comply with any of those conditions he shall be guilty
of an offence against these regulations.


(3.) Where an alien who is not in possession of any such pass-
port is a member of the crew of any such vessel the master shall,
as soon as may be after the arrival of the vessel at any port, give
written notice of the presence of that alien on board the vessel to
the Collector of Customs, and that alien shall leave New Zealand
with that vessel.
(4.) Nothing in this regulation shall apply to any master or
member of the crew whose home is in New Zealand.
8. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed
part of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 28th August, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
28th August, 1916; revoked War Regulations of 11th February,
1916; and came into operation 4th September, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. The Minister of Defence may approve of a badge to be worn on
the arm by men—
(a.) Who have been honourably discharged from the Expedi-
tionary Forces, or have been in any manner engaged in
active service during the present war and have been
honourably discharged therefrom; or
(6.) Who have been voluntarily enlisted or enrolled for active
service in the present war but have not yet been called
up; or who have offered themselves for active service
in the present war but have been rejected or exempted
because of inability to fulfil the requirements of the
Defence Department, or because of their engagement in
any essential industry or employment.
2. The badge so to be approved may be in such several different
forms as the Minister of Defence thinks fit.
3. The badge so approved may be issued by any military officers
to such men as are deemed qualified to receive and wear the same.
4. Every badge so issued shall be accompanied by a card signed
by a military officer and containing particulars as to the man to
whom it is issued, and the reasons for its issue.
5. Every man to whom any such badge has been issued shall
at all times while wearing the badge or having it in his personal
possession carry with him the card issued to him along with the
badge as aforesaid, and shall on the request of any military officer,
or of any constable, or of any warrant officer or non-commissioned


officer of an Expeditionary Force or of the Permanent Staff produce
the said card for his inspection.
6. No man shall falsely represent himself to be a person who
is entitled to receive or wear any such badge.
7. No man other than a man to whom such a badge has been
duly issued by a military officer shall wear any badge so approved
by the Minister of Defence.
8. No man, whether a badge has been so duly issued to him or
not, shall wear upon his arm any badge of any description what-
ever other than—
(a.) An approved badge lawfully issued to him under these regu-
lations or under the War Regulations of the 29th day of
March, 1916, relative to the officers and crews of trans-
ports ; or
(b.) A badge indicative of military, naval, or official rank: or
(c.) A badge indicative of mourning.
9. No man to whom an approved badge has been issued under
these regulations shall wear that badge, whether on his arm or
otherwise, in any mutilated or substantially altered form.
10. Every badge approved by the Minister of Defence before
the coming into operation of these regulations under para-
graphs (a), (c), or (d) of clause 2 of the regulations hereby revoked
shall be deemed to have been approved under paragraph ( h) of
the present regulations.
11. Every badge approved by the Minister of Defence before
the coming into operation of these regulations under paragraph (6)
of clause 2 of the regulations hereby revoked shall be deemed to have
been approved under paragraph (a) of the present regulations.
12. All badges and cards issued under the regulations hereby
revoked shall be deemed to have been issued under the present
regulations.
13. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed
part of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 28th August, 1916.]
Amending War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
28th August, 1916.
SCHEDULE.
1. The War Regulations of the 2nd day of May, 1916 (relative to
enemy shareholders), are hereby amended by inserting at the end


of clause 6 thereof the words “Provided that no such sale shall
take place without the consent of the Attorney-General.”
2. Revoked by clause 2of 20th November, 1916 .
3. The War Regulations of the 21st day of August, 1916
(published on page 2801 of the Gazette, and relating to the sale of
intoxicating liquor), are hereby amended by inserting in the
definition of licensed premises, in clause 1 thereof, the words “or a
New Zealand wine license ” after the words “ accommodation
license.”
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette. 2nd September, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
2nd September, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. An attorney, agent, trustee, executor, or administrator who, being
a member of an Expeditionary Force under the Expeditionary Forces
Act, 1915, is absent from New Zealand on His Majesty’s service, or
is about to leave New Zealand on such service, may by a power of
attorney executed by him delegate to the Public Trustee all or any
of the powers, functions, or duties conferred or imposed upon him as
such attorney, agent, trustee, executor, or administrator. (Extended
hy regulations of 26th March, 1917. Page 101.)
2. In pursuance of such delegation and within the limits thereof
the Public Trustee may, at all times while the grantor of the power
of attorney is absent from New Zealand on His Majesty’s service,
exercise and perform in New Zealand on behalf of the grantor all
powers, functions, and duties vested in or imposed upon him in his
capacity as attorney, agent, trustee, executor, or administrator.
3. All acts so done by the Public Trustee in pursuance of any
such delegation shall have the same force and effect as if done by the
attorney, agent, trustee, executor, or administrator in his capacity
as such.
4. An act so done by the Public Trustee in good faith and in
intended pursuance of any such delegation, and without notice of the
fact that the grantor of the power of attorney has died, or has
revoked the power of attorney, or has ceased to be an attorney,
agent, trustee, executor, or administrator as aforesaid, or is no longer


absent from New Zealand on His Majesty’s service, shall not be in-
validated by that fact, but shall have the same effect and operation
as if the fact was otherwise.
5. The grantor of any such power of attorney shall be under no
liability in respect of any default or misfeasance of the Public Trustee
in the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by these regulations,
and the Public Trustee shall in respect of any such default or mis-
feasance incur the same liabilities as if he had himself been the
attorney, agent, trustee, executor, or administrator on whose behalf
he has so acted.
6. For all services rendered by the Public Trustee under any such
power of attorney he shall be entitled to receive from the grantor of
that power such remuneration as shall be agreed upon, and in default
of agreement such remuneration as is fixed by the Public Trust Office
Board.
7. Nothing in the foregoing regulations shall in any manner affect
or take away any power of delegation which may be possessed by the
attorney, agent, trustee, executor, or administrator independently of
these regulations.
8. A minor who is a member of any such Expeditionary Force
may grant to any person or body corporate a power of attorney in the
same manner and for the same purposes, and with the same force
and effect, as if he was of full age, save that nothing done under any
such power of attorney while the grantor remains a minor shall have
any greater or other force or effect than if it had been done by the
minor himself.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 11th September, 1916.]
Additional War Regulation made by Order in Council dated the
11th September, 1916.
REGULATION.
Clause 25 of the War Regulations of the twenty-fourth day of July
1916, is hereby amended by adding to paragraph (a) thereof the words
“ such other discharges as the Superintendent of Mercantile Marine
may deem satisfactory ; or.”
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 2nd October, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
2nd October, 1916; came into operation 9th October, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. Any Superintendent or Inspector of Police may, with the approva
of the Commissioner of Police, make application, in the form No. 1
in the Schedule hereto, to the Licensing Committee of the licensing
district in which are situated any premises held under a publican’s
license, for the cancellation of that license on any of the grounds
following, namely:—
(a.) That the licensee has committed a breach of the Licensing
Act, 1908, or that he has committed a breach of any regu-
lation made under section 3 of the War Regulations Amend
ment Act, 1916, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor,
or that he has committed a breach of any of the conditions
of his license ; or
( b .) That he has permitted the licensed premises to be frequented
by disorderly or disreputable persons ; or
(c.) That he has failed to conduct the licensed premises in an
orderly manner ; or
(i d .) That for any other reason (to be specified in the application)
the licensee is not a fit and proper person to be the holder
of such license.
2. (1.) Upon receipt of any such application the Clerk of the
Licensing Committee shall arrange a time and place for the holding
of a meeting of the Licensing Committee to deal with the application,
and shall notify the applicant of the time and place fixed for such
meeting.
(2.) The applicant may thereupon, with the approval of the Com-
missioner of Police, serve upon the licensee a notice, in the form No. 2
in the Schedule hereto, calling upon him to appear before the Licens-
ing Committee at the time and place specified in the said notice, to
show cause why his license should not be cancelled on the ground or
on any of the grounds specified in the notice.
(3.) Not less than ten clear days’ notice in writing shall be given
to the licensee of the time and place fixed for the hearing of an
application under these regulations.
3. (1.) On the hearing of an application under these regulations a
Licensing Committee shall have the same powers of summoning wit-
nesses and of hearing evidence on oath as it has in respect of proceed-
ings before it under the Licensing Act, 1908.
(2.) At the hearing of any such application the applicant may
appear personally or by counsel, and may call evidence in support
of the application.


(3.) The licensee may thereupon, either personally or by counsel,
call evidence in rebuttal, and may call such other evidence as the
Committee deems relevant to show cause why the application should
not be granted.
(4.) The applicant shall thereupon have a right of reply.
4. Upon the conclusion of the hearing the Licensing Committee
may, on all or any of the grounds stated in the application, cancel
the license in respect of which the application is made if in its opinion
it is advisable so to do in the public interest.
5. The provisions of the Licensing Act, 1908, relating to the
conduct of meetings of a Licensing Committee shall, so far as
applicable, apply to meetings of the Committee held under these
regulations ; and, in so far as such provisions do not apply or as
these regulations do not extend, the Committee may determine its
own procedure.
6. (1.) Upon the cancellation of any license under these regula-
tions, if the licensee is not the owner of the licensed premises, the
Chairman of the Licensing Committee may, on the request of the owner
of the premises, order the licensee to vacate those premises. If the
licensee fails to vacate the premises pursuant to the said order he
shall be deemed to have committed an offence against the War Regu-
lations, and shall be liable accordingly.
(2.) If the licensee is a lessee or sublessee of the licensed premises
the Chairman may, on the request of the lessor or sublessor, execute
in the name and on behalf of the licensee an assignment or surrender
of the lease or sublease, and such assignment or surrender shall have
the same effect as if it were executed by the licensee himself.
SCHEDULE.
Form No. 1.
Application to Licensing Committee for Cancellation of
Publican’s License.
Under War Regulations made pursuant to Section 4 of the War
Regulations Amendment Act, 1916.
To the Licensing Committee of the [ Name of licensing district ].
I hereby apply, pursuant to regulations made under section 4 of the
War Regulations Amendment Act, 1916, for the cancellation of the
publican’s license held by [Name of licensee] in respect of the premises
known as [ Name hy which premises known], situated at [ State location
of premises], on the grounds following, namely :
[Set out in detail the grounds on which the application is made.]
Dated at this day of ,19 .
Superintendent of Police
' [or Inspector of Police].


Endorsement.
Approval by Commissioner of Police.
I hereby approve the application herein.
Given under my hand, at , this day of ,19
Commissioner of Police.
Form No. 2.
Notice to Holder of Publican’s License to show Cause why
his License should not be cancelled.
Under War Regulations made pursuant to Section 4 of the War
Regulations Amendment Act, 1916.
To [ Name and address of licensee ].
Take notice that you are hereby required and directed to appear
before the Licensing Committee of the Licensing District at
the Magistrate’s Court [or as the case may be] at , on
day of ,19 ,at o’clock in the
noon, to show cause why the publican’s license held by you in respect
of the licensed premises known as [Name by which premises known],
situated at , should not be cancelled on all or any of the
grounds following, namely:—
[Set out in detail the grounds on which the application is made.]
Dated at this day of ,19
Superintendent of Police
[or Inspector of Police].
Endorsement.
Approval by Commissioner of Police.
I hereby approve of the proceedings herein.
Given under my hand, at , this day of ,19
Commissioner of Police.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 13th October, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
13th October, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
Certificates for Imported Goods.
1. In these regulations —
“ Uncertificated, goods ” means goods for which a certificate of
interest or a certificate of origin and interest, as here-
inafter defined, is required by these regulations and has
not been produced and delivered in conformity there-
with :
“ Prohibited goods ” means (a) goods the importation of which
is prohibited by an Order in Council under the Customs
Act, 1913, and the Regulation of Trade and Commerce
Amendment Act, 1915 ; (6) goods imported, purchased,
procured, or otherwise dealt with by the importer or any
other person under such circumstances that an offence
has been thereby committed against the Trading with the
Enemy Act, 1914, or the War Regulations, or would have
been thereby committed against such Act or regulations
if those circumstances had been fully known :
“ Collector of Customs ” and “ importer ” have the same
meanings as in the Customs Act, 1913:
“ Foreign country ” means any country other than the United
Kingdom or a British possession or protectorate, but does
not include enemy territory in the military occupation of
His Majesty.
2. (1.) A certificate of origin and interest is required in respect of
all goods imported into New Zealand from the countries mentioned in
the First Schedule hereto.
(2.) A certificate of origin and interest is a certificate issued by a
British consular officer in the country from which the goods have been
imported to the effect that it has been proved to his satisfaction
that the goods have not been produced or manufactured in enemy
territory, and that no person who is an enemy or is treated as an
enemy under any law or Proclamation for the time being in force in
the United Kingdom relating to trading with the enemy or with
persons of enemy nationality or association has any interest in the
goods.
3. (1.) A certificate of interest is required in respect of all goods
imported into New Zealand from the countries mentioned in the
Second Schedule hereto.
(2.) A certificate of interest is a certificate issued by a British
consular officer in the country from which the goods have been im-
ported to the effect that it has been proved to his satisfaction that no


person who is an enemy or is treated as an enemy under any law or
Proclamation for tne time being in force in the United Kingdom
relating to trading with the enemy or with persons of enemy nationality
or association has any interest in the goods.
4. If a Collector of Customs has reason to believe or suspect that
any goods imported into New Zealand are goods in respect of which
a certificate of interest or a certificate of origin and interest is required
by these regulations, he shall detain those goods, and they shall not
be delivered from the control of the Customs until the importer has
produced and delivered to the Collector a certificate of interest or
of origin and interest, as the case may be, or has satisfied the Collector
or the Comptroller of Customs that no such certificate is required
by these regulations. u
5. The foregoing regulations as to certificates shall not apply to
any goods as to which the Collector is satisfied that they have left
the country of exportation before the 15th day of October, 1916
oILj g °t od f Shall remain sub J ect t 0 the War Regulations of the
26th day of January, 1915, relating to certificates of origin, in the
same manner as if those regulations had not been revoked.
Detention op Suspected Imports.
6. When any goods are imported into New Zealand and a Collector
of Customs has reason to believe or suspect that those goods are pro-
hibited goods as hereinbefore defined, he may detain the goods, and
they shall not be delivered from the control of the Customs until the
Sa f t n fie ? tha V hey are not P r °hibited goods, unless the
Comptroller of Customs, being satisfied either that they are not pro-
hibited goods or that their delivery is advisable in the public interest
authorizes the delivery thereof from the control of the Customs.
General Provisions as to Detention of Imports.
7. On any goods being detained under these regulations as being
or prohibited, notice of the detention thereof undef
these regulations may be given by or on behalf of the Collector to the
importer or to his agent; and after the receipt of such notice it shall
not be lawful, so long as the detention continues, for the importer
or any other person, without the written consent of the ComptrolleJ
of Customs, to pay or remit to any person any sum of money in respect
of the purchase or consignment of those goods, or to accept make
upLi 1 ?] 1 ° r °?r n ? deal With any bill of exchanged other
S“heret U “ *" ° f thoSe « otherwise having
S. If any goods are detained by a Collector of Customs under
rw 6 m regulatl . on „ s as bemg uncertificated, and the Comptroller of
tons is satisfied by a statutory declaration or otherwise that the
failure to procure and deliver the requisite certificate was not wilful
on the part of the importer, and also that there is no sufficient reason
for detaining the goods under clause 6 of these regulations as being


prohibited goods, the Comptroller of Customs may, if he thinks fit,
in his discretion, cause the goods to be delivered from the control
of the Customs on payment by the importer by way of penalty of
a sum not exceeding 10 per cent, of the fair market value thereof,
as defined by section 114 of the Customs Act, 1913, and all
sums so paid shall be accounted for and dealt with as Customs
revenue.
9. While any goods are detained under the authority of these
regulations it shall not be lawful for any person to take pos-
session of the same or to interfere in any other manner with the
right of detention or control hereby conferred upon the Collector of
Customs.
10. The foregoing regulations or the exercise of the powers thereby
conferred shall in no way exclude or affect any provisions as to for-
feiture or punishment contained in the Customs Act, 1913, the Trading
with the Enemy Act, 1914, the War Regulations, or any other Act or
regulations in that behalf.
11. The War Regulations of the 7th day of June, 1915, relating to
the detention of suspected goods, together with clause 13 of the War
Regulations of the 2nd day of May, 1916, relating to the same matter,
are hereby revoked, but shall nevertheless continue to apply to all
goods detained or moneys deposited in pursuance thereof before the
coming into operation of the present regulations.
12. (1.) The War Regulations of the 26th day of January, 1915,
relating to certificates of origin, are hereby amended by revoking
clauses 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 18 thereof and the Second Schedule
thereto.
(2.) The War Regulations of the Bth day of March, 1915, and of the
10th day of April, 1916, relating to certificates of origin, are hereby
'•evoked
Army Contracts.
13. (1.) In these regulations—
“ Army contract ” means a contract made by any person with
the Crown (whether before or after the coming into operation
of these regulations) in respect of or for the purposes of the
present war:
“ Army contractor ” means any person who is a party to an
Army contract made with the Crown (whether before or
after the coming into operation of these regulations).
(2.) Every person who (whether before or after the coming into
operation of these regulations) has made any contract with an Army
contractor in respect of or for the purposes of an Army contract made
by that Army contractor, and who commits any wilful breach of the
contract so made by him with the Army contractor, whereby or in
consequence of which any breach of the Army contract, whether wilful
or not, is committed by the Army contractor, shall be guilty of an
offence against the War Regulations Act, 1914, and shall be liable
accordingly.


(3.) Without in any manner limiting the generality of the foregoing;
provisions, every person who, being in the employment of an Army con-
tractor, wilfully commits any breach of his contract of service, whereby
or in consequence of which any breach of an Army contract, whether
wilful or not, is committed by the Army contractor, or commits or is a
party to any wilful act or default with intent that any such breach of
an Army contract shall be committed by the Army contractor, shall be
guilty of an offence against the War Regulations Act, 1914, and shall be
liable accordingly.
(4.) Nothing in these regulations shall in any manner restrict or
affect the operation of any other War Regulations relative to contracts
made with the Crown.
Miscellaneous.
14. Revoked hy clause 2 of 20th November, 1916.
15. (1.) Whenever by virtue of the War Regulations or any declara-
tion made thereunder, whether before or after the date of the present
regulations, it is unlawful to purchase goods from any person, it shall
also be unlawful to purchase or otherwise procure from any other
person, being or carrying on business out of New Zealand, any goods
wholly or partly manufactured or produced by, or sold by, or procured
from or through such first-mentioned person.
(2.) Clause 13 of the War Regulations of the 24th day of July, 1916,
is hereby revoked.
16. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed
part of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
FIRST SCHEDULE.
Countries in respect of which Certificates op Origin and
Interest are required.
Norway. Denmark, Switzerland. Belgium.|
Sweden. Holland. Finland.*
SECOND SCHEDULE.
Countries in respect of which Certificates of Interest are
REQUIRED.
All foreign countries except —
Those mentioned in the First Schedule.
France, Italy, Russia, Japan, Rumania, Portugal, China, Siam,
the United States of America, and French possessions in the
South Pacific. (As amended hy regulation of 26th March ,
1917. Page 101.) j? t Furry,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
* Added 25th November, 1918.
t Added Bth April, 1919.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 20th November, 1916.]
Additional War Regidations made by Order in Council dated the
20th November, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. Licenses for the importation of goods into New Zealand from certain
foreign countries, as provided for in the War Regulations of the 24th
July, 1916, shall no longer be required.
2. Clauses 1 to 10, inclusive, of the said War Regulations of the
24th July, 1916, clause 2 of the War Regulations of the 28th August,
1916, which came into operation on the 29th August, 1916, and clause 14
of the War Regulations of the 13th October, 1916, are hereby revoked.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 4th December, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
December, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. No person shall publish, or cause or permit to be published, or do
any act with intent to publish or to cause or permit to be published,
any seditious utterance.
2. No person shall do in New Zealand any act with intent to procure
the publication elsewhere than in New Zealand of any seditious utterance.
3. In these regulations “ seditious utterance ” means any utterance
which is published with a seditious intention, or the publication of which
has a seditious tendency.
4. In these regulations “ seditious intention ” and “ seditious
tendency ” mean respectively an intention or tendency—
(a.) To excite disaffection against His Majesty or the Government of
the United Kingdom, or of New Zealand, or of any other part
of His Majesty’s dominions; or
(b.) To incite, procure, or encourage violence, lawlessness, or dis-
order whether in New Zealand or in any other part of Hie
Majesty*s dominions; or


(c.) To incite, procure, or encourage the commission, whether in New
Zealand or in any other part of His Majesty’s dominions, of
any offence which is prejudicial to the public safety in respect
of the present war; or
(i d .) To excite, whether in New Zealand or in any other part of His
Majesty’s dominions, such hostility or ill will between different
classes of His Majesty’s subjects as may endanger the public
safety in respect of the present war; or
(e.) To interfere with the recruiting, training, discipline, equipment,
or administration of His Majesty’s Forces, or with the effective
conduct of the military or naval preparations or operations
of His Majesty or his allies, whether in New Zealand or else-
where ; or
(/.) To interfere with the manufacture, production, output, supply,
delivery, or carriage of any goods or articles required by His
Majesty, whether in New Zealand or elsewhere, for any pur-
pose in connection with the present war; or
(g.) To interfere with the lading, unlading, manning, equipment,
despatch, or use of any vessel carrying or about to carry from
New Zealand any of His Majesty’s Forces or any goods or
merchandise belonging to or destined for or required by His
Majesty, whether in New Zealand or elsewhere, for any pur-
pose in connection with the present war; or
( h .) To interfere with the effective conduct of any undertaking of His
Majesty which is requisite for the public safety during the
present war; or
(i.) To prejudice His Majesty’s relations with foreign Powers; or
(j.) To discourage the prosecution of the present war to a victorious
conclusion; or
(&.) To excite or encourage opposition to the enforcement or adminis-
tration of the laws in force for the time being, whether in
New Zealand or in any other part of His Majesty’s dominions,
relative to compulsory military training or service during the
present war, or to interfere with the proper and effective
enforcement or administration thereof; or
(1.) To interfere with the due administration in New Zealand of
criminal justice in matters relating to the present war; or
(m.) To incite any person or persons to refuse or fail, whether in New
Zealand or elsewhere, to render service to the Crown in anv
capacity in respect of or for the purposes of the present war,
or in respect of or for the purposes of any undertaking of
His Majesty which is requisite for the public safety during
that war; or
(n.) To excite disloyalty, whether in New Zealand or elsewhere, in
respect of the present war.


[(o.) To insult, offend, annoy, or discredit, whether in New Zealand or
elsewhere, the subjects, or any class or classes of the subjects, of
any State which is in alliance with His Majesty in the present war
with Germany, or which is at peace with His Majesty. (Added
hy clause 4of 18th June, 1918. Page 161.)\
5. In these regulations—
“ His Majesty’s Forces ” means the military or naval Forces of the
United Kingdom, or of New Zealand, or of any other of His
Majesty’s possessions :
“Utterance” includes words, writing, pictures, or any other
significant expression or representation whatever:
“ Publish ” means to communicate either to the public or to any
person or persons, and whether orally or otherwise howsoever.
6. Nothing in the foregoing regulations shall make it an offence for
any person without seditious intention—
(a.) To sell or distribute in the ordinary course of business any news-
paper printed and issued in any part of the British dominions
other than New Zealand; or
(6.) To publish any telegram transmitted from abroad and passed
for publication by the censorship; or
(c.) To publish any matter which a military authority has approved
for publication; or
(d.) To publish a true report of the proceedings of any Court of
justice or other judicial tribunal.
7. (1.) No person shall be a party to a seditious conspiracy.
(2.) “ Seditious conspiracy ” means an agreement between two or
more persons to carry into execution a seditious intention.
8. (a.) When the Attorney-General is satisfied that any person is
disaffected or disloyal, or of such a character that his presence in New
Zealand would be injurious to the public safety, and that such person is
about to arrive or land in New Zealand from parts beyond the seas,
the Attorney-General may by order signed by him prohibit that person
from landing in New Zealand. Any such order may be at any time
revoked by the Attorney-General.
(6.) If while any such order remains unrevoked the person against
whom it has been made lands in New Zealand with knowledge of the
fact that the order has been made against him, he shall be guilty of
an offence against these regulations and shall be liable accordingly.
( c .) Any person who is lound on shore in New Zealand at any time
while an order so made against him remains unrevoked may be arrested
without warrant by any constable and placed and detained on board the
ship by which he arrived in New Zealand, or on board any other ship
belonging to the same owner and bound for the country from which
that person was brought to New Zealand, and may, pending his removal
to such ship, be detained in such custody and in such place as the
Attorney-General may direct.


(d.) If the owner or master of any ship having knowledge of the
making of any such order against any person carried to New Zealand
in that ship or in any other ship belonging to the same owner refuses
to permit that person to remain on board the ship in obedience to the
order, or refuses to receive that person on board the ship when brought
thereto in custody in accordance with these regulations, or connives at
or is privy to the escape of that person from the ship, such owner or
master shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations and shall
be liable accordingly.
(e.) “ Owner ” includes charterer.
9. (a.) When the Attorney-General, in pursuance of clause 26 of the
War Regulations of the 24th day of July, 1916, orders any person to
leave New Zealand the Attorney-General may, by the same order if
he thinks such a course necessary for the public safety, authorize the
immediate arrest and detention of that person, and thereupon any
officer may without warrant arrest that person and place him on board
any vessel about to leave New Zealand for the country from which he
came to New Zealand, and detain him on board that vessel until it has
left New Zealand; and paragraphs (b), (c), and ( d) of clause 26 of the
said War Regulations shall apply to any such case in the same manner
as if the order to leave New Zealand had been duly served and default
had been made in complying therewith within seven days after the date
of service thereof.
(b.) When any person ordered to leave New Zealand has been arrested
in pursuance of clause 26 of the said War Regulations or in pursuance
of this present regulation he may, pending his removal to a ship in
pursuance of those regulations, be detained in such custody and in such
place as the Attornej'-General may direct.
(c.) For the purposes of clause 26 of the said W T ar Regulations, no
person shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident in New Zealand who
first becomes ordinarily resident therein after the date of these present
regulations.
10. Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to revoke or affect
any other War Regulations already in force, and all such other War
Regulations shall remain in full force and effect according to their tenor
concurrently with the present regulations, but so that no person shall
be punished twice for the same offence.
P' "P 168 ® regulations shall be read together with and deemed part
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 21st December, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the-
18th December, 1916.
Whereas by clause thirty-two of the War Regulations of the third day
of April, one thousand nine hundred and sixteen, it is provided that
no owner of a British ship registered in New Zealand, or of any share-
in such a ship, shall transfer the ship or any share therein to any
person not qualified to own a British ship :
And whereas it is expedient to impose further restrictions with
respect to the transfer of such ships or shares therein and to impose-
restrictions with respect to mortgages and transfers of mortgages of
such ships and shares :
Now, therefore, I, Arthur William de Brito Savile, Earl of Liverpool,
the Governor of the Dominion of New Zealand, acting by and with the
advice and consent of the Executive Council of the said Dominion, do
hereby, in pursuance of the War Regulations Act, 1914, and of all other-
powers and authorities enabling me in that behalf, make the following
additional regulations for the purposes aforesaid.
REGULATIONS.
1. No owner of a British ship registered in New Zealand, or of any
share in such a ship, shall transfer the ship or any share therein to a
foreign-controlled company. (See also Shipping Regulations of 11th
June , 1917. Page 109.)
2. No owner of a British ship registered in New Zealand, or of
any share in such a ship, shall mortgage the ship or any share therein
to any person not qualified to own a British ship or to a foreign-
controlled company; and no person, being the mortgagee of any such
ship or of anv share therein, shall transfer his mortgage to a person not
qualified to own a British ship or to a foreign-controlled company.
3. For the purposes of these regulations the expression “ foreign-
controlled company ” means any corporation —
(a.) Where the majority of the directors, or persons occupying the-
position of directors, by whatever name called, are not British
subjects; or
( b .) Where the majority of the voting-power is in the hands of per-
sons who are not British subjects, or who exercise their voting-
powers directly or indirectly on behalf of persons who are nob
British subjects; or


(c.) Where the control is by any other means whatever in the hands
of persons who are not British subjects; or
(d.) Where the executive is a foreign-controlled company, or where
the majority of the executive are appointed by a foreign-
controlled company.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 10th January, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
18th December, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
1. The Minister of Defence may, by notice published in the Gazette,
declare that any land defined in such notice, and being within one
mile of a camp of military training or exercise, shall, for the purposes
of these regulations, but not otherwise, be deemed to be included in
and to form part of that camp.
2. While any such notice remains in force all persons who may be
in occupation of such land or of any part thereof, or of any house,
hut, tent, or other premises situated on such land, and all other persons
who may from time to time be in any such premises or on such land,
shall comply with the directions of the officer in command of the camp,
or of any medical officer attached to the camp or to any troops for
the time being stationed therein, with respect to the maintenance of
such land or premises in a proper sanitary condition.
3. For the purposes of these regulations the officer in command of
a camp, or any medical officer attached to the camp or to any troops
stationed therein, or any person authorized in that behalf by the officer
in command or by any medical officer aforesaid, may enter upon and
inspect any land to which a notice under clause 1 of these regulations
relates, and any premises situated thereon, and may, if he thinks fit,
do or cause to be done upon such land or premises all such things as
may, in his opinion, be necessary or advisable for the purpose of
maintaining the same in a proper sanitary condition.
4. Every person who fails to comply with any directions given pur-
suant to these regulations, or who obstructs any other person in his
compliance with any such directions, shall be guilty of an offence against
these regulations, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act,
1914, accordingly.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 21st December, 1916.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
21st December, 1916.
REGULATIONS.
Enemy Property.
1. Where any property is enemy property within the meaning of
section 3 of the War Regulations Amendment Act, 1916, by reason of
the fact that any interest in that property (whether such interest is
that of ownership or any lesser interest) belongs or at any time since
the commencement of the present war with Germany has belonged to
any person or company of enemy nationality, descent, origin, residence,
connections, or associations (other than a person resident in New Zea-
land or a company incorporated in New Zealand), the Attorney-General
may, by order signed and gazetted by him, order and declare that such
interest shall be vested in the Public Trustee as the Custodian of Enemy
Property.
2. On the gazetting of any such order the interest to which it relates
shall thereupon vest in the Public Trustee as the Custodian of Enemy
Property in trust to sell the same, and to hold the same and the income
thereof, and the proceeds of the sale thereof, in trust for all persons
entitled thereto in accordance with their respective rights and titles.
3. When the interest so vested in the Public Trustee is a registered
interest in land under the Land Transfer Act, 1915, the District Land
Registrar shall, on the request of the Public Trustee, register him as
the proprietor of that interest in the same manner as if that interest
had been duly transferred to the Public Trustee by the registered pro-
prietor thereof, and the order of the Attorney-General shall be a sufficient
warrant for such registration accordingly.
4. The Public Trustee may in such manner and on such terms as he
thinks fit sell and transfer any interest so vested in him.
5. The proceeds of any such sale, and all revenues derived by the
Public Trustee from any interest so vested in him, shall be disposed
of in accordance with the trusts affecting the same in his hands. All
such moneys for the time being unexpended by the Public Trustee shall
be invested by him in the common fund of the Public Trust Office. No
moneys so invested shall, so far as payable to any person to whom pay-
ment is unlawful during the present war, bear any interest.
Unlawful Meetings.
6. If the Commissioner of Police is satisfied that any place is about
to be used or is likely to be used for the holding of any meeting or
meetings having reference to the war, and of a kind injurious to the
public safety or the interests of His Majesty in respect of the war, the
Commissioner may by notice prohibit the use of that place for meetings
having reference to the war.


7. So long as any such notice remains in force with respect to any
place, every meeting held in that place and having reference to the war
shall, unless held in pursuance of a written permit issued by the Com-
missioner of Police, be an unlawful meeting within the meaning and
for the purposes of these regulations.
8. Every person who permits an unlawful meeting to be held in
or upon any premises or land owned or occupied by him shall be guilty
of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
9. Every person, other than a constable or a person acting in aid
of the police, who is present at an unlawful meeting, or who is a party
to the holding of any such meeting, shall be guilty of an offence against
these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
10. So long as any such notice remains in force with respect to any
place, a constable may at all times by day or night, when he has reason
to believe that any meeting is being or is about to be held in that place,
enter upon that place and upon every part thereof, and any one who
obstructs a constable in the exercise of this right of entry shall be guilty
of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
11. Every such notice shall be given either by publishing the same
in some newspaper circulating in the neighbourhood of the place to which
the notice relates, or by publicly exhibiting the same at that place.
Every person who without lawful authority removes or otherwise inter-
feres with any notice so exhibited at any time while it remains in
force shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall
be liable accordingly.
12. It shall be sufficient if any such notice issued in respect of any
place sets forth that meetings having reference to the war are pro-
hibited in that place under the War Regulations.
13. Every such notice shall remain in force until revoked by the
Commissioner of Police by a notice published in some newspaper cir-
culating in the neighbourhood of the place to which it relates.
14. In these regulations—
“ Meeting ” means any assembly at which more than twelve
persons are present:
“Place” means a building, or a part of a building, or a public
place within the meaning of Part II of the Police Offences
Act, 1908, or a piece of land owned or occupied by any person.
Miscellaneous.
16. No prosecution for an offence against the War Regulations of
the 21st day of August, 1916 (relating to treating), shall, without the
consent of the Attorney-General, be commenced —
(a.) Against any constable; or
(b.) Against any other person in respect of an act done by him in
pursuance of the directions of a Superintendent or Inspector
of Police.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council,


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 16th January, 1917.]
Additional If ar Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
16th January , 1917.
REGULATIONS.
I. In these regulations the expression “person exempted from military
service by reason of his occupation ” means and includes—
(a.) Every person called up for service with the New Zealand Expedi-
tionary Force under the Military Service Act, 1916, or required
under section 35 of the said Act to show cause why he should
not be called up for such service, who has, by himself or his
employer, appealed on the ground that by reason of his occu-
pation his ca lling-up for military service is contrary to the public
interest and whose appeal on such ground has been allowed by a
Military Service Board, or whose obligation of military service
has been suspended by a Military Service Board; and
(b.) Every voluntary recruit who has been granted leave of absence
from his military duties by reason of the fact that at the date of
his enlistment he was engaged in an employment of such a nature
that his withdrawal from that employment by the requirement
of immediate military service is contrary to the public interest.
2. (1.) Every person exempted from military service by reason of his
occupation shall, on ceasing to be engaged in that occupation, forthwith by
registered letter send notice of that fact and of his place of'abode to the
Commandant of the Defence Forces.
(2.) Every person exempted from military service by reason of his
occupation (other than a person engaged in casual employment) shall,
on ceasing to be employed by any employer, forthwith by registered letter
send notice to the Commandant of that fact and of his place of abode, and
also of the name, address, and occupation of his new employer (if any),
(3.) Every person being the employer (otherwise than by way of casual
employment) of a person known by him to be exempted from military
service by reason of his occupation shall forthwith by registered letter
send notice to the Commandant of the Defence Forces if the person so
exempted leaves his employment or otherwise ceases to be engaged in the
occupation in respect of which the exemption was granted.
(4.) Every person exempted from military service by reason of his
occupation shall, on changing his place of abode, forthwith by registered
letter send notice of the fact and of his new place of abode to the Com-
mandant of the Defence Forces.
3. Every person who for seven days fails bo send to the Commandant
any notice required of him by these regulations commits an offence, and
shall be liable as for a breach of the War Regulations accordingly.
4. The foregoing regulations shall apply in the case of all persons
exempted from military service by reason of their occupation, whether their
exemption has been granted before or after the making of these regulations.


5. Every person who wilfully deceives a Military Service Board in the
exercise of any jurisdiction conferred upon it by the Military Service Act,
1916, or in the exercise of any additional jurisdiction conferred upon it by
the Governor in Council under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1908, shall
be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable under
the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, sth February, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the sth
Fehruary, 1917; revoked War Regulations of 9th January, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
I to 4. Revoked hy regulations of 2nd April, 1917.
Arkest of Offenders against the Army Act.
5. (1.) If an authorized officer (within the meaning of the Military
Service Act, 1916) has reasonable cause to suspect that a soldier of the
New Zealand Expeditionary Force has committed, whether before or after
the making of these regulations, any offence for which he is liable to be
tried and punished under the Army Act, such authorized officer may
issue to an officer of police his warrant for the arrest of that soldier.
(2.) Every such warrant may be addressed to all constables, and shall
be sufficient if it purports to be issued in pursuance of the Army Act.
(3.) Every such warrant may be executed by any constable, whether
the warrant has been delivered to him or not," and on any day of the
week.
(4.) Every soldier so arrested shall be delivered into military custody
in accordance with the tenor of the warrant.
Detention of Disaffected Aliens.
6. A military authority, if satisfied that any alien is disaffected or
is of such a character that his liberty is a source of public danger, may
order the arrest of that alien and his detention in such place as the
military authority thinks fit, and during his pleasure, unless discharged
by the Minister of Defence, and such alien may be arrested and detained
accordingly in pursuance of the tenor of such order. (Applied to strangers
by regulations of 19th November, 1917. Page 121/..)
7. These regulations shall be deemed part of and read together with
the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, sth February, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
sth February, 1917.
COAL TRADE REGULATIONS.
Part I.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Coal Trade Regulations.
2. Part I of these regulations shall come into operation on the day
of the making thereof.
3. The term “ Minister in Charge ” means a member of the Executive
Council charged by the Governor with the administration of the Coal
Trade Regulations.
4. The Minister in Charge may require any person to give to him
information relative to the production, importation, exportation, supply,
sale, purchase, carriage, storage, use, and consumption of coal, and as to
any other matters within the scope of the powers and functions of the
Minister under these regulations, and it shall be the duty of all persons
to give to the Minister all such information in their possession when so
required, and any breach of that duty shall be an offence against these
regulations.
5. For the purpose of making adequate provision for the storage of
coal required for the use of His Majesty or for the essential industries
of New Zealand, the Minister in Charge may take and hold possession of
any coal-hulk, wharf, or other place the possession of which he deems
necessary for the said purpose, and may use the same for the storage of
coal accordingly, whether such coal is the property of the Crown or not.
No person shall in any manner obstruct the Minister in Charge in the
exercise of the powers conferred upon him by this regulation.
6. These regulations shall extend and apply to the State coal-mines,
to the Government railways, to transports and other vessels in the
service of His Majesty, and to all Government Departments and officers
of the Crown in the same manner so far as may be as to private indus-
tries and private persons.
7. The Minister in Charge may, by notice in the Gazette, exempt
lignite coal either wholly or partially from the requirements of these
regulations, and may in like manner revoke any such exemption.
Part II revoked hy regulations of 28th August, 1917. Page 117.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 6th February, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the 6th
February, 1917; came into operation 6th February, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
Relative to the Sale of Wheat, Flour, Bran, and Pollard.
1. Revoked by regulations of 22nd December, 1917. Page 128.
2. (1.) Every manufacturer of fiour, and every agent of a manu-
facturer of flour, who, whether by himself or an agent, enters into
any contract for the sale of flour, bran, or pollard shall, within seven
days after the end of the calendar month in which that contract is
made, send or cause to be sent to the Board of Trade, by means of a
letter posted and addressed to the Secretary of that Board at Wellington,
a notification of such contract containing the following particulars :
(a.) The names and addresses of the purchaser and seller;
(b.) The date on which the contract was made;
(c.) The quantity of flour, bran, or pollard so purchased;
(d.) The agreed date and place of delivery;
(c.) The price;
(/•) Particulars of any terms or conditions which are not in accord-
ance with the established custom of the trade at the date of
these regulations;
(g.) A declaration made by or on behalf of the seller that the price
is not in excess of the maximum price of the goods so sold as
fixed at the date of the contract by any Order in Council made
under the Regulation of Trade and Commerce Act, 1914.
(2.) Every person who makes default in sending or causing to be
sent a notification in accordance with the foregoing provisions, or who
sends or causes to be sent to the Board of drade anv such notification
which is false or misleading in any particular, shall be guilty of an
offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.'
3. Every person who, whether as principal, agent, or otherwise, buys
or sells or is in any manner concerned in the buying or selling of wheat,
flour, bran, or pollard at a price in excess of the maximum price thereof
as determined by any Order in Council for the time being in force under
the Regulation of Trade and" Commerce Act, 1914, shall be guilty of an
offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
4. (1.) The Minister of Agriculture or any member of the Board of
Trade may require any person to give to him information relative to
the sale or purchase of any wheat, flour, bran, or pollard, whether by the
person so required to give information or by any other person, and it
shall be the duty of all persons when so required to give all such informa-
tion in their possession accordingly,
. ( 2 -) Every person who makes default in giving any such informa-
tion when so required, or who, whether so required or not, gives any
false or misleading information to the Minister of Agriculture or to


any member of the Board of Trade relative to the sale or purchase
of any wheat, flour, bran, or pollard, shall be guilty of an offence against
these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
5. For the purposes of these regulations an option for the sale or
purchase of any goods shall be deemed to be a contract for the sale and
purchase thereof, and these regulations shall apply accordingly.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 9th February, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
9fh February, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
1. The Governor may from time to time, by Order in Council publisher
in the Gazette , declare any wharf or wharves to be a Government wharf
within the meaning and for the purposes of these regulations, with the
distinguishing name given thereto by such notice and with the bound-
aries defined by such notice. Any such notice may be in like mannei
revoked.
2. In these regulations the term “ wharf ” includes any wharf, quay,
pier, jetty, or other place used or capable of being used for the lading
or unlading of ships, and also includes any place belonging to or in
the possession of or under the control of a Harbour Board; and also
includes any public highway so far as it intersects or is_ contiguous to
any such wharf, quay, pier, jetty, or other place as aforesaid.
3. By the same or any other Order in Council published in the
Gazette the Governor may from time to time appoint any person to
be the Controller of such Government wharf, and may also appoint such
other persons (if any) as he thinks necessary to be the Assistant Con-
trollers of that wharf. All persons so appointed shall hold office during
the pleasure of the Governor.
4. Every §uch Assistant Controller shall, subject to the control and
direction of the Controller, have the same powers, authorities, and
functions as the Controller himself, and every reference in these regu-
lations to the Controller of a Government wharf shall be read as in-
cluding a reference to any Assistant Controller accordingly^
5. The Controller of a Government wharf may from time to time
employ all such wharf labourers and other persons as he considers neces-
sary for the loading, unloading, and despatch of vessels at that wharf,
and for the performance of any other duties incidental to any such


operations, and may enter into such contracts as he thinks reasonable
on behalf of the Crown for the payment of such persons at such rates
as may be agreed on.
6. When the Controller of a Government wharf is satisfied that the
conduct or character of any person is such that his liberty of access
to that wharf is prejudicial to the effective use, control, or adminis-
tration thereof, the Controller may, by order in writing (whether that
person is then upon the wharf or not), warn him off that wharf. Every
such order shall take effect so soon as the making thereof has been
brought in any manner to the knowledge of the person against whom
it is made. Every such order may be revoked by the Controller by
order in writing.
7. If after any person has been so warned off a Government wharf,
and while the order remains in force, such person enters or remains
upon that wharf, or loiters in the vicinity of any entrance thereto, he
shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be
liable according!}-.
8. The Controller of a Government wharf, if satisfied that such a
course is advisable for the effective use, control, or administration
thereof, may by order close that wharf or any part thereof specified
in the order. Every such order shall take effect when a notification
thereof has been published in a newspaper circulating in the district
in which the wharf is situated, or has been publicly exhibited upon the
wharf or upon the part of it so closed. Every such order may be
revoked by the Controller in like manner.
9. (1.) So long as any such order closing a Government wharf or
any part thereof remains in force, no person shall enter upon that
wharf or upon that part thereof, as the case may be, except in pur-
suance of a permit issued by the Controller of the wharf or by his
authority, and no person shall loiter in the vicinitv of any entrance
to the closed wharf or of the closed part thereof, as the case may be.
(2.) Nothing in this regulation shall apply so as to prohibit the
entrance of—
(a.) Any person in the employment of the Crown;
(b.) Any person employed as a member of the permanent staff of a
Harbour Board by which the wharf is owned ;
(c.) Any seaman or passenger belonging to any ship lying at or in
the vicinity of the closed wharf or the closed part thereof, as
the case may be.
10. Every person who incites any other person to refuse or fail to
offer or render service or effective service as a wharf labourer on any
Government wharf, or who does any act, or publishes (whether to any
person or persons or to the public at large) any utterance, intended
or calculated to interfere with the effective use, control, or administration
of a Government wharf, or with the proper loading, unloading, or
despatch of any vessel lying at or in the vicinity of a Government wharf,
or to obstruct the due administration of these regulations by the Con-
troller of a Government wharf or by any person acting in aid of the


Controller, shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and
shall be liable accordingly.
11. The Controller of a Government wharf, and every person acting
in aid of him, shall have at all times a right of access to that wharf and
to every part thereof, and to every ship lying thereat.
12. Every person who does wilful damage to a Government wharf or
to any building or structure situated thereon, or to any goods, machinery,
plant, or other property being thereon or on any ship lying thereat, or
in the vicinity thereof, shall be guilty of an offence against these regula-
tions, and shall be liable accordingly.
13. The Controller of a Government wharf may make thereon any
structural or other alterations which he deems necessary for the effective
enforcement of these regulations or the proper use, control, or administra-
tion of the wharf.
14. The Controller of a Government wharf may give such orders as
he thinks necessary as to the berthing, lading, unlading, or despatch
of any ship lying at or in the vicinity of that wharf. Disobedience to
any such order shall be an offence against these regulations.
15. Every person who conspires with any other person to prevent, de-
lay, or otherwise interfere with the proper loading, unloading, or despatch
of any vessel, whether lying at a Government wharf or not, or who does
any act or publishes (whether to any person or persons or to the public at
large) any utterance intended to prevent, delay, or otherwise interfere
with the proper loading, unloading., or despatch of anv vessel, whether
lying at a Government wharf or not, shall be guilty of an offence against
these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 16th February, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
16th February, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
1. The Governor, if satisfied that any industry is essential for the public
welfare, may by Order in Council declare that industry to be an in-
dustry essential for the public welfare.*
* By Orders in Council of the 16th February, 17th April, and sth July, 1917’
the following industries have been so declared: The coal-mining industry, the shipping
industry, the carriage of goods, merchandise, or passengers by land or sea, the lading and
unlading of ships, the frozen-meat industry, the manufacture and supply of coal-gas, the
manufacture and supply of electricity for light or power, the supply of water for domestic
or industrial purposes.
4—War Regs.


Seditious Strikes and Seditious Lockouts.
2. No person shall be a party to a seditious strike or to a seditious
lookout, or shall incite, encourage, or procure any such strike or lockout
or the continuance thereof.
3. “ Seditious strike ” means any strike, or transaction in the nature
of a strike, or combination, agreement, common understanding, or con-
certed action on the part of any workers, which is intended or has a
tendency to interfere with —
(a.) The effective conduct of military or naval preparations or opera-
tions during the present war, whether in New Zealand or
elsewhere; or
(b.) The manufacture, production, output, supply, delivery, or car-
riage of goods or articles required by His Majesty, whether m
New Zealand or elsewhere, for any purpose in connection with
the present war; or
(c.) The lading, unlading, manning, equipment, despatch, or use of
any vessel carrying or about to carry from New Zealand any
of His Majesty’s Forces, or any goods or merchandise belong-
ing to or destined for or required by His Majesty, whether in
New Zealand or elsewhere, for any purpose in connection with
the present war; or
(d.) The manufacture, production, output, supply, delivery, or
carriage of goods or articles in or in connection with any
industry declared by the Governor in Council, pursuant to the
foregoing provisions of these regulations, to be essential for
the public welfare, or otherwise to interfere with the effective
conduct of any such industry; or
(e.) The effective conduct of any undertaking of His Majesty which
is requisite for the public safety during the present war.
4. “ Seditious lockout ” means any lockout, or transaction in the
nature of a lockout, or combination, agreement, common understanding,
or concerted action on the part of any employers which is intended or has
a tendency to interfere with—
(a.) The effective conduct of military or naval preparations or opera-
tions during the present war, whether in New Zealand or
elsewhere; or
(b.) The manufacture, production, output, supply, delivery, or
carriage of goods or articles required by His Majesty, whether
in New Zealand or elsewhere, for any purpose in connection
with the present war; or
( c.) The lading, unlading, manning, equipment, despatch, or use of
any vessel carrying or about to carry from New Zealand any
of His Majesty’s Forces, or any goods or merchandise belong-
ing to or destined for or required by His Majesty, whether in
New Zealand or elsewhere, for any purpose in connection with
the present war; or


(d.) The manufacture, production, output, supply, delivery, or
carriage of goods or articles in or in connection with any
industry declared by the Governor in Council, pursuant to
the foregoing provisions of these regulations, to be essential
for the public welfare, or otherwise to interfere with the effec-
tive conduct of any such industry; or
(e.) The effective conduct of any undertaking of His Majesty which is
requisite for the public safety during the present war.
5. Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to revoke or affect
any other War Regulations already in force, and all such other War
Regulations shall remain in full force and effect according to their tenor
concurrently with the present regulations, but so that no person shall be
punished twice for the same offence.
6. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed part of
the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 28th February, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the 26th
February , 1917; came into operation Ist March , 1917.
REGULATIONS.
1. No male person whose age exceeds fifteen years shall, while these regu-
lations continue in force, land in New Zealand from any place beyond
the seas unless and until he has made and delivered to an officer of
Customs a declaration in the form in the Schedule hereto.
2. The last preceding regulation shall not apply to —
(a.) Any person returning from the Commonwealth of Australia, if
he is in the possession of a permit to visit the Commonwealth
issued to him under the authority of the War Regulations
relating to such permits;
(6.) Any person resident in New Zealand returning to New Zealand
on a return ticket issued to him in New Zealand;
(c.) Any member of the naval or military Forces of any of His
Majesty’s allies entering New Zealand on duty, or any mem-
ber of the naval or military Forces of any part of the British
dominions entering New Zealand on duty; or
(d.) Any person arriving in New Zealand as the master or a member
of the crew of the vessel in which he arrives. (Amended by
clauses 1 and 2of 4th November, 1918. Page 183.)
4* —War Regs.


3. No person who, in any declaration made under these regulations,
has declared his intention of not becoming permanently resident in New
Zealand shall be granted a permit to leave New Zealand except within
three months after the date of his arrival in New Zealand, or within
such extended time as the Minister of Internal Affairs, on application
in writing made before the expiry of the said period of three months,
may allow.
4. Every person who lands in New Zealand without having made the
declaration required by these regulations, and every person who know-
ingly makes any false declaration under these regulations, commits an
offence, and is liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly,
SCHEDULE.
War Regulations Act, 1914.
Questions to be put to Male Persons over Fifteen Years of Age
arriving in New Zealand.
1. What is your name?
2. What is your occupation?
3. What is your usual place of residence?
4. In what country were you born?
5. What is your age?
6. What are the names of your parents?
F ather :
Mother :
7. In what country were your parents born?
Father :
Mother :
8. Are you a British subject? If so, are you —
(a.) A natural-born British subject? or
(b.) A naturalized British subject?
9. If you are a naturalized British subject—
(a.) When and where were you naturalized?
(6.) What was your former nationality?
10. If you are not a British subject, -what is your nationality?
11. Do you intend to become permanently resident in New Zealand?
12. If not, what is the date of your projected departure from New
Zealand ?
13. What is your purpose in coming to New Zealand?
I do solemnly declare that the above answers made by me to the above
questions are true.
Signature:
Declared at this day of , 19 , before me —
Officer of Customs.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 26th March, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
26th March, 1917.
SCHEDULE.
A certificate of interest, within the meaning of the hereinbefore-recited
Order in Council of the 13th day of October, 1916, shall hereafter be
requii’ed in respect of all goods imported into New Zealand from Hayti,
and the said Order in Council is hereby amended accordingly by omitting
from the Second Schedule thereto the word “ Hayti.”
F. W. FURBY ,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 26th March, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
26th March, 1917.
SCHEDULE.
Relating to the Delegation of Powers by Attorneys and Others.
1. In addition to the powers of delegation conferred by the hereinbefore-
recited regulations (of 2nd September, 1916), an attorney, agent,
trustee, executor, or administrator who, being a member of an Expedi-
tionary Force under the Expeditionary Forces Act, 1915, is absent from
New Zealand on His Majesty’s service, or is about to leave New Zealand
on such service, may, by a power of attorney executed by him, delegate
all or any of the powers, functions, or duties conferred or imposed upon
him as such attorney, agent, trustee, executor, or administrator to any
person or body corporate that may be approved for the purpose by g
Judge of the Supreme Court, or a Stipendiary Magistrate, on application
in that behalf by that attorney, agent, trustee, executor, or adminis-
trator.
2. Where, pursuant to the powers conferred by the last preceding
clause, any powers, functions, or duties are delegated to any person or
body corporate other than the Public Trustee, all references to the Public
Trustee in clauses 2,3, 4, and 5 of the regulations aforesaid shall, for
the purposes of such delegation, be deemed to be references to that person
or body corporate, and the said clauses shall be construed accordingly.
F. W. FURBY ,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, sth April, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the 2nd
April , 1917; revoked Regulations Ito 1/. of sth February , 1917 .
REGULATIONS.
Publication of Shipping Intelligence.
1. No person shall, without the written consent of a military authority,
publish or cause or permit to be published in a newspaper, or in any
other periodical publication, any statement or indication as to the
movements, whereabouts, cargo, or employment (whether past, present,
or future) of any seagoing ship other than one exclusively engaged in
the coastal trade of New Zealand, or any information as to any such
ship which if known to the enemy might be a source of danger to that
ship or might otherwise be of use to the enemy.
2. No person shall, without the written consent of a military autho-
rity, sell, distribute, or publicly exhibit any document containing any
statement or indication as to the movements, whereabouts, cargo, or
employment (whether past, present, or future) of any such ship as afore-
said, or any information as to any such ship which if known to the enemy
might be a source of danger to that ship or might otherwise be of use
to the enemy.
3. No person shall, except in the course of his lawful business in
relation to any such ship as aforesaid, send or cause to be sent out of
New Zealand by means of any telegram, letter, or otherwise howsoever
any such statement, indication, or information as aforesaid with respect
to that ship.
4. Nothing in the foregoing regulations shall make it an offence to
publish in New Zealand—
(a.) Any matter contained in a newspaper printed in the United
Kingdom and received in New Zealand prior to the publica-
tion there of such matter; or
(b.) Any matter transmitted to New Zealand by telegram from a
recognized Press agency in the United Kingdom, and passed
for publication in a newspaper by the censors of telegraphic
messages; or
(c.) Any information as to the loss of a ship; or
(d.) Any information as to matters occurring more than four months
before the date of the publication thereof.
5. Nothing in these regulations shall make it an offence to sell or
distribute any newspaper printed and published elsewhere than in New
Zealand.
6. It shall be no defence to a charge of a breach of the foregoing
regulations that the statement, indication, or information which is the
subject-matter of the charge does not name or otherwise identify any
particular ship to which it relates.
F. W. FURBY.
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, oth April, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
2nd April, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
Management of Soldiers’ Properties.*
1. These regulations may be cited as the Soldiers’ Property Regulations.
1917.
2. In these regulations—
“ Soldier ” means a member of any Expeditionary Force consti-
tuted under the Expeditionary Forces Act, 1915:
“ National Efficiency Board ” means the National Efficiency
Board constituted by the Governor by Warrant dated the 27th
day of February, 1917 :
“ Board of Trustees ” or “ Trustees ” means a Soldiers’ Property
Board of Trustees constituted and appointed under these
regulations.
3. (1.) The Minister of Defence may, on the recommendation of the
National Efficiency Board, constitute and appoint such number of
Boards of Trustees (herein referred to as Soldiers’ Property Boards of
Trustees) as he thinks necessary to carry into effect the purposes of these
regulations.
(2.) Every such Board of Trustees shall be constituted and appointed
with such official name as the said Minister thinks proper, thus “ The
[.Distinctive name ] Soldiers’ Property Board of Trustees.”
(3.) Every such Board of Trustees shall consist of not less than four
members, who shall hold office during the pleasure of the said Minister,
and of whom one shall be a member of the National Efficiency Board.
The last-mentioned member may, by writing under his hand, appoint as
his proxy, to act at any meeting of the Board of Trustees in his absence,
any person who may be nominated in that behalf by the Minister of
Defence. Such nomination and appointment respectively may be either
general or for the purposes of any particular meeting. Any person so
acting as a proxy at any meeting shall for the purposes of that meeting
have all the powers of the member for whom he acts.
(4.) Each such Board of Trustees shall from time to time appoint one
of its members to be the Chairman of the Board of Trustees.
(5.) In the absence of the Chairman from any meeting of a Soldiers’
Property Board of Trustees the members present shall elect one of their
number to be the chairman for that meeting.
(6.) Meetings of any Board of Trustees shall be held at such times
and places as the Chairman may appoint. The Chairman shall at any
* See also Soldiers’ Businesses Regulations, p. 168.


time summon a meeting of the Board of Trustees on the requisition in
writing of any two members of that Board.
(7.) At any meeting two members of a Board of Trustees shall form a
quorum, and the decision of a Board of Trustees on any question before
it shall be determined by a majority of the votes cast.
(8.) At all meetings of a Board of Trustees the Chairman shall have
a deliberative vote, and in the event of an equality of voting shall have
a casting-vote also.
i. All deeds and other instruments executed by a Board of Trustees
shall be signed by the Chairman and one other member thereof acting
with the approval in writing of the National Efficiency Board.
5. (1.) Any soldier, whether of full age or a minor, may by a power of
attorney purporting to be executed in pursuance of these regulations
appoint any Board of Trustees in its official name as his attorney, to
exercise in respect of his property, business, or affairs, or any part
thereof, in accordance with these regulations, such powers of manage-
ment, sale, lease, or disposition as may be mutually agreed on between
such soldier and the Trustees.
(2.) No such power of attorney shall be accepted by a Board of
Trustees except with the consent in writing of the Chairman of the
National Efficiency Board or of the member of the Board of Trustees
who is for the time being a member of the National Efficiency Board.
6. Every such power of attorney shall have the same operation and
effect as if it had been granted jointly and severally to all of the members
of the Board of Trustees who are in office at the time of the execution of
the power of attorney, and to their successors in office, to the intent that
the powers conferred by such power of attorney shall be exercisable from
time to time and jointly or severally by the members of that Board for
the time being in office.
7. Every such power of attorney shall continue in force for all pur-
poses notwithstanding any notice of the death or incapacity of the soldier,
and notwithstanding any revocation thereof, and notwithstanding the
discharge of the soldier from the Expeditionary Force, unless and until
the Board of Trustees receives not less than three months’ express notice
in writing signed by the soldier of the revocation of the power of
attorney, or, in the event of the death of the soldier, until probate of
the will or administration of the estate of the soldier has been granted
by the Supreme Court of New Zealand, or if probate of the will or letters
of administration have been first granted by any other Court, then until
such probate or letters of administration have been resealed in the
Supreme Court of New Zealand : Provided that the Board of Trustees
may, with the approval of the National Efficiency Board and on giving
to the soldier not less than three months’ notice in writing of its inten-
tion so to do, surrender the trust at any time after the discharge of the
soldier from the Expeditionary?- Force.
8. Every power of attorney granted under these regulations shall be
subject not only to these regulations, but to every amendment thereof


which may at any time thereafter be made in these regulations by Order
in Council, save that no such amendment shall so operate as to confer
upon any Board of Trustees any power which is beyond the scope of such
power of attorney.
9. No member of a Board of Trustees under these regulations shall
incur any liability in respect of anything done or omitted by him in good
faith in the execution or intended execution of the powers conferred by
these regulations or by any power of attorney granted thereunder.
10. All moneys belonging to a soldier and coming to the hands of a
Board of Trustees in pursuance of these regulations or of any power of
attorney granted by that soldier shall, except so far as such moneys are,
in the opinion of that Board, presently required for expenditure in pur-
suance of such regulations or power of attorney, be deposited in the Post
Office Savings-bank or with the Public Trustee so as to form part of the
common fund of the Public Trust Office: Provided that the Board of
Trustees may, with the approval of the National Efficiency Board, from
time to time withdraw any moneys so deposited if in the opinion of the
Board of Trustees such moneys are required by it for expenditure as
aforesaid.
11. (1.) Every Board of Trustees acting under a power of attorney
executed pursuant to these regulations shall keep such accounts as the
National Efficiency Board may from time to time prescribe.
(2.) All such accounts shall be audited half-yearly by an auditor
approved for the purpose by the National Efficiency Board.
(3.) At the close of each year or of such other period as the National
Efficiency Board may appoint, the Board of Trustees shall prepare and
submit to the National Efficiency Board a balance-sheet signed by the
auditor, together with a statement of receipts and expenditure for the
same period, and such other statements as the National Efficiency Board
may require.
12. Any power of attorney executed pursuant to these regulations
for the management of any property as a farm may authorize the Board
of Trustees to manage such farm jointly with any other farm (whether
a soldier’s property or not), and in any such case the expenses of manage-
ment shall be divided between the several properties in such proportions
as the Trustees think proper.
13. The National Efficiency Board may from time to time make such
rules for the guidance, direction, and assistance of Boards of Trustees
as it majr deem necessary for the efficient exercise and performance by
such Boards of the powers and duties conferred or imposed on them by
these regulations or by any power of attorney executed pursuant thereto,
and every such Board of Trustees shall in the exercise of its functions
be subject in all respects to the control and direction of the National
Efficiency Board.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 24th April, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
2J / .th Ajtril, 1917.
Whereas by notice under the hand of the Minister of Agriculture, dated
the thirty-first day of January, one thousand nine hundred and seventeen,
and published in the Gazette of the first day of February, one thousand
nine hundred and seventeen, the terms and conditions were set forth
on which the New Zealand Government is prepared, for and on behalf
of His Majesty’s Government of the United Kingdom, to purchase sheep-
skins for the purposes of the war :
And whereas by notice under the hand of the said Minister dated
the fourteenth day of March, one thousand nine hundred and seventeen,
and published in the Gazette of the same date, the terms and conditions
were set forth on which the New Zealand Government is prepared, for
and on behalf of His Majesty’s Government aforesaid, to purchase hides
(including calf-skins) required for the purposes of the war :
And whereas in order to supply the requirements of His Majesty’s
Government of the United Kingdom for the purposes of the present
war it is necessary to restrict the sale of sheep-skins, hides, and calf-
skins otherwise than to the New Zealand Government pursuant to the
terms of the. notices hereinbefore referred to, in accordance with the
regulations hereinafter set forth :
Now, therefore, I, Arthur William de Brito Savile, Earl of Liver-
pool, the Governor of the Dominion of New Zealand, acting by and
with the advice and consent of the Executive Council of that Dominion,
and in pursuance and exercise of the powers conferred on me by the
War Regulations Act, 1914, and its amendments, and of all other powers
and authorities enabling me in that behalf, do hereby make the fol-
lowing regulations with respect to the sale and purchase of sheep-skins,
hides, and calf-skins; and I do hereby order and declare that the said
regulations shall come into force on the date of the publication of this
Order in Council in the Gazette.
REGULATIONS.
Sale and Purchase of Sheep-skins otherwise than to or by the New
Zealand Government.
1. After the commencement of these regulations no person shall sell
any sheep-skins except—
(a.) To the New T Zealand Government pursuant to the scheme of
purchase set forth in the hereinbefore-recited notice of the
31st January, 1917 ; or


(6.) To a person authorized to purchase sheep-skins for resale to
the Government pursuant to a license issued under clause 13
of the said notice.
(Amended by Regulation 1 of 11th February, 1918. Page 129.)
2. After the commencement of these regulations no person other than
a person acting on behalf of the New Zealand Government or a person
acting pursuant to a license issued under clause 12 of the aforesaid
notice shall purchase any sheep-skins in New Zealand. (Amended
by Regulation 2of 11th February, 1918. Page 139.)
Sale and Purchase of Hides and Calf-skins otherwise than to or
by the New Zealand Government.
3 to 5. Revoked by Order in Council of 16th April , 1918.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 6th June, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
sth June , 1917.
REGULATIONS.
Restricting the Use of Coal-gas and Electricity.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Lighting Regulations, 1917.
2. In these regulations—
“ Minister in Charge ” means the Minister in Charge under
the Coal Trade Regulations made under the War Regula-
tions Amendment Act, 1916, on the sth day of February,
1917 :
“ Lighting authority ” means any local authority or company
engaged in the supply to the public of coal-gas or of
electricity :
“ Electricity ” means electricity used or supplied for light or
power, whether produced by steam-power or by water-
power [or by means of oil fuel (added by regulation of
15th October, 1917. Page 122.)]
3. For the purpose of preventing the wasteful consumption of coal-
gas or electricity, and for the purpose (in any locality in which both


coal-gas and electricity are supplied to the public as alternative or
competitive sources of light or power) of securing complete or partial
uniformity in the restrictions imposed upon the use of each of those
sources, it shall be lawful, notwithstanding any Act, contract, or obliga-
tion to the contrary, for any lighting authority to impose from time to
time such restrictions as it thinks fit upon the use of coal-gas or elec-
tricity supplied by that authority, and any restriction so imposed may
be at any time varied or cancelled by the lighting authority.
4. Any such restriction may be imposed generally upon all consumers,
or upon any class of consumers, or upon consumers individually.
5. Any such restrictions may be imposed, varied, or cancelled either
by notice in writing delivered or posted to the consumers, or by notice
published in some newspaper circulating in the neighbourhood in which
the supply of coal-gas or electricity takes place.
6. When the lighting authority is a company, the powers conferred
upon the company by these regulations may be exercised by the board
of directors of the company, or by any manager, director, secretary,
or other officer to whom such powers have been delegated for the time
being by that board.
7. When the lighting authority is a local authority, the powers con-
ferred upon that local authority by these regulations may be exercised
by the Council or Board having the general control of the affairs of
that local authority, or by any committee or officer to whom such powers
have been delegated for the time being by that Council or Board.
8. When the Minister in Charge is satisfied that any lighting autho-
rity has not adequately exercised the powers conferred upon it by these
regulations, or has unreasonably exercised those powers, the Minister
may, in lieu of that lighting authority, exercise any powers so vested
in it, and may impose any such restrictions as the lighting authority
might itself have imposed, and may vary or cancel any restrictions
whether imposed by himself or by the lighting authority. No restric-
tions so imposed by the Minister in Charge shall be cancelled or varied
by the lighting authority without the consent of the Minister.
9. Every person who uses or permits the use of, or is knowingly
concerned in the use of, any coal-gas or electricity in breach of any
restriction imposed in pursuance of these regulations shall, whether he
is a person to whom such coal-gas or electricity has been supplied by
the lighting authority or not, be guilty of an offence against these regu-
lations and shall be liable accordingly.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 11th June, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
11th June, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
Shipping Regulations.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Shipping Regulations, 1917.
2. In these regulations the term “ New Zealand ship ” means any
British ship having its port of registry in New Zealand.
3. Save with the consent of the Minister of Marine, it shall not be
lawful to procure the transfer of the registry of a New Zealand ship to
a port of registry out of New Zealand, or the removal of any such ship
from the register of British shipping, and all persons who in New Zea-
land are knowingly concerned in any such transfer or removal, or
attempted transfer or removal, shall be guilty of an offence against these
regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
4. Save with the consent of the Minister of Marine, it shall not be
lawful to sell or transfer, or agree to sell or transfer, or to mortgage
or agree to mortgage, any New Zealand ship or any share therein, and
all persons who in New Zealand are knowingly concerned in any such
sale, transfer, mortgage, or agreement, whether it takes place in New
Zealand or elsewhere, shall be guilty of an offence against these regula-
tions, and shall be liable accordingly.
5. Save with the consent of the Minister of Marine, it shall not be
lawful to grant a charter of any New Zealand ship other than a ship
which has not at any time within twelve months before the date of the
charter been engaged in trading in or with New Zealand, and all persons
who in New Zealand are knowingly concerned in the grant of any such
charter, whether granted in New Zealand or elsewhere, shall be guilty of
an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
6. (1.) It shall not be lawful for any New Zealand ship to leave New
Zealand for any place beyond the seas, or to leave a proclaimed port
(as hereinafter defined) for any other port or place in New Zealand,
except in pursuance of a license issued in that behalf by the Minister
of Marine, and every person who in New Zealand is knowingly concerned
in any such departure of a New Zealand ship, save in pursuance of such
a license, shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall
be liable accordingly.
(2.) Any such license as aforesaid may be issued on such terms as to
the voyage or employment of the ship as the Minister of Marine thinks
fit, and may be granted either generally or in respect of any specified
voyage or voyages, and every person who in New Zealand is knowingly


concerned in any breach of the terms of such license, whether committed
in New Zealand or elsewhere, shall be guilty of an offence against these
regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
(3.) Every such license shall be revocable at the will of the Minister
of Marine.
(4.) No certificate of clearance shall be granted under the Customs
Act, 1913, to any ship in respect of any voyage in breach of this
regulation.
(5.) In this regulation the term “ proclaimed port ” means any port
of entry in New Zealand under the Customs Act, 1913, to which this
regulation has been applied by the Minister of Marine by notice pub-
lished by him in the Gazette, and for the time being in force.
(6.) The Minister of Marine may accordingly, by notice in the
Gazette, from time to time declare that this regulation shall apply to
all or any of such ports of entry, and may at any time in like manner
cancel or vary any such notice.
7. (1.) Without the consent of the Minister of Marine it shall not
be lawful for any New Zealand ship which at the date of these regula-
tions is engaged in trading in or with New Zealand to be withdrawn
from that trade, whether permanently or temporarily; and every person
who in New Zealand is knowingly concerned in any such withdrawal,
whether it takes place in New Zealand or elsewhere, shall be guilty of
an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
(2.) Such consent may be granted subject to such terms as to the
employment of the ship as the Minister of Marine thinks fit, and if the
ship is employed otherwise than in accordance with those terms, whether
in New Zealand or elsewhere, every person who in New Zealand is
knowingly concerned in such employment shall be guilty of an offence
against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
8. It shall be the duty of every owner or charterer of a New Zealand
ship, and of every servant or agent of any such owner or charterer, to
afford at all times to the Minister of Marine such information as he
may demand as to the voyages, employment, or whereabouts of that
ship, or otherwise with respect to that ship; and every person who fails
or refuses to give such information, or who wilfully gives any false
information as to the matters aforesaid, shall be guilty of an offence
against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
9. Every person who deceives or attempts to deceive the Minister of
Marine in the exercise of the authority conferred upon him by these
regulations shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and
shall be liable accordingly.
10. Nothing in these regulations shall in any manner revoke or
affect any other War Regulations heretobefore made and now in force
relative to shipping.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 11th June, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
11th June, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
1. (1.) It shall not be lawful, without the permission of a military
authority, to hoist on any flagstaff, or otherwise conspicuously display
on shore in New Zealand, the white ensign or the blue ensign, whether
with or without any distinguishing mark, or any flag so closely re-
sembling the same as to be calculated to deceive; and if any ag is
hoisted "or displayed in contravention of this regulation every person
who hoists or displays the same or permits the same to be hoisted or
displayed, or is knowingly concerned in the hoisting or display ol the
same, shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall
be liable accordingly.
(2.) Nothing in this regulation shall apply to the hoisting or display
of the New Zealand Ensign.
2. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed part
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 4th July, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations as to Returns required from Reservists of the
Second Division under the Military Service Act, 1916, made hy Order in
Council dated the 4th July, 1917.
Whereas by an Order in Council dated the fourth day of July, one
thousand nine hundred and seventeen, and made under the Military
Service Act 1916, the Second Division of the Expeditionary I orce
Reserve has been divided into six classes by reference to the num-
ber of the children of the reservist; And whereas for the pur-
poses of the due enrolment of those classes under the said Act and
otherwise for the purpose of the effective administration of that Act,
it is necessary that reservists of the Second Division shouldl supply to
the Government Statistician such information as will enab e himto
determine the classes to which those reservists belong foi the time being .


Now, theiefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the Execu-
tive Council of that Dominion, and in exercise of the authority conferred
upon him by the War Regulations Act, 19U, doth hereby make the
following regulations under that Act,
REGULATIONS.
1. (1.) With the exception hereinafter set forth, every reservist of the
Second Division of the Expeditionary Force Reserve under the Military
Service Act, 1916, shall within ten days after the 11th day of
July, 1917, deliver to a postal officer at a post-office, upon a printed
term to be obtained on application at that post-office, a true statement
indicating the number of his children as on the said 11th day of
Ju!y, 1917, together with the names, dates, and places of birth of
those children, and if the reservist had no children on that date indi-
cating the fact.
(2.) If any such children are illegitimate, adopted, or step-children,
this fact must be specially indicated in the said statement.
(3 ) Nothing in the foregoing regulation shall apply to any reservist
who h as already before the date of this Order in Council furnished to
the Government Statistician in writing, either under the National Regis-
tratmn Act, 1915, or under the Military Service Act, 1916, sufficient
correctf T aS chlldren to enable the Government Statistician
correctly to enrol that reservist in his proper class in the Second Division
as at the said 11th day of July, 1917.
. If af u ter * he llth day of July, 1917, any change takes place
in the number of the children of any reservist of the Second Division of
T°T f* eS6rve ’ the reservist shall, within ten days
ment \ w Change takeS P lace ’ P ost t( > the Govern-
Ilt ICIaD / Wellington a registered letter informing him of
J ’ d ; and na ure of the chan ge, and setting out the full name,
s donee, and occupation of the reservist. '
3. If any reservist fails to fulfil any obligation imposed unnn him W
th?c^2ttrrAcririVt:„ r x^ ons ’ and shall be Iia ’ ble uni * ei
4 In these regulations the term “child" or “children" h„.
same meaning as in the Schedule to the Order in Council of S,
day of July, 1917. whereby the Second DivisLn of the Fro d'
Force Reserve was divided into classes. ' ‘ P e * tlona ry
F. D. THOMSON,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 9th July, 1917.]
Extension of certain War Regulations to Cook Islands by Order in
Council dated the 9th July, 1917.
Whereas by section six of the War Regulations Amendment Act,
1916, it is provided that the War Regulations Act, 1914, and
all amendments thereof, shall be in force in the Cook Islands,
and that regulations made under those Acts, whether before or
after the passing of the War Regulations Amendment Act, 1916
shall not be in force' in the Cook Islands except so far as expressly
extended thereto : And whereas it is expedient to extend certain
War Regulations to the Cook Islands :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the
Dominion of New Zealand, in pursuance and exercise of the power
and authority conferred by the said Acts, and acting by and with
the advice and consent of the Executive Council of the said Do-
minion, doth hereby extend the War Regulations set out in the
Schedule hereto to the Cook Islands; and doth hereby declare that
the said War Regulations shall come into force therein on the
twenty-fifth day of July, one thousand nine hundred and seventeen.
SCHEDULE.
War Regulations extended to Cook Islands.
1. Clause 4 of the War Regulations of the 19th July, 1915 to
wit, — J ’
4. (1.) No person shall publish, or cause or permit to be
published, any statement or matter likely to interfere with the
recruiting, training, discipline, or administration of His Majesty’s
Forces, whether by sea or land, or with the effective conduct of the
military or naval operations of His Majesty or his Allies in the
present war, or likely to be injurious to the public safety in the
present war, or to prejudice His Majesty’s relations with foreign
1 owers, or any false reports relative to the present war and likely
to cause alarm, or any statement or matter which in any manner
indicates disloyalty or disaffection in respect to the present war
‘(2.) In this regulation the term ‘publish’ means to make
known either to individuals or to the public at large; and the term
His Majesty’s Forces’ includes the New Zealand and all other
military or naval Forces raised by the Government of any British
possession. J
2. Clause 3 of the War Regulations of the 20th September
1916, to wit, —
“3. No person shall by words, writing, or otherwise incite
encourage, advise, or advocate violence, lawlessness, or disorder’
or express any seditious intention.”


3. Clause 4 of the War Regulations of the 20th September,
1915, to wit, —
“ 4. No person shall print, publish, sell, distribute, have in his
possession for sale or distribution, or bring or cause to be brought
or sent into New Zealand any document which incites, encourages,
advises, or advocates violence, lawlessness, or disorder, or expresses
any seditious intention.”
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 16th July, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
16th July, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
1. (1.) Iso person shall enter on board a seagoing ship, other than one
exclusively engaged in the coastal trade of New Zealand, while such ship
is moored alongside any wharf, or is in any harbour in New Zealand,
without the permission in writing of a military authority or of the owner,
master, or agent of the ship.
(2.) This regulation shall not apply to—
(a.) Any person in the service of the Government of New Zealand
who enters the ship on duty; or
(b.) Any person employed by the harbour authorities and entering
the ship on duty; or
(c.) Any member of the ship’s crew, or any person who has engaged
a passage in the ship.
2. The master of any such ship shall maintain a sufficient guard on
each gangway by which the ship can be entered.
5. If the master or any member of the ship’s crew permits any
person to enter, or negligently fails to prevent any person from entering,
on board the ship in contravention of these regulations he shall be guilty
of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
4. Any constable, officer of Customs, officer of the Defence Forces,
or the master or any officer of the ship may arrest without warrant any
person who enters or is reasonably suspected of having entered or of
being about to enter any ship in breach of these regulations.
5. These regulations shall be read together with and be deemed part
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 16th July, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations as to Protection of Mining Privileges made
Order in Council dated the 16th July, 1917.
Whereas by the War Regulations Amendment Act, 1916, the Governor
m Council is empowered to make by regulations such provisions as,
having regard to the exigencies of the present war and the conditions
created thereby, he thinks advisable for the maintenance of industries
essential for the public welfare :
And whereas, having regard to the considerations aforesaid, it is
deemed advisable for the maintenance of the mining industry to make
further provision for the protection of mining privileges :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
o New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, and in pursuance of the authority
5 0 i ? 0 u feri i ed Up ,° n , ilim tbe War Regulations Amendment Act, 1916
doth hereby make the following regulations under that Act.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Mining Privileges Protection
Regulations, 1917.
2- E .v er y registered mining privilege under the Mining Act, 1908
which is protected under these regulations shall be free from all
liability to abandonment or forfeiture for any cause arising during
the period of protection, other than default in payment of rovaltv°
rent, or license fees. J " ’
3. The protection under these regulations of any mining privilege
may_ be granted by any Military Service Board under the Military
Service Act, 1916, on the hearing and dismissal by it of any appeal
under that Act, if the Board is of opinion that such nrotection is
expedient having regard to the conditions created by the* compulsory
military service of the reservist whose calling-up is appealed against.
4. On the grant of any such protection the Chairman of the Military
Service Board shall transmit to the Mining Registrar of the district in
which the mining privilege is situated a certificate of protection in the
form set forth in the Schedule hereto or to the like effect, and the
Registrar shall thereupon register the certificate in the Register of
Mining Privileges.
5. Protection under these regulations shall take effect as soon as
the certificate of protection has been received by the Registrar, and
shall, unless sooner cancelled under these regulations, continue during
the present war and for the period of twelve months thereafter.
6. Protection granted under these regulations may be at any time
cancelled by the Minister of Mines on the recommendation of a Military
Service Board.


Registered Number.
Name of Holder.
Nature of Privilege.
f
SCHEDULE
Mining Privileges Protection Regulations, 1917.
Certificate of Protection.
I hereby certify that, in pursuance of the above-mentioned regulations,
protection was granted by the Military Service Board on
the day of . 191 , for the following mining privilege :
Dated this day of , 191 .
Chairman.
To the Mining Registrar at
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 20th August, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
20th August , 1917.
REGULATIONS.
1. Clause 1 of the said War Regulations of the 2nd day of May, 1916,
shall not apply to any alien enemy who is a British subject by naturaliza-
tion in any part of the British Empire, or is a subject of the United
States of America by naturalization therein : Provided that it shall not
be lawful for any such alien enemy to be engaged in foreign trade as
defined in the said clause 1 unless he is permitted to do so by a license
issued by the Attorney-General; and the Attorney-Generaf is hereby
empowered to issue such license accordingly.
2. Clause 26 of the War Regulations made on the 3rd day of April.
1916, shall not apply to any alien enemy to whom a license has been
issued by the Attorney-General under the preceding regulation.
3. No person, firm, or company shall act as the agent of any person
who is prohibited by the said clause 1 from engaging in foreign trade.
4. These regulations shall be read together with and be deemed part
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 20th August, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
20th August , 1917.
REGULATIONS.
1. No person shall obstruct or otherwise interfere with or impede any
member of the military police in the execution of his duty.
2. No person shall incite or encourage any member of an Expedi-
tionary Force to resist or assault any member of the military police in
the execution of his duty.
3. These regulations shall be read together with and be deemed part
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 29th August, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
3Sth August , 1917; revoked Part 11 of Coal Trade Regulations of
sth February , 1917 .
AMENDMENT OF COAL TRADE REGULATIONS.*
1. The Governor may from time to time by Warrant gazetted declare that
any portion of New Zealand is thereby constituted a coal trade district
for the purposes of the Coal Trade Regulations, and may from time
to time, by the same or any other Warrant gazetted, appoint for each
such district a Coal Trade Committee consisting of such persons as the
Governor thinks fit, who shall hold office during his pleasure.
2. The Chairman of each such Committee shall be such member thereof
as the Governor from time to time appoints.
3. Meetings of each such Committee shall be held at such times and
places as the Chairman may appoint, and a majority of the members
of any such Committee shall form a quorum at any meeting thereof, and
the decision of a majority of the members of a Committee present at
any such meeting shall be the decision of the Committee.
4. The functions of each Coal Trade Committee shall be—
(a.) To inquire, at the request of the Minister in Charge, into all
matters relative to the production, importation, exportation,
supply, purchase, sale, distribution, carriage, storage, and use
of coal, and into all matters arising out of the administration
of the Coal Trade Regulations, and to advise the Minister as
to all such matters as aforesaid;
* See further amendment 21st May, 1918, p. 148.


(b.) To exercise, on behalf of the Minister in Charge, any powers
vested in him by the Coal Trade Regulations, so far as any
such powers may for the time being be delegated to any such
Committee by the Minister;
(c.) To grant permits under these regulations.
5. (1.) Save in pursuance of a permit issued in that behalf by the
Coal Trade Committee of a coal trade district, or by the Minister in
Charge, it shall not be lawful for any person to deliver or be concerned
in the delivery of any coal at any place within that district in pursuance
of any contract of purchase whether made before or after the constitution
of that district.
[(2.) Except in such coal trade districts or parts thereof as may be
specified in that behalf by the Minister in Charge by notice in the Gazette,
nothing in this regulation shall apply to the delivery of coal for domestic
or other uses in quantities not exceeding 10 cwt. at any one time, and
not exceeding 1 ton delivered to any one person in any one period of
twenty-eight days. (As substituted 2nd June, 1919. Page 205. J]
6. In granting any such permit in respect of any coal the Coal Trade
Committee or the Minister in Charge, as the case may be, may impose
such terms and conditions as to the mode of dealing with that coal as
the Committee or Minister thinks advisable for the regulation of the
coal trade and the maintenance of industries essential for the public
welfare.
7. Any such permit shall be revocable at the will of the Committee
or Minister by whom it was granted.
8. When coal has been delivered under such a permit, no person shall
thereafter, without the consent of the Committee or Minister by whom
it was granted, deal with that coal or be concerned in dealing therewith
otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions on which the
permit was granted.
9. Any person who makes any false representation with intent thereby
to obtain a permit under these regulations either for himself or for
any other person, or who in any manner deceives or attempts to deceive
a Coal Trade Committee or the Minister in Charge in the exercise of the
powers conferred by these regulations, shall be guilty of an offence
against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
10. These regulations shall be read together with and shall be deemed
part of the Coal Trade Regulations made on the sth day of February,
1917.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 3rd September, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
3rd September, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
1. Evert reference to a military authority in any regulations now in
force} or hereafter to be in force under the War Regulations Act, 1914,


or its amendments, shall, except where the contrary is expressly provided,
be deemed to include a reference to a naval authority as herein defined.
2. “Naval authority” means any officer of His Majesty’s naval
Forces, whether of the United Kingdom or of New Zealand, appointed
by the Minister of Defence, by warrant signed by him and gazetted, as
a naval authority for the purpose of the regulations made under the
War Regulations Act, 1914, and its amendments.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 10th September, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
10th September, 1917.
SCHEDULE.
Clause 19 of the regulations made under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
on the 3rd day of April, 1916, relating to trading with the enemy, and
clause 12 of the regulations made under the said Act on the 24th day
of July, 1916, relating to the same matter, are hereby revoked.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, Ist October, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
Ist October, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
Permits and Passports.
1. Every permit issued under the War Regulations made on the 15th
day of November, 1915, shall upon the expiration, revocation, or other
determination thereof be returned to the Minister or Under-Secretary of
Internal Affairs.
2. Any passport issued by the Governor-General may at any time be
recalled by the Minister or Under-Secretary of Internal Affairs by notice
in writing to the person to whom it was issued, and immediately upon
the receipt of such notice the holder of any such passport shall forward
or deliver the same to the Under-Secretary of Internal Affairs.
3. These regulations shall be deemed part of and be read together
with the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914, and shall
apply to all permits and passports issued since that date.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 10th October, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
10th October , 1917.
REGULATIONS.
Safety of Ships and Cargoes.*
1. In these regulations—
“ Competent authority ” means a military authority or naval
authority under the War Regulations, or the Commissioner of
Police, or a Superintendent or Inspector of Police :
“ Wharf ” means any wharf, quay, pier, jetty, or other place used
for the lading or unlading of ships; and includes all ware-
houses or other buildings adjacent to any such wharf, quay,
pier, jetty, or other place and used in connection therewith;
and also includes any public highway so far as it intersects
any such wharf, quay, pier, jetty, or other place :
[ <£ Ship ” means any description of vessel used in navigation, whether
seagoing or not, other than a vessel propelled exclusively by
oars; and also includes any lighter, barge, boat, or other vessel
used in connection with the lading or unlading of a ship as so
defined. (As substituted by clause 3of Jf.th November, 1918.
Page 183.J]
“ Cargo ” includes any goods or merchandise on or about a wharf
having been unladen from a ship or awaiting shipment:
“ Constable 5 ’ includes any guard stationed by a military or naval
authority at any wharf or ship in pursuance of clause 8 of
the War Regulations made on the 10th day of November, 1914.
2. Every person who by any act or default, whether wilful or negli-
gent, endangers the safety of any ship or cargo, shall be guilty of an
offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
3. (a.) After the 17th day of October, 1917, save in pursuance
of a license issued by a competent authority, it shall not be lawful for
any alien, or for any person who is a British subject by naturalization
only, to be engaged in the work of lading or unlading a ship, or to be
engaged in any manner of work whatever on or about any wharf or ship.
( b .) Nothing in this regulation shall apply to the work on or about
any ship of the master or any member of the crew thereof who has arrived
in that ship from any place out of New Zealand.
( c .) Every person who is engaged in any work in breach of the fore-
going provisions shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations,
and shall be liable accordingly.
(d.) Every person who procures or permits any other person to be
engaged in any work in breach of this regulation shall be guilty of an
offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly; pro-
vided that on a prosecution for any such offence it shall be a good defence
that the accused believed on reasonable grounds that such engagement
was not in breach of this regulation.
* See also regulations of 23rd November, 1917, p. 124.


and consent of the Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby
make the following regulations under the said Acts; and doth declare
that they shall extend to and be in force in the Cook Islands.
REGULATIONS.
1. Bt the order or with the authority of a Resident Commissioner under
the Cook Islands Act, 1915, any alien enemy in the Cook Islands may
be arrested and detained in such manner and in such place within those
islands as the Resident Commissioner thinks fit, and during his pleasure,
unless discharged by the Minister of Defence.
2. Any alien enemy so arrested may by the order of a Resident Com-
missioner be deported in custody to New Zealand, there to undergo such
detention (if any) as a military authority may direct under the authority
conferred upon him in respect of alien enemies by the War Regulations
in force in New Zealand.
3. “ Alien enemy ” has the same meaning as in the War Regulations
in force for the time being in New Zealand.
F. D. THOMSON,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 15th October, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated tht
15th October , 1917.
Whereas on the fifth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and
seventeen, certain regulations known as the Lighting Regulations, 1917,
were made by the Governor-General in Council in pursuance of the War
Regulations Amendment Act, 1916:
And whereas, having regard to the exigencies of the present war and
the conditions created thereby, it is deemed advisable to amend those
regulations in the manner hereinafter appearing :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of the said Dominion, and in pursuance and exercise
of the authority conferred upon him by the War Regulations Amendment
Act, 1916, doth hereby amend the said Lighting Regulations, 1917, by
adding at the end of the definition of “electricity,” in clause two thereof,
the words “ or by means of oil fuel.”
F. D. THOMSON,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 19th November, 1917.]
i
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the 19th
November , 1917. —Sale and Purchase of Lamb-pelts prohibited.
Whereas for the purposes of the present war it is necessary for His
Majesty to obtain further supplies of lamb-pelts: And whereas for the
purpose of more effectually providing for His Majesty’s necessities in
that behalf it is expedient to prohibit, in manner and to the extent here-
inafter appearing, the private sale and purchase of such pelts :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Do-
minion of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of
the Executive Council of that Dominion, and in pursuance and exercise
of the powers conferred upon him by the War Regulations Act, 1914,
doth hereby make the following regulations under that Act.
REGULATIONS.
1. In these regulations—
“ Lamb-pelts ” means lamb-skins from which the wool has been re-
moved by any fellmongering process :
Lamb ” means a sheep under the age of twelve months ;
“ Sale ” includes any mode of disposition by way of agreement other
than a disposition by way of security only.
2. It shall not be lawful for any person to sell or agree or offer to
sell, whether as principal, agent, or otherwise, any lamb-pelts produced
in New Zealand, whether before or after the making of these regula-
tions, otherwise than—
(a.) To His Majesty; or
(b.) For delivery by the seller to the purchaser in the United King-
dom ; or
(c.) For delivery by the seller on board a ship in New Zealand for
direct carriage to the United Kingdom; or
( d•) With the precedent approval of the Controller of the Department
of Imperial Supplies.
3. It shall not be lawful for any person to be concerned in the ful-
filment or performance of any sale or agreement which is made in breach
of these regulations, or which, if made in New Zealand, would have been
a breach thereof.
4. For the purposes of these regulations the grant of an option or
right of purchase shall be deemed to be an agreement to sell.
5. For the purposes of these regulations every agreement for the
sale of pelts shall be deemed to be an agreement for the sale of lamb-pelts
produced in New Zealand if, in accordance with the terms of the agree-
ment, any pelts of that description could be delivered in due fulfilment
of the agreement. The provisions of these regulations as to offers,
options, and rights of purchase shall be construed in like manner.


6. In granting his approval of any sale under these regulations the
Controller of the Department of Imperial Supplies may impose such con-
ditions as he thinks fit as to terms of the sale and as to the disposition
of the goods sold; and every person who is concerned in a breach of am
conditions so imposed, or who deceives the Controller in the exercise of
his functions under these regulations, shall be guilty of an offence against
these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 19th November, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated th
19th November, 1917.
REGULATIONS.
1. Clause 6 of the regulations made on the sth day of February, 1917,
under the War Regulations Act, 1914 (relative to the arrest and detention
of aliens as being disaffected or dangerous), shall extend and apply to
strangers, as hereinafter defined, in the same manner as to aliens.
2. “ Stranger” means any person who is not permanently resident in
New Zealand at the date of this Order in Council.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 23rd November, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations for the Safety of Ships and Cargoes madi
by Order in Council dated the 33rd November. 1917.
For better securing the public safety during the present war, His
Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion of New Zealand,
in exercise of the authority conferred upon him by the War Regulations
Act, 1914, and acting by and with the advice and consent of the Execu-
tive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby make the following regulations
under the said Act; and doth declare that they shall come into operation
on the thirtieth day of November, one thousand nine hundred and
seventeen.


REGULATIONS.
1. In these regulations—
“ Oversea ship” means any seagoing ship other than one exclu-
sively engaged in the coastal trade of New Zealand, and includes
any such ship belonging to or in the possession of the Crown :
“ Examining officer ” means in respect of any port the Collector
of Customs at that port, and any other officer or officers
of Customs at that port whom the Collector may from time to
time authorize to act as an examining officer for that port
under these regulations :
“ Port ” means a port of entry under the Customs Act, 1913 :
“ Wharf ” has the same meaning as in the War Regulations of the
10th day of October, 1917.
2. While an oversea ship is in any port no cargo, stores, baggage,
or other goods or articles of any description whatsoever shall be laden,
taken, or placed on board that ship until passed for shipment thereon
by an examining officer.
3. Every person who is in any manner concerned in lading, taking,
or placing, or in attempting to lade, take, or place, upon any oversea
ship any cargo, stores, baggage, goods, or articles in breach of the fore-
going provisions, or who is in any manner concerned in deceiving or
obstructing or in attempting to deceive or obstruct an examining officer
in the exercise of his authority under these regulations, shall be guilty
of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
4. An examining officer shall not pass for shipment any cargo, stores,
baggage, goods, or articles until and unless he is satisfied that there is no
ground for suspecting that the shipment thereof will be a source of danger
to the ship or to its cargo.
5. An examining officer may, if he thinks it advisable so to do, open
or require to be opened for the purpose of examination any package or
other receptacle brought or found upon any wharf or intended for ship-
ment upon an oversea ship. All labour necessary for the examination of
any cargo, stores, baggage, goods, or articles shall be supplied by or at the
expense of the shipper.
6. An examining officer may in any case in which he is of opinion
that the effective examination of any cargo, stores, baggage, goods, or
articles brought upon any wharf or intended for shipment upon any
oversea ship is for any reason impracticable, refuse to examine the same
or to pass the same for shipment until the expiry of such period as
he deems necessary for the purpose of ascertaining that the shipment
thereof will not be a source of danger to the ship or its cargo, and in
the meantime may, if he thinks fit, take and retain possession of such
cargo, stores, baggage, goods, or articles.
7. An examining officer may require any person who is or has been
in any manner concerned in lading, taking, or placing on board an
oversea ship, or upon a wharf for shipment upon an oversea ship, or in
packing or otherwise preparing for shipment upon an oversea ship, any
cargo, stores, baggage, goods, or articles whatsoever to answer any ques


tions as to the nature, contents, ownership, origin, or preparation for
shipment of such cargo, stores, baggage, goods, or articles, or any other
question in relation thereto which the examining officer thinks material
in the execution of his office under these regulations; and any person
who fails to answer to the best of his knowledge any question so sub-
mitted to him, or who answers any such question falsely, shall be guilty
of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
8. An examining officer, or any constable with the authority of an
examining officer, may enter upon any warehouse, store, or other build-
ing or place whatever in which he has reason to believe that any cargo,
stores, baggage, goods, or articles intended for shipment upon an oversea
ship may be situated, and may examine the same and every part thereof,
and all such cargo, stores, baggage, goods, or articles found therein;
and any person who obstructs any such entry or examination shall be
guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accord-
ingly.
9. (1.) No person shall take any photograph or make any sketch or
other representation of an oversea ship at any port or place in New Zea-
land, or publish, exhibit, or have in his possession any photograph, sketch,
or representation taken or made in breach of this regulation, or any
reproduction or copy of any such photograph, sketch, or representation.
(2.) A constable, military officer, or officer of Customs may seize and
retain possession of any photograph, sketch, or representation (wherever
found) made in breach of these regulations, or any reproduction or copy
thereof (wherever found), or any camera, photographic apparatus, or
photographic material found in the possession of any person while en-
gaged in committing or preparing to commit any offence against these
regulations.
10. (1.) It shall not be lawful for any boat, launch, or other craft
or vessel whatsoever, at any time after sunset and before sunrise, to
approach a seagoing ship at any distance less than 50 yards therefrom
in any port unless the approaching boat, launch, craft, or vessel carries
and exhibits a bright light visible from the deck of the ship approached
by it, or (whether such light is carried or not) in disregard of any
challenge, warning, or order received from any person on board the
ship approached.
(2.) Every person who causes or permits any boat, launch, craft, or
vessel to approach a seagoing ship in breach of the foregoing provisions
shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable
accordingly.
(3.) Any boat, launch, craft, or vessel approaching a seagoing ship
in breach of the foregoing provisions may be fired upon by any guard
or watch upon the ship approached, or by or with the authority of the
master or any officer of that ship or any naval or military authority.
11. (1.) At all times when an oversea ship is engaged in receiving or I
discharging cargo, stores, or baggage at any port, the owner and the
master of that ship shall station and maintain thereon an efficient guard
or watch charged with the duty of superintending the receipt, stowage,


and discharge of such cargo, stores, or baggage and of using due care for
the protection of the ship and cargo from all attempts against the safety
thereof.
(2.) A naval authority under the War Regulations may from time
to time give instructions to the owner or master as to the nature of the
guard or watch to be so maintained and as to the duties with which the
guard or watch is to be charged, and it shall be the duty of the owner and
master to obey all such instructions.
(3.) Every owner or master who makes default in the performance of
any duty imposed upon him by this regulation, and every person stationed
as a guard or watch on an oversea ship in pursuance of this regulation
who makes default in the performance of any duty with which he is
charged in that behalf, shall be guilty of an offence against these regula-
tions, and shall be liable acordingly.
(4.) “ Owner ” includes charterer, and also the representative in New
Zealand of an owner or charterer out of New Zealand.
12. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed part of
the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 22nd December, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the 22nd
December , 1917. —As to the Sale and Purchase of Wheat.
Whereas by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917, it is
provided that the Governor-General in Council may by regulations
under the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions as, having
regard to the exigencies of the present war or the conditions created
thereby, he thinks advisable for the maintenance, control, regulation, and
management of any industry, business, or undertaking which he re-
gards as essential for the public welfare: And whereas the growing
of wheat and the manufacture of flour in New Zealand are industries
essential for the public welfare : And whereas by reason of the condi-
tions created by the present war it has become necessary to make special
provisions for the maintenance, control, regulation, and management of
those industries through the establishment of a scheme for the purchase
and sale of wheat by the Government of New Zealand :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, and in pursuance of the authority


conferred upon him in that behalf as aforesaid, doth hereby make the
following regulations under the War Regulations Act, 1914, and doth
hereby revoke the regulations made under that Act on the tenth day of
September, one thousand nine hundred and seventeen, relative to the
purchase of wheat, and doth hereby also revoke clause one of the regula-
tions made on the fifth day of February, one thousand nine hundred and
seventeen, under the War Regulations Amendment Act, 1916, requiring
returns of purchases of wheat.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Wheat Trade Regulations.
2. In these regulations, except where a contrary intention appears,—-
Wheat ” means wheat of any kind or quality grown in New
Zealand during the season 1917-1918 :
“ Free wheat ” means—
(a.) Any wheat after its purchase and resale by the Govern-
ment in pursuance of the scheme of purchase set forth
in these regulations;
(b.) Any wheat which has been offered to the Government for
purchase in pursuance of the said scheme of purchase
and has been rejected as being unmerchantable or other-
wise not of the kind or quality required by the Govern-
ment :
“ Good milling-wheat ” means wheat suitable for milling and of
fair average quality for the season as determined in accordance
with the custom of the trade, or of a quality superior thereto :
“Government” means His Majesty the King in respect of the
Government of the Dominion of New Zealand.
Part I. — Private Dealings in Wheat prohibited.
3. Save in accordance with and pursuance of the scheme of purchase
and sale set forth in these regulations, it shall not be lawful for any
person, whether as principal, agent, or otherwise, to purchase or agree
or offer to purchase any wheat other than free wheat, or to be concerned
in the making of any such purchase, agreement, or offer by any other
person, whether in New Zealand or elsewhere, or to be concerned in the
fulfilment or performance of any agreement for the purchase of any
such wheat, whether such agreement has been made in New Zealand or
elsewhere, and whether it has been made before or after the making of
these regulations.
4. Save in accordance with and pursuance of the scheme of purchase
and sale set forth in these regulations, it shall not be lawful for any
person, whether as principal, agent, or otherwise, to sell or agree or offer
to sell any wheat other than free wheat, or to be concerned in the making


lrLa B .^V:' e ;, ag T ment ’ ° r ? fler by “y otlier pe«»». whether in
: N Z lai i d 01 elsew here, or to be concerned in the fulfilment or per-
formance of any agreement for the sale of any such wheat, whether such
agreement has been made in New Zealand or elsewhere, and whether it
has been made before or after the making of these regulations.
o. In the foregoing regulations the terms “purchase” and “sale”
me ude any mode of acquisition or disposition by agreement other than
acquisition or disposition by way of security only.
6. For the purposes of the foregoing regulations an option or right
of purchase oi sale shall be deemed to be an agreement to purchase or to
sell, as the case may be.
7 Notwithstanding anything in these regulations, it shall be lawful
foi the glower of any wheat to sell any quantity or quantities thereof
not exceeding in the aggregate 100 bushels to any other wheat-grower for
use by the purchaser as seed-wheat.
Part ll.— Control of the Wheat Trade.
8. Good milling-wheat will be purchased and resold by the Govern-
ment in accordance with the scheme hereinafter in these regulations set
forth. °
9. All purchases and sales of wheat by the Government will be effected
through the agency of brokers appointed by the Board of Trade and
acting on account of the Government, and hereinafter referred to as
Government brokers.
10. Every broker so appointed shall hold office at the will of the
Board of Trade.
11. Government brokers will be required to give to the Government
such security as the Board of Trade may require for the due perform-
ance of their contract with the Government and for due obedience to
these regulations.
12. The general control, supervision, and execution of this scheme
of purchase and sale will be in the hands of a Controller appointed by
the Minister of Agriculture and acting on behalf of the Government, and
hereinafter called the Wheat Controller.
13. The headquarters of the Wheat Controller shall be at Christ-
church.
14. There will be associated with the Wheat Controller an advisory
committee to be known as the Wheat Trade Committee, and to consist of
such representatives of the wheat-growers, flour-millers, and Government
brokers as the Board of Trade may from time to time appoint.
15. Every Government broker will be appointed for a particular dis-
trict to be defined by the Board of Trade in appointing such broker, and
it shall not be lawful for any such broker to purchase for the Govern-
ment under these regulations any wheat grown elsewhere than in the
district for which he has been appointed.
5 War Regs.


Part 111.—Purchases of Wheat by the Government.
16. Government brokers will buy good milling-wheat on account of
the Government at the following prices :
A. Good milling-wheat grown in the South Island, —
1. Sold for delivery free on board at the nearest port—
(a.) In January, February, or March, 1918, ss. lOd,
per bushel.
( b .) In April, 1918, ss. 10|d. per bushel.
(c.) In May, 1918, os. lid. per bushel.
(d.) In June, 1918, ss. ll|d. per bushel.
(e.) In July, 1918, 6s. per bushel.
(/.) In August, 1918, 6s. o|d. per bushel.
( g .) In or after September, 1918, 6s. Id. per bushel.
2. Sold for delivery otherwise than free on board at the nearest
port —
A price equivalent as regards the seller to the prices
aforesaid.
B. Good milling-wheat grown in the North Island, —
1. Sold for delivery free on board at the nearest port, being
Wellington, Wanganui, New Plymouth, Napier, Gis-
borne, or Auckland —
The same price as that of good milling-wheat growr,
in the South Island and sold for delivery free
on board at the nearest port, with an addition of
4d. per bushel.
2. Sold for delivery otherwise than free on board at the port*
aforesaid —
A price equivalent as regards the seller to the price
aforesaid.
17. Government brokers will not purchase on behalf of the Govern-
ment any wheat other than good milling-wheat : nevertheless it shall not
be lawful for any person to sell wheat of any quality otherwise than to
the Government until and unless it has been offered to a Government
broker for sale to the Government in pursuance of these regulations, and
has been rejected as unmerchantable or as not being good milling-wheat.
18. In these regulations “ nearest port ” means the port of entry
under the Customs Act, 1913, nearest to the place where the wheat is
grown.
19. Sacks will be paid for, in addition to the above prices, at the fair
market value not exceeding lOjd. each.
20. When wheat is sold to a Government broker without express agree-
ment as to the month of delivery it shall be deemed to be sold for
delivery in the month in which the contract is made.
21. When wheat is sold to a Government broker for delivery by
instalments in different months or on different terms or conditions, the
sale of each instalment shall be deemed to be a separate contract.
22. Save in special cases at the express direction of the Wheat Con-
troller, and on such terms as may be approved by him, wheat will be sc


purchased by a Government broker only on the terms that the seller will
deliver the same to a purchaser from the Government as directed by
the broker whether free on board, on rail, direct to the purchaser’s
store, or otherwise. Save as aforesaid, the Government broker will in
uo case accept delivery on behalf of the Government, or act as a ware-
houseman tor the Government. The Government broker may, however
act at the same time as the broker, agent, or warehouseman, either of
the seller to the Government or of the buyer from the Government, on
such terms as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties.
23 ’ A 1) W A at 80 P urchased by the Government shall become the pro-
pert}' of the Government on delivery thereof in accordance with the terms
of the contract if the wheat is in conformity with the contract.
SU °k de^vei T w heat the Government broker, on being
satisfied that the wheat so delivered is in accordance with the contract,
will forward to the Wheat Controller a voucher in duplicate, in such
form as the Controller may require, authorizing the payment of the
contract price.
(2.) The sum so payable will be paid by the Wheat Controller as
imprestee to the seller or to any other person authorized by the seller
in that behalf by a written authority transmitted through the broker to
the Controller.
(3.) Such payments will be made on the Ist and 14th days of each
calendar month in the case of all vouchers duly received by the Con-
troller at least seven days before any such pay-day.
(4.) If any such pay-day is a holiday, payment will be made on the
next following business-day.
25. Every contract made by a Government broker for the purchase
of wheat on account of the Government shall be made in accordance with
and shall incorporate the provisions of these regulations so far as
applicable to contracts of purchase, and the rights and obligations of
the parties shall be determined accordingly.
Part IY.—Sales of Wheat by the Government.
26. No sales of wheat shall be made by a Government broker on
account of the Government except to persons holding a warrant issued
by the Wheat Controller authorizing the holder to purchase wheat, and
hereinafter referred to as a wheat-purchase warrant.
27. Every such warrant will contain such conditions and restrictions
as the Wheat Controller thinks fit, and no sale shall be made to the holder
otherwise than in conformity with these conditions and restrictions.
28. Every wheat-purchase warrant may be cancelled at any time for
any reason which the Controller in his absolute discretion thinks suffi-
cient.
29. No such warrant shall be transferable.
30. The Wheat Controller will in his absolute discretion allocate to
each flour-mill in New Zealand its due quota of the total quantity of
apod milling-wheat estimated by him from time to time to be available
during the year 1918, and the wheat-purchase warrants issued by the
s*—War Begs.


Controller to flour-millers will be based on the quota as so determined
for the time being.
31. Each flour-miller will be required to purchase and take delivery
of his full quota of wheat as soon as is practicable in the discretion of
the Wheat Controller, and this obligation will be enforced by the Wheat
Controller by withholding or cancelling the wheat-purchase warrant of
any flour-miller who makes default herein.
32. Flour-millers will be required in purchasing wheat to purchase
and take delivery of different kinds or qualities of good milling-wheat
in such proportions as the Wheat Controller may from time to time
determine, having regard to the respective quantities of such kinds or
qualities available, and all Government brokers shall in effecting sales
of wheat observe all directions given to them by the Wheat Controller
in this behalf.
33. The price at which wheat is so sold by a Government broker on
account of the Government shall be the price per bushel at which it was
purchased by the broker on account of the Government, with the addi-
tion of lid. per bushel, together with the price of the sacks as aforesaid.
34. Payment for wheat so sold and delivered shall be made by the
buyer to the Government broker on account of the Government, and the
terms of payment shall be such as may be agreed upon between the
buyer and the broker, being either cash on delivery, cash against ship-
ping documents, or cash within seven days after delivery. All pur-
chase-money in arrear and unpaid shall bear interest at the rate of
8 per centum per annum.
35. When wheat is sold for delivery by instalments each instalment
shall be treated as the subject of a separate contract, and payment shall
be made accordingly.
36. All moneys so received by a Government broker shall be paid by
him into the Public Account immediately" on the receipt thereof, and all
moneys not so paid into the Public Account shall bear interest at the
rate of 8 per centum per annum until so paid.
37. Every Government broker will guarantee to the Government the
due payment by the buyer of the purchase-money for all wheat so sold
to him by r that broker, and on default made by the buyer the purchase-
money, with all accrued interest thereon, shall be recoverable by the
Government from the broker.
38. After delivery to the buyer the wheat shall be in all respects at
the buyer’s risk, but the property in the wheat shall not pass to the buyer
until the purchase-money has been received by the Government broker;
and on default made by the buyer the broker or the Wheat Controller
may take and retain possession of the wheat on behalf of the Government
as a security for the purchase-money.
39. Every" contract made by a Government broker for the sale of
wheat on account of the Government shall be made in accordance with
and shall incorporate the provisions of these regulations so far as appli-
cable to contracts of sale, and the rights and obligations of the parties
shall be determined accordingly.


Part V. — Terms of Employment of Brokers.
40. In respect of every contract for the purchase of wheat by
Government broker on account of the Government the broker shall be
entitled to receive from the Government a commission of Jd. for every
bushel delivered in pursuance of and in conformity with that contract.
41. In respect of every contract for the sale of wheat by a Govern-
ment broker on account of the Government the broker shall be entitled
to receive from the Government a commission of £d. for every bushel
delivered in pursuance of and in conformity with that contract.
42. It shall not be lawful for a Government broker to receive, directly
or indirectly, any additional commission or remuneration from any
party other than the Government in respect of the making of any such
contract of purchase or sale; but nothing herein contained shall prevent
the broker from receiving from any such party remuneration for services
rendered in respect of storage or otherwise howsoever in addition to the
service of making the contract of purchase or sale.
43. It shall not be lawful for any Government broker to give, offer,
or promise to any person any rebate, refund, commission, allowance,
gratuity, or other valuable consideration as an inducement to that person
to sell or purchase wheat to or from the Government through that broker,
or for the reason that he has so sold or purchased wheat.
44. It shall not be lawful for a Government broker to purchase,
whether for himself or on account of any other person, any wheat of a
quality inferior to good milling-wheat except under the authority of a
license issued to the broker in that behalf by the Wheat Controller and
in accordance with the terms of that license. Any such license may be
at any time cancelled by the Controller for any reason which in his
absolute discretion he thinks sufficient.
45. In all matters within the scope of their employment and not
specifically provided for by these regulations Government brokers shall
act in accordance with directions from time to time received from the
Wheat Controller.
46. Government brokers shall from time to time make to the Wheat
Controller such returns relative to the business done by them as the
Controller may require.
47. Every appointment of a Government broker shall be deemed to
incorporate, as a contract between the broker and the Government, the
provisions of these regulations so far as they relate to the rights, powers,
duties, and liabilities of such brokers.
Part Vl.— Disputes.
48. When any dispute arises as to whether any wheat offered to a
Government broker for sale to the Government is good milling-wheat,
or when any dispute arises as to whether any wheat delivered in fulfil-
ment of any contract of purchase or sale entered into by Government
brokers on account of the Government is in accordance with the contract
in respect of kind, quality, or condition, the dispute shall be determined


by a Government grader appointed for this purpose by the Board of
Trade, and his decision shall be final.
49. When any dispute, other than as mentioned in the last preceding
clause, arises between the parties to any contract entered into by a
Government broker on account of the Government, or between a Govern-
ment broker and the Government, or between a Government broker and
any seller or purchaser of wheat to or from the Government, touching
the meaning or operation of these regulations or of any contract so
entered into, the dispute shall be determined by the Wheat Controller.
whose decision shall be final.
50. Nothing in the last two preceding clauses shall apply to any pro-
secution for an offence against these regulations.
51. (1.) Subject to the foregoing provisions as to the settlement of
disputes, the following weights shall be accepted by all parties as the basis
of settlement in all contracts for the purchase or sale of wheat by or to
the Government
Wheat delivered direct to a mill —flour-millers’ weights :
Wheat delivered free on board —customary free-on-board weights:
Wheat delivered ex store either to mills or free on board —ex store
weights.
(2.) The only deduction from such weights shall be 31b. tare per sack.
Part Vll. —Offences.
52. Every person shall be guilty of an offence against these regula-
tions. and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accord-
ingly, who does or attempts or conspires to do any act declared by these
regulations to be unlawful.
53. Every Government broker shall be guilty of an offence against
these regulations, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act.
1914, accordingly, who commits any wilful breach of his contract with
the Government under these regulations.
54. Every seller of wheat to the Government or purchaser of wheat
from the Government under these regulations who commits a wilful
breach of his contract with the Government shall be guilty of an offence
against these regulations, and shall be liable under the War Regulations
Act, 1914, accordingly.
55. Every person who, being a servant or agent ot any Government
broker or of any such seller or purchaser of wheat, wilfully does any
act whereby or in consequence of which such Government broker, seller,
or purchaser breaks his contract with the Government shall be guilty of
an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable under the War
Regulations Act, 1914. accordingly.
56. Every person who deceives or attempts to deceive a Government
broker or the Wheat Controller in the exercise of his functions under
these regulations shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations,
and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
57. Every person who incites, aids, abets, counsels, or procures any
other person, or conspires with any other person, to commit an offence


against these regulations shall be guilty of an offence against these regu-
la ions, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accord-
ingly.
58. Ever} person who fails to make in accordance with these regula-
tions any return required thereby or in pursuance thereof, or who makes
f n> sl * ch return which is false or misleading in any particular, shall
be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable under
the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
09. Every person who, whether as principal, agent, or otherwise, sells
or purchases, or agrees or offers to sell or purchase, wheat at a price in
excess of the maximum price thereof as determined for the time being
under the Regulation of Trade and Commerce Act, 1914, shall be guilty
of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable under the War
Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
Pakt Ylll.— Returns.
60. On or before the 25th day of January, 1918, every grower of
wheat shall make to the Wheat Controller a return showing, as at the
•51st day of December, 1917, —
m? e nu ™ ber of acres that are under crop for wheat on his land :
(6.) Ihe estimated quantity of wheat to be obtained therefrom, show-
r in g separately the different varieties of wheat:
(c.) I lie district where the wheat is grown, the railway-station (if
any) at which the wheat will be loaded for transit to the
market, or the method of delivery otherwise than by rail:
(d.) Ihe quantities of feed-wheat and seed-wheat which he requires
to retain for his own use exclusively for feeding or sowing,
showing each variety of wheat separately.
61. On or before the sth day of June, 1918, every grower of wheat
shall make to the Wheat Controller a return showing, as at the 25th day
of May, 1918, — J
(a.) The number of bushels of each variety of wheat grown by him
and threshed but not yet sold and delivered :
(6.) How much of such wheat still lies on the grower’s farm :
(c.) The location of any such wheat which is stored or held else-
where.
62. On or before the sth day of June, 1918, every grower of wheat
shall make to the Wheat Controller a return showing, as at the 25th day
of May, 1918, —
(a.) The estimated quantity of wheat, in bushels, which the grower
has still unthreshed, the quantities of each variety of wheat
to be stated separately :
( b ■) The probable date of threshing and delivery to the market.
63. In the case of all wheat remaining unthreshed on the 25th day
of May, 1918, the grower shall, within one week after the threshing
thereof, make to the Wheat Controller a return showing the actual yield
of each variety.


64. On or before the 28th day of January, 1918, every flour-miller
carrying on business in New Zealand shall make to the Wheat Controller
a return showing—
(a.) The capacity of his mill :
( b .) His output of flour, bran, and pollard during the years 1915,
1916, and 1917, showing each year separately :
(c.) His probable requirements of wheat for milling for the period
between the 25th day of January, 1918, and the 28th day of
February, 1919 :
(d.) His carry-over of stocks of wheat, flour, bran, and pollard as at
the 25th day of January, 1918 :
( e .) His storage capacity fot wheat.
65. Every flour-miller carrying on business in New Zealand shall,
on or before the 15th day of each calendar month, commencing in
February, 1918, make to the Wheat Controller a return showing full
particulars of all wheat delivered to him during the last preceding
calendar month in pursuance of purchases made by him.
66. Every threshing-mill proprietor carrying on business in Net
Zealand shall, on or before the 15th day of each calendar month, com-
mencing in February, 1918, make to the Wheat Controller a return
showing full particulars of all wheat threshed by him during the previous
calendar month.
67. In making all such returns as aforesaid the person by whom the
return is to be made shall use such forms and give such additional par-
ticulars as the Wheat Controller may from time to time require.
68. (1.) Every person who, whether as principal or agent, and
whether personally or through an agent, enters into any contract for
the purchase of free wheat otherwise than from the Government shall,
within seven days after the day of the making of the contract, make or
cause to be made to the Wheat Controller a return of such contract con-
taining the following particulars :
(a.) The names and addresses of the purchaser and seller :
(b.) The date on which the contract was made :
( c .) The class and quantity of wheat so purchased :
(d.) The agreed date and place of delivery:
( e .) The price of the wheat per bushel;
(/.) The price of the sacks :
(g .) Particulars of any terms or conditions which are not in accord-
ance with the established custom of the trade at the date of
these regulations :
(h.) If the contract is made or evidenced by any written document, a
copy of that document: /
(i.) A declaration made by or on behalf of the purchaser that the
price of the wheat is not in excess of the maximum price as
fixed at the date of the contract by any Order in Council made
under the Regulation of Trade and Commerce Act, 1914.
(2.) Nothing in this clause shall render necessary a return of any
contract for the purchase of wheat in any quantity less than 50 bushels,
save that two or more contracts made between the same parties or sub


stantially at the same time shall be deemed to be one contract for the
purpose of this exemption.
Part IX. — Seed-wheat.
G 9. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in these regulations,
a Government broker in purchasing wheat on account of the Government
may, with the permission of the Wheat Controller, resell that wheat or
any part thereof to the broker himself as seed-wheat at the price at
which he purchased it for the Government with the addition of Ud. per
bushel.
70. No commission shall be payable to the broker in respect either of
the purchase or resale of any wheat so dealt with.
71. The Government broker shall pay to the Government the pur-
chase-money for all seed-wheat so purchased by him in cash on the
delivery of the wheat to the broker in pursuance of the contract.
72. In all other respects these regulations shall apply to any such
resale by the Government to a Government broker in the same manner as
if the Government broker were an independent third person purchasing
the wheat from the Government through that broker.
73. Save with the permission of the Wheat Controller it shall not be
lawful for a broker who has so purchased seed-wheat to dispose of it
in any manner otherwise than by the sale thereof as seed-wheat to
farmers. >.
74. Any surplus of seed-wheat so purchased by a Government broker
and undisposed-of by sale to farmers before the close of the sowing season
of the year 1918 may be demanded by the Wheat Controller for the
Government, and shall thereupon be resold to the Government by the
broker at the price hereinbefore prescribed for good milling-wheat sold
to the Government for deliver}' in the month in which such demand was
made by the Wheat Controller.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 22nd December, 1917.]
Additional War Regulations mode hy Order in Council dated the
22nd December , 1917.
REGULATIONS.
1 If a military or naval authority is satisfied that any person, not
being a British subject, is a subject of any State which is in alliance
with His Majesty in the present war, and that such person is liable
to compulsory military service under the laws of that State, such military
or naval authority may, on the request of any Consular Officer of that
State, order the arrest of that person and his deportation either to the
United Kingdom or to any territory belonging to the aforesaid State,,


and his detention pending such deportation in such manner and plact
as the military or naval authority thinks fit and during his pleasure,
until discharged by the Minister of Defence, and every such order
shall have effect according to its tenor.
2. If a military or naval authority has reason to suspect that there
is in any house, building, land, ship, or other premises any document
or other thing whatsoever which may be evidence of an offence com-
mitted or about to be committed against any regulation made under
the War Regulations Act, 1914, or its amendments, or against the
Military Service Act, 1916, or the Army Act, or which may be evidence
of the whereabouts of any offender against any such regulation or Act,
the military or naval authority, or any officer or officers authorized bv
him, may enter such house, building, land, ship, or premises and search
the same or any part thereof, and may seize all documents or other things
whatsoever found therein whi h may be or may be supposed to be evidence
as aforesaid, and all documents and other things so seized shall be re
tained until a military or naval authority or the Attorney-General
authorizes their return to the person entitled thereto.
3. (a.) In this regulation “ invisible ink ” means any fluid or othei
substance capable of use as ink or as a substitute for ink, and not
immediately, clearly, and permanently visible on being so used.
(b.) In this regulation “ writing ” includes typewriting, printing,
and any other method of producing a document.
(c.) It shall not be lawful for any person to use invisible ink in
writing, or to procure possession of invisible ink for the purpose of
such use by himself or any other person, or to sell or deliver to am
other person invisible ink for the purpose of such use, or to manufacture
invisible ink for the purpose of such use.
4. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed part of
the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 16th February, 1918.] 1
Additional War Regulations relative to the Sale of Sheep-skins madt
by Order in Council dated the 11th February , 1918.
Whereas by regulations made on the twenty-fourth day of April, ow
thousand nine hundred and seventeen, under the War Regulations Act,
1914, the sale and purchase of sheep-skins was prohibited to the extent
and in the manner therein appearing ; And whereas it is desirable t(
amend those regulations in manner hereinafter appearing :


Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting in pursuance of the authority conferred upon
him by the War Regulations Act, 1914, and by and with the advice and
consent of the Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby make the
following regulations under that Act.
REGULATIONS.
1, Clause 1 of the aforesaid regulations of the 24th day of April, 1917,
prohibiting the sale of sheep-skins shall not apply to any sale—
(a.) To the New Zealand Government pursuant to the scheme of pur-
chase set forth in a notice dated the Ist day of February,
1918, signed by the Controller of the Imperial Government
Supplies Department, and published in the Gazette on the
Ist day of February, 1918; or
(b.) To a person authorized to purchase sheep-skins for resale to the
Government pursuant to a license issued under clause 12 of
the said notice.
2. Clause 2 of the said regulations prohibiting the purchase of
sheep-skins shall not apply to a purchaser acting on behalf of the New
Zealand Government or in pursuance of a license issued under clause 12
of the aforesaid notice.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 28th February, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
27th February , 1918. —Compulsory Notification of Claims by British
Subjects against the Enemy.
Whereas in the interests of His Majesty in respect of the present war
it is of great importance that full information should be obtained with
regard to property in enemy territory and belonging to British sub-
jects, and also with regard to the claims of British subjects against
enemy persons and enemy Governments, and also with regard to pro-
perty belonging to British subjects and situated in territory in the hostile
occupation of the enemy, and with regard to the claims of British sub-
jects against persons resident or carrying on business in such territory:
And whereas by two several Proclamations made by His Majesty on
the seventh day of September, one thousand nine hundred and sixteen,
and the twenty-seventh day of November, one thousand nine hundred
and seventeen, provision has been made for acquiring such information
from British stibiects in the United Kingdom :


And whereas it is expedient that similar provision be now made in the
Dominion of New Zealand :
Now, therefore. His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, in exercise of the authority conferred upon him by
the War Regulations Act, 1914, and acting by and with the advice and
consent of the Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby make
the following regulations under that Act.
REGULATIONS.
1. On or before the 30th day of April, 1918, every British subject
resident in New Zealand, and every company or other corporation in-
corporated in New Zealand, shall make to the Public Trustee at Wel-
lington a return in writing of the matters following:
(a.) All property which belongs to that British subject or corporation
and which is situated within the territories of His Majesty’s
enemies :
(b.) All property which belongs to that British subject or corporation
and which is situated within any territory which is now in the
military occupation of His Majesty’s enemies :
(c.) All pecuniary claims of that British subject or corporation
against any enemy Government:
(d .) All pecuniary claims of that British subject or corporation
against any persons or corporations resident or carrying on
business within the territories of His Majesty’s enemies :
(e.) All pecuniary claims of that British subject or corporation
against any person or corporation resident or carrying on
business in any territory which is now in the military occu-
pation of His Majesty’s enemies.
2. Returns shall be made as aforesaid in respect of all enemy terri-
tory, notwithstanding the fact that such territory may be now in the
military occupation of His Majesty’s Forces.
3. When any return has been made under these regulations by any
person or corporation, it shall be the duty of that person or corporation
at any time and from time to time thereafter to supply, on the demand
of the Public Trustee, all such further information as to the property
or claim to which the return relates as the Public Trustee may require,
and also, if required by the Public Trustee, to verify by a statutory
declaration the return so made or any such further information so
supplied.
4. Nothing in these regulations shall render necessary any further
return of property or claims whereof returns have already before the
date of this Order in Council been voluntarily made to the Public Trustee,
but clause 3 of these regulations shall apply as if such returns had been
made under and in conformity with these regulations.
F. D. THOMSON,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 20th March, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
18th March, 1918.
I, Arthur William he Brito Savilb, Earl of Liverpool, the Governor-
General of the Dominion of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice
and consent of the Executive Council of that Dominion, do hereby make
the following regulations in pursuance of the War Regulations Act, 1914,
for the purpose of more effectually securing the censorship of telegraphic
messages during the present war.
REGULATIONS
1. Every person who transmits from New Zealand a secret-code telegram
shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be
liable accordingly.
2. Every person who in New Zealand is knowingly concerned in
the transmission by any other person into New Zealand of a secret-code
telegram shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall
be liable accordingly.
3. “ Secret-code telegram ” means a telegraphic message having an
apparent meaning on the face thereof but having a different meaning
for the intended recipient or for any other person.
F. D. Thomson,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 3rd April, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
2nd, April, 1918.
REGULATIONS.
1. The War Regulations of the 20th day of September, 1915, as amended
by the War Regulations of the 29th day of November, 1915, and the
24th day of July, 1916, relative to firearms and ammunition, and pro-
hibiting. inter alia, the sale, supply, purchase, procuring, importation,
or possession of firearms and ammunition without a permit, shall apply
to explosives in the same manner as to ammunition.
2. The said War Regulations of the 20th day of September, 1915,
are hereby amended accordingly in manner following :
(a.) Clauses 5 and 6 thereof are amended by inserting, after the
word “ ammunition ” wherever it occurs, the words “or
explosive.”


( h .) Clause 7 thereof is amended by inserting, after the word
“ ammunition ” in paragraph (a), the words “or explosives.”
( c.) Clause 7 thereof is further amended by inserting, after the word
“ammunition” in paragraphs (c) and (d), the words “or
explosive.”
3. In this regulation and in the said War Regulations of the 20th
day of September, 1915, as so amended the word “ explosive ” shall,
without restricting the generality of its meaning, include all detonating
substances or appliances, and all articles, appliances, and substances
of which an explosive forms part; but does not include—
(a.) “Ammunition” within the meaning of the said War Regu-
lations :
(b.) Cartridges for shot-guns of a kind ordinarily used in New Zea-
land for sporting purposes :
(c.) Explosives belonging to or supplied by any Department of the
Executive Government and lawfully in the possession or
custody of any member of the Defence Forces or the Police
Force, or of any other person :
(d.) Fireworks, as defined in Class 7 of the regulations under the
Explosive and Dangerous Goods Act, 1908, dated the 27th day
of July, 1914.
4. Every person who manufactures or keeps an explosive in breach
of the provisions of the Explosive and Dangerous Goods Act, 1908, or
of any regulation made thereunder, or who does any act with intent
so to manufacture or keep an explosive, shall be guilty of an offence
against the War Regulations Act, 1914, and shall be liable accordingly.
5. These regulations shall come into force on the day after the publi-
cation thereof in the Gazette.
F. D. THOMSON,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 3rd April, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations relating to the Sale of Intoxicating Liquor
made hy Order in Council dated the 2nd April , 1918.
Whereas by Order in Council dated the twenty-first day of August, one
thousand nine hundred and sixteen, and published in the Gazette of the
same day, the Governor-General of the Dominion of New Zealand, in
pursuance of the War Regulations Act, 1914, and its amendments, made
certain regulations relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor: And
whereas it is expedient to amend the said regulations:


Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Do-
minion of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of
the Executive Council of the said Dominion, and in pursuance and
exercise of the powers conferred on him by the War Regulations Act.
1914, and its amendments, doth hereby amend the said regulations of
the twenty-first day of August, one thousand nine hundred and sixteen
in the manner set forth in the Schedule hereto.
SCHEDULE.
1. When a bar-attendant is convicted of an offence against the War
Regulations of the 21st day of August, 1916, relating to the sale of intoxi-
cating liquor, and has not previously, whether before or after the date
of this Order in Council, been convicted of an offence against the said
regulations, the convicting Magistrate may in and by the conviction,
if in his discretion he thinks fit so to do, order that the disqualifi-
cation imposed by clause Bof the said regulations shall not take effect,
or that the period thereof shall be reduced to such period as the Magis-
trate thinks fit.
F. D. THOMSON,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealandl Gazette , 16th April, 1918. j
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the 16th April,
1918 . revoking the Regulations with respect to the Sale and Purchase of
Hides and Calf-skins.
Whereas by Order in Council of the twenty-fourth day of April, one
thousand nine hundred and seventeen, published in the New Zealand
Gazette of the same date, regulations were made, under the authority
of the War Regulations Act, 1914, prohibiting, inter alia, the sale and
purchase of hides and calf-skins otherwise than to or by the New Zealand
Government: And whereas it is now expedient to revoke the said regu-
lations so far as they relate to the matter aforesaid.
Now, therefore, I, Arthur William de Brito Savile, Earl of Liverpool,
Governor-General of the Dominion of New Zealand, acting by and with
the advice and consent of the Executive Council of that Dominion, and
in pursuance of the War Regulations Act, 1914, and its amendments,
do hereby revoke clauses three, four, and five of the regulations made
under that Act by the aforesaid Order in Council of the twenty-fourth
dav of April, one thousand nine hundred and seventeen.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 30ch April, 1918. |
Additional War Regulations under Section 35, Paragraphs (a) (h) and fc)
ofthe War Legislation Act, 1917, made by Order in Council dated the
30th day of April, 1918.
Whereas by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917 it is
tlI° V w ed S'*' w- Governor-General in Council may, by regulations under
the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions as, having regard
o the exigencies of the present war or the conditions created thereby
he thinks advisable, inter alia, for the following purposes, that is to
say .
(a.) For prohibiting or restricting the use of labour or capital in
or in connection with or for the purposes of any industry, undertaking
or purpose that may be deemed by the Governor-General to be not essen-
tial or tobe only partially essential for the public welfare;
(6.) For prohibiting or restricting the registration in New Zealand
ot companies proposing to carry on business in New Zealand, and for
prohibiting or restricting the issue of shares or debentures by any com-
pany registered in New Zealand; and
(c.) For prohibiting the commencement of business in New Zealand
by any foreign company, or for imposing such restrictions and condi-
tions as may be deemed advisable on any such company proposing to
commence business in New Zealand, or on any foreign company carrying
on business in New Zealand: J y ®
And whereas pursuant to the authority conferred on the Governor-
General in Council as aforesaid it is desirable to make the regulations
hereinafter set forth : 6
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, and in pursuance and exercise of
the powers conferred on him in that behalf by section thirtv-five of the
e £ lB ! atl ? n ct > and of all other powers and* authorities
enabling him in that behalf, doth hereby make the following regulations
under the War Regulations Act, 1914; and doth hereby deefare that
these regulations shall come into force on the first day of May one
thousand nine hundred and eighteen.
REGULATIONS.
Restriction op New Development Works,
L For the purposes of these regulations the term “development
works the erection (including the repair and extension) of
any building the installation of any plant or machinery, the construc-
tion of any drainage-works, harbour-works, or waterworks, the com-
mencement of any mining-works, and the formation or construction of
any road, bridge, railway, or tramway.


2. On and after the coming into force of these regulations it shall
not be lawful for any local authority or for any person or body corporate
to undertake or commence any development works, or to enter into
any contract for any such works during the continuance of these regula-
tions, without having first obtained, pursuant to these regulations, the
consent of the Minister of Finance so to do.
3. Nothing in the foregoing regulations shall apply—
(a.) To any development works the total cost or the estimated total
r cost of which does not exceed £3,000; or
(b.) To any building proposed to be erected wholly or principally for
residential purposes; or
(c.) Where any building or other work has been destroyed or damaged
by fire or earthquake, to the reconstruction or repair of such
building or work, so far as the total cost of such reconstruction
or repair does not exceed the amount of insurance-moneys (if
any) paid or payable in respect of the destruction of or damage
to the original building or work as aforesaid.
Companies.
4. (1.) No company or private company registered in New Zealand
either before or after the commencement of these regulations shall,
without the precedent consent of the Minister of Finance, increase its
capital by the creation and issue of new shares, or by the issue of shares
which but for the provisions of these regulations it would be authorized
to issue, or by the calling-up of the amount or any portion of the amount
unpaid in respect of any shares, or by the issue of debentures.
(2.) Every application for the consent of the Minister of Finance
undei this regulation shall state full particulars as to the purposes for
which the proposed increase of capital is required.
5. Where application is made to the Attorney-General for authority
to issue a certificate of the incorporation of any company pursuant to
the provisions in that behalf of clause 24 of the War Regulations of the
3rd day of April, 1916, the Attorney-General may, notwithstanding
that he may be satisfied as to the several matters referred to in the said
clause 24, refuse to authorize the issue of such certificate if he is of
opinion, having regard to the exigencies of the present war and the con-
ditions created thereby, that the objects or any of the objects for which
the company is established are not essential in the public interest.
6. Where application is made to the Attorney-General, by or on
behalf of a company incorporated out of New Zealand, for a license
to carry on business in New Zealand, pursuant to the provisions in
that behalf of clause 25 of the War Regulations of the 3rd April, 1916,
the Attorney-General may, notwithstanding that he may be satisfied as
to the several matters referred to in the said clause 25, refuse to issue
such license if he is of opinion, having regard to the exigencies of the
piesent war and the conditions created thereby, that the business pro-
posed to be carried on in Neiv Zealand is not essential in the public
interest.


General.
7. Applications for the consent of the Minister of Finance under
these regulations shall be made in writing, and may be made in the
first place to the Secretary to the Treasury, at his office in the Govern-
ment Buildings at Wellington.
8. On receipt of any application under these regulations the Secre-
tary to the Treasury shall forthwith place the same before the Minister
of Finance, who may grant or refuse the application, or may grant the
application subject to such conditions as, having regard to the exigencies
of the present war and the conditions created thereby, he thinks fit in
the public interest.
9. Before finally dealing with any application under these regula-
tions the Minister of Finance may refer the same to such person or
persons as he thinks fit for inquiry and report, and may require the
applicant to verify by statutory declaration the facts, or any of the facts,
set forth in such application.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 7th May, 1918. J
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the 7th May,
1918.
Whereas by regulations made under the War Regulations Act, 19U,
and its amendments, on the sixteenth day of March, one thousand nine
hundred and seventeen, and published in the Gazette of the nineteenth
day of the same month, certain provisions were made for the protection
of soldiers against judicial and other process : And whereas it is ex-
pedient that such protection be extended to the guarantors of soldiers
in the manner and to the extent hereinafter set forth :
Now, therefore, I, Arthur William de Brito Savile, Earl of Liverpool,
the Governor-General of the Dominion of New Zealand, acting by and
with the advice and consent of the Executive Council of the said Do-
minion. and in pursuance of the War Regulations Act, 1914, and its
amendments, do hereby make the following additional regulations under
that Act, and do hereby declare that the regulations hereby made shall
be read together with and deemed part of the hereinbefore-recited regula-
tions of the sixteenth day of March, one thousand nine hundred and
seventeen, and shall also be read together with and deemed part of the
War Regulations of the tenth day of November, one thousand nine
hundred and fourteen.


REGULATIONS.
Protection of the Guarantors of Soldiers against Judicial and other
Process.
1. Without the previous consent in writing of the Attorney-General, it
shall not be lawful for any person to issue or be concerned in the issue of
any process of execution against the property of a guarantor of a
soldier in pursuance of any judgment, decree, or order of any Court in
its civil jurisdiction obtained against the guarantor in respect of the
guaranteed obligation, whether so obtained before or after the making
of these regulations, or to continue or be concerned in the continuance
of any such process of execution, whether commenced before or after
the making of these regulations.
2. Without the previous consent of the Attorney-General, it shall
not be lawful for any person to file a bankruptcy petition against a
guarantor of a soldier in respect of any debt or liability incurred by
reason of the guaranteed obligation.
3. In these regulations the expression “guarantor of a soldier”
means a person liable upon any covenant or contract in respect of the
obligation whereof he is legally or equitably entitled to be indemnified
by a soldier.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 28th May, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the 21st
May, 1918, restricting Remittances of Money from New Zealand.
Whereas by the War Regulations Act, 1914, the Governor-General in
Council is empowered to make such regulations as he thinks necessary
for the prohibition of any acts which in his opinion are injurious to
the effective conduct of the military operations of His Majesty during
the present war; And whereas, having regard to the necessity of pro-
curing revenues adequate for the conduct of the war, it is in the opinion
of the Governor-General in Council expedient to impose restrictions on
the transmission of moneys from New Zealand for investment elsewhere :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of the said Dominion, and in pursuance of the War
Regulations Act, 1914, doth hereby make the following regulations under
the said Act.
REGULATIONS.
1. Without the permission in writing of the Minister of Finance no
person resident in New Zealand shall either directly or indirectly, and


either on his own behalf or on behalf of any other person resident in New
Zealand, send any remittance exceeding .£l,OOO out of New Zealand—
(a.) For the purpose of making or subscribing to any loan or sub-
scribing to any issue of capital out of New Zealand ; or
(b.) For the purpose of purchasing any land, shares, stocks, deben-
tures, securities, or other property whatsoever (other than
merchandise) if the property is out of New Zealand; or
(c.) For any purpose otherwise than in the ordinary course of the
business of the person by whom or on whose behalf the re-
mittance is sent.
2. In these regulations the expression “ person resident in New Zea-
land ” includes any company or other body corporate which is incor-
porated in New Zealand, or which, wherever incorporated, carries on
business in New Zealand.
3. Every reference in these regulations to the sending of a remit-
tance out of New Zealand shall be deemed to include a reference to
placing money in New Zealand at the disposal of a person not resident
in New Zealand.
4. No banker or other person shall be a party to the sending of
any remittance exceeding £l,OOO out of New Zealand by or on behalf
of any person resident in New Zealand, except in pursuance of a written
statement made by that person or his agent setting forth the purpose
for which the remittance is intended.
5. Every person who commits any breach of these regulations, or who
makes any such written statement as aforesaid which is false or mis-
leading in any particular, or who makes any false or misleading repre-
sentation to the Minister of Finance for the purpose of obtaining his
permission under these regulations, shall be guilty of an offence, and
shall be liable under the War Regulations Act accordingly.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 29th May, 1918.]
Additional War Regidations made hy Order in Council dated the
21st May , 1918. — Amendment of Coal Trade Regidations.
Whereas by an Order in Council dated the fifth day of February, one
thousand nine hundred and seventeen, as amended by an Order in
Council dated the twenty-eighth day of August, one thousand nine
hundred and seventeen, certain regulations known as the Coal Trade
Regulations were made by the Governor-General in Council pursuant to
the War Regulations Amendment Act, 1916 :
And whereas, having regard to the exigencies of the present war
and the conditions created thereby, it is deemed advisable to further
amend those regulations in the manner hereinafter appearing :


Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of the said Dominion, and in pursuance of the War
Regulations Amendment Act, 1916, doth hereby make the regulations
hereinafter set forth, and doth hereby declare that the regulations hereby
made shall be read together with and deemed part of the Coal Trade
Regulations hereinbefore referred to.
REGULATIONS.
1. Nothing in these regulations shall apply—
(a.) To any coal delivered pursuant to a permit issued by a Coal
Trade Committee or by the Minister in Charge in pursuance
of the provisions in that behalf of clause sof the amending
Coal Trade Regulations of the 28th August, 1917; or
( b .) To any coal delivered elsewhere than in an area within which
these regulations have been declared by the Minister in Charge,
by notice in the Gazette, to be in force.
2. (1.) The Minister in Charge may, by notice in the Gazette, declare
that these regulations shall be in force generally throughout New Zea-
land, or in such area or areas as may be specified in such notice.
(2.) Any notice issued by the Minister in Charge under this regulation
may be in like manner revoked.
3. Subject to the provisions of clause lof these regulations it shall
not be lawful for any person to deliver or be concerned in the delivery
of any screened coal or of any coal-nuts to any person in any area
in which these regulations are in force, unless at the same time he
delivers to that person an equal quantity by weight of steam coal or
of small coal or coke.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, Bth June, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
J/.th June, 1918.
REGULATIONS.
1. (1.) Except as hereinafter provided no person shall sell or supply
any intoxicating liquor —
' (a.) To any member of an Expeditionary Force (after the date when
such member has first been called into a camp of military
training) while such member is undergoing medical or curative
treatment as a patient in, or an outpatient of, any hospital
or other institution, whether such sale or supply takes place
within such hospital or other institution as aforesaid or else-
where ; or


(b.) To any person who has been discharged from an Expeditionary
Force, and who is undergoing medical or curative treatment
as a patient in, or an outpatient of, any hospital or other
institution, whether such sale or supply takes place within
such hospital or other institution as aforesaid or elsewhere.
(2.) Nothing in the foregoing provisions shall apply to the supply
of intoxicating liquor to any person by or pursuant to the directions
or with the authority of any medical officer or medical practitioner
having control or care of that person.
2. It shall be a good defence in any proceedings for a breach of these
regulations if the defendant proves that he did not know and had no
reasonable ground for suspecting that the person to whom he sold or
supplied the intoxicating liquor was a member of an Expeditionary
Force, or had been discharged from an Expeditionary Force, and was
undergoing medical or curative treatment in any hospital or other
institution.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 21st June, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
18th June , 1918.
In pursuance and exercise of the powers conferred on him by the War
Regulations Act, 1914, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Do-
minion of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of
the Executive Council of the said Dominion, doth hereby amend in the
manner set forth in the Schedule hereto certain regulations (relating
to prohibited publications) made under the said Act by Order in Council
dated the eleventh day of October, one thousand nine hundred and
fifteen, and also certain regulations (relating to seditious utterances)
made under the said Act by Order in Council dated the fourth day of
December, one thousand nine hundred and sixteen.
SCHEDULE.
1. Clause 2 of the hereinbefore-recited regulations of the 11th day of
October, 1915, is hereby amended by omitting from paragraph (a) the
words “Minister of Defence,” and substituting the words “Attorney-
General.”
2. All notices heretofore issued by the Minister of Defence under the
authority of the said regulations and unrevoked on the making of this
Order in Council shall hereafter be deemed to have been issued by the
Attorney-General under the authority of the said regulations as hereby
amended, and shall operate accordingly.


3. When any book or other publication is imported into New
Zealand, and the Minister of Customs deems that the sale or distri-
bution of that book or publication would or might be injurious to
the public interest in respect of the present war, he may detain such book
or publication, or cause the same to be detained by a Collector of
Customs for such period as the said Minister thinks fit.
4. Clause 4 of the hereinbefore-recited regulations of the 4th day of
December, 1916, is hereby amended by adding thereto the following
paragraph :
(o.) To insult, offend, annoy, or discredit, whether in New Zealand
or elsewhere, the subjects, or any class or classes of the subjects,
of any State which is in alliance with His Majesty in the pre-
sent war with Germany, or which is at peace with His Majesty.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 24th June, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated, the
2J/.th dune. 1918.
REGULATIONS.
1. Every person who trespasses on a guarded wharf shall be guilty of
an offence, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
accordingly.
2. In these regulations “guarded wharf” means any wharf or part
of a wharf the entrance to which from the landward side is guarded by
an armed guard stationed there by a naval or military authority in
pursuance of clause 8 of the regulations made on the 10th day of Novem-
ber, 1914, under the War Regulations Act, 1914.
3. For the purposes of these regulations every person shall be deemed
to trespass on a guarded wharf who enters upon that wharf, whether
from the seaward or the landward side, otherwise than in pursuance of
a permit granted by a naval or military authority.
4. An officer or any such armed guard as aforesaid, or any person
authorized for that purpose by a naval or military authority, may arrest
without warrant any person who is reasonably suspected of having com-
mitted or of being about to commit any breach of these regulations.
5. Nothing in these regulations shall make it an offence for the
master or any member of the crew or any passenger of a ship lawfully
lying at a guarded wharf to land upon that wharf from such ship.
6. It shall not be lawful for any person without the written permit
of a naval or military authority to approach within fifty yards of a
guarded wharf in any pleasure boat of any kind or size, or in any other


boat, launch, or vessel of less than 15 tons gross register, not being an
official naval, military, or Harbour Board craft.
7. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed part of
the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 24th June, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
2J/.th June , 1918. —Providing for Compulsory Notional Service by
Alien Enemies and other Persons of Alien Enemy Descent.
Whereas by section twenty-live of the Finance Act, 1918, the Governor-
General is authorized to make War Regulations for procuring, exacting,
enforcing, controlling, and regulating national service, as defined in the
said section, during the present war : And whereas it is expedient to
make regulations accordingly with respect to services required to be
rendered by alien enemies and persons of alien enemy descent as herein-
after provided :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, in pursuance and exercise of the powers conferred on him
by the War Regulations Act, 1914, and its amendments, and by section
twenty-five of the Finance Act, 1918, and acting by and with the advice
and consent of the Executive Council of the said Dominion, doth hereby
make the following War Regulations for the purposes aforesaid.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Alien Service Regulations.
2. In these regulations—
“ Commissioner ” means the Commissioner appointed for the
purposes of these regulations :
“ Alien enemy ” means and includes every person who is or has at
at any time been a subject of any State with which His Majesty
is now at war, notwithstanding that such person may be also
by birth, naturalization, or otherwise a British subject, or may
. have in any manner ceased to be a subject of any such State :
“ Alien reservist ” means, without in any manner restricting the
foregoing definition of alien enemy, a person who, having been
called up for service under the Military Service Act, 1916, and
not having served beyond the seas with the New Zealand
Expeditionary Force, has leave of absence from military service,
and whose father is or at any time was a subject of any State
with which His Majesty is now at war:


“ Medical Officer ” means any duly qualified medical practitioner
named by the Commissioner in a requirement by the Commissioner
under these regulations:
“ National service ” means any work or service in the employment
of the Executive Government of New Zealand or of any local
authority in connection with any road or railway construc-
tion or drainage works, or in the employment of the Executive
Government aforesaid or of any private employer in connection
with any pastoral or agricultural operations, and all such forms
of service are hereby declared to be essential to the public welfare
for the purposes of section 25 of the Finance Act, 1918.
3. The Minister of Defence may, by notice under his hand and gazetted,
appoint any person to be the Commissioner for the purposes of these
regulations.
4. (1.) The Commissioner may from time to time, by notice under
his hand, require any alien enemy or alien reservist to report himself, at
any time and place to be specified in the notice, to such person as may be
therein mentioned or designated, for the purpose of becoming employed
in national service.
(2.) A notice under these regulations may be delivered personally or
may be sent by registered letter addressed to the person to whom it relates
at his last known place of residence.
5. (1.) Every person who receives a notice under these regulations
commits an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable under
the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly, if he—
(a.) Fails without reasonable grounds, the proof whereof shall be on
him, to report himself as required by the notice ; or
(6.) Having reported himself as required by the notice, fails or refuses
to accept such employment in any national service as may be
offered to him by or with the approval of the Commissioner on
such terms and conditions as may, subject to the provisions of
these regulations, be offered to him.
(2.) Every person employed in any national service under these regula-
tions commits an offence who refuses or neglects to perform any work
required of or undertaken by him in connection with such service, or fails
to perform such work with due diligence, or leaves such work without the
permission of the Commissioner or of his employer, or of some person acting
with the authority of the Commissioner or his employer, or who assaults
any person having direction or authority over him in the performance of
his duties, or uses any threatening or abusive or insulting language to any
such person.
6. (1.) Any person employed by the Executive Government of New
Zealand or by any local authority in any national service under these
regulations may, at the option of the person for the time being in charge
of the works on which such person is employed, be employed either on
piecework or at an hourly or daily or weekly rate of wages. The price for


piecework shall be fixed by the person for the time being in charge of such
works as aforesaid.
(2.) Where two or more persons are employed on piecework as
aforesaid in respect of the same work they may be employed as co-
operators on such co-operative system as may be approved by the person
for the time being in charge of the works.
$(3.) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this clause, every person
employed in any national service pursuant to these regulations shall be
paid therefor at a rate to be approved by the Commissioner, not exceeding
in any case the rate for the time being current in the locality for the same
or similar works.
7. (1.) Any person who claims that he is medically Unfit to perform
any work or service required of him pursuant to these regulations may
be required by the. Commissioner to submit himself for medical exami-
nation by a Medical Officer to be nominated by the Commissioner in that
behalf.
(2.) Where such Medical Officer reports that such person is medically
unfit at the time of the examination the Commissioner may at any later
time or times, and from time to time, require such person to again submit
himself for examination by the same or any other Medical Officer.
(3.) The report to the Commissioner by the Medical Officer shall be
conclusive evidence of the medical fitness or unfitness of such person at the
date of such report to perform the work or service required of him. The
Medical Officer may report that such person is medically fit for other work
or service, and in such case the Commissioner may substitute and re-
quire such other work or service in lieu of the work or service originally
required.
(4.) Every person who, having been required as aforesaid to submit
himself for medical examination, fails without reasonable grounds (the
proof whereof shall lie on him) to comply with such requirement, or who
knowingly misleads or attempts to mislead any Medical Officer in the
course of such medical examination, commits an offence against these
regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
8. (I.) It shall be the duty of all alien enemies and alien reservists,
and all persons employing any such alien enemy or alien reservist, to
furnish to the Commissioner, at his request, all such particulars as he may
from time to time require with respect to the names, places of residence,
and occupations of such alien enemies and alien reservists, and also to
inform the Commissioner of the termination of any contract lor the
employment of any such person.
(2.) Any person who fails to supply to the Commissioner any information
required of him by the Commissioner pursuant to this regulation, or who
knowingly supplies false or misleading information, commits an offence
against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 12th July, 1918.]
Regulations as to the Importation, Salt, and Distribution of Petrol
made by Order in Council dated the 9th July, 1918.
Whereas by section forty-six of the Customs Act, 1913, as extended
by section two of the Regulation of Trade and Commerce Amendment
Act, 1915, it is enacted that the Governor-General in Council may
prohibit the importation of any goods if the prohibition of the im-
portation thereof is in his opinion necessary in the public interest, and
that such prohibition may be either absolute or such as to allow the
importation of such goods subject to any conditions or restrictions : And
whereas in the opinion of the Governor-General it is necessary in the public
interest, by reason of the conditions created by the present war, to prohibit
the importation of petrol to the extent and in the manner hereinafter appear-
ing: And whereas by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917,
it is enacted that the Governor-General in Council may by regulations
under the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions as, having
regard to the exigencies of the present war or the conditions created thereby,
he thinks advisable for the maintenance, control, regulation, and manage-
ment of any industry or business that may be regarded by him as essential
for or affecting the public welfare : And whereas the importation, sale,
distribution, and supply of petrol is in the opinion of the Governor-General
an industry or business essential for the public welfare, and it is desir-
able to make regulations for its control and regulation according!}’: And
whereas by section two of the Regulation of Trade and Commerce
Act, 1914, it is enacted that the Governor-General in Council may by Order
in Council gazetted fix and determine the maximum price in New Zealand
of any class of goods : And whereas it is desirable that such last-mentioned
power should be exercised in respect of petrol:
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the Executive
Council of that Dominion, doth hereby, in exercise of the several authorities
aforesaid, make the regulations contained in Part I of the Schedule hereto ;
and doth hereby, in exercise of the powers conferred as aforesaid by the
Customs Act, 1913, make the regulations contained in Part II of the
Schedule hereto ; and doth hereby, in exercise of the powers conferred
as aforesaid by the War Legislation Act, 1917, make under the War Regula-
tions Act, 1914, the regulations contained in Part 111 of the Schedule hereto ;
and doth hereby, in exercise of the powers conferred as aforesaid by the
Regulation of Trade and Commerce Act, 1914, make the regulations con-
tained in Part IV of the Schedule hereto.


SCHEDULE.
Part I. —General.
1. The regulations contained in this Schedule may be cited as the Petrol
Regulations.
2. In this Schedule—
“ Minister in Charge ” means a member of the Executive Council
charged by the Governor-General with the administration of
the Petrol Regulations :
“ Board of Trade ” means the Board of Trade established under
the Cost of Living Act, 1915 :
“ Petrol ” means and includes petrol, benzine, motor-spirit, naphtha,
gasolene, distillate, naphthalate, and every other form or pro-
duct of petroleum (with the exception of benzoline) which gives
off an inflammable vapour at a temperature of less than 100
degrees Fahrenheit.
3. All powers and authorities conferred by these regulations on the
Board of Trade may be exercised by any two members of that Board.
4. For the assistance of the Minister in Charge and the Board of Trade
in the exercise of the powers and authorities conferred by these regula-
tions there shall be an advisory committee, to be known as the Petrol Com-
mittee, which shall consist of such representatives of those who are engaged
in the business of importing or selling petrol as the Minister in Charge, on
the recommendation of the Board of Trade, may from time to time appoint,
to hold office during his pleasure.
Part ll.— lmportation of Petrol.
5. No petrol shall be imported into New Zealand except in pursuance
of an import-license issued to the importer by the Minister in Charge on the
recommendation of the Board of Trade.
6. Every such import-license shall be revocable at the will of the
Minister in Charge.
7. Any such import-license may either relate to a specific consign-
ment of petrol, or may be a general authority to import petrol during the
currency of the license with or without any restriction as to quantity, time,
or port of importation.
8. No such import-license shall be granted to any importer until the
importer has entered into a written agreement with the Minister in Charge
on behalf of the Crown containing the terms and conditions following,
together with any other terms or conditions which the Minister on the
advice of the Board of Trade thinks necessary for the due control of the
importation, sale, supply, or distribution of petrol:—
(a.) That the agreement will remain in force during the currency of the
license and until the licensee has disposed of all petrol imported
in pursuance thereof:


(fe.) That the licensee will, when he deals with a consumer, limit that
consumer to a quantity of petrol not exceeding four weeks’ supply,
or such greater or less supply as may be determined upon from
time to time by the Minister in Charge on the advice of the Board
of Trade :
(c.) That the licensee will, when he deals with a wholesale or retail
distributor, limit that distributor to a quantity of petrol not
exceeding four weeks’ supply, or such greater or less supply
as may be determined from time to time by the Minister in Charge
on the advice of the Board of Trade ;
( d .) That when the licensee knows or has reasonable grounds to suspect
that a consumer or distributor is already in possession of more
than the supply specified in the two last preceding paragraphs, he
will refuse to supply that consumer or distributor with any
further petrol during such period as will reasonably suffice to
reduce his stocks to the quantity so prescribed :
ie.) That the licensee in supplying petrol will give preference to those
requiring it for essential uses as defined by the Minister in Charge
on the advice of the Board of Trade :
{/.) That the licensee will keep accurate records of all sales of petrol,
and will permit such records to be inspected at all times by any
officer authorized for that purpose by the Minister in Charge ;
(g.) That at the request of the Minister in Charge the licensee will
refuse supplies of petrol to any consumer or distributor until
that consumer or distributor has furnished to the Minister such
particulars as he may require with regard to the holding, dis-
position, or use of supplies of petrol by that consumer or
distributor :
{ h.) That the licensee will not sell petrol at prices in excess of those
which may be approved from time to time by the Board of 1 rade :
(i.) That the licensee will from time to time as required make to the
Minister in Charge or to the Board of Trade such returns relative
to the business of the licensee in regard to petrol as the Minister
or Board may require for the purpose of the effective control
of the importation, sale, supply, or distribution of petrol, such
returns to be verified by statutory declaration if required .
(j.) That before the issue of any such license the licensee will give
security to the Crown for the due observance of the terms and
conditions of such agreement in the sum of £5OO, or such lesser
sum as the Minister may on the advice of the Board of Trade
think sufficient, such security to be given by the deposit of money
with the Minister in Charge, or in such other manner as the
Minister on the advice of the Board of Trade may think sufficient.
(A*.) That if any dispute arises between the licensee and the Minister
in Charge as to the interpretation or effect of such agreement,
or as to'any breach thereof by the licensee, the dispute shall be
referred to the Board of Trade, whose decision shall be final.


Part lll— Purchase op Petrol.
9. (1.) Save in pursuance of a distributing license issued by the Minister
in Charge on the recommendation of the Board of Trade, it shall not be
lawful for any person to acquire under a contract of sale or otherwise (whether
such contract is made before or after the coming into operation of these
regulations) the ownership or possession of more than four thousand gallons
of petrol at one time (other than petrol imported by himself).
(2.) The exercise by any person of any powers of disposition over any
petrol not then already in the ownership or possession of that person shall
be deemed to be an acquisition of the possession thereof within the meaning
of this regulation.
(3.) All petrol the ownership or possession of which is acquired by any
person, whether from the same or from different persons, within any period
of twenty-eight days shall be deemed to have been acquired at one time
within the meaning of this regulation.
10. A license granted under this Part of these regulations shall be
revocable at the will of the Minister in Charge.
11. Any such license may be granted on such terms and conditions,
whether as to the disposition of the petrol to be so acquired or otherwise,
as the Minister in Charge on the advice of the Board of Trade thinks
necessary in the public interest for the due control of the sale, supply, or
distribution of petrol.
12. The Board of Trade may from time to time require any person to
make to the Board a return of all stocks of petrol held by him, and it
shall be the duty of that person forthwith to make such return accordingly,
verified if the Board so requires by a statutory declaration.
13. Every person shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable under
the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly who —
(a.) Acquires the ownership or possession of petrol in breach of the
provisions of this Part of these regulations ; or
(6.) Commits any breach of the terms or conditions on which a license
has been granted to him under this Part of these regulations ; or
(c.) Obtains any such license on a false representation ; or
(d.) Fails to make any return required from him in pursuance of these
regulations ; or
(e.) Makes any such return which is false in any respect; or
(/.) Makes any false representation for the purpose of obtaining a supply
of petrol from any other person.
Part IV. — Price of Petrol.
14. In this Part of these regulations—
The term “ Class A ” means petrol, motor-spirit, benzine, naphtha,
and gasolene:
The term “ Class B ” means distillate and naphthalate :
The term “ port ” means a port of entry under the Customs Act,
1913.


Per Case of
Per Tin of
Less than
not less than
not less than
4 Gallons.
8 Gallons.
4 Gallons.
Per Gallon.
Class A
27/6
13/9
3/6
Class B
22/6
11/3
.3/-
At Napier and Timaru.
Class A
.. 28/-
14/-
3/7
Class B
23/-
11/6
3/1
At Wanganui, New Plymouth, and
Gisborne.
Class A
.. 29/-
14/6
3/9
Class B
24/-
12/-
3/3
At Invercargill.
Class A
29/6
14/9
3/9
Class B
24/6
12/3
3/3
15. The maximum retail price of petrol at the ports named in the
following table shall be the price set out in that table.*
At Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, and Dunedin.
16. At any place other than the aforesaid ports the maximum retail
price of petrol shall be the maximum retail price fixed as aforesaid for the
port from which the seller customarily obtains his supply of petrol, or
where there is no such customary port of supply, then for the nearest port,
together in each case with such addition to the maximum retail price for
that port as is equivalent to the actual cost of transportation from that
port to the place of sale.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 12th July, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
9th July, 1918.
REGULATIONS.
1. In these regulations “military papers” means, in respect of any
person, —
(a.) A certificate of his enrolment in the Expeditionary Force Reserve
established under the Military Service Act, 1916, signed by
the Government Statistician ; or
* See amending regulation of 30th July, 1918, p. 165.


(b.) A certificate of his discharge in consequence of disablement or
ill health, from an Expeditionary Force or from some* other
portion of His Majesty’s Forces, after service beyond the seas
during the present war; or
(c.) An instrument granting him leave from military service in an
Expeditionary Force for a period not yet expired.
2. (1.) Any man who may reasonably be supposed by any constable
to be of military age within the meaning of the Military Service Act,
1916, and who is not in the uniform of the New Zealand Defence Forces
or of some other portion of the Military or Naval Forces of His Majesty,
may be required by that constable there and then to produce his
military papers.
(2.) Any person who, on being required as aforesaid to produce his
military papers, fails to produce any such papers may be detained by
the constable and kept in custody for such time, not exceeding forty-
eight hours, as may be reasonably required for the purpose of ascertain-
ing his identity and whether there are reasonable grounds for charging
him with an offence against the Military Service Act, 1916. or the Army
Act.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 26th July, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
23rd July, 1918.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Censorship Regulations.
2. When the Attorney-General is satisfied that the exercise of the
authority hereby conferred upon him is advisable for the purpose of
securing the public safety during the present war, he may give or cause
to be given to the proprietor, publisher, editor, or printer of any
periodical publication a notice—
(a.) That no issue of that publication is to be published until it has
been submitted to censorship under these regulations, and
the publication thereof has been authorized by a Censor; or
(b.) That any matter or kind of matter specified in the notice is not
to be published in any issue of that publication until the
matter so to be published has been submitted to censorship
under these regulations, and the publication thereof has been
authorized by a Censor.
■3. When the Attorney-General is satisfied that the exercise of the
authority hereby conferred upon him is advisable for the purpose of


securing the public safety during the present war, he may give or cause
to be given to the proprietor or manager of any printing-press a notice—
(a.) That no matter is to be printed on that printing-press until such
matter has been submitted to censorship under these regula-
tions, and the publication thereof has been authorized by a
Censor; or
(b.) That any matter or kind of matter specified in the notice is not
to be printed on that printing-press until the matter so to be
printed has been submitted to censorship under these regula-
tions, and the publication thereof has been authorized by a
Censor.
4. Every notice given under the preceding regulations shall remain
in force until revoked by the Attorney-General.
5. (1.) The Attorney-General may appoint such persons as he thinks
fit as Censors for the purpose of these regulations, and may at any time
cancel any such appointment.
(2.) All matter submitted for censorship under these regulations shall
be examined by a Censor so appointed, who if satisfied that its publi-
cation is not prejudicial to the public safety shall approve the same for
publication, but if not so satisfied shall refuse such approval.
6. Except where other provision is made in that behalf by any such
notice as aforesaid, all matter required by any such notice to be sub-
mitted to censorship shall for that purpose be transmitted to the Chief
of the General Staff of the Defence Forces at Wellington.
7. If any issue of a periodical publication which is required to be
submitted to censorship under these regulations is published without
being so submitted or without the approval of a Censor appointed under
these regulations, or if any matter required to be submitted to censor-
ship under these regulations is published in any issue of a periodical
publication without having been so submitted or without the approval
of a Censor so appointed, the publisher, editor, and printer of that
publication, and every person knowingly concerned in the publishing of
such issue, shall be severally guilty of an offence against these regula-
tions, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
accordingly.
8. (1.) If any matter which is required to be submitted to censorship
under these regulations before being printed on any printing-press is
printed on that press without having been so submitted, or without the
approval of a Censor appointed under these regulations, the printer
and every person knowingly concerned in the printing thereof shall be
severally guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be
liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
(2.) The printing of a proof for revision or for submission to censor-
ship shall not be an offence against these regulations.
9. (1.) For the purposes of these regulations a periodical publication
shall be deemed to be identical with any periodical publication which
is published in succession thereto or in substitution therefor, and which
has the same proprietor, publisher, editor, or printer, and every notice
6—War Begs.


given under these regulations in respect of the former publication shall
continue in force with respect to any such succeeding or substituted
publication.
(2.) For the purposes of these regulations a printing-press shall be
deemed to preserve its identity notwithstanding any change of name or
otherwise, if the proprietor, manager, premises, or plant remains the
same; and every notice given under these regulations shall remain in
force accordingly.
10. For the purposes of these regulations every issue of a periodical
publication shall be deemed to include as part thereof every document
which is printed or published for sale or distribution along with copies
of that publication.
11. Every person who commits an offence against the Printers and
Newspapers Registration Act, 1908, shall also be guilty of an offence
against these regulations, and shall be liable under the War Regulations
Act, 1914, accordingly.
12. Every notice authorized by these regulations to be given to the
proprietor, publisher, editor, or printer of a periodical publication or
to the proprietor or manager of a printing-press may (without excluding
any other mode of delivery) be given by leaving the same on the pre-
mises at which the periodical publication is published, printed, or
managed, or on the premises on which the printing-press is situated,
as the case may be, and may be addressed to such proprietor, publisher,
editor, printer, or manager by description as such, and without naming
him.
13. The term “ public safety ” as used in these regulations shall be
deemed to include (without in any manner limiting the scope of the
term) the effective conduct of the military or naval operations of His
Majesty during the present war, and also the maintenance of industries
essential for the public welfare, and also the prevention of seditious
utterances as defined by the War Regulations of the 4th December, 1916.
14. (1.) Clause 2 of the regulations made under the War Regulations
Act, 1914, on the 11th October, 1915, and relating to prohibited publi-
cations, is hereby amended by revoking paragraph (d) thereof, and
by adding to that clause the following paragraphs :
“ (e.) No person shall print a prohibited publication.
“ (/.) No person shall deliver a prohibited publication to any other
person, or have in his possession a prohibited publication
for the purpose of such delivery.
“ (g.) No act done in good faith by an officer of police or other
servant of the Crown in the execution of his office shall con-
stitute an offence against this regulation.
“ (h.) Every abridgment or extract from or abstract of a prohibited
publication shall be itself a prohibited publication.
“ (i.) Every periodical publication which is published in succession
to or in substitution for a prohibited periodical publication,
and which has the same proprietor, publisher, editor, or
printer, shall be itself a prohibited publication.”


(2.) Clause 2 of the aforesaid regulations of the 11th October, 1915,
as amended by these present regulations, shall apply to all prohibited
publications, whether the sale thereof has been prohibited before or after
the making of these present regulations.
15. (1.) Save in a newspaper duly registered under the Printers and
Newspapers Registration Act, 1908, no person shall print any matter
relating to or referring to the present war unless such matter has been
submitted to censorship, and approved for publication by a Censor ap-
pointed under these regulations.
(2.) No person shall do any act with intent to procure the printing
elsewhere than in New Zealand, but for sale, publication, or distribution
in New Zealand, of any matter relating or referring to the present war,
unless such matter has been submitted to censorship, and approved for
publication by a Censor appointed under these regulations.
(3.) The printing of a proof for revision or for submission to censor-
ship shall not be an offence against this regulation.
(4.) No person shall sell or distribute, or have in his possession for
sale or distribution, any printed matter which has been printed or the
printing of which has been procured in breach of this regulation.
(5.) For the purposes of this regulation printing shall be deemed to
include all mechanical methods of multiplying a document.
16. No person shall print or publish in any periodical publication,
or in any other printed document, —
(a.) Any matter or statement which in any manner indicates, or may
be reasonably supposed to indicate, the existence in that docu-
ment of any omission, alteration, or addition due to the
exercise of the powers of censorship conferred by these regu-
lations; or
(b.) Any statement or indication that any matter or kind of matter
has been required to be submitted to censorship under these
regulations, or that a Censor has refused his authority for the
printing or publication of any matter or kind of matter.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, Ist August, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
30th July, 1918.
REGULATIONS.
1. (1.) Every British seagoing ship of 1,600 tons gross tonnage or
upwards registered in New Zealand, in respect of which a license to
install wireless-telegraph apparatus is or has been granted by the Minister
of Telegraphs, shall be provided with a wireless-telegraph installation,
6*—War Regs.


and shall maintain a wireless-telegraph service, and shall be provided
with two certified operators, together with suitable accommodation for
the apparatus and operators.
(2.) Application to the Minister of Telegraphs, in a form prescribed
by him for the grant of such a license under section 3 of the Post and
Telegraph Amendment Act, 1911, shall, unless a license has before the
making of this regulation been granted in respect of any such ship, be
made by the owner on or before the 20th day of August, 1918.
(3.) The Minister of Telegraphs shall, as and when wireless-telegraph
apparatus and the services of operators become available for the purpose,
cause licenses to be issued in respect of such of those ships as in the
opinion of a Naval Authority should in the national interests be fitted
with such apparatus, and each license shall specify the date as from which
the carrying of such apparatus under this regulation is to be compulsory,
the character of the apparatus, and the qualifications of the operator.
(4.) The Minister of Telegraphs may—
(a.) Extend the time mentioned in any license as the time within
which any apparatus is to be provided; and
(b.) Exempt any ship from all or any of the obligations im-
posed by this regulation.
(5.) If the provisions of this regulation or the terms of any license
granted as herein provided are not complied with in the case of any ship,
the owner of the ship shall be guilty of an offence against this regulation,
and shall be liable accordingly; and if any owner fails to make an appli-
cation in accordance with this regulation, he shall be guilty of an offence
against this regulation, and shall be liable accordingly; and in either
case, if the ship is at any time subsequently found at a port in New
Zealand, the ship may be seized and detained.
2. While a British ship, whether registered in New Zealand or not,
is in waters included within the territorial limits of New Zealand, it
shall be unlawful for any person to do on board that ship and with
respect to the navigation thereof, or to the use of wireless telegraphy
thereon, any act which if done on board that ship on the high seas would
have been an offence against any regulation made under the Imperial
Defence of the Realm Act, 1914, for the purpose of better securing the
public safety and for the time being in force in the United Kingdom;
and every person who does any such act as aforesaid shall be guilty of an
offence against these present regulations, and shall be liable under the
War Regulations Act. 1914, accordingly.
3. (1.) For the purpose of better securing the public safety a Naval
Authority may give to the owner or master of any British ship, whether
registered in New Zealand or not, such orders as the Naval Authority
thinks necessary as to the navigation of that ship or as to the use of
wireless telegraphy on board thereof.
(2.) If any such ship, while in waters included within the territorial
limits of New Zealand, or while on a voyage to or from any port or place
in New Zealand and within three hundred miles of the coast of New
Zealand, is navigated in breach of any orders so given to the owner or
master, or fails to conform to any such order as to the use of wireless


telegraphy, every person knowingly concerned in the breach of such order
shall, whether he is then within the territorial limits of New Zealand or
not, be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable
under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly,
4. These regulations shall be read together with and be deemed part
of the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, Ist August, 1918.]
Amending Regulations as to Maximum Prices of Petrol made by Order
in Council dated the 30th July, 1918.
In pursuance of the powers conferred on him by section two of the Regula-
tion of Trade and Commerce Act, 1914, His Excellency the Governor-
General of the Dominion of New Zealand, acting by and" with the advice
and consent of the Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby
amend, in the manner and to the extent set forth in the Schedule hereto,
Part IV of the Petrol Regulations made on the ninth day of July, one
thousand nine hundred and eighteen, and gazetted on the twelfth day of
that month.
SCHEDULE.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Part IV of the Petrol
Regulations aforesaid, the maximum retail price of Class A petrol per
case containing not less than eight and one-third gallons shall be one
shilling more than the maximum price of such petrol per case of not
less than eight gallons.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 6th August, 1918.]
Regulations imposing Restrictions on the Export of Timber made by
Order in Council dated the 6th August, 1918.
Whereas by section forty-seven of the Customs Act, 1913, as extended
by section twenty-four of the Regulation of Trade and Commerce Act,
1914, it is enacted that the Governor-General may, by Order in Council,
prohibit the exportation of any goods the prohibition of the exportation
of which, is in his opinion necessary in the public interest, and that


such prohibition may be either absolute or such as to allow the exporta-
tion of such goods subject to any conditions or restrictions :
And whereas, in the opinion of the Governor-General, it is neces-
sary in the public interest that the exportation of sawn timber should
be prohibited to the extent and in the manner hereinafter appearing :
And whereas by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917,
it is enacted that the Governor-General in Council may, by regulations
under the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions as, having
regard to the exigencies of the present war or the conditions created
thereby, he thinks advisable for the maintenance, control, regulation,
and management of any industry or business that may be regarded by
him as essential for or affecting the public welfare :
And whereas the manufacture, production, and use of sawn timber
is, in the opinion of the Governor-General, an industry or business
affecting the public welfare, and it is desirable to make regulations for
its control accordingly :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby, in exercise of the
several authorities aforesaid, make the regulations contained in Part I
of the Schedule hereto; and doth hereby, in exercise of the powers con-
ferred as aforesaid by section forty-seven of the Customs Act, 1913, and
section twenty-four of the Regulation of Trade and Commerce Act, 1914,
make the regulations contained in Part II of the Schedule hereto; and
doth hereby, in exercise of the powers conferred as aforesaid by the
War Legislation Act, 1917, make under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
the regulations contained in Part 111 of the Schedule hereto.
SCHEDULE.
Part I.— General,
1. The regulations contained in this Schedule may be cited as the
Timber Regulations.
2. In these regulations—
“ Board of Trade” or “Board” means the Board of Trade
established under the Cost of Living Act, 1915 :
“Minister in Charge” or “Minister” means a member of the
Executive Council for the time being charged by the Governor-
General with the administration of these regulations :
“ Sawmill ” means a mill at which sawn timber is produced from
the log.
3. For the assistance of the Minister in Charge and the Board of
Trade in the exercise of the powers and authorities conferred by these
regulations there may be appointed an advisory committee, to be known
as the Timber Industry Committee, which shall consist of such repre-
sentatives of persons engaged in the business of sawmilling or of ex-
porting timber from New Zealand, or in any business depending upon


a supply of timber, as the Minister in Charge, on the recommendation
of the Board of Trade, may from time to time appoint to hold office
during his pleasure.
4. The owner or manager of every sawmill shall, within twenty-eight
days after the publication of these regulations in the Gazette, furnish to
the Board of Trade particulars as to—
(a.) The name and address of the owner of the mill;
( b .) The location of the mill; and
(c.) The names, addresses, and businesses of all persons who, since
the 31st day of March, 1917, have obtained from the-sawmill
not less than 50,000 superficial feet of sawn timber.
Part ll.— Exportation of Timber.
5. (1.) The Minister in Charge may from time to time determine,
with respect to any sawmill, the minimum quantity of sawn timber of
any kind or grade produced in that sawmill that may be required for
use in New Zealand in any period. Such quantity may be fixed either
definitely as a specified amount of timber, or indefinitely as a frac-
tional part of the output from the mill of timber of the kind or grade
referred to. (Extended by clause 2of 18th February, 1919. Page 186.)
(2.) The quantity so determined by the Minister for any period in
respect of any sawmill may from time to time be increased or reduced
by him.
(b.) Notice of the quantity so fixed with respect to any sawmill, and
of any increase or reduction thereof, shall be forthwith given to the
proprietor or manager of that sawmill by the Minister or the Board
of Trade.
(4.) In fixing, with respect to any sawmill or sawmills, the minimum
quantity (if any) of sawn timber required to be reserved pursuant to
these regulations for use in New Zealand, the Minister may have regard
to the terms of any agreement between the owners of any sawmills that,
in consideration of the terms of the agreement, the whole or any specified
portion of the timber that may be required for use in New Zealand
from the mills owned by the parties to the agreement shall be produced
in one or more specified mills to the exclusion or partial exclusion of
other specified mills.
(5.) A breach of any such agreement shall not constitute a breach of
these regulations, but on such breach being proved to the satisfaction of
the Minister he shall forthwith adjust, in such manner as he deems equit-
able, the quantities of timber to be reserved for use in New Zealand
from the several sawmills affected by the agreement.
6 and 7. Revoked by clause 7of 18th February, 1919. Page 187.
8. (1.) Every person carrying on business as a sawmiller or as an
exporter of sawn timber, and every person requiring supplies of sawn
timber for the purposes of any business carried on by him, shall from
time to time make to the Minister in Charge, or to the Board of Trade,
such returns as to his business as the Minister or Board of Trade may
from time to time require for the purposes of this Order in Council, such


returns to be verified by statutory declaration if and so far as the Minister
or the Board so requires.
(2.) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing provisions of this
regulation, the Minister or the Board of Trade may require any saw-
miller or exporter of sawn timber, or any person requiring supplies of
sawn timber for the purposes of his business as aforesaid, to furnish
returns as to his business for any period subsequent to the 31st day of
March, 1915.
9. The Minister in Charge may from time to time, by notice in the
Gazette, exempt any kind or grade of timber from the operation of these
regulations, and may in like manner revoke any such notice.
Part lll.— War Regulations.
10. Every person shall be guilty of an offence, and shall be liable
under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly, who —
(a.) Fails to make any return or to furnish any particulars required
from him pursuant to these regulations;
(b.) Makes any such return which is false in any respect; or
(c.) Makes any false representation for the purpose of obtaining a
permit under these regulations.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 27th August, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
27th August, 1918.
Whereas by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917, it
is enacted that the Governor-General in Council may, by regulations
under the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions as, having
regard to the exigencies of the present war or the conditions created
thereby, he thinks advisable for the maintenance, control, regulation,
and management of any industry, business, or undertaking that may
be regarded by the Governor-General as essential for or affecting the
public welfare:
And whereas in the opinion of the Governor-General in Council the
businesses of soldiers engaged in military service during the present
war are essential for or affect the public welfare, and it is expedient
accordingly, having regard to the exigencies of the present war and the
conditions created thereby, to make further provisions for the main-
tenance and management of such businesses :
And whereas by section twenty-five of the Finance Act, 1918, it is
enacted that the Governor-General in Council may, by regulations under
the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions as, having regard
to the exigencies of the present war or the conditions created thereby,


he thinks advisable for prohibiting or restricting any service, employ-
ment, occupation, business, work, or industry : P y
And whereas in the opinion of the Governor-General in Council
3 t 0 * the 6Xlg T ieS 0f the Resent war and the condition
c rea ed theieby, it is expedient to make provision accordingly for the
prohibition or restriction in manner hereinafter appearing of businesses
which compete with those of soldiers,'and the unrestricted establishment
or continuance of which may injure or destroy the businesses of soldiers :
Now therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of Mew Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the Execu-
tive Council of that Dominion, and in pursuance of the authority so
conferred upon him by the aforesaid Acts, doth hereby make the follow-
ing regulations under the War Regulations Act, 1914.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Soldiers’ Businesses Regula-
tions, 1918.
2. In these regulations—
“ National Efficiency Board ” means the National Efficiency
Board constituted by the Governor-General by Warrant dated
the 27th day of February, 1917 :
“ Board of Trustees ” means a Soldiers’ Property Board of
Trustees constituted under the Soldiers’ Property Regulations,
1917, made under the War Regulations Act, 1914, on the 2nd
day of April, 1917 :
“ Soldier ” means a member of an Expeditionary Force consti-
tuted under the Expeditionary Forces Act, 1915 :
“ Business ” means any business, trade, profession, manufacture,
industry, or undertaking other than employment in the service
of an employer.
3. (1.) Every reference in these regulations to a Board of Trustees
shall, in respect of the business of any soldier, be construed as a
reference to —
(a.) A Board of Trustees having any powers of management or dis-
position of that business under a power of attorney executed
in pursuance of the Soldiers’ Property Regulations, 1917; or
( b.) A Board of Trustees, authorized by a power of attorney executed
by that soldier or by an attorney of that soldier, having any
powers of management or disposition of his business, to exer-
cise on behalf of that soldier the powers conferred by these
present regulations.
(2.) All the provisions of the Soldiers’ Property Regulations, 1917,
relative to powers of attorney shall, so far as applicable, apply to a
power of attorney granted to a Board of Trustees under paragraph (b)
of this regulation.


(3.) A soldier’s business in respect of which a Board of Trustees holds
any such power of attorney as aforesaid is in these regulations referred
to as a protected business. .
4 For the purposes of these regulations the concurrent action ot any
three or more members of the National Efficiency Board, whether at a
meeting of the Board or otherwise, shall be deemed to be the action of
the Board.
5. (1.) When the National Efficiency Board is satisfied that any per-
son is carrying on or is about to carry on any business which will
compete with the protected business of a soldier, and which will be ren-
dered more profitable by the destruction or diminution of that protected
business through the absence of that soldier on military service, the
National Efficiency Board may give to the person by whom such first-
mentioned business is or is about to be carried on a notice that such
business is not to be carried on except under a license to be granted
by the National Efficiency Board under these regulations.
(2.) Without precluding any other method of giving such notice, any
such notice may be given by leaving it at the place of business or at
any place of business of the person to whom it is to be given, addressed
to that person either by name or by any name under which that business
is carried on.
(3.) Every business in respect of which any such notice has been given
and remains in force is hereinafter referred to as a restricted business.
6. (1.) Any such notice may relate either to the whole of the business
of the person to whom it is given or to any part thereof specified in the
notice, and distinguished by reference to its nature or to the locality in
which it is carried on.
(2.) When any such notice is in force with respect to part of a
business only, such part shall be deemed to be in itself a separate re-
stricted business, and all the provisions of these regulations shall be
construed and shall apply accordingly.
7. Any such notice may at any time be revoked by the National
Efficiency Board.
8. So long as any such notice remains in force it shall not be lawful,
at any time later than twenty-one clear days after the day on which
the notice was given, to carry on the restricted business save under a
license issued in that behalf by the National Efficiency Board, and in
accordance with the terms and conditions of that license; and every
person who carries on, or is knowingly concerned in carrying on, any
business in breach of this regulation shall be guilty of an offence, and
shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
9. A license granted as aforesaid may be granted on such terms and
conditions as the National Efficiency Board thinks necessary for the
maintenance of the protected business or for the control in the public
interest of the restricted business.
10. In particular, and without in any manner restricting the gene-
rality of the last preceding clause, any such license may be granted on
the condition that the licensee shall entar into a deed of agreement with


the Board of Trustees of the protected business, acting in the name and
on behalf of the soldier, to make to that Board on behalf of the soldier
such payments as may be estimated by the National Efficiency Board
to be equivalent to the additional profits to be derived by the restricted
business from the cessation or diminution of the protected business
through the absence of the soldier on military service.
11. The amount and terms of the payments to be so made shall be set
out in the agreement with the Board of Trustees, and such payments
may be estimated either as fixed sums or as defined proportions of the
profits of the restricted business, or in such other manner as the National
Efficiency Board thinks just and practicable in the particular case.
12. All payments so agreed upon shall constitute a debt recoverable
from the licensee by the Board of Trustees in the name and on behalf
of the soldier.
13. All moneys so received by the Board of Trustees shall be deemed
to represent profits derived by that Board from the management of the
protected business, and shall be disposed of by the Board of Trustees
for and on behalf of the soldier accordingly.
14. A license granted by the National Efficiency Board under the
foregoing provisions may be at any time revoked by that Board by notice
given to the licensee in the manner hereinbefore provided with respect
to notices, and such revocation shall take effect on the fourteenth day
after notice of revocation has been so given.
15. Any such license may be at any time surrendered by the licensee
by notice given to the National Efficiency Board.
16. When any license has been so revoked or surrendered, or when
the business in respect of which the license has been issued ceases to be
a restricted business, every agreement entered into between the licensee
and the Board of Trustees as a condition of the grant of that license
shall thereupon determine and cease to be in force; save that no such
determination shall release the licensee from his obligation to make any
payments already payable under that agreement, together with an appor-
tioned part of any payment then accruing due.
17. After any such revocation or surrender has taken effect it shall
not be lawful for any person, so long as the business in respect of which
the license was issued remains a restricted business, to carry on that
business save under and in pursuance of a new license granted by the
National Efficiency Board on such terms and conditions as the Board,
in accordance with the foregoing provisions as to licenses, thinks fit
to impose; and every person who carries on, or is knowingly concerned
in carrying on, such business in breach of this regulation shall be guilty -
of an offence, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
accordingly.
18. Every agreement so entered into with a Board of Trustees shall,
unless sooner determined under these regulations, remain in force so
long as the business of the licensee remains a restricted business.
19. A restricted business shall remain so restricted notwithstanding
the death of the soldier by whom the protected business was carried on,


but it shall cease to be a restricted business so soon as that soldier has
been discharged from the Expeditionary Force.
20. When a business is carried on by a soldier in partnership with
any other person, the business shall, for the purposes of clause 3of these
regulations, be deemed, in respect and to the extent of the share of the
soldier therein, to be a separate business carried on by him, and may
become a protected business accordingly; and in such case the business
may, in respect and to the extent of the interests of the other partner
or partners therein, become a restricted business under these regulations.
21. When a business is carried on by a private company within the
meaning of the Companies Act, 1908, and one of the shareholders is
a soldier, the business shall, for the purposes of clause 3 of these regula-
tions, be deemed, in respect and to the extent of the share of the soldier
in that company, to be a separate business carried on by him, and may
become a protected business accordingly; and in such case the business
of the company may, in respect and to the extent of the interests of the
other shareholders therein, become a restricted business under these
regulations.
22. Every business carried on by any person as the successor or
assignee of a person carrying on a restricted business shall itself be
deemed to be a restricted business, and it shall be unlawful to carry on
any such business save under and in pursuance of a license granted by
the National Efficiency Board under the foregoing regulations, and all
the provisions of these regulations shall apply accordingly.
23. (1.) Every person who carries on or is concerned in the carrying-
on of a restricted business shall at all times give to the National Efficiency
Board all such information as may be demanded by that Board relative
to the nature, scope, conduct, and profits of that business, and as to
all other matters as to which the Board desires information for the pur-
poses of the administration of these regulations.
(2.) Every person who fails or refuses to give any such information
as aforesaid, or who gives to the Board any false information on any
such matters as aforesaid, or who in any manner deceives the Board in
the exercise of its powers under these regulations, shall be guilty of an
offence, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
accordingly.
24. (1.) Without the permission of the National Efficiency Board it
shall not be lawful for any person to establish or carry on any new
business as a retail shopkeeper, merchant, importer, exporter, commis-
sion agent, indent agent, accountant, auditor, land agent, manufacturer,
solicitor, medical practitioner, or dentist.
(2.) Such permission may be granted by the Board with such restric-
tions as to the locality or manner in which the business shall be carried
on as the Board thinks necessary in the public interest.
(3.) Any extension or alteration of an old business, whether in respect
of the locality in which it is carried on or in respect of its scope or


nature, shall be deemed to be the establishment or carrying-on of a new
business within the meaning of this regulation.
(4.) Every person who establishes or carries on or is knowingly con-
cerned in the establishment or carrying-on of a new business without the
permission of the Board, or otherwise than in accordance with any
restrictions so imposed by the Board, shall be guilty of an offence, and
shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
(5.) The fact that a business has been established with the permission
of the Board under this regulation shall in no manner take away or
affect with respect to that business the powers hereinbefore conferred on
the Board with respect to protected and restricted businesses.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 3rd September, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
3rd September, 1918.
Whereas by section three of the War Regulations Act, 1914, it is pro-
vided that the Governor-General in Council may make such regulations
as he thinks necessary for the prohibition of any acts which in his
opinion are injurious to the effective conduct of the military or naval
operations of His Majesty during the present war .
And whereas by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917,
it is further provided that the Governor-General in Council may, by
regulations under the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions
as, having regard to the exigencies of the present war or the conditions
created thereby, he thinks advisable, inter alia, for the maintenance,
control, regulation, and management of any industry, business, or under-
taking that may be regarded by the Governor-General as affecting the
public welfare:
And whereas, for the purpose of ensuring the maintenance of the
health, efficiency, and discipline of soldiers of His Majesty’s Forces on
the occasion of their arrival in New Zealand from beyond the seas, it is
expedient to make regulations for restricting the sale and supply of
intoxicating liquor :
And whereas the Governor-General is of opinion that the sale of
intoxicating liquor is a business affecting the public welfai e :
Now, therefore. His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of the said Dominion, doth hereby, in pursuance of


the War Regulations Act, 1914, and its amendments, and of section
thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917, make the following addi-
tional regulations under the first-mentioned Act.
REGULATIONS.
1. In these regulations—
‘ ‘ Licensed premises” means premises in respect of which a
publican's or an accommodation license, or a New Zealand
wine license, is in force under the Licensing Act, 1908, and
includes the premises of a chartered club under that Act:
“ Licensee ” means the holder of any such license, and includes
the secretary of a chartered club.
Troops ” means soldiers of the New Zealand Expeditionary
Force, or of any other of His Majesty’s Forces, whether raised
in New Zealand or elsewhere.
2. (1.) Before, upon, or after the arrival at any port in New Zealand
of any oversea vessel carrying troops, the Commissioner of Police or any
Superintendent of Police, upon receipt of a requisition on that behalf
from the Minister of Defence, may publish a notice in the form in the
Schedule hereto, or to the effect thereof, ordering that all licensed premises
situated within the area to be specified in the notice in accordance with the
following provisions of this regulation shall be closed for the sale of
intoxicating liquor for such time as may be specified in the notice (not
exceeding twenty-four hours on any one occasion). (As amended 25th
February , 1919. Page 188.)
(2.) In the case of the arrival of a vessel as aforesaid at the ports
of Auckland, Wellington, or Dunedin (including Port Chalmers), the
following area may be specified in any notice under the foregoing pro-
visions of this regulation—that is to say, the area having a radius of
twenty-five miles from the Chief Post-office in the City of Auckland,
Wellington, or Dunedin, as the case may be. (As amended 2nd De-
cember, 1918, and 25th February, 1919. Pages 185, 188.)
(3.) In the case of the arrival of a vessel as aforesaid at the Port
of Lyttelton, the following area may be specified in any notice aforesaid
—that is to say, an area having a radius of twenty-five miles from the
Chief Post-office in the City of Christchurch. (As amended 2nd Decem-
ber, 1918. Page 185.)
[(4.) In the case of the arrival of a vessel at any port other than the
ports of Auckland, Wellington, Lyttelton, or Dunedin (including Port
Chalmers), the following area may be specified in any notice under this
regulation that is to say, the area having a radius of ten miles from
the principal or other specified wharf or quay of the port. (As amended
25th February, 1919. Page 188.)]
3. Every notice under these regulations shall be published by being
prominently displayed at or near the principal entrance of the police-
station or principal police : station within the area in which the notice
is expressed to have effect.


4. While any notice under these regulations is in force with respect
to any licensed premises, every person commits an offence against these
regulations, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
accordingly, who, whether as principal or as servant or agent
(a.) Sells or exposes for sale in such premises any intoxicating liquor,
or opens or keeps open such premises for the sale of intoxi-
cating liquor, or allows any intoxicating liquor to be sold, or
exposed for sale, or to be consumed in such premises; or
(6.) Is found on such premises at any time when those premises are
required pursuant to these regulations to be closed for the
sale of intoxicating liquor, unless he satisfies the Court that
he was lawfully on the premises for a purpose not connected
with the sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor.
5. For the purposes of these regulations the supply of intoxicating
liquor for a pecuniary consideration on the premises of a chartered club
under the Licensing Act, 1908, shall be deemed to be a sale of such
liquor.
6. (1.) While a notice under these regulations is in force within any
area it shall not be lawful for the holder of a wholesale license under
the Licensing Act, 1908, to sell or deliver any intoxicating liquor within
that area. (See amendment 18th February , 1919. Page 185.)
(2.) While a notice under these regulations is in force within any
area it shall not be lawful for the holder of a brewer’s license to sell or
deliver any beer within that area. (See amendment 18th February ,
1919. Page 185.)
7. In any proceedings for a breach of these regulations it shall be
a good defence if the defendant proves that when the offence was com-
mitted he did not know and had no reasonable opportunity of knowing
that a notice had been issued and was in force requiring licensed pre-
mises situated within the area within which such offence was committed
to be closed for the sale of intoxicating liquor.
Schedule.
I, , of , Commissioner [or Superintendent] of Police,
in pursuance of the War Regulations of the day of ,
1918, do hereby order that all licensed premises and chartered clubs
situate within twenty-five miles of [e.g., the Chief Post-office, Featherston
Street, in the City of Wellington] shall be closed for the sale of intoxi-
cating liquor from o’clock of the noon of day*
the day of ,19 , until [State hour , being not later than
twenty-four hours after the time fixed for commencement of closing ].
Dated this day of ,19 .
Commissioner [or Superintendent] of Police.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 11th September, 1918.]
Additional If ar Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
10th September, I&lB.—.Sale of Milk in Boroughs.
Whereas by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917, it
is provided that the Governor-General in Council may by regula-
tions under the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions as,
having regard to the exigencies of the present war or the conditions
created thereby, he thinks advisable for the maintenance, control, regu-
lation, and management of any industry, business, or undertaking which
may be regarded by him as essential for the public welfare, and for pro-
hibiting or restricting the use of labour or capital in any undertaking
or purpose that may be deemed by him to be not essential for the public
welfare:
And whereas the supply of milk to the inhabitants of boroughs is an
industry or business essential for the public welfare :
And whereas owing to the conditions created by the present war it
is advisable to make provision in manner hereinafter appearing for the
regulation and control of that industry or business with a view to secur-
ing for the inhabitants of boroughs an adequate supply of milk at a
reasonable price and of good quality :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of ISew Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, and in pursuance of the authority
conferred on him in that behalf as aforesaid, doth hereby make the
following regulations under the War Regulations Act, 1914.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Milk Supply Regulations, 1918.
2. In these regulations—
Milk includes cream, but does not include condensed or dried
milk.
•3. The following regulations shall be in force onlv in respect of
boroughs in which they have been declared to be in force by the Minister
of Internal Affairs in pursuance of this regulation.*
(2.) The Council of any borough may make application under the
seal of the borough to the Minister of Internal Affairs to declare the Milk
Supply Regulations, 1918, in force in that borough.
(3.) The said Minister may thereupon, if he thinks fit, publish in the
Gazette a notice signed by him declaring that on and after a specified
* In force in City of Wellington— Gazette, 1919, p. 102


date the Milk Supply Regulations, 1918, shall be in force in that borough,
and such notice shall have effect according to its tenor.
(4.) Any such notice may at any time thereafter be revoked by the
Minister of Internal Affairs by notice in the Gazette as from a date to
be specified in the notice of revocation.
4. (1.) In any borough in respect of which these regulations are in
force it shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal, agent,
or otherwise (other than the Corporation of that borough, if thereunto
lawfully authorized, and its servants or agents), —
(a.) To sell milk; or
( b .) To deliver milk in pursuance of a contract of sale made, whether
within the borough or elsewhere; or
( c .) To have milk in his possession for sale, save under a license issued
in that behalf by the Council of the borough, and in accord-
ance with the terms and conditions thereof.
(2.) Nothing in this regulation shall make it an offence to sell milk
for consumption on the premises of the seller, or to have possession of
milk for the purposes of such a sale.
5. For the purpose of securing for the inhabitants of the borough an
adequate supply of milk of good quality and at a reasonable price, the
Council of the borough may in its absolute discretion grant, refuse, or
revoke any such license as aforesaid, and may in granting any such
license grant it on such terms and conditions as the Council thinks proper
for the purpose aforesaid. By such terms and conditions the Council
may limit the exercise of the license to a specified portion of the borough
only.
6. Every person who is knowingly concerned in any breach by himself
or any other person of the terms or conditions of any such license as
aforesaid shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall
be liable accordingly.
7. When the Corporation of any borough in respect of which these
regulations are in force carries on the business of selling or delivering
milk within the borough (being thereunto lawfully authorized), every
servant or agent of the Corporation who wilfully commits any breach of
his contract with the Corporation in respect of the sale delivery of
milk, and every other person who is knowingly concerned in any such
breach, shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall
be liable accordingly.
8. If and so long as these regulations are in force in respect of any
borough, it shall not be lawful for any person, other than the Corpora-
tion of that borough, without the consent of the Minister of Agriculture,
to erect, adapt, or equip any building within thirty miles of that borough
as a new factory or establishment for the production of butter, cheese,
condensed milk, dried milk, or other products of milk.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 18th September, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
17th September, 1918. —Restricting the Business of Fellmongering
by Licensees of Meat-export Slaughterhouses.
Whereas by Order in Council dated the twenty-fourth day of April,
one thousand nine hundred and seventeen, and published in the Gazette
of the same date, the sale of sheep-skins was prohibited except to the
New Zealand Government for and on behalf of His Majesty’s Govern-
ment of the United Kingdom, or to licensed persons for resale to the
New Zealand Government as aforesaid :
And whereas by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917,
it is enacted that the Governor-General in Council may, by regulations
under the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions as, having
regard to the exigencies of the present war or the conditions created
thereby, he thinks advisable for the maintenance, control, regulation,
and management of any industry or business that may be regarded by
him as essential for or affecting the public welfare :
And whereas fellmongering is, in the opinion of the Governor-General,
an industry affecting the public welfare, and it is desirable, having
regard to the exigencies of the present war in respect of the acquisition
of sheep-skins for the service of His Majesty, to make the regulation
hereinafter set forth restricting licensees of meat-export slaughterhouses
from carrying on the business of fellmongering :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, and in pursuance of the powers
conferred on him by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917,
doth hereby make the regulation hereinafter set forth, and declare that
the said regulation shall come into operation on the first day of October,
one thousand nine hundred and eighteen.
SCHEDULE.
Regulation.
It shall not be lawful for the licensee of a meat-export slaughterhouse
under the Slaughtering and Inspection Act, 1908, without the consent of
the Controller of the Department of Imperial Government Supplies, to
receive any sheep-skins to be fellmongered by the licensee, whether on
the premises of the meat-export slaughterhouse or elsewhere, or to fell-
monger, whether on the said premises or elsewhere, any sheep-skins other
than the skins of sheep slaughtered on the said premises.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, Ist October, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
Ist October , 1918.—Relating to the Employment of Alien Enemies
as Masters, Mates, or Engineers of Ships or as Officials of Harbour
Boards.
REGULATIONS.
1. In these regulations the term “ home-trade ship ” means any British
ship, whether registered in New Zealand or elsewhere, —
(a.) That is employed in trading or going between any ports or places
in New Zealand; or
(b.) That is engaged in plying on any navigable waters in New Zea-
land; or
(c.) That goes to sea from any port or places in New Zealand and
returns to New Zealand without going more than fifty miles
from the coast thereof :
Provided that a vessel shall not be deemed to be a home-trade ship
within the meaning of these regulations by reason merely of the fact
that in the course of or as preliminary to a voyage to or from any place
out of New Zealand she is employed in going between two places in New
Zealand; and provided also that for the purposes of this definition the
Cook Islands shall be deemed to be part of New Zealand.
2. (1.) After the Ist day of October, 1918, save in pursuance of a
license issued by the Minister of Marine, it shall not be lawful for an
alien enemy to be engaged or to continue to be engaged as master, or
as a mate or engineer, on any home-trade ship as hereinbefore defined, or
to be engaged or to continue to be engaged as a Harbourmaster or in any
other official position in the employment of a Harbour Board.
(2.) Every such license shall be revocable at the will of the Minister of
Marine.
(3.) Every person who is engaged or continues to be engaged in any
employment in breach of the foregoing provisions shall be guilty of an
offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
3. Every shipowner, member or officer of the Harbour Board, or other
person who procures, permits, or consents to the engagement or continued
engagement of an alien enemy in breach of these regulations shall be
guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accord-
ingly; but it shall be a good defence if the defendant proves that he
believed on reasonable grounds that the person so engaged was not an
alien enemy.
4. It shall not be necessary for any person holding a license under
these regulations to hold in addition thereto a license under the War
Regulations of the 10th day of October, 1917, relative to the safety of
ships and cargoes.
5. These regulations shall be read together with and deemed part ot
the War Regulations of the 10th day of November, 1914.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 15th October, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
Bth October , 1918. —Sale and Purchase of Wool 'prohibited.
Whereas by reason of the exigencies of the present war it is necessary
to obtain supplies of wool for the necessary purposes of the war, and to
requisition accordingly for the use of His Majesty all wool grown in
New Zealand :
And whereas in view of such requisition, and for the purpose of
more effectively providing for His Majesty’s necessities in respect of
the war, it is expedient to prohibit in manner and to the extent herein-
after appearing the sale of wool otherwise than to the New Zealand
Government on behalf of His Majesty :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, and in pursuance and exercise of
the powers conferred on him by the War Regulations Act, 1914, doth
hereby revoke the regulations made under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
on the tenth day of August, one thousand nine hundred and seventeen,
prohibiting the sale and purchase of New Zealand wool, and also the
amending regulations made under the said Act on the tenth day of
October, one thousand nine hundred and seventeen, and doth hereby make
the following regulations in lieu thereof under the said Act.
REGULATIONS.
1. Save as hereinafter provided, it shall not be lawful for any person
in New Zealand to purchase or agree or offer to purchase, whether as
principal, agent, or otherwise, any wool grown or to be grown in New
Zealand, or to be concerned in New Zealand in the making of any such
purchase, agreement, or offer by any other person whether in New
Zealand or elsewhere, or to be concerned in New Zealand in the fulfil-
ment or performance of any purchase or agreement which is made in
breach of these regulations, or which if made in New Zealand would
have been a breach thereof.
2. Save as hereinafter provided, it shall not be lawful for any person
in New Zealand to sell or agree or offer to sell, whether as principal,
agent, or otherwise, any wool grown or to be grown in New Zealand,
or to be concerned in New Zealand in the making of any such sale,
agreement, or offer by any other person whether in New Zealand or
elsewhere, or to be concerned in New Zealand in the fulfilment or per-
formance of any sale or agreement wihch is made in breach of these
regulations, or which if made in New Zealand would be a breach thereof.
3. Save as hereinafter provided, it shall not be lawful for any person
in New Zealand to agree or offer to act as the agent of any other person
in the sale or purchase, whether in New Zealand or elsewhere, of wool
grown or to be grown in New Zealand, or to be concerned in New Zea-
land in the making of any such agreement or offer by any other person,
whether in New Zealand or elsewhere.


4. In these regulations “ purchase ” includes any mode of acquisi-
tion by way of agreement, and “ sale ” includes any mode of disposition
by way of agreement, save and except that acquisition or disposition by
way of security only shall not be deemed to be a purchase or sale.
5. For the purposes of these regulations the grant of an option or
right of purchase shall be deemed to be an agreement to sell, and the
request or receipt of an option or right of purchase shall be deemed to
be an agreement to purchase.
6. For the purposes of these regulations every agreement for the sale
of wool shall be deemed to be an agreement for the sale of wool grown
in New Zealand if, in accordance with the terms of the agreement, any
wool grown in New Zealand could be delivered in due fulfilment of the
agreement. The provisions of these regulations as to offers, options,
and rights of purchase shall be construed in like manner.
7. Nothing in these regulations shall apply to—
(a.) Any wool which is or has been the property of the Crown :
(b.) Any sale of wool to the Crown :
(c.) Any purchase, sale, agreement, or offer to which the Controller
of the Department of Imperial Government Supplies has given
his precedent consent in writing on being satisfied that the wool
to which the purchase, sale, agreement, or offer relates is not
required for the use of His Majesty.
8. In granting his approval of any sale under these regulations the
Controller of the Department of Imperial Government Supplies may
impose such conditions as he thinks fit as to terms of the sale and as to
the disposition of the w r ool sold; and every person who is concerned in a
breach of any conditions so imposed, or who deceives the Controller in
the exercise of his functions under these regulations, shall be guilty of
an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable accordingly.
9. (1.) Notwithstanding anything contained in these regulations, the
Controller of the Department of Imperial Government Supplies may
license such persons as he deems fit to purchase wool for subsequent sale
to the Crown, and any person so licensed may purchase wool in pur-
suance of and in accordance with the terms and conditions of his license.
(2.) Such license shall be issued subject to such terms and conditions
as the Controller shall fix, and shall be revocable at the will of the Con-
troller.
(3.) All wool purchased by a person so licensed shall be forthwith
delivered by him to a Government wool-broker for sale to the Crown in
pursuance of any scheme for the time being in force for the purchase
of wool by the Crown, and if he fails so to deliver any such wool he shall
be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable
accordingly.
(4.) All licenses heretofore granted under the aforesaid regulations
of the 10th day of October, 1917, and in force at the date of these present
regulations, shall be deemed to have been granted under these present
regulations and shall operate accordingly.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 22nd October, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the 22nd
October , 1918. — Prescribing a Standard Size for Butter-Boxes.
Whereas by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917, it
is enacted that the Governor-General in Council may, by regulations
under the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions as, having
regard to the exigencies of the present war or the conditions created
thereby, he thinks advisable for the maintenance, control, regulation,
and management of any industry or business that may be regarded by
him as essential for or affecting the public welfare :
And whereas the exportation of butter is, in the opinion of the
Governor-General, an industry or business affecting the public welfare,
and it is desirable to make the regulations hereinafter appearing with
respect to the packing of butter for exportation :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby, in exercise of the
powers conferred on him as aforesaid, make the following regulations
under the War Regulations Act, 1914.
REGULATIONS.
1. In these regulations all references to boxes of the standard size shall
be deemed to be references to rectangular boxes of which the inside
measurements shall be 15J in. by 10£ in. by in., and the outside
measurements shall be 16| in. by ll|in. by in.
2. (1.) After the commencement of these regulations it shall not be
lawful, except with the consent in writing of the Minister of Agriculture,
for any person, whether as principal or agent, to pack any butter for
exportation beyond New Zealand except in boxes of the standard size.
(2.) After the commencement of these regulations it shall not be law-
ful, except with the consent in writing of the Minister of Agriculture, for
any person, whether as principal or agent, to export any butter from
New Zealand except in boxes of the standard size, unless such butter was
otherwise packed in readiness for export before the commencement of
these regulations.
(3.) The consent of the Minister of Agriculture shall not be given
pursuant to these regulations with respect to any butter to be packed
after the expiry of one year from the commencement of these regulations.
3. These regulations shall commence on the Ist day of November,
1918.
J. F ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 4th November, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations under the War Regulations Act, 191 J/..
For better securing the public safety during the present war, His Ex-
cellency the Governor-General of the Dominion of New Zealand, in
exercise of the authority conferred upon him by the War Regulations
Act, 1914, and acting by and with the advice and consent of the Execu-
tive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby make the following regula-
tions under the said Act; and doth declare that they shall come into
operation on the fifteenth day of November, one thousand nine hundred
and eighteen.
REGULATIONS.
1. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the War Regulations
of the 26th day of February, 1917 (relative to declarations required from
persons landing in New Zealand from places beyond the seas), any person
who arrives in New Zealand from any place beyond the seas as the master
or a member of the crew of the vessel in which he arrives may thereupon,
or at any time thereafter, whether before or after he has landed from
that vessel, be required by any officer of Customs or of Police to make
and deliver to that officer a declaration in the form set out in the
Schedule to the said regulations, with the substitution when necessary of
the term “ Officer of Police ” for the term “ Officer of Customs ” where
it appears in that form.
2. Every person who refuses or fails to make or deliver such a de-
claration in conformity with any such requirement, or who makes any
such declaration which is in any respect wilfully false or misleading,
shall be guilty of an offence, and shall be liable under the War Regula-
tions Act, 1914, accordingly.
3. Clause 1 of the War Regulations of the 10th day of October, 1917,
relative to the safety of ships and cargoes, is hereby amended by repealing
the definition of “ ship,” and substituting the following definition :
“ < Ship ’ means any description of vessel used in navigation, whether
seagoing or not, other'than a vessel propelled exclusively by oars; and
also includes any lighter, barge, boat, or other vessel used in connection
with the lading or unlading of a ship as so defined.”
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.


•[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 28th November, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
25th November , 1918.—Providing for Certificates of Origin and
Interest for Goods imported from Finland.
Whereas by Order in Council dated the thirteenth day of October, one
thousand nine hundred and sixteen, and published in the Gazette of the
same date, certain regulations were made under the War Regulations
Act, 1914, and its amendments, providing, inter alia, that a certificate
of origin and interest as defined in the said Order in Council is required
in respect of all goods imported into New Zealand from the countries
mentioned in the First Schedule thereto :
And whereas in the opinion of the Governor-General it is necessary
in the public interest that certificates of origin and interest as aforesaid
should be required in respect of goods imported into New Zealand from
Finland :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of the said Dominion, and in pursuance and exercise
of the powers conferred on him by the War Regulations Act, 1914, and
its amendments, doth hereby amend the hereinbefore-recited Order in
Council of the thirteenth day of October, one thousand nine hundred and
sixteen, in the manner set forth in the Schedule hereto.
SCHEDULE.
A certificate of origin and interest within the meaning of the herein-
before-recited Order in Council of the 13th day of October, 1916, shall
hereafter be required in respect of all goods imported into New Zealand
from Finland, and the said Order in Council is hereby amended accord-
ingly by adding “ Finland ” to the countries mentioned in the First
Schedule thereto. F . D ThomsoN;
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 2nd December, 1918.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
2nd December, 1918.
Whereas by Order in Council made on the third day of September, one
thousand nine hundred and eighteen, and published in the Gazette of the
same date, regulations were made under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
restricting the sale and supply of intoxicating liquor upon the occasion
of the arrival in New Zealand of soldiers of His Majesty’s Forces from


beyond the seas : And whereas it is expedient to amend the said regu-
lations in the manner hereinafter set forth :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of the said Dominion, doth hereby, in pursuance of
the authority conferred upon him by the War Regulations Act, 1914,
and its amendments, and by section thirty-five of the War Legislation
Act, 1917, amend the said regulations in the manner set forth in the
Schedule hereto.
SCHEDULE.
1. Subclauses (2) and (3) of clause 2 of the regulations hereinbefore
referred to and the form in the Schedule to the said regulations are
hereby amended by substituting the words “twenty-five miles” for the
words “ fifteen miles ” wherever they occur.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 20th February, 1919.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
18th February, 1919.
Whereas by Order in Council made on the third day of September, one
thousand nine hundred and eighteen, and published in the Gazette of the
same date, regulations were made under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
restricting the sale and supply of intoxicating liquor upon the occasion
of the arrival in New Zealand of soldiers of His Majesty’s Forces from
beyond the seas :
And whereas it is expedient to amend the said regulations in the
manner hereinafter set forth :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby, in pursuance of the
authority conferred by the War Regulations Act, 1914, and its amend-
ments, and by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917,
amend the said regulations in the manner set forth in the Schedule
hereto.
SCHEDULE.
Clause 6 of the regulations hereinbefore referred to shall not be construed
so as to prohibit the delivery at a wharf or railway-station within the
area in which a notice under those regulations is in force, for carriage
by rail or sea beyond that area, of any intoxicating liquor by the holder
of a wholesale license or of any beer by the holder of a brewer’s license.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 20th February, 1919.]
Amending Regulations relating to the Export of Timber made by Order
in Council dated the 18th February, 1919.
In pursuance and exercise of the powers conferred on him by section
forty-seven of the Customs Act, 1913, and section twenty-four of the
Regulation of Trade and Commerce Act, 1914, His Excellency the
Governor-General of the Dominion of New Zealand, acting by and with
the advice and consent of the Executive Council of that Dominion, doth
hereby amend in the manner set forth in the Schedule hereto the regula-
tions contained in Part II of the Schedule to an Order in Council of
the sixth day of August, one thousand nine hundred and eighteen, im-
posing restrictions upon the export of timber from New Zealand.
SCHEDULE.
1. In these regulations “the principal regulations” mean the herein-
before-recited regulations of the 6th day of August, 1918.
2. (1.) Before finally determining with respect to any sawmill the
quantity of sawn timber of any kind or grade required for use in New
Zealand in any period, pursuant to clause 5 of the principal regulations,
the Minister, or the Board by the direction of the Minister, may give to
the proprietor or manager of the sawmill a provisional notice setting
forth—
(a.) The quantity of such timber proposed to be required for use in
New Zealand; and
(b.) The quantity of such timber proposed to be made available for
export from New Zealand. '
(2.) A notice under the last preceding subclause shall require the
proprietor or manager of the sawmill to which it relates to furnish to
the Board within fourteen days, or such longer period as may be ap-
pointed in that behalf, particulars as to the quantity of timber (being
the production of the sawmill during the period to which the notice
relates) that is intended to be exported.
(3.) On receipt of such particulars, or if such particulars are not
received by the Board within the time limited in that behalf, the Minister
shall proceed to determine, with respect to the several sawmills affected,
the quantity of timber required to be reserved for use in New Zealand
pursuant to clause 5 of the principal regulations, and in such determina-
tion shall have regard to the returns furnished under this clause.
3. (1.) As soon as practicable after the Minister has fixed, with re-
spect to any sawmill, the quantity of sawn timber of any kind or grade
that may be required for use in New Zealand in any period, the Board
of Trade may issue a permit authorizing the export from New Zealand


of any sawn timber produced at the sawmill during that period in excess
of the quantity so required for use in New Zealand.
(2.) A permit under this clause may authorize the export of a definite
quantity of timber, or may authorize in general terms the export of a
specified percentage of the timber produced at the sawmill during the
period to which the permit relates.
(3.) The Board may, if it thinks fit, on the issue of any permit as
aforesaid, or at any time thereafter, fix a period within which the same
must be exercised, and if the permit is not exercised within the period
so appointed, or within such extended period as the Board may allow in
that behalf, the Board may, if it thinks fit, cancel the permit.
(4.) On the cancellation of any permit as aforesaid the Minister may
make such adjustment (if any) as he thinks fit with respect to the quan-
tities of timber required to be reserved for use in New Zealand from
other sawmills.
4. After a notice has been given fixing the quantity of timber of any
kind or grade required to be reserved from any sawmill for use in New
Zealand, it shall not be lawful for any person (whether a sawmiller or
not) to export sawn timber of that kind or grade, being the production
of that sawmill (whether produced before or after the delivery of the
notice), except pursuant to a permit issued in that behalf by the Board
of Trade.
5. (1.) Every person who, after the commencement of this Order in
Council, proposes to export any timber of a kind or grade to which a
notice under the principal regulations applies shall produce to the Col-
lector of Customs at the port of shipment the permit to export such
timber, and shall furnish to the Collector —
(a.) Particulars as to the quantity, kind, and grade of timber pro-
posed to be exported;
(&.) Particulars as to the sawmill at which the timber was produced;
and
( c .) A declaration under the Customs Act, 1913, that the proposed
export is in conformity with the Timber Regulations and with
the permit of the Board of Trade.
(2.) The Collector of Customs shall thereupon endorse on the permit
particulars as to the quantity, kind, and grade of timber exported, the
date of the shipment, the name and address of the shipper and the name
of the vessel, and shall then return the permit to the shipper.
6. All permits heretofore issued by a Collector of Customs under the
principal regulations and before the commencement of this Order in
Council shall be deemed for all purposes to have been issued by the
Board of Trade under these regulations.
7. Clauses 6 and 7 of the principal regulations are hereby revoked.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 25th February, 1919.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
25th February, 1919.
Whereas by Order in Council made on the third day of September, one
thousand nine hundred and eighteen, and published in the Gazette of the
same date, regulations were made under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
restricting the sale and supply of intoxicating liquor upon the occasion
of the arrival in New Zealand of soldiers of His Majesty’s Forces from
beyond the seas :
And whereas it is expedient to amend the said regulations in the
manner hereinafter set forth :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby, in pursuance of the
authority conferred by the War Regulations Act, 1914, and its amend-
ments, and by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917,
amend the said regulations in the manner set forth in the Schedule
hereto.
SCHEDULE.
Clause 2 of the regulations hereinbefore referred to is hereby amended
as follows :
(a.) By omitting from subclause (1) the words “ the ports of Auck-
land, Wellington, Lyttelton, or Dunedin (including Port Chalmers),”
and substituting the words “ any port in New Zealand.”
(6.) By inserting, after the word “Dunedin” in subclause (2), the
words “ (including Port Chalmers).”
(c.) By adding the following subclause :
“ (4.) In the case of the arrival of a vessel at any port other than the
ports of Auckland, Wellington, Lyttelton, or Dunedin (including Port
Chalmers), the following area may be specified in any notice under this
regulation—that is to say, the area having a radius of ten miles from the
principal or other specified wharf or quay of the port.”
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 25th February, 1919.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
25th February, 1919.—As to the Sale and Purchase of Wheat.
Whereas by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917, it
is provided that the Governor-General in Council may by regulations
under the War Regulations Act, 1914, make such provisions as, having


regard to the exigencies of the present war or the conditions created
thereby, he thinks advisable for the maintenance, control, regulation,
and management of any industry, business, or undertaking which he
regards as essential for the public welfare ; And whereas the growing
of wheat and the manufacture of flour in New Zealand are industries
essential for the public welfare : And whereas by reason of the condi-
tions created by the present war it has become necessary to make special
provisions for the maintenance, control, regulation, and management of
those industries through the establishment of a scheme for the purchase
and sale of wheat by the Government of New Zealand : And whereas,
pursuant to the authority aforesaid, a scheme was established, by an
Order in Council dated the 22nd day of December, 1917, for the purchase
and sale by the Government of wheat grown in New Zealand during the
season 1917-1918, and it is expedient that the scheme so established
should, with certain modifications, be made applicable with respect to
wheat grown in New Zealand during the season 1918-19 ;
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby make the following
regulations under the War Regulations Act, 1914.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1910.
2. In these regulations, except where a contrary intention appears, —
“ Wheat ” means wheat of kind or quality grown in New
Zealand during the season 1918-19 :
“ Free wheat ” means—
(a.) Any wheat after its purchase and resale by the Govern-
ment in pursuance of the scheme of purchase set forth
in these regulations;
( h .) Any wheat which has been offered to the Government for
purchase in pursuance of the said scheme of purchase
and has been rejected as being unmerchantable or other-
wise not of the kind or quality required by the Govern-
ment :
“ Good milling-wheat ” means wheat suitable for milling and of
fair average quality for the season as determined in accordance
with the custom of the trade, or of a quality superior thereto :
“ Government ” means His Majesty the King in respect of the
Government of the Dominion of New Zealand :
“ The Wheat Trade Regulations, 1917,” means the Wheat Trade
Regulations of the 22nd day of December, 1917.
Part I. — Private Dealings in Wheat prohibited.
3. Save in accordance with and pursuance of the scheme of purchase
and sale set forth in these regulations, it shall not be lawful for any
person, whether as principal, agent, or otherwise, to purchase or agree


or offer to purchase any wheat other than free wheat, or to be concerned
in the making of any such purchase, agreement, or offer by any other
person, whether in New Zealand or elsewhere, or to be concerned in the
fulfilment or performance of any agreement for the purchase of any
such wheat, whether such agreement has been made in New Zealand or
elsewhere, and whether it has been made before or after the making of
these regulations.
i. Save in accordance with and pursuance of the scheme of purchase
and sale set forth in these regulations, it shall not be lawful for any
person, whether as principal, agent, or otherwise, to sell or agree or offer
to sell any wheat other than free wheat, or to be concerned in the making
of any such sale, agreement, or offer by any other person, whether in
New Zealand or elsewhere, or to be concerned in the fulfilment or per-
formance of any agreement for the sale of any such wheat, whether such
agreement has been made in New Zealand or elsewhere, and whether it
has been made before or after the making of these regulations.
5. In the foregoing regulations the terms “ purchase ” and “sale'’
include any mode of acquisition or disposition by agreement other than
acquisition or disposition by way of security only.
6. For the purposes of the foregoing regulations an option or right
of purchase or sale shall be deemed to be an agreement to purchase or to
sell, as the case may be.
7. Notwithstanding anything in these regulations, it shall be lawful
for the grower of any wheat to sell to any other wheat-grower and for
the purchaser to purchase any quantity or quantities thereof not ex-
ceeding in the aggregate 100 bushels for use by the purchaser as seed-
wheat.
Part II. — Control op the Wheat Trade.
8. Good milling-wheat will be purchased and resold by the Govern-
ment in accordance with the scheme hereinafter in these regulations set
forth.
9. All purchases and sales of wheat by the Government will be effected
through the agency of brokers appointed by the Board of Trade and
acting on account of the Government, and hereinafter referred to as
Government brokers.
10. (1.) Every broker so appointed shall hold office at the will of the
Board of Trade.
(2.) Every person appointed as a Government broker pursuant to the
Wheat Trade Regulations, 1917, and holding office on the making of these
regulations, shall be deemed to have been appointed a Government
broker under these regulations for the district for which he was appointed
under the first-mentioned regulations.
11. Government brokers will be required to give to the Government
such security as the Board of Trade may require for the due perform-
ance of their contract with the Government and for due obedience to
these regulations.
12. (1.) The general control, supervision, and execution of this scheme
of purchase and sale will be in the hands of a Controller appointed by


the Minister of Agriculture and acting on behalf of the Government, and
hereinafter called the Wheat Controller.
(2.) The person holding office on the making of these regulations as
the Wheat Controller under the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1917, shall
be deemed to have been appointed as Wheat Controller under and for
the purposes of these regulations.
13. The headquarters of the Wheat Controller shall be at Christ-
church.
14. (1.) There will be associated with the Wheat Controller an advisory
committee to be known as the Wheat Trade Committee, and to consist of
such representatives of the wheat-growers, flour-millers, and Government
brokers as the Board of Trade may from time to time appoint.
(2.) The persons holding office on the making of these regulations as
the Wheat Trade Committee under the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1917,
shall be deemed to have been appointed members of the Wheat Trade
Committee under and for the purposes of these regulations.
15. Every Government broker will be appointed for a particular dis-
trict to be defined by the Board of Trade in appointing such broker, and
it shall not be lawful for any such broker to purchase for the Govern-
ment under these regulations any wheat grown elsewhere than in the
district for which he has been appointed.
Part 111. — Purchases of Wheat by the Government.
16. Revoked hy clause lof 3rd April, 1919. Page 199.
17. Government brokers will not purchase on behalf of the Govern-
ment any wheat other than good milling-wheat: nevertheless it shall not
be lawful for any person to sell wheat of any quality otherwise than to
the Government until and unless it has been offered to a Government
broker for sale to the Government in pursuance of these regulations, and
has been rejected as unmerchantable or as not being good milling-wheat.
18. In these regulations “ nearest port ” means the port of entry
under the Customs Act, 1913, nearest to the place where the wheat is
grown.
19. Sacks will be paid for, in addition to the above prices, at the fair
market value, not exceeding an amount less by 2d. than the maximum
prices of sacks as fixed by an Order in Council of the 21st January, 1919,
made under the authority of section 2 of the Regulation of Trade and
Commerce Act, 1914.
20. When wheat is sold to a Government broker without express agree-
ment as to the month of delivery it shall be deemed to be sold for
delivery in the month in which the contract is made.
21. When wheat is sold to a Government broker for delivery by
instalments in different months or on different terms or conditions the
sale of each instalment shall be deemed to be a separate contract.
22. Save in special cases at the express direction of the Wheat Con-
troller, and on such terms as may be approved by him, wheat will be so
purchased by a Government broker only on the terms that the seller will
deliver the same to a purchaser from the Government as directed by
the broker, whether free on board, on rail, direct to the purchaser’s


store, or otherwise. Save as aforesaid, the Government broker will in
no case accept delivery on behalf of the Government, or act as a ware-
houseman for the Government. The Government broker may, however,
act at the same time as the broker, agent, or warehouseman, either of
the seller to the Government or of the buyer from the Government, on
such terms as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties.
23. All wheat so purchased by the Government shall become the pro-
perty of the Government on delivery thereof in accordance with the terms
of the contract if the wheat is in conformity with the contract.
24. (1.) On such delivery of wheat the Government broker, on being
satisfied that the wheat so delivered is in accordance with the contract,
will forward to the Wheat Controller a voucher in duplicate, in such
form as the Controller may require, authorizing the payment of the
contract price.
(2.) The sum so payable will be paid by the Wheat Controller as
imprestee to the seller or to any other person authorized by the seller
in that behalf by a written authority transmitted through the broker to
the Controller.
(3.) Such payments will be made on the Ist and 14th days of each
calendar month in the case of all vouchers duly received by the Con-
troller at least seven days before any such pay-day.
(4.) If any such pay-day is a holiday payment will be made on the
next following business-day.
25. Every contract made by a Government broker for the purchase
of wheat on account of the Government shall be made in accordance with
and shall incorporate the provisions of these regulations so far as
applicable to contracts of purchase, and the rights and obligations of
the parties shall be determined accordingly.
Part IV. —Sales op Wheat bt the Government.
26. No sales of wheat shall be made by a Government broker on
account of the Government except to persons holding a warrant issued
by the Wheat Controller authorizing the holder to purchase wheat, and
hereinafter referred to as a wheat-purchase warrant.
27. Every such warrant will contain such conditions and restrictions
as the Wheat Controller thinks fit, and no sale shall be made to the holder
otherwise than in conformity with these conditions and restrictions.
28. Every wheat-purchase warrant may be cancelled at any time for
any reason which the Controller in his absolute discretion thinks suffi-
cient.
29. No such warrant shall be transferable.
30. The Wheat Controller will in his absolute discretion allocate to
each flour-mill in New Zealand its due quota of the total quantity of
good milling-wheat estimated by him from time to time to be available
during the year 1919, and the wheat-purchase warrants issued by the
Controller to flour-millers will be based on the quota as so determined
for the time being.
31. Each flour-miller will be required to purchase and take delivery
of his full quota of wheat as soon as is practicable in the discretion of


the Wheat Controller, and this obligation will be enforced by the Wheat
Controller by withholding or cancelling the wheat-purchase warrant of
any flour-miller who makes default herein.
32. Flour-millers will be required in purchasing wheat to purchase
and take delivery of different kinds or qualities of good milling-wheat
in such proportions as the Wheat Controller may from time to time
determine, having regard to the respective quantities of such kinds or
qualities available, and all Government brokers shall in effecting sales
of wheat observe all directions given to them by the Wheat Controller
in this behalf.
33. The price at which wheat is so sold by a Government broker on
account of the Government shall be the price per bushel at which it was
purchased by the broker on account of the Government, with the addi-
tion of IJd. per bushel, together with the price of the sacks as aforesaid.
34. Payment for wheat so sold and delivered shall be made by the
buyer to the Government broker on account of the Government, and the
terms of payment shall be such as may be agreed upon between the
buyer and the broker, being either cash on delivery, cash against ship-
ping documents, or cash within seven days after delivery. All pur-
chase-money in arrear and unpaid shall bear interest at the rate of
8 per centum per annum.
35. When wheat is sold for delivery by instalments each instalment
shall be treated as the subject of a separate contract, and payment shall
be made accordingly.
36. All moneys so received by a Government broker shall be paid by
him into the Public Account immediately on the receipt thereof, and all
moneys not so paid into the Public Account shall bear interest at the
rate of 8 per centum per annum until so paid.
37. Every Government broker will guarantee to the Government the
due payment by the buyer of the purchase-money for all wheat so sold
to him by that broker, and on default made by the buyer the purchase-
money, with all accrued interest thereon, shall be recoverable by the
Government from the broker.
38. After delivery to the buyer the wheat shall be in all respects at
the buyer’s risk, but the property in the wheat shall not pass to the buyer
until the purchase-money has been received by the Government broker;
and on default made by the buyer the broker or the Wheat Controller
may take and retain possession of the wheat on behalf of the Government
as a security for the purchase-money.
39. Every contract made by a Government broker for the sale of
wheat on account of the Government shall be made in accordance with
and shall incorporate the provisions of these regulations so far as appli-
cable to contracts of sale, and the rights and obligations of the parties
shall be determined accordingly.
Part Y. —Terms of Employment of Brokers.
40. In respect of every contract for the purchase of wheat by a
Government broker on account of the Government the broker shall be
7—War Regs.


entitled to receive from the Government a commission of £d. for every
bushel delivered in pursuance of and in conformity with that contract.
41. In respect of every contract for the sale of wheat by a Govern-
ment broker on account of the Government the broker shall be entitled to
receive from the Government a commission of Jd. for every bushel
delivered in pursuance of and in conformity with that contract.
42. It shall not be lawful for a Government broker to receive, directly
or indirectly, any additional commission or remuneration from any
party other than the Government in respect of the making of any such
contract of purchase or sale; but nothing herein contained shall prevent
the broker from receiving from any such party remuneration for services
rendered in respect of storage or otherwise howsoever in addition to the
service of making the contract of purchase or sale.
43. It shall not be lawful for any Government broker to give, offer,
or promise to any person any rebate, refund, commission, allowance,
gratuity, or other valuable consideration as an inducement to that person
to sell or purchase wheat to or from the Government through that broker,
or for the reason that he has so sold or purchased wheat.
44. It shall not be lawful for a Government broker to purchase,
whether for himself or on account of any other person, any wheat of a
quality inferior to good milling-wheat except under the authority of a
license issued to the broker in that behalf by the Wheat Controller and
in accordance with the terms of that license. Any such license may be
at any time cancelled by the Controller for any reason which in his
absolute discretion he thinks sufficient.
45. In all matters within the scope of their employment and not
specifically provided for by these regulations Government brokers shall
act in accordance with directions from time to time received from the
Wheat Controller.
46. Government brokers shall from time to time make to the Wheat
Controller such returns relative to the business done by them as the
Controller may require.
47. Every appointment of a Government broker shall be deemed to
incorporate, as a contract between the broker and the Government,
the provisions of these regulations so far as they relate to the rights,
powers, duties, and liabilities of such brokers.
Part VI. —Disputes.
48. When any dispute arises as to whether any wheat offered to a
Government broker for sale to the Government is good milling-wheat,
or when any dispute arises as to whether any wheat delivered in fulfil-
ment of any contract of purchase or sale entered into by Government
brokers on account of the Government is in accordance with the contract
in respect of kind, quality, or condition, the dispute shall be determined
by a Government grader appointed for this purpose by the Board of
Trade, and his decision shall be final.
49. When any dispute, other than as mentioned in the last preceding
clause, arises between the parties to any contract entered into by a
Government broker on account of the Government, or between a Govern


merit broker and the Government, or between a Government broker and
any seller or purchaser of wheat to or from the Government, touching
the meaning or operation of these regulations or of any contract so
entered into, the dispute shall be determined by the Wheat Controller,
whose decision shall be final.
50. Nothing in the last two preceding clauses shall apply to any pro-
secution for an offence against these regulations.
51. (1.) Subject to the foregoing provisions as to the settlement of
disputes, the following weights shall be accepted by all parties as the basis
of settlement in all contracts for the purchase or sale of wheat by or to
the Government:
Wheat delivered direct to a mill—flour-millers’ weights :
Wheat delivered free on board—customary free-on-board weights :
Wheat delivered ex store either to mills or free on board —ex-store
weights.
(2.) The only deduction from such weights shall be 3 lb. tare per sack.
Part Vll. —Offences.
52. Every person shall be guilty of an offence against these regula-
tions, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accord-
ingly, who does or attempts or conspires to do any act declared by these
regulations to be unlawful.
53. Every Government broker shall be guilty of an offence against
these regulations, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act,
1914, accordingly, who commits any wilful breach of his contract with
the Government under these regulations.
54. Every seller of wheat to the Government or purchaser of wheat
from the Government under these regulations who commits a wilful
breach of his contract with the Government shall be guilty of an offence
against these regulations, and shall be liable under the War Regulations
Act, 1914, accordingly.
55. Every person who, being a servant or agent of any Government
bioker or of any such seller or purchaser of wheat, wilfully does any
act whereby or in consequence of which such Government broker, seller,
or purchaser breaks his contract with the Government shall be guilty of
an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable under the War
Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
56. Every person who deceives or attempts to deceive a Government
broker or the Wheat Controller in the exercise of his functions under
these regulations shall be guilty of an offence against these regulations,
and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
57. Every person who incites, aids, abets, counsels, or procures any
other person, or conspires with any other person, to commit an offence
against these regulations shall be guilty of an offence against these regu-
lations, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act, 1914, accord-
ingly-
-58. Every person who fails to make in accordance with these regula-
tions any return required thereby or in pursuance thereof, or who makes
7*—War Regs.


any such return which is false or misleading in any particular, shall
be guilty of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable under
the War Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
59. Every person who, whether as principal, agent, or otherwise, sells
or purchases, or agrees or offers to sell or purchase, wheat at a price in
excess of the maximum price thereof as determined for the time being
under the Regulation of Trade and Commerce Act, 1914, shall be guilty
of an offence against these regulations, and shall be liable under the War
Regulations Act, 1914, accordingly.
Part Vlll. —Returns.
60. On or before the 7th day of June, 1919, every grower of wheat
shall make to the Wheat Controller a return showing, as at the 31st day
of May, 1919 — . , , .
(a.) The number of bushels of each variety of wheat grown by inm
and threshed but not yet sold and delivered :
(6.) How much of such wheat still lies on the grower’s farm :
(c.) The location of any such wheat which is stored or held else-
where.
61. On or before the 7th day of June, 1919, every grower of wheat
shall make to the Wheat Controller a return showing, as at the 31st day
of May, 1919 . , ~ , .
(a.) The estimated quantity of wheat, in bushels, which the grower
has still unthreshed, the quantities of each variety of wheat
to be stated separately:
(h.) The probable date of threshing and delivery to the market.
62. In the case of all wheat remaining unthreshed on the 31st day
of May, 1919, the grower shall, within one week after the threshing
thereof,’ make to the Wheat Controller a return showing the actual yield
of each variety.
63. On or before the 15th day of March, 1919, every flour-miller
carrying on business in New Zealand shall make to the WReat Controller
a return showing— .
(a.) His probable requirements of wheat for milling for the period
between the Ist day of March, 1919, and the 28th day of
February, 1920; and
(6.) His carry-over of stocks of wheat, flour, bran, and pollard as at
the 28th day of February, 1919.
64. Every flour-miller carrying on business in New Zealand shall,
on or before the 15th day of each calendar month, commencing in
March, 1919, make to the Wheat Controller a return showing full
particulars of all wheat delivered to him during the last preceding
calendar month in pursuance of purchases made by him.
65. Every threshing-mill proprietor carrying on business in New
Zealand shall, on or before the 15th day of each calendar month, com-
mencing in March, 1919, make to the Wheat Controller a return showing
full particulars of all wheat threshed by him during the previous calendar
month.


66. In making all such returns as aforesaid the person by whom the
return is to be made shall use such forms and give such additional par-
ticulars as the Wheat Controller may from time to time require.
67. (1.) Every person who, whether as principal or agent, and
whether personally or through an agent, enters into any contract for
the purchase of free wheat otherwise than from the Government shall,
within seven days after the day of the making of the contract, make or
cause to be made to the Wheat Controller a return of such contract con-
taining the following particulars:
(a.) The names and addresses of the purchaser and seller:
( h.) The date on which the contract was made;
(c.) The class and quantity of wheat so purchased :
(' d .) The agreed date and place of delivery:
(e.) The price of the wheat per bushel;
(/.) The price of the sacks:
(i 9• ) Particulars of any terms or conditions which are not in accord-
ance with the established custom of the trade at the date of
these regulations :
(h.) If the contract is made or evidenced by any written document, a
copy of that document:
(i.) A declaration made by or on behalf of the purchaser that the
price of the wheat is not in excess of the maximum price as
fixed at the date of the contract by any Order in Council made
under the Regulation of Trade and Commerce Act, 1914,
(2.) Nothing in this clause shall render necessary a return of any
contract for the purchase of wheat in any quantity less than 50 bushels,
save that two or more contracts made by the same purchaser at or sub-
stantially at the same time (whether from the same or different sellers)
shall be deemed to be one contract for the purpose of this exemption,
Paut IX. —Seed-wheat.
68. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in these regulations,
a Government broker in purchasing wheat on account of the Government
may, with the permission of the Wheat Controller, resell that wheat or
any part thereof to the broker himself as seed-wheat at the price at
which he purchased it for the Government with the addition of l£d. per
bushel.
69. No commission shall be payable to the broker in respect either of
the purchase or resale of any wheat so dealt with.
70. The Government broker shall pay to the Government the pur-
chase-money for all seed-wheat so purchased by him in cash on the de-
livery of the wheat to the broker in pursuance of the contract,
71. In all other respects these regulations shall apply to any such
resale by the Government 1o a Government broker in the same manner as
if the Government broker were an independent third person purchasing
the wheat from the Government through that broker.
72. Save with the permission of the Wheat Controller it shall not be
lawful for a broker who has so purchased seed-wheat to dispose of it
in any manner otherwise than by the sale thereof as seed-wheat to
farmers.


73. Any surplus of seed-wheat so purchased by a Government broker
and undisposed-of by sale to farmers before the close of the sowing season
of the year 1919 may be demanded by the Wheat Controller for the
Government, and shall thereupon be resold to the Government by the
broker at the price hereinbefore prescribed for good milling-wheat sold
to the Government for delivery in the month in which such demand was
made by the Wheat Controller.
Part X. —Sale of Old Wheat.
74. Nothing in the foregoing regulations shall apply to wheat of
the season 1917-18 (hereinafter referred to as old wheat), and, save as
herein otherwise provided, all such wheat that has not been disposed of
before the date of the making of these regulations shall remain subject
to the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1917.
75. (1.) Old wheat will be purchased by Government brokers at the
prices fixed by clause 16 of. the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1917, for
wheat to be delivered in or after the month of September, 1918. Sacks
will be paid for at the price fixed by clause 19 of these regulations in
lieu of the price fixed by clause 19 of the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1917.
(2.) All old wheat so purchased shall be sold by Government brokers
as if it were wheat of the season 1918-19 sold to the Government for
delivery during the month in which it is sold by the Government.
Clause 33 of the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1917, is hereby modified in
so far as it is inconsistent with this clause,
76. Every person who sells old wheat to the Government shall disclose
in writing to the Government broker the fact that it is old wheat, and
every seller of old wheat who fails to make such disclosure commits an
offence against these regulations, and shall be liable under the War Regu-
lations Act, 1914, accordingly.
77. Every person who is knowingly concerned in the sale to or pur-
chase by the Government of any old wheat at a price in excess of the
prices fixed by the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1917, for wheat to be
delivered in the month of September, 1918, commits an offence against
these regulations, and shall be liable under the War Regulations Act,
1914, accordingly.
J. F. ANDREWS ,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 7th April,'l9l9.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
3rd April , 1919.—As to the Sale and Purchase of Wheat.
Whereas by an Order in Council made on the twenty-fifth day of Febru-
ary, one thousand nine hundred and nineteen, and published in the
Gazette of the same date, regulations entitled the Wheat Trade Regula


tions, 1919, were made under the War Regulations Act, 1914, with
respect to the sale and purchase of wheat by the Government;
And whereas it is desired to amend the said regulations in the manner
hereinafter set forth ;
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of that Dominion, and in pursuance of the powers
conferred on him by section thirty-five of the War Legislation Act, 1917,
and of all other powers enabling him in this behalf, doth hereby amend
the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1919, in the manner set forth in the
Schedule hereto.
SCHEDULE.
1. Clause 16 of the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1919, is hereby revoked,
and the following clause substituted therefor :
16. Government brokers will buy good milling-wheat on account of
the Government at the following prices :
A. Good milling-wheat grown in the South Island elsewhere than in
the Provincial Districts of Nelson and Marlborough,—
(1.) Sold for delivery free on board at the nearest port—
(a.) In January, February, March, or April, 1919, 6s. 6d.
per bushel.
(b.) In May, 1919, 6s. 6|d. per bushel.
( c.) In June, 1919, 6s. 7d. per bushel.
\d.) In July, 1919, 6s. 7|d. per bushel.
(e.) In or after August, 1919, 6s. Bd. per bushel.
(2.) Sold for delivery otherwise than free on board at the nearest port,
a price equivalent as regards the seller to the prices aforesaid.
B. Good milling-wheat grown in the North Island or in the Pro-
vincial Districts of Nelson or Marlborough,—
(1.) Sold for delivery on rail at the nearest railway-station—
The same price as that fixed by subclause A hereof for good
milling-wheat grown in the South Island (elsewhere than in
Nelson or Marlborough), and sold for delivery free on board
at the nearest port, with an addition of 4d. per bushel.
(2.) Sold for delivery otherwise than free on rail at the nearest rail-
way-station, a price equivalent as regards the seller to the price
aforesaid.
2. All references to the Wheat Trade Regulations, 1919, appearing
in the Order in Council of the 25th day of February, 1919, made under
section 2 of the Regulation of Trade and Commerce Act, 1914 (fixing
the maximum price of wheat of the season 1918-1919), shall be con-
strued as references to those regulations as hereby amended.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.


[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 15th April, 1919.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
Bth April , 1919. —Providing for Certificates of Origin and Interest
for Goods imported from Belgium.
Whereas by Order in Council dated the thirteenth day of October, one
thousand nine hundred and sixteen, and published in the Gazette of the
same date, certain regulations were made under the War Regulations
Act, 1914, and its amendments, providing, inter alia, that a certificate
of origin and interest as defined in the said Order in Council is required
in respect of all goods imported into New Zealand from the countries
mentioned in the First Schedule thereto :
And whereas in the opinion of the Governor-General it is necessary
in the public interest that certificates of origin and interest as aforesaid
should be required in respect of goods imported into New Zealand from
Belgium :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of the said Dominion, and in pursuance and exercise
of the powers conferred on him by the War Regulations Act, 1914, and
its amendments, doth hereby amend the hereinbefore-recited Order in
Council of the thirteenth day of October, one thousand nine hundred
and sixteen, in the manner set forth in the Schedule hereto.
SCHEDULE.
A certificate of origin and interest within the meaning of the herein-
before-recited Order in Council of the 13th day of October, 1916, shall
hereafter be required in respect of all goods imported into New Zealand
from Belgium, and the said Order in Council is hereby amended accord-
ingly by adding “ Belgium ”to the countries mentioned in the First
Schedule thereto.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 2nd May, 1919.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the 29th
April , 1919.—F0r the Protection of Soldiers and Discharged Soldiers.
Whereas by section twenty-six of the War Legislation and Statute
Law Amendment Act, 1918, it is provided that the Governor-General
in Council may by regulations under the War Regulations Act, 1914,
make such provisions as he deems just and necessary for the pro-
tection of soldiers or discharged soldiers from the execution of civil


judgments ox process, proceedings in bankruptcy, forfeitures, the exercise
of rights of distress or re-entry, the exercise of rights of sale or entry
into possession in pursuance of any mortgage or other security, or the
enforcement in any other manner of the civil obligations or liabilities
of soldiers or discharged soldiers :
And whereas it is expedient to revoke the several Orders in Council
now in force under the War Regulations Act, 1914, relative to the afore-
said matters and to make other provision in lieu thereof :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, in pursuance of the authority so conferred upon'him
by the War Legislation and Statute Law Amendment Act, 1918, and of
all other authorities enabling him in that behalf, and acting by and with
the advice and consent of the Executive Council of that Dominion, doth
hereby revoke the Orders in Council specified in the Schedule hereto,
and doth hereby make the following regulations in lieu thereof; and
doth hereby declare that nothing in this Order in Council shall be so con-
strued as to supersede or in any manner affect the Order in Council
made on the seventh day of May, one thousand nine hundred and
eighteen, under the War Regulations Act. 1914, for the protection of the
guarantors of soldiers against bankruptcy proceedings or the execution
of civil process.
REGULATIONS.
1. These regulations may be cited as the Soldiers’ Protection Regula-
tions, 1919.
2. In these regulations—
“ Soldier ” means a member of an Expeditionary Force under the
Expeditionary Forces Act, 1915, who is in receipt of military
pay as such, or who is on leave without pay after his return to
New Zealand from military service beyond the seas :
“ Discharged soldier ” means a person who has in any manner
ceased to be a member of any such Expeditionary Force after
military service as such beyond the seas :
“ Recently discharged soldier ” means a discharged soldier at any
time within twelve months immediately succeeding his return
to New Zealand after military service beyond the seas. (As
amended 2nd June, 1919. Page 201 f..)
11 Assisted discharged soldier ” means a discharged soldier who is for
the time being indebted to the Crown in respect of any loan
granted to him, with or without security, under the Discharged
Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915, or the Repatriation Act, 1918.
3. Without the previous consent in writing of the Attorney-General,
granted on the recommendation of a Stipendiary Magistrate, it shall not
be lawful for any person—
{a.) To issue any process of execution against the property of a
soldier, or recently discharged soldier, or assisted discharged
soldier in pursuance of any judgment, decree, or order of any
Court in its civil jurisdiction, whether obtained before or
after the making of these regulations; or


(b.) To seize or sell the property of any soldier, recently discharged
soldier, or assisted discharged soldier by way of distress for
rent; or
(c.) To file a bankruptcy petition against a soldier, recently dis-
charged soldier, or assisted discharged soldier; or
(d.) To exercise (otherwise than with the leave of the Supreme Court
under the Mortgages Extension Act, 1914) any power of sale
conferred by any mortgage, bill of sale, or other security over
the property of a soldier, recently discharged soldier, or
assisted discharged soldier, whether that mortgage, bill of sale,
or security was given before or after the making of these
regulations, and whether the person whose property is subject
thereto became a soldier, recently discharged soldier, or assisted
discharged soldier before or after the date of the mortgage, bill
of sale, or security.
(See clause 2of 2nd June, 1919. Page 20 1f..}
SCHEDULE.
Orders in Council revoked.
Order in Council dated the 31st day of July, 1916, relative to the
protection of soldiers against arrest or criminal proceedings under the
Destitute Persons Act, 1910, or the Imprisonment for Debt Limitation
Act, 1908.
Order in Council dated the 16th day of March, 1917, relative to the
protection of soldiers against distress for rent, bankruptcy proceedings,
and the execution of civil process.
Order in Council dated the 18th day of June, 1917, amending the
last-mentioned Order in Council.
Order in Council dated the Ist day of October, 1917, relative to the
protection of soldiers against the enforcement of certain securities.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 15th May, 1919.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the
12th May, 1919. —Property of Prisoners of War.
Whereas by regulations made on the twenty-fourth day of July, one
thousand nine hundred and sixteen, under the War Regulations Act,
1914 (hereinafter referred to as “ the said regulations ”), provision was
made for the administration of the property of prisoners of war by the
Public Trustee :
And whereas it is expedient to extend and amend such provision in
manner hereinafter appearing :


Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, in exercise of the power conferred upon him by the War
Regulations Act, 1914, and acting by and with the advice and consent
of the Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby make the follow-
ing regulations under that Act.
REGULATIONS.
1. The appointment of the Public Trustee under the said regulations as
Custodian of the property of any person as a prisoner of war (whether
such appointment is made by that person himself or by the Attorney-
General, and whether it is made before or after the making of these
regulations) shall continue in full force and effect until revoked by the
Attorney-General, even though that person has ceased to be a prisoner
of war or to be resident in New Zealand; and all the provisions of the
said regulations shall continue to apply to that appointment in the same
manner as if that person remained a prisoner of war held in confinement
in New Zealand.
2. For the purposes of the said regulations as amended by these pre-
sent regulations the term “ prisoner of war ” shall include any alien
enemy whose arrest has been authorized by a military authority under
the War Regulations, although he has not yet been actually arrested.
3. (1.) Clause 20 of the said regulations is hereby amended by adding
thereto the following paragraphs :
“ (g.) In the case of a prisoner of war who is no longer in New
Zealand, to sell the whole or any part of the real or personal
property of that prisoner in New Zealand, and to execute
in his name and on his behalf all proper instruments of
assurance.
“ (h.) To exercise in respect of the property of the prisoner of war
any other powers which may be expressly conferred upon the
Public Trustee by that prisoner in the instrument of ap-
pointment executed by him.”
(2.) Clause 20 of the said regulations as so amended shall apply to
all appointments, whether made before or after the making of these
present regulations.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 2nd June, 1919.]
Additional War Regulations made hy Order in Council dated the 2nd
June, 1919. —For the Protection of Soldiers and Discharged Soldiers.
Whereas by Order in Council dated the twenty-ninth day of April,
one thousand nine hundred and nineteen, regulations intituled the
Soldiers’ Protection Regulations, 1919, were made under the authority


of section twenty-six of the War Legislation and Statute Law Amendment
Act, 1918, for the protection of soldiers and discharged soldiers from the
execution of civil judgments or process, proceedings in bankruptcy, for-
feitures, the exercise of rights of distress or re-entry, the exercise of rights
of sale or entry into possession in pursuance of any mortgage or other
security, or the enforcement in any other manner of the civil obligations
or liabilities of soldiers or discharged soldiers :
And whereas it is expedient to amend such regulations in the manner
hereinafter set forth:
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, in pursuance of the authority conferred upon him by the
War Legislation and Statute Law Amendment Act, 1918, and of all other
authorities enabling him in that behalf, and acting by and with the advice
and consent of the Executive Council of that Dominion, doth hereby
amend the hereinbefore-recited regulations in the manner set forth in the
Schedule hereto.
SCHEDULE.
1. In these regulations the expression “ the principal regulations ” means
the Soldiers’ Protection Regulations, 1919.
2. Clause 2 of the principal regulations is hereby amended by omitting
from the definition of “ recently discharged soldier ” the words “ six months,”
and substituting the words “ twelve months.”
3. (1.) Nothing in clause 3 of the regulations hereinbefore referred to
shall apply to proceedings taken with respect to the balance for the time
being of an account current of any soldier or discharged soldier with): any
bank or approved trading company or approved merchant, or with respect
to any mortgage, bill of sale, or other security securing such account
current, and all such proceedings may be taken accordingly without [the
consent of the Attorney-General.
(2.) For the purposes of this clause an approved trading companyf or
approved merchant means any company, firm, or person approved in that
behalf by the Attorney-General.
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.
[Extract from New Zealand Gazette, 2nd June, 1919.]
Additional War Regulations made by Order in Council dated the
2nd June , 19ID. —Amendment of Coal Trade Regulations.
Whereas by Order in Council dated the twenty-eighth day of August,
one thousand nine hundred and seventeen, and published in the Gazette
of the twenty-ninth day of the same month, certain regulations were


made pursuant to the War Regulations Amendment Act, 1916, in sub-
stitution for Part II of the Coal Trade Regulations made on the fifth
day of February, one thousand nine hundred and seventeen :
And whereas it is deemed advisable to amend the said regulations of
the twenty-eighth day of August, one thousand nine hundred and seven-
teen, in the manner hereinafter appearing :
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor-General of the Dominion
of New Zealand, acting by and with the advice and consent of the
Executive Council of the said Dominion, and in pursuance of the War
Regulations Amendment Act, 1916, doth hereby amend the said regula-
tions in the manner set forth in the Schedule hereto.
SCHEDULE.
Clause 5 of the said regulations is hereby amended by omitting sub-
clause (2) and substituting the following subclause :
“ (2.) Except in such coal trade districts or parts thereof as may
be specified in that behalf by the Minister in Charge by notice in the
Gazette, nothing in this regulation shall apply to the delivery of coal
for domestic or other uses in quantities not exceeding lOcwt. at any
one time, and not exceeding 1 ton delivered to any one person in any
one period of twenty-eight days.”
F. W. FURBY,
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council.




INDEX.
page
Acts of authority : Publication in Gazette to be notice to all persons concerned 15
Administrator on active service—
May delegate powers to Public Trustee .. .. • • ..74
Also to person or body corporate approved by a Judge or Magistrate .. 101
Advertisements of goods of enemy unlawful .. .. • • .. 61
Agent on active service
May delegate powers to Public Trustee .. .. • • .. 74
Also to person or body corporate approved by a Judge or Magistrate .. 101
Alien —
Suspected of being dangerous may be arrested .. .. .. 4o
Disaffected, or whose liberty is source of public danger, may be detained .. 92
Not to load ship or work about wharf unless licensed .. .. • • 120
Alien enemy—
Power to make regulations as to labour of .. • • • • • • 1 '
May be arrested by order of military authority and detained .. .. 2J
Assisting King’s enemies may be tried by Court-martial and sentenced
to death .. • •
No person to act as intermediary for .. .. • • zo >
Regulations not to operate as conferring rights on .. .. .. 26
Regulations not to interfere with right of His Majesty to deal with .. 26
Not to change name .. • • • • • • • • ' ’ oq
Communication with person in enemy territory prohibited .. .. M
Definition of “ alien enemy ” for War Regulations .. •. 33, 44, 57, 63
Not to leave New Zealand without consent of Minister of Defence .. 34
Business carried on under misleading name .. • • • • • •
Consent of Attorney-General necessary to applications for probate, &c. .. 44
Proceeds of estate of deceased person not to be paid to, as beneficiary or
Not to commence to carry on business in New Zealand unless licensed 51, 116
Not to acquire shares or debentures of New Zealand company .. • • 51
Custodian may require particulars of all property of .. .. .. 52
Not to be engaged in foreign trade as principal or agent .. 54, 116
In prosecutions accused presumed an alien enemy until he proves contrary 57
In Cook Islands may be detained or deported to New Zealand .. • •
Not to be employed as officer of home-trade ship or by Harbour Board
without license ..
Alien service I Provision for national service by alien enemies and reservists 15-
Allied States, deportation of subjects of, liable to compulsory military service 13 7
Armed guard— , .
May fire on person approaching any place in disregard of warning ..
No person to approach, enter, or leave place where armed guard stationed 26
Army contracts (see Contracts).


Arrest page
Without warrant, of person committing breach of War Regulations .. 23
Procedure for dealing with such person .. .. .. .. 23
Of persons who have committed offence in enemy territory in military
occupation ~ .. ~ .. ~ ~ .. 28
Of persons sentenced to imprisonment in any such territory .. 29
Of persons reasonably suspected of being alien enemies .. .. 35
Of soldier for offence against Army Act ~ ~ .. .. 92
Arrivals —
Disaffected or disloyal person may be prohibited from landing .. .. 85
Male person to make declaration before landing .. .. .. 99
Attorney, being member of Expeditionary Force—
May delegate powers to Public Trustee .. .. ~ .. 74
Also to person or body corporate appointed by a Judge or Magistrate .. 101
Not liable for defaults of Public Trustee J.. .. .. .. 75
Badges—
For discharged soldiers, men voluntarily enlisted, and rejected or exempted
men .. .. .. .. 72
Cards to be issued to men to whom badges issued .. .. .. 72
No other man to wear an approved badge .. .. .. .. 73
Wearing of badges other than those authorized prohibited .. .. 73
Not to be worn in mutilated or altered form .. .. .. 73
Bankruptcy—
Petition not to bo filed against guarantor of soldier without consent .. 147
Petition not to be filed against soldier without consent of Attorney-General
on recommendation of a Magistrate .. ~ .. .. 202
Books—
Inciting or advocating violence or disorder or expressing seditious intention 37
Sale may be prohibited where injurious to public interest .. 39,150
May be detained by Minister of Customs if injurious to public interest .. 151
Prohibited book not to be printed or delivered .. .. Ig2
Bran (see Flour).
Buildings, power to enter and search _ ... _ 24 138
Business—
Carried on under misleading name may be prohibited .. ~ .. 35
Carrying on business in name of enemy may be prohibited .. "50
Carried on by or on behalf of enemy, enemy company, or alien enemy,
Attorney-General may impose restrictions on .. .. . * 51
Controller of, when company, firm, or person declared an enemy ~ 58
Powers of Controller of such business .. .. .. gg
Restrictions may be imposed on business of partner of an enemy .. 60
Restricted business, license required for, if competing with soldier’s busi-
ness •• •• •• •• •• .. .. ..no
Certain new businesses not to be carried on without permission of National
Efficiency Board .. .. ..
Restricting fellmongering by licensees of meat-export slaughterhouses .. 178
Butter-boxes : Butter for export to be packed in boxes of standard size .. 182
Capital—
Power to make regulations as to use of .. .. .. 28
Company not to increase capital without consent of Minister of Finance .. 145


Cargo page
Information as to cargo of oversea ship not to be published .. .. 44
Information as to such cargo not to be sent out of New Zealand .. 45
Offence to endanger safety of ship or cargo .. .. .. .. 120
Alien or naturalized British subject not to load cargo unless licensed .. 120
Cargo for oversea ship to be examined before shipment .. .. 125
Such cargo may be opened or detained ~ .. .. .. 125
Person concerned may be questioned as to nature and contents .. .. 125
Such cargo may be examined in warehouse or store .. ~ .. 126
Censorship—
Evasion of censorship of telegrams or letters prohibited ~ 28
Statement indicating omission due to censorship not to be published 45,-163
Provisions for censorship of periodical publications .. .. .. 160
Save in newspaper no person to print matter relating to war unless ap-
proved by Censor .. .. .. .. .. .. 163
Certificates of origin and interest or of interest for imported goods 79, 101,184, 200
Cinematograph : Minister of Defence may prohibit exhibition .. 46
Claims : Returns of all pecuniary claims against enemy to be made .. 140
Coal-gas, restrictions may be imposed on use of .. .. 107, 122
Coal trade—
Information as to coal may be required .. .. .. .. 93
Possession may be taken of place for storage of coal .. .. .. 93
Coal Trade Committees may be appointed for districts .. .. .. 117
No coal to be delivered without permit from committee .. 118, 205
Conditions on which permits will be granted .. .. .. ..118
In specified areas equal quantities of large and small coal to be delivered.. 149
Communications —
With prisoners of war only through Post Office .. ~ .. 26
With persons in enemy territory prohibited .. .. .. .. 28
Of information as to certain matters prohibited .. ~ 32, 45
Confidential, from military authority, not to be published .. .. 45
Company-
May be declared an enemy .. .. .. .. .. 49, 61
Certificate of incorporation not to be issued until authorized by Attorney-
General .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
Incorporated elsewhere than in New Zealand requires license of Attorney -
General .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51
Enemy or alien enemy not to acquire shares or debentures of New Zealand
company .. .. .. .. .. .. 51
Shares of enemy shareholder may be vested in custodian by Attorney-
General .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 65
Vesting, sale, and disposal of proceeds of such shares .. .. 55, 61, 73
In which enemy possesses substantial interest may be declared enemy .. 56
Public Trustee may be appointed controller of business of .. ~ 58
No winding-up proceedings while controller in office .. .. .. 59
British ship registered in New Zealand not to be transferred to foreign-
controlled company .. .. .. .. .. .. 87
British ship not to be mortgaged to foreign-controlled company.. .. 87
Not to increase capital without consent of Minister of Finance .. .. 145
Certificate of incorporation may be refused if objects not essential .. 145
License to foreign company may be refused if business not essential .. 145
Conspiring to prevent or delay loading or unloading of any vessel .. .. 97


Contracts {see also Enemy contracts) — page
Effect thereon of requisition of military supplies .. .. 9, 10
When contracts for military supplies may be cancelled.. .. ..16
Not to be made with person with whom correspondence prohibited .. 27
Breach of contract to serve on transport prohibited .. .. .. 34
Inciting person to break contract with Crown .. .. 34, 42
No person to wilfully break contract with Crown .. .. .. 41
Breach of contract with Army contractor unlawful .. .. .. 81
Breach of contract of service with Army contractor unlawful .. .. 82
For new development-works not to be entered into without consent of
Minister of Finance .. .. .. .. .. .. 145
Controller—
Of business of company, firm, or person declared an enemy .. 58
Powers with respect to such business .. .. .. .. 58
Disposal of moneys received therefrom .. .. .. .. 59
Cook Islands —
War Regulations Acts to be in force in .. .. .. .. 15
Certain of the War Regulations extended to .. .. ~ .. 113
Alien enemy may be arrested and detained or deported to New Zealand .. 122
Correspondence with certain persons or companies prohibited .. .. 27
Court-martial—
Of alien enemy assisting King’s enemies .. .. .. .. 24
Sentence by to be confirmed by Governor .. .. .. .. 35
No British subject to be tried by .. ~ .. .. 35
Crews of ships {see Seamen).
Custodian of enemy property, Public Trustee appointed as .. .. 47
Declaration may be required from master or member of crew before landing 183
Declaration of ultimate destination of goods before shipment .. 29, 60
Declaration to be made by male person before landing in New Zealand .. 99
Delegation—
Of powers of attorney, agent, trustee, executor, or administrator on active
service to Public Trustee .. .. .. .. 12, 74
Also to person or body corporate approved by a Judge or Magistrate .. 101
Deportation—
Disaffected or disloyal person may bo removed from New Zealand 63, 86
Person prohibited from landing may be removed .. .. .. 85
Of alien enemy from Cook Islands to New Zealand .. .. .. 122
Of subject of Allied State who is liable to compulsory military service .. 137
Detention—
Of persons who have committed offence in enemy territory in military
occupation ~ .. .. .. ~ .. .. 28
Of persons sentenced to imprisonment in such territory .. .. 29
Of goods suspected to be prohibited goods .. .. .. .. 80
Of disaffected alien or one whose liberty is a source of public danger .. 92
Of strangers — i.e., persons not permanently resident in New Zealand—if
disaffected or dangerous .. .. .. .. .. # , 124
Development-works not to be undertaken without consent of Minister of
Finance .. .. .. .. .. .. .. # , 145


Disaffected— PAQE
And dangerous alien may be arrested .. ~ .. .. 36
Or disloyal person may be removed from New Zealand .. 63, 86
Or disloyal person may be prohibited from landing in New Zealand .. 'B5
May be arrested and detained in custody until removal .. .. 85
Alien may be detained .. .. .. ~ .. .. 92
Disloyalty or disaffection, statements indicating, prohibited .. .. 34
Distress for rent—
Property of soldier not to be seized or sold without consent of Attorney-
General on recommendation of a Magistrate .. .. ~ 202
Documents—
May be seized, also instruments or other things .. ~ 24, 138
Inciting or advocating violence or lawlessness or expressing seditious
intention ~ .. .. .. .. .. 37
May be detained until return directed .. .. .. .. 44
Power to search for and seize documents required as evidence .. .. 138
Electricity, restrictions may be imposed on use of .. .. 107, 122
Enemy (see Alien enemy)—
Company, firm, or person may be declared enemy .. .. 49, 61
Company in which enemy has substantial interest may be declared enemy 56
Controller of business thereof and his powers .. .. .. .. 58
No bankruptcy or winding-up proceedings while controller in office .. 59
Enemy companies in New Zealand may be declared enemies ~ .. 56
Enemy property—
Power to make regulations with respect to .. .. .. 11
Particulars thereof to be sent to custodian .. .. .. .. 47
Rents, dividends, &c., of enemy to be paid to custodian .. .. 48
Custodian may demand payment of other moneys due to enemy .. 48
No payment to assignee of enemy without Attorney-General’s permission 49
No transfer of property or acquisition of business of enemy without consent 49
Shares of enemy shareholders may be vested in custodian .. .. 55
Vesting sale and disposal of proceeds of such shares .. .. 55, 61, 73
Custodian may be authorized to take possession of enemy property .. 61
Interest in enemy property may be vested in Public Trustee .. .. 89
Procedure for vesting such interest and disposal thereof .. .. 89
Enemy trade —
Power to make regulations for suppression, restriction, or control .. 11
With company, firm, or person declared an enemy prohibited .. .. 49
Restrictions on business of servant or partner of enemy .. .. 60
Essential industries may be declared .. .. .. .. .. 97
Essential industry or business: Power to make regulations as to mainten-
ance .. .. •• •• .• • • • • 13, 18
Evidence-
In prosecutions under War Regulations .. .. .. .. 7
Publication in Gazette to be notice to all persons .. .. .. 15
In prosecutions accused presumed alien enemy until he proves contrary .. 57
Power to search for and seize documents required as evidence .. ~ 138
Execution —
Against guarantor of soldier not to be issued without consent .. .. 147
Against property of soldier not to be issued without consent of Attorney-
General on recommendation of a Magistrate -- .. . • 201


Executor on active service— page
May delegate powers to Public Trustee .. .. • • . • 74
Also to person or body corporate approved by a Judge or Magistrate .. 101
Exemption from military services: Obligations of persons so exempted by
reason of occupation .. .. .. •. • • .. 91
Explosives—
Provisions as to sale, supply, importation, or possession of .. .. 141
Manufacture or keeping of explosives in breach of Explosives Act an offence 142
Explosive substances, possession of, in certain places prohibited .. .. 38
Exportation of goods {see Goods).
False reports, publication of, prohibited .. • • • • .. 34
Fellmongering, restricting business of, by licensees of meat-export slaughter-
houses .. • • •• • • • • •• • • • *
Firearms and ammunition : Sale, importation, possession, carrying, or dis-
charge thereof 37,42,64,141
Flags : White or blue ensign not to be displayed on shore in New Zealand .. 11l
Flour, bran, or pollard—
Particulars of contracts of sale to be sent to Board of Trade .. .. 94
Buying or selling in excess of fixed maximum price prohibited . . .. 94
Minister of Agriculture may require information as to sale or purchase .. 94
Foreign correspondents, return of, to be made to Attorney-General » 56
Foreign trade— , . . . , , eo
No alien enemy to be engaged m, whether as principal or agent .. 53
No one to act as successor of alien enemy in.. .. .. .. 54
Prohibition not to apply to British or American subject by naturalization 116
No person to act as agent of person prohibited from .. .. ..116
Gas: Restrictions may be imposed on use of coal-gas .. .. 107, 122
Goods —
May be requisitioned by Minister of Defence ~ .. .. .. 8
Declaration of ultimate destination before shipment .. .. 29, 50
Declaration not required if exported to Tahiti .. .. .. 31
Minister of Customs may prohibit exportation if he suspects consignee
is an enemy . • • • • • • • • • • • .. 50
Newspaper advertisements of goods of enemy unlawful .. •. 61
Custodian may take possession of enemy goods or merchandise .. .. 61
Certificates required in respect of imported goods .. 79, 101, 184, 200
Detention of suspected imports . . .. .. .. ..80
General provisions as to detention of imports .. .. .. .. 80
Purchase of goods of prohibited person from any other person unlawful .. 82
Guarantor of soldier: Execution not to issue against without consent of
Attorney-General .. • • • • • • • • • • • • 147
Guard {see Armed guard) —
To be maintained on gangway of seagoing ship .. .. .. 114
To be stationed when oversea ship receiving or discharging cargo or baggage 126
Member of guard liable for default in performance of duty .. .. 127
Harbour —
Ship entering defended harbour may be fired on .. .. .. 24
Master of ship to obey rules of military authority .. .. .. 25


PAGE
Harbour Board : Not to employ alien enemy as Harbourmaster or officer with-
out license .. .. .. .. ~ .. # 179
Harbouring person who has acted in contravention of regulations .. .. 25
Hides and calf-skins, regulations as to, revoked .. .. .. ~ 143
Highway adjoining camp may be closed for traffic .. .. .. 39
Houses of ill fame—
Offence to keep, manage, permit to be used, or let as .. .. 67
Warrant to search premises suspected of being .. .. .. 67
Person convicted may be prohibited from living within fifty miles of a
specified place .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 68
Imported goods—
Certificates of origin and interest required for certain goods ~ 79, 184, 200
Certificates of interest for certain other goods .. .. 79, 101
Suspected imports may be detained .. .. .. .. .. 80
General provisions as to detention of imports .. .. .. .. 80
Incitement —
To break contract with Crown unlawful .. .. ~ 34 42
To violence, lawlessness, or disorder .. .. ~ .. ~ 36
To discontinue service under Crown unlawful.. '.. ~ ..42
To refuse or fail to render service under Crown unlawful .. .. 42
To seditious strike or lockout prohibited .. .. .. .. 98
Industries—
Power to make regulations for maintenance of those essential for public
welfare.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13,18
Those essential to public welfare may be so declared .. .. .. 97
Infant on active service may grant power of attorney .. .. ..75
Inflammable liquid, possession of, in ceitain places prohibited .. .. 38
Intoxicating liquor—
For preventing sale of, by unlicensed person .. ~ .. .. 12
For preventing sale of, by licensees except in conformity with licenses .. 13
For regulation of sale of, to women .. .. .. .. ~ 13
Not to be sold to members of Forces for consumption off premises .. 32
Not to be given, supplied, or procured for consumption off premises .. 32
Not to be brought or possessed on troop-train ~ .. .. 42
Not to be brought, sent, or possessed in a camp .. .. .. 42
Treating on licensed premises an offence .. .. .. 65, 74
Persons liable in respect of offence of treating .. .. 65, 90
Disqualification of bar-attendant convicted of an offence .. 65, 143
Constable may enter premises without warrant and search for and
seize .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
Not to be sold or supplied to soldier undergoing medical or curative treat-
ment .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 149
Restricting sale and supply on arrival of troopship .. .. 174, 185, 188
Delivery at wharf or railway-station not prohibited .. .. .. 185
Invisible ink not to be used in writing, or procured, sold, or manufactured .. 138
Labour —
Power to make regulations as to use of labour .. .. 18
Also as to delivery of goods in boroughs so as to save labour .. .. 18
Also as to labour of alien enemies .. .. .. ..18
Power to make regulations as to national service .. .. 19,152


PAGE
Lamb-pelts : Sale and purchase prohibited except as specified .. .. 123
Landing—
Disaffected or disloyal person may be prohibited from landing in New Zea-
land .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 85
Declaration to be made by male person before landing in New Zealand .. 99
Master or member of crew may be required to make similar declaration .. 183
Lawlessness or violence, encouraging or advocating, prohibited .. .. 3G
Letters of administration : Consent of Attorney-General required where alien
enemy concerned .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 44
Licensed premises—
Liability of licensee, &c., in respect of treating .. .. ~ 65
Treating on, an offence .. .. .. .. .. 65, 74, 90
Women not to be in bar after 6 p.m. .. .. .. .. 66
Lighting : Regulations for restricting use of coal-gas and electricity 107, 122
Local authority—
Not to undertake new development-works without consent of Minister of
Finance .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 145
Procedure on applications for consent .. .. .. .. 146
Lockout: No person to be party to seditious strike or lockout .. .. 98
Meetings (see Unlawful meetings).
“ Military authority ” defined .. .. .. .. .. 23
Military camp—
Land adjoining may be declared part of camp .. .. 88
Regulation of occupiers thereof and of premises thereon .. .. 88
•‘Military officer” defined .. .. .. ..23
Military Police —
No person to obstruct, interfere with, or impede .. .. ..117
No person to incite member of Expeditionary Force to resist .. ..117
Military service—
Notice to be exhibited by person to whom delivered ~ .. .. 69
Notice to be exhibited at cinematograph exhibitions, if so directed .. 69
Notice to be exhibited on tram-cars and ships, if so required .. .. 69
Notice to be exhibited, no person to interfere with public exhibition of .. 70
Obligations of persons exempted from, by reason of occupation .. .. 91
Person wilfully deceiving a Board commits an offence .. .. .. 92
Returns required from Reservists of Second Division as to children .. 112
Deportation of subject of Allied State who is liable to compulsory military
service.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 137
Constable may require any man to produce his military papers .. .. 160
Military supplies—
May be requisitioned by Minister of Defence .. .. .. ..8,21
When contracts for, may be cancelled .. .. .. .. 16
Milk-
Providing for the supply of milk in boroughs .. .. .. .. 176
License required from Council of borough where regulations in force .. 177
Factory for milk products not to be established within thirty miles of
that borough .. .. .. .. .. 177


Mining Privileges— page
Protection may be granted by Military Service Board on hearing and dis-
missal of appeal .. .. .. .. .. 115
Certificate of protection to be registered .. .. .. .. 115
Minor on active service may grant power of attorney .. .. .. 75
Money : Remittances out of New Zealand exceeding £l,OOO prohibited .. 147
Moving-pictures : Minister of Defence may prohibit exhibition .. .. 46
Name-
Alien enemy not to change name .. .. .. .. ... 28
Business under misleading name may be prohibited .. .. .. 35
Attorney-General may prohibit carrying on business in name of enemy .. 50
National service, power to make regulations as to .. .. 19, 152
Naturalized British subject not to load ship or work about wharf unless licensed 120
Naval authority, reference in regulations to military authority to include .. 119
Newspaper advertisements of goods of enemy unlawful .. .. .. 61
Newspapers (see Publication prohibited).
Notices : Publication in Gazette to be notice to all concerned .. 15
Obstruction of officer an offence .. .. .. .. .. 25
Officer—
Means military officer or constable .. .. .. •. .. 23
Obstructing, interfering with, or misleading an .. .. .. 25
Information to be furnished to .. .. .. .. .. 25
Partner of an enemy : Restrictions may be imposed on his business .. 60
Passports—
Definition of “ passport ” .. .. .. .. .. 70
Persons over fifteen not to land without passport .. .. 70
Persons not required to have passports .. .. .. 71
Officer or Collector of Customs may take possession of passport .. 71
Alien master or member of crew not to land without passport .. 71
Temporary permission to land may be granted by Collector .. .. 71
Those issued by Governor-General may be recalled .. .. .. 119
Penal provisions of other Acts not affected .. .. .. • • 6
Permits —
Bond may be required before permit to leave New Zealand issued .. 17
Required for sale, importation, or possession of firearms or ammunition .. 37
To leave New Zealand required by all persons over fifteen 41, 42, 43, 70,119
May be issued to temporary resident only within three months of arrival 100
No person to enter on seagoing ship without permission in writing .. 114
On expiration or revocation permits to be returned .. .. ..119
Person includes a body corporate .. .. .. .. .. 52
Petrol: Provisions as to importation, sale, and distribution .. 155,165
Photograph or sketch of oversea ship prohibited.. .. .. ..126
Pollard (see Flour).


Postal packets— page
Sending to certain persons or companies may be prohibited .. 27
While such order in force, communication or sending money prohibited .. 27
Not to be sent otherwise than through Post Office .. .. 28
Having seal or stamp for raising moneys attached may be detained .. 35
Power of attorney—
Power to continue in force for certain period .. .. ~ ~ 12
Provisions of Property Law Act as to may be modified .. ~ 12
Cases in which same may be granted to Public Trustee .. .. 74
Minor on active service may grant .. ~ .. 75
Also to person or body corporate approved by a Judge or Magistrate .. 101
Printers and Newspapers Registration Act —
Offence against also an offence under War Regulations .. .. 162
Save in newspaper no person to print matter relating to war unless ap-
proved by Censor ~ .. .. .. . # ..163
Prisoner of war—
Definition of ~ .. .. .. .. # _ .. 23
Assisting escape of prisoner of war prohibited . ~ .. 26
Communication with, only through Post Office .. .. .. 26
Persons sentenced in enemy territory in military occupation may be de-
tained in New Zealand .. .. ~ .. .. .. 29
Public Trustee may be appointed custodian of property ~ .. 62
Powers with respect thereto and disposal of proceeds .. ~ .. 62
Appointment of Public Trustee to continue until revoked by Attorney-
General .. .. .. .. .. .. 203
Further powers as to prisoner of war no longer in New Zealand .. .. 203
Probate ! Consent of Attorney-General required where alien enemy concerned 44
Procedure in prosecutions under War Regulations Acts .. .. .. 6
Property, British : Returns of all held by enemy to be made . . .. 140
Property of enemy {see Enemy property).
Property of soldier—
Providing for management of, by trustees .. ~ .. ~ 103
Execution against, only with consent of Attorney-General .. *. 201
Recommendation of a Magistrate required .. .. .. " 201
Not to be seized or sold by way of distress for rent without consent .. 202
No bankruptcy petition without consent of Attorney-General .. .. 202
Prostitute-
Loitering in public place commits an offence .. .. .. . . 67
Living on earnings of, an offence .. .. .. .. 67
Publicans’ licenses—
Regulations for cancellation in certain cases may be made .. .. 14
Application for cancellation ~ .. .. * 76
Grounds on which license may be cancelled ~ .. .. 76
Powers of Licensing Committee as to hearing application .. .. 76
Procedure on cancellation .. .. .. ~ # * * 77
Publication in Gazette to be notice to all concerned .. .. .. 15
Publication prohibited—
Of information as to military or naval matters when secrecy enjoined .. 26
Of information relating to naval and military matters specified *32 45
Of prejudicial or injurious statements or false reports .. .. . 34


Publication prohibited— continued. page
Of statements likely to interfere with recruiting or discipline .. .. 34
Of statements indicating disloyalty or disaffection .. .. .. 34
Of documents inciting or advocating violence or lawlessness or expressing
seditious intention .. ~ .. ~ .. 36
Of books and other publications of which sale injurious to public
interest .. .. .. .. .. .. 39,150,162
Of information as to cargo or use of ship for troops .. .. .. 44
Of confidential communication from military authority .. .. 45
Of any matter if military authority so directs .. .. 45
Of any matter indicating omission due to censorship .. .. 45,163
Of seditious utterances .. .. .. .. .. .. 83
Of shipping intelligence .. .. .. .. .. ..' 102
Public Trustee—
Appointed custodian of enemy property .. .. .. .. 47
May require particulars of property of alien enemy .. .. .. 52
May be appointed controller of business of company, &c., declared an enemy 58
Powers as such controller .. .. .. .. .. ~ 58
May be appointed custodian of property of prisoner of war .. 62, 203
Delegation to, of powers of attorney, agent, trustee, executor, or adminis-
trator on active service .. .. .. .. .. .. 74
Powers under such delegation .. .. .. .. .. 74
Recruiting, statements likely to interfere with, prohibited .. .. 34
Regulations—
Matters in respect of which they may be made .. 5,6, 11, 14, 17, 19, 20
Not invalid because dealing with matter provided for by other Act .. 6
Not invalid because repugnant to any such Act .. .. .. 6
Liability for breach of .. .. .. .. ~ 6, 10
Validity.. .. .. .. .. .. 6,7,10,11,17,21
Powers conferred by, to be in addition to other powers .. .. 26
Remittances of money exceeding £l,OOO out of New Zealand prohibited .. 147
Rent, distress for, against soldiers, only with consent of Attorney-General .. 202
Reports and statements (see Publication prohibited).
Reservist of Second Division to make return as to children .. ..112
Returns—
children to be made by Reservist of Second Division .. ..112
•jJJOf all British property held by, or pecuniary claims against, enemy .. 140
Seamen —
Not to commit breach of contract to serve on transport .. .. 34
Restrictions on shipping as member of crew of oversea vessel .. 63, 70, 75
Alien master or member of crew not to land without passport .. .. 71
Liable for permitting any person to enter seagoing ship without permission
in writing .. .. .. .. •• •• ..114
May be required to make declaration before landing .. .. ..183
Search-
Power to search building or ship and seize documents .. .. 24, 44, 138
Power to search ship and cargo .. .. .. . • .. 35
Power to search any person for firearms and explosives .. .. 38
Power to search licensed premises and houses of ill fame .. 66, 67
Power to search building or ship and seize documents required as evidence 138
Secret-code telegrams from or to New Zealand prohibited .. .. 141


Sedition — page
Encouraging violence or lawlessness or expressing seditious intention .. 36
Printing or distributing documents for same purpose .. .. 37
Seditious utterances, publication of, prohibited ~ .. .. 83
“Seditious intention” and “ seditious tendency” defined ~ 83,151
Seditious conspiracy, no person to be a party to .. .. 85
Seditious strikes and lockouts, no person to be a party to ~ .. 98
Seizure of documents, instruments, and other things .. .. 24,44,138
Sheep-skins, restrictions on sale and purchase of .. .. 107,139
Ship-
Power to search ship and seize documents .. ~ ~ .. 24
Entering defended harbour may be fired on .. .. .. .. 24
After warning, no person to approach ship on which there is armed guard 24, 26
Trespass on ship in possession of Crown .. .. .. .. 25
Master of ship to obey rules of military authority .. .. .. 25
Clearance may be refused on instructions of military authority .. .. 34
If prohibited goods shipped except as bona fide stores clearance may be
refused .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Breach of contract to serve on transport prohibited .. .. .. 34
Alien enemy not to be carried without permission .. .. .. 34
Power to search ship and cargo .. ~ .. .. .. 35
No person to be carried without permit to leave New Zealand .. .. 41
Power to requisition British ship as transport .. .. .. 43
Information as to cargo or use for troops not to be published .. .44
Not to be transferred to person not qualified to own British ship ~ 52
Restriction on shipping as member of crew of oversea vessel .. 63, 70, 75
Alien master or member of crew not to land without passport .. .. 71
British ship registered in New Zealand not to be transferred to foreign-
controlled company .. .. .. ~ .. .. 87
Not to be mortgaged to disqualified person or foreign-controlled company 87
Conspiracy to prevent or delay loading or unloading of any vessel an
offence ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 97
Publication of shipping intelligence prohibited ~ .. .. 102
Shipping industry of New Zealand, providing for the control of .. 109
No person to enter on seagoing ship without permission in writing .. 114
Alien or naturalized British subject not to load ship unless licensed . . 120
Endangering safety of any ship or cargo an offence .. .. 120,183
Constable or Customs officer may question person engaged in such work .. 121
May also search and detain person or package found on or about ship .. 121
Certain persons may be excluded from all ships .. .. .. 121
Cargo and baggage for oversea ship to be examined before shipment .. 125
May be opened or detained or persons questioned as to contents .. 125
Photograph or sketch of oversea ship prohibited .. .. .. 126
No boat or launch to approach seagoing ship at night .. .. .. 126
When oversea ship is receiving or discharging cargo or baggage owner to
station efficient guard .. .. .. .. .. .. 126
Guard liable for default in performance of duty .. .. .. 127
New Zealand seagoing ship to be provided' with wireless-telegraph in-
stallation ~ .. .. ~ ~ < # 163
British ship in New Zealand waters, offence not to be committed against
Imperial War Regulations .. .. .. .. ..164
British ship to obey orders of Naval authority as to navigation and use
of wireless telegraphy .. .. .. .. . # ..164
Alien enemy not to be employed as officer of home-trade ship without
license .. .. .. .. _ 179
‘ Shouting ”on licensed premises unlawful .. .. .. .. 65


PAGE
Signals : Signalling to enemy or prisoner of war .. .. .. 26
Sketches of oversea ships prohibited .. .. .. .. ..126
Soldier-
Arrest of, for offence against Army Act .. .. .. .. 92
Property, providing for management of, by trustees .. .. .. 103
Execution against property of guarantor of soldier not to be issued with-
out consent of Attorney-General .. .. .. . .. 147
Bankruptcy petition against such guarantor not to be filed without
similar consent .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 147
Businesses, providing for protection of business of any soldier .. .. • 169
Execution against property not to be issued without consent of Attorney-
General .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 201
Recommendation of Magistrate required before consent given .. .. 201
“ Soldier ” includes recently discharged soldier and assisted discharged
soldier .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 201
Distress for rent, property not to be seized or sold for, without such con-
sent .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 202
Bankruptcy petition against, not to be filed without such consent .. 202
Power of sale under mortgage or bill of sale not to be exercised without such
consent .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 202
Preceding provisions not to apply to certain accounts current .. .. 204
Statements—
Likely to interfere with recruiting, &c., prohibited .. .. .. 34
Indicating disloyalty or disaffection prohibited .. ~ .. 34
Strangers: Persons not permanently resident in New Zealand may be de-
tained if disaffected or dangerous .. .. .. .. .. 124
Strikes :No person to be party to seditious strike or lockout .. .. 98
Supreme Court, civil jurisdiction may be conferred on, in respect of enemy
trade or property .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
Tahiti, declaration of ultimate destination not required if goods exported to 31
Telegrams, secret-code, from or to New Zealand prohibited .. .. 141
Telegraphic wire or apparatus not to be interfered with .. .. .. 26
“ Territory of enemy State ” defined .. .. .. .. ~ 35
Timber : Imposing restrictions on the export of timber .. .. 165, 186
Trading with the enemy {see Enemy trade).
Transport {see Ship).
Treating—
On licensed premises an offence .. .. .. .. 65, 74
Persons liable in respect of such offence .. .. .. 65, 90
Disqualification of bar-attendant convicted of offence .. .. 65, 143
Constable and person acting under directions not liable .. .. 90
Trespass on any place or ship in use of Crown prohibited, or on railway .. 25
Trustees —
On active service may delegate powers to Public Trustee .. .. 74
Also to person or body corporate approved by a Judge or Magistrate .. 101
Of soldiers’ property may be appointed .. .. .. .. 103


PAGE
Ultimate destination, declaration of, as to goods before shipment .. 29, 50
Unlawful meetings—
Commissioner of Police may prohibit meetings having reference to war .. 89
Person permitting or present at, guilty of an offence .. .. .. 90
Validation of regulations .. .. .. .. 6,7, 10, 11, 17, 21
Venereal disease, regulations may be made for prevention of .. .. 13
Verification of instruments, regulations may be made as to .. .. 12
Vessel {see Ship).
Violence or lawlessness, encouraging or advocating, prohibited .. .. 36
War Regulations—
War Regulations Act, 1914.. .. .. .. .. ..5
Regulations as to powers and duties of Defence Forces .. .. 5
Regulations prohibiting acts injurious to the public safety .. .. 6
Liability for breach of regulations .. .. .. ~ 6
Validity of regulations .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Procedure in prosecutions under Act .. .. .. .. 6
Penal provisions of other Acts not affected .. .. .. 6
War Regulations Amendment Act, 1915 .. .. .. 7
Validating regulations theretofore made .. .. .. .. 7
Evidence that may be admitted .. .. .. .. .. 7
Acts include those of omission as well as of commission .. .. 7
War Regulations Amendment Act (No. 2), 1915 .. .. .. 8
Minister of Defence may requisition military supplies .. .. 8
Requisition to be deemed a contract .. .. ~ 9
Price to be determined by arbitration .. .. .. 9
Penalty for failure to comply with requisition .. .. .. 9
Minister may take possession on failure to supply .. .. .. 9
Penalty for obstruction .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
Requisition to be defence to actions for breach of contract .. .. 9
Requisition not to affect contract with Crown ~ .. 10
Cancellation of requisitions .. .. .. .. 10
Penalty under principal Act altered .. .. .. .. 10
Validating all regulations theretofore made .. .. .. .. 10
War Regulations Amendment Act, 1916 .. .. .. ..11
Validation of regulations theretofore made .. .. .. 11
Power to make further regulations as to enemy trade, enemy property,
delegation of power of attorney, agent, &c., continuing powers of
attorney in force, minors granting powers of attorney, modifying pro-
visions as to powers of attorney, verification of instruments, sale of
intoxicating liquor, treating, prostitution, venereal disease, maintain-
ing essential industries.. .. .. .. .. ..11
Power to make regulations for cancelling publicans’ licenses .. .. 14
Publication in Gazette notice to all concerned .. .. 15
Acts extended to Cook Islands .. .. .. .. 16
Repeal: Duration of Acts .. ~ .. .. 15
War Legislation Amendment Act, 1916, section 41 .. .. ~16
Contract for military supplies may be cancelled .. ; .. 16
War Legislation Act, 1917, sections 26, 34, and 35 .. .. 17
Bond may be required before permit to leave New Zealand issued .. 17
Validation of all regulations theretofore made .. .. ..17
Power to make further regulations as to use of labour and capital, re-
stricting registration of companies or foreign companies, regulating
delivery of goods, labour of alien enemies, employment in or manage-
ment of essential industry, employment of women and girls.. 17


War Regulations— continued. page
Finance Act, 19X8, section 25 .. .. .. .. .. 19
Power to make further regulations as to national service .. .. 19
War Legislation, &c.. Act, 1918, sections 24, 26, 29, and 30 .. .. 20
Duration and termination of war defined .. .. .. 20
Protection of soldiers and discharged soldiers from judicial process .. 20
Extension of meaning of military supplies .. .. .. .. 21
Validation of all regulations theretofore made .. .. .. 21
Wharf-
May be declared a Government wharf .. .. .. .. 95
Powers of Controller as to such wharf .. .. .. 95
Inciting person to refuse to render service as wharf labourer thereon ... 96
Damaging such wharf or buildings or goods thereon .. .. ~ 97
Conspiring to prevent loading or unloading of any vessel .. .. 97
Alien or naturalized British subject not to work about wharf unless licensed 120
Certain persons may be excluded from all wharves .. .. .. 121
Trespass on guarded wharf prohibited .. .. .. .. 151
Pleasure or other small boat not to approach guarded wharf .. .. 151
Wheat Trade Regulations, 1917 and 1919 —
Private dealings in wheat prohibited.. .. .. .. 128,189
Control of the wheat trade .. .. .. .. .. 129, 190
Purchases of wheat by the Government .. .. .. 130, 191, 199
Sales of wheat by the Government .. .. .. .. 131, 192
Terms of employment of brokers .. .. .. .. 133, 193
Settlement of disputes .. .. .. . • • • 133, 194
Offences against the regulations .. .. .. .. 134, 195
Returns to be made to Wheat Controller .. .. .. 135, 196
Purchase and sale of seed-wheat .. .. .. .. 137, 197
Sale of old wheat of season 1917-18 .. .. .. .. .. 198
Wireless telegraphy—
No person to have in possession or use instruments without license .. 25
New Zealand seagoing ship to be provided with wireless-telegraph instal-
lation .. .. .. .• •• •• •• •• 163
British ship to obey orders of Naval authority as to use of * .. .. 164
Women—
Power to regulate sale of intoxicating liquor to .. .. 13
Power to make regulations as to employment of women or girls .. 18
Women not to be in bar of licensed premises after 6 p.m. .. .. 66
Wool-
Purchase of certain wool by any person prohibited .. .. .. 180
Sale of such wool other than to Crown prohibited .. .. • • 180
No person to act as agent in sale or purchase of . • • ■ • • 180
Consent may be given to purchase or sale of wool not required by Crown.. 181
Persons may be licensed to purchase wool for subsequent sale to Crown .. 181
Works —
New development-works not to be undertaken without consent of Minister
of Finance .. • • • • • • • • • • • • *^s
Procedure on application for consent .. .. .. .. 146
By Authority : Marcus F. Marks, Government Printer, Wellington.
[1,500/5/19 —8802
