

WAR I
■ : ■ lb "■ •• • ' ]
st„
BY H, CHRISTOPHERSON, B.A
- CONTENTS:
Introductory Origin and Causes of War
Peace Movement in the past
Some Contemporary Views
Nation Making Some Theories
Commercial imperialism Future Capitalistic Peace
A Democratic Peace Policy
A Policy for Australia
<*.£—■THREE PI
'lVlarxian Press, 115 Goulburu St.. Sydney.




How to Abolish War.
INTRODUCTORY.
I wish to dispel at the outset any ex-
pectations which may be entertained,
that I am going - to put forward a ready-
made scheme, easily put into practice,
which will abolish war at once and for
all time. This essay is rather a historical
review of the peace movement and a. cri-
ticism of past and present international poli-
tics. The last chapters are devoted to a short
exposition of what ought in my opinion to be
the attitude of democratic and peace par-
ties towards militarism, imperialism,
war, and internationalism, in accordance
with the deductions made in the course of
my argument. I also wish to say that I
do not expect any sudden regeneration,
and that although I am an anti-militarist
and an anti-imperialist, I believe that
there will be wars and wars before mili-
tarism is abolished, if it ever will be
abolished. At the same time I believe it
is the duty of every democrat to oppose
militarism and war wherever he can as
the chief enemies of real liberty. The at-
titude _of democratic parties towards
militarism and Imperialism has in the
past been bewildering and varying in the
extreme for reasons which I shall endea-
vour to point out. Meanwhile, in the end


I think all real democrats will be_ able to
meet in support of the same principles.
The apparent differences are due to ad-
verse circumstances, which force people
to adopt certain lines of conduct* rather
than to differences in ideals.
ORIGIN AND CAUSES OF WAR.
Let us look first at the origin and
causes of war. Some people say that
war is unnatural and only due to the vil-
lainy of a few men. This is so far from
being the case that originally war was
the only natural state in human society
and the only state possible. If we go
back to the dark age of the pure savage,
we find conditions in which the fight for
existence, the fight for food, was a neces-
sity. Man, no doubt, also had from the
first to fight against ferocious beasts. At
a later stage, when the human race had
congregated into tribes they often had
to fight'for possessions of their territory
on account of the scarcity of food. This
is probably the origin of the common,
aversion towards all strangers. The
human race has thus been born and bred
with the fighting instinct in it, and the
development of modern militarism has
been a natural growth.
Peace, as applied to ancient history
was a purely negative condition. It was
the political condition which prevailed in
the intervals between -wars. Grotiusdn
hii treatise, “De jure belli ac pads”


(1625) shows the subordination of peace
to the subject of war. In our own time
peace has obtained a higher status, purely
due to the fact that differed! parts of the
present capitalist communities are much
more interdependent than they formally
were. The preservation of peace has be-
come an object of direct political effort.
This again is a direct outcome of natural
agencies in economics and sociology. Mili-
tarism and war has grown naturally un-
til it has attained proportions which
threaten to destroy modern civilisation.
Although it has been a natural growth,
it has at last reached such proportions,
that the desire to substitute something
less socially destructive for war is also a
natural outcome of the present state of
things. In the past there came a time
when tribal wars' had to go. The econo-
mic structure had become such that tri-
bal wars were impossible, except at the
cost of the established system ' The
fighting spirit of the tribes and clans lin-
gered on for some centuries, but gradu-
ally died a natural death. So will the in-
ternational wars continue long after they
have become a scourge to society: but,
in my opinion, they also will die a natu-
ral death, though they will die hard.
The world at large realises that it is
heavily burdened and hampered in its
progress by its cumbersome coat of mail.
Yet, it sees nothing but confusion, politi-
cal and economic, if it disarms. National


pride, religious bias, thirst of military
glory, and the idea of exploiting the
world for the benefit of home capitalists,
still play a large part in the countries of
the world. But it is not religion any
long-er that is the instigation of national
passions. _ The wars of the future will be
commercial wars.
The present policy of the commercial
countries has given itself expression in
the Imperialistic policy of Germany and
Great Britain, and the policy of political
expansion of the United States. The
economic tap-root, the chief directing
motive of all modern Imperialistic policy
is the pressure of capitalist industries for
markets for their surplus products, and
the need for new fields of investment
for the surplus capital of modern com-
mercial countries. The financiers who
govern all Government, want new colo-
nies and dependencies for exploitation.
There is also the spirit of national ag-
gression. Each capitalistic Empire wants
to keep the people in subjection it has
subdued, and if possible to subdue more
people. It is evident that as long as this
is so there can be no possibility of per-
manent peace. Imperialism and war go
together, and those who aspire to Em-
pire will have to pay the price. Not only
will they have to pay the price as long
as they can maintain their Empire, but
judging by past history, there is no pos-


sibility of any nation maintaining a per-
petual world-empire.
The error of Norman Angell in his
work, “The Great Illusion,” is that he
himself is working under the illusion
that economic causes are the only causes
of war. This essay recognises the diffi-
cult psychological and sentimental ele-
ments, and tries to deal with them.
PEACE MOVEMENT IN THE PAST.
I shall consider now what has been
done in the past in order to counteract
the tendency to war. Though the idea of
preserving peace by international agree-
ments has had many exponents and sup-
porters in the past, no complete and prac-
ticable scheme has ever yet been put
forward. The first attempts to preserve
peace have been made by summoning
•conferences of some sort or other from
the contending- parties and trying to
settle the differences by agreement or
arbitration. These conferences were at
first purely local and often national; they
did not affect the international position
generally. The first known council which
tiied to regulate hostilities between dif-
ferent localities was the semi-religious,
semi-political Amphictyonic Council of
the Greeks, which met at Delphi. It for-
bade certain extreme measures of hos-
tility against any city sharing in the
-common _ Amphictyonic worship, and it
was forbidden to raze any Amphictyonic


city or to cut off its water. Its influence
was only temporary and not extensive.
The next example is of a different char-
acter, but one which has had as many
imitators and supporters as the first type.
It was the ‘Tax Romana” established
within the Roman Empire. It was mere-
ly a peace within an Empire governed
from a central authority, the constituent
parts of which were held in , subjection
by a network of bureaucratic administra-
tion and armed force. During the feudal
system devices for preservation of peace
fell out of use. The feudal system was
an organisation whose object was effici-
ency in war, not maintenance of peace.
During the last century the Powers of
Europe have met in conferences. This
combination of powers is known as, the
“concert of Europe.” It has lately ad-
mitted the United States and Turkey to
its conferences, and such States as Japan
will no doubt expect to be admitted in
the future. These conferences have set-
tled questions relating to the_ near East,
the dividing up of West Africa (Berlin,
1885), etc. The essential feature of the
concert has been the recognition of the
advantage to all the great Powers of
common action in cases where interven-
tion was desired for some reason or
other.
Henry IV. of France was the first to
promulgate the “grand_ design” of an in-
ternational Parliament. In 1898 Czar


Nicholas 11. sent out his famous rescript,
stating- that he thought that the moment
was “very favourable for seeking, by
means of international discussion the
most effectual means of assuring to all
peoples the benefits of a real and durable
peace.” “In the course of the last twenty
years,” added the rescript, “the preserva-
tion of peace has become an object of
international policy.” The enormous ex-
pense of energy in keeping up huge arm-
aments was transforming armed peace
into a crushing burden, which nations
had more and more difficulty in bearing.
The Czar invited the interested Powers
to participate in a conference. The first
conference was held in 1899 at the
Hague, and another followed in 1907. At
the earlier one 26 Powers were repre-
sented, at that of 1907 there were 44 —-
practically the whole world. The con-
ventions drawn up by the 1907 confer-
ence were a codification of the hitherto
unwritten international law, which na-
tions had hitherto interpreted with more
or less latitude according to their power.
At the conference of 1899 an arbitration
court was initiated for the purpose of
dealing judicially with such matters in
dispute as the Powers agreed to sub-
mit to it. The third Hague conference
is timed to be held in 1917. Secretary
Knox, of the United States, proposed to
establish a permanent prize court at the
Hague, thus creating a tribunal which
would be always to hear cases.


Thus, while armaments are increasing
and aggressive wars planned, statesmen
of all parts are ostensibly at least, at-
tempting to establish a judiciary to ad-
just their lifferences in accordance with
written law. Many of the Powers who
participated in the Hague conferences
have no doubt considered them purely as
farces, and have played the old trick of
confessing their devotion to peace, while
they have been scheming for war. Never-
theless, if the Hague conferences have
been of no practical value, they have at
least helped to popularise the idea of set-
tling international differences by peace-
able means. In fact, so widespread is
this tendency to advocate abolition of
war that the Hague conferences may be
considered as nothing more than a re-
sponse to popular demand. Yet, the world
is no nearer, or very little nearer, the
solution of the question than it was be-
fore. National feeling and racial preju-
dice are as deep-rooted as ever. The pub-
lic are looking with distrust on the rapid
growth of armaments, and fear that they
may lead to grave economic evils in ad-
dition to the curse of war. The conser-
vative statesmen, and even some of the
professedly democratic politicians have
kept on repeating, parrot-like, the old
formula, “The best way of preserving
peace is to prepare for war.” The result
that might be expected was the European
war, 1914.


SOME CONTEMPORARY VIEWS.
. : Socialists are opposed to the ex-
isting - armies; firstly, because they wish
to abolish most existing institutions or
alter their form, and they fear that the
military may defend the status quo; sec-
ondly, because most Socialists do not
want to maintain the present States on
their existing basis. Voluntary armies of
of the British type are quite as objection-
to anti-militarists, as are the national
armies of the compulsory type, raised on
the European continent. Mr. Bruce Gla-
sier,_ at the annual conference of the
British Independent Labour Party in
• I 9 °7i said that he denounced militarism
root and branch. Mr. Keir Hardie, at the
same conference, said that a citizen army
was as _ great a menace to an industrial
population as a professional army.
eople would find that a citizen army
officered by rich and recruited from the
ranks of the workers, would be taught
to regard the flag as something- holy,
while they shot down strikers and Soc-
ialists just as freely as the most exclu-
sive professional army in the world could
Patriotism was one of the weapons
used by the enemies of the people to blind
them to facts. _ Other Socialists,- both
British and foreign, have always vigor-
ously denounced militarism.
There is, however, a surprising differ-
ence in the attitude taken up by Social-


ists towards militarism. Some, and es-
pecially the syndicalists, advocate the es-
tablishment of a democratic citizen
army. The ideal army from their point
of view is the armed nation. The British
“Social Democrat” says, October, 1907.
“A standing army of professional sol-
diers is the most effective instrument in
the hands of the dominent class, the
greatest menace to democracy and popu-
lar liberty, and the most effective barrier
to revolutionary change that could pos-
sibly be conceived. And surely, too, the
antithesis to that is the armed nation —
every citizen a soldier, and every soldier
a citizen.” So that this writer favours a
strong citizen force and looks upon it
as something different to the regular
national armies. It is difficult to see how
such an army could be kept democratic,
if such a thing as a democratic army is
possible under any circumstances. Mr.,
Quelch, the editor of “Justice,” is even
more optimistic in his opinion of the
armed democracy. “An armed nation,” he
says, “whatever it may do or submit to,
is essentially a free nation, and whatever
such a nation determines upon, that it
can do and have, in spite of any ruling
class.” Similar opinions have frequently
been expressed by Continental Socialists.
They seem , to forget that such an army
would always be at the disposal of any
aggressive government that might be
blown into office. It. would be danger-


ously similar to the present German
army, and would constitute a greater
menace to, than guarantee of, the world’s
peace. So much for. the Socialists’ atti-
tude towards the army. Some favour
democratic citizen forces; others, the
greater number, are absolutely anti-mili-
tarists. The division of opinion, although
regrettable, is easily accounted for. The
more thoughtful democrats and Social-
ists see that militarism is absolutely op-
posed to true democracy; yet they have
to admit that under the present system of
international feud, jealousy, and greed,
it might mean national extinction to dis-
band the armies.
It is interesting to note the attitude of
the professed British Socialist, Robert
Blatchford during the present war. He
has recently published a manifesto,
“England and Germany,” in which he
calls on every Briton to defend the Bri-
tish Empire and British freedom. It is
as ardent an appeal to the British people
to arm themselves as has ever been seen
from any Tory politician. There can be
no doubt Robert Blatchford is honest in
his conviction that he is doing his duty.
This attitude, of course, is natural, but it
proves that the dictum that the idea of
nationality does not exist in the mind of
a Socialist needs some modification.
People, and even Socialists, who are held
under the iron yoke of a foreign Empire,
will rise in rebellion as soon as they think


they have got the remotest chance of
throwing off the yoke, even if the gain is-
only of a sentimental and not of a ma-
terial nature. It is useless, therefore, to-
ignore national sentiment, and it is far
better to try to devise a scheme of divid-
ing' the world into countries, will
leave room for national sentiment, than
to persist in the present method, which
is military conquest..
NATION MAKING.
Prior to the French revolution people
were grouped together into nations with
very little regard to either territorial or
racial unity. After 1815 up to 1850 the
tendency was to g'roup European terri-
tories into countries according to the
language of the inhabitants. This, how-
ever, was not universally the case. After
1850 this process has been continued in
some cases, while in other cases the 1 ten-
dency has been to avoid further re-ar-
rangement of boundaries, and to com-
plete the homogeneity by forcing reluc-
tant populations to adopt the language
of the predominant or governing race.
Thus, in parts of Alsace-Lorraine, Ger-
man-speaking immigrants are gradually
displacing, under Government encourage-
ment, the French-speaking population.
Russia, in trying to solve the same prob-
lem, by absorbing Finland into the na-
tional system, is burdening herself with
a difficulty which may work out in cen-


turies of unrest, if not in domestic vio-
lence.
_On the other hand there are such coun-
tries as the United States and Sotnh
America, where large bodies of alien im-
migrants arrive annually. To allow the
upgrowth of alien communities, it is
recognised might lead to domestic
troubles of a perilous character. The
policy in such places is therefore to en-
torce a universal official language, trust-
ing the influence of social intercourse and
tune to root out subsidiary languages.
1 nus, while ,in one case homogeneity of
language with State boundaries seems to
be one of the conditions making for
peace,--the avoidance of interference with
a well-marked homogeneous area like
r inland would seem to contribute to the
same end. The Dominion of Canada, the
Commonwealth of Australia, the South
African Union, and the Dominion of New
Zealand are recent examples of nation-
making. With the exception of the
South African Union, it is* the result of
a voluntary linking up of States or col-
omes voluntary linking up of'
smaller entities into larger aggregates
has been so successful in these cases that
it worth while considering whether
this is hot the only desirable and .pos-
sible way of constituting the States of
the future.
I think that many small nations will
giadually pass out of existence. It is in-


teresting to notice in this connection that
Mr. Bjornson, the son of the Norwegian
dramatist, Bjornson, during: recent years
has carried on a Teutonic campaign
throughout Scandinavia. .He was actual-
ly on a lecturing tour, advocating a Teu-
tonic union, when the war broke out. the
public, which, before that had given him
a hearing, compelled him to close down
as soon as Germany went to war. His
cause had suffered a set-back. This seems
to prove that to try to force a change
results onty in retarding a natural pro-
cess.
I do not think anyone will contend
that all peoples and races are equal as
regards civilisation and capacity for in-
tellectual development, nor that _ they
will become so in any future within my
imagination. It is a fact. then that the
world is composed of civilised people and
savages, as well as all the intermediate
stages. We are therefore confronted
with the necessity of protecting civilisa-
tion. Too much has, however, always
been made out of this. The Egyptians
f. ex. may be backward, but they are not
dangerous, and the British occupation is
quite unnecessary. On the other hand,
we have such places as New Guinea and
the Congo. In both these places it would
be folly to abolish all forms of militar-
ism. My idea is that in such places a sort
of police force should be maintained as


long- as necessary, and gradually be dis-
pensed with, as the natives adapt them-
selves to the amenities of civilisation.
SOME THEORIES.
_Mr. Joseph McCabe, in his book, Ms
Disarmament Possible?” suggests the
possibility of the proletariat rising in a
time of war, overthrowing the military
caste and revolutionising the world at
one stroke. He also sees, the possibility
of women becoming the dominant force
in political life, and influence the national
policy in the interest of universal peace.
Both ideas are fantastic, and although
something of the nature indicated may
happen, it is not likely to have lasting re-
sults.
The idea inspired by the ancient “Pax
Romana” has always fascinated a cer-
tain number of Imperialists. British Im-
perialists have dreamt of a world-wide
“Pax Britannica” maintained by armed
force. German Imperialists have dreamt
of a similar “Pax Germanica,” and so on.
The idea, however, in spite of its daz-
zling brilliancy, 'must be dismissed by
all practical men as being outside the
range of possibilities. The interests in
the world are too conflicting, and one
nation could claim the same right to have
its particular nationality and language
forced or the world as another, anyhow.'
Even if it were possible for one nation
to subdue the rest of the world, the mo-
ment it had succeeded each part of it


would be seething with revolt, and prac-
tical experience has taught that violated
national sentiment is not easily paci-
fied, nor is national suffering quickly
forgotten. Imperialism is becoming more
and more repugnant to democracy, and
were it not for the different civilisa-
tions the world represents, its day would
have gone long ago. I am an anti-imper-
ialists ; I do not think the world is for
one race only to bustle in, but for all
people, nor is it for any one race to dic-
tate to the rest.
Personally I doubt whether the ex-
treme attitude of rendering no resistance
to even the most barbaric invader would
work out in practice. Of course, it is true
that in order to invade a country an
enemy must be to some extent civilised,
or rather skilled in the arts of produc-
tion and organisation. But it is worth
while considering whether a merely pas-
sive resistance towards foreign invaders
would not be more effective than armed
resistance, especially where a small na-
tion is being overthrown by a big - one.
Take the instance of Germany and Bel-
gium at the present time. Perhaps,
roughly speaking, 30,000 Belgians have
been killed in the present campaign. If
the Belgians had offered ~no active re-
sistance, but merely protested, the Ger-
mans would, no doubt, have occupied
Belgium. The Belgians might at once
have got up a movement for independ-
-16


•ence. Some agitators would, no doubt,
have been expelled, and others executed.
Still, if the Belgians kept on with
political agitation, declarations of inde-
pendence, election of national councils in
spite of the power in military occupation,
the Germans would, no doubt, have to
grant local self-government before they
had killed off 30,000 political aig-
tators —the assumed sacrifice of the Bel-
gians in their futile attempt to with-
stand the German invasion. So that
better results seem to be obtainable in
some cases by persistent sedition than
by armed resistance.
COMMERCIAL IMPERIALISM.
The most striking feature of modern
Imperialism is of such importance that
it needs a chapter .to itself. The thirst
for national glory may play a great part
in the fostering of an Imperialistic spirit,
but the motive which drives the whole
capitalistic organisation to support a
policy of national aggression is the hope
of commercial gain. It is well worth ex-
amining in how far capitalism gains from
Imperialism, and whether many of the
generally drawn conclusions ore not in
the end fallacious. The ideal of commer-
cial Imperialism is to capture the mar-
kets of subject colonies and dominions
for the benefit of the home capitalist, or,
as some maintain, for the benefit of both
parties. Is either of these results pos-
sible?


We have first to consider whether in
trade one party can constantly gain, an-
other constantly lose. It is obvious that
at such a process can only go
on until the losing party has lost all it
had. But if this were the result there is.
no doubt that the loser would find some
means to maintain something like a bal-
ance. Experience shows that there ex-
ists a natural tendency to a constant re-
turn to the state of balance of trade be-
tween different trading territories, i.e., a,
country s exports must, roughly speak-
ing, equal its imports in value. If thev
did not the result would be that coin
must be exported. The value of cur-
rency would increase on account of scar-
city, and manufacture inside the terri-
fy would be stimulated on account of
the low money prices for raw materials
inside, and the high money prices for ma-
terials outside. This would check im-
ports, and this is what has happened so
often as to have been accepted as an
axiom. Ihe idea that one-sided exploita-
tion in its most crude form is possible
must therefore be dismissed.
.Let us next examine whether indus-
trial nations which form Empires can
benefit by an interchange of commodi-
ties with subject parts, while maintaining
the balance of trade. There is one as-
pect _ which has never been adequately
considered. It is generally forgotten that
cun ency is part of a country’s commodi-
-18


ties, and the importance of the exchange
of money in the form of loan and invest-
ment has not been realised. It is quite
possible that Great Britain or Germany,
or rather their capitalists, by exploiting
undeveloped countries, should be able
to gain profits in the first instance by
advancing commodities and machinery to
such countries as capital to start with.
This has to be repaid in raw materials
and primary produce. If sufficient of
this is not raised, the country may have
to transmit cash to the country on
which it has become financially de-
pendent. But it will not do to
deplete a country of cash; the bal-
ance of trade has to be kept up. The
cash has therefore to be retained by some
means in order to carry on business.
The method by which the money is re-
tained is generally by the dependent
country floating loans in the country on
which it is dependent. The most con-
venient way of doing this is by _ way of
Government loans, but shares in com-
panies may also be sold on the
the financial countries in order to, raise
the necessary cash. This is what has
taken place in such countries as Aus-
tralia and India, and also in the minor
German colonies, the industrial concerns
of which are entirely owned by German
capitalists. Once a dependent country
has fallen into indebtedness, there is a
tendency to this indebtedness increasing


in a geometrical progression, as the
country has to pay interest on every
Iresh loan m addition to its previous bum
dens. It is evident, therefore, that there
is a possibility of all the means of pro-
duction in such countries gradually pass-
ing into the hands of the capitalists of
older countries. The result would be that
colonies and dependencies would have to-
produce commodities and export them
to capitalist countries. This is what is
talcmg piace to some extent, and this is
how the ownership of the world is gradm
lhe hands of capitalists
ted Statef ntam ’ German T> and the Uni-
But jet us see whether, if it were pos-
sible, it would be a desirable state of
things for a certain capitalistic commun-
ity to succeed completely in gaining
maSter / over de P en dent coun?
tries. It is evident that the balance of
trade must still be maintained. The own-
mg country could not obtain its rent and
r n i e i eSt 7 n ! 51011 7- but m ust ultimately
receive them in the form of commodities 7
being unable to return commodities other
jf n l ol ] ey ’ h< T” the . mone y which nomi-
nally had to be paid to the capitalist
country, but really remained in the col-
ony, commodities being sent instead. In
other words, the position of the present
i en l e y producing industrial countries
.d the colonial dependencies would be
versed. The industrial countries would


no longer be producing; by gaining their
object they would annihilate their in-
dustry. Unemployment would most like-
ly be the result, so that it is evident that
if there was any ultimate gain, it could
be for the capitalists only. The two
classes of countries would correspond to
the classes of tenants and owners.
But it is not likely that capitalistic or-
ganisations will succeed even in this, be-
cause long before colonies and dependen-
cies fall into complete bondage, they will
have discovered means of ridding them-
selves of their dependence. The extreme-
method is by repudiation of debts, a me-
thod which would no doubt be met by-
armed force. It is not likely to be at-
tempted. But there are plenty of less,
drastic means. One is refusal to pay in-
terest or more than nominal interest, the
difference to be applied to repayment of
loans, a quite justifiable measure in cer-
tain cases.
But it is generally believed that com-
mercial Imperialism can benefit both par-
ties, both the dependent nation and its
conqueror or originator. Thus it is be-
lieved that all parts of the British Em-
pire can benefit by keeping trade within
the Empire, a crazy idea, promulgated
chiefly by a press ever at the call of the
money bags in London. Exchange being
an exchange of commodities, it is evi-
dent that if all parties are to reap the
maximum benefit, exchange must be free,.


and the possessor must be free to offer
it for exchange in the place where he
can value in return. If there is
restriction, it is evident that one party
only can gain,, that is the party which
wishes to make profit at the expense
of the producer. There is only one ex-
ception to this. It may be desirable for
a country with high standard of living
among its working class to maintain this
by exclusion of goods produced by sweat-
ed labour. But this should always, be
approached in a very cautious manner.
Tariffs should never more than barely
cover the difference in cost of labour,
minus cost of transport-’ -rather less
than more. If they exceed this, the con-
sumer is the loser. With all preferential
tariffs the consumer is universally the
loser, and the capitalist ..the gainer.
Lastly, let us consider whether com-
mercial Imperialism, that is Imperialis-
tic exclusiveness by means of tariffs or
custom unions can be to the general ad-
vantage of the countries inside the union,
or to the general disadvantage of those
outside. First as to the inside countries,
if an Empire ceases to import commodi-
ties from outside countries, export must
also tend to cease in accordance with the
balance of trade principle. In most cases
exclusion of foreign imports will only
lead to the cessation of foreign com-
merce, and it is highly improbable that
even the capitalists will gain anything.
22


The excluded countries, of course, will
gain nothing. Now let us look at the
other side of the question. Can an Em-
pire injure foreign nations by excluding
their goods ? In the case of outside Em-
pires or large commercial entities, it is
highly improbable that this can be done..
At the most, it means that the excluded
countries will have to spend more lab-
our in producing certain commodities
than would be necessary if these were
imported in exchange for_ articles more -
suited for production inside their own-
border. But as long as there is more
labour and resources on the market than
required, this can mean no great real loss..
In the case of small countries, or in the
case of countries which are compact and
possess little variation of natural re-
sources, and therefore have to rely on
imports of necessaries, the postion may
become serious. They may have either
to become financially dependent on the
Empires which pursue an aggressive ex-
clusionist, i.e., extreme protectionist,
policy, unless they can establish exchange
with other countries in the same predica-
ment as themselves, but differing in re-
sources. If there is any just cause for
war, it is an obstructive system of pre-
ferential tariff, aiming at the destruction
of a certain country. If every country
has equal rights it may be argued that
in the abstract every country is justified
in taking such measures as will ensure


to it such rights. Therefore, the im-
position of preferential tariffs is of gra™ e
importance, and a matter in which every
AW°S tIC countr y Should be carefuf
■ lto §" et her, commercial Imperialism is
immoral m its methods and pernicious
n its results; it is the gravest menace to
the world's peace, and needs checking
FUTURE capitalistic peace
Now, as for the development of the
peace movement in the future This has
to be n t! t 0 r° Wlth what 1 think ought
uu i he P?. llc y to be followed, but onlv
with the policy which is likely to be fol-
factors wh!T T° c W !d eration all the
1} üblch . P la F a n important part at
a cehalntfl,? 6 - Dem ? cr W ma T
certain influence in the world but at
perialism al f Sm ’ natio P alism , and Im-
periahsm play far more important parts
The development of capitalism has
reached a stage at which war is destruc-
tive even to capital. That is why we Tee
such capitalists as Carnegie being the
leaders of the peace movement. It S true
that many capitalists profit by militar
Ihe’drC 311 / by ame§ ,LTwhe n
the climax of war is reached capitalists
taken all round, are bound to lose not
th AU U the ac ? ual destruction as by
and ,nterference . Wl th production. Trade
SerSTTU A S ° and
nternafional that a disturbance in one
part of the world affects the capitalist!?
2 4


system throughout the world. Many
capitalists profit by the needs of bellig-
erent Governments, but many lose, and
on the whole the risks are too great for
the majority of capitalists. For this, rea-
son there can be no doubt that after the
present war the capitalists will attempt
to establish a capitalistic armed peace, a
system under which the capitalists can
make profits out of peace conditions
without losing their profits on arma-
ments. The armies and fleets will be
maintained, and some system of arbi-
tration will be inaugurated. The jingoes
will, no doubt fall in with the idea in the
same way as they to-day profess to arm
only in the interests of peace. Probably
if they contemplate aggression they will
try arbitration first, and if they can ob-
tain nothing that way they will go to
war afterwards. The system is likely to
break down time after time. A perma-
ment armed peace is impossible.
The time will come when this state of
things will be intolerable to the commer-
cial interests, and a league between the
leading capitalistic States will be enter-
ed into, agreeing among themselves to
maintain the peace of the world by a
military force under international con-
trol. There is abundant evidence that
modern capitalistic sentiment is tending-
in this direction. I shall only quote one
extract. It is a recent newspaper inter-
view with a gentleman just returned


from Europe. He said he hoped the pre-
sent war would kill the mad race for
armaments for many a long day. Could
there not be one world’s army, supported
by all the great nations to police the
wor!d,_ and treat avaricious and covetous
nations as the authorities treated bur-
glars and murderers now, for was not
this war burglary and murder on a gigan-
tic scale ? This gentleman, of course, has
not invented these_ sentences. They ex-
press the views which are shaping in the
bourgeois mind. It is doubtful whether
democracy will gain very much from such
a capitalistic policing of the world. The
chief objection is that it will support op-
pression rather than exterminate it.
A DEMOCRATIC PEACE POLICY.
Having reviewed the forces at work, I
wish to give a few brief statements as
to the ideal towards which every demo-
crat ought to work. As a matter of pol-
icy? J think we should oppose national-
ism m any form. Although we may ad-
mit that a nation has a right to retain
its national traditions and cherish its na-
tional aspirations, we must not forget
that there is always a natural tendency
to nationalism, attaining unjustifiable
proportions; from passive nationalism it
becomes aggressive nationalism, and a
sort of blind and ferocious racial preju-
dice That is why democratic parties
should very carefully avoid pandering to
national prejudice.


It is futile to say that the best way to
preserve peace is to prepare for war..
Therefore it is the duty of every anti-
militarist and democrat always to ad-
vocate general disarmament. Imperial-
ism and war by necessity go together.
Imperialism, by its very nature, can
never be controlled by the people; there-
fore, it is the duty of democrats to be
anti-Imperialists. Imperialistic forces
have always been used in the interests
of capitalism and against the interests of
democracy. We would not consider it
just that a distant Empire should attempt
to subdue us by armed force. Therefore,
we should not attempt to subdue or keep
in subjection any people, who want to be
independent of us. It follows that what
is now called treason and disloyalty
should not be looked upon by democrats
as crimes, but as virtues. If people think
that their interests can be better served
by forming a new economic and national
unit, they should be allowed to advocate
their ideas, even if they advocated the
splitting up of the present artificial na-
tional or rather non-national division of
the world. International co-operation to
resist military domination in all parts of
the world should be started on a far more
extensive and effective scale than has
hitherto been attempted. The most prac-
tical way of breaking the back of mili-
tarism is by starting leagues in all coun-
tries, the members of which pledge them-


selves not to serve in any conscript, com-
pulsory, citizen, or voluntary army no
matter what the punishment inflicted by
military despotism may be at first *
Generally, our aim should be to make
process of nation-making an entirely
voluntary process. If a nation such as
elgmm wants to remain independent it
shauld have the right to doso-tf’ £
wants to federate in some form or other
with another State it should have the
rig it to do so. If the unfortunate Poles
who are dmded between three Empire s’
should desire to reform their country’
Somh Sh A U f haV£ a Tight to do so - K
m l Afnca ™ ts independence, it
» ould be granted it. Examples of such
evelopments are fortunately not un-
known in the history of fairly democra-
tic countries. About ten years ago Nor-
ha7hlt\ Ced ? d / rom . of wihdi it
h f °T e ? a part ’“ no war fol-
,eXamplf fr ° m which the world
ought to learn a lesson. The question of
nationahty shouM be made like the ques-
ton . of rc ngmn. a voluntary one If
people had the right to belong to any
nation they chose, the chances are that
they would soon, like the case of religion
be indifferent as to whether they be-
ffon ged f t ?T? ny - Y ° U may think adop-
tion of this principle would lead to a
h lend ai ? d dangerous disintegration. I '
do not think so. The modern tendency
is towards integration, and not towards
28


disintegration, but I do not think tins
process can be hastened by using force.
If it could it would still be undesirable,
but past experience shows that force re-
tards the process rather then hastening
it.
Commercial interests in different coun-
tries are seeking new territories to ex-
ploit. We must do what we can to check
this all-engrossing* greed. We must op-
pose and combat the capitalistic carrion
birds who follow in the track of every
conquering army to reap the profits of
war and to fatten and batten on the car-
cases of the patriotic workers who have
been lured or forced into a war of for-
eign conquest. We must begin in our
•own home.
A POLICY FOR AUSTRALIA.
These problems can best be illustrated
by taking a concrete example. Let us
■consider the position of Australia. Aus-
tralia forms an ideal economic unit, and
I think that if it is left to Australians to
act voluntarily in the matter, they will
always agree to form one administrative
entity, that is the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia. But should a part such as Tas-
mania wish to secede for economic rea-
sons, no Australian should resist such ac-
tion or try to subdue Tasmania by«force.
Should other units, such as New Zealand,
find it to their advantage to link up, they
should be admitted, if both parties
agreed. But Australia should on no ac-


count pursue an imperialistic policy. I
have noted with regret that there"is a
section which is attempting- to make Aus-
tralia a sort of Pacific Empire, by obtain-
ing possession of all the Pacific islands.
The interests of the tropical islands in
the Pacific and of Australia are not iden-
tical, and can never be reconciled. To
try to keep the islanders under an Aus-
tralian iron yoke will only lead to per-
petual trouble for both parties, and if the
tropical islands need some assistance in
order to be developed, our policy should
be to give such assistance and to ask only
for the recompensation which advantage-
ous trade relations will bring. As soon
as the time is ripe, we should help them
to form independent island communities-
of their own.
Australia should not interfere with
what happens outside Australia. The
course which would give the most satis-
factory results in the end, would be to
keep the Australian Commonwealth as
far_ as possible independent of outside
political powers. Australia is a conti-
nent, and in a very near future will be
well able to look after itself. For Aus-
tralia to remain in close connection with
any particular European country will
only cause the troubles of European poli-
tics to be reflected in Australia. Aus-
tralia should keep neutral in all crises
outside Australia. We should try to fill
Australia as far as -possible with a homo--


geneous population; but I certainly think
that from whatever part of the world im-
migrants arrive in Australia, we should
attempt to get them to adopt a common
language and a common nationality.
The problem before us, it will be rea-i
lised, is a difficult one. Prejudice, super-
stition, and egotism are the forces that
are against us. Our efforts must be
rected not against one obstacle only, but
against obstacles on all sides. _ Only when
we have succeeded in abolishing capital-
istic exploitation will we have abolished
the commercial reasons for war, and only
when we have made nation-making a vol-
untary process will we have abolished
the sentimental or patriotic reasons for
war. This must take place not in one
country only, but in all countries. We
cannot at present abolish Avar ; but we
■can agitate to get our principles adopted,
■and when our principles are universally
adopted, not before, will Avar be abolish-
ed. It is for us to carry on the agita-
tion. Ido not wish to see the day when
there is no strife in the world. There
will always be something to fight for.
But instead of the world engaging itself
in socially suicidal Avars, the fight should
be one in which the weapons of murder-
ers are not used, one not for destruction,.
Tut for social and intellectual advance-
ment.
