

FOURTH EDITTON. [?]
WAR SERMONS
OR
WAR
Religiously
Considered.
BY
REV. A. MACDONALD, M.A.
Price - - Sixpence.
Otautau Standard Print, Otautau.
19l7.




CONTENTS.
Page.
I. The War: Its Benefits ... ... 3
11. The War and Patriotism ... .. 9
111. The War and Christianity ... ... 16
IV, The War and German False Teachers 24
V. The Last Great War: “Armageddon” 33


PREFACE.
Each winter I have delivered special sermons on the moonlight
Sabbath evenings. These five sermons were delivered during the
past winter. I had no intention of them appearing in print, but the
Editor of “The Otautau Standard” (Mr Fisher) asked me to write
them out one by one and he would publish them. After the last one
had been published there came a spontaneous request from many
quarters that the five sermons should he published in pamphlet form.
I was not the originator of the scheme; it has grown, and I have
acquiesced in it. Only one of the sermons will pass away with the
war—namely, Sermon IV. on “The War and German False Teachers.”
That sermon contains the evil principles we are fighting against. It
is important that all should know these evil principles. The other
four sermons are on permanent topics.
The sermons evoked great interest in this place, and, as the people
here are a fair average in intelligence, it is hoped they will evoke
the same interest in other places.
A. M.
Otautau, New Zealand,
26th October, 1915.


I. — THE WAR: ITS BENEFITS.
We are apt to think too much of the harm that war does—the
number slain, the many homes thrown into mourning, the paralysing
of trade for the time being, the destroying of property and the laying
waste of the country. In face of these facts it is not surprising if
many earnest people ask, what benefits can come out of this war ?
We admit the picture has a very dark side, but let us look at the
other side, and we will see the benefits of war. Let us view this
subject—(l) From a worldly point of view; (2) from a religious
point of view.
I.—WORLDLY POINT OF VIEW.
A great benefit of the war will be a notable expansion in British
trade and industry. The Germans have a large trade by sea. Their
vessels sail all seas. There will be less of that after the war. There
will be fewer German-made articles bought by us. British factories
will produce a larger and more varied output, and British consumers
will be sure to stipulate for “made in Britain” brand on articles in-
stead of “made in Germany.” Britain will capture German trade by
sea and expand her industries after the war.
As to ourselves. New Zealand has benefited by the war. Prices
of grain, wool, grass seed and stock have advanced. Prices never
were higher. While we admit there will be an expansion of trade
and industry in Britain and increased prices in New Zealand for
mostly all farm produce, let us leave these benefits and look at larger
and better benefits.
HEROISM.
We are apt to think that many well-off people nowadays love ease
and pleasure so much that heroism has ceased to be amongst them.
Our well-to-do people have cast aside ease and pleasure and aie
ready for heroic deeds. And among the humbler walks of life you
will find many heroes. EAmry day, almost, we are reading of heroic
acts done by our soldiers and sailors. Many win the V.C.


SELF-SACRIFICE.
God and our country call us to acts of self-sacrifice. Let me
give you examples. The soldiers have been called upon to face the
rigours and hardships of a winter campaign. Frost and snow have
alternated with periods of continuous rain. The men have been call-
ed upon to stand for many hours together in trenches up to their
knees in mud and cold water. They have been glad to sleep on straw
in sheds and in tumble-down buildings. All these are men who have
been accustomed to comfortable homes. They have sacrificed all
for their country.
Doctors and nurses have gone to the front. They were in good
positions but they sacrificed them for the war. The people have
sent socks and garments for our soldiers and sailors. Money and
clothes have been sent to the relief of the Belgians. Fathers have
given their sons, wives have given their husbands. The Earl of Ran-
furly, who lost his only son, felt honoured he had him to give. He
said if he had had another son he would have given him also. Fathers
and mothers are putting the best face on things when their sons leave
for the front. They hide sad hearts with a smiling face. A mother
said, “I said good-bye to my boy with a smiling face. I knew there
would be plenty of time to cry after he had gone.”
TEMPERANCE.
You would have thought the lead in temperance reform would
have emanated from Britain where there are so many temperance or-
ganisations. But no, it was Russia that led in the reform. The tem-
perance reform got a great lift when the Tzar of Russia, by means of
a decree, prohibited the sale of vodka among his soldiers. This kind
of liquor, when partaken of, makes men worse than drunk; they act
as if possessed of devils by doing brutal deeds and committing ex-
cesses. Britain has followed in the train of Russia. Our King is to
abstain from all intoxicating liquors for at least the period of the
war. His example is being followed by many of the nobles, by Cabinet
Ministers, Members of Parliament, by military and naval leaders, by
Governors of our colonies, and by other men of position. Lord
Kitchener's appeal to the soldiers on behalf of temperance is now
well-known. The Archbishop of Canterbury has backed him up and
so have the leading doctors. They all discourage treating soldiers
and recruits. The doctors all assert, if men are wounded they have a
better chance of recovery if they never touch drink. The generals all
assert if men are to have a steady nerve so as to shoot straight they
must be abstainers. The thing that has hindered the production of
munitions of Avar is drink. Men Avere earning large wages and they


spent half their time drinking. The big wages caused them to drink
more. The Government has had to take the matter up. The success
of the war was being imperilled. It has been well said that Britain
is at present fighting two wars—Germany and the drink traffic. I
believe Britain will conquer Germany, but Britain is afraid of the
drink traffic. If she does not conquer the .drink traffic the drink
traffic will conquer her. British courage has not failed in the trenches,
but it has failed us in the House of Parliament in London. British
men of lofty name are afraid—of what? Of British brewers and dis-
tillers, and of British drunkards. Lloyd George has declared, “We
are fighting Germany, Austria and drink, and the greatest of these
deadly foes is drink.” And just an Act of Parliament would slay
the worst foe. Even a decree of the Ministry would destroy it. But
it has been decided there will be no Act of Parliament and no decree
of the Ministry. Britain does attempt to crush Germany, but does not
dare to try to crush drink. How humiliating! If Britain does not slay
drink during this war she will miss a magnificent opportunity of van-
quishing the one foe. Not only has Russia prohibited vodka among
her soldiers, and Britain in some respects has followed her example,
but France has followed suit. In France absinthe is prohibited and
.drunkenness has disappeared. See then what advances the temper-
ance movement has made as the result of the war in Russia, Britain
and France! The war will reconstruct Europe on the temperance
question. It will be forced on the nations of Europe to take a stand
against alcoholic liquors if they are to maintain their efficiency.
CLASS DISTINCTION ABOLISHED.
AVar is a great leveller. Class distinctions have been abolished
by the war—the sons of the nobility, members of Parliament, lawyers,
and ministers of the Gospel have enlisted as privates. During times
of peace one of the abominations is class distinction. When you read
Society Notes in the “Otago Witness” you find very much the same
names mentioned as being present at some paltry party. “We are
the people,” they think. War levels such stuff.
BROTHERHOOD OF MAN.
Fancy German children taught to hate the British! Notwithstand-
ing that, the progress among the Allies in recognition of the brother-
hood of man has been wonderful. If one should ask, who is my neigh-
bour? We now realise that our neighbour is not the man over the
fence, but our neighbour is the man who renders us help when we are
in need of it. We can no longer say “Am I ray brother’s keeper?”


When we realise we are brothers we realise we are our brothers’
keepers. This war will bring la the time that Burns foresaw:
“It’s coming yet for a’ that,
When man to man the world wide o’er
Shall brothers be for a’ that.
THE UNITY OF THE EMPIRE.
The Germans thought the British Empire would .break in pieces
when war came. Not so. Every part of the Empire has held together.
They have responded to the call of the Mother Country for help.
Australia, South Africa, India, Canada, and New Zealand have all sent
reinforcements. The Empire was never more united than at present.
Even in politics men have submerged their differences and are doing
what they can to aid the Empire. Take for example Ireland. All
local differences were set aside so that the country might unitedly
fight the common enemy. I do not overlook the treasonable conduct
of a small and contemptible section of the'South African Boer populace,
who, by the influence and support of the enemy, raised the standard
of revolt. That has now been quelled and the Empire stands rniced.
We know that, for wherever you go you see the Union Jack waving and
you hear the people singing the National Anthem.
NOT DECADENT.
We have seen the war has called forth many excellent qualities
—it has called forth our heroism, our self-sacrifice, our temperance,
and our love for one another in the abolition of class distinctions, and
in the recognition of the brotherhood of humanity. The war has
brought out what is noblest in us. Many excellent qualities lie dor-
mant in a time of peace, but when war breaks out these qualities
are called forth. It is war that wakes up in us our nobler selves.
Usually nations rise and fall. As men we see our best, then grow
old and die. So with nations. Some have thought Britain has seen
her best and is now decadent. But Britain seems young yet and full
of vigour. The empires of the past melted away because the people
became indolent and luxurious. Not so with Britain. She is not a
spent force. This war proves that Britain is not decadent.
lI.—FROM A RELIGIOUS POINT. OF, VIEW.
TURNING TO GOD.
The war will bring people back to God. This is a pleasure-loving
age. They hunt pleasure and forget God. In time of national con-
flict men’s minds turn from frivolity and pleasure to higher things.


The men in the trenches, as well as the people at home, seek God.
The churches are better attended during the war than before it. Inter-
cessory services are held in many churches on week days, when
prayers are offered for the war. The work of our chaplains at Home,
where the men are in training in camp, also at the front, and
particularly in the hospital among the wounded, is much appreciated.
The soldiers, before going into the trenches, have asked the sacra-
ment to be 'dispensed to them, and to many of them it has indeed
been the last supper. Not only has religion revived in the churches,
it has also revived in the families. Because so many have sons at
the front in almost every family prayer is made for their safety.
Our boys at the front are praying for their parents and that they
themselves may return home safely, and their parents are praying
for them. The men in the trenches pray to God earnestly. This
holds true of all countries engaged in the war. Instead of the
world getting happier it is getting fuller of sorrow. Never since
the flood has the world been so face to face with death. The many
sorrows have led people to pray to God for help. The world was
never so full of prayer as at present because it was never so full
of sorrow. The editors of our leading daily papers have discussed
the subject of prayer and have urged people to pray to God. One
leading daily says in this connection: “It is high time the
newspapers discussed subjects of such essential interest.” The cir-
culation of the Scriptures during the war has been enormous. The
British and Foreign Bible Society and the Bible Society of Scot-
land have been unable to meet the demand. It is wonderful the
way in which the Word of God is being received by our soldiers
and sailors. Before the war began none would have imagined that
such a demand for the Scriptures could be possible. We have
noticed three religious benefits of the war —the churches are better
attended and intercessory prayers are offered in them daily, family
prayer is revived, and the Scriptures are being freely circulated
and read. So that one great religious benefit of the war is a
quickening performance of people’s religious duties. Formerly many
well-nigh neglected divine things, now they take a deep interest in
them. They attend the churches better, they pray oftener, and they
read the Word of God regularly. Religion is a more real thing than
it has been for years.
NEW ERA.
This war is like a new birth. There is much pain and movement
among the nations. In fact “the whole creation groaneth and tra-
vaileth in pain.” The result will be the nations engaged will be re-
born. A new era is like a new birth. This is the birth time, and the
nations are in pangs. The nations will be born again. The war will


introduce a new era in Europe—Britain, France, Russia, Belgium and
Germany will be re-born —that will affect all Europe. A new Britain
will emerge from this conflict, purged of many evils, more firmly baaed
on faith in God, and on temperance principles. A new Russia will
arise, when the inhabitants will have greater privileges, and conces-
sions will be granted to the Poles and Finns. A new Germany will
come forth, purged of militarism and revived in true religion, the
religion of Luther. After this war European civilisation will be re-
constructed upon a more permanent foundation —faith In God. We
shall, after this war, be able to make a new start, and to make it
altogether—Britain, France, Belgium, Germany, Russia, etc. We are
really all fighting together for a new and better state of existence.
We are not only witnessing the death of the old order, but the birth
of a new, and out of the ruins of the out-worn world there will arise
the fabric of a nobler civilisation. Lord Tennyson says:—
Ring out old shapes of foul disease,
Ring out the narrowing lust of gold,
Ring out the thousand wars of old,
Ring in the thousand years of peace.
Ring in valiant men and free,
#
The larger heart, the kindlier hand,
Ring out the darkness of the land,
Ring in the Christ that is to be.
CONCLUSION.
We have seen that while war is one of the greatest evils, it
is not altogether an unmixed evil. God will so dispose the issues
of this war as to make the good transcend the evil.


II. —WAR AND PATRIOTISM.
Patriotism means love of country. As the word is derived from
the Latin word, Patria, fatherland, a more literal meaning of patriot-
ism is love of the land of our birth. Patriotism is one of the noblest
traits to be found in man. That man who is not a patriot is worthy
of contempt. Because men happen to be absent from their native
land it does not follow that they love it less, that they think
about it less. Each one loves his native land with a deep affection;
each one stands up for his country, and won’t allow any one to
run it down. “Our country right or wrong,” we stand by her.
But someone may say: Would you stand by your country when
she is wrong? Yes, I would. It is when our country is wrong
that we need to stand by her. Suppose you have a friend and he
gets into trouble; it is then you require to stand by him. When
he is right he does not need your assistance. Take our country,
and she makes a mistake, you are not to desert hex then. Our
country will err now and then, just as individuals eii now and
then. I don’t mean to say that if our country were thoroughly
wrong, as Germany is, that I would stand by her. But if, in the
main, she he right and now and then makes a mistake, I say My
country right or wrong,” I stand by her. True love of country is
not mere love of the sod beneath one s feet (love of its dust and
stones), although that may not be wanting, but love of the language
(the Gaelic, Scotch, or English), love of the laws, and love of the
religion (Presbyterian, Methodist, Anglican, or Roman Catholic).
LOVE OF COUNTRY VERSUS THE WORLD AT LARGE.
There are some people who do not love their country. They say
they love the world at large. We require to be suspicious of such
people. A man who does not love his own household, but pretends to
love something beyond its limits, we rightly regard with suspicion.
A man who does not love his own country, but claims to love man-
kind, we look upon as an imposter. No Christian denies that we
have a duty to all men and all nations, but with the patriot his
own country comes first, just as his own family comes first. Love
of fatherland tends to build up stronger and larger souls than any
mere sentiment of universal brotherhood. It is not a vice but a
virtue to love one’s country above all others.


Lord while for all mankind we pray,
Of every clime and coast ;
Oh hear us for our native land,
The land we love the most ;
Our fathers’ sepulchres are here,
And here our kindred dwell,
Our children too, how should we love
Another land so well ?
PATRIOTIC DEEDS.
A patriot shows himself by his deeds. The bravest deeds have
been done by those who loved their country. We read often of Greeks
and Romans who did heroic deeds for their country. Joan of Arc
is the martyr-patriot of France. She was a timid peasant girl who
was placed at the head of troops, raised the siege of Orleans, and
turned the tide of battle against the invaders. The hero of Ireland
is Dan O’Connel; the heroes of England are Nelson and Wellington,
the one the hero of Trafalgar, the other the hero of Waterloo; the
heroes of Scotland are Wallace and Bruce.
PATRIOTIC SONGS.
It is a common saying, “If a man were allowed to write all the
patriotic songs, he did not need to care who made the laws of nations.”
That shows how patriotic songs influence people. Each country has
its patriotic songs. For example—Germany, “The Watch on the
Rhine”; France, “The Marseillaise”; Ireland, “The Shamrock,” "Oh,
Steer my Barque,” “Killarney,” “Dublin, Fair City,” and “Tipperary”;
Scotland, “Scots Wha Hae,” “Blue Bells of Scotland,” “The Bonnie
Banks o’ Loch Lomond.” “The March of the Cameron Men”; Eng-
land, “Rule Britannia,” “The Death of Nelson,” “Hearts of Oak.”
Just as many of the Jewish patriotic songs are about Jerusalem,
so many of the English patriotic songs are about London.
“Carry me back to London Town,
To London Town, to London Town,
Leicester square, anywhere,
But carry me back to London Town.”
PATRIOTISM A NATURAL AND THEREFORE UNIVERSAL VIRTUE.
We believe patriotism is inborn, hence it is a natural and universal
virtue. That patriotism is undoubtedly a natural and universal
virtue. We have Scott’s lines —
“Breathes there a man with soul so dead
Who never to himself hath said
This is my own, my native land.”


Some say savages know nothing of patriotism, that patriotism
pertains only to civilised nations. Such nonsense! Savages love the
country of their birth and fight for it. Tribal wars arose when one
tribe tried to take land from the other. Hence men of every race
and of every age have been swayed by this passion. Let us prove
this. Take the Jews for example; they were patriots, tney always
loved Palestine and Jerusalem. Take the case of the Jews In exile in
Babylon, how they loved Jerusalem! “If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,
let my right hand forget its cunning. If I do not remember thee let
my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem
above my chief joy.” Such was the solemn language of one of the
Jewish captives -when sitting down by the waters of Babylon as the
recollection of Zion as his home passed before his mind. He was very
much attached to his country, and he expresses his attachment in
this beautiful and sublime passage: “If I forget thee, o, Jerusalem,
etc.” Palestine was the land the Jews loved, every hill and every
valley in the vicinity of Jerusalem was the scene of some noly event.
To the Jews Palestine was historical ground. From that land the
Jews were now driven by the sword of a cruel and merciless foe.
The Jews were now made to serve in a foreign land as exiles. No
wonder then they said: “If I forget thee, O, Jerusalem, etc.” That
is the language of patriotism.
Moses was patriotic. One day he went out and espied an Egyptian
smiting one of his brethren and he killed the Egyptian and buried
him in the sand. I once thought that was a dreadful thing for Moses
to do. Since this war I understand it differently. Suppose we were
under German oppression and you saw a German abuse a Briton, you
would be a coward if you stood by and did nothing. If you killed
the German you would be doing what Moses, in like circumstances,
did. The Jews were slaves and Moses had often seen the Egyptian
taskmasters abuse and kill his brethren, and he vowed if ever he
had a chance he would strike a blow for liberty for his people. The
killing of the Egyptian was Moses’ first blow for liberty. When he
tied into exile God did not put a mark upon him, as He did upon
Cain, for the murder of his brother. God approved of Moses’ act,
for years afterwards He called him to be the liberator of his people
—He called him to finish what he had so well begun when he slew
the Egyptian.
David was patriotic; he made the advancement of the Kingdom
his main hobby.
Daniel was patriotic. When he was Prime Minister he made the
welfare of Jerusalem his principal object. Christ was patriotic.
“When he beheld the city he wept over it.” “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,


how often would I have gathered thee as a hen gathereth her chickens
under her wings, but ye would not.” “Having loved His own He
loved them to the end.”
Paul was patriotic. Though he was the first missionary to the
Gentiles he loved his own countrymen, the Jews, above ail other
people. Here is what he says: “To the Jews first and also to the
Gentiles.” “I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for
my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh, who are Israelites.”
He says on another occasion. “I also am an Israelite of the seed
of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.” The Jews were a nation,
which, beyond all other nations, were patriotic. The Greeks, as a
nation, were very patriotic. So were the Romans. The Germans
are patriotic. They speak of Germany as “the Fatherland.” The
Irish are patriotic, their emblem being the Shamrock; the English
are patriotic, their emblem being the Rose; the Scotch are patriotic,
their emblem being the Thistle. They have also their patron saints
- —St. Patrick, Ireland; St. Andrew, Scotland; and St. George, Eng-
land; and we, whether born in New Zealand or the Old Country,
are patriotic. A person is unworthy of his country if he be not
patriotic. Patriotism then is a virtue of all nations, both ancient
and modern;, the love of the land of their birth is deeply implanted
in all hearts.
A UNITED EMPIRE.
In time of war—the Boer war and this present great war—the
Empire has shown its unity, for ail parts of the Empire sent reinforce-
ments to help the Mother Country. Just as a domestic calamity in
the home will bring members of the same family to her help, so a
war in which the Mother Country is involved will bring her sons
from all parts to her help. The patriotic feeling runs through all
British subjects in time of war. It is in time of war that the unity
of the British Empire is tested and proved to hold good. All parts
of the Empire are interested in the Mother Country. The honour
of the Empire is ours; an insult to the nation touches all parts
of the Empire. The defeat of the Mother Country would be our
disgrace, the victory of the Mother Country would be our joy.
DEFENCE.
What patriotism implies. It implies defence. The defence of the
country against invasion is part of a patriot’s duty. It is a fine pat-
riotism which answers the Empire’s call and volunteers to go to the
front. In proposing to go to the front we want all our men to be
trained. They should spare no pains to make themselves efficient
soldiers so as to render all the help they can in defence of the Empire.


In opposition to defence we have the shirker. He has not the spirit
of patriotism. He stands at the street corner and discusses the war,
hut will not volunteer to go to the front. There are many such. We
wonder what sense of patriotism they have. If they have any it is
far from worthy. Against defence we have also the Quakers; they
deny that Christians should serve in the army. They rightly em-
phasise the contradiction between the spirit of the Gospel and the
evil spirit of aggression, which is called militarism, but they do not
perceive that militarism is the enemy of patriotism and can only
flourish at its expense. The Quakers, though excellent Christians,
forget the sanction which Christ’s religion gives to patriotism.
FREEDOM.
What are we fighting for? As patriots we are fighting for freedom.
As patriots we have privileges, and these must be defended. One of
our great privileges is freedom, is liberty. We are not a nation of
slaves under a tyrant. We live in a free democratic country. Every
country in Europe is under conscription except Britain. Britain is
the only free country in Europe. Militarism threatened Europe in Na-
poleon’s time. What prevented it was Napoleon’s retreat from Moscow
in the winter. His splendid army nearly perished amongst the snow.
We believe God then overwhelmed the devil of militarism in Europe a
century ago by means of little flakes of snow. In this present war
we are again threatened with the devil of German militarism with
all its cruelty and lies. It has taken many years to lead us from
slavery to freedom. If we lose in this war it will be an instantaneous
change from freedom to bondage. If we are now free we must fight
for our freedom, if we don’t we will be under German militarism.
Moses led the Israelites from slavery to freedom. The Kaiser wants
to lead us from freedom to slavery. The cost of freedom is great in
men and money. Mr Asquith, at a crowded meeting in the Guildhall,
Hondon, on June 29th, said: “One hundred years ago our ancestors had
spent £800,009,000 in vindicating the freedom of Europe. We were
likely to spend £3,000,000 daily for months in the same cause.” The
liberty of British rule is well-known. It has been tested and admitted
to be beneficial for the races it rules. We know that Britain has ruled
subject races well- —Egypt, India, and Transvaal. Conquered peoples
under her flag have enjoyed a larger measure of liberty than would
have been accorded them by any other nation, and to-day we are
reaping what we have sown. The spectacle of the colonies of the
Empire rallying to the flag in the hour of peril is an impressive testi-
mony to the essential fairness and justice of British rule. Especially
impressive is the attitude of South Africa. It has submitted willingly
to British rule because the people enjoy more privileges under it than


under any other rule. I believe there is not one spot on earth where
Britain’s foot is placed to-day that would not be less and unspeak-
ably worse off were that foot lifted and taken away. Not one step has
Britain taken around the world that has not been for the advantage
of the human race, for the breaking down of tyrannies, for the uplift
of humanity, and for the spread of industry, education and liberty.
We speak of the flag of freedom. Yes, wherever the British flag waves
the people enjoy freedom. Britain has ever set freedom before her as
an ideal, and when her freedom is threatened she must fight to pre-
serve it and to impart it to others. The proof that Britain confers
freedom is that to-day the countries she has conquered are her best
friends, and they prove their friendship by fighting for us against
Germany.
FALSE PATRIOTS.
There are men who make all they can out of a war. They try
to run up the price of foodstuffs. Samuel Johnston says, “Patriotism
is the last refuge of a scoundrel.” Patriotism, if it is worth anything,
should render impossible the accumulation of huge fortunes out of
army contracts. Past wars have reeked with such scandals. Any
man seeking an undue advantage to himself at the expense of the
nation at such a time as this is a traitor to his King and his country
and should be dealt with as such.
PATRIOTISM AND SELF-SACRIFICE.
Patriotism implies self-sacrifice in two directions:
“Here’s £50,000,” said a man, “for our country in its need,” when war
had broken out. “The waste will he great, I know, because we were
caught unprepared, but spend it and there’s another £50,000 when
that is done.” A man arrived in England from Vancouver with ins
wife and little children. He had deliberately left a position bringing
him over £IOOO per annum. And why? That he might go to fight for
his King and country. We have been all subscribing to the patriotic
funds. There are now so many funds that the best way would be a
war tax. (2) Life.—lt is not a mere saying, it is a deep truth. “Dulce
et decorum est pro patria mori.” (It is sweet and glorious to die
for one’s country.) On all sides we see sacrifices of life. A father who
lost his son in the war wrote: “He fought for God, King and Empire,
true and brave and worthy of the traditions of his forefathers, and
he died at his post. lam trying to settle my private business here. It
will take some time, but I want to go to the front to take his place.
My other two sons are anxious to go to the front.” Another parent,
who lost his son, wrote: “I would rather be the father of a son who
has done his duty to his country, even if he has died in doing so, than


be the father of a son who shirked his duty to his country.” Job says,
“Skin for skin, yea all that a man hath wilt he give for his life.” That
is a deep truth. It is wonderful how men are willing to die for their
country. A true patriot will always be willing to make sacrifices for
the Empire, even the sacrifice of life itself.
RELIGIOUS PATRIOTISM.
Patriotism is one part of religion. Scripture says: “Fear God,
honour the King.” If we love God we will love our King and
country and fight to defend them. We will only be patriotic in the
noblest sense according as we are Christians —that is, according as
we love God, so will we love our King and country. The Jews were
passionately patriotic, and we know the patriotism of the Jewish
nation expressed itself religiously. Furthermore, that patriotism is
a part of religion, David utters this stern truth: “The nations that
forget God will be turned into hell.” The true strength of a nation
does not consist in its silver and gold, its army and navy; it con-
sists in the faithfulness of its sons and daughters to God. That
patriotism and religion naturally go together and help each other,
we have examples in history. Under Cromwell England was like to
become a land of saints, but at no time of English history did pat-
riotism burn with a brighter or finer flame. The covenanters of
Scotland were Godly men who suffered much for their country.
The Pilgrim Fathers left the shores of England (Plymouth) and
founded a New England in U.S.A., where they became patriotic to
the land of their adoption, and there they reared churches wherein
they might worship their father’s God. Thus patriotism and religion
have ever gone hand in hand throughout the ages. It is religion
that gives beauty and purity and strength to patriotism. Take
religion out of the history of Britain and what would be left? Very
little, for religion has been the greatest factor in the life of Britain.


III.—THE WAR & CHIRISTIANITY
This is a subject beset with difficulties, nevertheless I have steered
a straight course to show that War and Christianity accord.
This war comes as a terrible shock to our Christianity. It is ter-
rible that after nineteen centuries of Christianity, Europe to-day should
be an armed camp. We would have thought that after nineteen cen-
turies of Christianity the nations of Europe would be living at peace,
but no, they are like crouching tigers waiting to spring upon their
prey. This war is a terrible reflection upon our Christianity. Christen-
dom never before exhibited so hideous and shameful a spectacle. War
is a terrible thing, for see the loss of money and property and life,
and the terrible amount of pain and sorrow thrust into homes. It
is not surprising if many ask themselves, what has the church to-
day to say to this state of affairs? Is Christianity a failure? Does
this w r ar bring dishonour upon Christ? Does the Gospel sanction
war? Is Avar contrary to the spirit of Christianity? Is Christianity
a peace religion or a war religion ?
OLD TESTAMENT VERSUS NEW TESTAMENT.
The Old Testament differs from the New Testament in many Avays.
One Avay is, the Old Testament countenances war and the use of the
sword. Hoav full the Old Testament is of wars! The psalms of David
breathe the war-like spirit. It is somewhat different in the New Testa-
ment. On this subject, “Christianity and War,” we have not to study
Avhat the Avhole Bible teaches on war, but Avar in relation to Christian-
ity. What we have to do is to interpret the mind of Christ. What is
the teaching of Christ on Avar? In regard to the teaching of Christ on
war it is a. little perplexing. It is easy to quote texts from the Nbav
Testament that do not seem to sanction war and it is as easy to quote
others that do sanction war. We have therefore tAvo kinds of Chris-
tians: those Avho say that Christ’s teaching does not favour war and
those who say the reverse—that it does. Among those Avho say Christ’s
teaching does not faAmur war we have “The Society of Friends” (Quak-
ers). They urge the settling of every difference among the nations by
an international council of peace. Beyond the Quakers we have many
earnest Christians Avho say Christ’s teaching is contrary to Avar. Take
this example. Look! Christ in khaki, out in France, thrusting his
bayonet into the body of a German. See! The Son of Man Avith a
machine gun catching a column of Germans unaAvares and mowing


them down in their helplessness. Hark! The Man of Sorrows in a
cavalry charge hacking and thrusting the Germans. No! No! Tnat
picture is an impossible one. That settles the matter for me, they say.
I cannot uphold war. These affirm that no one can support any war
or take part in it and remain a Christian. In short they assert that
Jesus says “War is wrong.’’ Such Christians find it difficult to re-
concile war with the teaching of the “Sermon on the Mount.” They
say, “War is hell,” it means tearing up the Sermon on the Mount.
Such insist on a literal interpretation of Christ’s words in that
sermon. That is the one class of Christians. There is the other
class who believe war and Christianity accord. Let us, then view
both sides of this question—let us firstly view the texts that seem
to go against war, and secondly those that seem to sanction war.
I.—TEXTS SEEMINGLY AGAINST WAR.
Let us begin with texts from “The Sermon on the Mount,” as
this sermon is supposed by some to oppose war.
RESIST NOT EVIL.
“Resist not evil, but whosoever will smite thee on the right cheek,
turn to him the other also”-—Mat. v. 39. There are some who make
this text the whole duty of a Christian towards war; they say it con-
tains the principle of the non-resistance to evil. But the doctrine of
non-resistance to evil does not apply to nations, it only applies to in-
dividuals. That is evident, for the words “Resist not evil,” were not
addressed to mankind, but to the disciples. As individual Christians,
when we are struck on the one cheek, we should not strike back,
that is, we are not to retaliate. When rightly interpreted this text
does not prohibit war. It has nothing to do with war. It concerns
our attitude to personal affronts and injuries. It forbids all re-
sistance to personal evil. It condemns the old law of retaliation,
or as we should term it, reprisals, and not the defence of righteous
principles. A national policy of non-resistance would mean the
surrender of the world to the dominion of the Devil and it would
be treachery to Christ to let His enemies trample His cause under
feet. It is an impressive fact that a policy of non-resistance proves
impossible in actual practice. There are times when even as Chris-
tians we must fight for Christ’s cause and not allow it to ne thwarted.
LOVE YOUR ENEMIES.
Another text from the “Sermon on the Mount” is “Love your
enemies” —Mat. v. 44. “An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth” was
the Old Testament teaching, but “Love your enemies” is the New Testa


incut teaching. We know who our enemies are. Every man, woman
and child in Germany regards the British as their enemies. Child-
ren are taught in the home and in the school to hate us. Whilst
that is their attitude to us, that is not our attitude to them. We
P ra y for them because we love them. We pray this war may do
tln- m good. It is an outrageous thing to assert that Jesus says “Love
your enemies” and our generals tell us to kill them. As individuals
we will have enemies, as nations we .will have enemies, and yet
we can love them.
MY KINGDOM NOT OF THIS WORLD.
“My Kingdom is not of this world; if my Kingdom were of this
world, then would my servants fight that I should not be delivered
to the Jews, but now is my Kingdom not from hence”—John 18-36.
That text, instead of being against war, rather favours it. Our Lord
was directing Pilate’s attention to the non-combative attitude of His
followers as an instance of what He meant by a spiritual Kingdom.
Cbrist states if He were King of an earthly kingdom His subjects
would fight, but because He is King of a spiritual Kingdom it is
unnecessary to fight. In other w r ords, if Christ were placed in this
world, as we are, He would fight.
THOU SHALT NOT KILL.
Some say, War is forbidden by the Sixth Commandment, for “war
is organised murder.” They believe that killing is murder and is
wrong even in defensive war. To that we reply, the Sixth Command-
ment refers to individuals and not to nations. It forbids one person
killing another, but has nothing to do with warfare. In killing a
man in war it is done in self-defence. If a man kills another in self-
defence he is acquitted. Besides, the Israelitish nation, to which the
Ten Commandments were given, had a regular army sanctioned by
God, who had given the Sixth Commandment. That army had often
fo fight during the 40 years wanderings of the Israelites and in these
fights many were killed. Moses himself prayed to God that the
Israelites might be victorious over their enemies. In tact, as one
says “the Old Testament carries the legitmacy of war on every page.”
CHRIST THE PRINCE OF PEACE.
Some say, those who call themselves followers of the Prince of
Peace cannot favour war. They also say the angels at Christ's birth
proclaimed, “Peace on earth and good-will to men.” The result is
that many have favoured international disputes being submitted to
arbitration at the Palace of Peace at the Hague, Notwithstanding all


that Andrew Carnegie and others have done in this direction the time
has not yet come for such methods. What we hear people say is “If
you wish peace, prepare for war.” The time has not yet come for
disarmament. We must he prepared for war. Hence the Govern-
ments of the nations vote large sums for military and naval arma-
ments of a size and order unprecedented in the history of the world.
This policy threatens to overload their already vast debts to the verge
of national bankruptcy. We as Christians w r ant peace. Peace is our
goal, war is our way to reach it. In order that we may be able to
live peaceably we must defend ourselves against our enemies. Hence
our police force for internal order, and our army and navy for
defence against the foreign disturber of our peace.
LOVE.
Some say, as Christianity teaches love there should be no war.
They say the words “God is love” exclude war. They say, Chris-
tianity is not a Gospel of hate but of love. To those who allege
that love excludes war we reply that love and fighting accord. Love
wall not stand by and see one loved abused. Let us put to our-
selves the question: “Could a Christian stand passive and see out-
rage done on mother, wife, sister, child?” We say, with a great
certainty, that he could not. If ever anyone did so he wouldn’t
be a Christian, but a coward. Take also love for children. That
does not mean we will never chastise them. “He that spareth the
rod hateth the child.” Take patriotism, which means love of coun-
try. It is love for one’s country that has caused most wars. Wp
love our country and hence we fight for it. Take also God and af-
fliction. We believe God loves us but that does not keep Him from
smiting us. “Whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth.” Love and war
then are in accord. Love will lead us to fight and to fight bravely.
II.—TEXTS AND PRINCIPLES IN FAVOUR OF WAR.
1 have quoted texts which appear to go against war. Let me
now quote texts and Christian principles in favour of war.
“I CAME NOT TO BRING PEACE ON EARTH BUT A SWORD.”
Some say that upholds war. This text refers to matters purely
spiritual. It means that Christ would, by His influence and teaching,
disturb many people and raise up many against Him, and so it has
been. The Gospel of Christ has first of all made enemies (sword)
and then led them to become followers of Christ (peace). This
text therefore does not refer to war.


THE STATE.
We read in Romans xiii. 4, “He beareth not the sword in vain, for
he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
doeth evil.” It is of the civil magistrate that St. Paul is here speak-
ing of, he is God s minister in the State. Here it is definitely de-
clared that the sword has been given by God to the officer of the
State and herein lies the whole principle of war. In other words,
when the State asks men to bear arms and enter battle they are to
do so. That’s the teaching of St. Paul. To deny the lawfulness of
war is to deny the State. Nothing can be.more solemn than this
Power conferred upon the rulers in the State, the power to make
war. The judge on the bench wields the power of the sword to
such an extent that, in certain cases, he can sentence a man to
death. But a judge who delighted in sentencing his fellow-men to
death would be notoriously unfit to retain his seat on the bench, and
similarly the nation that delights in war is not fit to retain its place
among the nations. “Scatter thou the people that delight in war”
saith the Scriptures. It is remarkable how the Apostles, writing to
men under the dominion of the Roman Empire, bade them submit
to the law and pray for the Emperor—l Peter 11. (13-14) I Tim II
(1-2).
HELP THE WEAK.
We entered into a treaty with Belgium and France to protect
them in the event of war. These treaty obligations, requiring us to
take up arms for the protection of weaker nations, could not be set
aside without a breach of national good faith. Besides our friendship
for Belgium and France would not allow us to leave them in the lurch.
Britain has been the friend of the oppressed and down-trodden. As a
Christian nation she has always helped the weak. We have entered
into this war under a grave sense of our treaty obligations. We are
thrilled with the idea of our nation taking up arms to defend the
weaker.
CHRISTIAN SOLDIERS AND MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL
FIGHTING.
Christianity and war must be reconcilable as many Christian men
are fighting as soldiers. In the New Testament we read of soldiers
who were Christians. It is significant that our Lord pronounced the
highest eulogy on a Roman soldier: “I have not found so great faith,
no, not in Israel.” Of the centurion at Capernaum it is said “He loveth
our nation and hath built us a synagogue.” The centurion who
superintended the crucifixion of Christ said “Truly this was the Son
of God.” These are three examples of soldiers who were Christians.


Besides, Christ neither required the Roman centurion at Capernaum
nor any other soldier to abandon the military profession because
he had become a Christian —Mat. viii. (5.13). In modern times we
have had many Christians who were soldiers —General Gordon, Lord
Roberts, etc. As to our soldiers at the front, many of them engage
in prayer daily and many partake of the Lord’s Supper before going
into action.
The Catholic Church holds that a priest is a minister of peace
and to some extent betrays his office by becoming a soldier. Some
of the Popes have protested strongly against the laws, which in
various countries have forced the clergy into military service. The
Church of England view seems to be much the same. Notwithstanding
these rules there are priests and there are Anglican clergymen at the
front as soldiers. The Presbyterian view is apparently more in favour
of ministers of the Gospel becoming soldiers. And during this war
many Presbyterian ministers have enlisted as soldiers. Professor
W. P. Paterson, of Edinburgh University, declared that he and many
of his clerical fellows are “proud of any brethren who have thought
it their duty to join in the fight.” Incidentally he quoted with
strong approval the saying of Christ to the Apostles, “He that hath
no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one.” English Non-
Conformist ministers have in several cases adopted the same inter-
pretation of their duties, for a number of Congregationalist ministers
have enlisted.
THE EXAMPLE OF CHRIST.
The question for Christians is: What would Jesus do? We learn
that from one* very important occasion. The enemies of Christ began
to use the temple as an ordinary market, they bought and sold in
it, and we are told He made a scourge of cords and drove them out.
These traders were the enemies of Christ, they were usurping ground
that was consecrated to the worship of God and He fought them.
And when the Germans have invaded Belgium and France and stormed
and destroyed places of worship, we, as Christians, are bound to
follow Christ’s example and drive them out.
RIGHTEOUS WAR.
As to this war being a righteous one we have the majority of
the people of the British Empire supported by their leaders declaring
that the national cause is right. We are sure that Britain’s partici-
pation in this war is justified. For what w r as Germany’s intention?
Germany was to make Belgium the avenue to the conquest of France
and from France the way would be open for the real objective, the
humiliation of Britain. These ideas were adopted by the German


Government. As soon as Britain knew this, she felt justified in going
to war with Germany. It is only when redress is otherwise impossible
that war is justified. It was so in this case. We will do our duty,
as a Christian nation, if we fight and overthrow completely Prussian
militarism in Germany.
In connection with the Germans using asphyxiating gases, Lord
Kitchener, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London have ad-
vocated that we use the same. That is based on the law of retri-
bution. “With what measure you mete it shall be measured to you
again.” It is not anti-Christian to mete out retribution. Retribution
is one thing, revenge is another. We don’t want to take revenge
on Germany, but we want to fight for the right. To take revenge
would be un-Christian. The Prime Minister, Mr Asquith, in his speech
in Dublin, laid it down with emphasis that “this war has for its
object the dethronement of violence and the exaltation of love and
justice.” It is because we have entered the war in this spirit that
we feel able to invoke upon our efforts the blessing of God. For
we did not want to go to war. It accords with none of our aims.
We sought no territory, we looked for no reward in gold or glory.
All we wanted was righteousness. We must fight against the evil
in the world that right may prevail. Christianity teaches the sacri-
fice of everything in a righteous cause. It is “righteousness alone
that can exalt a nation.” If we feel this is a righteous war, it be-
comes us as Christians to fight. God is angry with unrighteousness
and He will use us to put it down. “God will reign in righteous*
ness” and He will use us to effect His purposes. We believe every
righteous war is brought about by God.
WAR BECAUSE OF OUR IMPERFECT STATE.
St. James tells us the cause of war is that we are in an imperfect
state. “Whence come wars and fightings among you? Come they
not hence even of your lusts that war in your members? Ye desire
to have and cannot obtain, therefore ye fight and war and kill.” In
these words St. James states the causes of war have their root in
jealousy, in avarice, and the lust for power. Christianity then re-
cognises war as a fact. It is compelled to deal with human nature
as it finds it. When Christianity has so transformed men’s evil nat-
ures—when Christ shall have cast out evil from the hearts of men.
when He shall have transformed the lust for power into the passion
for service for the sake of others—then we may look for that time
when war shall be no more. War then is necessary so long as we
are in an imperfect state. The mission of the Christian Church is
to create an atmosphere in which the spirit of war cannot live. The


evil of war is manifest, but while we are as we are, fallen creatures,
war is necessary to keep evil in check. The necessity of war will re-
main until wicked passions are eradicated from the human soul.
SUMMARY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT TEACHING ON WAR.
We have seen there are some texts which seem to go against
war and others to favour it, and hence some have concluded that
the New Testament has left war an open question—that is, it has
left us to decide when war should he waged. But after looking at
all the texts for and against I have tried to show that the New
Testament favours Avar. It is simply untrue that the New Testament
absolutely prohibits war. In the actual utterances of Christ there
is not to be found one Avord prohibiting Avar.
CHRIST NEARBY SIBENT ON WAR : WHY ?
Some one might ask: Why is Christ nearly silent on war ? It
was because Palestine was a colony tributary to Rome, Roman
soldiers were everywhere to keep the people down. There were three
well-known garrisons, one at Capernaum, one in Jerusalem, and one
in Caesaria, each under a centurion. If Christ had spoken against
war the Roman soldiers would have resented it. See even how He
Avas tried to be entrapped with the question, “Is it lawful to pay
tribute?” Christ replied: “Render unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar’s.” If Nbav Zealand was under German rule we would be
nearly silent on war. So, as Palestine Avas under Roman rule, Christ
Avas nearly silent on war.
CHRISTIANITY APPARENTLY A FAILURE: WHY.
I have stated at the beginning that after nineteen centuries of
Christian teaching this war has come and, as it were, has made
Christianity apparently a failure. All our teaching on gentleness,
kindness, brotherliness are for the time being cast aside. But it
is easier to make anything a failure, easier than to make it a success.
Take a reaper and binder in good bands, it Avill cut the crop per-
fectly. but if an enemy unscrewed some of the bolts secretly it would
not work. So with Christianity; it is a perfect system, and if it
had been alloAved to Avork its Avay for nineteen centuries we would
not have the present Avar. But some people, both individually and col-
lectively, have opposed it. They have done their best to make it a
failure and they have been so far successful. But that does not
mean that Christianity is wrong, or a failure, if left alone to work
its Avay among people. And so we come to look at the church as
militant. The church is a mighty, army, under Christ, the captain, to


fight against evil, the thing that opposes Christianity. It is a great
fight. “We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against wicked
spirits.” Are you a member of the great army of the church of
Jesus Christ? Are you on His side in the great battle against self
and sin? It is only by joining this army that you will help to bring
about the time when Christianity shall prevail everywhere and when
there will be no need of war.
IV. —THE WAR AND GERMAN
FALSE TEACHERS.
The Germans are our kinsfolk by blood. They are Saxons, and so
are we. We call the Germans our cousins. So they are, because
we are so closely linked in blood. We have also close family ties
with the Germans. Queen Victoria’s daughter was the mother of
the Kaiser. Princess Beatrice married the late Prince Henry of Batten-
burg. There has been a great deal of marrying between British and
German Royalty. The Germans then are our kinsfolk by blood and by
family ties. They are also our benefactors in music, poetry, philoso-
phy, science, religion. For example, to Germany we owe much in
music, for-they have given us Bach, Handel, Mozart, Beethoven, Wag-
ner. In poetry they have given us Schiller and others. In philosophy
they have given us Kant, Fichte, Hegel, Schopenhauer, Hartmann, and
Nietzsche. As to religion we have got much from them. First of all
Luther, the Reformer, was a German. The most of our commentaries
on the Bible are translations of German authors, the same with church
history and theology. A minister’s library is full of German books
translated into English. We have therefore been indebted to Ger-
many for much. The world’s debt to Germany in music, poetry,
philosophy, science and religion is incalculable. It would be a poorer
world without Germany’s contribution. Notwithstanding our indebt-
edness to German teachers in all departments, Germany has produced
many false teachers. For example, Dr Strauss wrote his false “Life
of Jesus.” He was backed up by Schleiermacher and others. They
denied the miraculous, even the resurrection of Jesus. They invented


theories to account for the supposed resurrection of Christ, on natural
grounds. But the three false teachers who are mainly responsible
for this war are Nietzsche, Trietschke and Bernhardi. Heinrich von
Nietzsche was born in Saxony in 1844 and died in 1900. He was a
professor in Bale, but he had to resign on account of ill-health. He
was granted a pension of £l2O a year. From that time he became
a wanderer on the face of the earth, having no home and few friends.
He betook himself to writing books, on which his reputation rests,
and to finding new disciples. His ill-health never left him and he
became increasingly morbid. He needed stronger and stronger sleep-
ing draughts to counteract the gloom and melancholy of his sleepless
nights. In the last days of 1888 the catastrophe came. He had a
paralytic stroke and was mentally deranged. He was removed to an
asylum and there died a lunatic. It seems he used narcotics for
many years which had ruinous effects.
Nietzsche was radically and bitterly opposed to Christianity. He
was a deadly enemy of Christianity. The philosophy known by the
name of' Nietzscheanism is Anti-Christian. He poured contempt upon
the teaching of Jesus and created an altar to the God of Force, which
is the true anti only Anti-Christ. All we have been taught to con-
sider sacred he cast out as contemptible. He abolishes Christianity
and sets up paganism again. It was reserved for Nietzsche to take
the last fateful step and to abolish Christ, and to set up Anti-Christ,
the God of Force. Religion still exists in Germany, especially among
the peasants, but at the top Anti-Christian impulses have been at
work, which have driven the country into war. What had the Ger-
mans to offer to the world they hoped to conquer? The religion of
Nietzsche, the author of “Anti-Christ.” They were faced with the
alternative of Nietzsche or Jesus Christ. Such was the teaching of
Nietzsche who died a lunatic.
Heinrich von Trietschke was born in 1834 and died in 1896. He
was' a professor and was also the great national historian of Ger-
many. His teaching has permeated the whole German people. He
was a great advocate of the world-destiny of Germany. To attain her
due dominion there was only one road—that of Power. Everything
was subordinate in his mind to the gaining of power. “Among all
political sins,” he wrote, “the sin of feebleness is the most contempt-
ible.” It has been put dramatically that two spiritual forces contend
for men’s allegiance in the 20th century—Napoleon and Christ, and
Germany has deliberately taken the side of Napoleon. The Germans
seek not to be world-conquerors only, but to be the authors of a
new religion, a religion of the super-man, a religion in which Might
is Right. Such was the teaching of Trietschke, which saturated the
thoughts of his fellow-countrymen.


General von Bernhard! was a distinguished cavalry officer. He
was not only a distinguished soldier but something of a scholar as
well, for he studied the history, the literature, the politics, and the
philosophy of his nation, and he wrote a book “Germany and the Next
War.” This book has been widely read in Germany. Eernhardi is
really the pupil of Nietzsche and Trietschke—that is, he advocates
what they advocated. Since the war broke out there has been a great
demand for the works of Nietzsche, Trietschke, and Bernhardi. These
are the three leaders of German thought. Let us consider their
main ideas.
PAN-GERMANISM.
One of their main ideas is Pan-Germanism. They advocate the
Germans having a world-wide empire and to attain that war is
the method. The whole German people have become possessed of
the same idea—that is to say, the Germans of to-day are profoundly
imbued with the idea that Germany is destined to dominate the world.
The Pan-Germanic idea of a Greater Germany, nay, of an all-pervading,
all-powerful Germany, has spread and taken hold of many. To that
end the Germans have been making preparations for<*the past forty
years. Germany has gone on expanding in population and in military
and naval strength. Its military system has been perfected and as to
its navy, they have been adding ship to ship, Dreadnought to Dread-
nought. Its military system has been looked to in the first place and
as a supplement to that it has been building up its fleet. Germany
has only one obstacle to the establishment of a world-wide empire,
that is Britain. Germany has one enemy; that nation is Britain. The
enemy of enemies is Britain. She alone bars the way to the realisa-
tion of all that is highest to the Germans—the Pan-Germanic ideal.
Britain possesses one-fifth of the habitable globe. Germany says:
What right has Britain to have so much? We are not to acquiesce
in her having one-fifth of the globe. Britain, which possesses one-fifth
of the habitable globe, stands in the way of Germany’s course towards
a world-wide empire. Bernhardi says: “For us there are two alter-
natives, and no third, world-dominion or ruin.” We are fighting
against Pan-Germanism. We are fighting against the arrogant ambi-
tion of German militarism whose policy is for world-wide dominion.
MIGHT IS RIGHT.
Another of the-main ideas of the three leaders of German thought
is, “Might is Right.” What is good and what is evil, what is right
and what is wrong are determined by references to the attainment
of might or power. German teachers say: What is good is for the
advantage of Germany (even atrocities), what is bad is for the dis-
advantage of Germany, even though it be a good thing. Whatever


increases power is right, however it may he judged by individual
standards. Might is right: What succeeds is good, what fails is bad.
Treaties are scraps of paper to be torn up when it suits Germany’s
convenience. The State is not to be judged by the ordinary canons
of morality. Germany has set up new standards of morality. Take
what you can get, keep what you can hold. Away with all notions
of honour. What pays it right, what does not pay is wrong. The
end of States is power, increase of power, and for the attainment of
this end the State must make war on the weak. Bernhardi says:
“Might is the supreme right and the dispute as to what is right
is decided by the arbitrament of war.” Take two men living over the
fence, the one has six sons and the other none. The man with the
six sons keeps quiet till they are grown up and then he says: “I will
cast out the man with no sons and take his place from him.” It
has been so with Germany. She has waited till she has grown strong
and now she thinks she has the power to take whatever she likes.
She believes “Might is Right.” The German Empire is worshipping at
the shrine of her present potential greatness. Their main object is
to grow powerful. Might is right and the sword must decide all
international questions. That is the faith of young Germany to-day.
The prevalent bend of mind among all classes in Germany is toward
a religion of greatness as a nation. This confessed principle of
German teachers that might is right sets selfishness on high. It
literally says: “When you have the advantage you are to take it.”
That sounds brutal and it is brutal. But it is on such a principle
that the policy of Germany is based. A defence of it is based on the
doctrine of evolution. In nature the strong always succeeds and the
weak goes to the wall. The strong therefore has a right to succeed
everywhere. Germany then puts selfishness foremost in all things.
The Germans preach the gospel of the bußy, he must rule.
While the German motto is: “Might is Right,” our motto is “Right
is Might.” The Germans say, “The race is to the swift and the battle
to the strong.” Scripture says, “The race is not to the swift nor the
battle to the strong.” With the Germans the weak must go to the
wall. Scripture teaches that we are to help the weak. Germans say,
“Blessed are the strong for they shall .inherit the earth.” Scripture
says, “Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth.” Ger-
mans say, “Blessed are the war-makers.” Scripture says, “Blessed
are the peace-makers.”
Against this German creed that might is right and selfishness the
only law, our soldiers are fighting. This war will decide whether
might is right shall rule humanity. And because we believe our nation
is fighting against a pagan ideal and on the side of civilisation and a
Christian conception of life, we can pray that we may be victorious.


DER TAG.
The Germans have been preparing for this war for 40 years,
until now their military system is well-nigh perfect. They have
looked forward to the day when they would strike for world-wide
dominion. We know that, for the German nation has had for years
as its toast “Der Tag” (The Day). What does der tag mean? It
means they look forward to the day when they shall feel strong
enough to attack others. They think that day has come now. We
trust the day has not come when a military despotism can crush the
free nations of Europe.
EVIL FRUITS OF GERMAN FALSE TEACHING.
I.—HATRED.
The Germans sing hate songs nightly in thousands of places
of amusement throughout Germany and the audience joins vocifer-
ously in the chorus. Hate poems are recited nightly at public and
private entertainments. Hate salutations are given every day. In-
stead of saying “Good morning,” the Germans say, “God punish Eng-
land,” to which the reply made is “May He punish her.” When the
members of a family meet at breakfast the head of the house greets
them with the words “God punish England,” and each one of them re-
plies, “May He punish her.” The Germans hate the British. Britain is
the great robber-empire. She owns one-fifth of the globe and the
Germans must dethrone her. The Germans teach their children to
hate us. To show the intensity of that hatred here is an example:
“No self-respecting German will ever consent to remain in any room
of which an Englishman is the occupant. If the German cannot
eject the Englishman, he will himself leave the room. We cannot
be expected to breathe the same polluted air as our deadliest foes
who fell upon us from the rear in the night.” Hatred begets hatred.
A British soldier fighting at the front said: “If I am spared to
return home, I shall for the future treat the Germans as the Ameri-
cans treat niggers.” You see hatred begets hatred. If the Germans
had taught their children to love us, we would have loved them.
The Archbishop of Canterbury suggested that everyone at noon offer
the following prayer: “God bless our King and country and defend
the right.” This, said the Archbishop, would prove a wholesome ef-
fective for good, as the German curse against England would prove
baneful to those taught to ejaculate it.
lI.—CRUELTY.
The gospel of hate taught by the leaders of German thought has
led the Germans to practice great cruelty in this war. With them


there is a law for peace-time and a law for war-time. It is legiti-
mate, the Germans believe, to carry on war in the most drastic
manner, the ultimate aim, peace, will thus be brought about all the
more speedily. They therefore say: “Pierce the enemy to the heart.”
Cruelty becomes legitimate when it promises victory. Thier cruelty
has come out in their .treatment of prisoners and in their submarine
warfare. They are capable of any cruelty if it will lead to victory.
The Germans say, “You talk about atrocities committed in Belgium
by German soldiers. Whatever was committed in Belgium cannot be
called barbarism on the part of the German army, but once let us
get into England and there will be no way of holding back our soldiers,
and no doubt the world will learn of atrocities committed which are
unknown to-day.” Professor Bannerman, speaking in the Free Church
General Assembly, Edinburgh, said: “Bible killing in Germany had
led to baby killing.” Killing the Bible leads people to savagery. Y r ou
can excuse savages for murder, they know no better, but the Ger-
mans are an enlightened people and through abandoning the Bible
as their guide they have become worse than savages.
lII.—LOW RELIGIOUS . LIFE IN GERMANY.
This is another evil fruit of German false teaching. For some
years a great change has been passing over the religious life of
Germany. The churches have been getting emptier and emptier.
Under two per cent, of the population attend church. Large secessions
have taken place from the State church. The reasons for this are two:
(1) The pastors of the State church support the throne. Every
measure introduced by the Government to curtail the liberties of the
people has had the support of the church. Never a protest is raised
at the piling up of armaments. (2) The growth of materialism. The
greed for gain, the lust for money, the stronger lust after the pleas-
ures, lawful and unlawful, which the possession of money can secure,
the rapidly-growing distaste for the serious things of life, the almost
total neglect of religion, are all signs that will lead to shipwreck
unless it is checked.
IV.—BERLIN MORALITY.
The low religious life of Germany has brought about a low moral
life. For, see the low state of affairs in Berlin! It is a city without
night, almost without sleep. Dusk is linked to dawn by an unbroken
round of music, dancing, feasting. Berlin has become the great city
of pleasure. Paris, in comparison, seems dull. London is asleep for
hours at night. New York, after midnight, is desolate. Between 10.30
and 11 o’clock the Berlin theatres pour forth a flood of people. No


one thinks of going home. They repair to the restaurants. At one
o'clock the people pour into other resorts, where the carousal goes on
till daybreak, when the restaurants open once more for the morning
glass.
DEVELOPMENT OF TPIE PROCESS IN GERMANY.
How can we account for the fact that Germany has undergone so
thorough a change from what she was, say 40 years ago? Plow can
we account for the development among the Germans of this warlike
spirit? They formerly were peace-loving and industrious, now all
their energies are devoted to war, they love war and live for war.
Such a change in the character of the whole German nation! Who
brought about this change? The Kaiser. He, through the education
system, has changed the whole character of the German people from
peace-loving to war-loving.
Ist.—EDUCATION GENERALLY.
State education has* played an enormous part in the alteration of
the German character. From the moment of the accession of the
present Kaiser to uncontrolled power he took education in hand and
turned it to his own purposes. The first thing he did was to make
universal education the law of Germany. He insisted on the element-
ary and upper school teachers of his realm that the sole purpose
of these teachers was to provide him with physically well-trained
soldiers.
SCHOOLS.
German patriotism is taught in the schools. It is one of the
chief subjects taught. History, for the schools, is rewritten to glorify
Germany. From the moment a child goes to school, by pictures on
the wall and by historical incidents, he is taught to look on Ger-
many as the greatest nation.
UNIVERSITIES.
To-day the Government appoints professors who are likely to
support their policy. Professors in the universities are terrorised
by every means at the disposal of the Prussian Ministry of Education,
into inserting into their lectures passages about German victories and
passages to the effect that all nations other than the German nation
were decadent and contemptible. A professor has no chance of
keeping his chair unless he can commend himself to the powers that
be as a safe man.


2nd.—THE CHURCH.
The very ministers of the Gospel uphold the policy of the Govern-
ment. If you look for liberty in the church, you find a State clergy
whose highest ambition is to say what pleases the Government. The
State clergy justify Germany in whatever she does and run down
Britain.
3rd.—THE PRESS.
The press, though of recent years showing signs of independence,
is kept strictly within bounds. There is a rigid censorship of opinion.
They are allowed only to write about what will please the Kaiser
and his Ministry. When the German papers distort news and publish
it, it is called the truth, though in fact it is German lies. When the
British papers publish the truth about German atrocities it is called
British lies. The whole German press is against Britain. Foreign
reports have no influence whatever upon the German mind. The Ger-
mans are so convinced of the accuracy of their own newspaper reports.
No attack upon the enemy is too gross for the German press to print,
and nothing is too absurd for its readers to swallow.
4th.—THE REICHSTAG (PARLIAMENT).
The people are simply not interested in politics, and the ruling
caste has no desire that they should be. In the empire they have
manhood suffrage, but when they do elect a parliament the final word
on any matter is left with the Kaiser and his Ministers. The Kaiser
appoints the Chancellor and his Ministers, they are and must be his
creatures. If the Reichstag becomes obstreperous, it is dismissed and
the Kaiser and his Ministers rule. There is no body of public opinion
in Germany to act as a guide or as a correction to the Imperial
policy.
It is evident that, for at any rate 40 years, a great change has
been passing over Germany. Since 1870 the idea of Germany as the
coming world-power has been steadily fostered and propagated. It
is taught in the schools, the universities, the pulpit, the press, and in
the Reichstag. We are told that in 1913 Germany produced 700 books
treating on war, while Britain did not produce 20. Militarism became
the avowed objective of the ruling classes, and they have fostered that
among all classes. The whole German nation now believes in the
Pan-Germanic movement. Drilling and marching characterise the
•smallest villages. One of our great privileges is that we have a right
to think. A German has not that right. He is to think what the
State has decided he should think and he is to do what the State
has decided he should do. If the State wages war every man must
Tight.


The real cause of the war is the Kaiser and the ruling class.
The war has come from the military and ruling class of Germany.
They have kept the world in turmoil during these long years and
the war is the result.
KULTUR.
German kultur is German civilisation. They pretend that their
culture is the highest moral culture' and they want to make it
supreme throughout the world. To do that they would force it on
others at the point of the bayonet. But what does German culture
stand for as revealed in this terrible war? It stands for atrocities
the like of which the world has never seen. Woe be to the world
if such culture were supreme !
IDEALS; GERMANY’S AND BRITAIN’S.
The German ideal is that the Germans are a superior people,
that their civilisation is to become supreme throughout the world
and to accomplish that they are to use force. Germany’s ideal is
might, that it alone exalts a nation. Britain’s ideal is righteousness,
that it alone exalts a nation. Is our ideal to be shattered and the
ideal of Germany to become the ideal of civilisation? The British
Empire is fighting for more than its existence, it is fighting for the
highest ideais of civilisation. A blow is being struck to-day at the
very base of our civilisation —as to whether Britain or Germany
is to prevail. There is at stake whether Britain or Germany is to
rule the world. The issue is whether the world is to be ruled by
principles of justice, freedom, truth, or by principles of injustice,
tyranny, and falsehood. We are fighting not so much against a
nation as against an intolerable system. This war is not only be-
tween two nations armed to the teeth, but between two ideals of life.
To allow Germany to conquer would be to reverse the course of
history for 2000 years.
PAGANISM VERSUS GALILEE.
Not only are the foundations of our national life being rudely
shaken, but the foundations of our religious life are also being-
shaken. A religion essentially Christian is being challenged by a
religion essentially pagan. Religion still exists in Germany among
the peasants, but the ruling classes have cast Christianity aside. Ger-
many in the main has outgrown Galilee. Germany will not wear, what
Carlyle called, “Hebrew old clothes.” Germany will have a religion
of its own “made in Germany.”
What have the Germans to offer the world? In place of the
religion of Jesus Christ they offer the world the religion of Nietzsche,
the author of Anti-Christ,” who died a lunatic. The Germans are
faced with the alternative, Nietzsche or Jesus Christ. A large number


have entered into the war because they felt that it was of a religious
character; they believed that the war was between paganism and
Galilee. And so it is. It is a great struggle between Christianity
and anti-Christ, between the religion of love and the religion of hate.
The Germans through following other teachers than Christ have been
led into a veritable hell. The thing which was now stirring Europe
was not the work of God, but the work of the devil. It was not the
development of God’s purposes, it was a maturing of the sheer wrong-
ness of man’s inventions.
ONE UNIVERSAL RULER, CHRIST.
Not the Kaiser but Christ is to be universal ruler. He is the
only one who is fit to rule the world. There is only one kingdom
that shall pervade all other kingdoms and that is the Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ. “He shall have dominion from sea to sea and
from the river unto the ends of the earth. Yea, all kings shall fall
down before Him, all nations shall serve Him. His name shall endure
for ever, His name shall be continued as long as the sun, and men
shall be blessed in Him, all nations shall call Him blessed.”—Psalm
72 (8-11-17).
V. "ARMAGEDDON.”
(Rev. 16-16.)
In former wars, as a rule, only two nations were involved, and
the battle was finished in a day, whereas in this war many nations
are involved and the war has raged for more than a year. This
war has therefore roused the curiosity of many and has led them to
ask: Is this great war the long-predicted Armageddon? Is the end
of the world at hand? Is Christ’s second advent about to take
place? These are questions that are being frequently asked. Any
one who attempts to answer them will get an attentive hearing. This
war then has put people into an enquiring mood. And people realise
that the Bible is the only book that has something truly to say about
the future events of the world.
THIS WAR : ITS RESEMBLANCES TO ARMAGEDDON.
I.—GREATEST TROUBLE.
Before Armageddon, we are told, there will be a time of the
greatest trouble. The prophet Daniel describes it as “a time of trouble
such as never was since there was a nation, even to this same time.”


Dan. 12-1. Our Lord calls it “Great tribulation such as was not since
the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.” —Mat.
24-21. Christ also says; “Ye shall have wars and rumours of wars,
nation shall rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and
there shall be earthquakes and famines and troubles, these are the
beginning of sorrows.” The time then before Armageddon will be
one of the greatest trouble. It has been so with this war. The
nations were greatly troubled before it came.
lI.—GREATEST BATTLEFIELD.
This war is like Armageddon in greatness. From the book of Rev.
we learn that Armageddon is the last great battlefield where the
kings of the earth will fight. “The Kings of the earth and the whole
world will gather themselves to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty.”—verse 14. It is so with this great war. The kings of
the earth are engaged in war against one another; it is like an
Armageddon. This war has brought into the fighting line against
each other the majority of the leading nations of the world—Germany,
Austro-Hungary, British Empire, France, Russia, Belgium,, Italy, etc.,
with a total population reaching the colossal figure of over 1,000,000,000,
or considerably more than half the human race. There is involved
in this war in Europe armies reaching a total of between twelve and
fifteen million soldiers. At the inaugural banquet given to the press
delegates in London, fully a year ago, Lord Rosebery pictured the
situation before 600 of the Empire’s editors. He said; “For forty
years it has been a platitude to say that Europe is an armed camp
and for forty years it has been true that all nations have been facing
each other, armed to the teeth, and that has been in some respects a
guarantee of peace. Now, what do we see? Without any tangible
reason, we see nations preparing new armaments. They cannot arm
more men on land, so they have to seek new armaments upon the
sea, piling up these enormous preparations, as if for some great Arma-
geddon, and that in a time of profoundest peace.” In these words
Lord Rosebery shows that the trend of events was leading in the
direction of a titanic struggle on the part of Germany for a world-
wide empire. This war is the greatest war of history. There has
been nothing in the world to compare with it. No wonder then in
regard to greatness some think it is Armageddon.
lII.—STRUGGLE BETWEEN GOOD AND EVIL.
This war is a struggle between good and evil; it is a struggle as
to whether “might” shall rule or “right.” So with Armageddon.
There is no doubt the powers of evil are increasing. But why, it is
asked, has not God arrested the power of evil? Why did He not
long ago put an end to the dominion of the Prince of Darkness? For
the same reason that a surgeon allows a sore to come to a head


before he lances it. God does nothing except in the fullness of time.
And so this war is a struggle between good and evil. And Arma-
geddon when it comes will be a great struggle between good and
evil, when evil will be finally overthrown and good finally victorious.
In these three respects this war is like Armageddon.
THIS WAR : ITS DIFFERENCES TO ARMAGEDDON.
I.—PEACE.
Armageddon is a place in Palestine and not in Europe. It is on
the southern rim of the great valley of Jezreel or Esdraelon, on the
frontier line of the territories of Issacher and Manasseh. To speak
roughly, it lies between Samaria and Galilee. Armageddon or Megiddo
is the great battlefield of the Old Testament. There the chief con-
flicts took place between the Israelites and their enemies. Here God’s
people obtained two victories, Barak over the Canaanites, and Gideon
over the Midianites; and for two disasters, the death of Saul in the
invasion of the Philistines, and the death of Josiah in the invasion
of the Egyptians. When Pharaoh-Necho came from Egypt against the
King of Assyria, Josiah, the King of Judah, joined the latter and was
slain at Megiddo and his body was carried from there to Jerusalem.
This calamity made a deep impression on the Jews and the lamenta-
tions for this good king became “an ordinance in Israel.” “In all
Jewry” they mourned for him and the lamentation was made perpetual
“in all the nation of Israel.” In the book of Revelation this valley of
Megiddo is presented as the scene of a terrible and final conflict
which will immediately precede the coming of the Kingdom of Christ.
The great nations of the earth are described as taking part in this
final contest. The scene of the present war is different, as yet, at
any rate. Armageddon is the mountain of Megiddon and it is in
Palestine, between Samaria and Galilee. If we must take prophecy
literally, therefore, the present war has nothing to do with it. The
definite locality rules it out. But who knows where it may end ?
lI.—CHRIST AND ANTI-CHRIST.
In the present war the nations engaged are all Christian nations
with one exception, Turkey. Turkey is anti-Christian. At Arma-
geddon Christ and Anti-Christ will fight—that is to say, Christ at the
head of the Christian nations of Europe are to fight against Anti-
Christ —the anti-Christian nations of Asia. Hence the present war
is not Armageddon, for Armageddon will be a conflict between the
Lord Jesus Christ and the armies of the East under Anti-Christ,
whereas this war is really between Christian nations, except Turkey.
SIXTH VIAL POURED OUT.
As we live under the emptying of the sixth vial let us notice the
signs of it in particular.


I.—THE UNSPEAKABLE TURK.
“And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates and the water thereof was dried up that the way of the
Kings of the Bast might be prepared.” This drying up of the Euphrates
directs our attention to Turkey, the country that owns this great river.
The Euphrates is an historic river flowing through the Asiatic por-
tion of the Ottoman Empire. This river is 1800 miles long, not
fordable at any place, rarely less than 10 feet deep and averaging 30
feet deep. As to whether it is to be literally dried up, it is not likely.
If it be necessary to dry it up, God can do so. The drying up of the
Euphrates is supposed to be taken as a figure, that the Ottoman Em-
pire shall dry up—shall shrivel up into nothing. Turkey was once a
vast empire, but how small it has become! In its old extent, it
included not only Turkey in Europe, but Greece, Bulgaria, Roumania,
Servia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the Crimea and a portion of
Southern Russia, Syria, Egypt, Tripoli, Tunis, Algiers and numerous
islands in the Mediterranean, the total population would be over
50 million and the area nearly twice Europe without Russia. One by
one her provinces have been taken away. Algiers and Tunis now
belong to France. Tripoli Avas taken recently by Italy. Egypt is
now under British rule. Servia and Bosnia are administered by
Austria. Roumania is a separate kingdom. Bulgaria is an inde-
pendent State under a King. Greece is under a King of its own. In
Europe alone Turkey has lost three-quarters of its land and about
the same proportion of its people. Asiatic Turkey alone has suffered
little diminution. It is wonderful how Turkey once greAV, it is wonder-
ful how Turkey is now shrinking. The Ottoman Empire is to-day a
fast dwindling thing. Its boundaries once stretched from the Danube
to the cataracts of the Nile, from the Euphrates to the borders of
Morocco. Turkey in Europe to-day consists merely of a small strip
of land stretching from the Black Sea to the Aegean Sea. Its wide
territories in Europe have been reduced to a small province. The de-
parture of the Turk from Europe cannot be much longer delayed. The
great nations are preparing for the event. The Turkish people them-
selves expect to have to go, and the Bible says that they shall go
and shall ultimately come to an end as a nation. That is what is
meant by the Euphrates drying up. It means that the Ottoman
Empire will cease to be. “And the sixth angel poured out his vial
on the great river Euphrates and the Avater thereof was dried up,
that the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared.”—Rev. 16-12.
The drying up of the river, which is to prepare the Avay of the Kings
of the East, cannot be taken in a literal sense. It certainly must be
read figuratively as referring to the coming end of Turkey. The
Turk Avill be driven out of Europe and finally despoiled of his Asiatic


possessions. When Turkey in Europe and Asia comes to an end it
will prepare the way for a mighty invasion from the East when “the
kings of the earth and the whole world” will fight in the battle of
Armageddon in Palestine.—Rev. 16-14. In other words, according to
prophecy, after the Turk is driven out of Europe and finally despoiled
of his Asiatic possessions, the civilised nations are to be called upon
to fight for their existence in Palestine, at Armageddon, that historic
cross-roads between three continents. The climax of this great battle
will be the standing up of Michael and the establishing of the Kingdom
of our Lord Jesus Christ. “At that time shall Michael stand up, the
great prince who standeth for the children of Thy people and there
shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a
nation, even to that same time, and at that time Thy people shall be
delivered every one that shall be found written in the book.” —Daniel
12-1. Michael is Christ. He will assume authority. He will take
possession of His Kingdom after Armageddon. The pouring out of the
sixth vial fortells the extinction of Turkey and the battle of Arma-
geddon. Turkey must be dried up out of the way in preparation for
the Kingdom of Christ.
11,-—THE DRAGON, THE BEAST, AND THE FALSE PROPHET.
You will observe there is something else in the description of the
sixth vial. While the Euphrates was to be drying in the East, other
influences were to be at work in the AVest (the dragon, the beast, and
the false prophet)—verse 13. The dragon represents a war-like nation.
The beast is used in the Bible and also in modern times to represent
a government. For example, we speak of Russia as a bear, Germany
as an eagle, and Britain as a lion. The false prophet is Mohammed.
HI.—FROGS.
AVe read that out of the mouth of the dragon, out of the mouth
of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet there pro-
ceeded three unclean spirits like frogs, which went forth throughout
all the world to gather the nations to the battle of Armageddon. “And
I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs, come out of the mouth of
the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth
of the false prophet. For they are the spirits of devils, working
miracles, which go forth unto all the kings of the earth and of the
whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty.”—Verses 13-14. These three unclean spirits, like frogs, John
saw emanate from the three European centres. These evil spirits,
like frogs, bring about Armageddon. An unclean spirit is a doctrine,
an unclean and false doctrine. Each of these systems will utter the
same thing and these utterances will have the effect of gathering the
nations of the earth to the great battle of Armageddon. The symbol


ism of Scripture rightly understood is very forceful and there is al-
ways a close resemblance between the symbol itself and the thing
symbolised. When the Holy Spirit uses a frog to represent certain
doctrines or teachings, we may be sure that the application will fit
well. While a frog is a small creature, it puffs itself up until it
almost bursts itself. A frog has a very wise look even though it does
not know very much. A frog croaks whenever it utters a sound.
The three most prominent characteristics of a frog then are pompos-
ity, an air of superior wisdom, and a continual croaking. The evil
spirits, like frogs, which come out of the mouth of the dragon, the
beast, and the false prophet, will be always boasting, will have an air
of superior wisdom, and will be always croaking, that is, foretelling
dire results to follow any failure to obey their counsels. The croak-
ing of the frog-spirits or doctrines will gather the nations together
to fight at Armageddon.
THE REAL, ARMAGEDDON : FOUR POINTS ABOUT IT.
I.—GOOD VERSUS EVIL.
The real Armageddon will be a final struggle between good and
evil, truth and error, right and wrong. Our Lord promised He would
come again and then He would right all wrong. There will be
a deadly and final outbrust of the powers of evil against the powers of
good. The evil cannot increase and the good increase without coming
to a decisive fight. The second advent will be preceded by a time
of the greatest trouble. There will be a failing away first, iniquity
will abound, evil will grow to its full ripene*ss and then the earth
will be reaped and the evil separated for ever from the good. Arma-
geddon will be a great and final struggle between good and evil, truth
and error, right and wrong, when good and truth and right shall
triumph, and evil and error and wrong shall be defeated.
lI.—WEST VERSUS EAST.
The real Armageddon will be a struggle between West and East,
often spoken of as the Occident and the Orient. The real Armageddon
is to be fought between the Western and Christian nations and the
Eastern and un-Christian nations. As far as trade by sea is con-
cerned the East (the Orient) meets the West (the Occident) at Port
Said. Armageddon i's only a little north from this, where East and
West will meet one another in a final and decisive battle. The civilised
nations are to be called on to fight for their existence at Armageddon
in Palestine, that historic cross-roads between three continents. When
East and West stand face to face that civilisation will survive which
justifies itself in the sight of God. When the Mohammedans and the
followers of Confucius, and the followers of Bhudda and of Brahma
rise to battle it will be a great battle. The Mohammedans number


millions. They have a contempt for death, hence they will make
terrible foes. They have always hated the Christians and they will
gladly join in a holy war against them. There is great unrest at the
present time in Asia. Japan is on the move and so is India and China.
The nations of the East have awakened from a sleep of hundreds of
years. They are adopting our dress, our methods of education, and
our methods of warfare. They no longer stick to antiquated notions
and methods. They are adopting everything up-to-date. When, there-
fore, the nations of the Bast with up-to-date methods meet the nations
of the West at Armageddon, it will be a great battle.
111. —CHRIST VERSUS ANTI-CHRIST.
The real Armageddon will be a struggle between Christ and Anti-
Christ. Let me define what is meant by anti-Christ. Anti-Christ
literally means against Christ. It includes all who deny Christ to be
the Messiah. “Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the
Christ.” He is Anti-Christ that denieth the Father and the Son. “Who-
soever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father. Many de-
ceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus is
come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an Anti-Christ.” That Anti-
Christ is apostacy, the principal feature of which is the denial of
the divinity of Christ, we have also: “Every spirit that confesseth that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God, and every spirit that
confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God,
and this is that spirit of Anti-Christ whereof ye have heard that it
should come and even now already is it in the world.” And further,
we have: “As ye have heard that Anti-Christ shall come, even now
there are many anti-Christs.” Anti-Christ is therefore not an in-
dividual but a movement including many. It includes all who deny
the divinity of Christ. Anti-Christ then includes all Mohammedans of
Turkey in Europe and Turkey in Asia, and all followers of Bhudda
and of Brahma and of Confucius in the East. Christ means all
who believe in Christ as the Messiah. The Roman Catholics do not
belong to Anti-Christ; they belong to Christ. That includes Italy,
Spain, Portugal, Prance, etc. The Greek Church also belongs to
Christ. That includes Greece, Russia, etc. Christ, therefore, includes
all Protestants and all Roman Catholics and the Greek Church—in
short, Christ includes all Europe. Christ, which includes all Europe,
will meet Anti-Christ, which includes all Asia, at Armageddon and the
latter will be defeated. Satan shall be thoroughly worsted, his power
completely broken and his hateful rule over the souls of men abolished.
“And the beast was taken and with him the false prophet that wrought
miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received
the mark of the beast and them that worshipped his image. These
both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.” That


is the end of Armageddon when the armies of the East, gathered under
Anti-Christ, are defeated by the armies of the West under Christ.
IV.—CHRIST’S SECOND ADVENT.
He will come prior to Armageddon. The verse before our text
says, “Behold, I am as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth.” St.
Paul says similarly, “The day of the Lord cometh as a thief in the
night.” What is this but the coming of the Lord? The time of its
occurrence is indicated in this general way. It is when the Euphrates
is dried up and the nations are armed and ready for the Armageddon
conflict that Jesus steals into the world to resume His work. The
sixth vial is nearly fulfilled, and Jesus comes under the sixth vial, but
exactly at what stage of it is not revealed. We are therefore in
the position described by Christ that “we know neither the day nor
the hour.” His first work is a work of judgment on His own house,
as indicated by the words, “Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth
his garments.” His next work is a work of public participation in the
wars that will ensue. The armies of the nations are gathered to
Armageddon, where Christ is victorious and His Kingdom set up in
nucleous form in Palestine. After the great battle of Armageddon there
will come the era of public tumult depicted in the seventh vial. Verses
17-21.
CONCLUSION.
Before Armageddon a time of extreme trouble shall prevail and
many shall fall away from the faith and iniquity shall abound. Christ
will come at Armageddon and gain the victory. Some people think
the world is going from bad to Avorse. We as Christians must believe
the reverse, that there has been an uninterrupted progress in truth
and righteousness from the beginning of the Christian era and that in
the end Christ will come and at Armageddon He Avill defeat Satan
and bring to an end his hateful rule 0A r er the souls of men and set up
His universal Kingdom. At Armageddon evil will be finally defeated
and good will finally triumph and Christ will claim the Kingdom for
His own and be crowned Lord of all.
For right is right, since God is God,
And right the day must win ;
To doubt would be disloyalty,
To falter would be sin.
Printed at the Otautau Standard Office, Otautau.
