

WAR
AND THE
MEDICAL
SERVICES
What is happening to
the people’s health
This pamphlet is the work of the Joint Medical Socialist Committee. The
Committee, consisting of members of the Socialist Medical Association, Left
Book Club Medical Group and University Labour Federation, was formed
at the outbreak of war to co-ordinate the activity of various medical socialist
bodies and to study the new conditions resulting from the war. Detailed
statistics relative to the present situation are not available. The reports on
which our conclusions are based were derived from individual letters and
statements. Those quoted are believed to be representative. Enquiries and
applications for further copies of this pamphlet should be addressed to the
Secretary, Joint Medical Socialist Committee, University Labour Club,
15 Percy Street, W.1.
THREEPENCE
LABOUR RESEARCH DEPARTMENT


FOREWORD
ADAPTATION of a system from peace to war is a
test of its organisation, efficiency and elasticity. The
attempt to adapt the medical services of Britain to
the new situation has revealed their ramshackle structure.
The confusion and disorganisation are an indictment, not
so much of the Government department concerned, but
of the condition of service which is considered sufficient
for the nation’s need in time of peace. The first impulse
is to criticise the Ministry of Health, but while much of
this criticism is justified, the real attack should be made
upon the public complacency which allows peace-time
medical work to be conducted without co-ordination or
central direction.
The Ministry has been asked to make its bricks without
straw. It has been compelled to improvise and com-
promise, and it is little wonder that its emergency service
has broken down, even before it has been called upon
to work. It is of paramount importance that we should
not lose this opportunity of drawing attention to the state
of Britain’s medical service. The details of inco-ordina-
tion, overlapping and confusion are set forth in this
pamphlet, but I cannot refrain from suggesting that the
main defence of the old system is the voluntary hospital.
The voluntary hospital, which evolved as a feature of
the dawning sense of health in man, belongs to another
age. It is a symbol of the detachment of Governments
from interest in the health of the people. It stands for
isolated, unco-ordinated effort. It remains as an island
of nineteenth century medicine in a rising sea of modern
public service. The voluntary hospital, in common with
many other relics of the past, cannot be defended in the
modern world, where health is as much a primary right
of the people as life itself.
ALECK BOURNE.


WAR AND THE MEDICAL SERVICES
“There is little to show that the hopes of an improve-
ment in the co-ordination of medical services, which were
expressed some weeks ago by the Ministry of Health, have
been brought nearer to realisation. On the contrary, both
the medical profession and those who stand in need of its
services find themselves in a position of increasing difficulty.
Patients cannot obtain treatment, even in some instances
treatment of which there is urgent need, and doctors are
compelled to stand by in idleness while the demands for
their services grow more and more insistent. . .
From a leading article in “ The Times,’’
Monday, October 23rd.
“ The plans drawn up for the organisation of the nation
in time of war have now had seven weeks of preliminary
testing. . . . Where the planning has been done efficiently,
. . . there has been no vestige of complaint. . . . The out-
standing example has been the transportation of the B.E.F.
to France. National Registration again, and the application
of the Armed Forces Act, have not evoked one word of
complaint, though both touch the tenderest susceptibilities
of the British people. But other plans, whose authors have
had far longer to perfect them, have not proved so satis-
factory.” (Our italics. — Ed.)
From “ The Times,” Tuesday, October 24th.
IN other words the National Government were able to
organise efficiently the registration, recruitment,
mobilisation and transhipment of the armed forces, but
they were unable to organise the continuation of health
services for the people. This is the problem that confronts
us today.
THE NEW SITUATION
Authorities have tried to evade responsibility for the
disorganisation of medical services on the plea that the
outbreak of war inevitably produces dislocation and


temporary hardship. But the fact is that for months we
have been actively preparing for war; for over three years
we have been studying Air Raid Precautions; for over
eight years wars have been waged on a large scale. There
was nothing to justify surprise at the outbreak of war
in Europe this September. Even now we have been
spared mass bombings for the first three months of the
war.
We have had every chance to be prepared for this
present emergency.
Taking this into consideration we must weigh up how
much of the present chaos and hardship is due to the
actual outbreak of war, how much to the previous
structure of the organisation of the health services of this
country, and how much could have been prevented by a
more far-sighted approach to the problem in the light
of the obvious risks. Only then can we begin to under-
stand how order can be restored and how the care of the
health of the people can be planned in time of war or
peace.
Three new factors have affected the health services
since the outbreak of war. These are:
(1) The Evacuation.
(2) Preparation for Air-Raid Casualties.
(3) Intensification of the Economic Crisis.
The effect of these must be considered in relation to the
conditions which already existed in the health services.
In many ways the present crisis has done much to expose
the weakness of the organisation of British medicine. As
a result of this study of the immediate effects of the
outbreak of war we hope to be able to point the way
forward, and to show how the real interests of doctors,
dentists, nurses, students, almoners, pharmacists, social
workers, public health officers and administrators
correspond to the interests of the public whom they serve.
Much of what follows is based on experiences in and
around London. It is realised that the dislocation has
been less in other cities. The conclusions derived from
our study are, we believe, none the less valid.


THE EVACUATION
The actual transportation from London was carried
out on the whole efficiently. Much has been made of
this although the movement itself was no more difficult
than the exodus that had to be organised by the transport
services every bank-holiday. Beyond this little credit is
due. There was no real organisation of the arrangements
for billeting and education, nor was there any plan for
the provision of medical care for the evacuees. We do
not intend to discuss the principles guiding the classifica-
tion of areas as dangerous, safe or neutral. We are con-
cerned with the medical effects.
Reports reveal great variation. In a few areas doctors
are thriving on account of an influx of more or less
wealthy patients, and no complaints have reached us from
patients in such areas. Elsewhere local practitioners,
although overworked, are grateful for the financial aid
that is resulting. But there is evidence from many regions
of an almost complete breakdown of the provision of
medical care for children and mothers. Even now the
standards of medical attention are far below pre-war level.
A general practitioner in a reception area thirty-five
miles north of London wrote complaining that there was
complete lack of co-operation between the local public
authorities and the local practitioners. Willing help was
refused while patients went untreated. No medical
examinations were made either before or immediately
after evacuation. Special clinics had to be set up to deal
with scabies and lice. Impetigo became epidemic. Over-
crowding made matters worse.
An almoner wrote:
“ At the beginning of the war no attempt was made to
give any real medical inspection. Now something is being
done in the way of clearing up minor ailments by school
nurses, who are trekking around from country district to
country district. There is still no organised medical
supervision of the evacuated children in most parts.
“ The school medical staff in reception areas are totally
inadequate to meet the increased demands on their services.
They ask for help from the local authorities, but these are
most unwilling to take on the extra responsibility, so
nothing gets done. The provision of free milk and meals
to the poorer children has been inadequate.”


Another report told of expectant mothers being
“ trotted round from house to house ” before beds could
be found for them. Was there any wonder that many
of them “ packed up and came home? ”
Many more returned to London because of the
difficulties of getting ante-natal care. Clinics were either
non-existent, grossly over-crowded, or far from the billets.
A letter from a South Coast town reports:
“ First-aid work is mostly done by the teachers, which
often means that the time available for teaching is
considerably reduced . . . there is no public facility for
cleansing dirty heads . . . some places cannot even get free
milk in the schools. We have no minor ailment clinics
for children of school age.”
Many letters report the difficulty of securing accom-
modation for acutely sick patients. Yet in the same
districts buildings which had been converted to base
hospitals for the reception of casualties were lying empty.
Other communications report the unwillingness of
doctors to treat evacuee patients except for cash. Under
the evacuation scheme local general practitioners are
entitled to 10/- per annum per child unaccompanied by
a parent. This is only now being realised in practice.
Children accompanied by parents have to be paid for
or application made to the Public Assistance Committee.
As yet we can make no accurate estimate of the harm
that has resulted from the breakdown of medical care in
parts of the reception areas. But even with our limited
survey a number of things stand out clearly.
As far as London was concerned the Ministry of
Health made no attempt whatever to organise medical
attention for the evacuated children and mothers.
Of course this has never been regarded as a national
responsibility. Of course there is no reason why they
should now undertake to do what they have never done
in peace time. Yet education is now regarded as a funda-
mental right irrespective of birth or means. Is it not
time that adequate health facilities for all should be
regarded in the same way? In the past the failure of
the State authority has been made up by voluntary, semi-
voluntary and municipal efforts.
The closure of such clinics and extra facilities has


exposed the basic deficiency in the organisation of
the health services.
A second important feature of many of the complaints
is the unwillingness of local authorities to co-operate with
each other or with the local practitioners. There is a
tendency to evade responsibility, to pass it on to someone
else, to some other authority. There has been endless
wrangling as to just who was responsible for what. Where
arrangements have been adequate the credit is due to the
efforts of individuals in the localities. The failure else-
where is closely related to the unplanned organisation of
health and medical services in this country.
It would be unfair, however, to lay too much of the
blame on the local authorities. Their position has been
difficult. Their powers are laid down in a Ministry of
Health memorandum:
“ The local authority in the receiving area should [our
italics. — Ed.] provide medical services to the evacuated
population in the same manner as they provide medical
services to their normal population.
“ The additional expenditure falling upon the authorities
in the receiving areas in regard to medical services will
not ultimately fall on (a) the receiving authorities or ( b)
the householder who billets the evacuated population.
“ The evacuating authorities cannot expect to be relieved
of all their financial liability in regard to the medical
services rendered to evacuees, merely because the evacuees
are no longer in the area of the evacuating authority.
“The Ministry of Health will determine how ultimately
the additional costs will be adjusted.”
From circulars of the Ministry of Health.
No provision is made to ensure that mothers and
children who were used to the services provided by, say,
the L.C.C. will be equally well cared for in the reception
area.
Finance is at the root of the trouble.
Local authorities in the poorer districts dare not raise
the rates which incidentally fall heavily on the working-
class sections. They are dependent on grants and loans
for any new projects. Before the war attempts were
already being made to deflect investments from local
housing or hospital building schemes into armament
channels.


Now more drastic measures are being adopted.
On September 13th, 1939, the Treasury issued a
circular to local authorities pointing out that:
“ It is the intention of His Majesty’s Government that
capital expenditure by local authorities, whether or not
authorised, should be restricted within the narrowest limits.”
The conciseness of this statement contrasts with the
vague instructions as to the provision of medical care in
reception areas.
It may be possible to force the Ministry of Health to
be more specific as to how the cost of the necessary
services is to be “ adjusted.” At present the local
authorities are afraid to spend money because they do
not know whether they are going to recover it.
THE EMERGENCY MEDICAL SCHEME
Preparations were made to deal with a flood of
casualties which did not materialise. We shall not
attempt to judge what would have happened if the first
air-raid warnings had been followed by the type of mass
bombings that so many of us anticipated. Provided that
no bombs had fallen in their immediate vicinity, many
of the casualty clearing stations would have been able
to do quite good work.
First aid posts were less well prepared, equipment was
deficient, personnel was untrained, protection against
even blast and flying splinters inadequate.
As for the base hospitals, they were just not ready.
To give a typical example, one large base hospital
destined to receive three thousand casualties was
equipped for no more than fifty patients two weeks after
the beginning of the war. No doubt the actual bombing,
had it started at the outset of the war, would have
produced a rapid reorganisation on the basis of the
lessons learnt. These lessons might have been expensive
in terms of loss of life and unnecessary suffering.
But whatever the efficiency of the Emergency Medical
Scheme in dealing with casualties, the immediate effect
on the care of civilian sick was tragic.
The Emergency Medical Scheme was organised by the
Ministry of Health. It involved the partial taking over
of hospitals, schools, libraries and other suitable build


ings. In London it was organised on a sector basis, each
sector being nominaly in the charge of a sector officer
appointed from one of the teaching hospitals in the sector.
The service included voluntary and municipal hospitals
although the employees of the London County Council
remained under the Council.
The immediate steps taken at the beginning of the
war were concerned solely with the provision of the
number of casualty beds ordered by the authorities.
Many hospitals discharged all their patients and
refused to admit more. A small number of sick and
convalescent patients were evacuated. A still smaller
number of very sick patients were allowed to remain.
Out-patient departments stopped and only slowly began
to function again with depleted staffs. Hospitals that
continued to admit more or less urgently sick patients
found themselves understaffed since most of their nurses
had been evacuated to base hospitals. Gradually there
has been a tendency for admissions to return to normal
as far as acute and sick patients are concerned, but
practitioners still find difficulty in getting patients into
hospital. Although some base hospitals were able to get
going fairly soon, and to admit civilian cases from the
former voluntary hospital waiting lists, further evacuation
to the base hospitals has continued slowly on the whole
and the medical and nursing staffs have been kicking
their heels in idleness “ waiting for the bombs,” while
elsewhere patients have found medical services
unobtainable.
Many of the difficulties in the way of a smooth adapta-
tion to the existing situation are organisational. As a
rule no one knows who is in control. L.C.C. superin-
tendents were getting mutually contradictory instructions
from the Ministry of Health, County Hall, and the Sector
Officers. The Sector Officers having regarded themselves
as responsible for the organisation of their sectors, dis-
covered later that their powers were “ only advisory ”
and that anything that they had done could be cancelled
indiscriminately by the Ministry.
The suffering and hardship caused by this muddle can
only be appreciated in terms of the fate of individual
patients, multiplied a thousand times.


AVAILABLE BEDS
According to statements in Parliament there were
ninety-seven thousand beds available for the care of the
sick in the Metropolitan Area before the war. There are
now available ninety-eight thousand beds in the London
Sector Area (which is larger than the Metropolitan Area)
and in outlying base hospitals. A large proportion of
these —at least 20 per cent —are still reserved for
casualties. Hutment hospitals are being built but are not
yet ready. The available accommodation for the treat-
ment of civilian sick, especially the chronic invalids, has
undoubtedly been reduced.
A letter from the Ministry of Health to The Times of
December 6th, 1939, illustrates the extent of this
reduction:
“ There were 6,334 beds in the twelve teaching hospitals
when the war began. Of these, at the present time, 2,450
are reserved for casualties, 1,185 shelter the sick, and 2,699
are closed.”
The effect of all this is illustrated by the following
examples.
From an ophthalmic hospital it is reported:
“ Patients evacuated or sent home before treatment
completed, with risk of blindness resulting.”
From a cancer hospital;
“ Complete cessation of all radium treatment, with dis-
charge of patients in the middle of courses of treatment.”
From a convalescent home with only untrained nursing
staff to which patients had been evacuated:
“Accident case received, no anti-tetanus serum, and died
of tetanus.”
From a lady almoner:
“A man of 42, carcinoma of jaw, in hospital in July,
came up on September 9th in severe pain. Given medicine
and taken home to his sister, who was herself very weak
and incapable of looking after an ill man.”
This type of story is the real basis of the growing dis-
satisfaction with the arrangements that have been made
to carry on the care of civilian sick.


MEDICAL STAFF
The chaos is well illustrated by the way the Emergency
Medical Service in London are treating their medical
staff. At the outbreak of war most of the resident house
surgeons and house physicians transferred to the service.
The remaining members of the consultant staff and a
number of physicians and surgeons who had previously
been in private practice signed on. The staffs of the
teaching hospitals were redistributed to the base hospitals
leaving only a small nucleus at the original hospitals
which were to function as casualty clearing stations. The
staffs of the L.C.C. hospitals were largely left unchanged.
There was at first gross dissatisfaction at many of the
inequalities involved. Junior house officers transferred
to the E.M.S. suddenly found themselves earning £350
per year and were duly grateful. House officers and
junior medical officers in the L.C.C. complained and were
told that everything would be adjusted in due course.
The meaning of this became clear when a large section
of the E.M.S. doctors received a curt note from the
Ministry of Health telling them they were sacked, on the
ground that the Ministry had not realised that they
already had contracts with their hospitals which of course
were inviolate. The indignation was not surprising. It
resulted in a meeting of residents from over twenty
London hospitals and the appointment of a delegation to
wait on the sector officer, the British Medical Association
and the Ministry of Health. They were reinstated in their
appointments for another three months but with no
written contract. Many were then transferred back to
their original voluntary hospital control at £200 per
annum.
The latest alterations to the scheme provide payment
of £500 a year as a retainer to consultant surgeons and
physicians, to enable them to continue their private
practices. This is an alternative to the jobs at £800 a
year full-time.
The conditions of the junior doctors are to be arranged
by the hospital authorities. The poorer voluntary
hospitals are financially in a bad way and their reduction
of staff is the result of this urgent need to economise.
At one hospital all the resident doctors were given a


month’s notice. Four of the six jobs were then advertised
at pre-war rates and four of the residents re-engaged.
This was possible because two medical students were
available to fill the gaps.
This example of what is known in industry as
dilution of labour reveals the official attitude towards
students and medical education.
A brief survey of other aspects of this problem will
show that it is one of general importance.
MEDICAL EDUCATION
In London the outbreak of war brought about the
complete disruption of medical education. Students
were distributed to casualty clearing stations and base
hospitals in the sectors under the control of the sector
officers from their teaching hospitals. The continuation
of education in any form whatsoever was entirely
dependent on the individual initiative of the medical staff
at the hospital to which they were sent. Many of these
hospitals had previously been doing no teaching of any
kind. At the same time examination standards were
lowered, pathology removed from the examination for
the conjoint degree M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. and other
examinations cancelled.
Many students were financially hit by having to move
to outlying parts, where their living expenses were higher.
The students in one sector received a note from their
Dean explaining that they would be expected to pay full
fees in spite of the collapse of education because of the
magnificent jobs that would subsequently become avail-
able to them in the E.M.S.
The attitude of the Ministry of Health to the whole
question was revealed in a letter which pointed out
that since the students would be “ signed up ” for
any time spent at casualty clearing stations they had no
real complaint. In other words, the whole scheme was
designed to allow as many students as possible to become
qualified quickly, without reference to their ability. At
a time when we are likely to need more and better trained
doctors, the policy was calculated to produce an im-
mediate flood of poorly trained doctors. Such a plan
might have been justified if all available doctors were
being required for the services. But in fact there is a


long waiting list and many doctors who enrolled for
service before the outbreak of war have not yet been
called up.
GENERAL PRACTITIONERS
Another section of the profession that has been
particularly badly hit by the' evacuation and the E.M.S.
arrangements is the mass of general practitioners remain-
ing in the evacuated areas. Their problems require
special consideration.
A number of those left behind in the evacuated areas
are facing ruin. Many factors have contributed to this.
No redistribution of medical personnel accompanied the
evacuation. Indeed under the existing panel system it
is difficult to see how any such redistribution could have
been effected with equity. Doctors remaining in town
were immediately deprived of sections of their private
practice.
The attitude of the hospitals, acting under instructions
from the Ministry, has not helped to solve the problems
of the G.P. Hospital facilities have been reduced.
Consultants are difficult to get hold of, both in hospital
and in private practice. A large number of chronic sick
have been sent home to be nursed under completely
unsatisfactory conditions. District nursing services are
depleted owing to the evacuation and the use of personnel
in first aid posts, etc.
Further, the hospitals are sending back to the G.P.
many types of case that had previously been treated in
out-patients departments. Special clinics, child welfare,
tuberculosis, birth control, etc., have been closed down.
Theoretically much of this work involves services to
which the patient has every right under the panel system,
but for so long the hospital-clinic system has been taking
over various sections of work from the over-burdened
practitioner that he is no longer fully equipped to do it.
For the first time many patients are coming to
realise that the existing insurance scheme is hopelessly
inadequate.
It provides for a general practitioner and medicine but
it does not attempt to provide anything resembling a
complete health service.


In the past panel patients have taken it for granted
that their panel doctors would give them a letter to a
hospital and all would be straightforward. This has
almost been regarded as part of the same system. The
fact that the hospitals were provided from quite different
income sources has not really affected their acceptance
as part of the “ established order.”
Moreover, the panel is restricted to adult workers and
to only a proportion of these. Many of the uninsured
are going to be less and less able to afford private fees
as the present crisis deepens. Much of the care of the
unemployed and the dependants of the insured will have
to be given by the general practitioner. He has a right
to be paid for it and to know where the money is coming
from.
EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CRISIS
The intensification of the economic crisis is going to
affect the G.P. in other ways. His own expenses will rise
with the cost of living as will those of his patients. Large
sections of the middle classes have already been affected
and this is likely to extend. Small shopkeepers, small
businesses are the first to be hit in a time like the present.
There is unemployment now in most professional circles.
This means that even the people who were able to afford
reasonable fees in the past may be unable to so in the
future. The security of the average practitioner has been
undermined. The present upset is helping to make
people realise that, even for the doctor, private practice
with a panel is not the ideal basis for the organisation
of medicine.
Yet even among those who recognise the trends in the
development of medicine there is a fear of “ State
Medicine.” We must not be frightened by the idea
of a nation-wide organisation of the health of the country.
In some spheres of health work this has already taken
place. On the other hand we must appreciate that there
is a difference between a national or state medical service
imposed and administered by a lay bureaucracy, and real
co-operation between all sections of the health services
in the localities with a view to planning what is best for
patientr and medical worker alike.


TUBERCULOSIS
The fate of many patients suffering from tuberculosis
illustrates the callousness with which the E.M.S. was
introduced.
A few examples show the effect on individuals of
indiscriminate discharge from hospital.
From a lady almoner working in connection with a
London hospital:
“ Re C.B., aged 22. Has advanced pulmonary tuber-
culosis. Sent home from hospital on September 1st, having
been completely confined to bed until then. An openly
infectious case in a small working-class home.”
“Re M.K., aged 23. Patient was recommended institu-
tional treatment for extensive pulmonary tuberculosis, with
positive sputum, on August 21st. No reply, no offer of
bed room from local authority, patient getting steadily
worse at home.”
“ Re C.C., aged 35. Suffering from advanced pulmonary
tuberculosis. In hospital since January, 1939. Had
serious operation on chest (thoracoplasty). Suddenly sent
home at beginning of war. In pain and unable to get
about. Sent to her married sister’s address, who had been
evacuated because pregnant, so was left with no one to
look after her.”
“ Re C.P., aged 17. Sent home from hospital on account
of war on September 1st. Would normally have gone to
sanatorium. Home now in overcrowded conditions and
sleeping in same room with two brothers. Family is very
susceptible to tuberculosis, two sisters have died of it and
there is a family history of low resistance.”
No wonder a correspondent to the Lancet of
October 14th writes:
“ How many sanatoria have been evacuated, or partly
evacuated, throughout the country ? Here, I understand,
some 700 tuberculosis patients have been sent home;
the one sanatorium still working has 200 beds and is quite
full. Meanwhile, it is almost impossible to get a patient into
a sanatorium, unless he can afford to go to a private one.”
These facts are freely admitted, as can be seen by the
replies to questions asked in Parliament.
On October 24th, in the House of Commons, Mr.
Parker (Labour, Romford) “ asked the Minister of Health
whether he is aware that considerable alarm is being ex


pressed by the medical profession, owing to the fact that
the treatment of tuberculosis in the country is at a stand-
still; that cases of open tuberculosis have been sent home
to act as sources of infection; that no provision is being
made at many sanitoria for the out-patient treatment of
summarily discharged cases; and whether he will under-
take to remedy this.”
Mr. Elliot in his reply stated:
“ Any discharged person suffering from tuberculosis
who would benefit by further treatment in an institution
or who would act as sources of infection should at once
be re-admitted.”
On November 9th, in reply to a question by Mr.
Griffiths, Mr. Elliott announced:
“ 1 am informed that the number of patients on the
waiting list for admission to tuberculosis sanitoria and
hospitals in Wales was 225, or including patients dis-
charged by reason of the E.M.S. about 600.”
Thus there were 375 patients, discharged at the
outbreak of war, awaiting re-admission in Wales
alone.
On November 2nd, Mr. Parker tried to obtain the same
figure for England. The Minister replied that before the
war 30,000 beds were available. The diminution of this
number since the war varied in different parts.
Dr. Haden Guest then asked how many infective cases
were still at large. The Minister replied:
“ I cannot say, nor would it be possible to detect that
without examination of all the patients. The only way
to solve the problem is to seek out and hospitalise these
cases as soon as possible when beds are available.”
Later in replying to a deputation from a group of
organisations interested in the treatment of tuberculosis:
“ Mr. Elliott said that he was having the greatest
difficulty in persuading people that hospital services
were available now just as before the war.”
We appreciate the difficulties of the Minister but the
facts are not on his side.


THE PROBLEM
This, then, is the state of disorder with which we are
faced today. At a time of crisis, when the standards of
living are likely to become rapidly worse, the medical and
health services for the civilian sick are in a state of chaos.
Who is to blame ? What is to be done ?
It is easy to look back over some aspects of British
medicine with pride. But there has been developing,
particularly among the younger members of the medical
profession, the realisation that all was not well. In spite
of the progress of science, in spite of the increasing con-
sciousness of the need for team-work, in spite of the
growth of hospitals here and clinics there, nothing has
been done to change the confused structure of the
organisation as a whole, that structure on which our
individual efforts have to be built.
More and more the public is thinking in terms of the
hospital, the clinic or “ the panel ” and is often unaware
of the name of the individual doctor. Modern medicine
demands opportunities for team-work. This the panel
system has failed to provide. Hospitals and clinics have
grown up outside of and in spite of the Government’s
panel insurance scheme. The possibilities of scientific
medicine have outgrown the limits of the individualism
implied in the panel system. A new organisation must be
evolved or even greater chaos will result.
Private practice, the voluntary hospitals, the municipal
hospitals, special clinics, nursing homes, the panel, the
approved societies, the P.A.C. and £30,000,000 a year
on patent medicines. Here is part of the explanation of
the situation today. Less than the cost of a destroyer
spent on medical research in a year and “ the sanctity of
voluntary effort.” That is the official attitude to scientific
attack on the problems of disease. What does this cover?
A vested interest in the status quo ?
Not on the part of the private practitioners themselves.
Most of them have realised in this time of crisis how much
they would prefer to exchange their present insecurity for
an adequate regular salary and a chance to practise
medicine under conditions more favourable to both
themselves and their patients.
Not solely on the part of the “ aristocracy of
medicine.” Harley Street and the realities exposed by


books like The Citadel are not the causes of the defects
in the organisation of medicine. They are results. The
causes lie deeper.
VESTED INTERESTS
On the surface appear a number of individual vested
interests: of sections that benefit directly from the
existing system and that therefore are vitally interested in
preserving it. These include the insurance companies
who have made loans for the purchase of practices, the
patent medicine manufacturers and important sections
of the medical profession.
The higher ranks of the medical profession contain
even now many eminent men of influence with a firm faith
in the need for the preservation of the voluntary hospitals
and the private practice system. They have attained their
positions of eminence in this system and have known no
other. They are afraid of organisation, yet they are really
interested in the progress of medicine. Their advice is
respected by the Government and the Ministry. Hence
the contradiction that while the development of medicine
demands: id) that the family doctor, remaining as the
basic unit, be brought into closer touch with other
sections of the health services; ib) that hospitals and
clinics be co-ordinated and used to the maximum
advantage; (c) that the insurance principle be extended
to provide a full health service; eminent physicians and
surgeons support the combination of the present lack of
unity between the panel system, the municipal hospitals
and clinics, and the voluntary hospital and private
practice.
In connection with the E.M.S. the Ministry has been
consistently opposed to any widespread “ taking over ”
of civilian hospitals except for military purposes. They
are in favour of preserving the present “ dualism,” i.e„ of
provision of services by voluntary effort and by local
authorities; these systems working in competition with
each other and with the panel system.
This attitude of the Ministry explains the difficulty
experienced in organising an adequate health service for
the evacuees. Because it wants to preserve the status
quo, even under crisis conditions, the Ministry is prepared
to try to organise a service to deal with casualties from


air-raids, while leaving other authorities to be responsible
for the civilian sick and for “ civilian ” casualties, in the
same hospital, using the same equipment and the same
medical and nursing staff.
At the same time there is increasing evidence of
attempts to bolster up the voluntary hospitals in opposi-
tion to those in the hands of municipal authorities. Lord
Nuffield’s recent gift of £1,250,000 is specifically designed
to support the voluntary institutions.
GOVERNMENT POLICY
But individual interests are only part of the picture.
The biggest obstacle is the policy of the National Govern-
ment, of which the Ministry of Health is only a part.
This Government has never taken any serious steps to
organise the health services of this country.
Health, except in certain limited aspects, is not
regarded as a national responsibility. We must realise
that it is only during the past fifty years that the idea of
a right to health ” has begun to emerge. The ruling
classes in this country still think of medical care as a
commodity to be bought and sold individually. They
still regard the work of the municipal authorities as an
extension of poor law relief—as palliative attempts to
provide a little for those who cannot pay. This whole
conception must go before real reorganisation can be
begun.
But this attitude is in the last resort based on
economic policy.
Maintenance and extension of the health services cost
money. And money was needed for re-armament—is
needed now for the prosecution of the war. It seems that
we are being presented with the choice of “Guns or
Health.”
There is evidence that the Ministry is trying to
carry out a policy of reducing expenditure on all
health services. It is combining this with a desperate
attempt to preserve the voluntary system.
Since September, much of the work of progressive
bodies such as the Labour London County Council has
been undermined. Comparison is almost inevitable
between this tragedy and the wanton destruction of the
housing achievements of the Austrian Social-Democrats


by Schuschnigg. The method has differed, the result may
well be the same.
THE B.M.A.
And the British Medical Association? What have
they done to champion the profession they claim to repre-
sent? Certainly they had devised a scheme for an exten-
sive health service for the nation, but where is it now?
What has been the role of the B.M.A. leadership during
these past few months? Have they fought for the health
of the people? Have they pretended even to represent
the medical profession?
At many local British Medical Association meetings
the truth is recognised. The B.M.A. Central Emergency
Committee has acted as the executive organ of the
Ministry of Health. The leadership of the B.M.A. has
failed in a moment of crisis. Considerable pressure by
the rank and file of the association is necessary if the
B.M.A. officials are to act firmly in the interests of their
mem ben;.
WHAT THEN IS BEING DEMANDED :
By the People
They want adequate medical care and health services
for themselves and their children. Health services are
being cut down at a time when large sections of the public
are less able than ever to afford private fees. They want
some way in which they can get medical attention without
charity and without the taint of “ pauperism ” that still
survives in the administration of the ex poor law services.
They demand adequate provision for the care of air-
raid casualties as part of a general development of
efficient A.R.P., but they will not agree that this
necessitates the drastic curtailment of ordinary medical
facilities.
The Doctors
They want to continue the work that they are qualified
to do with some degree of security at a remuneration
similar to what they had been getting in peace time.
General Practitioners
They are demanding extension of the panel and raising
of the capitation fee. They are afraid of the evacuation


of their patients and the reduction of the capitation fee in
the name of war economy. They still see the clinics as
competitors rather than as part of a health service to
which they themselves belong. The essential content of
their demands is economic security and adequate
remuneration.
House Officers
They are demanding present security and the oppor-
tunity for work and further training. They are prepared
to work in the E.M.S. and the Army but they want to see
some planning and order.
Medical Students
They want to complete their education under the best
conditions that can be arranged without reduction of
educational or examination standards. It is essential for
the welfare of the public that their number should not
be reduced, but rather increased.
Nurses
Probationers are distressed because in many cases their
training has practically ceased. For too long now they
have been paid excessively low wages on the pretext that
they were there to be taught. Where teaching has
stopped, however, wages have remained unchanged.
Apart from the teaching, their conditions have become
worse, and there is already extensive unemployment since
the outbreak of the war. This must be remedied. Trained
nurses want the opportunity to do useful work in the
health services, to be decently paid for it and to be free
from petty restrictions.
NEED FOR CO-ORDINATION
Most sections of the medical world realise that co-
ordination between hospitals, clinics, public health
authorities and general practitioners is essential for real
progress, but are afraid of the imposition of this by the
State or by a bureaucratic local government. This fear
is partly justified. In spite of considerable efficiency in
many aspects of their work, most local authorities have
not yet inspired the confidence of the profession as a
whole in their administrative ability.
Yet the public health services cannot be isolated from
other public services.
Efficient, representative local authorities, who would


try to enlist the co-operation of medical workers,
should be able to break down this lack of confidence.
Already doctors are beginning to get together to discuss
these problems of organisation and administration. The
demands from different sections of medical workers must
be co-ordinated in a general plan. And that plan must
have the confidence of all sections of medical workers
concerned. Such a plan must correlate the real needs
of the people with the needs of the medical profession.
It must visualise the wider relationships between preven-
tive and curative medicine. The present is no time for
armchair presentation of detailed schemes in the nature
of panaceas. Only the general direction of advance can
be sketched out. Certain general principles can be
advanced for discussion as a basis on which the details
for adaptation to local and individual needs can be built
up. Many doctors are afraid of the “ State Medicine
bogey ” just because they feel that flexibility would be
lacking. But organisation and efficiency do not neces-
sarily mean bureaucracy and lay tyranny.
Furthermore, suggestions must be considered in the
light of experience inside and outside Britain as to how
such schemes can be made to work. The State-organised
medical services in the Scandinavian countries have for
long aroused the interest and enthusiasm of British
visitors. The achievements of the completely socialised
medical services of the U.S.S.R. can serve in many ways
as a lesson in what can be done by organisation under
conditions of extreme difficulty. The New Zealand
experiment must be watched with care. The Highlands
and Islands medical service and the co-ordinated service
in Gloucestershire are nearer home and warrant attention.
THE HIGHLANDS AND ISLANDS SERVICE
This was established in 1913 to deal with local condi-
tions of peculiar difficulty. In 1929 it became really
effective. A State grant of £70,000 formed the basis of
grants to doctors who would otherwise get no remunera-
tion for much of the work required of them. To quote
the account of the service in the P.E.P. report on the
health services:
“ The persons entitled to the modified-fee medical service


are the families and dependants of insured persons, un-
insured persons of the cottar and crofter classes and their
families and dependants, and others in like circumstances
to whom the payment of the practitioners’ ordinary fees
for medical attendance would be an undue burden.”
The maximum fee is 5/- for a first visit and 3/6 for
subsequent visits. The grants enable doctors to run
motor-cars or motor boats and thereby to get to patients
otherwise inaccessible. Grants also enable the maximum
use to be made of long-distance telephone services and
at times to use aeroplanes for transit where the urgency
of the case has required it.
Specialist and hospital services are provided by a
similar arrangement and the Royal Northern Infirmary
at Inverness provides the chief hospital. The emoluments
of resident surgeons on outlying islands are augmented
from the fund. The inadequacies of the provision of
tuberculosis, venereal disease, maternity and child-welfare
clinics by poor local authorities are made up from the
fund. The administration of the service acts as a co-
ordinating and directing body.
“ All authorities are agreed that the setting up of the
Highlands and Islands Medical Services Fund has been
an inestimable boom to the populations concerned. It
has vastly improved the medical and nursing services and
strengthened the hospital services in the area. The co-
ordination of the services of doctor and nurses, the use
of modern methods of communication, and the tentative
development of a centralised hospital system are object
lessons to other parts of the country. In fact the scheme
has become a model for the development of health
services in a sparsely populated area where communica-
tions are difficult.”— P.E.P. report on the British health
services.
Many of the principles involved may with advantage be
applied to the organisation of the health services else-
where and particularly where recent developments have
underlined the urgent need for such changes.
THE GLOUCESTERSHIRE MEDICAL
SERVICES SCHEME
This illustrates the possibility of the co-ordination of
the work of general practitioners, hospitals, nurses, etc..


within a given area. The county is divided into areas
on the basis of geographical considerations and the loca-
tion of hospitals. Where possible maternity and infant-
welfare clinics, tuberculosis dispensaries, medical treat-
ment of school-children, etc., are conducted at one centre
instead of at different places in the same area. Each area
has a large hospital and a number of out-stations.
Individual practitioners serve at the out-stations in rota-
tion and are paid a regular fee for each session. This
facilitates co-operation with specialists who also attend
the out-stations. The administration is closely linked
with the Gloucester County Borough Council and all
urban and rural district councils and local authorities in
the area. Co-operation of the medical profession is
secured by the election of a medical advisory committee
from the hospital staffs and general practitioners
concerned.
PROPOSALS
In the light of this we present the following suggestions:
(1) Co-ordination of all existing health services
on a regional basis.
(2) Democratic control by local authorities with
full representation of all lay and medical
interest.
(3) Finance to be under control of the local
authority. The Ministry of Health would be
a central co-ordinating body responsible for
general policy, and particularly for allocation
of State grants according to local needs.
The health services would be financed by:
(1) Insurance.
(2) Rates.
(3) Government grants.
Charity should no longer be relied on as a regular
source of income.
The insurance principle to be extended:
(1) To all non-insured likely to be unable to afford
private fees.
ia) To wives and dependants of insured.
ib ) To all unemployed and old age pensioners.
(c) To all workers within given income limits.
(d) Extension of limit to £500 per annum.


(2) To include provision of a complete health
service.
Contributions should come only from those in work.
Additional expenditure will be covered by moderate in-
creases in the employees’ contributions and larger
increases in the employers’ contribution.
Rates fall heavily on the working class and cannot
be raised. State grants must be increased to cover
additional expenditure necessary.
Private practice would not be abolished. Hospitals
and clinics would be open to non-insured at fixed rates.
The panel as such would be abolished and the panel
doctor would become a part-time or full-time salaried
family doctor with a group of patients for whom he was
responsible in sickness or in health. It is obvious that
under a scheme of this kind such things as holidays,
time-off, pensions, post-graduate study, and opportunities
for association in the work of the hospitals, clinics and
dispensaries would all be increased and facilitated. An
adequate health service for the people is the only
guarantee that the doctors will have a chance to do their
work under conditions of security.
Objections on the grounds of expense are invalid.
Co-ordination of existing services would save money and
the greater facilities for preventive medicine in the wider
sense of the word would tend to reduce rather than in-
crease the burden imposed by sickness on the national
budget.
WHERE TO BEGIN
Such a scheme may sound ambitious at a time like this.
We believe it to be the best way of making use of the
facilities that are already available and of planning the
development of the additional facilities required. It is
suggested that the reorganisation should be started
where the need is greatest, in the reception areas. The
children must always be a first care and while it is certain
that a great degree of re-adjustment will take place during
the next few months, we would urge that here is an
opportunity for creating a real co-ordinated medical
service on planned lines. Positions in such a service
would be welcomed by many practitioners now feeling


anxious about their future. School doctors would be in
a position to see that their advice was carried out. A
basis of a healthy nation could be laid.
Later the plan could be extended to the non-insured in
the big towns and finally to the full range indicated above.
Once more it must be stressed that any reorganisation
is doomed to failure unless the doctors, nurses, health
visitors and all medical workers are given an opportunity
to take part in the necessary planning. Detail must vary
from district to district and rigidity must be avoided.
The actual conditions of medical men under such a
scheme cannot be exactly laid down in advance but their
security would be insured by democratic control. Active
representative participation of the medical profession, not
only in the initial planning of the scheme, but also in the
effective introduction and subsequent operation is
regarded as important.
HOW CAN THIS BE OBTAINED ?
In the first place we have to understand that this
reorganisation is a responsibility of the whole of the
people, of their elected representatives and of the medical
profession. No one can remain aloof from these basic
problems. If we do not plan for ourselves, it is likely that
others will do the job for us and a hundred times less
efficiently. We must agree on the general line of develop-
ment required. We can then bring tremendous pressure
to bear on the Government through the trade unions,
through local authorities, political parties. Parliament
and the Press; through the B.M.A. and all medical
bodies. The whole issue must be brought into the
open and the urgent needs of the people made clear. The
profession and the public must discuss every aspect of
it and make known their wishes.
In this war we are supposed to be fighting for
democracy. We still have the freedom to make our
voices heard. Never have so many people been
conscious of the need for a complete overhaul of
our health services. Never has there been such
disorganisation. Never has there been such an
opportunity to get things changed.
The health of the people is at stake.


PUBLISHED BY LABOUR RESEARCH DEPARTMENT, 6 HIGH HOLBORN, W.C.I, FOR
THE JOINT MEDICAL SOCIALIST COMMITTEE, UNIVERSITY LABOUR CLUB, 15 PERCY
STREET, W.I, AND PRINTED AT THE FARLEIGH PRESS (t.U. ALL DEPTS.),
CAYTON STREET, LONDON, E.C.I.


The
Socialist Medical Association
of Great Britain
PRINCIPAL OBJECTS
To work for a socialised medical service, both
preventive and curative, free and open to all. To secure
for the people the highest possible standard of health.
To disseminate the principles of socialism within the
medical and allied services.
AFFILIATIONS
The Association is affiliated to the Labour Party, the
Fabian Society, the Labour Research Department, the
International Socialist Medical Association, and to the
National Trade Union Club and the University Labour
Club.
MEMBERSHIP
Membership is open to medical practitioners and
members of the allied professions such as Dentists,
Pharmacists, Nurses, Midwives, Health Visitors, etc.,
and to students of these professions.
ADVANTAGES OF MEMBERSHIP
Attendance at Meetings of the Association at which
medico-political problems are discussed: participation
in social activities. Receipt of the monthly Bulletin and
of the quarterly journal Medicine Today and Tomorrow.
Reduced subscriptions to the above mentioned clubs.
For further particulars and application form apply to;
The Hon. Secretary, S.M.A., 168, Camberwell Grove,
London, 5.E.5.
