

WAR-WOWSERS
AN OPEN LETTER
TO
Political Pretenders, Pocket Patriots, and Press Panders
Who Corner the People’s Food Supply.
(.Reprinted from the “ Caster ton Free Press.”)
“ Woe unto you, hypocrites! for ye devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long
prayer; therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.
“Woe unto you, hypocrites! for ye compass the sea and land to make one proselyte, and,
when he is made, you make him twofold more the child of Hell than yourselves,
“Woe unto you, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but
within they are full of extortion and excess.
“Woe unto you, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanliness.
“ Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy
and iniquity.
“ Ye serpents, ve generation of vipers, how can ve escape the damnation of Hell?”
' —-JESUS.
Priests and Acolytes of Mammon,
I preface this Open Letter to you with that scathing
denunciatory indictment which Jesus of Nazareth, the
Man who had not where to lay His head, uttered 2000
years ago, when He was confronted with your proto-
types, the Scribes and Pharisees, who did just as you
are doing to-day, only you are worse than they, because
you are more Mammonistic, and more Godless. Yes,
you are such unconscionable rogues, so utterly devoid of
the bowels of compassion, so cunningly cupidous, so
evil in heart, that the Ancient Hebrew wasn’t in the
same street as you as a chousing cornerer, a robbing
ringer, a financial fraud, and a commercial ’cute, reeking
with crookedness and chicane. What would Jesus call
you if He were to come to Australia? He would rouse
on you with more indignation than He displayed towards
the cheats of His time—He would denounce you with
the awful wrath of a God, and send you to that Hell
out of which there is no redemption!
You do not like this kind of heart-to-heart talk, do
you, ye war wowsers, ye graves of the poor—yes, graves
that appear not to be graves, and the men, women, and
children know not that they are graves until they fall
into them, that you may fill your interiors with more
dead bones! This language is not too strong for you,
as I shall prove to you. and the people you are robbing
and slaying, before I have done with you. Oh, you are
beauties, aren’t you? You pose as patriots and make
patriotism a cloak for your scoundrelism, and your
piety a stalking horse to capture the meek, the lowly,
and the helpless, whom you chouse and cheat, and render
miserable in this world, telling them that God loveth
those whom He chasteneth, and promising them a reward
in Heaven! They may get to Heaven, but it is a million
to one on that your destination is Hell. You stroke your
sleek paunches and draw near to Jesus in His Churches,
which your pestilential presence profanes, and you
praise Him with your mouths and honour Him with your


lips, while your hearts are far from Him—your hearts
are M-'tnmon’s. Yes, you worship God, but you teach
for doctrines the commandments of men—-that is, com-
mandments made by you to enable you to exploit the
people and put money in your purses, while the people
ask you, the Masters of the Bread, for crumbs of food!
You remind me of the, dirty parasitical brood that
Jesus found in the Temple of God. They bought and
sold in the Temple, and worked money changing dodges
—“ ringing the changes ” it is called in vulgar parlance
—when Jesus said to them, “My house shall be called
the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of
thieves.” Do you hear, ye war-wowsers—a den of
thieves, and you are turning our Parliaments, and our
Press, into veritable dens of hypocrisy and wolfishness!
You preach patriotism with your tongues in your cheeks,
the people’s wealth in your pockets, and the women and
children’s food in your garners—your “ cool stores ” —for
exportation to the Kaiser or the blood-stained Sultan of
Turkey, or any other —friend or enemy—if he is the
highest bidder for the provender you have pinched from
the people! You are asking mothers to send their sons,
and wives to send their husbands, and sisters to send
their brothers, to fight the unspeakable Islamic hordes in
the Dardanelles! You are loudly calling, calling, calling,
for the young life and blood, the stalwart muscle and
sinew, of Australia’s nationhood to come out and fight
for King and Country, You who are middlemen—ah,
ye pernicious, pestilential parasites—you are the loudest
mouthed, and biggest lipped, and vilest hearted of them
all—ye are bawling “ God Save the King ” from the
housetops, and wrapping yourselves in Union Jacks and
Royal Standards, and hurrahing yourselves hoarse over
the, deeds of daring of our brave boys whose baptism
of fire was one of the most terrible ever visited on newly-
trained troops!
But what are ye doing inwardly, ye Priests of Mam-
mon, while you, and your acolytes and subsidised syco-
phants, are palpitating and perspiring on platforms. You
are cornering food supplies —you are selling the people’s
food to the "higher bidder abroad —the Kaiser and the
Sultan if they bid high enough—to put money in your
purses. You are lagoes, you are Judases, you are
Whited Sepulchres, you are heartless humbugs, you are
howling hypocrites, yes, you are full of corruption, and
ato. within, chambers of Hell, full of anguish, and blood,
and hones of perishing people, upon whose bodies vou
batten and fatten and offer up <\s sacrifices to Mammon
on his reeking altars. It was you that Dr. Johnson had
in his mind when he said that patriotism was the last
refuge of a scoundrel. He did not mean the genuine
patriot—he meant you, the pocket patriot, the low-down,
contemptible, craven who uses the people’s necessities to
put money in his purse and wax fat—he meant the war-
wowser, which is you!
The gemme patriot that springs from the neopie is
obsessed .with a and will fight to the last
trench to maintain an inviolate nationality. The poor
patriot mother will give her all, her son : the poor patriot
wife will send her husband, and tell her bairns, with a
patriotic glow in her bosom, that daddy is going awav
to fight for the preservation of hearth and home; (be
patriot sweetheart will part with her lover with farewell
kisses and tears, telling him to die like a hero if he must
die, but to come back as a conqueror and claim his bride
if God so wills it. It is all a question of.“ Thy will he
done!” with these poor people,-these patriotic people,
these humble ones who toil for a living in times of peace
and light to a finish for King and Country in times of
war. They are loyal to their God. they are loyal to their
country, they are loyal to their race, and they will die to
preserve the glorious traditions of their ancestors. These
be the genuine patriots, the bulwarks of the Empire;
these be the lads who brave the awful poisonous gases,
and siege guns, and torpedoes, and all the horrors that
come forth when the Teutonic fiends lift the lid of Hell!
But what are you, ye war-wowsers, who prance and
prate and preen your petty plumage and puff your purses
with pelf purloined from the people? What about you,
1 say? You corner the food supplies, you starve the
mothers and bairns, and wives and sweethearts, who
have, sent their -breadwinners and sustainers and lovers
to the front, and export the stolen food to neutral ports
at huge profits so that it may reach Germany and
Turkey!
Yes, that is what you do, and are doing, ye war-
wowsers, ye mouthing mountebanks, ye devourers of
widows’ homes and orphans’ sustenance! It is no use
mincing matters. You are traitors! Dirty, despicable
traitors! You are prepared to sell the people, and their
King, and their country for gold, the Kaiser’s gold, any-
body’s gold, so long as it is gold! Why the Federal
Legislature had to pass special War Precaution Acts to
protect the people against you, and are now asking
for increased power by way of referenda to further clip
your claws before you tighten your talons too fiercejy
and firmly in the flesh of your victims.. You are out to
defeat these propositions to thwart you, and are crying
out for a pretended peace while you purse the pelf. You
don’t want any Party warfare during the war! You are
the Party—you are the Partly that is against the people;
you are the Part}' that plunders the people; and you
want “ Party ” legislation delayed ! Of course you do,
you war-wowsing frauds: but I’m up to all your tricks,
and so are many others, and the proper way to treat you
is to hit you with a bludgeon every time you pop up
your heads from below where you manipulate the wires
that make your host of mercenary myrmidons dance and
do your bidding. We have got quite enough to do—we
have our hands quite full enough—in fighting the Kaiser
and his hordes, and the Sultan and his Mahometans,
without having to contend with crawlsome, greedy ser-
pents like you at home. We don’t want two wars—one
at home and one in Europe—and the sooner you are
blown out the better. You will be blown out, that is a
certainty, and the sooner the -people set about getting
rid oi you the better. The referenda question referring
to combines will scotch you, kill you. if the people
answer in the affirmative in December next, and then our
fighting patriots mav go to the front with the comfort-
ing feeling that you, the vampires, being dead, their
women and children will not starve in their absence. I
have said enough just now for you, ye war-wowsers, to
mark, learn, and inwardly digest, but I have not done
with you by a long chalk, and will give you another
rousing in a future issue.
I am. in the meantime,
Right Up Against You,
ANGUS FRANCIS TURNKEY.
Casterton, 30th June, 1915,
“ Free Press.” Castcrton.
