

WAR:
SHOULD A CHRISTIAN NATION ENGAGE IN IT?
A
SERMON
BY THE
R EV. J. S. WHITE, M.A. LL.D.,
OF
GOWRIE, SINGLETON;
DELIVERED IN
St. Andrew’s Presbyterian Church, Singleton,
ON THE
26th APRIL, 1885.
Singleton:
“ARGUS” STEAM PRINTING WORKS, JOHN STREET.
1885.




WAR: Should a Christian Nation Engage in it?
DELIVERED BY THE
REV. J. S. WHITE, M.A., LL.D.
“ I will defend this city.”—lsaiah
xxxviii., 6.
Such was God’s promise and assur-
ance to Hezekiah, King of Judah, when
Jerusalem, his capital, was besieged by
Sennacherib, King of Assyria.
It may be neither unreasonable, nor
unprofitable, at the present time, when
“ the blast of war sounds in our ears,”
with somewhat of an ominous note, to
discuss the question whether it is lawful
for a Christian nation, as such, to engage
in war.
If he is “ thrice armed who has his
quarrel just,” he who, thus armed, has
a good conscience, is likely in such
quarrel to use bis armour all the more
vigorously and all the more effectively.
A distinguished English statesman
pronounces war to be “ the combination
and concentration of all the horrors,
atrocities, crimes, and sufferings of
which human nature, on this globe, is
capable.” Can it be lawful, then, for a
Christian nation to engage in war ?
War, as to the objects of it, is of two
kinds—(.l) war of offence, (2) war of
defence.
War of offence originates in selfish-
ness, and is carried on for the gratifica-
tion of sinful lust and passion. It is of
it that St. James speaks when he asks,
“ From when come wars and fightings ?
Come they not hence, even of your
lust ?”
In such a war, it is not lawful for a
Christian nation to engage. As Chris-
tians, we are bound to mortify selfish-
ness. We are, we can be, Christians
only to the extent to which we do this ;
therefore a Christian nation, as such,
may not lawfully engage in a war of
offence.
A war of defence is a war for the pre-
servation of the lives and interests of
ourselves and others whose lives and
interests are in our keeping.
All living beings are the subjects of
a law by which they seek to preserve
themselves. The last effort of a dying
plant is to put forth a bud, and so per-
petuate its kind. In all living sentient
beings this law is coeval and coextensive
with consciousness of existence. In
them it operates more actively, and its
action respects not only themselves, but
others. The lower animals defend
even to the death the lives and interests
of themselves and their young.
Man acts in obedience to this law in
respect of the life and interests of him-
self and of those whose life and interests
are in his keeping. He does so not as
the result of the influence of any senti-
ment, or faculty, or, consciously at the
least, of the will. He Joes so spontane-
ously and instinctively. The law by
which he acts is a law unto itself.
Hence the law of self-preservation is
universally recognised as the first law
of nature —a law upon which our happi


ness, our well-being, nay, our very
existence depends. Christianity finds
us subject to this law, and it does not
seek to interfere with it.
It could not seek to interfere with it
and continue to contemplate us as human
beings. If it interfered with it, it would
put us out of the sphere of its influence.
It recognizes it as the law of a law —the
law by which our action towards others
involving all our duties to them is to be
regulated. Thou shalt love thy neigh-
bour as thyself. A war of defence comes
not of our lusts but necessarily of this
instinct of self preservation. Since
Christianity does not seek to interfere
therewith, and since it cannot con-
sistently with its own character and
object, interfere with it, since it recog-
nizes and necessarily recognizes it, it is
not, it cannot be unlawful for a Christian
nation as such to engage in a war of
defence.
Under the Old Testament dispensa-
tion war was justified. We prefer, how-
ever, to discuss the question proposed on
the ground of New Testament principles.
We are Christian, and to our own
Master we must stand or fall.
There are passages in the New Testa-
ment scriptures, which, taken literally
do, at first sight, seem very decisively to
settle the question in the negative.
Take one of the strongest of these.
“ Resist not evil, but whosoever will
smite thee on the one cheek, turn ta him
the other also.” This injunction refers
evidently to only trifling annoyances and
injuries, such as those to which we are
exposed in our ordinary intercourse with
our fellow men.
Let us read it in the light of New
Testament illustration. St. Paul
sought safety from persecution, and
complained of violent treatment at the
hands of even those in authority. Our
Lord himself, on more than one occa-
sion, did the same ; sc shat it is evident
the injunction was m fc intended to be
taken literally.
“ Pa. up thy sword again into his
sheath, for every one that takoth the
sword shall perish by the sword,” is a
command add ' Ito St. Peter when
attacking anotL o had not molested
him. It was evi ly intended to warn
him of the folly or contending with the
Roman guard, and of the fact, that
taking the sword endangers life which
is not to be trifled with.
We are exhorted “ as much as lieth
in us ” to “live peaceably with all men,”
which implies, that it may be impossible
for us so to live, and that it may be
necessary and dutifn! to be at war.
St. Jude exhorts us to “ contend
earnestly for the faith once delivered to
the Saints.” The word translated con-
tend means to strive most strenuously
with all our bodily powers, as the ath-
letes in the great public games of classic
antiquity did.
Christianity seeks to develop all our
virtues. War, especially a war of
defence, tends to develop courage.
Courage, though not in itself a virtue,
may be a safeguard of virtue, and so
acquire the character of a virtue.
Philanthropy or love of our kind, is
of the very essence of Christianity, and a
war of defence is directly philanthrophic,
in respect of those defending them-
selves and of those defended ; and it
may be so indirectly in respect of those
attacking ; for it may teach them a
useful practical lesson, and cause them,
by the way that they came, by the same
to return, sadder, wiser and better men.
Even a war of offence may give oo-
casion to those who engage in it to
exercise virtue ; how much more a war of
defence !
In acting, it is our duty, of two evils,
to choose the less. A war of defence


generally, if not always, involves, in the
end, fewer evils than the subjugation of
‘ a nation ; and therefore, in engaging in
it, a Christian nation is acting lawfully.
It is universally admitted, that it is
at once the right and the duty of the
Christian civil magistrate to protect the
lives and interests of citizens, and, in
extreme cases, to take even the life of
those who endanger them. If it is the
right and the dnty of a Christian civil
magistrate to do this, in respect of the
invaders of domestic security and peace,
it surely cannot be unlawful for a Chris-
tian nation to protect itself against
foreiga invaders.
The evils to be guarded against from
without may be, and they generally are,
much greater than those to be guarded
against from within.
If it is unlawful for a Christian nation
to resist evil from without, then it must
be even more so to resist it from within—
a doctrine subversive of all government
and all authority. Acting upon it,
society would be disintegrated and
wrecked. Man would return to the
savage state, and in that state, having
ceased to resist evil-doers, his existence
would be but precarious and brief.
Some, who are styled advocates of
peace at any price, hold that it is our
duty and our interest to surrender to an
invader all he demands rather than
resist him.
We have attempted to show that it is
not our duty to do so, on the ground of
either natural or revealed religion—but
the contrary. How it can be our in-
terest, it is difficult to perceive. If an
invader deprive us of our means, our
liberty, our wives, our children, our
friends, our life itself, what interest
remains to ns ? It may be said, that
having done this, he has no more that he
can do, and that he still leaves ns a good
conscience—the most valuable of all cur
possessions.
A good conscience results from the
performance of duty, but if it is not our
duty to surrender these things tamely,
then the surrendering of them so cannot
constitute a good conscience, but the
contrary. The nation that tamely sur-
renders them is chargeable with lack of
appreciation of some of the best gifts of
the Creator—with ingratitude for some
of the greatest of His blessings, with
insensibility to, and repudiation of,
every obligation and responsibility
wherewith we are charged, by religion
natural and revealed.
But by tamely surrendering every-
thing to the invader, if we sacrifice our-
selves we may convert and save him.
This would be to love our neighbour,
not only as ourselves, but better than
ourselves, which we are nowhere com-
manded to do. To love our neighbour
better than ourselves is as much a viola-
tion of our duty as to love him less.
But independently of this consideration,
was ever thief made honest by the un-
restricted indulgence of his thievish
propensity? Was ever murderer made
benevolent by being allowed, without
restraint, to imbue his hands in the
blood of victims ?
Are not thieves and murderers en-
couraged and hardened by impunity in
the commission of crime? What are
invaders, in a war of offence, but thieves
and murderers ?
Peace at any price cannot be secured.
Suppose the price paid for peace is life.
Is peace secured to those whose lives
have been sacrificed ? They have not,
for themselves at the least, secured it.
But what of the survivors ? Deprived
of their civil and religious liberty, of
their social and domestic happiness, of
their means of existence, how could they
have peace ?


But suppose, that survivors were left
in possession of many, perhaps the
majority, of their blessings ? Would
there be no regret for what had been
taken ! If they considered what had
been taken not as a loss, since it
belonged to the invader, aud what re-
mained, as his gift, would there be no
anxiety and fear for the permanent pos-
session of that gift ? And anxiety and
fear are incompatible with peace.
What security would there be, that he
who had plundered their store would
not violate their hearths ? W hat
security, that be who would violate their
hearths would not sacrifice their lives ?
Would not the fact, that be had com-
mitted the one crime, be a just ground
of apprehension that he would commit
the other ?
Call we such a state of things a state
of peace ? It is not, it could not be,
peace at whatever price purchased.
Bat suppose by the tame surrender of
only a portion of our material wealth—
the least valuable of our possessions—
we succeeded in securing all our other
blessings. Would we then have secured
peace ? No! Even to a servile race
bondage is sometimes irksome. We are
not a servile race. We could not long
brook even the appearance of servitude.
Sooner or later the spirit of our fathers
would revive within us. Sooner or later
the flame of patriotism would be re-
kindled within our breasts, to burn all
the more brightly, all the more fiercely,
for its temporary suppression. Sooner
or later, we would be ourselves again,
and as such, we could live, or die, but
free—“ the equals of men and the ser-
vants of God.”
Even the contract of the chain, without
its friction, would gall beyond endurance
and remind us of the high estate whence
we had fallen. The liberty we had lost
would be enhanced a thousand fold in
our estimation. To regain it, we would
be prepared to do, to suffer and to
sacrifice all things. There would ba in-
surrection and rebellion. There would
be strife and bloodshed. Instead of
peace, there would be war—-war, in com-
parison with which, either as to character
or duration, resistance in the first inst-
ance would have been as nothing—a war
which would be ended only by the ex-
termination of our race, or the achieve-
ment of its freedom.
On the score of humanity, resistance
would be preferable to peace, though
purchased at the smallest price.
The advocates of peace at any price
act inconsistently, and therefore they
may be justly suspected of insincerity.
They avail themselves of every mean 8
of protection against domestic evildoers*
They build strong houses wherein to
bestow their goods, and these strong
houses they secure with bolts and bars.
They take every precaution to render
their private dwellings safe against them,
that they may lie down and sleep and
take their quiet rest. These buildings
ere in truth but private fortifications.
They avail themselves of the protec-
tion of the guardians of the public peace,
and they supplement them by private
watchmen, whom they arm that they
may the more effectually perform their
duties. What are they but soldiers
under another name and in another form i
All this they do to protect their lives
and interests against domestic robbers
and murderers who are but domestic
invaders. When these robbers and
murderers are apprehended, they
acquiesce in the punishment of them.
They do not allow them to escape, even
although they know that their conviction
will involve the forfeiture of their lives.
W hy then object to fleets and armies
to protect the country from foreign


invaders—from robbers and murderers
from without ?
Meanwhile, while they protest against
fleets and armies, they are content to
enjoy the protection they afford, and
would no doubt be among the first to
complain if deprived of it.
Why do not the advocates of peace
at any price expose their goods and their
lives to the mercy of domestic robbers
and murderers, and so purchase peace
with these domestic invaders ?
The advocates of peace at any price
urge that the evils of war of even defence
are such as to render it impossible for a
Christian nation to undertake the re-
sponsibility of them. We know, we
admit, that the evils of even war of
defence transcend the powers of ex-
pression, and baffle the powers of even
imagination. But for these evils, who
is responsible ? Not those who act in
self-defence, but those who render action
in self-defence necessary. It must needs
be that offences come. Who is regarded
as responsible ? Not he who is offended.
Against whom is the woe denounced?
Not against him who is offended, but
against him who offends. Woe unto
him by whom the offence cometh.
Against whom may we be called at
the present time to engage in a war of
defence ?
Against a nation comprised of a
legion of tribes just emerging from bar-
barism, and for the most part regarded
by those who know them best as unfit
to be entrusted with freedom and there-
fore kept in bondage.
Against a nation grossly ignorant,
and superstitious to idolatry.
Against a nation whose policy has
always been characterised by all absorb-
ing selfishness in its worst form.
Against a nation which socially and
morally would “ pollute our worst dwell-
ing with its foot.”
For what may we be called to engage
in a war of defence f
For our country. What does that
represent? Does it represent only a
certain area of the earth’s surface, with
eertain peculiarities of natural features,
soil and climate—with a certain amount
of mineral wealth—and a certain power
of productiveness to minister to our
necessities, or our comforts ? To all of
us it represents these. To some of us
it is also the scene of early reminiscences
and the place of birth. In consideration
simply of these things it is to be
valued. In consideration simply of
these things it should be dear to us,
and should be strenuously defended.
But it represents incomparably more
than these things.
It represents our hearths and homes
with all their tender and hallowed asso-
ciations.
It represents a free constitution and
equal laws, by which our lives and
interests at home and abroad are held
sacred and inviolable, and by which is
guaranteed to us, the right to worship
God according to our conscience, under
our own vine and under our own fig-tree,
none daring to make us afraid.
It represents institutions by which
our bodily, mental, and moral powers
are developed, by which the poor and
the sick are cared for, and the vicious
are sought to be reclaimed.
It represents benevolence, operating
for the good of men and the glory of
God—through instrumentalities as
numerous and as effective as the wisdom
of her wisest, and the humanity of her
most benevolent sons can devise, and her
incomparable and princely national
wealth sustain—-benevolence, which
seeks to make the most of man in respect
of his nature, in all its comprehension,
and his existence in all its extension—
which seeks to exhibit him, to the eye


of men and angels, as the “ beauty of the
world and the paragon of animals,”
These involve matters which refer to
us as men—which constitute a part of
our higher being—an eternal possession.
They are special gifts of a gracious
Providence who has not dealt so with
any people. They are worth defending.
It is our duty as men, aud especially as
Christians, to defend them. Not only is
it lawful for us, as men and Christians, to
defend them, but should they be emperil-
led, neither as men, nor as Christians,
may we lawfully surrender them but with
our lives.
Contemplating, as they do the good
of men and the glory of God, we need
not fear the final result of a struggle for
their retention.
Only let us be strong and very
courageous. We can bring to the con-
test the vigorous arm, the stout heart,
and above all, as men and Christians,
the good conscience, which makes its
possessor bold as a lion, and constitutes
him a fellow worker with God, who will
be for us, and who will defend our city.
“ Argus” Steam Machine Printing Works, John-street, Singleton.


