

S TATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY COMMISSION
WATER SUPPLIES
TO
COUNTRY TOWNS
1st PROGRESS REPORT 1944
2nd & FINAL " 1944
COUNTRY TOWN WATER SUPPLIES 1947




VICTORIA
TOWN WATER SUPPLIES COMMITTEE
INQUIRY
INTO
WATER SUPPLIES
TO
COUNTRY TOWNS
Second and Final Report
1944
13074/44
H. E. DAW, Government Printer, Melbourne.


TOWN WATER SUPPLIES COMMITTEE
PERSONNEL
H. W. McCay, Esq., 8.C.E., A.M.I.E. Aust. Chairman
R. E. P. Stafford, Esq. Member
F. A. Jenkins, Esq., C.E., F.C 1.5., J.P. Member
T. H. Grigg, Esq., J.P. Member
R. H. Richmond, Esq., 8.C.E., A.M.I.E. Aust.,
Secretary.


STATE [?] SU PPLY CO MM ISS ION .
RECOMMEDATIONS OF TOWN WATER SUPPLLES COMMITTEE
INFORMATION FOR WATER AUTHORITIES
The recommendations made by the Town Water Supplies
Committee in its First Progress Report provide a general .basis for
determining the assistance to be given by the Government towards
the cost of works to provide adequate water supplies of satisfactory
quality to country towns in Victoria, Such assistance will be
given in respect of the Capital cost of works - all operating costs,
including Depreciation, being met by the local Water Authorities,
The Committee has given a formula which takes into
account the different circumstances which apply when water is
obtained either by gravitation or by pumping or when it is
purchased in bulk from another Authority, and this formula provides
that where the cost of supplying water in a country town exceeds a
certain basic figure, assistance is to be given by way of subsidy
towards the Capital cost on a graduated basis.
Where the Gee it 1 cost exceeds a sum dependent upon the
water^ requirements of tne town, the Government would bear half the
additional cost up to t e.p cif led excess, then three-quarters of
any further specifi o < s cost, after which the Government
would bear seven-., yhi , v/ rll additional cost where such might
be involved to provide vat rin difficult circumstances. In
determining the ansiri, uc: to be given by the Government, the
whole undertaking is considered and a .1 existing Capital Liability
is taken into account as well as the estimated cost‘of new works.
As already mentioned, the assistance is to be based on
water requirements, and as there is inevitably a good deal of
wastage where water is not metered with consequent high Capital
cost of works, the full assistance under the formula will be
provided only where the Authority has a general policy of metering
services from which water is used for other than domestic purposes.
Where meters are not installed, assistance will be given only on a
reduced basis.
A technical explanation of the application of the formula
is given^separately for the information of Officers of Water
Authorities, but, generally speaking, it can be said that the
effect will be that where the total overall cost of water to a
Water Authority does not exceed 1/- per thousand gallons, the whole
cost would be borne by the water users as this charge is regarded
So one well within the means of ratepayers, but where the total cost
would be above this, a proportion would be borne by the State by way
of a grant towards the Capital cost of the works. For example,
where the overall cost amounted to 1/Ij.d per thousand gallons, the
grant given would mean tht the State would bear one-half of the
excess over 1/-, that is, 2d. per thousand gallons and the water
users would bear 1/2J per thousand gallons; where the total cost
was 1/od the State would bear 13d. and the water users 1 /3d; where
the cost was 2/~ per thousand gallons the State would bear ? Bd, and
the water users would bear 1/kd,
20th July, 1 9kk.


Office of tfje iWmteter of OTater H>upplp,
TREASURY GARDENS.
MELBOURNE, C. 2.
20th July, 1944
Dear Sir,
A few days ago, I forwarded for the information of
f. u | t Progress Report of the Town
your Authority a copy w tae " ' advise you that the Government
Water ' t * i 3 r eoommendetions in regard to fin-
ha a approved or the tomu.de. o r, ' lv vorhs in country
ancisl assistance towards the cost of water ouppxy
towns o
Your Authority may, therefore, now plan for the
development of its t°if/n_ water on the basis set
tion that financial nroiects should, therefore,
out by the Committee o bigo p improvements
be put in hand without aelay, that any / ond materials
can be planned for construction as soon os mauyu
bcc ome a vailablc e
In accordance with the provisions of Wott-r Acts,
all proposals must he submitted to and any
Commission for examination and appro o - recommendations of
enquiries in rogard to the appl3.es tio. *' rr'do "directly to
the Town Water Supplies Committee should also ho msue airco.jy
the Commission*
I am enclosing for the information of your Authority.
a brief explanation of the effect Who guidance of
Town Water Supplies Committee ana a btdtement to tQ apply the
your Engineer and other Officers, who will J financial
approved formula in order to determine the extent I c
ass is tanc o° which will he available towards the cost of works.
Yours faithfully.
JOHN G. B. McDONALD
Mi ni s ter o f Water Suppl y
and Electrical Undertakings*


TOWN WATER SUPPLIES COMMITTEE.
FIRST PROGRESS REPORT.
The Honorable
The Minister of Water Supply,
Melbourne, C. 2.
Dear Sir,
In compliance with your instructions of the 24th November, 1943, the Town Water
Supplies Committee appointed to inquire into town water supplies in country districts in
Victoria submits herewith its First Progress Report.
This Report deals with the cost of water supplies controlled by Local Authorities,
and recommendations are made for a basis on which Government assistance might be given
towards the cost of new works, and for the adjustment of existing loan liabilities where it
is considered undue burdens are now imposed on the ratepayers.
The Committee held its first meeting on 12th December, 1943, arrangements being
made with the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission for Mr. D. C. Hensher to act as
Secretary pending the release from the Army of Mr. R. H. Richmond, 8.C.E., A.M.I.E. Aust.,
who was appointed Secretary and Investigating Engineer on 11th January, 1944.
SCOPE OF INVESTIGATION.
The Committee was directed to inquire into and report on the disabilities of Local
Authorities supplying water to country towns in Victoria with special reference to :
1. Writing off of the whole or part of capital liabilities in respect of vanished or
depreciated assets.
2. Adjustment of interest charges in respect of Loan Advances.
3. Nature and incidence of rates and charges.
4. The necessity for and cost of improvements or additional works to provide
adequate water supplies of satisfactory quality.
5. Whether the cost of such works could be met by the ratepayers, and if not,
the extent of financial assistance necessary and the basis on which such
assistance might be given by the Government.
Water has been supplied to 258 towns in country districts in Victoria under
the provisions of the Water Acts. One hundred and thirty-two of these supplies are
controlled by Local Authorities and 126 by the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission,
and in addition there are several town water supplies controlled by Municipal Councils under
the provisions of the Local Government Acts, the most notable example of such a supply
being that for the town of Sale. There are also a number of country towns at present
without a reticulated water supply where proposals for waterworks are under consideration.
While the terms of reference to the Committee refer specifically to water supply
undertakings controlled by Local Authorities the Committee is of the opinion that, as the
problems are common to all country town water supplies, it must include in its inquiries a
review of the undertakings controlled by the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission
and also consider the effect of its recommendations in relation to future water supply
undertakings.
GENERAL.
The first objective of the Committee was to obtain basic data in relation to existing
town water supplies, and on 30th December, 1943, questionnaires were sent to all Local
Authorities concerned seeking information in regard to the adequacy of the present service
and the financial obligations involved, as well as particulars of proposed improvements
considered necessary either to safeguard the supply or to provide for future development.


Some Local Authorities have not yet replied to the questionnaires and others delayed
so long that time has not permitted an analysis of the position of the town water supplies
controlled by them to be taken into consideration for the purposes of this Report.
However, replies received in respect of 111 towns out of a total of 132 controlled by
Local Authorities, supplemented by information available in the records of the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission, have been analysed to show the position in respect of water
supply in those towns.
Of the 111 towns included in this analysis, 53 obtain supplies by gravitation, 47 by
pumping, and 11 partly by gravitation and partly by pumping. In some of these towns
the Local Authority controlling the distribution system purchases water in bulk from
another Authority. These 111 supplies are allocated in all parts of the State and may be
taken as representing a typical cross-section of country town water supplies.
VISITS.
The Committee has not sought formal evidence in any country town as it considers
it preferable that all information in respect of existing or proposed waterworks should be
submitted to it in writing by the Authority concerned.
However, to inform itself generally as to the problems involved in town water supplies
and to enable it to better appreciate the infomation forwarded, visits were made to country
towns where conditions were typical of a number of supplies or where special problems
existed.
The towns visited for this purpose were as follow :
19th-20th January, 1944—Numurkah, Rutherglen, Shepparton, Wahgunyah.
25th-27th January, 1944—Daylesford, Dunolly, Heathcote, Inglewood,
Maryborough, St. Arnaud, Tarnagulla, Wedderburn.
22nd~24th February, 1944—Drouin, Foster, Korunjburra, Leongatha, Morwell,
Toora, Traralgon, Warragul, Wonthaggi, Yarram.
21st-23rd March, 1944 —Ararat, Ballan, Ballarat, Beaufort, Hamilton, Lismore,
Mortlake, Port Fairy, Portland.
At a later stage when its inquiries are further advanced the Committee proposes to
visit additional towns, the itineraries being arranged in the light of circumstances disclosed
by those inquiries, but it is obviously not practicable for a visit to be made to each of the
258 towns where water supplies exist in addition to those where proposals for reticulated
supplies are under consideration.
FINANCIAL.
In general water supplies in country towns in Victoria are provided by Waterworks
Trusts and other Authorities constituted under the provisions of the Water Acts, and in
addition the Local Government Acts include certain powers under which Municipal
Councils may supply water to areas within their municipal districts.
Under the Water Acts the Government assumes the responsibility of providing loans
on long terms to meet the capital cost of works for town water supplies controlled by Local
Authorities constituted under those Acts to construct and manage the waterworks.
The total of loan advances made to existing Local Authorities to the 30th June, 1943,
was £2,956,597, of which £276,374 was written off in 1899 in respect of loan advances prior
to that date.
Subject to the effect of this writing off and the grants to which reference is made in the
next paragraph the whole of the annual charges involved by the construction and operation
of waterworks have been met entirely by the consumers benefited. The revenues necessary
to meet these annual charges—interest and redemption charges on loans, maintenance,
management and depreciation—are raised principally by means of rates on the net annual
valuation of the properties benefited, supplemented by income from sales of water used for
other than domestic purposes.


During the early years of the depression some financial assistance was given by the
Government to encourage construction of works and thereby assist in relieving
unemployment, and in 1938 the Government adopted a general policy of providing grants
towards the cost of approved works on the following basis :
(а) Reservoirs, service basins, and purification plants—two-thirds of the capital
cost.
(б) Pipe lines—one-half of the capital cost.
(c) Pumping plants—one-third of the capital cost.
Under this policy, grants totalling over £200,000 were made available to Local
Authorities towards the cost of new water supply works or improvements to existing supplies.
In adopting the above basis, the primary consideration was the relief of unemployment
and the proportion of cost to be met by way of grant was determined rather by the character
of the proposed works than by reference to the financial resources of the community to be
benefited or consideration of the financial burdens already being carried by that community
as a result of previous construction.
Although the greater part of the revenue of a Local Authority is derived from rates,
misleading results arise from any endeavour to compare the costs to the consumers of water
supplies in various towns on the basis of the amount of the rate in the pound.
Under the provisions of the Water Acts the net annual valuations to be adopted by a
Local Authority are those made by the local Municipal Council and. the valuations of similar
properties in different towns, though nominally made on the same basis, vary widely, being
influenced by local demands for housing and by the personal opinions of individual valuers.
If valuations for all purposes were made by one Authority such as a State Valuation
Department the latter cause of variation would be largely removed.
Also the amount of the rate in the pound is influenced to a great extent by the
relative proportions of the revenue derived from rates and from charges for water sold
by measure.
The main functions of a town water supply are as follow :
(а) To provide water for domestic purposes.
(б) To provide water for industries and gardens.
(c) To provide water for fire fighting.
(d) To provide water for street flushing, &c.
The values of functions (a) and (6) are directly related to quantity supplied for these
purposes, but those of functions (c) and ( d ) are quite independent of quantity. Moreover,
the availability of supply (i.e., potential benefits) has a value which can be recouped only
by a rate.
It is apparent, therefore, that revenue should be raised both from rates and from
charges, but the proportion to be raised from each source is a matter of policy for the Local
Authority.
In two similar towns these proportions may vary widely, a relatively high rate with a
low charge for water by measure will provide the same total revenue as a relatively
low rate with a high charge. In the extreme case where one town is largely metered and the
other unmetered the divergence will be more pronounced, as in the first case a substantial
part of the revenue is derived from sales of water, while in the second case the whole revenue
must be derived from rates and, moreover, in the absence of meters a larger revenue is
necessary, due to greater waste of water, with consequent higher total annual costs.
While the consumption of water for purely domestic purposes may bear some relation
to valuation, e.g., the larger properties housing more residents, the consumption for garden
watering is two to three times the domestic consumption and bears no relation to valuation.
For the foregoing reasons it is considered that the amount of the rate in the pound
is not a proper basis for comparison of costs.
Annual cost per capita has sometimes been suggested as a basis for comparison, but
consumption for industrial purposes confuses the issue, and where such consumption is
relatively large could lead to very misleading results.


The Committee after careful consideration of various methods of comparing costs
came to the conclusion that the most satisfactory basis of such a comparison is the cost to
the Local Authority per 1,000 gallons delivered in the district.
Unfortunately, in very few towns can reliable figures be obtained of the actual total
quantity of water so delivered, owing to the absence of meters on the main supply lines,
and it has been necessary to rely largely on estimates.
In 21 towns where the total quantity delivered to the urban district is measured the
average consumption exclusive of special industrial requirements is 70 gallons per head per
day.
The quantity of water supplied to ratepayers is less than the total quantity delivered
in the town as the latter includes free supplies for public purposes such as street watering,
flushing of gutters, fire fighting, and public institutions, unavoidable losses, and also supplies
given at concession rates for various purposes.
It is obvious, therefore, that the charge per 1,000 gallons to ordinary consumers is
not necessarily the same as the cost to the Authority per 1,000 gallons of water delivered
in the district, the difference being due to the effect of. rates on properties with a low
consumption, e.g., shops, &c., and of losses on free supplies and supplies at concession rates
both of which are provided for the general benefit of the community, and also the effect on
finances of unavoidable losses of water, e.g., leakage.
The Committee considers that a reasonable basis for comparison is to assess the cost
per 1,000 gallons delivered in the district on the assumption that the total quantity so
delivered is equal to 75 gallons per head per day plus an allowance for large special or
industrial requirements, the population served being estimated at an average of four persons
per occupiable tenement (Le., dwelling, shop, &c.).
It is probable that in many towns where services are generally unmetered, and more
particularly in the northern parts of the State, the actual quantity of water supplied would
exceed this estimated or “ basic ” consumption, but, in these cases, the actual unit costs would
be correspondingly lower than the calculated figures, and it is considered unlikely that in
the southern portion of the State the actual consumption would be sufficiently below this
“ basic ” figure to affect the conclusions to any serious extent.
In assessing the costs to the Local Authorities the actual net annual costs for the
year 1943 have been taken and no attempt has been made to determine the cost borne by the
State by reason of the grants made available during the depression years. No account has
been taken of the reduction in loan liability to be effected under Act 4983 (1943).
In some of the towns included in the analysis the works are not capable of supplying
the estimated requirements and in these cases the cost has been calculated on the quantities
actually available. While this gives a true cost of headworks it has had the effect of showing
an excessive cost of distribution in a number of cases.
ANALYSIS OF COSTS.
Works to provide a town water supply may conveniently be divided into two parts,
firstly, the headworks, that is, the works necessary to bring water to the district, and
secondly, the distribution works, that is, the works necessary to distribute the water to the
consumers in the district.
Headworks comprise such items as reservoirs, main pipe lines, pumping plants,
purification works and service basins or elevated tanks, while distribution works comprise
reticulation mains and, in some cases, local service basins or tanks.
For towns of similar size there is a wide variation in the capital cost of the headworks
owing to differing geographical, climatic and topographical conditions which influence not only
the accessibility of the source, but also the works necessary for its utilization for a town
water supply.
The capital cost of distribution works is also influenced, but to a very much lesser
degree by local conditions, in one town the development may be concentrated in a relatively
small area while in another the same number of buildings are scattered over a relatively
large area.


The analysis made in respect of 111 towns showed the following average results : —
Cost in Pence per 1,000 Gallons.
Gravitation.
Pumped,
Interest and redemption charges
5-52
3-89
Pumping costs
2-60
Management costs
1-29
1-30
Maintenance and depreciation costs
2* 31
1-89
Total
912
9-68
This variation in capital cost of works, both head works and distribution works, is
reflected in the annual costs of the water supply undertaking, which may be subdivided
into the following items :
(а) Interest and Redemption charges (on loans).
(б) Pumping costs (pumped supplies only).
(c) Management costs.
{d) Maintenance and Depreciation costs.
The total cost to the Authority of water per 1,000 gallons varies widely from the
general average of 9 * 4 pence, the maximum being 18*36 pence and the minimum 2 * 98 pence
per 1,000 gallons. In a number of cases where the total cost is well below the average the
interest and redemption charges are lower than would be normal because the Authorities
concerned have met a substantial part of the capital cost from revenue.
The variation in total cost is due principally to wide differences in capital cost being
reflected in great differences in interest and redemption charges.
Following this analysis the Committee has formed the following opinions :
(i) The principal cause of variation in cost of water supplies per 1,000 gallons
is the wide variation in capital cost due to differences in geographical,
climatic and topographical conditions, particularly insofar as they affect
accessibility of sources of supply, and to enable towns to obtain a water
supply at a reasonable cost some assistance is necessary where local
conditions are unfavourable.
(ii) To preserve the fundamental condition essential to successful local control,
namely, local responsibility for at least portion of the cost, any assistance
should be on a proportional basis.
(iii) Government assistance should be confined to providing portion of the capital
cost of works, and all operating costs including maintenance and
depreciation should be borne by the communities served.
(iv) Assistance should be given on a basis of general application throughout the
State.
(v) To place both new supplies and existing supplies where improvements are
required on a common basis, the formula for determining the assistance
to be given should take into account existing burdens.
(vi) In the case of existing supplies where no further works are required any
adjustment of liabilities should be in accordance with the general formula,
after taking into account any relief which may be given in respect of lost
or vanished assets.
(vii) It is not practicable to provide for uniform costs for water supply
throughout the State, but the aim should be to reduce the variation in costs
as far as practicable.
(viii) In determining the assistance to be given account must be taken of the
effect of the reduction in loan liabilities provided for in recent legislation
enabling reduction of rates (Act No. 4983). This reduction of loan
liabilities will amount to approximately £750,000 in respect of Local
Authorities, and £500,000 in respect of urban supplies controlled by the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission.


(ix) A general policy of metering services where water is used lor other than
domestic purposes is essential to the proper management of water
supplies, providing as it does, not only a more equitable distribution of
costs, but also the only satisfactory and practicable control of waste of
water.
(x) In many towns the available depreciation funds are inadequate to provide
for replacement costs, very largely because of insufficient provision made
by Local Authorities prior to 1916 (until the enactment of the Water Act
1916 there was no statutory requirement for payments to depreciation
in respect of pipe mains). Some reduction of liabilities is desirable in
certain of these cases so that the cost of replacements can be met from
capital funds without imposing undue burdens on the ratepayers.
(xi) A reasonable price for water is one shilling per 1,000 gallons, and water could
be supplied to consumers at this price if the overall cost to the Local
Authorities does not exceed ninepence per 1,000 gallons, the difference
of threepence per 1,000 gallons being necessary to offset losses on free and
concession supplies and unavoidable leakages referred to earlier in this
Report.
(xii) Of the overall cost of ninepence per 1,000 gallons to the Authority , not more
than fourpence per 1,000 gallons should be due to management,
maintenance, and depreciation costs, with an additional 2-5 pence per
1,000 gallons for pumping costs in the case of pumped supplies, leaving a
balance of fivepence per 1,000 gallons in the case of gravitation supplies
and 2-5 pence in the case of pumped supplies to meei interest and
redemption charges. With interest and redemption at 4| per cent, per
annum (the rate generally obtaining on existing loan advances) this would
meet the charges on a capital expenditure per million gallons per annum
to be supplied to the district of £450 for gravitation supplies, and £225
for pumped supplies. It is, therefore, considered reasonable to expect a
Local Authority to meet all capital costs up to an amount equal to £450
per million gallons per annum to be supplied in the case of gravitation
supplies or to £225 per million gallons per annum to be supplied in the
case of pumped supplies, and where the cost exceeds these figures
assistance should be on a proportional basis with a steeply graduated
scale.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. Assistance by the State should be given in respect only of capital cost of works.
All operating costs including depreciation should be met by Local Authorities, i.e., the
consumers concerned.
2. For the purpose of determining the assistance to be given the “ basic ”
consumption of water per annum shall be calculated as equal to 300 gallons per day for each
occupiable tenement (shops, dwellings, &c.), plus an allowance for special or industrial
consumers using large quantities of water.
3. In determining the basis of assistance there should be two definite classifications
of water supply undertakings, namely, gravitation supplies and pumped supplies, there
being a definite divergence in operating costs of these two classes of undertaking.
4. In the case of gravitation supplies the formula on which assistance is to be given
should be as follows :
Where the capital expenditure on works divided by the “ basic ”
consumption in million gallons per annum does not exceed £450 the whole cost
should be borne by the Local Authority, that is, all the capital should be provided
by way of loan to the Local Authority.
Where the capital expenditure for each million gallons per annum of “ basic ”
consumption exceeds the above amount of £450, the additional capital cost should
be provided in the following proportions :
The next £l5O half loan, half borne by the State.
The next £l5O one-quarter loan, three-quarters borne by the State.
Any balance one-eighth loan, seven-eighths borne by the State.


5. In the case of pumped supplies the formula on which assistance is to be given should
be as follows :
Where the capital expenditure on works divided by the “ basic ”
consumption in million gallons per annum does not exceed £225, the whole cost
should be borne by the Local Authority, that is, ail the capital should be provided
by way of loan to the Local Authority.
Where the capital expenditure for each million gallons per annum of “ basic ”
consumption exceeds the above amount of £225 the additional cost should be
provided in the following proportions
The next £l5O half loan, half borne by the State.
The next £l5O one-quarter loan, three-quarters borne by the State.
Any balance one-eighth loan, seven-eighths borne by the State.
6. Where the supply is partly by gravitation and partly pumped, the amount of
capital cost of works for each million gallons per annum to be borne wholly by the Local
Authority should be determined by the following formula :
£450 less £225 x Q uantit y to be Vamped
Total requirements.
7. Where water is purchased in bulk by the Authority, then each one penny per I,OOC
gallons should be deemed to be equivalent to a capital expenditure of £75 per million gallons
per annum calculated as above, and the apportionment between loan and capital borne by
the State of capital cost of local works should be adjusted as though this amount had been
expended and proportioned in accordance with the formula.
8. The liability of any Local Authority in respect of existing works should be adjusted
so that the principal on which interest and redemption is paid by the Local Authority shall
be reduced where necessary to an amount equivalent to that which would have been
advanced by way of loan in accordance with the above formula.
9. Where further works other than renewals are to be constructed, the proportions
of loan and capital borne by the State should be determined by applying the formula to
the whole cost of both existing and proposed works. In this way a town that is developing
rapidly would not receive undue advantages as compared with one developing slowly,
following the provision of works of sufficient capacity to meet future demands.
10. Where loan moneys are provided at 3| per cent, for interest and redemption,
as will be the case in the future, the base amounts in the formula should be increased by
one-third in each case in so far as those loans are concerned.
11. Where a reticulated supply is desired in a very small township, a special difficulty
arises in that any Waterworks Trust constituted to construct and manage such an
undertaking would be unable to meet the minimum administrative costs involved, including
certain unavoidable expenses in the legal procedure for the making and collection of rates.
In these cases it would appear preferable for such small undertakings to be constructed and
managed by Municipal Councils under the provisions of the Local Government Acts, which
enable special rates and charges to be made in respect of water supply. With this
arrangement there should be a substantial saving in administrative costs. As Municipal
Councils would not be able to obtain loan funds on as favourable terms as those now available
to Waterworks Trusts under the provisions of the Water Acts, namely, 3J per cent, per
annum, the base amounts in the general formula should be determined on the assumption
that interest and redemption charges on loans raised would be 4| per cent, and would,
therefore, be the same as apply in the case of existing loan advances to Waterworks Trusts!
12. The formula should apply only in those cases where the Local Authority has
adopted or adopts a general policy of metering services where water is used for other than
domestic purposes, and in other cases the amount of capital cost to be borne by the State
should be reduced to two-thirds of that determined by the. formula and the balance be
provided by increasing the loan to be advanced to the" Local Authority.
10643 2
9


13. A Local Authority should be relieved of loan liabilities in respect of lost or
depreciated assets on the following basis :
Lost assets to the extent that these assets no longer serve any useful water
supply purpose nor provide revenue to the Authority.
Depreciated assets where the accumulated depreciation fund is inadequate to
provide for their renewal—to an extent which will enable their replacement
from capital funds without imposing an undue burden on the ratepayers.
Any such adjustment should be made before computing the amount of assistance,
if any, to be given in accordance with the general formula.
14. In all cases where liabilities are to be reduced or assistance given towards the
cost of new works due allowance should be made for the reductions in liabilities provided foi
in Act 4983. r
CONCLUSION.
i The Committee considers that where water can be supplied for one shilling per 1,000
gallons it is not unreasonable to expect the Local Authority, that is the consumers, concerned
to meet the whole cost of the water supply undertaking.
With interest and redemption charges at 4\ per cent, per annum the price of water
to the consumer should not exceed one shilling per 1,000 gallons, provided the capital cost
of works per million gallons supplied per annum does not exceed £450 in the case of
gravitation supplies or £225 in the case of pumped supplies.
In unfavourable circumstances where, owing to local conditions—geographical,
climatic and topographical—-sources of supply are relatively inaccessible, the capital cost
of a water supply may considerably exceed these amounts.
While pumping, management and maintenance costs do not increase appreciably
with increase in capital cost of works, interest and redemption charges are directly
proportional to capital cost, and if the Local Authority has to meet them in full the cost of
water is substantially increased.
The detailed recommendations in the Report, therefore, provide that where the
capital cost of works per million gallons supplied per annum exceeds £450 in the case of
gravitation supplies or £225 in the case of pumped supplies the balance should be provided
as follows :
The next £lso—half by loan to the Local Authority and half borne by the State.
The next £lso—one-quarter by loan to the Local Authority and three-quarters
borne by the State.
Any balance—one-eighth by loan to the Local Authority and seven-eighths
borne by the State.
l\ith interest and redemption charges at 3| per cent, per annum as applies to future
loans to Local Authorities for water supply works all the above base amounts would be
increased by one-third.
_ If is also recommended that loan liabilities in respect of existing supplies should be
adjusted on the same basis after allowance is made for reduction in liabilities provided for in
Act 4983. * v
It is estimated that the total amount by which existing liabilities would be reduced
in respect of the 132 town water supplies controlled by Local Authorities following the
adoption of the recommended basis would be approximately £300,000, but in most cases the
reduction would be more than covered by the reduction provided for in Act 4983.
Until detailed investigations can be made into proposed improvements to the existing
water supplies and also proposed new waterworks for towns at present without reticulated
supplies it is not possible to give any exact estimate of the capital cost of works or of the
amounts to be borne by the consumers and the State respectively.
However, it is considered the total cost of works would be of the order of £2,500,000,
of which about £1,750,000 would be borne by the consumers and the balance of £750,000 by
the State, after allowance has been made for the effect of reduction of liabilities of £1,250,000
by the operation of Act 4983,
The total expenditure of £2,500,000 could probably be spread over a period of years
with the most urgent cases receiving priority.
10


A number of ca&es have been examined on the basis of the recommended formula and
it would appear that the highest cost to the Local Authority of water delivered in a district
would be approximately fifteen pence per 1,000 gallons instead of approximately twenty-eight
pence per 1,000 gallons without assistance, thus enabling consumers to be supplied even
under difficult conditions at a cost not exceeding eighteen pence per 1,000 gallons.
In later reports the Committee will submit detailed recommendations in regard to
adjustment of existing liabilities of Local Authorities, and also will deal with other matters
included in the terms of reference.
Yours faithfully,
H. W. McCAY, Chairman.
F. A. JENKINS, Member.
R. E. P. STAFFORD, Member.
T. H. GRIGG. Member.
R. H. RICHMOND,
Secretary.
20th May, 1944.
By Authority: J. J. Gourley, Government Printer. Melbourne.
11




VICTORIA
TOWN WATER SUPPLIES COMMITTEE
INQUIRY
INTO
WATER SUPPLIES
TO
COUNTRY TOWNS
Second and Final Report
1944
13074/44
H. E. DAW, Government Printer, Melbourne,


TOWN WATER SUPPLIES COMMITTEE
PERSONNEL
H. W. McCay, Esq., 8.C.E., M.I.E. Aust. Chairman
R. E. P. Stafford, Esq. Member
F. A. Jenkins, Esq., C.E., F.C.1.5., J.P. Member
T. H. Grigg, Esq., J.P. Member
R. H. Richmond, Esq., 8.C.E.. A.M.I.E. Aust.,
Secretary.


TOWN WATER SUPPLIES COMMITTEE.
SECOND AND FINAL REPORT.
The Honorable
The Minister of Water Supply,
Melbourne, C. 2.
Dear Sir,
In further compliance with your instructions of the 24th November, 1943, and
supplementing its First Progress Report of the 20th May, 1944, the Town Water
Supplies Committee, appointed to inquire into water supplies to country towns in
Victoria, now submits its Second and Final Report.
SCOPE OF INVESTIGATIONS.
The Committee was directed to inquire into and report on the disabilities of
Local Authorities supplying water to country towns in Victoria with special reference
to :
]. Writing off of the whole or part of capital liabilities in respect of vanished
or depreciated assets.
2. Adjustment of interest charges in respect of Loan Advances.
3. Nature and incidence of rates and charges.
4. The necessity for and cost of improvements or additional works to
provide adequate water supplies of satisfactory quality.
5. Whether the cost of such works could be met by the ratepayers, and if
not, the extent of financial assistance necessary and the basis on
which such assistance might be given by the Government.
VISITS.
Prior to the presentation of its First Progress Report, the Committee visited a
number of towns to inform itself generally as to the problems involved in town water
supplies and to enable it to better appreciate information furnished, and has since
visited the following additional towns
20th-22nd June —Boort. Echuca, Kerang, Kyabram, Kyneton, and Swan
Hill.
11th-13th July—Beech worth, Benalla, Euroa, Kiewa. Kilmore, Seymour,
Wodonga, and Yackandandah.
In accordance with the practice adopted from the inception of the inquiry formal
evidence was not sought in these towns, the Committee requiring all information to be
furnished in writing by the Local Authority concerned.
To enable complete data to be assembled, questionnaires were forwarded to all
Local Authorities, and the information so obtained has been analysed in conjunction
with the records available in the office of the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission.
GENERAL.
In its First Progress Report the Commit tee set out certain general conclusions it
had reached and made specific recommendations in regard to the following items of its
Terms of Reference.
No. 4 —“ The necessity for and cost of improvements or additional works to
provide adequate water supplies of satisfactory quality.”


s—“ Whether the cost of such works could be met by the ratepayers,
and if not, the extent of financial assistance necessary, and the basis
on which such assistance might be given by the Government.”
These recommendations provided for assistance towards the capital cost of works
to be given in accordance with a “formula” having general application throughout the
State. The Committee also indicated the basis on which it considered adjustments
should be made of the liabilities of Local Authorities in respect of existing works so that
these undertakings should be placed on a basis comparable with new projects.
In this Second and Final Report the Committee deals with the remaining items
oi its Terms of Reference and with other matters which it considers come within the
general scope of its inquiries.
ADJUSTMENT OF LOAN LIABILITIES IN RESPECT OF VANISHED AND
DEPRECIATED ASSETS.
The Committee sought, from each Local Authority, information as to the works
vested in it, including particulars of the character, age, and condition of those works,
the purpose which they served, and the loan advances obtained to meet their cost.
In some cases, works, the cost of which had been met from loan advances, could
no longer serve any useful purpose in providing a supply of water to the towns concerned,
and it is considered these works should be regarded as “ vanished assets ” and that the
Local Authorities should be relieved of loan liabilities in respect of these “ vanished
assets.”
In many cases, where works of a perishable nature have depreciated, the accumulated
depreciation fund now available towards meeting the cost of replacement is less than the
amount necessary to ensure that adequate funds will be available from this source to
meet such cost at the end of the estimated life of the works. It is considered that these
works should be classified as “ depreciated assets ” and that the Local Authorities
concerned should be relieved of charges on an amount of principal equivalent to the
estimated present deficiency in the depreciation fund, provided that the principal as so
reduced on account of depreciated assets ’ does not fall below £225 per million gallons
of basic consumption per annum in the case of gravitation supplies and corresponding
lesser amounts for pumped or purchased supplies consistent with the “ formula ” set out
in the First Progress Report.
With this adjustment of liabilities and proper contributions to depreciation in the
future, the cost of replacements in excess of moneys then available in the depreciation
fund could be met from further capital advances without imposing an undue burden on
the ratepayers.
It is recommended, therefore, that reductions in liabilities in respect of “ vanished
assets ” and “ depreciated assets ” of individual Local Authorities be effected by reducing
the principal at 30th June, 1943, by the amounts determined on the basis set out above,
the reduction being made pro rata between the various loan advances, and that the
respective balances of these advances outstanding at that date be reduced proportionately.
Following this adjustment of liabilities in respect of “ vanished and depreciated
assets,” the “ formula ” recommended by the Committee in its First Progress Report
has been applied to determine whether any further adjustment of liabilities should be
made and, if so, the appropriate reduction of principal and liability outstanding at 30th
June, 1943, has been computed.
Where the reduction provided for in Act 4983 is less than the total reduction
computed in respect of “ vanished assets,” “ depreciated assets ” and by the application
of the “ formula,” it is recommended that the necessary further reduction be made.
In those cases where the total reduction of liabilities computed in respect of
“ vanished and depreciated assets ” and by the application of the “ formula ” is less
than that provided for in Act 4983, it is recommended that the adjustment made under
that Act should apply but the position be recorded so that, in the future, an appropriate
reconciliation can be made when further works are carried out.


Appendix I. of this Report sets out in detail the position of each Local Authority
giving—
(a) Principal at 30th June, 1943 ;
( b ) the reduction in respect of “ vanished and depreciated assets ; ”
(c) the principal as adjusted for tc vanished and depreciated assets;”
(d) the further reduction by application of the “ formula ; ”
(e) the total reduction under the Committee’s recommendations ;
(/) the reduction under Act 4983 ;
( g ) the principal as adjusted under the Committee’s recommendations ;
(h) the principal as adjusted by Act 4983 ;
( i ) the principal to be borne by the Local Authority.
In future applications of the “ formula ” to apportion the cost of new works
between a Local Authority and the State, the capital cost of works at 30th June, 1943,
should be taken as the “ Principal as adjusted for vanished and depreciated assets ” as
set out in Column (c) of Appendix I. The principal actually borne by the Local
Authority in respect of these works is obtainable from Column (i) of Appendix I. and
allowance should be made for the capitalized value of any subsidies being received.
Appendix 11. of this Report is a schedide showing those Local Authorities where
reductions of liabilities, further to those provided for in Act 4983, are recommended by
the Committee. This schedule shows —
(i) the principal at 30th June, 1943, as reduced by Act 4983 ;
(ii) the net loan liability at 30th June, 1943, as reduced by Act 4983 ;
(iii) the principal at 30th June, 1943, as further reduced under the Committee’s
recommendations ;
(iv) the net loan liability at 30th June, 1943, as further reduced under the
Committee’s recommendations.
This further reduction of liabilities would require legislative authority.
ADJUSTMENT OF INTEREST CHARGES IN RESPECT OF LOAN ADVANCES.
As indicated in its First Progress Report the Committee, when making recommendations
for a “ formula ” on which assistance might be given towards the cost of water supply
works, took into consideration the rates of interest payable on loan advances.
As the Government has adopted this “ formula ”, the Committee does not desire
to make any recommendations for alteration in the rates of interest now payable.
Any alteration would necessitate recasting the “ formula ” to compensate for
such alteration, and, in those cases where assistance is recommended, there would be no
change in the distribution of annual cost as between Local Authorities and the State,
but only an alteration in the means of effecting that distribution.
NATURE AND INCIDENCE OF RATES AND CHARGES.
As indicated in the Committee’s First Progress Report the principal purposes of a
water supply may be classified into two main divisions—
I. “ Actual ” . . Provision of water for domestic purposes and for
industries and gardens.
11. “ Potential ” .. Provision of water for fire fighting and for street
flushing, &c.
and, while the value of the purposes in the first division is directly related to quantity
supplied, the value of those in the second division is independent of quantity supplied.
Moreover, the very existence of a supply has a value irrespective of whether water
is used or not.
For fully developed properties with a low consumption of water, such as stores
and shops, the principal value of a water supply is “ Potential ” usage and, therefore,
payment should be principally by means of a rate related to the value of the property.


hor well developed properties with a high consumption of water, such as residences
\\ith large gardens, or factories with a high consumption, the principal value of water is
Actual usage and, therefore, the payment should be principally by means of a
charge related to the quantity of water supplied. For moderately developed properties
with a moderate consumption of water, such as normal residences, either a rate or a
charge would operate with reasonable equity.
Consideration was given to the question of financing town water supply undertakings
by means of a rate on properties related to their value and a charge for all water
consumed, that is, a two-part tariff similar to that for domestic electricity supply.
Howevei, usage of water varies from year to year much more widely than
c ornestic usage of electricity, as seasonal conditions have a very marked effect on water
consumption, but only a minor effect on the annual domestic consumption of electricity.
While annual usage of water varies quite widely, the annual cost, especially in the
case of gravitation supplies, remains practically constant, and, therefore, the application
o a two-part tariff to water supply undertakings does not appear nearly so attractive as
tor domestic electricity supply. If the major part of the revenue of a’ Water Authority
is to come from rates there is, in fact, no particular merit in a two-part tariff.
Provided services where water is used for other than domestic purposes are
metered it is considered that the present practice of making a rate and charging for
excess water is a reasonably equitable system in principle.
Under such a system, what might be termed norma] residences pay in rates
amounts approximately proportional to the quantities of water used, a property with a
relatively high consumption pays in rates and excess water charges an amount proportional
to quantity used, and a fully developed property, that is, a highly improved one, with a
low consumption pays in rates an amount greater than would be justified by that
consumption but on the other hand receives much greater potential benefits than
properties of lower value.
However, a rate uniform in amount on annual valuation is not necessarily the
most equitable m all circumstances, and some modification is possible under existing
egislatmn, m that the rate can be varied on a sliding scale according to valuation and
w ater Authorities may fix minimum amounts of rates on buildings and vacant allotments.
These provisions have been used to reduce the amount of rate payable on fully
developed properties with improvements of high value, and to increase the amounts of
rate payable on properties with improvements of low value and on properties without
improvements, that is, vacant allotments.
An alternative method of achieving such an adjustment would be to make the
rates on unimproved capital values, and the Committee, therefore, suggests that a
Water Authority should be empowered to adopt, if it thinks fit, this alternative of
rating on unimproved capital values where such values have been adopted for rating-
purposes by the Council of the Municipality within which the Waterworks District is
situated.
METERS.
As indicated in its First Progress Report, the Committee is strongly of the opinion
that metering of all services where water is used for other than domestic purposes is
essential to the proper control of water supplies, both from the point of view of discouraging
waste thereby enabling proper utilization of water resources, and for the equitable
distribution of costs.
Under existing legislation a Water Authority may require any consumer to
provide a meter on his service, and the consumer must then either purchase a meter or
hire one from the Authority.
This arrangement is not entirely satisfactory owing to the difficulty of ensuring
proper maintenance of private meters, and it would be preferable for all meters to be
installed and maintained by the Water Authority.
In those cases where the consumption through a metered service does not exceed
the allowance for the amount of rate payable, the consumer concerned frequently objects
to what he considers the unnecessary expense of providing a meter. In many of these
cases removal of the meter would inevitably result in increased consumption as there
would no longer be any incentive to reduce waste of water.


If the Water Authority were to install meters without charge, where it considers
such installation necessary, this difficulty would be overcome.
It is recommended, therefore, that the Water Acts be amended to provide that all
meters shall be provided and maintained by and at the cost of the Water Authority.
The abolition of meter rentals in a town where the majority of the services are
metered would necessitate a small increase in the rates—probably about 2d. in the £ —-to
recoup the W ater Authority for the loss of revenue from meter rentals, but the total
payments by the consumers as a whole would not be increased.
The introduction of meters in a town where the services are generally unmetered
would enable rates to be reduced as a result of the additional revenue derived from excess
water charges and, in the case of pumped supplies, a further reduction would be possible,
as reduction in waste of water would result in reduced pumping costs.
FINANCING OF INVESTIGATIONS.
The present practice in regard to investigation and initiation of water supply
works is for the Local Authority to meet the cost of preparation of reports, estimates,
plans and specifications from its own funds and, when construction commences, this
preliminary expenditure is considered to be part of the capital cost and is recouped from
funds made available by the Government.
If a long period elapses between the time works are generally approved and the
commencement of construction the Local Authority may be financially embarrassed.
To avoid this embarrassment the tendency is to limit the preliminary expenditure to
that necessary to obtain approval to the proposals and defer preparation of detailed
plans and specifications until funds are available to meet the cost of construction.
The result of this necessary caution in expenditure is that, when funds are
provided to meet the cost of approved works, commencement of construction is delayed
until plans and specifications are prepared.
To obviate this delay it is considered that, once proposals are generally approved,
advances should be made by the Government to cover the expenditure incurred in
obtaining the preliminary reports and estimates, and to meet the cost of the preparation
of detailed plans and specifications to the extent approved by the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission, such advances not to exceed four per centum of the estimated
cost of the work, and to be free of interest charges until absorbed later in the capital
funds when such funds are advanced to meet the cost of the works following approval to
commence construction.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
Reference No. 1.
k£ Writing of of the whole or part of capital liabilities in respect of vanished or
depreciated assets .”
Recommendation :
In the case of twenty Local Authorities the reduction in liabilities to be effected
under the provisions of Act 4983 is less than would be made in accordance with the basis
recommended in the Committee’s First Progress Report. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that further reductions be made in the liabilities of these Local Authorities
to the amounts shown in Appendix 11.
The total amount of additional financial relief which would be given to these
twenty Local Authorities would be as follows :
£ s. d.
In respect of principal .. .. ~ .. 59,550 18 1
In respect of net loan liability .. .. .. 44,254 3 7
Reference No. 2.
“ Adjustment of interest charges in respect of Loan Advances .”
Recommendation :
As recommendations made in the First Progress Report took into account the
burden of interest charges as now existing, the Committee does not desire to make any
further recommendation in respect to this matter.


Reference No. 3.
“ Nature and incidence of rates and charges
Recommendation ;
That the Water Acts be amended to empower a Water Authority, if it thinks fit,
to rate on unimproved capital values where such values have been adopted for rating
purposes by the Council of the Municipality within which the Waterworks District is
situated.
Reference No. 4.
“ The necessity for and cost of improvements or additional works to provide
adequate water supplies of satisfactory quality
Recommendation :
This matter was dealt with and a recommendation made in the First Progress
Report.
Reference No. 5.
Whether the cost of such works coidd he met by the ratepayers, and if not , the
extent of financial assistance necessary and the basis on which such assistance might be
given by the Government .”
Recommendation :
This matter was dealt with and a recommendation made in the First Progress
Report.
General Recommendations :
(a) Meters—That the Water Acts be amended to provide that all meters shall be
provided and maintained by and at the cost of the Water Authority.
{b) Financing of Reports, Plans and Specifications —That, after proposals for new
works or improvements to existing works have been generally approved, advances be
made by the Government to cover the expenditure incurred in obtaining preliminary
reports and estimates and to meet the cost of preparation of detailed plans and specifications
to the extent approved by the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission. Such
advances should be limited to not more than four per centum of the estimated cost of the
proposed works and be free of interest charges until absorbed later in the capital funds
when such funds are advanced to meet the cost of the work following approval to
commence construction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
The Committee desires to place on record its thanks for the substantial assistance
received from the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission and its officers in
supplementing and analysing the information submitted by Local Authorities. This
assistance was of particular importance in those cases where Local Authorities were
unable to furnish all the information necessary to the inquiry.
The Committee also desires to express its appreciation of the valuable services
rendered to it by Mr. R. H. Richmond, 8.C.E., A.M.I.E. Aust., in his dual capacity of
Secretary and Investigating Engineer to the Committee.
H. W. McCAY, Chairman.
F. A. JENKINS, Member.
R. E. P. STAFFORD, Member.
T. H. GRIGG, Member.
R. H. RICHMOND,
Secretary.
28th November, 1944.
8


No.
Authority.
(«)
Principal at
30th June,
1943.
(6)
Reduction in
Respect of
“ Vanished and
Depreciated
Assets.”
(C)
Principal as
Adjusted for
“ Vanished and
Depreciated
Assets ”
(«) -(b)
(d)
Further
Reduction by
Application of
the “ Formula.”
(0
Total Reduction
under
Committee’s
Recommendations
(b) + id)
(/)
Reduction
under
Act 4983.
(9)
Principal as
Adjusted under
Committee’s
Recommendations
(a)-(e)
(h)
Principal as
Adjusted by
Act 4983
(a)-(f)-
(i)
Principal to be
Borne by
Local Authority
(g) or ( h)
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
1
Alexandra Waterworks Trust ..
5,484
5,484
5,484
5,484
*
*
2
Apollo Bay Waterworks Trust
6,022
123
5,899
123
4,489
5,899
1,533
1,533
3
Avenel Waterworks Trust
5,251
1,140
4,111
208
1,348
3,093
3,903
2,158
2,158
4
Avoca Township Waterworks Trust
17,445
1,557
15,888
1,557
6,979
15,888
10,466
10,466
5
Bairnsdale Waterworks Trust
34,621
4,735
29,886
4,735
824
29,886
33,797
29,886
6
Ballan Waterworks Trust
*
*
'7
Bealiba Waterworks Trust
3,140
119
3,021
119
1,514
3,021
1,626
1,626
8
Benalla Waterworks Trust
26,376
3,020
23,356
3,020
1,240
23,356
25,136
23.356
9
Boort Waterworks Trust
6,469
29
6,440
1,433
1,462
6,469
5,007
❖
*
10
Bridgewater Waterworks Trust
2,443
2,443
2,443
2,443
1,875
568
11
Bright Waterworks Trust
6,913
974
5,939
974
4,600
5,939
2,313
2,313
12
Broadford Waterworks Trust ..
15,955
3,093
12,862
117
3,210
6,785
12,745
9,170
9,170
13
Carisbrook Waterworks Trust
5,905
2,432
3,473
2,432
3,230
3,473
2,675
2,675
14
Charlton Waterworks Trust ..
10,404
5,611
4,793
3,102
8,713
10,404
1,691
*
❖
15
Cobram Waterworks Trust
11,672
1,000
10,672
1,159
2,159
7,029
9,513
4,643
4,643
16
Colac Waterworks Trust
81,277
3,828
77,449
3,828
466
77.449
80.811
77,449
17
Colbinabbin Waterworks Trust
926
926
208
208
926
718
*
18
Coleraine and Casterton Waterworks Trust
(Coleraine) ..
22,443
747
21,696
2,689
3,436
10,698
19,007
11,745
11,745
19
Coleraine and Casterton Waterworks Trust
(Casterton)
40,986
2,219
38,767
7,021
9,240
20,078
31,746
20,908
20,908
20
Corryong Waterworks Trust ..
16,490
491
15,999
4,760
5,251
7,500
11,239
8,990
8,990
21
Daylesford, Borough of, Waterworks Trust
22,697
22,697
2,465
22,697
20,232
20,232
22
Devenish Waterworks Trust ..
2,383
95
2,288
1,019
1,114
1,582
1,269
801
801
23
Donald Waterworks Trust
19,021
19,021
8,360
8,360
10,611
10,661
8,410
8,410
24
Drouin Waterworks Trust
20,006
11
19,995
11
9,336
19,995
10,670
10,670
25
Echuca, Borough, Water Trust
29,713
5,038
24,675
5,038
11,080
24,675
18,633
18,633
26
Elmore Waterworks Trust
4,909
1,139
3,770
1,139
4,649
3,770
260
260
27
Euroa Waterworks Trust
29,862
3,722
26,140
3,722
11,430
26,140
18,432
18,432
28
Foster Waterworks Trust
7,171
3
7,168
3
2,473
7,168
4,698
4,698
29
Gisborne Waterworks Trust ..
6,670
672
5,998
672
3,018
5,998
3,652
3,652
30
Glenrowan Waterworks Trust
2,065
98
1,967
98
866
1,967
1,199
1,199
31
Hamilton Waterworks Trust ..
76,787
19,170
57,617
19,170
22,439
57,617
54,348
54,348
32
Healesyille Waterworks Trust
22,999
22,999
6,131
22,999
16,868
16,868
APPENDIX I.
TOWN WATER SUPPLIES COMMITTEE.— SECOND REPORT.
Recommended Adjustment of Principal.
9


(a)
(b)
(«)
I
(d)
(«)
(/)
(?)
( h )
(»)
No.
Authority.
Principal at
30th June,
1943.
Reduction in
Respect of
“ Vanished and
Depreciated
Assets.”
Principal as
Adjusted for
“Vanished and
Depreciated
Assets ”
(a)-(b)
Further
Reduction by
Application of
the “ Formula.”
Total Reduction
under
Committee’s
Recommendations
(b) + (d)
Reduction
under
Act 4983.
Principal as
Adjusted under
Committee’s
Recommendation
(a)-(O
Principal as
Adjusted by
Act 4983
s (a)-(f).
Principal to he
Borne by
Local Authority
(?) or (A)
Heathcote Waterworks Trust ..
. £
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
e
33
13,156
2,284
10,872
2,284
461
7.901
10.872
X
r x
34
Hepburn Waterworks Trust ..
7,394
461
6,933
450
6,933
18 375
6,944
17,671
❖
a Qoo
35
Horsham, Town of, Waterworks Trust..
18,375
18,375
704
0,5700
17,671
36
Kaniva, Shire of, Waterworks Trust (Kaniva Urban)
6,705
71
6,634
693
764
6,705
5 941
37
Kerang Waterworks Trust
13,960
6,841
7,119
6,841
897
7 119
13 063
7,119
15,164
6,613
1,053
24,112
11,655
13,300
38
Kilmore Waterworks Trust
24,054
8,138
15,916
8,138
8.890
15 916
15 164
39
Koo-wee-rup Waterworks Trust
8,693
8,693
1,964
1 ,964
2,080
6,729
1,053
24,112
11,655
13,300
7,381
26,077
6,613
1,096
24 647
40
Koroit Waterworks Trust
2,903
1,850
1,053
1,850
1.807
41
Korumburra Waterworks Trust
25,110
998
24,112
998
463
42
Kyabram Waterworks Trust ..
15,526
590
14,936
3,281
3,871
178
15,348
13,300
9.31
43
44
Kyneton Shire Waterworks Trust
Lancefield Waterworks Trust ..
13,300
9,202
1,635
13,300
7,567
186
1,821
3.971
45
Leongatha Waterworks Trust
28,228
1,854
26,374
297
2,151
10,241
17,987
o,Zo I
17,987
46
Lilydale Waterworks Trust
47
Lismore Waterworks Trust
3,395
59
3,336
337
396
2,798
2,999
1,210
15,714
8,552
15,204
3,169
9,639
97,159
2,758
1,405
12,108
9,865
4,700
19,110
6,112
6,122
4,993
12,518
4,022
17,558
9,809
7,285
597
597
48
Longwood Waterworks Trust ..
2,558
1,348
1,210
1,348
1,443
1,115
5,142
4,878
14,949
1,251 j
4,569
72,899
368
49
Lome Waterworks Trust
16,063
349
15.714
349
10,921
1,1 io
5,112
50
Macedon Waterworks Trust ..
10,543
652
9.891
1,339
1.991
51
52
Maffra Waterworks Trust
Malmsbury Waterworks Trust
15,204
3,258
15,204
3,258
89
89
255
2 007
4.878
14,949
53
Mansfield Waterworks Trust ..
11,840
2,201
9,639
2,201
7 271
1,251
54
Maryborough Waterworks Trust
120,121
18,679
101,442
4,283
22,962
47,222
3,573
2,207
3,490
7,772
2,060
368
1.252
3,796
2,153
6,601
4,553
17,274
11,808
5,655
4,569
72,899
55
Marysville Waterworks Trust ..
3,941
463
3,478
720
1 183
56
Merrigum Waterworks Trust ..
2,207
400
1.807
402
802
368
57
58
Moe Waterworks Trust
Mooroopna Waterworks Trust..
12,108
9,865
12,108
9,865
8,618
2,093
2,640
19,547
5,059
4,024
2,894
6.147
998
6.147
1,513
4,713
8,618
59
60
61
62
63
64
Mortlake Waterworks Trust
Morwell Waterworks Trust
Mount Macedon Waterworks Trust
Murchison Waterworks Trust
Murtoa Waterworks Trust
Myrtleford Waterworks Trust
4,700
19,915
6,31 1
7,820 j
5,047 1
12,748
805
626
54
230
4,700
19.110
6,311
7,194
4.993
12,518
199
1,072
805
199
1,698
54
230
2,093
2,640
19,110
5,059
4,024
2,894
65
66
67
Nagambie Waterworks Trust
Nhill Waterworks Trust
Numurkah, Shire of, Waterworks Trust (Numurkah)
5,551
23,421
13,321
1,529
2,163
3,512
4,022
21,258
9,809 1
3,700
1,529
5,863
3,512
6.147
998
6.147
68
Numurkah, Shire of, Waterworks Trust (Nathalia)
10,368
1,888
8,480
1,195
3,083
1)513
69
Numurkah, Shire of, Waterworks Trust (Strath-
4,713
merton)
781
391 1
390 I
391
768
390
13
13
10
Appendix I.— continued .


(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
(e)
(/)
({/)
(h)
(0
No.
Authority.
Principal at
30th June,
1943.
Reduction in
Respect of
“ Vanished and
Depreciated
Assets.”
Principal as
Adjusted for
“ Vanished and
Depreciated
Assets ”
(«) -(b)
1 Further
Reduction by
Application of
the “ Formula.”
Total Reduction
under
Committee’s
Recommendations
(■ b ) + ( d)
Reduction
under
Act 4983.
Principal as
Adjusted under
Committee’s
Recommendations
(a)-(e)
Principal as
Adjusted by
Act 4983
(«)-(/).
Principal to be
Borne by
Local Authority
( S) or (h)
70
71
72
73
Numurkah, Shire of, Waterworks Trust (Wunghnu)
Omeo Waterworks Trust
Orbost Waterworks Trust
Port Fairy Waterworks Trust
£
1,203
5,512
34,357
22,680
26,862
4,717
12,690
6,444
3,300
10,335
24,147
32,230
32,714
£
1,610
773
271
1,532
1,685
917
2,101
222
1,134
12,725
5,983
4,146
16,615
208
3,978
1,408
£
1 ,203
3,902
33,584
22,409
£
109
4,407
' £
109
1,610
5,180
£
754
2,977
15,556
£
1,094
3,902
29,177
£
449
2,535
18,801
£
449
2,535
18,801
74
Portland Waterworks Trust
6,898
7,169
13,133
15,511
9,567
9,567
75
Riddell’s Creek Waterworks Trust
25,330
3,032
382
1,914
766
24,948
26,096
24,948
76
Rochester Waterworks Trust
84
1,685
1,937
3,032
2,780
2,780
77
Romsey Waterworks Trust
11,7/3
4,343
1,001
5,801
11,689
6,889
6,889
78
Rosedale Waterworks Trust .
418
2,101
2,625
4,343
3,819
3,819
79
Rushworth Waterworks Trust..
3,078
640
2,199
2,660
1,101
1,101
80
81
82
Rutherglen Waterworks Trust
Seymour Waterworks Trust
Shepparton Urban Waterworks Trust .
9,201
11,422
26,247
28,569
42,067
1,692
1,251
2,826
13,976
5,983
8,575
15,335
557
7,509
10,171
26,247
1,760
8,812
31,673
1,760
8,812
26,247
83
St. Arnaud Borough Waterworks Trust
58,682
3,571
24,367
32,729
6,648
8,437
3,468
14,621
16,961
46,751
6,800
4,992
4,145
28,569
32,394
28,569
84
Stratford Waterworks Trust
2,885
16,615
32,695
42,067
25,987
25,987
85
86
Sunbury Waterworks Trust
Swan Hill Waterworks Trust .
3,363
20,389
3,093
3,978
3,571
261
478
20,389
*
24,106
*
20,389
87
Tallangatta Waterworks Trust
Ox 5*3 2-' 1
6,6-18
2,460
3,868
1,661
28,861
31,068
28,861
88
Tatura Waterworks Trust
1,509
150
1,279
461
2,503
498
281
281
4,206
6,367
2,442
2,442
89
Tongala Waterworks Trust
6,928
486
1,995
89
6,442
8,348
6,442
90
91
92
93
Toora Waterworks Trust
Trafalgar Waterworks Trust
Traralgon Waterworks Trust
Trentham Waterworks Trust . .
3,31o
13,342
16,500
44,248
508
658
1,279
461
2,503
119
8,262
4,001
7,525
2,810
13,342
16,500
44,248
3,349
6,359
12,960
39,226
2,810
6,359
12,960
39,226
94
Tungamah, Shire of, Waterworks Trust (Tungamah)
6,302
4,992
2,046
498
3,002
6,302
3,798
3,798
95
Tungamah, Shire of, Waterworks Trust (Kata-
2,046
2,126
2,946
2,866
2,866
96
matite)
Tungamah, Shire of, Waterworks Trust (St. James)
1,595
1 696
1,595
1,696
321
369
321
884
1,274
711
711
97
Underbool Waterworks Trust .
810
369
939
1,327
757
757
98
Violet Town Waterworks Trust
10,011
3,115
40,410
4,740 1
18,429 I
27,707
4,012 1
27,902
25,255 j
182
354
4,875
810
9,829 j
2,761
35,535
449
449
810
361
*
*
99
100
Wahgunyah Waterworks Trust
Wangaratta Waterworks Trust
1,376
87
1,558
441
4,529
1,953
8,453
2,674
5,482
1,162
5,482
1,162
101
Warburton Waterworks Trust
4,875
13,274
35,535
27,136
27,136
102
Warracknabeal Waterworks Trust
659
4,/4U
5,205
86
5,864
86
555
4,740
4,185
4,185
103
104
Warragul Waterworks Trust
Winchelsea Waterworks Trust
17,770
27,707
12,577
1,679
12,565
27,621
5,852
26,028
5,852
26,028
105
106 |
Wodonga Waterworks Trust
Woodend Waterworks Trust .. .. J
5,837 j
1,278 !
4,012
22,065
23,977
281
582
2,874
281
6,419 |
4,152 !
3,545
12,864 |
7,114 !
3,731
21,483
21,103
467
15,038
18,141
467
15,038
18,141
11
Appendix I.— continued.


(«)
(b)
(0
(d)
(«)
(/)
(9)
(h)
(0
No.
Authority.
Principal at
30th June,
19*3.
Reduction in
Respect of
“ Vanished and
Depreciated
Assets.”
Principal as
Adjusted for
“ Vanished and
Depreciated
Assets ”
(a)-(h)
Further
Reduction by
Application of
the “ Formula.”
Total Reduction
under
Committee’s
Recomendatlons
(b) + ( d)
Reduction
under
Act 4983.
Principal as
Adjusted under
Committee’s
Recommendations
[a)-(e)
Prinqipal as
Adjusted by
Act 4983
(«)-(/)•
Principal to be
Borne by
Local Authority
(9) or (h)
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
107
Yackandandah Waterworks Trust
4,625
18
4,607
18
2,521
4,607
2,104
2,104
108
Yarra Junction Waterworks Trust
11,911
265
11,646
265
5,939
11,646
5,972
5,972
109
Yarram Waterworks Trust
20,465
4,400
16,065
4,400
3,334
16,065
17,131
16,065
110
Yarrawonga Waterworks Trust
11,008
1,144
9,864
1,144
1,815
9,864
9,193
9,193
111
Yea Waterworks Trust
Local Governing Bodies.
8,338
8,338
359
359
7,356
7,979
982
982
112
Ararat, Town of
109,443
25,901
83,542
25,901
35,331
83,542
74,112
74,112
113
Ballarat Water Commissioners
336,635
2,060
334,575
2,060
17,459
334,575
319,176
319,176
114
Beechworth, Shire of..
27,001
4,346
22,655
4,346
6,728
22,655
20,273
20,273
115
Bet Bet, Shire of (Dunolly) ..
7.778
2,006
5,772
2,006
3,064
5,772
4,714
4,714
116
Bet Bet, Shire of (Tarnagulla)
2,673
603
2,070
603
800
2,070
1,873
1,873
117
Chiltern, Shire of
5,985
1,525
4,460
1,525
334
4,460
5,651
4,460
118
Clunes, Borough of ..
11,024
2,103
8,921
2,103
8,354
8,921
2,670
2,670
119
Creswick, Shire of
3,399
3,399
5,268
1,886
7,575
1,886
3,399
3,399
3,399
120
121
Inglewood, Borough of
Korong, Shire of (Korong Vale)
14,606
1,886
5,268
690
9,338
1,196
1,196
9,338
7,031
❖
7,031
*
122
123
Korong, Shire of (Wedderbum)
Ripon, Shire of (Beaufort)
Stawell, Borough of ..
13,924
17.579
2,269
2,211
11,655
15,368
46
2,315
2,211
6,699f
7,388
11,609
15,368
7,225f
10,191
7,225f
10,191
124
74,124
21,278
52,846
21,278
36,180
52,846
37,944
37,944
125
Talbot, Shire of
2,168
2,168
41,532
1,854
2,168
314
314
126
Warrnambool, City of
41,532
6,269
35,263
35,263
23,290
18,242
*
127
Werribee, Shire of
16,027
8,886
7,141
7,141
16,027
16,027
T otals
2,425,228 .
287,271
2,137,957
•
131,818
419,089
777,652
2,006,139
1,647,576
1,588,025
♦ Annual Subsidies fco be paid as follows: —
£ s. <1
Alexandra .. .. .. . • 133 19 1
Ballan .. .. .. • • • • 140 3 8
Boort .. .. •. • • • • 8 0 0
Charlton .. .. .. .. 65 14 2
Colbinabbin .. ■. • • • • 0 14 8
Kaniva .. .. • • • • • • 48 6 2
MerrSgum .. .. •. • • 8 5 0
Stratford .. .. .. •• 14 15 9
Underbool .. .. .. • • 41 17 7
Korong Vale .. .. .. .. 48 18 2 (from Wedderburn account)
Werribee .. - .. .. .. 118 1 0
t Reduction allows for Annual Subsidy of £4B 18s. 2d. to Korong Vale account.
12
Appendix I. continued.


Loan Group.
Principal at
30th June, 1943,
as Reduced
by Act 4983.
Net Loan
Principal
Net Loan
Liability
as Further
Reduced under
Committee's
Recomrtie nd atio ns.
No
Authority.
Interest.
Annual
Payment.
Liability at
30th June, 1943,
as Reduced
by Act 4983.
as Further
Reduced under
Committee’s
Recommendations.
Waterworks Trusts—
continved.
%
°/
/o
£ s. d.
£ 8. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
10
Morwell Waterworks Trust
4J
u
u
4
13,953 7 7
5,593 5 5
11,197 18 8
5,503 2 10
13,641 13 6
5,468 6 6
10,947 15 9
5,380 4 2
Total
19,546 13 0
16,701 1 6
19,110 0 0
16,327 19 11
11
Portland Waterworks Trust
u
4f
26,096 8 7
24,828 0 2
24,948 0 0
23,735 8 0
12
Seymour Waterworks Trust
H
U
A3
31,132 18 5
540 9 11
21,192 10 4
534 18 8
25,799 2 1
447 17 11
17,561 14 8
443 5 9
Total
31,673 8 4
21,727 9 0
26,247 0 0
18,005 0 5
13
Shepparton Urban Water-
works Trust ..
4f
u
4*
4
22,604 2 2
9,789 15 7
16,106 10 8
9,461 18 8
19,935 2 10
8,633 17 2
14,204 15 3
8,344 14 5
Total ..
32,393 17 9
25,568 9 4
28,669 0 0
22,549 9 8
14
Sunbury Waterworks Trust
H
H
4i
AS
*4
21,315 13 5
2,789 16 11
15,184 17 5
2,752 13 2
18,029 5 8
2,359 14 4
12,843 14 4
2,328 5 3
Total
24,105 10 4
17,937 10 7
20,389 0 0
15,171 19 7
15
Swan Hill Waterworks
Trust
4*
4h
°8
41
41
4f
43
5 o
17,283 7 11
12,065 19 3
151 19 4
1,566 10 2
14,420 6 8
11.827 0 2
150 14 2
1,415 7 3
16,055 14 4
11.208 17 8
141 3 5
1,455 4 7
13,396 0 5
10,986 18 1
139 19 11
1,314 16 6
Total
31,067 16 8
27,813 8 3
28,861 0 0
25,837 14 11
16
Tatura Waterworks Trust
H
H
41
4
6,112 19 3
2,235 7 1
4,586 9 2
2,203 9 6
4,717 1 8
1,724 18 4
3,539 3 1
1,700 6 4
Total
8,348 6 4
6,789 18 8
6,442 0 0
5,239 9 5
17
Tonga la Waterworks Trust
H
H
41
4f
2.216 17 7
1,132 3 2
1,892 9 4
1,104 4 6
1,860 1 4
949 18 8
1,587 17 4
926 9 11
Total
3,349 0 9
2,996 13 10
2,810 0 0
2,514 7 3
18
Yarram Waterworks Trust
4
41
H
U
4f
5 i
9,966 1 1
5,574 9 2
1,590 8 10
7,939 15 2
5,486 14 0
1,405 18 1
9,345 18 7
5,227 11 10
1,491 9 7
7,445 14 4
5,145 5 11
1,318 8 6
Total
17,130 19 1
14,832 7 3
16,065 0 0
13,909 8 9
14
Appendix ll. — continued.


No.
Authority.
Loan Group.
Principal at
30th June, 1943,
as Reduced
by Act 4983.
Net Loan
Liability at
30th June, 1943,
as Reduced
by Act 4983.
Principal
as Further
Reduced under
Committee’s
Re comme nd atious .
Net Loan
Liability
as Further
Reduced under
Committee’s
Recommendations.
Interest.
Annual
Payment.
Local Governing Bodies.
%
0/
/o
£ 8.
d.
£
s.
d.
£ s.
d.
£ s. d.
19
Chiltem, Shire of
u
3,618 17
5
2,312
4
2
2,856 7
0
1,825 0 2
4h
4|
2.031 15
1
2,010
15
2
1,603 13
0
1,587 1 11
Total
5,650 12
6
4,322
19
4
4,460 0
0
3,412 2 1
20
Warrnambool, City of ..
H
44
17,254 3
4
11,191
19
1
u
43
988 5
9
983
15
0
Total
18,242 9
1
12,175
14
1
Totals ..
419,014 18
1
336,078
16
8
359,464 0
0
291,824 13 1
By Authority: H. E. Daw, Government Printer, Melbourne,
15
Appendix ll. — continued.




