

WAYS AND MEANS.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT
THE HONORABLE JAMES WATSON,
COLONIAL TREASURER
NEW SOUTH WALES.
MADE 9th FEBRUARY,
1881.
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.








WAYS AND MEANS.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT
THE HONORABLE JAMES WATSON,
COLONIAL TREASURER
NEW SOUTH WALES.
MADE 9th FEBRUARY,
1881.
SYDNEY ; THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.


CONTENTS.
Financial Statement 3
Accounts showing the actual and estimated Revenue and Expendi-
ture of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of New South Wales,
for the years 1879, 1880, and 1881 49-57
Abstract Statement showing the Actual Revenue of the years 1879
and 1880, and the Estimated Revenue for the year 1881 58-62
Statement of Balances on the Public Accounts of New South Wales
and the Distribution of the same on the 31st December, 1880... 63
V


FINANCIAL STATEMENT.
Mr. Cameron,
I beg to move that there be granted to Her
Majesty out of the Consolidated Revenue Eund the*
sum of £1,929, to meet Pensions for 1881, under
the head of Supplement to Schedule B. As this
resolution is of the usual formal and initiatory
character which enables me to explain to the House-
the financial position of the Country, I shall now
proceed to discharge that important duty to the best
of my ability, feeling assured that while doing so I
shall receive from Honorable Members a similar in-
dulgence to that which was so generously extended
to me on former occasions. Although it will be
my endeavour to make my statement as concise and
intelligible as possible, I fear I shall not succeed
to the extent I could wish, because I know that in
every assembly there are always some who weary
under explanations of accounts, and I do not lay
claim to the power of embellishing them in lan-
guage which would make them attractive otherwise.
My desire is to place before the Committee our
present and prospective financial position in a man-
ner which all can comprehend.


The statement which I am about to make will
be for the most part an explanation respecting the
finances of the year that is past, and a forecast of
those of the year upon which we have entered; but
in doing this it will be my duty to show whether
our existing sources of revenue are sufficient to
produce an income during the present year equal to
our estimated expenditure, and if not in what way
we propose to make up the deficiency.
To the student of political economy the true state
of the finances of a country, whether it be the
country of his adoption or of his birth, cannot fail
to be interesting, inasmuch as he must be aware
that in proportion to the prosperous condition of
its public revenue will be that of its inhabitants,
provided always of course, they are fortunate
enough to have men at the helm of affairs chosen
and supported by their representatives in Parlia-
ment, on account of their experience, their abili-
ties, their capacity to govern, and their apprecia-
tion of the requirements of the Country. With-
out being so arrogant as to assume for a moment
that the present Government possess all these neces-
sary and desirable qualifications, I venture to say
that, in the preparation of the Estimates, and those
measures which have already been, or will yet be
submitted to Parliament, we have been actuated
solely by a desire to promote the best interests of
the Country and the welfare of the community


generally; we also feel satisfied that in all we have
done our motives will bear the keenest scrutiny hy
either our opponents or our supporters.
Before dealing with the accounts, I desire to say
a few words in explanation of what may he con-
sidered hy some, unnecessary delay in submitting
the Estimates and in making the Einancial State-
ment. As required hy the Electoral Act of 1880,
Parliament was summoned to meet within seven
days after the date the Writs of Election were made
returnable, namely, on the 15th December last, —a
period of the year inconvenient in many respects,
and one moreover which did not admit of much
business of importance being either initiated or pro-
ceeded with before the Christmas holidays set in.
In a financial point of view the time of meeting was
still more inconvenient, because being so near the
close of the year it was undesirable that either the
Estimates should be submitted or the Einancial
Statement made until the results of the year 1880
had been more fully developed. The adjournment
for the Christmas holidays, it will be remembered,
extended to the 11th January, and on the 13th of
that month the General Conference of the Austral-
asian Colonies, of which I was a member, met in
Sydney, and continued its sittings until the 27th;
but notwithstanding that, I was prepared, and it
was my intention, to have made the Einancial
Statement last Wednesday, but in consequence of


the unexpected adjournment of the House to enable
Honorable Members to be present at the opening
of the railway extensions to Dubbo and Albury.
I was precluded from doing so. It will thus be
seen that it was almost beyond my power to submit
the statement at an earlier date. I admit that it is
highly desirable that the Estimates of Expenditure
should be passed before the commencement of the
year to which they apply, hut Honorable Members
must acknowledge that, under the circumstances
stated, this was impossible with regard to those of
1881. In fact I find that on one or two occasions
only since the inauguration of Responsible Govern-
ment has the Appropriation Act been passed within
the proper time.
The practice which has so long prevailed in this
Colony of carrying on the Public Service under
the provision made by monthly Supply Bills, is in
many respects objectionable. It is a practice
besides which is attended with no small amount
of inconvenience, inasmuch as none of the Public
Works provided for on the Estimates can be pro-
ceeded with until the annual Appropriation Act
is passed, which of late years has not been done
until more than half the year to which it applied
had expired. In order to put an end to this unsatis-
factory state of affairs, I trust the House will assist
the Government in having the Estimates for this
year passed as early as possible, and in forwarding


also their other measures with a view to closing the
present Session at latest in April next which would
thus enable Parliament to meet again in sufficient
time to have the Estimates for 1882 passed before
the close of the present year.
It affords me no small satisfaction to he in a posi-
tion to congratulate the Committee on a state of
financial prosperity at the present time which is
perhaps —indeed I am sure is not equalled by any
of the other Australian Colonies, —a prosperity, too,
which is not confined to the public revenue alone,
but one which permeates the whole community, and
will, I hope, he of long continuance. I think I can
assert without fear of contradiction that at the
present time there is remunerative employment for
every one who is inclined to work, that trade and
commerce are in a flourishing condition, and that
the prospects of agriculturists and graziers have been
much improved by the fertilizing rains with which
the whole Colony has recently been blessed.
It will no doubt be in the recollection of many
Honorable Members that during the early part of
last year, and after I had submitted the Estimates
for 1880, the revenue fell off so unexpectedly and to
such an alarming extent that I considered it my duty
to take the somewhat unusual step of making a sup-
plementary statement. When I made that state-
ment, which I did on the 16th June last, our prospects
were gloomy in the extreme. Instead of a large


increase in the revenue over that of 18/9, which I
had anticipated there would he, there was really an
actual falling-off during the first five months of
over £260,000. Had this rate of decrease con-
tinued, as we had reason at the time to fear it would,
the deficiency at the end of the year would have
been a serious one. It was in view of this possible
deficiency that I submitted, for the purpose of
equalizing the revenue and expenditure, proposals
for imposing a small export tax upon wool and
coal, and a tax or assessment on horned cattle and
horses. Notwithstanding, however, my proposals
were not received with the favour which I think
they deserved, I still adhere to the conviction that
under the circumstances they were just and reason-
able. In proof of this I think lam justified in
saying that no strenuous opposition to them was
manifested by those most interested. The benefits
which squatters and conditional purchasers derive
from the extension of our railways into the interior,
from improved communication by the opening of
new roads and the erection of bridges throughout
the Colony, and from other public works and local
services, are so great that neither of these great and
important classes of the community could, I think,
reasonably object to contribute to the general
expenses of Government in the manner I proposed.
Again, with respect to the coal tax : surely the
enormous expense the Country has been put to in
the construction of wharves, erection of cranes,


coal-shoots, and other shipping conveniences, and in
improving the ports of the Colony generally, hut
more particularly the port of Newcastle, was a
sufficient justification for its proposal. Fortunately
however for both the Country and myself, the
revenue began to recover before the prorogation of
Parliament, and continued to increase month by
month until at the close of the year there was an
increase of £430,000 over the revenue of 1879, or
an increase during the last six months of the year
hs compared with the corresponding six months of
1879 of no less than £690,000. This is a result
which must he gratifying to the House and the
Country, inasmuch as it is a sure evidence of
abiding prosperity, and a substantial and convincing
proof that all classes are participating in its blessings.
Some writers, no doubt, have endeavoured to
undervalue our increased revenue, by representing
that we have been sacrificing our national estate in
order to create an income equal to our expendi-
ture. In doing this they have not only been reckless
in their statements, hut apparently indifferent to the
effect which their insinuations against the Govern-
ment may have upon the credit of the Colony in
that great money market of the world, London,
where we and other Colonies have to raise
our loans. One would imagine that the mission
O
of writers on our public finances was rather to
promote the interests of the Colony, by stating


facts as they existed, than to distort those facts.
However, notwithstanding such representations our
public securities recently stood higher in the esti-
mation of British capitalists than on any former
occasion, and higher considerably than those of any
of our neighbours. When I come to deal with the
accounts of last year I think I shall he able to
prove to the satisfaction of the Committee that we
have not been pushing our land sales for the purpose
of swelling the revenue, and that in proportion to
population the amount received for auction sales in
1880 was less than that received twenty-five years
ago.
In reviewing our financial position, it would
be as pleasing to me as I feel sure it would be to
the Committee, if I could dispense with details and
submit general results only. It is however desirable,
I think, that I should follow the usual practice, in
order that the Committee may understand the
various accounts submitted with the Ways and
Means, which will be placed in the hands of Hon.
Members during the course of the evening. These
accounts are four in number, and are all required to
elucidate our present financial position and future
prospects. No. lis the Surplus Revenue Account,
and shows the operations upon it from its com-
mencement to the 31st December last. No. 2 shows
how far the revenue of the year 1879 fell short of
the expenditure of that year. It will be remembered


by some Hon. Members that when I made the
financial statement on the 10th December, 1879,
I had to estimate to some extent both the revenue
and expenditure. It is therefore only right that I
should take this opportunity to show how far my
estimates have been realized. No. 3is an account
of revenue and expenditure for 1880, which so far
as the expenditure is concerned is still partly an
estimate, as the votes of last year live, in accordance
with the terms of the Appropriation Act, until the
close of the year 1881. No. 1 statement is an
account of estimated revenue for the present year
in relation to the estimated expenditure. In dealing
with these accounts I will take them in the order in
which I have referred to them.
I desire, however, to remark that so long as we
adhere to the system of appropriating funds for the
service of each individual year, so long will it be
necessary to show whether the revenue of each year is
equal to the authorized expenditure or otherwise.
This is no doubt the right principle upon which our
public accounts should be kept, and it is the one
which up to this time has prevailed in New South
Wales. It has, however, its drawbacks as I dare say
any system would have. One great inconvenience
arising from our present system is the length of
time which some votes of Parliament must be
retained in the books of the Treasury as liabilities,
and the uncertainty which consequently exists with


regard to the exact position of each year’s account.
For example —under the Appropriation Acts of the
last four years, no vote of Parliament can he written
off until the close of the year following that for
which it was obtained. This of course gives votes
at once a currency of two years ; but this is not all,
for if a contract is entered into for say the building
of a bridge or the erection of a gaol before the close of
the second year’s life of the vote for the purpose, then
the vote must he retained until the completion of the
work, even if that did not occur for three, four, or five
years.
The Committee must therefore see that under this
system, which I admit has its advantages notwith-
standing, a good deal of uncertainty must necessarily
exist for some considerable time after the expiry
of the year with regard to its exact position—that
is, before it can he definitely ascertained whether the
revenue was sufficient or otherwise to meet the
actual expenditure; and this cannot he done until
either the votes have lapsed legally, or the Services
authorized and contracted for within the two years
allowed for the purpose, have been completed. At the
present moment there are several votes for Services
authorized in the years 1877,1878, and 1879, which
have to he reserved for expenditure during the
present year, as it has been reported to the Treasury
that the works are being carried out under contracts
entered into within the legally specified time.


If, on the other hand, votes of Parliament had a
currency of only one year, the result would he that
probably more than one-half of every year’s appro-
priations for Public Works and special Services would
lapse and he written off finally, a course which could
not fail to be attended with great inconvenience to
the public, as the House might not feel disposed to
revote the amounts in the year following. The
uncertain periods for the meeting of Parliament in
this Colony, and the delays that frequently occur in
passing the Estimates and obtaining the annual
Appropriation Act, entirely preclude the possibility
of commencing, or even entering into contracts for
carrying out within the year all the public works
annually provided for. It was in consequence of this
unsatisfactory state of matters that the Hon. Member
for Illawarra, when Treasurer, inserted in the Appro-
priation Act of 1877 the clause which gives each
year’s appropriations a two years’ currency.
The Auditor General in his last annual Report sug-
gested that votes should be taken to meet the probable
actual payments within the financial year irrespective
of date of service, and in support of his suggestion
he refers to the practice with regard to the accounts
of the United Kingdom. In England, however, the
Imperial Parliament meets almost invariably in the
month of Eehruary, and provides regularly for
carrying on the Public Service by voting in globo ,
as required, large sums on account, so that the Services


of the year —whether Departmental or Public Works
—are not delayed until the final Appropriation Act
is passed. But, besides that, there is very little
analogy between the Services of the United Kingdom
and those of this Colony —I mean Services other
than Departmental. Here the Government have
to undertake works which in Great Britain would,
in many cases, he carried out by local bodies from
funds locally raised. Again, there are large State
Departments in England to whom the expenditure
of the funds voted by Parliament are at once
entrusted, and who retain them until the Services
for which they were granted are completed, when
they return to the Exchequer such balances only as
are no longer required. Eor these and other reasons
which could he given the Government do not feel
justified in giving effect to the Auditor General’s
suggestion at the present time. The matter, how-
ever, shall receive careful attention, and if on further
inquiry it should he found practicable, without creating
inconvenience to the public and those Departments
entrusted with the expenditure for public works, we
may endeavour to apply the principle to the Estimates
of 1882 during the next Session of Parliament.
I will now proceed to explain as briefly as I can
how the Surplus Bevenue Account stands at the pre-
sent time. Eor the information of those Honorable
Members who have taken their seats in the House
this Session, for the first time, I would mention that


this Account was commenced on the Ist January,
1879. When I made my first Financial Statement
in February of that year, I estimated that at the close
of the year 1878 the accumulated surplus amounted
to close upon two millions and a half. Instead of
carrying the surplus forward as an asset in the
account of the following year, as had been done
by my predecessors, I resolved to make a separate
and distinct account of it, and submit to the House
an estimate of expenditure for Services which we
thought were fairly chargeable against that surplus.
This proposition was made in the utmost good faith,
and with no other object in view than to utilize the
surplus in carrying out Services of such a character
as had previously been provided for by Loan, or
which could not, if undertaken at all, have been
defrayed from the ordinary current revenue. The
surplus which existed at the close of 1878 was only
a portion of what had been accruing for years—
I think from the year 1872 —from the sale by
auction of our waste lands, the proceeds of which
were very much in excess of what was necessary,
in addition to our ordinary revenue, to carry on the
Government of the Country. It would serve no
useful purpose now to prove that the proceeds of our
land sales have neither been wasted nor misapplied.
If I mistake* not, this has already been done on
more occasions than one by some of my immediate
predecessors, and probably much more satisfactorily
than could be done by me at the present time.


I think it is generally conceded that the several
Governments who have controlled public affairs
during the last nine or ten years acted wisely in
expending those funds on public works, and in
clearing off our old deficiency debts, and other
national liabilities of a similar character. No one
who has watched the progress of the Colony during
the last decade will hesitate to admit that great
progress has been made in everything that tends to
promote the welfare of the people and develop the
resources of the Country. Immense strides have
undoubtedly been made in commerce, in manufac-
tures, and in agricultural, pastoral, and mining pur-
suits. Although it has often been asserted that we
are a slow-going people compared with our neigh-
bours in Victoria, we have done much of late, I
think, to wipe out that reproach, if indeed it were
ever merited, and it may he confidently asserted
that our financial, moral, educational, and social
position at the present time will compare favourably
with any Colony of the British Empire.
When I made the financial statement on the 10th
December, 1879,1 estimated that, after allowing for
all the services authorized and proposed to be charged
against the Surplus Revenue Account, there would
still remain an unexpended balance of £618,000,
out of which, however, I proposed to make good the
deficiency in the revenue of 1879, in consequence of
the land sales of that year having failed to realize the


original estimate; that deficiency was then shown to
he £200,000. Deducting this sum from the surplus
balance of £618,000, there still remained a balance of
£IIB,OOO. Although the deficiency on account of
1879 has, from various causes which will be explained
when I come to deal with the account for that year,
increased from £200,000 to £382,000, the sum now
charged to the Surplus Revenue Account, there is
a balance on that account still of £320,000 in
round numbers, a sum which the Government
do not at present intend to suggest should be ex-
pended, as they think it is desirable to have a
balance in reserve to meet any emergency which
may hereafter arise. To detail the various changes
which the lapse of time has necessarily produced in
this account would I fear only tire the patience
of the Committee. I may, however, remark that
the various payments made out of the Surplus
Revenue Account since it was commenced
as a separate account on the Ist January,
1879, to the 31st December, 1880, and the pay-
ments still to be made therefrom, will be found
fully set forth in the Explanatory Statement of the
Public Accounts as embodied in the Ways and
Means for the present year, which I will shortly
lay on the Table of the House. It will be seen
from a statement which I have had prepared and
placed with these Ways and Means that appro-
priations to the amount of £300,993 Is. 3d. lapsed
on the 31st December last, and have been finally


written off in the books of the Treasury. Amongst
these it will he observed is the vote of £210,000
for the erection of New Law Courts, as the site on
which such buildings should he erected has not yet
been fixed upon. I am glad to inform the Com-
mittee that the necessary steps were taken within
the prescribed period to secure from lapsing not
only the vote for the erection of a new Tree Public
Library, but of almost the whole of the other votes
that were taken in 1879 for Services of importance
and public utility.
I now come to the year 1879, which was one of
general depression, not only in New South Wales
but in all the Colonies, indeed I might say through-
out the world, —a depression which seriously affected
our public income, and created a deficit for the first
time since the year 1871. In making the financial
statement in Pebruary, 1879,1 estimated the revenue
of that year at £5,096,000, and the expenditure in
round numbers at £1,970,000, which gave us an
estimated surplus of £126,000. However, as the
year advanced the revenue gradually fell off, so that
when I made my second statement in December
following, with eleven months’ actual receipts to
guide me, I estimated that the revenue of the whole
year would only amount to £4,525,000; but even
that was an over-estimate, for when the year closed,
it was found to have reached only the sum of
£4,482,000. This was £614,000 short of my first


estimate, and £13,000 of my second. Compared
with the revenue of 1878, the reduction was no
less than £510,000. In framing both these esti-
mates, the greatest possible care had been taken by
the Heads of the various Departments from whom
information of this kind is usually obtained, in
addition to which, they underwent a keen scrutiny
by myself, which resulted in several alterations being
made to bring them more into harmony with the
revenue of the preceding year. At the commence-
ment of 1879 it was never anticipated that such a
falling off would occur, as there was no indication
then that such a general depression as that which
immediately followed, and which continued up to
the month of June, 1880, was about to overtake the
Colony.
Comparing my first estimate of the revenue of
1879 with the actual outcome of the year, I find that
there was a falling off under the head of Taxation
of £01,000; in Land Sales there was a falling off
of £509,000; and in the annual Land revenue of
£39,000. In Receipts for Services rendered the
falling off was £IIO,OOO. These made together a
total falling off of £719,000, which was, however,
reduced to £614,000 by an increase on Miscellaneous
Receipts to the extent of £105,000. I would draw
the special attention of the Committee to the fact
that of this net decrease of £614,000, no less than
£509,000 was on account of a falling off in the Land


Sales ; so that after all the revenue proper was not
in that unsatisfactory state which at first blush it
would appear to he for that year.
Unfortunately, while the revenue of 1879 was
falling off in this unexpected and somewhat alarm-
ing manner, there was no corresponding diminution
of expenditure —indeed, the reverse was the case,
for, as already stated, I estimated in February,
1879, that it would amount to £1,969,000, hut, in
December of the same year, when re-stating the
account, I found that it had been increased, by
additional charges, to £5,075,000. Having, how-
ever, then estimated that there would he savings
to the amount of £350,000, this latter charge
was reduced to £1,725,000. The charge against
the account for 1879, as now ascertained, is
£1,857,117 9s. Id., while the actual revenue and
receipts available to meet this amount is only
£1,175,059 Bs. lid., —thus showing a deficit of no
less than £382,388 os. 2d. It is just possible that
this deficit may be slightly reduced by the lapsing
of some balances which may not he required on
those appropriations which are still retained, at the
request of my colleague, the Secretary for Public
Works, for expenditure during the present year.
The deficiency on this account I have charged, as
already explained, against the Surplus Revenue
Account, which under the circumstance was fairly
liable for the amount.


The next account to come under review is that
for 1880, which must, for many reasons, be more
interesting to the Committee than the one for the
year preceding, which I have just shown was an
exceptionally had year. It was in 1880 that we
endeavoured, in view of the falling off in the Land
Sales of 1879, and the requirements of the Country,
to establish an equilibrium between our annual
revenue and annual expenditure by means of fresh
taxation. Our propositions to effect this desirable
object were of three descriptions, namely, to increase
the Customs duties on certain articles, to establish
Excise Duties, and to re-impose Stamp Duties. I
estimated that we should derive from these, if our
proposals were carried in their entirety, an aggre-
gate sum of £358,500. It is, however, well known
that we carried only a portion of our scheme of
taxation, and that several important alterations were
made in the Stamp Duties Bill, which had the effect
of very materially reducing the amount I expected to
obtain from this source. The new duties of Customs
which the House authorized, namely, increased duties
on imported Wines and Spirits, I estimated would
produce £112,000 ; I also estimated that the Stamp
Duties would, if brought into operation on the Ist
of April, have realized £150,000, or at the rate of
£200,000 per annum. In consequence, however,
of the alterations referred to, and the fact that the
Bill did not come into operation until the Ist of
July, the amount realized in 1880 was only


£72,000, or less than one-half of my original
estimate. Then again, with reference to spirits, I
estimated that, inclusive of the increased duty
which was to produce £IOO,OOO, we should receive
during the year £630,000, hut as we only received
£600,000 it is evident that the additional 2s. per
gallon was not productive of the increase expected.
I also estimated that inclusive of the higher duties
authorized to he collected on wines they would
produce in 1880, £17,000. Inasmuch, however, as
they produced only £II,OOO, it proves that we only
received one-half of the additional £12,000 I
anticipated. Some persons have argued from this
that the increased duties on wines and spirits have
had the effect of diminishing the consumption of
these articles, hut the mere fact of my estimate
not being realized during the first year of their
imposition is not conclusive evidence of such a
result. It is only natural to expect that merchants,
publicans, and private individuals, would exhaust
their stocks before laying in fresh supplies at
the higher rates. Tor this reason I think the
receipts of last year are not a fair criterion by
which a just estimate can he formed of what the
increased rates will add to our Customs revenue.
The receipts of the present year will, however,
furnish a more reliable test of this question.
I need not again refer to the action which the
Government took in June last to increase the public


income, with a view to make good the actual falling
off in the revenue during the first five months, and
the anticipated falling off during the remaining
seven of last year, having already alluded to the
subject. Nor need I refer to the unexpected and
striking change in the revenue that took place about
the latter end of June, and continues, I am glad to
say, even up to the present time, as I also informed
and congratulated the Committee respecting that
highly gratifying circumstance. Suffice it to say
that the revenue of last year will cover the expendi-
diture, and leave us with an estimated surplus of
£49,510. It is, however, only right to state that it
is possible, nay probable, that this surplus will he
nearly, if not wholly, absorbed by a further Supple-
mentary Estimate. I need hardly say that this is a,
result which no one could have expected, wdien it
is borne in mind that the revenue up to June last
was over £260,000 less, in place of that amount
more than the revenue of the corresponding period
of 1879. The falling off in the revenue of last year
as compared with my original estimate was chiefly
in the auction land sales, which according to the
estimate of my colleague, the Secretary for Lands,
were expected to yield £750,000. But as they only
yielded £435,000 the revenue lost under this head
alone £315,000, which if obtained would have
increased my estimated surplus to over £360,000.
I would take this opportunity of showing that the
auction sales of land in 1880 were not so large in


proportion to population as they were in 1856, the
first year of responsible Government in this Colony.
In that year the sales amounted to £245,000, which
for a population of 287,000 is equal to 17s. per head.
In 1880 the sales by auction realized £435,000,
which, estimating the population of that year at
785,000, gives a rate of only 11s. Id. per head. As
a proof also that we are not misapplying the pro-
ceeds of our land sales or using them to meet the
ordinary expenses of Government, I would mention
the fact that our expenditure on public works,
including of course roads and bridges, out of the
Consolidated Revenue Fund during last year, was
close upon £1,250,000, being actually more than the
amount realized from land sales of every descrip-
tion. In 1856 the expenditure on Public Works,
also including Roads and Bridges, was only £97,000,
which is a sum considerably less than the proceeds
of the land sales of that year. This comparison
shows that we are not now at least living upon our
land sales to the extent that was done twenty-five
years ago. My only object in referring to these
matters is to prove that the statements so frequently
.and so persistently set forth in some of the public
prints of the Colony with respect to the alleged
misappropriation of the proceeds of our lands, are
so biased and exaggerated as to render them of no
value to the public for whose instruction or enter-
tainment I presume they are written.


Before closing my remarks on tlie account for last
year, I think it is my duty to show to the Committee
that, notwithstanding I did not receive all the
revenue I anticipated from the old and the proposed
new sources combined, there were some of the former
which yielded considerably more revenue than my
estimate, and that these are the very sources which
more conclusively prove the general prosperity of
the people. We received for interest on land
conditionally purchased £14,600 more than I had
estimated; Pastoral Occupation yielded £12,600
more; and Mining Occupation £6,000. I would
remark here that the pastoral tenants of the Crown,
whose runs were re-appraised last year, have not
yet been called upon to pay the additional amounts
due because the new appraisements have not all
been finally approved. Had these increased rents,
which I estimate at £60,000, and which properly
belong to the year 1880, been received on or before
the 31st December last, the surplus would have been
over £IOO,OOO. Our Railways yielded £1,189,000,
as against my estimate of £1,100,000, which is
an increase of £89,000. The Post Office gave
an increase of £11,200 over my estimate, hut
this I have no doubt is attributable to the
fact that postage stamps were largely used during
the latter part of the year in lieu of duty stamps.
The exact amount so used cannot he estimated
with certainty, as there are no ready means of
arriving at it. To the extent however that post-


age stamps are used in this way to a like
extent will he the loss to the Stamp Depart-
ment. Mint receipts gave an increase of £1,500,
which is I think an indication of increased activity
on our Gold-fields. Taking the revenue of last
year as a whole, we have reason to feel thankful
that it has turned out so well.
Before proceeding to state to the Committee what
our financial prospects are for the present year I
will pause for a little for the purpose of sum-
marizing the results of the three accounts which I
have been reviewing, all of which refer to the past,
in order that Hon. Members may judge for them-
selves whether these results can bear the test of
an analysis of a different description. The test
which I propose to apply will take the form
of a Statement of Assets and Liabilities, with
which I think most persons are familiar, as it is
universally adopted by Banks, public Companies,
mercantile firms, and indeed trading institutions
generally. On the 31st December last the following
were the assets of the Consolidated Revenue
Bund:—
Cash balance —under ad-
vance in part to the
General Loan Account,
in the form of an overdraft £1,110,227 10 6


Amount due by, and to be re-
covered from the General
Loan Account, for ad-
vances made thereto, prior
to 1879, pending the sale
of Debentures ...
Amount of the Treasurer’s
Advance Votes for the
years 1879 and 1880, to be
repaid during the present
year
Which make together an
aggregate sum of
£165,437 18 7
200,000 0 0
... £2,105,665 9 1
The liabilities were :
Amount of appropriations
retainedfor Services which
were either in course of
execution or contracted
for at the close of the
year, chargeable against
the Surplus Revenue Ac-
count
960,181 1 9
Amount of appropriations
for Services provided for
in 1879 reserved for ex-
penditure during the
present year
124,774 14 6


Amount of appropriations
for Services provided for
in 1880 remaining unex-
pended on 31st December
last retained for future
expenditure, less appro-
priations to the amount of
£350,000 estimated as not
likely to be required
£490,474
6
1
Amount payable for com-
pensation for land resumed
under the “ Buslicutters
Bay Resumption Act of
1878”
16,811
0
0
Amount of Supplementary
Estimates now before tbe
House
143,932
14
9
Making a total of ... £1,736,173 17 1
Deducting the liabilities from the assets there is
left a credit balance of £369,491 125., which in
mercantile transactions would represent the balance
at the credit of Profit and Loss account, but which
in Government accounts simply represents the
amount still at the disposal of Parliament. This
credit balance of £369,491 12s. consists of the
balance of £319,981 11s. 4d. at the credit of the
Surplus Revenue Account, and £49,510 os. Bd. at
the credit of the account for 1880. I think this


method of stating the accounts proves conclusively
the correctness of those separate accounts which I
have been explaining to the Committee.
Having thus disposed of the transactions of past
years as far as that can now he done, the way is cleared
for submitting and discussing our propositions for the
future, at all events so far as they affect and relate
to the year upon which we have just entered. In
doing this it will not he necessary for me to detain
the Committee at any great length, as the Estimates,
which were laid on the Table of the House last
night, have no doubt afforded Hon. Members an
opportunity for ascertaining pretty accurately the
nature and extent of the Services for which we intend
to ask them to grant us the necessary supplies. A
perusal of these Estimates must have convinced
Hon. Members that in their preparation the Govern-
ment have exercised the strictest economy con-
sistent with a due regard to the public interests, and
that, where the proposed expenditure is increased,
it is justified in every instance, either on the ground
of some peculiar circumstance of the case or from
the fact of the service being of such a character as
to render an increase absolutely inevitable, as for
example in the case of our Railways, which every
year are penetrating further and further into the
interior. But as the alterations in the Estimates
are really few and unimportant, I consider it would
only be wasting the time of the Committee were


Ito point them out in detail. Of course there are
some items of an exceptional character which render
it necessary perhaps that I should make special
allusion to them. I would however preface my
remarks on these hy stating that during the recess,
and in consequence of the formation of a new Minis-
terial Department —that of Public Instruction —
which was required to carry out the provisions of
the “Public Instruction Act of 1880,” a rearrange-
ment of the public business was effected which has
varied somewhat the arrangements that previously
existed. The alterations are not, however, so
numerous as to disturb to any great extent the order
of last year’s Estimates. The principal changes
have necessarily occurred in what was formerly
the Department of Justice and Public Instruction,
hy transferring to the estimates of the new Depart-
ment all those services which naturally come under
the control of the Minister of Public Instruction,
who is responsible to Parliament, in common with
other Ministers, for a proper administration of the
Departments with which he is now entrusted. I
think it will he freely admitted hy hon. Members
generally that the manner in which my esteemed
friend and colleague, Sir Jolm Hohertson, has
grappled with, and successfully overcome the many
difficulties of his new position does him infinite
credit. His administration of the Public Instruction
Act up to the present time has not only won
him the approbation of the Press and the public, hut


secured him the gratitude of that large and respect-
able body, the Public School Teachers, whose
interests were to a certain extent in his hands.
The only other change of importance that I can
recollect at present is the transfer of the Prisons
from the control of the Colonial Secretary to
that of the Minister for Justice, —a change which I
think all must admit to be a judicious one, inasmuch
as the management of Prisons as naturally belongs
to the Department of Justice as the imprisonment
for crime follows the trial and conviction of the
criminal. I have no doubt the change will he
found to work well, —at all events it will relieve my
colleague, the Colonial Secretary, of a great deal of
work, for which his position in the Government
leaves him very little time.
The first increase I would draw attention to is a
sum of £6,000 for completing Topedo Defences. It
has been represented to the Colonial Secretary, by
Lieut.-Colonel Scratchley and Major Cracknell, that
this amount is absolutely necessary if the services of
the Torpedo Corps are to he rendered available in
the event of an invasion, of which I trust the chances
are still remote.
There is, as might naturally be expected, an in-
crease in the Police Estimate, which I must confess
is now assuming large proportions. £219,000
seems a large sum for police protection to a popula-
tion of about 800,000 souls; hut owing to the ever


increasing demands from outlying stations, and from
the inhabitants of districts which are daily growing
in importance, I presume there is no help for it.
The increase is about £6,000, which I see is chiefly
for additional constables.
There is no other increase of any importance on
the Colonial Secretary’s Estimate till we come to
Miscellaneous Services where I find a Service that
makes its appearance on the Estimates only once in
ten years, which some may think is often enough,
as no less than £20,000 is required for it. I allude
to the sum necessary to defray the expense of taking
the Census in April next, and for tabulating the
information contained in the returns. This is a
necessary and unquestionably an important Service,
and it is to be hoped that the gentleman entrusted
with the general supervision of it will do his utmost
to ascertain at the earliest possible moment, for the
information of the public, the population of the
Colony on the Ist of April next. We will all he
anxious for this information because it will to a
large extent illustrate the progress of the Country
during the last decade. Of course the tabulation
of the returns for statistical purposes will be a
labour requiring no small amount of skill, and
involving much time and patience. As the frequent
and correct ascertaining of the population of a new
country like this would, in my opinion, he attended
with immense advantage to the public, hut more
particularly to the Government, whose system of


Immigration it would enable them to regulate,
I am inclined to think that, in addition to the
elaborate Census taken decennially, we should have
a more simple and intermediate quinquennial one
taken of the population only. However I merely
give this opinion for what it is worth.
Honorable Members have no doubt observed that
a sum of only £50,000 is inserted on this year’s
Estimate for Immigration, as against £75,000 in
previous years. This has been done because to a
certain extent immigration is in abeyance at present,
and also because a considerable portion of the year
must elapse before the new regulations will be
submitted for the approval of Parliament.
Eor Public Instruction there is an increase of
£157,000 which requires explanation. No doubt
most Honorable Members are aware that the Public
School fees were greatly reduced under the Public
Instruction Act of 1880, and that provision was made
therein for their payment into the Treasury. Prior
to that Act coming into operation the teachers were
allowed to retain the fees for their own use. These
fees were of course over and above the fixed salaries
allowed by the Council of Education. Since the new
Act came into force the teachers have had to pay the
fees collected (which were reduced to 3d. per scholar
per week) into the Treasury. It consequently
became necessary to re-arrange the teachers’ scale
of remuneration; and in doing this allowance had to


be made not only for the fees paid into the Treasury,
but for the loss teachers had sustained by a reduction
of more than one-half in the scale of fees. The
amount of fees estimated as likely to be received from
the pupils attending the Public Schools this year is
£45,000; but had the rates remained as formerly, the
amount would in all probability have been £IOO,OOO,
a sum which really represents the loss sustained by the
teachers, and which the Government have to make
up to them in fixed salaries. This then accounts,
satisfactorily I hope, for £IOO,OOO of the £157,000
increase on the Estimates for this year, £45,000 of
which comes back to the Treasury, as already stated,
in the form of fees. Of the remaining £57,000 to
be accounted for, £9,000 is for High Schools for
boys and girls for six months, and £2,850 for Evening
Schools. Then there is a sum of £20,000 for school
sites, and £15,000 for rent of premises for schools
and teachers’ residences, besides several minor
amounts sufficient to make up the difference.
There is an increase on the Pailway Estimate of
£45,076 and in the Estimate of the Postmaster
General of £21,797; but these are what I term
inevitable increases, because the very nature of the
Services leads to an increased expenditure every year.
When the proper time arrives, my colleagues charged
with the administration of these branches of the
Public Service will no doubt be quite prepared to
fully explain and justify the proposed increased ex-
penditure on their respective Estimates.


After the long and somewhat irregular discussion
that took place a few nights ago with reference to
the amount awarded to the Milburn Creek Copper-
mining Company, which is now inserted in Estimate
of the Secretary for Mines, it is unnecessary for me
to attempt an explanation. In fact the papers
which have been laid on the Table of the House
give such a clear and full account of the whole
affair that anything I could say would he simply
superfluous. When the item is submitted in the
usual way for the sanction of the Committee, I
presume any additional information (if there he
such) will he forthcoming.
Although I have as rapidly and briefly as it was
possible for me to do, explained to the best of my
ability the larger increases shown in the Estimates
for 1881, there are of course other variations of a
minor kind which I have not alluded to, because, as
I said before, it would only be wasting the time of
the Committee to do so.
The Committee will perhaps hear with me a little
longer while I refer to one other matter —rather an
important one —in connection with the Estimates.
As usual, we have had recommendations from the
Heads of almost all the Public Departments for' in-
creases to the salaries of different officers. To have
complied with such wholesale recommendations
would have been next to impossible, but we have
taken upon ourselves the responsibility of inserting a


Under the Schedules to the
Constitution Act
£45,311
7
0
Departmental Expenditure
requiring Parliamentary
sanction ...
4,235,455
0
0
Interest on the Public Debt,
and other Special Appro-
priations ...
952,200
0
0
making a total proposed
expenditure of ...
£5,232,966
7
0
few increases to officers whose labours and responsi-
bilities have been largely increased of late years, feel-
ing assured that when they are submitted for con-
sideration the Committee will endorse, by their
votes, the small selection we have made. The time,
however, has arrived when a measure must he intro-
duced by the Government for regulating the Civil
Service and for fixing in some equitable manner
the salary attaching to each particular office. The
latter can, I imagine, only he done by a proper
classification of officers, and probably by having a
minimum and maximum salary for each class. I
cannot however at present describe the exact nature
of the Bill which the Colonial Secretary intends in-
troducing during the present Parliament, but I have
no doubt it will he one which is likely to give satisfac-
tion not only to the Civil Servants hut to the general
public, who are as anxious to see this important
matter properly settled as they are themselves.
The Expenditure proposed for 1881 may he
summarized thus: —


It now becomes my duty to show, and I would
ask the attention of honorable Members while I do
so, how this large expenditure can he provided
for—that is, whether our existing sources of
revenue and the increasing annual produce thereof
will he sufficient or otherwise for the purpose. It
affords me no small satisfaction to he able to
inform the Committee that our ordinary income,
as estimated for the present year, will provide the
necessary Ways and Means and in addition leave
a handsome surplus. This is a financial position
which cannot fail to give unbounded satisfaction to
the House and the Country, as it is one which,
seven or eight months ago, no one, I am sure, could
have anticipated. While the expenditure is
estimated at £5,232,966 75., our income is expected
to amount to the sum of £5,140,670, which, with
the exception of the year 1877, when the revenue
reached the enormous sum of £5,748,000, will be the
largest annual income we have ever had. Indeed, if
we exclude the proceeds of land auction sales in each
of these years, the revenue of 1881, if my estimate
is realized, will he considerably in excess of that of
1877. If from the revenue of the latter year, which
was, as already stated, £5,748,000, he deducted
£1,967,000 for auction sales, there is left an income
from other sources of only £3,781,000. Applying a
similar test to the estimated revenue of this year,
it would stand thus: —Revenue as estimated,
£5,440,000. Deducting therefrom the amount of


proceeds of land sales by auction, estimated at
£450,000, there is left an income from other sources
of £4,990,000, a sum £1,209,000 larger than the
ordinary revenue of 1877, and about £BO,OOO in
excess of the whole revenue of last year inclusive
of land sales. The estimate of revenue for this
year having been prepared with more than ordinary
care, and having been carefully revised by myself,
I feel confident it will be realized, unless some
unforeseen calamity should befall the Colony, in
which case any calculation of income would be sure
to be upset. I may, however, say that so far as the
year has gone my estimate bids fair to be realized, as
the revenue from Ist January to the Bth February
is £154,000 in excess of the corresponding period
of last year. From taxation of every description,
including Stamp Duties classed under this head, I
expect to receive the sum of £1,594,900, which
will be as near as possible about £2 per head of the
population. The Land Revenue, it is estimated,
will reach the sum of £1,811,800, of which only
£450,000 is from auction sales, and £230,000 for
interest on land conditionally purchased, an item
which I trust the House will never consent to give up,
because by doing so a grievous wrong would be done
to the community at large. For services rendered
the receipts are expected to aggregate £1,811,000,
and miscellaneous receipts are estimated to amount
to £222,000, making together, as already stated, a
grand total of no less than £5,440,000. Deducting
ZD


from this the estimated expenditure for 1881,
namely, £5,232,966 75., there is left an estimated
surplus of £207,703 13s.
The Committee will, I feel sure, agree with me in
thinking that with such a large annual income as
that which I have just explained is likely to he
derived from our existing sources of revenue during
the present year, there is no immediate necessity
for additional taxation, as it should he amply
sufficient to carry on the general Government of
the Country, and admit also of a large amount being
expended on public works. I freely admit that I
held a different view in the earlier part of last year,
hut circumstances have materially changed for the
better since then. During the time that our land
sales were producing such enormous sums of money
the Government was in a position to meet almost
every demand, no matter how extravagant, upon
them. The result of this was an abnormal expend-
iture for public works, which it is now absolutely
necessary, in the absence of such large sums from
the sale of our national estate, to bring within
reasonable bounds and within the limit of our
income as it now exists. It was while endeavouring
to provide for public works largely in excess of what
our ordinary income could bear that proposals were
made for increasing the taxation of the Country;
but as our present sources of income are proving
more productive than could have been anticipated,
I see no reason why we should not endeavour to


keep our expenditure within our means. It is, how-
ever, desirable that so soon as other urgent
questions are disposed of a complete revision of
our system of taxation should be effected, in order
to bring it more into harmony with economic princi-
ples. In any such fiscal changes new ground must
he occupied to replace the taxes now diminishing
in their productiveness, in consequence of new
industrial developments as well as to more equitably
distribute the public burdens. The importations of
beer, tobacco, and sugar, are falling off every year,
while it is well known the consumption is daily
increasing. If these articles, which have always
been considered luxuries, are rightly liable to
Customs duties when imported, they are equally
liable to duty if manufactured and consumed in
the Colony. In connection therefore with a well
devised system of taxation there should also exist
excise duties, otherwise our Customs duties become
to the manufacturers of the articles named nothing
more nor less than protection.
Taking our present population at an estimate of
800,000, the revenue of this year, if it come up to my
expectations, would he equal to £6 16s. per head. In
Greatßritain, with a population of say 40,000,000, the
revenue for the year 1880-1 was estimated to yield
about £85,000,000, which would be only equal to
£2 2s. 6d. per head, which is £4 13s. 6d. less than
our rate. Of course our income includes revenue
derived from sources which do not exist in England,
to the extent at all events that they do here, as for ex-
ample railways and land. While therefore perfectly


sensible that the conditions of the two countries
are so different as not to admit of a fair comparison,
I nevertheless think the difference in conditions is
not so great as to justify the much higher rate of
expenditure which exists in this Colony. It is no
doubt true we have a sparsely populated territory
to govern, nearly three times the area of Great
Britain and Ireland, but on the other hand we have
no large standing Army and Navy to maintain such
as that which costs the Imperial Exchequer over
£26,000,000 annually. Then again, the interest on
the Public Debt of Great Britain is £30,000,000, or
rather more than one-third of its whole expenditure,
while here the interest at the present time is only
£686,000, or something under one-eighth of our
entire income. As far as public debt is concerned I
think we have the decided advantage over the parent
State, for the simple reason that we have valuable and
reproductive works to show for it, while England has
little more to represent its debt of eight hundred
millions than the glory she achieved in many a hard
won battle, and the high and proud position she now
occupies amongst the nations of the earth.
I refer to these matters merely for the purpose
of showing the necessity for keeping our expen-
diture, if possible, within our income, as it is
not desirable to increase the burdens of the people
unnecessarily. It has been too long the habit of
all classes of the community to come to the
Government for the purpose of having their local


wants supplied, and even Municipalities, which were
thought to he liberally endowed when first
established, are not satisfied now unless they obtain,
in addition to that endowment, an annual grant equal
to the amount of their annual rates. This system is
not only demoralizing, hut destroying entirely that
self-reliance and manliness of spirit which should
characterise every free community. The measure
which the Colonial Secretary has obtained permission
to introduce for the extension of the principle of
local government in thinly inhabited districts will
he a step in the right direction, and tend to check
these frequent and unreasonable demands for local
works which are of no benefit to the public generally.
I am glad to he able to inform the Committee
that the working of our railways last year will
yield an interest on the capital invested of 4\ per cent.
This is a highly satisfactory result, and justifies the
hope that the day is not far distant when this great
national undertaking will not only pay the interest
on the money borrowed for the construction of
railways, but become a source of considerable profit
to the Colony. By the timely and judicious
reduction of rates which we have made we hope to
secure the greater part of the trade and traffic of
Biverina. After having gone to such immense
expense in extending the Great Southern line to
Albury and Narrandera it becomes the hounden
duty of the Government to do all in their power
to secure the benefits which such extensions, if


properly managed, are calculated to bestow upon
the metropolis. In proportion to the benefits derived
by the metropolis will be the advantages accruing to
the inhabitants of those distant parts of the Colony.
The connection of Melbourne with Sydney by
railway will enable us to ascertain shortly whether
the grand results which have been predicted from
such a union will be realized. A reasonable time
must, however, be allowed before a just opinion
can be formed, for like many new things its value
may neither at once be appreciated nor willingly
acknowledged. Although the steamers will continue
to compete with the railway, and probably with
success for a time, the latter must ultimately
triumph, as the journey between the two cities can
be effected in less than half the time and with
more comfort and considerably less risk to both
passengers and goods.
Before closing I desire to say a few words with
respect to the Loan Account. It was the inten-
tion of the Government last year to have launched
a loan in the London market during the present
year, and debentures were accordingly prepared
for that purpose, but since then money has
become so plentiful in Sydney that the proceeds
of such a loan if brought out to the Colony
could not be invested with the Banks (if. indeed
any of it would be taken by them) at rates
other than what would create a serious loss to the
Country; and if left in London, the probabilities


are that even still lower rates of interest would be
obtained there. Under these circumstances we felt
that we would not he justified in raising a loan in
London at the present time, notwithstanding the
market is highly favourable for the purpose, as the
securities of this Colony were never in greater
demand or stood higher in the estimation of the
public.
Besides the reason just given for delaying the
launching of a loan in England, I am glad to say
that there is no immediate urgency now, as we
have a balance in the Bank at the present time
sufficient to enable us to meet not only all the
requirements of the Consolidated Revenue Eund,
but to make such further advances to the General
Loan Eund as may he found necessary to carry on
our Railway extensions, our Water Supply works,
and such other Services as have been authorized
to be provided for by loans, for several months to
come. Should the necessity however arise, it may
be found expedient to negotiate a loan in the Colony
for five or six hundred thousand pounds, which I
feel confident will readily be taken up at prices
equal to, if not higher than those which could even
now be obtained for our bonds in England, as lam
told that there are many persons seeking investments
for trust and other funds who would gladly accept
our 4 per cent, debentures for the purpose. If we
get a price here only equal to what we could get in
London it would still be a preferable sale, because


we would have neither stamp duty, brokerage, nor
commission to pay.
The negotiation of a loan in the London market
cannot however be delayed for any great length of
time, as the General Loan Account is at the present
time indebted to the Consolidated Revenue and
other Punds for advances pending the sale of
debentures to the extent of £1,800,000 a large
portion of which will he required this year to carry
out the various works authorized out of the Surplus
Revenue Account. Of course so long as we can
abstain from borrowing, so long will we save the
Country a considerable sum for interest. The Loans
authorized but not yet negotiated amount to
£9,891,122 18s. 7d.
In the Explanatory Statement to which I have
already referred, the exact state of the Loan Accounts
will be found fully set forth, and with the Ways and
Means will be found several statements showing
the Services provided for by Loans, the amounts
expended thereon to the 31st December last, and
the balances remaining unexpended on that date.
A Loan Estimate is now in course of preparation,
and will be submitted shortly for the consideration
of the House. lam not in a position, therefore, to
state definitely at present what further railway
extensions are intended, as the question has not yet
been finally settled. I may, however, mention that
the extensions authorized amount to 679 miles, the
greater portion of which is now under construction,


and for the remainder the plans are being completed,
in order that tenders may at once be invited.
Surveys for fresh extensions have been made in
various parts of the Colony : amongst these may
he enumerated the extension to connect the Great
Northern Railway with the Southern and Western
Railways, the extension of the railway to Illa-
warra, a railway from the sea-board at Grafton to
the table-lands of New England, and the two
branches from the Southern line to Monaro and
Gundagai. When the Northern line is completed
to Tenterlield we shall be able to form a junction with
the Queensland Railways, and upon the completion
of the line connecting the Northern with the
Southern system, there will be uninterrupted railway
communication between the Capitals of Queensland
and New South Wales, a distance of 743 miles. To
connect the Capital of South Australia with Sydney,
244 miles of line must be constructed in this Colony
and about 60 in South Australia. The whole dis-
tance between Sydney and Adelaide is 863 miles,
559 of which have either been constructed or are
under construction. It may be said that we have
already formed a junction with the railways of
Victoria, for there are now only two miles of com-
mon road to intercept through railway communi-
cation between Sydney and Melbourne, a distance
of 575 miles.
The Public Debt has been reduced during the
past year to the extent of £33,500. This reduction


is due principally to the extinction of a portion of
the Railway Million Loan of 1867, for which there
is an annual appropriation of £70,000 for the pay-
ment of principal and interest until the whole Loan
is redeemed, which will not however occur until the
year 1902. In 1882 the Government have the option
of paying off or allowing to remain outstanding
certain interminable debentures to the amount of
£232,130. As these debentures, however, bear
interest at the rate of 5 per cent, it will he more
advantageous to pay them off, even if that has to he
done by renewal, as the money for the purpose can
now he readily obtained at 4 per cent, or under,
than to continue the Loan in its present form.
I think that I have now referred to all those topics
connected with the finances of the Colony which it
is usual to refer to in a statement of this kind, but
if there are others on which the Committee desire
information, it will afford me much pleasure to supply
it when required. The prosperous condition of the
Colony at the present time, and the highly favourable
state of our public income, have enabled me to place
accounts before the House and the Country showing
results far more satisfactory than I anticipated a
short time back, for I was then under the impression
that, in order to meet our ordinary expenditure, it
would again become my duty to make fresh proposals
for increasing the public revenue. Our present
sources of income have proved equal to the largely
increased expenditure of 1881, and for the time


being at least have spared me an unpleasant duty.
Although we can no longer boast of large annual
surpluses, I am not inclined to think that this is a
matter for regret, inasmuch as it is well known that
they often led to expectations of Government aid
which it was frequently found neither convenient
nor judicious to grant. As the surpluses of past
years were simply the result of a wholesale alienation
of our public lands, the limitation now of land sales
to a reasonable annual amount will rather prove
beneficial than detrimental to the public interest,
for it is a well-known fact that, without a correspond-
ing increase of population, land alienated in large
quantities cannot be utilized to the advantage of
the purchaser, much less to that of the general
public. I trust, however, the time is not far distant
when both will be so combined as to result in a
more rapid settlement of the Country than hitherto,
and when its great agricultural and mineral resources
will be developed in such a manner as to promote
the prosperity and well-being of all classes.
In conclusion I have to thank Honorable Mem-
bers for the patient hearing they have accorded to
what is generally considered a dry subject, but one
notwithstanding which, when rightly understood, is
full of interest to every one who has the progress
and welfare of the Colony at heart.


CONSOLIDATED REVENUE FUND.
SURPLUS REVENUE ACCOUNT
ACCOUNTS CURRENT
FOE THE YBABS
1879, 1880, and 1881.


CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENT showing the payments out of the
and the Outstanding and Further
Particulars.
Amount. Total.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
To Amount of Payments on account of the following Services
during the period from Ist January, 1879, to Slst Decem-
ber, 1880, viz. :
Services of 1877 and previous years
Services of 1878
Revenue of 1878 and previous years refunded
Drawbacks and refund of Duties of 1878 and previous years..
Charges on collections of same
International Exhibition Building under the Acts 42 Vic. Nos.
6 and 17
Public Works and other Services authorized under the fol-
lowing Acts to be defrayed out of the Surplus Revenue
Account, viz.:—
43 Vic. No. 10
408,413 8 4
954,295 6 11
173,152 7 2
17,851 12 2
4,766 9 5
100,000 0 0
457,260 9 11
101,835 13 3
44 Vic. No. 4
Cost of Land resumed under the “ Macquarie-street Land
Resumption Act” (43 Vic. No. 9), provided for by the
Supply Act, 43 Vic. No. 26
Special Endowments to Municipalities under the Act 44 Vic.
No. 15
59,867 4 1
41,164 1 8
2,318,596 12 11
Amount of Outstanding Liabilities on the Surplus Revenue
Account, on 80th September, 1880, viz.:—
Appropriations for Services of 1877
Appropriations for Services of 1878
Appropriations for Public Works and other Services authorized
under the Acts 43 Vic. No. 10 and 44 Vic. No. 4
10,761 19
63,687 12
885,731 9
960,181 1 9
~ Amount Payable for Compensation for Land resumed under
the “ Rushcutters’ Bay Resumption Act of 1878,” and for
charges connected therewith
Amount of Services on the Supplementary Estimates now
before the Legislative Assembly chargeable to this Account
Amount of Estimated Deficiency on the Revenue of 1879, as
shown on Account No. 2
16,811 0 0
27,646 19 1
382,388 0 2
Total Authorized and Estimated Charges
~ Estimated remaining Balance or Surplus.
James
Pearson,
r The Treasury,
New South Wales,
Sydney, 9th February, 1881.
Accountant


EEVENUE FUND.
Surplus Eevenue Account to tie 31st September, 1880,
Estimated Charges thereon at that date.
Particulars.
Amount. Total.
By Cash Balance at the credit of the Consolidated Eevenue Fund,
on 31st December, 1878
„ Amount of Advances to the General Loan Account, repaid
between Ist January, 1879, and 31st December, 1880
„ Amount Advanced from the Consolidated Revenue Fund,
under a Vote of 1878, for the completion of the Line of
Railway to Wagga Wagga, recovered from the Vote taken
for the purpose under the Loan Act 48 Vic. No. 11
~ Amount of the Treasurer’s Advance Vote for 1878, recouped in
full on the 31st December, 1879
„ Payments for Doubling Great Western Line of Railway between
Parramatta Junction and Parramatta, repaid from Loan
Votes .......
Total Cash Assets.
~ Amount of Advances to the General Loan Account remaining
unpaid on the 31st December, 1880
Total.
James Thomson,
JAMES
WATSON,
Consulting Accountant.
Treasurer.


CONSOLIDATED
ACCOUNT of the Eevenue and
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 9th February, 1881.
James Pearson,
Accountant,


EE VENUE FUND.
Expenditure for the Tear 1879.
Or.
No.
Particulars.
Amount.
Total.
£ s. d.
£ a. d.
1
By Amount of Revenue and Receipts for the Year 1879, as per
annexed Statement marked A, viz. :—
1,272,721 2 11
Land Revenue—
Sales £1,215,700 11 2
Annual Revenue 416,323 18 3
1,632,024 9 5
1,328,302 0 10
248,617 19 11
4,481,665 13 1
6,606 4 2
4,475,059 8 11
2
By Amount of estimated deficiency for the year 1879, charged to
382,388 0 2
*
£
4,857,447 9 1
James Thomson,
Consulting Accountant.
JAMES WATSON,
Treasurer.


Amount.
Total.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
o
4,148,449 0 0
46,237 11 2
798,000 0 0
4,992,686 11 2
14,000 0 0
177,060 8' 3
683 10 2
25,186 13 4
915 19 5
199 19 11
309 13 8
■
790 1 4
300 0 0
247 18 9
—
28,633 16 7
5,212,380 16 0
362,843 16 3
4,849,536 19 9
7,910 9 4
£
4,857,447 9 1
CONSOLIDATED
ACCOUNT of Eevenue and
Particulars.
To Charges on the Consolidated Revenue Fund, as follows, viz.
General Services as per Appropriation Act 43 Vie. No. 10
(exclusive of the Treasurer’s Advance Vote of £100,000) ....
Provided by Constitutional and Colonial Acts
Special Appropriations
~ Amount Appropriated under the Act 42 Vic. No. 24 for Tram
way from Redfern to Hunter-street
„ Amount of Supplementary Appropriations for Services of 1879,
as per Appropriation Act 44 Vic. No. 4
~ Additional Special Appropriations—
Interest on Debentures, further sum
International Exhibition—Expenses of the Commissioners
during the year 1879 under the Act 43 Vic. No. 8
Expenses of the Returning Officers of the Electoral Districts
of the Colony, further sum
Preliminary Expenses of Municipal Institutions
Schedule B—Pensions to Superannuated Officers, further sum
Temporary Judge, Supreme Court, from 9th August to 31st
December, at £2,000 I
Commissioners of Customs (6 months) .
Refunds under the Superannuation Repeal Act of 1873
Less Amount of Appropriations for Services of 1879 estimated
as not likely to be required
~ Amount of Services on the Supplementary Estimate now before
the Legislative Assembly, chargeable to this Account
Total Charges for 1879.
The Treasury,
New South Wales,
James Pearson,
Sydney, 9th Eebruary, 1881.
Accountant.


No.
Particulars.
Amount.
Total
1
By Amount of Revenue and Receipts for the year 1880, as per
Statement attached, marked A, viz. : —
Land Revenue —
Sales £1,177,393 1 1
Annual Revenue 468,938 10 2
Receipts for Services rendered
General Miscellaneous Receipts
Less Advances repaid carried to the credit of Appropriations
£ s. d.
1,417,293 12 9
1,646,331 11 3
1,594,067 6 8
254,298 9 1
£ s. d.
4,911,990 19 9
7,774 3 7
Total
4,904,216 16 2
James Thomson, JAMES WATSON,
Consulting Accountant. Treasurer.
REVENUE FUND.
Expenditure for the Year 1880.


Amount.
Total.
£ s. d.
£ e. d.
4,235,455 0 0
45,311 T 0
952,200 0 0
5,232,966 7 0
207,703 13 0
£
5,440,670 0 0
CONSOLIDATED
ACCOUNT of Estimated Revenue and
Particulars.
To Charges on the Consolidated Revenue Fund as shown in the
Summary of the Estimates-in-Chief for 1881, page 1:
General Services (exclusive of the proposed Vote of £lOO,OOO
for the Treasurer’s Advance Account, which forms no
permanent charge on the Revenue)
Provided by Constitutional and Colonial Acts.
Special Appropriations
~ Estimated Surplus
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 9th February, 1881.
James Peakson,
Accountant.


REVENUE FUND.
Expenditure for the Year 1881.
James Thomson,
Consulting Accountant.
Treasurer,


CONSOLIDATED REVENUE.
ABSTRACT Statement showing the Actual Revenue of the Tears
1879 and 1880, and the Estimated Revenue for the Tear 1881.
Head of Receipt.
Revenue of
1879.
Revenue of
1880.
Estimated
Revenue
1881.
Taxation.
£
1,111,531
40,225
3,845
1,840
3,420
111,860
&
1,188,930
36,510
7,353
72,303
£
1,273,900
40,000
7,000
160,000
Duty on Refined Sugar and Molasses
Duty on Spirits distilled in the Colony
112,197
114,000
Total Taxation
Land Revenue.
1,272,721
1,417,293
1,594,900
1,215,701
1,177,393
1,196,000
Annual Land Revenue —
Interest on Land conditionally purchased
Pastoral Occupation
170,986
210,833
13,933
20,571
204,634
222,624
20,310
21,371
230,000
345,400
18,100
22,300
Miscellaneous Land Receipts
Total Land Revenue
Receipts for Services rendered.
Railway and Tramway Receipts
416,323
468,939
615,800
1,632,024
1,646,332
1,811,800
976,898
259,170
9,370
1,328
32,902
843
47,791
1,189,564
286,134
10,213
1,363
26,038
845
27,552
52,859
1,365,000
805,250
10,000
1,300
30.000
925
45.000
53,900
Fees for Escort and Conveyance of Gold
Pilotage, Harbour, and Light Rates and Fees
School Fees under the Public Instruction Act of 1880
Total Receipts for Services rendered ..
General Miscellaneous Receipts.
Rents, exclusive of Land
1,328,302
1,594,068
1,811,375
10,869
10,092
227,657
37,349
12,482
204,467
43,595
12,300
166,700
Total Miscellaneous Receipts
Grand Totals £
248,618
254,298
222,595
4,481,665
4,911,991
5,440,670
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 9th Eebruary, 1881.
JAMES WATSON,
Treasurer.


1,173,272
15,658
1,226,400
47,500
1,188,930
1,273,900
- 36,510
40,000
7,353
7,000
72,303
160,000
1
4,521
2,507
96,496
4,555
95
1,728
750
594
414
537
5.000
2,800
97,000
5.000
100
1,750
750
600
400
600
EEYENUE
DETAILED
Estimated
Revenue of
Revenue of
Head of Receipt.
Revenue for
Taxation.
Customs —
Spirits..
Wine...
522,592
600,336
41,239
31,703
97,398
74,217
60,170
10,993
625.000
45.000
30.000
100.000
85.000
60.000
11,000
10,500
7,600
8,500
12,000
Ale and Beer
Tobacco and Cigars..
Tea
Sugar and Molasses .
Coffee and Chicory .
Opium
Malt
Hops
Rice -..
Dried Fruits
Specific Duties
Bonded Warehouses, 20 Vic. No. 21
Rent of Goods in Queen’s Warehouses, &c..
170,200
179,095
185,000
1,097,335
14,196
Cash Payments by the Government of South Australia.
1,111,531
Duty on Refined Sugar and Molasses
Duty on Spirits Distilled in the Colony
Stamps
Duty on Gold.
Licenses—
Wholesale Spirit Dealers
Auctioneers
Retail Fermented and Spirituous Liquors
Billiard and Bagatelle Licenses
Distillers and Rectifiers
Hawkers and Pedlers
Pawnbrokers
Colonial Wine, Cider, and Perry Licenses .
Licenses under the Gunpowder Act of 1876.
All other Licenses
111,860
1,272,721
112,197
114,000
Total Taxation £
1,417,293
1,594,900


Revenue Detailed — continued.
Head of Receipt.
Revenue of
1879.
Revenue of
1880.
Estimated
Revenue for
1881.
Land Revenue.
£
£
&
Sales—
Auction Sales
698,981
435,572
450,000
Improved Purchases, &c
156,471
245,094
226,000
Selections after Auction
66
42,363
50,000
4,743
5,799
Deposits on Conditional Purchases
231,116
293,113
275,000
Instalments on Conditional Purchases
87,293
113,603
150,000
Balances on Conditional Purchases
37,031
41,849
45,000
Total Revenue from Land Sales £
1,215,701
1,177,393
1,196,000
Annual Land Revenue.
Interest on Land Conditionally Purchased
170,986
204,634
230,000
Pastoral Occupation—
51,650
55,415
55,000
Rent of Runs
158,256
165,968
290,000
Assessment on Runs • • •
520
310
200
Quit Rents
407
931
200
210,833
222,624
345,400
Mining Occupation—
Mineral Leases
5,570
9,569
6,200
Mineral Licenses
368
1,432
1,300
Leases of Auriferous Lands
3,290
2,422
2,500
Miners’ Rights
4,211
6,110
5,500
494
777
600
2,000
13,933
20,310
18,100
Miscellaneous Land Receipts—
Licenses to cut Timber, &c.
6,320
6,668
7,000
Fees on Transfer of Runs
964
1,366
1,300
Fees on Preparation and Enrolment of Title-deeds ....
6,128
5,253
6,000
All other Receipts
7,159
8,084
8,000
20,571
21,371
22,300
Total Land Revenue £
1,632,024
1,646,332
1,811,800


Revenue Detailed — continued.
Head of Receipt.
Revenue of
1879.
Revenue of
1880.
Estimated
Revenue for
1881.
Receipts for Services rendered.
£
976,898
£
1,189,564
£
1,365,000
Post Office—
168,310
84,455
6,405
191,217
87,325
7,592
207,000
90,000
8,250
259,170
286,134
305,250
9,370
10,213
10,000
1,328
1,363
1,300
32,902
26,038
30,000
843
845
925
School Fees under the Public Instruction Act of
27,552
45,000
Fees op Office—
100
14,296
3,948
697
380
2,569
973
5,533
5,722
2,532
2,036
9,005
95
18,317
4,117
745
816
2,524
976
4,671
5,885
2,281
2,419
9,513
100
20,000
4,300
800
700
2,000
1,000
5.000
6.000
2.500
2.500
9,000
Total Receipts for Services rendered £
47,791
52,359
53,900
1,328,302
1,594,068
1,811,375


Revenue
General Miscellaneous Receipts.
Rents, exclusive of Land—
Tolls and Ferries
Wharfs
Government Buildings and Premises.
Glebe Island Abattoir
Glebe Island Bridge.
Fines and Forfeitures—
Sheriff
Courts of Petty Sessions
Unauthorized Occupation of Crown Lands
Crown’s Share of Seizures, &c
Confiscated and Unclaimed Property
Other Fines
Unclassified Receipts—
Sale of Government Property
Support of Patients in Lunatic Asylums
Collections by Government Printer
Store Rent of Gunpowder, &c
Value of Articles manufactured by Prisoners in Gaol, &c.
Fees on presenting Private Bills to Parliament and on
Letters of Registration
Interest on Bank Deposits
Fitz Boy Dry Dock Receipts
Assessment on Refinery
International Exhibition Receipts
Other Receipts
Total, General Miscellaneous Receipts £
Grand Totals £
Detailed — continued.
222,595
254,298
4,911,991 5,440,670
248,618
4,481,665
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 9th February, 1881.
JAMES
WATSON,
Treasurer.


STATEMENT OE BALANCES
OK THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OP NEW SOUTH WALES
AND THE DISTRIBUTION OP THE SAME
OK THE
31st DECEMBER, 1880.


STATEMENT o£ Balances on the Public Accounts of New South Wales,
TREASURY BALANCES.
Public Account.
Consolidated Revenue—
Revenue Proper
Loans’ Account (Old)
Trust Fund—
Church and School Estates Fund
Police Reward Fund
Police Superannuation Fund
Poundage
Shipping Master (Seamen’s Wages)
Revenue Suspense Fund
Trust Moneys, 20 Vic. No. 11
Lunacy Trust Fund, 42 Vic. No. 7
Immigration Remittances
Commissioners’ Fund —Real Property Act
Assurance Fund—Real Property Act
Government Savings’ Bank Account, 34 Vic. No. 15
British and Australian Telegram Account
Railway Store Account
Imperial Pension Fund Account _
Imperial Pension Fund Commission Account
Over-issues
Treasurer’s Advance Account
Gold Fields Survey Fee Account ...
Advances to Contractors Account .
San Francisco Mail Service Account
New Zealand Cable Account
Sheep Account .
Sundry Deposits.
Total Public Account
Superannuation Repeal Fund
Less Debit Balance :
General Loan Account, 42 Vic. No. 16
£ b. d.
*1,440,227 10 6
154,180 2 5
192,853 3 6
12,769 0 0
10,522 0 1
7,821 17 5
335 8 8
26,359 3 3
109,296 18 5
2,543 11 10
14,843 6 3
467 0 0
38,205 3 3
586,489 1 7
3,250 7 8
29,249 11 2
16 6
0 14 0
17,479 1 0
44,122 8 1
2,054 6 0
1,163 0 3
17,138 0 1
2,553 19 4
10,461 7 3
60,150 12 8
1,190,130
2,784,538 1 2
1,131,681 2 5
1,653,198 18 1
Total £
* In addition to this balance, there is a sum of £465,437 18s. 7d. to be recovered from Loan Funds, for
advances from the Consolidated Revenue Fund pending the sale of Debentures, which would, if repaid,
make the Balance on the Consolidated Revenue at this date £1,905,665 9s. Id.
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 9th Eebruary, 1881.


and ihe distribution o£ the same on the 31st December, 1880.
DISTRIBUTION OF THE BALANCES.
) £ s. d. £ si
Bank of New South Wales— ~ .
Public Account, Sydney 075,709 15 4
Less—Unpresented Cheques _______ 1 563 539 7 8
Less -Overdraft General Loan Account, Sydney 1,238,499 2 6
325,040 5 3
Less—Overdraft on London Account at date of latest advices 62,024 13 4
263,015 Hi
Loan Account, 36 Victoria No. 29 441 19
Total Bank op New South Wales £ 263,357 11
Cash in hands of the Receiver 198,814 14
Special Deposits : ... n n
Bank of New South Wales 105,452 0 0
Australian Joint Stock Bank 00,268 0 0
City Bank 75,325 0 0
Oriental Bank 75,325 0 0
Bank of Australasia 52,726 0 o
Union Bank of Australia ■ • • • 52,726 0 o
English, Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank 52,726 0 o
London Chartered Bank 52,726 0 0
Mercantile Bank 580,000 0
Securities in the Treasury Chest, viz. : ... . „
Police Reward and Superannuation Fund—Debentures 19,200 o o
Church and School Estates Revenue Fund-
Debentures £68,400 0 0
New South Wales Four per Cents 106,781 19 3
175,181 19 o
Assurance Fund—Debentures 22,000 0 0
Government Savings Bank—
Debentures 0 0
New South Wales Four per Cents 296,466 13 11
385,666 13 11
Other Securities ! 8,377 19 1 6 i0,426 12
Securities in the Bank of New South Wales 600 Q
Lunacy Trust Fund Debentures
Total £ 1,653,198 18
JAMES PEARSON,
Accountant.
F.










