





WAYS AND MEANS.
THE
FINANCIAL STATEMENT
THE HONORABLE GEORGE R. DIBBS,
COLONIAL TREASURER
NEW SOUTH WALES.
MADE 7th FEBRUARY,
1888.
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT’ PRINTER.




FINANCIAL STATEMENT.
Mr. Cameron,
This is perhaps the most fitting time for me
to place before the Committee a statement of the
financial position of the Colony. And in doing so
I will endeavour, even at the expense of risking a
departure from the form usually followed on such
occasions, to place the Statement of the Accounts
before honorable members in as simple and con-
cise a form as possible. Eor those honorable
members who desire closely* to study the intricacies
of our accounts, the volume of figures covered by
the “Ways and Means” and subsidiary papers will
afford them full scope. I presume it is the duty
of the Treasurer for the time being to deal with
figures more in bulk than in detail, and to lay
before the Committee, as far as practicable, ascer-
tained conclusions.
When the Treasurer of the late Administration
made his Budget Speech—on the Ist of November
last year—he informed the Committee that he esti-
mated he would have a surplus of revenue from


all sources, after providing for all present and con-
tingent liabilities, of £1,827,695. That estimate
has been exceeded by tlie actual result which tbe
operation of time lias enabled us to ascertain. I
find that tbe actual accumulated surplus at the
close of the year 1882 was £1,816,238. This, then,
is the sum with which we commenced the business
of the year 1883.
Briefly, it will be convenient for me to explain
at this stage in what shape this surplus is shown.
By reference to account No. 2 of the “ Ways and
Means,” page 11, it will be seen that, on the Ist
of January, 1883, there was a balance to the credit
of the Consolidated [Revenue Account of £3,888,753,
which would be increased by the recredit of two
items of £lOO,OOO each from the Treasurer’s advance
account, showing a total of £4,088,753 at the credit
of the Consolidated Bevenue Bund on the date
mentioned. But against this large sum there were
outstanding liabilities as detailed upon the opposite
page of the account to the extent of £2,242,514.
In this way is the surplus balance shown that we
have available, namely, £1,846,238. This is the
balance which we had on hand on the Ist of January
of this year, clear, free, and above all claims and
liabilities.
If honorable members will look at the “Ways
and Means” handed round, they will find that the
contingencies and liabilities which stand as charges


against the credit balance of £4,088,753, to the
credit of the Colony at this moment, are for services
which were authorized in previous years and for
which appropriations were duly obtained.
I wish the Committee to understand that we
start the year 1883 with £1,846,238 to the good.
The most interesting portion of the financial state-
ment is that which deals with the probable revenue
and expenditure for the current year. I estimate
that the revenue from all sources, available for the
year 1883 will be £6,819,200. This includes the
whole of the revenue so far as we can estimate it.
Sir John Eobebtson : Does it include the
surplus ?
Mr. Dibbs : No. It is the revenue proper for
the current year. If the honorable member will
add to these figures the balance of £1,846,238, he
will find the total amount which we estimate to
have available for this year. Against this current
income of the year—£6,Bl9,2oo—we propose by the
Estimates of Expenditure which were laid on the
table last night—of which I will presently speak
more in detail—to appropriate for the Public Service
£6,482,564, leaving an estimated surplus on the
current year’s transactions of £336,635, which sum,
added to the surplus with which we commenced the
year, amounts to £2,182,874. This large sum
would be available on the 31st December of the


present year but for special appropriations which
we propose to make. We propose to utilize of this
amount the sum of £1,0417,300 for services of a
special character, as shown in the Surplus Revenue
Estimate laid upon the table last night. This will
leave us with an estimated surplus at the close of
1883 of £1,135,571.
I will not weary the Committee with unnecessary
details of how our revenue for 1883 is made up.
Honorable members will find by a close and atten-
tive study of the pamphlet published under the
title of “ Ways and Means” the whole of the details
of the revenue for 1883 worked out in contrast with
the revenue which was produced in the year 1882.
I shall not take up the time of the Committee by
going at length into this enormous sea of figures,
which would only tend to confuse honorable mem-
bers in place of assisting them in arriving at any-
thing like a clear and distinct understanding
respecting the financial position of the Colony.
I may say, in a few words, that we estimate
fairly from the experience which we have had of
last month that we shall have an increase in Cus-
toms Revenue over 1882 in round numbers of
£BO,OOO. We fairly estimate, judging by the pro-
gress of the Colony in the past, and the likelihood
of an increase of business this year —judging by
the financial progress of the Colony and its con-
tinued prosperity that we shall receive from


stamps alone an increase of £22,000; from interest
on land conditionally purchased we expect to re-
ceive an increase of £38,000; from mining receipts
a small increase, hut a decided one, of £I,OOO.
I have put all the increases pretty well together,
so that honorable members may he able to follow
me. Prom onr Railways—the grandest asset which
the Colony possesses, and, I may as well state, an
asset which is capable at any moment, in case of
emergency, of contributing without undue pressure
on the people a still larger income than it yields
at the present moment—we expect to receive no
less a sum in excess of the receipts of last year than
£300,000. Prom Post and Telegraphs—another
branch, as it were, of the industrial hive, which
seems to he on the advance —we expect to receive
no less a sum by way of increase than £48,000;
from the Mint we expect to receive an increase of
£1,500 ; from Pilotage, which may he taken as an
index to the extent of the shipping trade of the
port, and is to a certain extent an index to the
prosperity of the Colony, we expect an increase of
£1,000; from Public School fees we expect to re-
ceive an increase of £4,000.
I can quite imagine that after the vote of last
night some honorable members may think that
there ought not to he an increase in this item ; hut
I hope that the good sense of the Committee will he
such that there will he no further attempt to discuss


the question or to take off these fees during the
present session. The resolution of last night, as it
stands, throws on the Government at a later date,
no doubt, the consideration of the question of what
shall be done with the School fees; but Ido not
suppose that the intention of the House last night
was that we should break through the Estimates of
income which we had already prepared, and take off
an item of revenue which we estimate at £55,000.
However, I believe that I am correctly gauging the
opinion of the Committee when I say that I think
that there will not be any effort to remit the School
fees for this year at least, and that we may, there-
fore, safely rely on this item as one which will
return the increase of £4,000.
Erom instalments of conditional purchases we
expect to receive an increase of £20,000. Then there
is an item which I am not prepared to explain, but
which older stagers in politics may understand—this
is fees of office, from which source we expect to
receive an increase of £7,000.
But against these increases we have to face—and
of course it is to a certain extent interesting to have
to face it, because it is portion of the policy of the
Government, —by whose action in the matter of
auction sales of land a decrease is made for this
year —not a loss, as I shall endeavour to explain
hereafter —of £547,000. We shall have a decrease
in the same conditional manner—l do not hold it


to be an actual loss, and I do not think that the
Committee will regard it in that light—income which
we should otherwise have received on improved
purchases to the extent of £BO,OOO ; under the head
of selections after auction we expect to have a
decrease of £379,000 ; deposits on conditional pur-
chases, a decrease of £21,000; and from balance on
conditional purchases a decrease of £9,000.
The continued prosperity of the Colony justifies
the reasonable hope that the considerable increase
which we have estimated will be realized; but, on
the other hand, the decreases which I have just
named are of an enormous character, and such as, I
venture to say, no other Colony under the British
Crown could attempt to submit to Parliament with
any hope of securing its approval. It shows the
buoyancy of our revenue in other respects when,
even if we had not the surplus left by our prede-
cessors —and for this I give them credit—we are able
to give up such a large item of revenue without
being forced to provide a substitute by taxation or
otherwise. We have this large decrease, but the
soundness of the financial condition of the Country
enables us to take a bold stand with regard to the
land question, and to shut off for the time being
this enormous amount of revenue. I say that no
other Colony under the British Crown could do any-
thing of the kind. I may say—and I believe that I
am borne out by public opinion in this—that the


magnificence of the state of the financial position of
the Colony allows Parliament the fittest opportunity
which was ever presented to it to deal with the
important question of land law reform.
The Committee will of course expect from me a
few words respecting that change which the Govern-
ment has felt itself called upon to make in dealing
with our land system, affecting as it does to so large
an extent our annual receipts from this source. In
the surrender of that large portion of our land
revenue which the Government deemed it an essential
part of their policy to abandon, it will he necessary
to hear in mind that this is not in any way a loss;
it is simply a non-alienation of portions of the public
estate, which remains to be dealt with in another
way; it is the first foreshadowing of that land policy
which will soon have to be submitted for the purpose
of dealing with our public lands to greater advan-
tage, and under, it is to be hoped—perhaps the
honorable member for Mudgee (Sir John Robertson)
does not think so—a wiser and a juster system.
Sir John Robertson : How do you know what I
think ?
Mr. Dibbs : I judge by the honorable member’s
speeches. If the honorable member thinks other-
wise, let him change his seat; we shall be most
happy to find a place for him over here. The present
temporary inconvenience caused by the withdrawal


of so much of the land revenue is of little conse-
quence in comparison with the permanent embarrass-
ment which would have resulted from continuing
the existing state of things.
As honorable members are aware, the reform of
our land system, in the direction which the public
has already indicated by recent circumstances, may
involve some changes in our financial policy. Land
reform and financial reform must therefore go hand
in hand. If, in the course of the present year, both
these great objects can be attained, it will be of no
importance that we shall not have placed at our
disposal, for the present, the sum which we should
have obtained by the sale of our public estate. Of
course we are enabled to take this stand with regard
to the question of land reform by means of the
surplus, as I said before; but what honorable
members will be surprised to find, no doubt, is, that
in spite of the enormous loss, or the enormous
shortcomings of the income from land, there has
been such a buoyancy in the other properties of the
country that this loss is hardly perceptible.
Now, I should like to read to honorable members
a statement of some of the items of revenue
which we expect to receive. They are—Customs,
£1,632,800; duty on spirits distilled in the Colony,
£5,000; stamps, £250,000 ; licenses, £116,750.
Now, if honorable members will follow me to page
13 of “ Ways and Means,” under head “ A.” of the


Consolidated Revenue Fund, they will get some
idea of the amount which we shall lose hy suspend-
ing the operation of the land law in certain respects.
Tinder the head of auction sales, improved purchases,
selection after auction, provisional pre-emptive
right sales, deposits on conditional purchases,
instalments on conditional purchases, balances on
conditional purchases, there was paid into the
Treasury last year a sum of £2,167,514, and we
estimate to receive this year £1,148,000 only. Under
the head of pastoral occupation—which consists of
rents of runs (annual leaseholds and special leases),
rents of runs (five years’ leaseholds), assessments on
runs, quit rents, which returned £409,244 last year
—we expect to receive £350,250 this year. Under
the head of mining occupation we received £20,248
last year, and this year we expect to receive £21,500.
For miscellaneous land receipts we received £29,862
last year, and this year we expect to receive
£26,600 only.
I think that this is a fitting time to give an
assurance which will he hailed hy the mercantile
public with some satisfaction, because there seems
to have been an idea that to meet the loss of revenue
caused hy the suspension of land sales some change
in the tariff will he necessary, and under this
suspicion large sums have been paid for the release
of goods.
Sir John Robertson : On stearine.


Mr. Bibbs: No; it was on tobacco. The
enormous snms paid into the revenue through the
Custom-house, during the last few days, seem to
indicate that it was thought to be the intention of
the Government to propose some change in the fiscal
policy of the country. I have no doubt that the
Committee will acknowledge the wisdom of the
course taken by the Government in view of probable
changes—l may, I suppose, venture to say boldly
that it is almost a certainty that a Land Bill will be
agreed to next session. Well, in view of these
probable changes, the Government consider that it
would not be desirable, in the interests of good
government, to attempt any change of our fiscal
policy at this period of the year.
I believe the Committee will approve of the
wisdom of the course taken by the Government in
deciding that land reform should precede fiscal
reform; or that land reform and fiscal reform —and
by fiscal reform I mean what relates to our tariff
for the future —should go hand in hand. Honorable
gentlemen will, at any rate, have the satisfaction of
reflecting that the land is not being alienated—that
the country is not receiving money torn from the
squatters, wrung from the Banks, diverted from the
ordinary channels of commerce to such an extent
that there is almost a panic. Money has never been
scarcer in Sydney than at this moment—and those
who are engaged in commerce will appreciate my


remarks—there never was a time short of an actual
panic when Banks felt the difficulty of increasing
overdrafts more than they do at the present moment;
and, to a large extent, this has been caused by the
withdrawal from the legitimate channels of com-
merce of an enormous amount of money to pay for
land taken up by squatters in order to protect them-
selves in another direction. If no other good should
result from our action, the circumstances alone that
it will in time help to sustain to a certain extent the
commercial credit of the Country, which is as much
as anything else in the hands of the Government for
protection, will in future he appreciated. I say it
advisedly, because I have had some commercial
experience, that never was money for trading pur-
poses so scarce as at present.
Sir John Bobebtson : How was it before the
Land Bill was thrown out—it was all right then ?
Mr. Hibbs : The honorable gentleman has a
craze in his head. He seems to think that the
tightness of the money market arises from the fact
that the Land Bill was lost on the second reading.
But the laws of demand and supply apply to money
as to everything else. The money is not in the
country. The Banks have been withdrawing their
reserves for the purpose of paying for land;
there has been over-speculation in land, and that
over-speculation has put a fancy value upon pro-
perty and has increased the demand for money to


an extent beyond the power of the Banks to supply.
The rejection of the Land Bill had nothing whatever
to do with the tightness of the money market. If
the honorable gentleman will look at the state of
the cash balances of the Banks as they have been
published from time to time during the last six
months, he will find that the tightness of money
arises not from the failure of his Bill to become law,
but simply because under the inevitable law of
supply and demand the coin in the Colony is not
sufficient for the business of the Colony.
I will just say a few words following upon what
I have been saying with regard to the condition of
the money market of the Colony. The proposal for
the inscription of our stock in London, which has
already received the approval of this House, and
now awaits the action of the other House before it
can become law, was, as you are aware, pressed upon
the attention of the Government by European capi-
talists, by our own Agent-General in England, and
by the policy of our predecessors. It is confidently
hoped that the immediate effect of the measure will be
to increase the confidence and meet the convenience
of investors in our stock, and thus to render it more
valuable. It is the intention of the Government to
replace the money advanced out of the Consolidated
Revenue to meet Loan Votes which have already been
passed by the House in previous sessions, and it is our
intention shortly to float a loan of some magnitude


with that object. At the present moment we have
nearly three millions of money nnder advance to the
Loan Account. A large portion of that will have
to he called hack to the Colony hy floating portions
of the loans which have already been authorized,
and that course I hope will restore commercial con-
fidence in a large measure, for I believe that confi-
dence is required at this moment. As considerable
sums will be required to meet the cost of the great
public works which have been already sanctioned,
and which it is the intention of the Government to
push on with the utmost vigour, the Government
intend at an early date to place a further loan on '
the market.
The Inscribed Stock Bill passed through this
House almost unanimously, without any amendment
whatever, and the delay which has taken place in
the passage of that Bill through the Upper Chamber,
has given the public ample time to discuss the merits
of the measure. It is a measure which it is to be
regretted was not passed at an earlier date. It
will improve the value of our securities in the old
country ; it will enable them to meet with a more
ready sale, and will open for them a wider field than
they have hitherto had, and will do away with the
insecurity of debentures. I have within the last few
hours received a telegram from Sir Saul Samuel, in
reply to one sent to him, in which he states that in
his opinion—and I presume he would not have


replied without first consulting some of the leading
financial authorities in England—that it will he in
the power of the Colony to convert its 5 per cent,
debentures into inscribed stock at a saying to the
Colony, in the first instance, of at least 2 per cent.
Sir Saul Samuel also, in reply to inquiries I made,
has sent the following information which I received
by telegram at 9 o’clock this morning : —Our 5 per
cent, debentures, falling due from 1888 to 1894, were
quoted on the London Stock Exchange yesterday at
£lO5 ; debentures falling due in 1902 and 1910 were
quoted in the market at £lll, while our 4 per
cent, debentures, which it is to he hoped will shortly
he inscribed, were saleable at £IO2J. If that 2 per
cent, were deducted from the £lO5 at which our
5 per cent, debentures were quoted yesterday, it
would reduce them to £lO3. That, with the price
at which our 4 per cents, are now saleable, without
the inscription, only makes a difference between our
4 and our 5 per cent, debentures due between 1888
and 1894 of \ per cent. lam sure that statement
will satisfy the House that we have acted wisely in
passing the Inscribed Stock Bill, and that the
passage of that Bill through the Upper Chamber
will restore to the money-lender in England a full
measure of confidence in our securities; not that
he ever lost confidence in our debentures, hut he
may have doubted our good faith in regard to
inscription, owing to our tardiness in providing for
it. And when within the next three or four months


we float our loan, which I hope to make the first
under the new Inscribed Stock Act, we shall be
able to sell our 4 per cent, stock at rates equivalent
to the quotations now ruling for our 5 per cent,
debentures. I anticipate that our 4 per cent,
inscribed stock will take such a place in the market
that in any future loan we may float, except in
times when there is great tightness of money, we
shall he enabled to go before the money-lenders of
the world upon terms which no other Colony under
the British Crown can command.
In reviewing the large enterprises with which the
Government of this Colony has to deal, the next in
order is our Railways. In addressing myself to this
question and to the necessary provision for enlarging
our railway system, and developing it in corre-
spondence with our material advancement, I shall
first of all say a few words on that important
portion of it which has so long been overlooked,
hnd for the delay in the completion of which we
shall now have to pay so enormously increased a
price—l mean the continuation of the railway from
Eedfern to the Circular Quay. This is a work
which the present Government propose to under-
take with the least possible delay. Steps are now
being taken to have the necessary surveys made by
various routes, with the view of placing the Govern-
ment in early possession of all essential information
as to cost, and the least possible disturbance of the


convenience of tlie public by tbe ordinary means of
communication. The basis for calculations and for
the selection of the railway route to the shores of
the harbour has not yet been laid. But active
exertions are now being made to effect this, and
within a short period it is hoped the Government
will be fully instructed on all matters upon which
they will require information to enable them to sub-
mit their proposal to Parliament for the completion
of this work, which is so generally admitted to be
an essential one; and which it would have been
well to have undertaken long ago under much more
advantageous circumstances for its economical
accomplishment than now exist.
I hope that, as regards this long-delayed and most
important question, which has been kept hanging
before us so many years, to which Members of
Parliament have pledged themselves upon the hust-
ings, which the Country has demanded—namely,
that the main highways of the Colony shall be con-
nected with the port, —honorable members will be
satisfied with the announcement by the Government
that the extension of the railway from Bedfern to
the Circular Quay is a portion of their policy which
they are determined to prosecute with the utmost
vigour. I hope that it will no longer form the sub-
ject of a question to be asked of members on the
hustings, but that henceforth it will be a settled
question, and that the Committee will give then


approval to the course the Government propose to
take. The subject has been kept dangling too long
before Parliament, and meantime an enormous
increase has taken place in the value of city pro-
perty. Por the delay we shall have to pay; hut
the sooner the question is tackled the sooner will
there he an end to the difficulty ; and, although the
cost will he great, yet I hope that it will not add so
greatly to the total cost of our railways as to
materially interfere with the annual earnings, to
which I shall presently refer.
There is another question of railway policy which
has been kept dangling before the eyes of the
Country, and that is the question of bringing the
railway from the table-land of New England to the
sea-coast. It is to be regretted that, in consequence
of the destruction by the fire at the Garden Palace
of the papers containing the information of the trial
surveys made as to the line of railway from the
table-land of New England to the coast, the Govern-
ment is without the means of addressing itself to
the consideration of that important matter. Mea-
sures have been taken to push on with all possible
despatch re-surveys of a line from South Grafton to
Glen Innes —from North Grafton to Tenterfield :
and a survey is in progress from Armidale to Trial
Bay, and an exploration survey of a coast line from
Morpeth to the Clarence Biver is also proceeding.
The Government, as a portion of their policy, are


determined to push on the construction of a line of
railway from the table-lands of New England to the
sea-coast. It is a question which involves grave
consideration; hut for the future of the Colony such
a railway will he a necessity, and one which this
Government, if they remain in office, pledge them-
selves to undertake.
There is a question closely bordering upon that
of railways, and one in which the House takes con-
siderable interest —I mean the question of tram-
ways. The Government is fully alive to the
necessity of pushing forward our tramway system
with the least possible delay. We have in progress,
and fast approaching completion, the works already
sanctioned by Parliament under a loan vote of
£600,000, £450,000 of which has been expended,
while the remainder will be absorbed in completing
the lines enumerated in the Schedule to the Act, and
in completing shed and other works in connection
with the tramways, so as to add to the efficiency of
the service. But we shall have to go beyond this,
and ask the House —and that this Session—for a
loan vote, to enable us to push on with other tram-
ways which have been impliedly if not directly
promised, and which the Government intend to
carry out. We shall ask for a loan vote of £600,000
at least, for a further extension of tramways.
Mr. Bukns : North Shore ?


Mr. Dibbs ; North Shore, of course. The posi-
tion in which the projected tramways stand at
present is this:—The line to Bondi is surveyed.
That to Field of Mars and Hyde, via the Iron Cove
Bridge, is nearly ready; hut a demand has been
made to convert this line into a light railway instead
of a tram line. But the question is, whether the
bridge will carry a line of railway, and that is the
only consideration which delays the work. The
line to Field of Mars Common and Hyde will he
commenced next after that to Bondi, and by means
of that line the Colony will derive a great advantage,
because it possesses an enormous estate there, which
has been wisely withheld from sale by previous
Governments, with the view to its sale when rail-
way or tramway communication shall have been
established. We hope to see the expenditure upon
the line largely recouped, and a large accession
made to our income by the sale of the Field of Mars
Common.
The line to connect Newcastle with Platshurg
and the coal-mining centres, is surveyed; hut as this
line is practically in conjunction with the railways,
the assent of Parliament will he necessary before
the works can he proceeded with. Ido not suppose,
however, that there will he any difficulty in obtain-
ing that assent. I know of no place which has
been more neglected than St. Leonards, nor any
place which has greater claims upon the country,


nor a place where a tramway would he more
serviceable. I hope the day is not far distant when
the short span of water which now forms a harrier
between what should he North Sydney and Sydney
proper will he bridged over, npt by such a bridge as
was proposed by our predecessors —although I
believe that is a question for the future—hut by
means of a plan which we shall propose in due
time, and when we shall see a line of tramways
opening a most magnificent country, and when by
means of a bridge over Middle Harbour the people
at Manly Beach will he able to participate in the
advantages of the tramway system. The country
north of this could he opened in time, hut at present
we look upon lines connecting St. Leonards, Lane
Cove, North Willoughby, and Manly Beach as one
of the accomplishments of the not far distant future.
In connecting St. Leonards with Milson’s Point we
shall have to adopt to a certain extent the wire-rope
system. St. Leonards from the reserve to the
water’s edge shows a very steep face, and what is com-
paratively the level ground of the suburb may he
easily reached from the water by means of the cable
system of tramways. lam satisfied that that system
will prove a success. Plans for its adoption are already
in progress. Por its introduction to the Colony we
are indebted to the recent visit to America of the
honorable member for Tenterfield. We shall bring
down further loan votes to enable these and other
works of the kind to he proceeded with.


The desirableness of connecting our grand trunk
line with a cheap system of light railways is ad-
mitted by men of all shades of opinion. Surveys
will be prepared and plans for these laid upon the
Table early next Session. But unfortunately, while
desirous of pushing on with these necessary exten-
sions, we feel that the labour available for railway
works is not in proportion to the new works we
desire to commence. This difficulty is no new one,
and we can only hope that the superior attractions
which New South Wales offers to labour will be
the means of soon restoring an equilibrium in this
respect. We want people to make our railways, to
find trade for them when made, and to settle the
country when opened by them. The question is:
how is that to be brought about ? Without wishing
to disparage any of the other Colonies, I believe
that this Colony is day by day attracting to itself
an enormous population from the neighbouring
Colonies. I shall show the Committee in a few
moments why I think that this Colony is the spot
upon which the eyes of the labouring population
of the world centre as the best home they can
possibly have.
Mr. See : America !
Mr. Bibbs : I leave America out of the question.
Unfortunately she is not under the British flag
now, though she might have been. What we have
to look to is first of all our superior attractions,


which, will bring, I hope, a large increase of popu-
lation ; hut the Government propose to expedite
that by taking a leaf out of the book of their
predecessors, and asking for a vote of £150,000 for
immigration. We think that is an expenditure
fairly chargeable to our surplus, which is the ac-
cumulation of our land revenue, and it is one of
the items which we have placed on the surplus
revenue estimate.
I said just now that this Colony was daily attract-
ing an enormous population. Now, I have been
enabled through the Custom-house to obtain a few
statistics of a very important character, which show
one of two things, and I am disposed to take the
more charitable view, hirst of all, if the operation
of the Licensing Act has been so conducive to the
moral welfare of the people that it has reduced the
consumption of drink, the late Government deserve
an enormous amount of credit. But here is an extra-
ordinary thing, that, in spite of the glowing accounts
we have had of the improvement in the moral tone of
the community, and the vigorous efforts of the
churches and teetotal societies, the consumption of
liquor in this country seems to go on quite apace
with the ordinary progress of the country. My
sympathies are largely with the temperance move-
ment —and I use the word not in a teetotal sense,
but as synonymous with moderation —and with all
the efforts made to improve the moral tone of


Society; but here is a wonderful state of facts. In
spite of the Licensing Act of which we have heard
so much, there is this extraordinary fact: that in
1882, the first year the Act was in operation,
the Colony consumed 51,000 gallons of spirits more
than were consumed the year before. I do not
think that it is because people have drunk more;
I do not think it is because grog is cheaper ; and 1
cannot attribute it to there being greater facilities
for the sale of spirits, as there have been less; Ido
not attribute it to the running of trams on Sunday
and to people going to the suburbs by this means to
drink an extra glass of grog; but I attribute the
enormous increase to
Sir Henry Parkes : The general election.
Mr. Hires : I have no doubt that the general
election is a sore point with the honorable member;
but I was speaking of the blessings which the ope-
ration of the Licensing Act, of which the honorable
member is the father, has conferred on the Country,
and was pointing out that, in spite of the Act, 51,000
gallons of spirits were consumed last year in excess
of the quantity consumed in the previous year. If
the increase were confined to ardent spirits alone
one might not so much object; but such is not the
case, as of wine of a still character there was an in-
creased consumption of 8,000 gallons; of cham-
pagne, 5,000 gallons; and of bottled beer—the im-
ported article—22o,ooo gallons extra. In addition


to the bottled beer there is another strange thing.
The Colonial brewers mnst have had an active busi-
ness during the same time, as their consumption of
malt increased during the year—the Licensing Act
notwithstanding—by 100,000 bushels. Those ac-
quainted with the operations of the brewer, and who
know the quantity of beer which can he made out
of a bushel of malt, will have some idea of the enor-
mous consumption of malt liquors.
These are extraordinary statistics. I take the
more charitable view of the question ; I believe that
the people are more moral, more temperate, and
more virtuous than they were before the passing of
the Licensing'Act, and further, I believe that —con-
sequent on the general election —they will become
more virtuous in the year 1883 than they were in
the year 1882. I wish to take a charitable view of
the matter, and to consider this enormous augmen-
tation as the result of the increase of our population.
It is because I see the Colony making such rapid
strides as far as population is concerned that I have
been so liberal in my estimate of our revenue in the
future. Besides drinking a fair allowance of the
good things of the world, the people last year con-
sumed s,ooofbs. more of imported manufactured
tobacco than they did in the year 1882. There was
a decrease in the consumption of leaf tobacco.
Then the larrikin element, which the honorable
member for Tenterfield has so keen a perception of.


and appreciates so highly, especially at elections,
increased the consumption of cigars hy 20,000fbs.
This must he an increase consequent on the increase
of population, if nothing else. Then of articles dear
to teetotallers, there was an increase in the con-
sumption of tea hy 130,000fb5.; coffee, ll,000fbs.;
chicory, B,ooolbs. —showing that adulteration still
goes on.
There was a decrease in the importation of sugar,
which is easily accounted for hy the fact that the
sugar-growing industry is so prosperous in the north;
there was a decrease both in refined and raw sugar.
There was an increase in molasses, which shows
that more refining was done here. In dried fruits
there was a decrease of 760,0001b5., but this was fully
counterbalanced hy an enormous increase in bottled
fruits, jams, and jellies. Here is an extraordinary
increase. In the year 1881 we received from pilotage
£20,000, and in 1882 £26,000, or an increase of
£6,000. As I said before, this is a good index to
what the trade industry and business of the
country really are. In harbour and light dues
there was an increase of £3,000. The increase
goes on in every article—bacon and hams, galvan-
ized iron manufactures, biscuits, blue, and starch;
on all sorts of articles there has been a large
increase; and as people cannot drink starch
and blue, for example, I suppose we may fairly
assume that the enormous increase in our imports


and consumption is attributable to the fact that
New South Wales offers to persons desirous of
establishing homes for themselves more attractions
than any other part of the world.
As to the question of our railways, honorable
members will perhaps hardly be surprised to find
that —despite the high price of labour, the excel-
lence of all the works connected with the railways,
and the fact that we keep them in a high state of
perfection as far as repairs and renewals are con-
cerned —they are producing most satisfactory re-
turns. I should like to branch off here to set the
honorable member for East Macquarie (Mr. Combes)
right on a particular point. He has an idea in his
head that our railway accounts are not kept on a
sound footing, and if the premises which he states
were correct the accounts would not be on a sound
basis. The idea of the honorable member is that
we charge to capital account all repairs, renewals,
and alterations which take place from time to time.
When I heard the honorable member make this
statement, and almost announce it as a fact beyond
controversy, I at once put myself in communication
with the Commissioner for Railways, and I have
ascertained from him beyond doubt that our in-
variable custom is to charge renewals of stations,
water-tanks, sidings, and the ten thousand and one
items of railway expenditure, against working ex-
penses wholly. We are most liberal in our way of


keeping these accounts. I will assume that when
a railway is first made certain works cost £SOO.
Increased trade, or wear and tear of the works,
necessitates the extension or repair of the works,
at a cost of £I,OOO. This amount, every farthing of
it, is charged to the working expenses of the rail-
way. This is a very important question, and lam
thankful to the honorable member for having raised
it and for having compelled me to look at it straight
in the face.
I am still more happy to assure the Committee
that, notwithstanding that we are liberal in the
extreme in this particular, our net earnings, calcu-
lated on a fair basis, are increasing. We do not go
before the world increasing the cost of our railways
by adding the cost of renewals to capital, hut we
charge these to working expenses. But the most
remarkable fact about the railways of New South
Wales—and it is one to he proud of—is, that despite
the important circumstance that our tariff of
charges is fixed at a lower rate than is adopted by
any other Australian Colony—that we facilitate
settlement by reason of the cheap carriage which
we give to the persons who use the lines, he they
rich or poor, squatters or selectors, storekeepers, or
those who provide for storekeepers —in spite of all
these things, the railways of New South Wales pay
a higher rate on the capital invested than any other
railways in the known world.


I have before me an interesting return on the
subject, and I think that it will be conceded that
this a fitting time to state the facts which it
contains. It is a statement of the returns of all the
railways in the world during the year 1881; and it
gives a complete idea of whatonr railways have done,
compared even with countries where there is cheap
labour and larger population than we have. The
average income of 1881 on the amount of capital
invested on all the lines of Great Britain was U 29
per cent. In the United States of America, with
their enormous population and the enormous
amount of traffic over their lines, the average for
the year was U6O only; India, with its teeming
population, returns 5T5 per cent.; South Australia,
3’50 per cent.; Queensland, 2'61 per cent.; New
Zealand, where the mileage of railways is larger
than onrs, but the railways are not of the same
character as onrs, 3*41 per cent.; Victoria, 4 per
cent.; and New South Wales, the crowning Colony
of the whole group, 5*31 per cent. This speaks
highly for the management of onr railways.
I believe that in no part of the world are the
railways better managed. One does not like to
speak boastfully or in an exulting spirit on an
occasion like this ; but I cannot help saying that I
do not think that in any other Colony is the good
management of the railways shown in such a prac-
tical way as it is here by the few accidents which


occur. The returns for last year show an income
of 5*17 per cent., or *l4 per cent, less than the year
1881; but it must he borne in mind that towards
the middle of last year an enormous reduction was
made in the railway rates, for the benefit of the
people; the people, practically, became participators
in the profitable working of our railway system;
the reductions which were wisely made in the rates
—although I did not think so at the time —have
caused not a loss but a reduction of the income by
£IOO,OOO for the year. If the amount of money
which we lost by the reduction, or rather made —as
where we give people cheaper carriage there is no
loss—were added to the receipts, the average would
have been 5'37 per cent, for the year. These are
facts of which the Colony may well be proud.
Honorable members to whom the Estimates were
handed last night will have observed, I hope with
some degree of satisfaction, that the Government
has felt itself obliged to make increases in the
salaries of some of the Civil Servants. When the
remuneration of persons in the ordinary employ-
ments of the country is taken into account, it is not
too much to say that what the Government proposes
is anything more than a bare act of justice. It is
to be regretted that time has not permitted the
submission of a measure to put the Civil Service of
the country on a satisfactory footing; but it was
felt that it would be hard to justify the postpone-


ment of the claims of such of the Civil Servants
who had long established their right to a fair
adjustment of their position to the favourable con-
sideration of the House. Of course, when' the
Estimates are before honorable members in detail,
Ministers in charge of the respective Departments
will have an opportunity to justify the increases
which are proposed. I hope that, in view of the
continued prosperity of the Colony, and the success
which has accrued in the management of many of
the commercial industries of the Colony, the House
will not deal with the salaries of the Civil Servants
in a niggardly spirit. If we want faithful service
from our public servants we must pay them liberally,
and he exacting in the extent of the work which
we require from them. Of course until we get a
Civil Service Act Ministers will not he relieved from
perpetual dunning for billets. Brief as is my ex-
perience as a Minister, it has been such as to prompt
me to say that I shall he only too glad —and I am
sure old Ministers will he glad of the same thing,
therefore we rely on their assistance when we bring
forward a Civil Service Bill—to he relieved of the
perpetual annoyance and get rid of those persons
who apply to Ministers for positions for which they
are not qualified, and who look upon the Civil Ser-
vice as a sort of benevolent institution. The trade
of the Colony is increasing, and the Civil Service is
a very important element of it; the work of the
country cannot he done, nor can we have good


government, without we have a highly educated and
faithful class of men in the Public Service. As I
said just now, I hope that when the Estimates are
before us honorable members will not deal with the
Civil Servants in any niggardly spirit, hut that each
man will receive fair play and justice.
I will now invite the attention of the Committee
to a few of the works for which we intend to provide
out of the surplus, to the amount of £1,047,300.
We propose to take, for works of defence, £48,000;
immigration, £150,000 ; charitable allowances,
£32,500; purchase of lands to he set apart as
places of public recreation in certain of the metro-
politan suburbs and in country towns, further sum,
£100,000; special grants to country and suburban
municipalities, equal to 15s. per £ of the total
amount of the ordinary rates collected for the muni-
cipal year ending sth Eehruary, 1883, £lOO,OOO.
With regard to the question of the future endow-
ment of municipalities, the Government has given
it anxious consideration. We have placed £IOO,OOO
on the Estimates, believing and hoping that this
would he the last time when Parliament would he
directly applied to by the municipalities for increased
endowment. We hope that the day is not far dis-
tant when there will he passed a measure which will
in some degree do away with the centralization
which has to a great extent been the cause of our
large expenditure, and that then these special


endowments will cease. The Government consider
that this will probably be the last chance which the
municipalities will have, and therefore submit the
item for the approval of Parliament. The working
of onr municipal system in the past has shown that
those who had the administration of it have acted
wisely, prudently, and conscientiously; they have
shown an amount of power and discretion which
inspires the hope that it is quite within the hounds
of possibility for a comprehensive local government
measure to he successfully worked; we believe that
the people will readily agree with the principles of
such a measure and comprehend its spirit and
intention, and thus they will he able to perform
satisfactorily the important functions which will
devolve on them when the Bill is passed. The Go-
vernment was unable to comply to the fullest
extent with the application made by a representative
deputation from the municipalities, hut we have
done what seemed fair and reasonable in proposing
to supplement the endowment of the municipalities
for the present year by a contribution at the rate
of 15s. per £on ordinary rates. This item takes
£IOO,OOO off the surplus.
Then there is an item which may he an unpopular
one, hut is believed to he necessary—£2s,ooo for
warlike stores. Bor the resumption of land at
Middle Harbour in connection with the powder
magazines stationed there we provide £5,000. Then,


in connection with the Department of Works, we
ask for £IO,OOO towards clearing and improving
the Mnrmmhidgee Diver; and £40,000 for a steam
ferry bridge to connect the city with the beautiful
suburbs of St. Leonards. Then there is an item
which I should like to see wiped off the paper —
£65,000 for the Callan Park Lunatic Asylum; hut
unfortunately there are people whom an all-wise
Providence afflicts with the loss of reason, and they
are thrown upon the care of the merciful and tender;
and hence we are compelled to construct asylums.
Then follow these items :—New General Post Office,
further sum, £60,000; Reformatory for Boys,
£20,000; Jervis Bay Light-house, £20,000; fur-
ther improvements at Glebe Island Abattoir,
£60,000; construction of reservoir and other im-
provements at the Quarantine-station, North Head,
£15,000; police stations and officers’ quarters,
£23,000 ; Government Printing Office, further sum,
£17,000; public buildings, Duhho, £20,000; twenty-
seven tanks and wells on stock routes, £25,000;
supply of machinery, &c., and completion of works
in progress in connection with inland water supply,
£6,800; Pastures and Stock Protection Act and
extermination of rabbits, £35,000.
The next item is one which I hope will he agreed
to without much discussion new public school
buildings and teachers’ residences, £150,000, and
I hope that it will also come as a subject for reflec-


tion by those honorable members who yesterday
voted for the abolition of school fees. Eor addi-
tional buildings in connection with the Sydney
University we propose to grant £20,000. The items
which I have ennmeratedmake a total of £1,047,300,
which is to be taken from the surplus revenue.
I have now, to the best of my ability, put before
the Committee and the Country as full and ex-
haustive a statement of the financial condition of
this country, and of the policy of the Government,
as I am able to furnish ; and I think I may be per-
mitted to express my gratification that circumstances
exist to justify the fullest confidence in that financial
condition. When we consider the nature of our
public debt, how it has arisen, what it represents,
and what is the guarantee for its discharge which
we offer to the public creditor, we can challenge
comparison with any country for the value of the
security which we offer to those from whom we
borrow. Unlike the national liabilities of older
countries, which have been incurred to meet the
expenses of long and devastating wars, our debt is
but the partial cost of vast and reproductive public
works, daily becoming of greater benefit to our-
selves, and, consequently of an increasing value to
our creditors. When those who inquire into the
sources of public prosperity examine the accounts
of nations, they wisely discriminate between the debt
which represents nothing but a sacrifice of blood


and treasure, and those debts which have been in-
curred in developing the resources, increasing the
public conveniences, and augmenting the value of
the public securities.
Happily for this country, our liabilities are all of
this latter nature. When it is borne in mind that
in a single department of our public works we have
an asset which would at any moment find a ready
sale on the London market for a sum which would
not only liquidate our entire debt to the uttermost
farthing, but would leave us a surplus of no less
than £7,000,000 sterling, we stand before the world
in a position of unequalled financial soundness and
national prosperity. It is of the last importance that
this great fact should be clearly understood. Our
public debt stands in round numbers at £18,000,000.
I have been dealing in round numbers all through.
Our railways alone have been valued at, and
can now be placed upon the London market for
the sum of £25,000,000 sterling. I have the
valuation of a gentleman well versed in enterprises
of the kind, and it gives the value of the railways
alone—without reckoning the value of the land on
which they stand, at the amount stated. If the
railways, with the rolling stock and appliances,
were handed over to buyers who could be got
to-morrow, we should get not less than £25,000,000
for them. And, moreover, apart from their absolute
value as a realizable asset, for the complete efface-


ment of our total liabilities, if such a course were
deemed necessary or desirable, it is also a fact that
cannot be too widely proclaimed that, even at a
tariff of railway charges lower than those in existence
in any other of the Australian Colonies, and pur-
posely reduced to the lowest point, for the purpose
of more effectually developing the resources of the
country, our net railway income to-day is more
than ample to cover the whole amount of the annual
charge for interest on our public liabilities. There
is no Colony in the group which can say this, and
I question whether any part of the world can say
the same thing justly. And while this single asset
is of such enormous value, and of itself so much
in excess of our debt, we have covered the face of
the country with every description of public works
which can minister to public convenience, increase
the value of our public estate, facilitate settlement,
and extend to all parts of the Colony the advantages
of good government.
In addition to the security which we offer by our
railways, we have owing to the Government, from
the conditional purchasers of the Colony, a balance
of about £12,000,000, for the payment of which
every new work undertaken is an additional
guarantee. When we, in the face of such facts as
these, are spoken of as undertaking liabilities without
either a wise provision for their discharge or a
sufficient justification for increasing them, it is


well, however superfluous, the task may appear to
us, to point out how utterly such statements are
wanting in actual foundation. I am induced to
say this because the Times , the powerful engine of
knowledge in England, has endeavoured in some
of its late articles to catechise the off-shoots of
the old country by assuming that we have overrun
the constable, and that we have exceeded our
borrowing powers. I have framed this sentence
for the purpose of conveying to them that we
have valid assets such as no other Colony pos-
sesses, and that though the total amount of our
indebtedness is £18,000,000 it does not cover the
cost of the works. Then there is the further fact
which must he gratifying to the English holders of
our debentures, that from one item of revenue alone
there is a sufficient sum to cover the whole of the
interest chargeable on our debt. I think that this is
a position more glorious than anything which was
ever aspired to in Australia, and one of which we
may well he proud.
Our prosperity has surpassed all possible antici-
pations of even those who looked most favourably
upon our great natural advantages, and who were
prepared to regard most kindly the efforts which we
had made to develop them. I have obtained from
the Customs Department a return to which I
specially invite the attention of honorable members
and of the people of England, as there are many


who are old enough to know what the trade of
London was fifty years ago; and they will he able
hy the comparison which I shall make to form some
possible idea of what the Colony of New South
Wales is. Who could have imagined that in 1881
this port of Sydney should, in the tonnage of ships
entering it —exclusive of the coasting service—have
far surpassed the tonnage entering the port of
London fifty years ago ? And yet this is the fact,
for against 1,482 vessels of a tonnage of 854,172
entering the port of London in 1833, there entered
the port of Sydney in the year 1881 no less than
2,254 vessels, with an aggregate tonnage of 1,456,239
tons. And this for the port of Sydney alone, leaving
the port of Newcastle with an amount of tonnage
entering it almost as large as that of Sydney. I
can say no more to establish our claims to the per-
fect confidence of the world in the extent of our
resources, the soundness of our securities, and the
greatness of our prosperity.


N • *
• - ' ■ ' . . ' ' " ■ '
■
' '
, • ■
f ■ ' -■ i -
.
'
: , '
• • ' ■ ■■ v


ESTIMATES
OF THE
WAYS AID MEANS
OP THE
GrOYEENMENT
NEW SOUTH WALES,
FOE THE YEAE
1883.


CONTENTS.
TAGE.
No. 1. Account of the Revenue and Expenditure of the Consolidated
Revenue Fund of New South Wales, for the year 1882 43
No. 2. Account of the Actual and Estimated Revenue and Expendi-
ture of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the year 1883 47
A. —Abstract Statement showing the Actual Revenue of the years
1881 and 1882, and the Estimated Revenue for the year 1883 ... 50
Loans Accounts.—Statement of Liabilities and Assets on 31st
December, 1882 55
Gb—Abstract of Expenditure for Public Works and other Services
provided for by Loans, from the commencement of the Loans’
Account to the 31st December, 1882 58
Statement of Balances on the Public Accounts on the 31st December,
1882 61


No. 1.
CONSOLIDATED REVENUE EUND.
ACCOUNT
KEYENUE AND EXPENDITURE
DURING THE YEAR
1882.


CONSOLIDATED
ACCOUNT of Revenue and
* Amount of Payments during the year 1882, as per Statements published in the Govern-
ment Gazette of the 3rd January, 1883, No. 6 £6,457,218 0 1
Less Repayments to the credit of Votes, as shown on other side 7,762 9 9
£6,449,455 10
4
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 7th Eehruary, 1883.
James Pearson,
Accountant.


REVENUE EUND.
Expenditure during tlie Year 1882.
Particulars.
By Ohsh Balance at the credit of the Consolidated Revenue Fund,
on the 31st December, 1881 '
~ Amount of Revenue and Receipts in the year 1882, as per
Statement attached marked A, page 50, viz.:—
Taxation.
Land Revenue— £ s. d.
Sales 2,167,514 7 8
Annual Revenue 746,880 2
Receipts for services rendered.
General Miscellaneous Receipts
Less—Amount of Repayments to the credit of Votes, the
expenditure on account of which has been reduced
to a like extent
Total.
James Thomson,
Consulting Accountant.
Amount. Total.
& s. d.
1,903,412 17 10
& s. d,
2,914,394 10 3
2,360,235 8 2
240,493 18 8
7,418,536 14 11
7,762 9 9
2,927,434 10 4
7,410,774 5 2
£ 10,338,208 15
G-EO. E
DIBBS,
Treasurer,




No. 2.
CONSOLIDATED REVENUE FUND.
ACCOUNT
ACTUAL AND ESTIMATED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE
FOE THE YEAE
1888.


CONSOLIDATED
ACCOUNT of Actual and Estimated Revenue
ARREARS OP 1882 AND PREVIOUS TEARS.
To Amount of Outstanding Liabilities against the Consolidated
Revenue Fund on the 31st December, 1882 :
For Services of 1878 .
For Services of 1879
For Services of 1880
For Services of 1881
For Services of 1882 £898,711 15 10
Less Amount of Appropriations estimated as
not likely to be required 250,000 0 0
For Services specially authorized out of Surplus Revenue
under various Acts
~ Amount appropriated under Act 46 Victoria No. 9, for Working
Expenses of Existing Railway Lines
Less —Paid under the Warrant of His Excellency the Governor
during the year 1882
~ Amount of Supplementary Estimates for Services of 1882
and previous years, as per the Supplementary Estimates
now before the Legislative Assembly
s. d.
12,104 3 7
4,527 8 5
27,346 9 8
54,986 10 10
648,711 15 10
894,566 17 6
150,000 0 0
20,000 0 0
£ s. d.
1,642,243 5 10
130,000 0 0
470,271 3 4
£ 2,242,514
9 2
CURRENT YEAR.
„ Charges on the Consolidated Revenue Fund as shown in the
Summary of the Estimates-in-Chief for 1883, page 1.
~ General Service (exclusive of the proposed vote of £lOO,OOO for
the Treasurer’s Advance Account and other votes which
form no permanent charge on the Revenue)
~ Provided by Constitutional and Colonial Acts
„ Special Appropriations .
~ Amount of Estimate of Expenditure proposed to he defrayed
out of Surplus Revenue
5,326,573 0
43,315 8
1,112,676 0
6,482,564 8 0
1,047,300 O' 0
~ Estimated Surplus
9,772,378 17 2
1,135,574 8 0
Total.
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 7th February, 1883.
£ 10,907,953
James Pearson,
Accountant.


EEYENUE FUND.
and Expenditure for the Year 1883.
Particulars.
Amount.
James Thomson,
Consulting Accountant.
D
GrEO. E. DIBBS,
Treasurer.
Total.
£ 10,907,953


CONSOLIDATED REVENUE,
ABSTRACT Statement showing the Actual Revenue of the Years
1881 and 1882, and the Estimated Revenue for the Year 1883,
Head of Receipt.
Taxation.
Customs
Duty on Spirits distilled in the Colony
Stamps
Licenses
Total Taxation
Land Revenue.
Annual Land Revenue—
Interest on Land conditionally purchased.
Pastoral Occupation
Mining Occupation
Miscellaneous Land Receipts
Total Land Revenue
Receipts for Services rendered.
Railway Receipts
Post Office
Mint Receipts
Pees for Escort and Conveyance of Gold
Pilotage, Harbour, and Light Rates and Fees
Registration of Brands
Public School Fees
Fees of Office
Total Receipts for Services rendered
General Miscellaneous Receipts.
Rents, exclusive of Land.
Fines and Forfeitures ...
Unclassified Receipts
Toial Miscellaneous Receipts
Grand Totals-
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 7th February, 1883.
Revenue of
1,458,676
3,705
192,503
115,964
1,770,848
2,229,981
253,357
286,003
20,288
31,365
591,008
2,820,989
1,459,684
330,414
10,455
1,881
34,884
949
1,942,283
51,050
14,416
114,741
180,207
6,714,327
Revenue of
1,552,706
5,637
228,138
116,932
1,903,413
2,167,514
287,526
409,244
20,248
29,862
2,914,394
746,880
1,828,094
2,360,235
358,525
7,418,536
52,314
17,072
171,108
240,494
GEO. R.
DIBBS
Treasurer,


REVENUE DETAILED
Head of Receipt.
Revenue
of 1881.
Revenue
of 1882.
Estimated
Revenue
for 1883.
Taxation.
Customs—
Spirits
Wine
Ale and Beer
Tobacco and Cigars..
Tea
Sugar and Molasses .
Coffee and Chicory .
Opium
Malt
Hops
Rice
Dried Fruits
Specific Duties
Bonded Warehouses, 20 Yic. No. 21
Rent of Goods in Queen’s Warehouses, &c..
Cash Payments by the Government of South
Australia
Duty on Spirits Distilled in tub Colony .
Stamps
Licenses—
Wholesale Spirit Dealers and Brewers ...
Auctioneers
Retail Fermented and Spirituous Liquors
Billiard and Bagatelle Licenses
Distillers and Rectifiers
Hawkers and Pedlers
Pawnbrokers
Colonial Wine, Cider, and Perry Licenses ...
Licenses under the Gunpowder Act of 1876
All other Licenses
Total Taxation.
* The difference between this sum and the £47,500 payable by the Government of South Australia
under the recent Convention is distributed under the various tariff heads, being the amount of duties
collected by New South Wales on bonded goods, which is taken as part payment of the amount
agreed upon.


&
707,594
179,949
417,715
1,041
621,017
129,921
109,677
2,167,514
287,526
65,417
343,053
230
494
Eetenue
Detailed
Head of Receipt.
Land Revenue.
Sales-
Auction Sales
Improved Purchases, &c
Selections after Auction
Provisional Pre-emptive Right Sales .
Deposits on Conditional Purchases
Instalments on Conditional Purchases
Balances on Conditional Purchases...
Total Revenue from Land Sales &
Annual Land Revenue.
Interest on Land Conditionally Purchased.
Pastoral Occupation—
Rent of Runs (Annual Leaseholds and Special
Leases)
Rent of Runs (Five years’ Leaseholds)
Assessment on Runs
Quit Rents
Mining Occupation—
Mineral Leases
Mineral Licenses
Leases of Auriferous Lands
Miners’ Rights
Business Licenses.
Miscellaneous Land Receipts—
Licenses to cut Timber, &c
Fees on Transfer of Runs ■ ■ • ■
Fees on Preparation and Enrolment of Title-deeds
All other Receipts
Total Annual Land Revenu
■continued.
Revenue of
566,404
494,262
351,885
2,908
592,966
129,547
92,009
Revenue of
2,229,981
Estimated
Revenue
for 1883.
253,357
63,968
220,604
585
160, 000
100,000
38,000
600,000
150.000
100.000
286,003
409,244
1,148,000
325,000
591,008
67,500
282,000
746,880
350,250
723,350


Revenue of
1881.
Revenue of
1882.
Estimated
Revenue for
1883.
£
£
£
1,398,486
61,198
1,703,850
124,244
1,978,000
150,000
1,459,684
1,828,094
2,128,000
221,480
100,211
8,723
229,911
118,606
10,008
275.000
120.000
11,000
380,414
358,525
406,000
10,455
8,987
10,500
1,881
1,808
1,750
34,884
46,850
48,000
949
859
800
46,347
51,312
55,000
106
25,287
4,146
712
1,227
2,340
623
4,294
6,499
2,627
9,808
142
26,750
4,982
1,032
1,154
2,304
868
5,170
8,313
3,289
9,796
100
35,000
4,500
1,000
1,400
2,000
1,000
5.000
7.000
3,200
10,250
57,669
63,800
70,450
1,942,283
2,360,235
2,720,500
Eevenije
Head of Receipt.
Eeceipts for Services rendered.
Railways—
Railways Proper
Tramways
Post Office—
Postage
Telegraph Receipts
Commission on Money Orders .
Mint Receipts
Fees for Escort and Conveyance of Gold
Pilotage, Harbour, and Light Rates and Fees. .
Registration of Brands
Public School Fees.
Fees of Office-
Certificates of Naturalization
Registrar-General
Prothonotary of Supreme Court .
Master in Equity
Curator of Intestate Estates
Insolvent Court
Sheriff
District Courts
Courts of Petty Sessions
Shipping Masters
Other Fees
Total Receipts for Services rendered £
Detailed — continued.


Eevekue
Detailed
Head of Receipt.
General Miscellaneous Receipts.
Rents, exclusive op Land —
Tolls and Ferries
Wharfs
Government Buildings and Premises.
Glebe Island Bridge
Fines and Forfeitures—
Sheriff
Courts of Petty Sessions
Unauthorized Occupation of Crown Lands
Crown’s Share of Seizures, &c.
Confiscated and Unclaimed Property
Other Fines
Unclassified Receipts—
Sale of Government Property
Support of Patients in Lunatic Asylums
Collections by Government Printer
Store Rent of Gunpowder, &c
Value of Articles manufactured by Prisoners in
Gaol, &c
Fees on presenting Private Bills to Parliament
and on Letters of Registration
Interest on Bank Deposits
Glebe Island Abattoir Receipts
Fitz Roy Dry Dock Receipts
Assessment on Sugar Refinery
Fisheries Commission
Other Receipts
Total, General Miscellaneous Receipts £
Grand Totals
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 7th Eebruary, 1883.
i— continued.
Revenue Revenue
of 1881. of 1882,
114,741
Estimated
Revenue
for 1883.
180,207
171,108
175,800
240,494
6,714,327
7,418,536
222,800
6,819,200
GEO
DIBBS,
Treasurer,


LOANS ACCOUNTS.
STATEMENT
LIABILITIES AND ASSETS
ON THE
31st DECEMBER, 1882.


Particulars.
Old Loans Account.
To Amount of Liabilities outstanding on 31st December, 1882,
being Appropriations and Balances of Appropriations for
Public Works and other Services authorized to be provided
for by Loans i
General Loan Account.
~ Amount of Liabilities outstanding on Slst December, 1882,
being Appropriations and Balances of Appropriations for
Public Works and other Services authorized to be provided
for by Loans
~ Overdraft in the Bank of New South Wales on the General
Loan Account on the Slst December, 1882
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 7th Eebruary, 1883.
LOANS
STATEMENT of the Liabilities and Assets
Amount. Total.
& s. d.
153,336 8 7
153,336 8 7
11,872,220 8 4
Peabson,
Accountant.
4,213,772 15 9
James


ACCOUNTS.
of Loans Accounts on the 31st December, 1882.
Particulars.
Old Loans Account.
By Cash in the Bank of New South Wales, Sydney, on 31st Decem-
ber, 1882, being' part of the balance at the credit of the Public
Account
General Loan Account.
Amounts yet to be raised by Loan under the following Loan Acts,
viz. ;
39 Vic. No. 18 (balance)
38 Vic. No. 2
40 Vic. No. 12 >■
41 Vic. No. 4 )
Is via No'. 11} £6.364,338 5 6
Less —Amount received in part of this
Loan lately negotiated in London 500,000 0 0
44 Vic. No. 12.
44 Vic. No. 28.
45 Vic. No. 22.
Grand Total
Amount.
5,864,338 5
1,262,000 0
7,807,500 0
1,000,000 0
16,085,993
£ 16,085,993
GEO. E.
£ 16,239,329 12
DIBBS,
Treasurer.


Gc.
SERVICES PROVIDED EOR BY LOANS.
ABSTRACT of Expenditure for Public Works and other Services provided
for by Loans, from the commencement of the Loans Account to the
31st December, 1882.
Head of Service.
Immigration.
Sewerage and Water Supply, Sydney
Compensation to Municipal Council of Sydney for land resumed under
the Water Supply Act, 17 Vic. No. 35
New Water Supply for Sydney ...
New Sewerage Scheme for Sydney
Public Works, Queensland, when it formed part of N. S. Wales
Harbours and Rivers Navigation Improvements
Improving the Harbour of Newcastle and the river Hunter...
Wharf, Newcastle
Wharf, Bullock Island
Steam Cranes, Newcastle
Southern Breakwater, Newcastle Harbour
Northern Breakwater, Newcastle Harbour
Coal Staiths, Newcastle
Navigation of the rivers Darling, Murray, and Murrumbidgee .
Improving the navigation of the Edward River
Harbour Works, Wollongong
Harbour Works, Kiama
Harbour Works, Lake Macquarie ._
Improving the navigation of other harbours and rivers, &c.
Steam Dredges and Punts
Improvements, Circular Quay
Steam Cranes, Wharf, &c., Darling Harbour
Dam at North Rocks, Parramatta
Dam at Hunt’s Creek, Parramatta
Fitz Roy Dry Dock
Wharf, &c., Woolloomooloo Bay
Reclaiming Land at Darling Harbour and Blackwattle Swamp.
Blackwattle Bridge and Causeway
Increased Wharf Accommodation at Sydney
Wharf, Eden
Wharf, Morpeth
Breakwater at the Clarence River .......
Improving the entrance of the Moruya River
Extension of Dock Accommodation


G- — continued.
Head of Service.
Public Works and Buildings :
Harbour Defences...,
University of Sydney
Affiliated Colleges
Grammar School
Australian Museum Enlargement
Parliamentary Buildings
Juvenile Reformatories
New General Post Office
New Printing Office
New Public Offices
Public Offices, Newcastle
Custom House, Newcastle
Receiving Houses at Redfern and the Necropolis
Free Public Library '
Observatory
Receiving Houses at Redfern and the Necropolis
Asylum for Destitute Children
Additions to the Sydney Infirmary
Public Works and Improvements, Sydney and Suburbs
Lunatic Asylum
Light-houses
Glebe Island Abattoirs, Bridge, &c
Gaols and Penal Establishments
Court and Watch Houses
Police Barracks and Stations, Sydney and Country Districts.
Roads and Bridges :
Bridges throughout the Colony
Metalling the Mudgee Road
Repayments by Loans :
Loans repaid under various Acts
Total.
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 7th February, 1883,
Services provided eor bt Loans— continued.
Amount.
£ s. d.
324,471 10 8
55.000 0 0
49,278 6 7
25.000 0 0
26,954 11 0
15.000 0 0
19,946 17 9
117,412 10 1
6,000 0 0
70.000 0 0
7,579 13 6
10,870 3 11
12,548 13 7
9,215 0 6
7.000 0 0
5.000 0 0
5.000 0 0
2,460 17 0
40,532 8 2
70,052 2 3
61,866 11 0
13,906 11 6
21,937 0 7
22,941 6 6
437,201 5 11
22,000 0 0
JAMES
£ s, d
999,974 4 7
459,201 5 11
1,335,230 0 0
23,118,775 1 3
PEARSON,
Accountant.




STATEMENT OE BALANCES
ON THE
AND THE DISTRIBUTION OE THE SAME
ON THE
31st DECEMBER, 1882.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF NEW SOUTH WALES


£
s.
d.
213,020
3
7
16,136
9
7
13,147 17
0
6,037 14 11
427
2
0
38,841
0
5
174,652
0
6
2,257
7
6
10,541 13 11
766
5
0
50,163
2
4
1,134,48;
1
3
7,703
3
0
22,700
6
9
10 13
6
49,374 15
8
2,422
8
8
2,059 14
6
477
0
6
3,739
8
5
649
3 11
10,579 13
2
125
0
0
. 124,585 19
0
STATEMENT of
TREASURY BALANCES.
Public Account.
Consolidated Revenue
Revenue Proper
Loans’ Account (Old)
Trust Fund —
Church and School Estates Fund.
'Police Reward Fund
Police Superannuation Fund
Poundage
Shipping Master (Seamen’s Wages)
Revenue Suspense Fund
Trust Moneys, 20 Vic. No. 11
Lunacy Trust Fund, 42 Vic. No. 7
Immigration Remittances
Commissioners’ Fund —Real Property Act
Assurance Fund —Real Property Act
Government Savings’ Bank Account, 34 Vic. No. 15
British and Australian Telegram Account
Railway Store Account
Imperial Pension Fund Account
Over-issues
Treasurer’s Advance Account
Gold Fields Survey Fee Account ...
Advances to Contractors Account .
San Francisco Mail Service Account
New Zealand Cable Account
Sheep Account
Bishopthorpe Estate Fund .
Sundry Deposits
Loans.
Less Debit Balance :
General Loan Account
Total .
The Treasury, New South Wales,
Sydney, 7th February, 1883.
Balances on the Public Accounts of New South "Wales,
3,888,753
153,336
Total Public Account £
1,884,899
£ 1,713,216 3 1


and the distribution o£ the same on the 31st December.
DISTRIBUTION OP THE BALANCES.
Bank of New South Wales—
Sydney Account—
Public Account
Less Overdraft on the General Loans’ Account
Special Deposits—
From the Public Account:—
Bank of New South Wales, Sydney.
City Bank
Oriental Bank
Australian Joint Stock Bank
English, Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank
London Chartered Bank
Mercantile Bank
Union Bank.
Cash in the hands of the Receiver, subsequently deposited in
the Bank of New South Wales
Less —•
Bank of New South Wales London Account—
Overdraft at date of latest advices
Total Cash Balance
Securities—
Treasury Chest: —
Police Reward and Superannuation Fund—Debentures
Clergy and School Estates Revenue Fund—•
Debentures £68,400 0 0
New South Wales Four per Cents 106,781 19 3
Assurance Fund—Real Property Act—Debentures
Government Savings’ Bank Fund: —
Debentures £89,200 0 0
New South Wales Four per Cents 296,466 13 11
296,466 13 11
Miscellaneous
Bank of New South Wales:—
Debentures—Lunacy Trust, 42 Vie. No. 7
Total.
■, 1882.
£ S. d.
4,450,370 6 9
4,213,772 15 9
500,000 0 0
75.325 0 0
75.325 0 0
60,268 0 0
52.726 0 0
52.726 0 0
52.726 0 0
52.726 0 0
921,822
1,467,050 7 8
1,092,637 0 10
23,200 0 0
175,181 19 3
22,000 0 0
* The proceeds of the £2,000,000 Loan lately floated in London (particulars not to hand), less £500,000
already received in Sydney, has to be credited to this account.
JAMES PEARSON,
Accountant.






