

ften+
flt V, rv
. c/
WAYSIDE SKETCHES
TASMANIA
S . H . AY INTLE.
MELBOURNE:
H. THOMAS, 80 CHANCERY LANE.
1880.
AUTHORS RIGHTS RESERVED.




NORTH-EASTERN TASMANIA.
Bt S. H. Wintle.
The Corners.
Notwithstanding that Tasmania is noted for the salubrity of its
climate, and the magnificence of its scenery from one end of the
island to the other, still there are localities which may claim
the preference, perhaps, in the eyes of the visitor who is in
search of health and the picturesque. There is no part of the
beautiful island that offers the same attractions as the North
East Coast in the neighborhood of George’s Bay, for here there
is a combination of majestic grandeur with Arcadian beauty.
To reach this favored locality, the traveller exchanges a seat in
the railway car for one in a four wheeled conveyance at the
Corners. It is very questionable if such another dreary,
monotonous spot exists on the face of the earth as the Corners.
Wherever the eye may wander, it meets with nothing but a
dismal stretch of a sheep run, dotted with a few stunted, dis-
torted trees, and the solitary, and still more dreary looking
hotel rising out of the midst, while its proprietor, and those
about him, have become hopelessly infected with the prevailing
gruesome air of the detested spot. But this unromantic
place is calculated to enhance the beauty of the scenes which
await the visitor, and as he bowls along on a hematite gravelled
road, as level as a billiard table, with good genial George Avery,
the Jehu, he feels a sense of satisfaction as he sees the Corners
fading away in the distance and the grand hills rising up before
him. On either side of the road for some distance, he will see
vestiges of the early days of the colony in the primitive fences of
brushwood, and “ dogleg.’’ In eight miles, Stoney Steps is
reached where there is a hostelry kept by Herr Shmidt. Here
the traveller for the first time since leaving the city, makes
acquaintance with that most beautiful river, the picturesque
South Esk. While the horses are being changed, he will have
an opportunity of watching the falls at the rear of the Inn
where the pellucid stream tumbles over a rugged barrier of
basalt ; and a little lower down observe how it spreads out into
a dreamy, apparently motionless reach, reflecting the acacia*,


easnarina, and gums that thickly clothe its banks. Be the
visitor an enthusiast in the icthyial pastime, not the least
attractive feature of this stream in his eyes would be the fine
brown trout with which it abounds. Fifteen miles further,
through country consecrated to sheepdom, Avoca is reached. It
is a small village or hamlet with one inn, two stores, and about
a dozen cottages, but it is exceedingly picturesque, with the
river St. Paul, meandering through it, and it is well calculated to
awaken memories of what Ireland’s lyric bard wrote about the
“ Meeting of the Waters.” Those
Blue Hills
which the traveller saw after leaving the dismal Corners, stretch-
ing like a barrier in the dim distance, he is now fairly amongst.
Grim, granite mountain heights, flanked and ribbed with the old
world paloeozoic slates and sandstones, that have been upheaved
by the said granite from their originally horizontal position, into
a nearly vertical one, rise on either hand before him. At the
feet of those gracefully rounded heights, on the left hand, flows
the South Esk, and now, and anon, the visitor will get glimpses
of it through the trees that he is not likely to readily forget.
He will observe that the material of the road is of a very
different character to that he has been travelling over for
some time past, since he took his seat in the coach. He will
observe that it consists of waterworn pebbles of quartz and gravel.
In a word, he is in an auriferous region, and that charming
river that flows so peacefully at the feet of the high hills far
below, is responsible for these pebbles. In the slates and sand-
stones on these hillsides, there are quartz veins and lodes containing
gold more, or less, and these have been worn down ages ago, the
result being that deep down in the old river bed the precious
metal lies, but it is locked up, and the woolgrowera have the key.
On the summits of those granite hills which are table-topped
there is tin ore in small quantity. But we must not stay here
too long to geologise, for we’ve many a league to traverse yet.
Now are we fairly in Saintdom, for we have crossed St. Paul’s
river, and two or three miles off the road to our right, rises St.
Paul’s Dome—a conspicuously rounded lofty hill, while St. Mary’s
Mt. St. Nicholas and St. Patrick’s Head await us in the distance.
Some of the earlier colonists who conferred these names, in most
instances quite inappropriate, must have been deeply imbued
with Saint Worship. The road now for many miles will skirt
the ancient bed of the South Esk, which is perhaps the finest
valley in the island; much of it is devoted to agriculture, but
more of it to grazing,
Towering far above all other hills proudly rises


Ben Lomond,
die highest mountain but one in Tasmania, and the founiain head
of several rivers. Here is another instance of topographical mis-
nomenclature in Tasmania. If the truth were known, it pro-
bably, in no particular, resembles the Ben Lomond of Scotland.
Its bold broken and rugged outline at once arrests the visitor’s
attention. It, in this particular, presenting such striking con-
trast to the smoothly rounded hills in the neighborhood. This
feature is due to the fact, that its summit consists of diorite, i. e.
trap rock used as metal for the roads. The granite, as already
stated, has burst through the stratified formations, and it in turn
has been disrupted by the diorite which covers it with a capping,
and this occurred during a far subsequent period known to geolo-
gists as the great Volcanic Epoch. Many, and diverse are the
forms the outline of this mountain present as the traveller
speeds along. At one time its southernmost part presents the
appearance of a lion ccuchant. A mile or two further on,
and this resemblance no longer exists, and is like anything the
imagination of the spectator can supply. On the eastern escar-
pement, near the foot of the mountain there is coal, and also
auriferous quartz lodes. The latter only is worked.
When about half the distance to Fingal is accomplished,
there is another short stoppage to change horses at a roadside
stable, and a little further on the visitor sees an antiquated
vestige of former days in the shape of a ruined dwelling. It is
known as Grenbers Haunted House. Tradition has it, that a
horrible murder was committed there in the early days of the
colony, and no one will live in it on account of the nightly visita-
tions of the ghost of the murdered man. Yonder lofty hill, with
the peculiar cone-shaped rock-mass rising high from the centre
of the summit, is Tower Hill, where gold mining in the quartz
lodes is carried on with apparently not very satisfactory results.
As the traveller proceeds along the smooth and winding road, he
will observe that some of the cuttings have been made to a con-
siderable depth through very rounded pebbles and boulders of
quartz, and granite, interspersed occasionally with slate, sandstone,
and greenstone, while bands of gravel are frequently interstratified.
These are the ancient bed of the South Esk river, rolling now
more than oue hundred feet below, through the valley, and they
tell him that many ages ago at this height that river flowed.
These exposed terraces alternate with cuttings through the
Silurran beds, exposing in vertical sections quartz veins, traversing
the almost vertical, and very much contorted slates and sandstones.
He has now reached “ Tullochgorum,” the fine property of James
Grant, Esq., where the neat villa is just discernible through the


foliage of willows which surround it. In half on hour more he
will enter the township of
Fingal.
A quarter of a century ago this place was the scene of much stir
and excitement, owing to it being the locale where payable gold
was first found in Tasmania. But the excitement was of com-
paratively brief duration. Much money was lost, and the place
sank into unimportance. There are two large, substantial hotels,
a bank, two or three stores, a jail, surrounded by a high brick
wall, and a church which has remained unfinished for years.
Immediately behind the township is an immense precipice several
hundred feet high, as smooth on the face as a wall, and as vertical.
This marks the line of a very extensive fault, which runs for
many miles through the district to the East Coast. There is a
stoppage here, long enough to enable travellers to partake of
refreshment, post letters, or send telegrams. “All aboard” again,
and in a very few minutes ihe coach is crossing the Break o’ Day
rivulet on a very neat and substantial bridge, lately thrown across.
Before him stretches the magnificent Break o’ Day valley, about
12 miles long and from 2to 3 miles in breadth. It may be con-
sidered as an easterly extension of the South Esk valley. It is
the cream of this part of the country, and is in the tight embrace
of the octopus arms of two or three woolgrowers. According to
tradition it was the haunt of one of the bands of bushrangers in
the olden days, and many thrilling tales are told of the daring,
exploits of some of these desperadoes, as from the lofty heights
on either side of the valley they could look down unperceived,
and observe what was going on below. To the naturalist the
stream that flows through the vale is of interest for the number
and size of its freshwater mussels, ( unio ) their shining, nacreous
shells strewing the banks—the work of the voracious cormorant.
Here, and indeed for some miles back, at intervals along the val-
ley of the South Esk he will hear a peculiar half cackling cry,
and then perchance see an apparently wingless bird about the
size and shape of a barn-door fowl, dart through the tall grass
with the speed of the emu and make for the rushes and sedges
which line the banks of the stream. This is the native hen. I
have never heard of them being shot for the table, as an impression
prevails that they are tough. The most striking feature about
them is the remarkable speed they attain when running, for there
are very few dogs that can catch them. The traveller is now
passing through a district in which there is much that is geo-
logically interesting and most paradoxical. High ranges shut
in the valley on either hand. That, on the left hand with
a huge precipice ascending from one side of a “ saddle ” is


Mount St. Nicholas,
celebrated for a very thick seam of coal and three or four
smaller ones which make their appearance on the side of
the range 500 feet above the valley. The large seam is 16
feet in thickness, but the coal, although bituminous, is of
a quality that renders it unfit for steam, or gas making pur-
poses. For one or two inches of good bright coal, there
are on the average from 12 to 15 inches of inferior earthy
matter—ln fine bituminized clay. On the opposite side of
the valley this seam again appears at the same altitude at
Mt. Legion 4 or 5 miles away, and again at the back of
Fingal. There is a bullock dray road to the big seam, which
is surrounded by some very romantic bits of scenery. For
500 feet above the upper seam of coal, volcanic rock obtains,
which on the summit of the hill rises in very fine columns,
a characteristic of the greenstone of the same age in Tas-
mania. The beds of clay above and below the coal furnish
very fine, specimens of fossil ferns conspicuous among
which, are the tongue-fern Glossopteris —the wedge-fern
Sphenopteris the nerve-fern Neuropteris and the tooth-fern
Odonfopleris. All of which are long since extinct it is be-
lieved.
That mansion just discernible through the poplar
and other acclimatised trees on the right hand of the visitor,
is Killymoon, the largest and most imposing structure in
the district, and is the residence of S. Ransome, Esq. Its
founder, the late Mr. Steiglitz, was evidently a man of
good architectural taste, and in it one is strongly reminded
of much that characterises the structures of medieval times.
The freestone of which it is built was quarried close by,
and is associated with the coal seams. It possesses the
remarkable property of resisting, to a great degree, the
action of fire, and in this respect much resembles itacoluraite
sandstone, which is employed for the floor of furnaces
occasionally in Europe. When it is closely examined it is
found to consist of small, well rounded grains of quartz,
bound together by an argillo-silecous cement.
The visitor is now passing through Cullenswood, by
which name this part of the Break o’ Day valley is known.
A few cottages, and cultivated fields, with a church and its
resting place for the dead, are its chief features. Two miles
further on it merges into St. Mary’s. This village boasts
one inn, one general store, and a smithy. The inn is sit-
uated on the brink of a clear, cool mountain stream which
is never failing. St. Patrick’s Head, with its perfect pyra-
mid form, rises grandly in front, while another conspicuous,


though less aspiring hill, the Black Elephant, forms the
eastern boundary of the vale. Horses are changed at the
inn and soon the traveller is being hurled merrily along
through an avenue of fine old wattle trees, whose branches
meet over-head, and if it be Spring time the perfume from
their golden blossoms is intoxicating. He must now be
prepared to witness in a very few minutes, one of the
grandest sights in natural scenery, of the Southern hemi-
sphere. There are few persons who have resided long
enough in these colonies to become acclimatised that have
not heard of
St. Mart’s Pass.
It is a proverb, “See Venice and die,” I would say, See
St. Mary’s Pass, and live to describe it if you can (for it will
sorely tax your descriptive powers, be they ever so good)
to your friends. It alone is worth travelling a thousand
miles to behold wkere expense is not a consideration.
From the time the last inn was left, the road gradually
ascends a gentle acclivity, and when the top is gained the
visitor is at the entrance of the Pass. An abrupt turn of
the road, and lo! opening far beneath him on his left hand,
is a yawning gulf, with almost perpendicular mountains
ascending on both sides. From this point it is Jacilis
descensus. As he looks down the awful chasm from the
narrow rock-hewn road, he involuntary recoils with a
shudder. Genial George observes this, for he was prepared
for it, and a suppressed smile, with a humorous twinkle in
his eye records it. Whatever exclamation of surprise,
fear, or appreciation of the sublime grandeur of the scene,
may escape the lips of the traveller, it is drowned with a
crack of the whip and “ Come, get along there, lazy bones ”
as the vehicle rattles over the adamantine; tortuous road,
leaving barely room for a foot passenger to pass between
it and the verge of the gorge ; for there is no fence, ex-
cept at very sharp turns of the road. Down—down—down,
sweeps the terrible gulf. Higher—higher—higher, ascend
the tree-crowned heights, and looking from the road, the
traveller feels it would be possible to shoot a bird on the
opposite side. There is not a foot of ground but what
is densely covered with timber and undergrowth. Far be-
low, in the cool mossy depths can be seen the ever beau-
tiful plume-fronded fern trees, waving in graceful un-
dulations with the breeze, born of the great chasm ; their
tender green, contrasting favorably with the darker, harder
hue of the surrounding gum trees High over the tops of


patriarchal forest giants, the eye sweeps the great abyss
and through the ambient air, can distinctly see the mosses
of green and gold draping the rocks and trees in the depths
of those sunless shades. It may be Spring time, and if so
the blossom of a wattle tree here and there, stands out in
strong relief among the myrtles and sassafras, scenting
the air with its rich perfume. Another turn of the Pass,
and there is a stone trough at which man and horse may
drink of water as pellucid and cool as the pendant dew-
drops, A mountain rill, which is almost vertical, comes
leaping down in tiny falls, and is then conducted by a lit-
tle flume into the stone trough. At one time the pass ap-
pears to have turned back on itself—at another it is taking
a course at right angles—so numerous and acute are its
windings as it rounds the heads of the many gullies. Con-
sidering that the pace at which the coach is being driven,
which is very little, if indeed, anything less than that be-
fore the Pass was reached, apprenhension of danger in the
coolest and most courageous spirits is excusable, but the
horses as well as driver know their work so well that a mis-
hap is of very rare occurrence while a fatal accident as far
as I know, has never yet been chronicled. St. Patrick’s
Head which the visitor saw from St. Mary’s rising into the
upper air, like a mighty pyramid he is now carreering along
A little over two miles of the descent is accomplished,
when another sharp turn unfolds to view the boundless
ocean rolling in long lines of foaming, curling, surges on
the shore —the hollow booming roar of which, is, and has
been for some time past distinctly audible. That little
hamlet consisting of one weather-boarded inn, and barely
half a dozen primitive cottages is Falmouth. The inn
which stands on a small headland overlooking the surf-
beaten shore, is as solitary-looking as a light-house. Down-
and still down, with its apparently endless windings, goes
the Pass. Deeper and still deeper seems to grow the
mighty gorge. On one hand is a high wall of rock, produced
by forming the road. It is compact greenstone, i.e. trap
rock, and testifies to the vast amount of labor and engineer-
ing skill in constructing the Pass in days long past. High
overhead the mountain soars, and huge masses of rock are
impending like Damocles sword, and seem ready to come
thundering down on the slightest provocation, carrying
destruction and death in their course. This threatening
aspect have they presented for untold ages, and for untold
ages it they may maintain Much room for marvel there is
as to how the trees continue to grow and hold their own


on such steep mountain slopes, looking much like Natural
Selection at fault. But then gumtrees in Tasmania will
grow anywhere. Here, and there, the gracefully formed,
and tender green foliaged Exocarpus (native cherry tree),
and the lightwood tree fringe the edges of the Pass. For
eight miles the traveller winds along this remarkable chasm
and then finds himself on the sandy plateau of Falmouth
at the bottom, with the heaving ocean in front, and a large
sheet of imprisoned seawater on his left hand, into
which the collected waters of the gorge empty themselves.
That large and commanding brick house standing by it-
self is the residence of Mr. Steele, who owns all the avail-
able land for dairy farming in the locality. Horses are
changed at the inn where dinner can be had and then a
start is made to cross the Styx, but genial George, in this
case, is old Charon. From Saintdom we have entered the
regions of classical history, and instead of being rowed over
the Styx we go through it on wheels. Somewhat excit-
ing is the transit, the horses belly deep, and the traveller
has to lift his feet till his knees are level with his nose,
while the wheels of the coach stir up the black mud which
emits the antithesis of an agreeable odor. This continues
for about a mile. The road now runs along the sea shore,
and is separated from the surf-beaten beach by sand dunes,
covered with stunted vegetation, chiefly boobyalla. There
are 16 miles of sand road between Falmouth and George’s
Bay to which latter place I will assume the visitor is going.
It is one of the most trying roads to horses in the island.
Flat, swampy land, stretches for nearly two thirds of the
distance. Where swamps do not. obtain, a profusion
of gay blossoming heath, chiefly epacridae, and the elegant
and sand loving grass tree clothe the ground. After
crossing the Styx, and having proceeded a mile, the pictur-
esque Scamander river is reached. It is spanned by a very
neat and substantial bridge lately built. The old bridge
in ruins is seen a short distance on the right. If the
traveller be a classical man, he will find the topographical
nomenclature of this region awaken associations of his
Alma Mater, I do not know whether the old-world
Scamander was distinguished for good fishing, but I do
know that this one offers splendid attractions to the
lovers of the rod and line. The water is half salt and
half fresh, being separated from the sea by a sand bar.
During rough weather, the waves break over this bar and
when there is a fresh in the river the reverse action takes
place. The water is always beautifully clear, and large


bream, and perch can be seen, in untold numbers, swim-
ming about among the seaweed. But they are often very
shy of the bait, owing, it is supposed to there being an
abundance of their natural food.
To the naturalist the long beach offers great attractions.
Close to the sandbar of the Styx there are numerous rock
pools where anemonies, chitons, a large variety of Badiata,
and choice algae abound. Add to these, a profusion of
sponge and litoral shellfishes. Dead shells strew the
beach in myriads, and it is owing to this feature that many
families make Falmouth a place of resort during the
summer season. Five or six miles from Falmouth
The Lagoon
is reached. This is a picturesque sheet of imprisoned seawater
into which two or three streams disembogue. This lagoon
is a favorite haunt of that strange bird the Musk Duck
which on the near approach of man darts along the surface
of the w'ater with great speed, by using their rudimentary
wings as paddles, with which they beat the water into
foam, uttering at the same time a peculiarly discordant
cry. The great dunes of blown sea sand shut out the
ocean from view for a great part of the distance to George’s
Bay, but the deafening roar of the surf is an accompani-
ment all the way. At Freshwater Creek, where a stream
flows through a compact reticulation of rushes, sedges,
and ferns, horses are changed. We are now half way to
the township of St. Helens. Densely timbered heights on
the one hand, the ocean on the other, and a gay blossoming
heath-covered parterre intervening. A mile or two further
on, and the sand dunes lose much of their height and con-
sequently glimpses of the ocean are obtained. Yonder
island, rising some five miles off, is Marouard Island, by
some called Rabbit Island, owdng to the large number of
rabbits it contains. It is granite, and what in geology is
known as an “ outlier.” How the rabbits manage to find
a living upon it is matter for marvel, for it has all the
appearance of a barren rock. Coasting crafts avail them-
selves of it for shelter in rough weather. It affords but
a poor haven at best, but there is no other between Fal-
mouth and George’s Bay. The small islet nearer the shore
is Paddy’s Island. Both, in days gone by were the resort
of seals. The road now passe* through some fenced-in
land, and after crossing a streamlet and a gentle eminence
where until very lately before the new road was made it
was the custom of the driver of the coach to call out, “ No w


gentlemen ” which being interpreted signified the pas-
sengers getting out and walking up the hill to relieve the
jaded horses. This custom has departed now. Upon
descending the opposite side the visitor finds himself face
to face with one of the most charming saltwater lakes in
the world. It is
Diana’s Basin
and one can well conceive the fair and fleet goddess
selecting such a spot to bathe her limbs. Yonder dwelling,
partly visible through the trees, which flourish to the
water’s edge, is the Summer retreat of F. Groome, Esq. ef
“ Harefield ” at St. Mary’s. This lake is like the others
which we have passed—an inlet of the sea enclosed by a
large and high sandbank. Wild ducks, teal, and the never-
absent cormorant, haunt it in vast numbers, for it abounds
in fish. Here for the first time since leaving the eastern
extremity of the pass we come upon granite the prevailing
rock of the stanniferous district we are about to enter. A
very interesting and instructive tale of cosmical change
does this same granite tell, but time and circumstance alike
forbid us staying to listen to it now. It will have been
observed that there is a most decided change in the
character of the vegetation in these parts. The gum trees
no longer have the white, smooth bark which mark them
a few miles to the south-east. Instead of this the bark is
rough, thick, and deeply furrowed. They are the iron
bark, or redgum of the colonists, an exceedingly hard, and
durable wood and it is much prized for sluice boxes by the
tin miner Five miles more, and as the sun is setting over
the blue and distant mountains in the west—an abrupt
turn of the road occurs, and lo ! the truly magnificent
George’s Bay
opens to the view, with its numerous points, promontories,
inlets and emerald flats. It is justly considered to be the
most picturesque bay in the colony, and as a fishing ground
is second to none. All the year round fine flounders can
be had while crayfish are a drug. There are some very
fine oyster beds which yield largely of these molluscs. The
township of St. Helens consists of about twenty houses.
There are three hotels which is just two too many. The
Telegraph hotel is considered the principal one. There is
a Bank, Post Office, and Telegraph Office in one neat
building. A Police Office and Commisssoner of Mines
combined. There are two general stores. The climate
of George’s Bay is unquestionably the finest in Tasmania.


It is warmer than the Capital and not subject to such
sudden transitions of temperature. There are very keen
frosts in Winter, and also occasional frosts in Summer,
but the sun beams out with resplendent glory through soft
blue skies, flecked with fleecy clouds, after them. St.
Helens is approached through Jason’s Gates, spanned by a
bridge at the mouth of the Golden Fleece, an estuary which
an artist would love to transfer to canvas. Here the names
again carry the memory back to the beautiful poetical
legend of the ancients. The traveller is now in the region
of tin mines. Try where he may, in the sands of the sea
shore, the gravel of the roads, he will obtain tin ore, but
it exists only in payable quantity from three to six miles
from the coast.
There is a fine river the George, rich in sylvan scen-
ery, and teeming with fish. The chief features of the dis-
trict are the hills of granite, with their smooth rounded
crests. These swell up in all directions, giving the country
a highly undulating appearance. There are some very
rare scene studies for the artist in the ravines. The Leda
Falls on the Saxleby tin claim is one of these. The
stream is divided into two falls at the edge of a granite
precipice in a deep rock-bound gorge.
Within one mile of the Falls is a singular “ weathered ”
granite mass which I have named Truganini’s Throne.
These spots and several others in the neighborhood are
well worth a visit, I may be excused for quoting here a
description of these two scenes which I lately published
in the Australasian Sketcher.
Leda Falls.
These Falls are situated on the Saxleby tin claim,
seven miles from George’s Bay, and in the centre of the
tin mining district. A stream which takes its rise in the
high granite hills of the district after flowing through
button-grass marshes, and dense thickets of banera, cut-
ting-grass and ti-tree, suddenly plunges down a deep
romantic rocky gorge. Here it is broken into numerous
miniature falls—now eddying round the walls of a granite
basin which it has carved out through untold ages, and
anon babbling among the moss-covered stones which inter-
rupt its course, till when halfway through the gorge it
leaps over a deep vertical precipice with deafening roar.
At the verge of this precipice the stream is intercepted by
a projection of rock which divides it and causes it to
fall in two streams into a depression of the granite. At


the sides of the ravine, huge overhanging masses of worn
granite—some of them thousands of tons in weight, give
rise to numerous recesses of sepulchral gloom. Over their
portals hang festoons of delicate climbing plants and
feathery-fronded ferns grow in profusion, gum-trees,
acacia, dogwood and others whose branches meeting over-
head form a canopy which excludes the noontide sunshine.
If I might venture to call to aid metrical composition I
would describe it thus:—
Forth from its secret mountain source it flows
Through em’rald swamps and tangled tl-tree dells ;
Now making music soft ’mong granite stones,
O’er-mantled with bright moss of green and gold ;
Now stealing dreamlike, through deep sunless shades,
Where never ripple ruffled its cool breast.
Thus flowing sea-ward in its chequered course
Till where a deep dark chasm twixt hills
All unexpected opens to the view.
There at the verge divided into twain
It plunges down into the gloom profound
Where noise and mist and wild confusion reign.
Truganini’s Throne
is distant about one mile from Leda Falls on the western
bank of the same stream. It is a remarkable example of
weathered granite about 40 feet high. Large gum-trees
grow out of the joints of the rock 70 to 80 feet in height.
This is also well worth a visit from the tourist.
The Tin Mines.
The vallies intervening the granite hills are the scenes of
the operations of the miners. These vallies are chiefly
occupied by button-grass marshes through which creeks
and smaller streamlets flow and which take their rise in
the higher mountain ranges in the interior. This button-
grass which may not be widely well-known grows in
tussocks from one foot to three feet in height and detached.
Its leaves are long and wiry, and its seed-vessels consist of
spherical, hard rough knobs about the size of marbles,
closely resembling the old brass buttons of that form,
from which it derives its name. These knobs are sup-
ported upon long smooth wiry stems often four and five feet
in length. In passing through one of these marshes these
knobs frequently spring back with considerable force, and
owing to their hard rough nature, and the flexibility of
the stems are capable of inflicting pain on the exposed face
and hands. The creeks running through these valleys are
fringed with belts of dense ti-tree among which is the


flowering mellaleuca of the botanist, banera, or the river-
rose and tall cutting-grass oftentimes so thickly interlaced
as to form an almost impenetrable barrier. The soil on
the hill-slopes is usually poor and gravelly formed by the
decomposition of the coarse porphyritic granite of the
district and yet it is thickly clothed with ironbark gums,
peppermint gums, prickly acacia and those arboraeolian
harps the sbmbre-hued Casuarina, on which, to indulge a
figurative expression the zephyrs love to play with viewless
fingers. The tin ore, for the most part is obtained at a
depth from the surface of the vallies of from four to six
feet, in a pebbly drift occupying the depressions of the
granite which is usually decomposed so as to present a
soft clayey consistency. It would seem to be what is
known as “ erratic ’’—that is it has come from a distance
as the pebbles with which it is associated have been
supplied by rocks which are not to be met with in the
locality.
At 10 miles inland to the west is the Land of Gos-
chen, a flat well grassed plateau on the banks of
the George river, with a mountain rising out of the
midst. Four miles further on Gould’s Country is reached,
with its lofty mountain ranges of granite and deep gullies,
densely covered with myrtle, sassafras, and tree ferns.
Here are situated the principal tin mines of the East Coast.
Profoundly grand are the gullies of this region as
the road winds along the mountain heights. Now on
the right hand, now on the left the sides of the mountains
sweep down into apparantly bottomless ravines. High
above the tops of trees over 300 feet in height in many
instances the eye of the traveller sweeps the terrible chasms
so thickly covered with tree-ferns and other shade and
moisture-loving vegetation as to be sunshine proof. The
scene of St. Mary’s Pass is a combination of the grand and
picturesque. That of Gould’s Country is the awfully
grand alone. Here there is a slab some miles in length
traversing the sides of the mountains. There are two
inns, several stores, and cottage dwellings. Sixteen miles
further to the West is Thomas Plain on which stands the
township of Weldborough surrounded for many miles by
tin mines. This is reached by a narrow pack-track from
Gould Country which is knee-deep in mud except in
the very height of Summer, All the tin ore raised here
has to be packed out on horses to Gould’s Country and
Morina and owing to the continual traffic of the heavily,
laden horses and the exclusion of wind and sunshine by the
dense vegetation the track is a very “ Slough of Despond."


Thotttas Plain is situated in the centre of the Ringa-
rooma district and enclosed by an amphitheatre of lofty
tree-crowned heights. Several cool pellucid never failing
streams flow through it. It is the most picturesque
in Tasmania.
Such are the salient features of the North East Coast
of Tasmania, and I believe the visitor in search of a salu-
brious clime and choice scenery will allow that these fully
repay the journey.




