

■r.
. M £,, * ■
\ ' ||\ v |f V
B \ Wl C *B % / I H W» K Jr I
TKumbelinct


fcT | ~
pr I V* — Vl • / a


£5
fCE^
]
SEN'S “THUMBELINA”
story of a fairy child, whc
'w bigger than your thumb
INNIE CHRISTIE
I'liuuimnvs
( b eiTl'st e_b e II )
Street
CLHIlUHiyEr^AUSTHALIA
a n
HANS ANDERSEN S “THUMBELINA"
The story of a fairy child, who
was no bigger than your thumb.


IN THE SAME SERIES
BABY BUNTING COMES TO TOWN
With Pictures and Story by
Connie Christie
Registered at the G.P.0., Melbourne, for
transmission by post as a book.
WHOLLY SET UP, PRINTED AND BOUND IN AUSTRALIA FOR
AUSTRALIAN DIGEST PTY. LTD., 170 little collins street, Melbourne
THE SPECIALTY PRESS PTY. LTD., Melbourne.


cnOJOUJ
T
* A
'jfj
.
ft
HERE was once a woman who
wished for a very small child, but
she didn't know where she could
get one. So she went to an old witch
and said: “I do so much wish for a very
small child. Can you tell me where I can
get one? Oh! That could easily be arran-
ged.” said the witch.
There you have a barleycorn . . . not
"an ordinary kind like the chickens eat


Put it into a flower-pot, and then see what you will find.
“Thank you,” said the woman, and she gave the witch twelve
shillings ... for that is what it cost.
She went home and planted the barleycorn. Immediately there
grew up a great handsome flower which looked like a tulip, but
the leaves were tightly closed as though it were still in bud.
“That is a beautiful flower” said the woman, and she kissed its
yellow and green leaves. But just as she kissed it the flower popped
open. It was a real tulip, as one could see now, but in the middle of
the flower there sat upon the green velvet stamens a little maiden,
delicate and graceful to behold. She was scarcely half a thumb’s
length in height ... so they called her "Wee One.” A neat polished
walnut shell served Wee One for a cradle, blue violet leaves formed
her mattress, with a rose leaf for a coverlet. There she slept at night,
but in the daytime she played on the table where the woman had


pur a plate with a wreath of flowers around it, whose stalks stood
in the water. On the water swam a great tulip leaf, and on this
leaf the little maiden would sit, and row from one side of the plate
to the other, with two white horsehairs for oars. It looked pretty,
indeed!
She could also sing, and indeed, so delicately and sweetly that
the like had never been heard before.
One night as she lay in her pretty bed. an old Toad crept
through the window in which a pane was broken. The Toad
was very ugly, big and damp; it hopped straight down upon the
table where Wee One lay asleep under her rose leaf.
‘She would make a very handsome wife for my son." said the
Toad, and she took the walnut shell in which Wee One lay sleeping
and hopped with it through the window down into the garden.
Here ran a great, broad brook: the bank was swampy and soft.


And it was here that the
Toad lived with her son.
Ugh! he was ugly, and
looked just like his mother.
“Croak! croak! brek-
brek-kek! That was all he
could say when he saw the
beautiful little maiden in
the walnut shell.
“Don’t speak so loudly
or she will wake,” said the
old Toad.
“She might run away from us, for she is as light as a bit of
swansdown. We will put her out in the brook upon one of the
broad lily leaves so she can’t get away while we put the stateroom
under the marsh in order. There you are to live and keep
house together.”
Out in the brook there grew many water-lilies with broad,
green leaves. They looked as if they were floating on the water.
The leaf that lay farthest out was the broadest of them all, and so
it was to that leaf the old Toad swam and laid the walnut
shell with Wee One in it.
When Wee One woke up in the morning and saw where
she was, she began to cry very hard for there was water on every
side of the great leaf, and she could not get to the shore.


r>r*
J. i "
■*
/ / //
i
«. , M V
- mil i® /#! I
MHKdKuf a \ 4tBm /m
f x i _/n
~i
I t
.> O jtHL


The old Toad sac down in the marshes decking our rhe room
with rushes and yellow weed, so as to make ir very pretty for the
new daughter-in-law. Then she swam out with her ugly son to
the leaf where Wee One lay. They wanted to put her pretty
walnut-shell bed in the bridal chamber before she herself went
in there.
The old Toad bowed low before her in the water and said;
“Here is my son; he will be your husband, and you will live
happily together in the marsh.
'Croak! croak!” was all that the son said.
Then the old Toad and her son took the delicate little bed, and
swam away with it. Wee One sat all
leaf and wept, for she did not want to
live at rhe nasty Toad's house and have
alone upon the green
rhe ugly son for a husband. The little
fishes that lived down below had heard
what the Toad said, so they stretched our
their heads to see the little girl.
When they saw her they considered
her very pretty and felt very sorry that
she should have to go down to the ugly
Toad's. "No. that must never be!’ They
gathered together in the water around the
green stalk which held the leaf Wee One
was on. and. with their teeth, chewed
awav the stalk. The leaf, now free, drifted
down rhe stream, and away went Wee


One on ir where the Toad could nor find her.
Wee One sailed by many cities, and the little birds who sat in
the bushes saw her, and said. "What a lovely little girl!" The leaf
floated further and further away with her; and Wee One travelled
right out of the country, away from the old Toad.
A graceful little white butterfly fluttered around her and at
last alighted on the leaf. Wee One pleased him, and she was glad
of this. It was beautiful floating along—the sun shone on the water,
and the water glistened like burnished gold. She rook her girdle
and bound one end of it round the butterfly, fastening the other
end of the ribbon to the leaf. The leaf, with Wee One standing
on it. now glided on much faster.
Just then up flew a big
Cricket. He saw her. and
immediately clasped his claws
around her slender waist, and
flew with her into a tree. The
green leaf went whirling down
the brook and the butterfly
j
with it.
Mercy! how frightened
was poor Wee One The
Cricket, however, did nor
trouble himself at all. He
seared himself with her upon
the biggest green leaf of the
tree, gave her the sweet part


of the flowers to eat, and declared
that she was very pretty, though
she did not in the least resemble
a cricket.
Afterwards, all the other
crickets that lived in the tree
came to pay a visit, and they
looked at Wee One, and said:
"Why, she has only two legs, and
has a wretched appearance!”
"She hasn't got any feelers!''
cried another.
“Her waist is quite slender
fie! she looks like a human
creature how ugly she is!” said
all the lady crickets.
And yet Wee One was very
pretty. Even the cricket that had
carried her away saw that, but
when all the others called her ugly, he believed it at last, and
would not have her at all she might now go where she wanted.
He flew down with her from ihe tree, and set her upon a daisy.
Wee One wept because the crickets said she was ugly and would
have nothing to do with her. Yet she was the loveliest little being
that you could imagine, and as render and delicate as a rose leaf.


JUj f^t
v^rs 'i*
J?\


The whole Summer through poor little Wee One lived quite
alone in a great wood. She wove herself a bed out of blades of
grass, and hung it under a shamrock, so that she would be protected
from the ram. She plucked the honey from the flowers for food,
and drank, the dew which stood upon the leaves every morning.
The Summer and Autumn passed away; and now came the
Winter, the long cold Winter. All the birds who had sung so
sweetly before her flew away; tree and flowers shed their leaves.
The great shamrock under which she had sheltered shrivelled up,
and there remained nothing
of it at all but a yellow with-
ered stalk, and she was dread-
fully cold. Her clothes were
torn, and she herself was frail
and delicate.
Poor little Wee One! She
was nearly frozen. It began
to snow and every snowflake
that fell would seem like a
shovelfull if it were thrown
upon one of us, for we are
tall and she was only an inch
long. She wrapped herself in
a dry leaf, but that tore in
the middle and would not


warm her she shivered with rhe cold. Close to the wood lay
a great cornfield, but the corn had gone long ago. Only the naked,
dry stubble stood up out of the frozen ground. This was just
like a great forest for her to wander through, and, oh' how she
trembled with the cold.
Wee One arrived at the door of Field Mouse. This little
mouse had a little hole under the stubble There she lived warm
and comfortable, and had a whole roomful of corn ... a glorious
kitchen and larder.
Poor Wee One stood at the
door just like a little beggar girl,
and begged for a piece of barley-
corn, for she had not eaten for
the last two days.
"You poor little creature.”
said Field Mouse ... for after
all she was a good field mouse
. . . "Come into my warm
room and dine with me.
As Wee One pleased her, she
said, "If you like you may stay
with me through the Winter, but
you must keep my room clean
and neat, and tell me little stones,
for I am very fond of them.”


And Wee One did as rhe kind old field mouse bade her,
and had a very good time.
"We shall soon have a visitor, said Field Mouse. “My neigh-
bour is in the habit of visiting me once a week. He is even better
off than I am. He has great rooms and a beautiful black velvety
fur. If you could only get him for your husband you would be
well provided for. You must tell him the prettiest stones that
you know.”
But Wee One didn't care about this; she thought nothing about
the neighbour for he was a Mole and paid his visits in his black
velvet coat. Field Mouse told how rich and how learned he was.
and how his house was more than twenty times as large again
as hers; that he had learning, but that he did not like the sun and
the beautiful flowers, for he had
never seen them. Wee One
had to sing, so she sang “Cricket,
fly away” and “When rhe
parson goes afield.’ The Mole
fell in love with her, because
of her delicious voice, but he
said nothing for he was a
sedate man.
A short time before, he had
dug a long passage through rhe
earth from his own house to


I y'"
yt »i i-
” m . w - vn
• • %*.•% .vfi
• >*.» * * •v* •• ,
A < *
•% • tw t %
•;V.Kv\VC*-\
y
pHH
ML***-#.
\ i i
ill
i * »
i'i i, f ■
M WiL. i *■' W3 t<A^,
!►


theirs, and Wee One and Field Mouse obtained permission to
walk through this passage as often as they wished. He told them
not to be afraid of the dead bird which was lying there. It must
have died only a short time before, and was buried just where
the Mole had dug his passage.
The Mole took a piece of decayed wood in his mouth and
it glimmered like fire in the dark. He went first and lighted
them through the long, dark passage. When the Mole came to
where the dead bird was, he thrust up his broad nose against the
ceiling, so that a great hole was made, through which the daylight
shone. In the middle of the floor lay a dead swallow, his beautiful
wings pressed close against his sides, his head and feet drawn back
under his feathers. The poor bird had certainly died of cold.
Wee One was very sorry for him. She was very fond of all
the little birds who had sung and twittered so prettily before her
through the Summer; bur the Mole gave him a push with his
crooked legs, and said. “Now he doesn't pipe any more. It must


...
be miserable to be born a bird. I’m thankful
that none of my children can be that: such
a bird has nothing but his tweet-tweet, and
has to starve in the Winter!”
“Yes, as a clever man you may well say
that.’’ said Field Mouse.
Wee One said nothing, but when the
others had turned their backs on the bird,
she bent down, put the feathers aside which
covered his head, and kissed him upon his closed eyes.
“Perhaps it was he who sang so prettily to me in the Summer,”
she thought.
“How much pleasure he gave me. the dear beautiful bird 1 ”
The Mole now closed up the hole through which the daylight
shone and accompanied the ladies home.
But that night Wee One could not sleep at all, so jbe—got
out of bed. and wove a large beautiful carpet of hay and carried
it and spread it over the dead bird. Then she laid the thin, soft
stamens of flowers, which she had found in Field Mouse's room,
at the bird’s side so that he would lie soft on the ground.
“Farewell, you pretty bird," she said “Farewell, and thanks for
all your beautiful songs in the Summer, when all the trees were
green and the sun shone down warmly upon us.” And then she
laid the bird's head upon her heart. But the bird was not dead;
he was only lying there stiff with cold, and now that he was


warmed he came to life again.
In Autumn, as you know, all the
swallows fly away to warm countries,
but if one happens to be left behind,
it becomes so cold that it falls down
as if dead, and is covered by the
snow. Wee One trembled. She was
startled, for the bird was quite large
compared with her. She was only an inch high. But she took
courage, placed the covering closer around the bird, and brought
a leaf that she had used for her own coverlet, and laid it over
the bird's head.
The next night, using decayed wood as a lantern, she crept out
to him again. He was still alive but weak. He could only open
his eyes for a moment to look at Wee One, who stood before him.
T thank you, pretty child,” said the sick Swallow. T have been
nicely warmed. I shall soon get my strength back again, and I
shall be able to fly away again in the warm sunshine.”
“Oh,” she said. “It is so cold outside; it snows and freezes. Stay
in your warm bed, and I will nurse you.”
Then she brought water to the Swallow in the petals of a flower.
The Swallow drank and told her how he had torn one of his
wings in a thorn bush, and thus had nor been able to fly as quickly
as the other Swallows who had sped far, far away to the warm
countries. So at last he fell to the ground, and he could remember


y H|
V y A / \ \ lliui
Jl v \ 1 jl
«rf I 1 llll
v » fV \ \ j s' Jii ,,
v\ >y
I JK - if
w < jiv yfcgpBg^^**'^
/ i y>"B—
l^ j^>


nothing more. He did nor know how he had come to be where
she had found him.
The whole Winter the Swallow remained there, and Wee One
nursed him and tended him carefully. Neither Field Mouse nor
the Mole heard anything about it, for they did not like the poor
Swallow. As soon as the Spring came, and the sun warmed the
earth, the Swallow bade Wee One farewell, and she re-opened the
hole which the Mole had made in the ceiling. The sun shone in
upon them gloriously, and the Swallow asked Wee One if she
would go with him; she could sit upon his
back and they would fly far away into the
green wood. But Wee One knew that Field
Mouse would grieve if she left her.
“No. I cannot!” said Wee One.
“Farewell, farewell, you good, pretty girl 1 '
said the Swallow, and he flew out into the
sunshine. Wee One watched him and the
tears came into her eyes, for she was so
heartily and sincerely fond of the poor
Swallow.
“Tweet, tweet! Tweet-tweet! sang the
bird, and flew into the green forest. Wee
One felt very sad. She did nor get permission
to go our into the warm sunshine. The corn
which was sown in the field over the house


of Field Mouse grew up high;
it was quite a thick wood for
the poor girl who was only an
inch in height.
"You are betrothed now,
Wee One, said the little mouse.
“My neighbour has proposed for
you. What good fortune for a
poor girl like you. Now you
must work at your outfit-
woollen and linen clothes both—
for you must lack nothing when you become the Mole’s wife."
Wee One had to turn the spindle, and the Mole hired four
spiders to weave for her day and night.
Every evening the Mole paid her a visit. He was always
saying that when the Summer drew to a close, the sun would not
shine as strongly as now when it burned the earth as hard as a
stone. Yes, when the Summer had passed he would then keep his
wedding day with Wee One.
But she was not glad at all, for she did not like the tiresome
Mole. Every morning when the sun rose, and every evening when
it was going down, she crept out at the door. When the wind
blew the corn ears apart, she could see the blue sky, and she
thought how bright and beautiful it was out there, and wished
heartily to see the dear Swallow again. Bur the Swallow did nor


come back again, he had doubtless flown far away in the fair
green forest.
When Autumn came, Wee One had all her outfit ready. “In
four weeks you shall celebrate your wedding." said Field Mouse to
her. But Wee One wept, and declared that she would not marry
the tiresome Mole.
Nonsense, said the kind old field mouse. “Don't be obstinate,
or I will bite you. He is a very fine man whom you will marry.
The Queen herself has not such a fine velvet coat, and his kitchens
and cellars are full. Be thankful for your good fortune.”
The wedding was now to be held. The Mole had already come
to fetch Wee One. She was to live with him underneath the earth,
and never, never come out into the warm sunshine, for the Mole
did not like it.
Poor little Wee One was
very sorrowful; she was now to
say farewell to the glorious sun.
which, after all, she was at least
allowed by Field Mouse to see
from the threshold of the door.
“Farewell, bright sun!” she
said, and stretched out her arms
towards it. Then she walked a
little way from Field Mouse's
house, for the corn had been


y
k 1 % ' V I m / JKjf
\ m n k v |U y
V I \\\ I*\ ||Ka v
■ t i y^'S■' i| ** "ijc'. f
1 vMJBMk n *s v '^
; , f> \
m wmsF *miM .•
K -\ § * v -x,
[vlJL HV! l^k^Sr
JHj; : v : . *.. ’'"•
/ k\A j
MRw ,******^^
a ii
B . ~~ " •
jR. _ *v


reaped, and only the
dry stubble stood in the
fields.
“Farewell l ” she re-
peated, twining her arms
around a little red flow-
er which still bloomed
there. "Greet the Swall-
ow for me when you
see him again.”
“Tweet-tweet! tweet-
tweet!” a voice suddenly
sounded over her head.
She looked up. It was
the little Swallow who was just flying by
When he saw Wee One he was very glad. She told him how
loath she was to have the ugly Mole for her husband, and that
she was to live deep under the earth where the sun never shone.
She could not refrain from weeping.
“The cold Winter is coming now. said the Swallow. T am
going to fly far away into the warm countries. Will you come
with me? You can sit upon my back and we shall fly away from
the ugly Mole and his dark house . . . away, far away, over the
mountains, to the warm countries where the sun shines warmer
than here, where it is always Summer, and there are lovely flowers.
Fly with me, dear little Wee One. for you saved my life when
I lay frozen in the dark earthy passage.”


“Yes, I will go with you!” said Wee One, and she seated herself
on the bird’s back, with her feet on his outspread wings, and bound
her girdle fast to one of his strongest feathers.
The Swallow flew up into the air, over forest and sea, high up
over the mountains where the snow always lies. When Wee One
felt the cold bleak air, she hid under the bird’s warm feathers, and
put her little head out only to admire the lovely scenery around her.
At last they came to the warm countries. There the sun shone
far brighter; the sky seemed twice as high; in the ditches and on
the hedges grew the most beautiful green and blue grapes; lemons
and oranges hung in the woods; the air was fragrant with the perfume
of lovely flowers; and on the road the loveliest children ran about
playing with the bright coloured butterflies.
But the Swallow flew still farther, and the land became more
and more beautiful. Under
glorious green trees by a blue
lake stood a palace of gleaming
white marble. It had been
there from olden times. Vines
clustered around the lofty
pillars; at the top were many
swallows’ nests, and in one of
these lived the Swallow that
had carried Wee One.
“That is my house,' said the
Swallow. “But it is not right
that you should live there.


It is not properly arranged
by a great deal, and you will
not be content with it. Select
for yourself one of the splendid
flowers that grow down yonder,
then I will put you into it and
you shall have everything as
nice as you wish."
"That is wonderful," she
cried, and clapped her little hands.
A great marble pillar lay
nearby. It had fallen to the
ground and had broken into three pieces. Between each piece grew
the most beautiful great white flowers.
The Swallow flew down with Wee One, and set her upon one
of the broad leaves. Imagine how great was the little maids surprise
when she saw a little man sitting in the midst of the flower. He
was white and as transparent as if he were made of glass. He wore
the neatest of gold crowns on his head, and the brightest wings
on his shoulders; he himself was no bigger than Wee One.
He was the lord of the flower. In each of the flowers dwelt
such a little man or maiden, but this lord was the Prince of them all.
“Heavens! how handsome he is,” whispered Wee One to the
Swallow.


The little Prince was very frightened by the Swallow, for the
bird was gigantic compared to him But when he saw Wee One,
he was very glad; she was the prettiest maiden he had ever seen.
He took off his golden crown, and put it upon her head. He asked
her name, and if she would marry him. If she did she would one
day become Queen of the flowers,
man to the son of the Toad, and
fur. She therefore said “Yes’ to
of every flower came a lady or a
Now this was truly a different
the Mole with the black velvet
the charming Prince. And out
lord so pretty that they were a
delight to behold. Each one brought Wee One a present, but the
best gift was a pair of wings which had belonged to a great white
butterfly. These were fastened to Wee One’s back, and now she
could fly from flower to flower. There was much rejoicing, and
the Swallow sat above them in his nest and sang the marriage song
as well as he could. But in his
heart he was sad, for he was very
fond of Wee One, and would
have liked her never to part
from him.
"You shall not be called Wee
One,” said the Prince of the
flowers. “That is an ugly name,
and you are fair and beautiful . . .
we will call you Princess May.”


"Farewell farewell!" said che little Swallow, and, with a heavy
heart, he flew away again from the warm countries back to faraway
Denmark. There he nested, and, one day, perched by the window
of a man who wrote fairy tales, the Swallow told this sweet story
in song.


-y -y
508
00134083


