

WENTWORTH:
HIS LIFE AND DEEDS.
Price, One Shilling.
SYDNEY
PRINTED FOR THE PROPRIETORS, BY JOHN FERGUSON,
426, GEPBOE STREET.




"IN MEMORIAM.”
From Sydney Punch.
Wentworth.
How should our kings be laid ?
The kings of mind who lead the nation’s march
From arid wastes where wild siroccos parch
To waving fields, and bending fruit trees’ shade.
Where should our kings be laid ?
The kings by force of Nature’s primal law,
That strong, the weak shall ever over-awe,
And right repair the ruin wrong hath made.
How, but with solemn tread,
Of a whole people in their funeral train,
Less sorrowing, since sorrow must be vain,
Than gladly honouring the glorious dead.
Where, but within her breast,
The land for which their all they gladly gave,
Proud to the last to find a patriot’s grave
In the warm bosom that they loved the best.
Such, 0! great dead, wert thou;
A king by virtue of that mighty heart,
That ever scorned the cringing coward’s part,
Turning to tyranny a dauntless brow.
Thou led’st us from a night
Dark as Egyptian gloom, when o’er the plains,
Now fair and free, was heard but clank of chains,
Nor seen but misery that mocked the light.
Thine, too, the master hand
Laid deep the broad foundations of the state,
Whence springeth all of beautiful or great
There yet hath blossomed in this Austral land.
Thou planted’st freedom’s tree,
And lo 1 a giant oak already spreads,
Wide as the land each free Australian treads,
Firm as the mother oak, beyond the sea.
Wherefore, with one acclaim,
Thy country hails thy last sad coming home ;
No need for her of sculptured urn, or dome,
Whose love’s immortal as thy deathless fame.




INTRODUCTION
It is fitting that the illustrious dead should receive the
homage of those in whose memory their great ( deeds are pre-
served. This homage is the spirit of gratitude ; a feeling com-
prehending all that mere personal gratitude may extend, while
it embraces the broader sentiment of national acknowledgment.
Those who do good for their fellow creatures, and who do this
good from no paltry and selfish motive, are among the few
Disinterestedness is almost as scarce as the four-leaved-sham-
rock. Patriotism, as we know it here, is a grim skeleton; self-
sacrifice an arrant impostor. Our politicians, with one or two
exceptions, are men of two classes—men of ability and men of
vanity. The men of ability sell their brains for place, influ-
ence, and oftimes, for gross pounds shillings and pence: the
men of vanity sell themselves for the privilege of indulging in
their passion. Can we pick a dozen from our gabblers who are
above these base influences ? Can we lay a hand on him who
is working heart and soul for the national good ? Can we point
out a man whose object in political life, is not self, but the
noble selfishness of patriotism ? Yes, there are a few men
among us who have motives above the sordid selfishness of
ordinary humanity. But they are few indeed ; so few, that to
think of one who, —dead now—when living, exhibited all those
noble attributes of the patriot which are classic, and whose
memory now receives the homage of his countrymen, is, to say
the least, to think of an extraordinary man. But so we think
of Wentworth—a man not without faults, but whose faults
were so generous as to approach virtues. So we think of the
warm, honest, clever, liberal advocate of the rights of the people;
a man who, in his way, might be esteemed the Cavour of our
political life; the creator, at any rate, of those political privi-
leges we at present enjoy. It was no fault of his, if his crea-
tion has been made the shuttlecock of rogues: the capital of
adventurers. Polluted as our political atmosphere may be, the
under current remains pure and undefiled. And he, at whose
breath, this life arose, lies dead among us.
To-day, we do his memory honour. His remains, brought
from the old country, are now interred, amidst an expression


W. C. WENTWORTH.
(From Barton's Poets and Prose Writers of New South Wales.)
William Charles Wentworth was bom at Norfolk Island, in
1791. His father, D’Arcy Wentworth, went there in the pre-
vious year, and a certain authority tells us that he was “ par-
ticularly noticed by Major Eoss (the Commandant), who, on
account of his abilities and reputation, immediately appointed
him as a Superintending Surgeon of the Island.” How long
he remained there is not known, but as the settlement was
broken up in 1805, he probably left it then. In 1819 his name
occurs rather frequently in the Civil List of the colony. He
was a Magistrate of the Territory and its Dependencies—Prin-
cipal Surgeon on the Medical Staff—Trustee and Commissioner
for Roads—Treasurer of the Police Establishment—Superin-
tendent of Police—and a Director of the Bank of New South
Wales,
His son left the colony in 1817, and went to England. Therr
he read for the Bar, and entered himself as Student at Came
bridge. In 1819 he published a work on the colony, in which
he aimed at two great objects—the promotion of emigration and
the removal of political abuses. It was a ‘ hasty production,
originating in the suggestion of an acquaintance and as it was
largely occupied with matters of a practical kind, little in the
way of literary excellence could be expected from it. It con-
tains passages, however, marked with very great power. Per-
haps the best is the following, in which he denounces the
conduct of the ‘ Exclusives
“ The covert aim of these men is to convert the ignominy of
the great body of the people into an hereditary deformity.
They would hand it down from father to son, and raise an
eternal barrier of separation between their offspring and the
offspring of the unfortunate convict. They would establish
distinctions which may serve hereafter to divide the colonists
into castes; and although none among them dares publicly
avow that future generations should be punished for the crimes
of their progenitors, yet such are their private sentiments, and
they would have the present race branded with disqualifications


not more for the sake of pampering their own vanity, than with
a view to reflect disgrace on the offspring of the disfranchised
parent, and thus cast on their own children and descendants
that future splendour and importance, which they consider to
be their present peculiar and distinguishing characteristics.
Short-sighted fools ! they foresee not the consequences of their
narrow machinations ! They know not that they would be
sowing the seeds of discords and commotions, and that by their
exalting their own immediate descendants, they would occasion
the eventual degradation and overthrow of their posterity. .
Shall the unhappy culprit, exiled from his native shore, and
severed, perhaps for ever, from the friends of his youth, the
objects of his first and best affections, after years of suffering
and atonement, still find no resting place, no spot where he
may hide his shame and endeavour to forget his errors ? Shall
the finger of scorn and derision be pointed at him wherever he
betakes himself ? And must he for ever wander a recreant and
outcast on the face of the earth, seeking in vain some friendly
shore, where he may at length be freed from ignominious dis-
abilities, and restored to the long lost enjoyment of equal rights
and equal protection with his fellows ?”
In 1828 he competed for the Chancellor’s medal for the best
English poem on “ Australasia. ” The prize was carried off by
W. M. Praed, one of the most brilliant versifiers of the day;
the second place in the list being awarded to Mr. Wentworth.
A comparison of the two productions will suggest doubts to
some readers as to the justice of the award. In local colouring,
at least, Wentworth’s is altogether superior, as might be
expected.
AUSTRALASIA.
I
Land o{ my birth ! tho’ now alas t no more
Musing I wander on thy sea-girt shore,
Or climb with eager haste thy barrier cliff,
To catch a glimmer of the distant skiff
That ever and anon breaks into light,
And then again eludes the aching sight,
Till, nearer seen, she bends her foaming way
Majestic onward to yon placid bay,
Where Sydney’s infant turrets proudly rise,
The of the Southern skies :
Dear Australasia, can I e’er forget
• » « *
His Account of the Colony passed through three editions i-i '
the course of five years. We may infer from this that it was a
successful work; but it seems to have attracted little notice from
the English press, Qa the appearance of the first edition, the


“ Edinburgh Review ” noticed it as ‘a work of merit ’ in an
article on the Colony. When the third edition was brought out,
the “ Westminster ” merely said that its execution was slovenly.
But it seems to have made its way with the public, successfully,
if silently, and to have influenced the course of legislation with
respect to the colony. The two last editions were greatly
enlarged. In these, the author entered upon an elaborate
vindication of Governor Macquarie, who had been severely
censured in the Report of Mr. Commissioner Bigge, and who
was recalled in consequence. The following passage from this
portion of the work is a fine specimen of vigorous eloquence:—
“But the distinguishing characteristic in the state of society
is to be traced to the causes which led to the origin of the colony
itself. For some considerable time after its foundation, there
were, of course, only two classes, —free persons, consisting almost
exclusively of the civil and military officers who were attached
to the establishment, and convicts sentenced to various terms of
transportation. The distinction between these classes was so
broadly drawn, that it soon produced a marked influence on the
conduct of each. The former became consequential and over-
bearing ; the latter equally humble and submissive. After a few
years, however, a third class slowly sprang up, composed of
persons who had been convicts, and had gradually become free,
either by the expiration of their respective sentences, or by
pardon. This intermediate class soon acquired the distinctive
appellation of “ emancipists —a name by which they are still
known, and which serves to contra-distinction them from those
whose emigration has been voluntary. Strange as it may appear,
such was the arrogance of one party, and such the servility of
the other, that the former class did not heap degradation on the
latter with more indifference than these seemed to endure it, as
if—pending the period of servitude —they had acquired a habit
and predilection for slavery, too inveterate for any subsequent
enjoyment of freedom to remove. Thus an aristocratic junta
gradually arose, who monopolized all situations of power, dignity,
and emolument, and at last gained such an ascendancy that they
were able for a long while to domineer alike over the Govern-
ment and the people. And to such a pitch of insolence did they
at last carry their pretensions, that they considered themselves
possessed of equal right to the Governor’s confidence as if they
stood in the same relation to him which the nobility of this
country bear to the King, and were, dejure, his hereditary coun-
sellors. Until the accession of Governor Macquarie, the great
body of the people, I mean of such as had become free, scarcely
possessed any civil priviledge, but that of suing and being sued


in the courts of justice, and even this privilege they were very
cautious of exercising out of their own circle. The whole power,
and nearly the whole property and commerce of the Colony
were in the hands of the few who had risen to this ascendancy
at the expense, and to the evident detriment and oppression
of the community at large • and even in those instances where the
emancipists had been allowed to acquire some little affluence,
their success was to be traced to the patronage and protection
afforded them by some member or other of the aristocratic
party, to whom they either acted as agents in the disposal of
merchandise (for it was considered by these gentlemen deroga-
tory from their dignity to keep shops and sell openly), or else
resorted to for the purchase of goods on their own account. At
the prosperity and importance, however, of this faction (for
such is their proper appellation), Governor Macquarie, seeing
that the power which they had attained was subversive of the
very end for which the Colony itself had been instituted,
levelled many a deadly blow during his long and judicious
administration; and, although he, unhappily, did not succeed
in extinguishing them altogether, he at least shore them of all
but the inclination to re-establish the domination which they
so long exercised. Like the Indian juggler’s bag of serpents,
their nature is not altered, hut they have happily lost their
poisonous fangs, Of the measures which this excellent, though
most calumniated gentleman adopted, with this view, the most
prominent were,, first, Prohibiting the military from holding
lands or being concerned in commerce ; secondly, Raising to
situations of trust and dignity some of the most
deserving of the class of emancipists ; and thirdly,
Throwing open the ports of the Colony to an unlimited
importation of all sorts of merchandize. But it was
not to be expected that he could effect these great and salutary
changes in the policy which had been so long acted upon by
his predecessors in the Government, without encountering the
most obstinate and rancorous opposition from the party whose
monopoly was thus overthrown. He, in fact, instantly drew
on himself their unrelenting and systematic hostility. Num-
berless were the attempts made on all hands to vilify his
motives and misrepresent his actions; but, as the leading
maxim of his administration—“ that it was good policy to
restore the deserving emancipist to that rank in society which
he had occupied previous to his conviction ” —attracted the
marked and cordial concurrence both of the Committee of the
House of Commons, that reported on transportation in 1812,
B,nd of the present Secretary of State for the Colony; they


judiciously desisted from cavilling any further with a policy
thus sanctioned, although it was still as repugnant as ever
to their feelings. With a pliant dexterity they immediately
shifted their ground, and, feigning to concede the soundness of
the principle itself, they resolved to seize every occasion to
condemn its application. Accordingly every emancipist, who
was fortunate enough to become the object of the Governor’s
countenance and protection, was instantly beset by this pack in
full cry. Not content with hunting up and giving a false
colouring to every little blemish which they could discover in
the individual’s history, they scrupled not to circulate as facts,
every species of calumny to which an unbridled and vituperate
ingenuity could give birth. In the teeth, however, of all the
discouragements and obloquy which the rancorous malignity of
this faction contrived to throw in his way, this humane and
upright Governor continued his course with the undeviating
inflexibility of a man who knew that he was pursuing the path of
honour and duty. In vain did they assail him with open censure :
in vain did they seek to undermine him by secret misrepresent-
ations. To every charge of his enemies his unshaken integrity
and unwearied zeal in the performance of 11 his duties, whether
public or private, proved a sufficient refuaation ; and in spite of
an opposition thus organised and invetertte, he stood, like some
frowning solitary rock of the ocean, on its own eternal basis,
heedless of the din, and unaffected by the assaults of the
boisterous elements around him.
WENTWORTH’S SPEECH AT THE HUSTINGS,
JULY 27, 1848.
Mr. Wentwoeth was received with enthusiastic cheers, fol-
lowed by cries of “ No coolies, no cannibals ; go down,” which
were, however, immediately drowned in renewed cheers. Mr.
Wentworth spoke as follows :—“ He thanked them for the re-
ception they had awarded him, for although he saw that he was
not universally popular, yet still it was easy to see that a large


majority of .those present were in his favour. If he had con-
sulted his own inclination—his own ease—his own advantag-
—his own happiness, he should not have appeared before them
to solicit their votes for a seat in the Legislative Council. His
advanced age, his diminished strength, the embarrassed state of
the circumstances of the colony, all pointed to a private life as
the most desirable. After a legislative career of five years,
during which he had participated in every legislative act, to
suppose that every principle he had supported—every act he
had performed, would be popular, would be most fickle and
absurd; but the prejudices which had been so studiously raised
against him were not founded upon opinions he had expressed
or acts he had done, but the grossest misrepresentations of
those opinions and those acts. He had heard that day raised
against him the same insane cry by which it had been sought
to prevent his former election, and which failed then, as he
was assured it would fail now. The “No Coolie” cry was still
in the mouths of his real opponents, who were ashamed to
speak it themselves. But who were so simple as not to per-
ceive that this cry was a mere election manseuvre. During the
last five years, during which he had been their representative,
there had not been fifty coolies imported into the colony; but
he should like to know whether a person choosing to import
coolies at his own expense had not a perfect right to do so.
They all claimed liberty of principle and liberty of action : by
what reasoning could they deny it to others ? (Cheers.) If
during his legislative career he had voted for the importation of
coolies, then indeed they would have a right to clamour ; but he
again asserted that every man had a free and undeniable right
to introduce any kind of labour he liked, so that he paid for it
out of his own pocket. He had never been a very ardent advo-
cate for the introduction of coolies. In the evidence he had
given before the Legislative Council, in the time of Sir Eichard
Bourke, he had distinctly stated that it would be most im-
proper to expend the public money for the importation of
Coolies. But he contended that if it were found impossible to
find white labour enough, then it would become both necessary
and wise, to employ black. He would now allude to the
question of transportation. On that question his vote, and the
expression of his opinion had not been understood. He had
been appointed chairman of a certain committee to consider a
question from the Secretary of State, as to whether it was
desirable that transportation to this Colony should be resumed
or not. The circumstances of the Colony were at that time
different to what they were now, and very different to what


they were at the time when transportation was discontinued to
to the Colony. At that time the committee had to consider
that there was a colony to the South, inundated with criminals
who were constantly forcing their way hither, —that it was
proposed to create a new penal colony to the North, from which
a similar stream might be expected to arise. If then they were
without any power to prevent being inundated with criminals
in this manner, he thought, and the committee thought that it
would be better to have the evil of convicts with the benefit of
a commissariat expenditure of £400,000 a year—with the con-
dition that one-half of the police expenditure of the colony
should be defrayed by the Home Government —that for every
cenvict exported three free emigrants should be sent out. Then
studying all the evil without these benefits they found, that
whether they would or no, convicts they must have ; that if
they came indirectly they would be an unmitigated evil: that if
they came directly, they would be accompanied by a direct
good. He believed that the system proposed in the much-
abused Transportation Report would have been far better than
that which had been adopted. The colony, without receiving
any advantage, would still be receiving convicts under another
name. The deceptive proposition of the Secretary of State,
involving all of the evil, and none of the good of the first
proposition, was now by those who had been most
violent in their opposition to the return to the system in any
shape whatever. The Legislative Council which rejected the
proposition of the Transportation Committee had adopted the
system of ‘ exileism’, each exile being accompanied by only one
free emigrant. Even his friend, Mr. Oowper, the very cham-
pion of the anti-transportation movement —had silently
acquiesced in this proposition for the introduction of “ exiles.”
Why then was he (Wentworth) singled out to be the mark of
obloquy ? Why not affix the charge on their idol, Mr. Robert
Lowe, who was as deeply in the Transportation Report as he
was—who was as deeply in the the exile proposition. He would
not say that he despised the clamour which had thus been
raised against him ; but he would say that he despised the
equity of a people who would heap this clamour on his head
clone. This clamour was not only unmerited, but particularly
unjust. The Transportation Report, so far from recommending
the resumption of transportation, was opposed to it—provided
that the Imperial Government would consent that it should be
altogether discontinued to these parts. He would tell them
that h a d the recommendation of the report been carried out,
instead 0 f £1,500,000 being realised in the colony by the wool


had been done, they had obtained leases—some for eight years,
some for fourteen, which might be renewed at the expiration of
those periods He asked how this could be construed into an
accusation that they desired to confiscate all the lands of the
colony. "What chance had this little band of squatters to wrest
from the hands of 25,000 inhabitants of the colony their natural
and indefeasible rights in these lands ? The thing was absurd.
He unhesitatingly declared that no man had proclaimed and
upheld the rights of the people more than he had. No man
had more earnestly upheld the people’s right of the freehold of
the soil than he had; and if he saw this right threatened, no
man would work more zealously to defend the attack. The soil
of this country was the patrimony of unborn generations ; and
whatever they might say or think of him, he did not think that
anyone would accuse him of being one to cheat him of his
patrimony. It had been said that on this and other questions
he had been influenced by self interest. He denied the charge.
But while he threw back this imputation with contempt on
those who made it, if he could be actuated by any particular
interest, it would be the highest patriotism, for he could not
separate himself from any interest, he was so mixed up and
identified with them all. He had now gone through the host of
delinquencies which had been ascribed to him. He trusted that
they would not be found altogether unpardonable. He would
now turn his attention to some reflections which had been made
against him by his opponents. He did not shrink from exer-
cising forbearance towards Mr. Lowe. Mr. Lowe had made his
dehut in political life in this colony as a nominee of the Crown,
and was appointed such by Sir George Gipps, and until he
quarrelled with that Governor he uniformly supported the mea-
sures of his appointee ; but in a short time he deserted his con-
stituents but clung to his appointment until driven from it by
the taunts of Mr. Roger Terry, who compared him, in the
Council, to the adder which stung to death the benefactor who
gave it warmth and strength in his bosom. Driven from this
appointment, Mr. Lowe next sought refuge from the counties of
St. Vincent and Auckland, and was returned by the squatting
interests upon his account, however strong his convictions
might be which led to this strength. His friend, Mr. Lamb,
had thought fit to say he had outlived his constituency—that
his opinions and principles now were not the opinions of his
constituency. He would not retort upon Mr. Lamb, as it was
the etiquette of English elections for candidates to canvass
rather on the demerits of their rivals rather than on any merits
of their own. He would say, therefore, nothing of Mr. Lamb,


further than that if they should, after weighing his qualifica-
tions, looking into his opinions and principles, think him a
better man than he (Mr. Wentworth), that from his past career
he deserved better their suportand confidence, it was their duty
to elect him. (Cries of ‘‘No, no.”) But he did not think it
would be consistent with his duty to show the same forbearance
to his other opponent, Mr. Robert Lowe. On the same occa-
sion, when Mr, Lamb had made the statement he had just
alluded to, Mr. Lowe had said that not only was he
unfit to represent the constituency of Sydney, but unfit
to represent any constituency. He (Mr. Wentworth) did
think that Mr. Lowe might have excepted that consti-
tuency which he had himself just deserted. (Great cheering.)
He might have at least admitted that he was fit to represent a
squatting constituency. (Cheers.) But he would ask what
constituency was the learned gentleman himself fit for ?
(Cheers.) That gentleman made his debut in political life in
this colony as a nominee of thee Crown, and was appointed
such by Sir George Gipps, and until he quarrelled with that
Governor, he uniformly supported the measures of his appointee.
But in a short time he deserted his constituent, but clung to
his appointment until driven from it by the taunts of Mr,
Roger Therry, who compared him in the Council to the adder,
which had stung to death the benefactor who had warmed it
into life and strength in his bosom. (Cheers.) Driven from
this appointment, Mr. Lowe next sought refuge from the
squatters of the Counties of St. Vincent and Auckland, and
was returned by them on his professions of support to the
squatting interest. A little time, however, and he changed his
opinions on the squatting question. However strong the con-
victions might be which led to this change, however well
founded they might be, however just the principles which he
was induced to adopt, it was the duty of Mr, Lowe to return to
the community of squatters who had elected him, and tell them
that he was no longer able to support their interests, and have
tendered the resignation of his seat. This would have been the
course every high-minded, honourable man would have taken,
(cheers); but not so with Mr. Robert Lowe. What claim had
a man like this to their confidence—a man who had betrayed
every constituency which had yet trusted him ? He (Mr.
Wentworth), too, remembered that he, too, had had the misfor-
tune to be the subject of his eulogy. Only two years ago this
man had heaped praises upon him—had in his eloquent flattery
designated him “the great son of the soil,” (cheers), now, how-
ever, he told those who went to listen to him, that he (Mr


Wentworth) was not fit to represent any constituency. r (Cheers.)
This was the consistency of the eloquent Mr. Lowe. But he
expected no more from him : he knew long ago that, having
borne his praises, he would soon' be bound to hear his bitterest
and most envenomed censure. The principle of th*e man’s life
was change, and he could not expect him to be consistent when
alone. (Cheers.J But he did not expect that an old comrade
—one who had fought side by side with him the battle of the
country against tyranny, would have made a treacherous detour
in his absence, and tapped him in the back. (Great cheering.)
This he could not have expected—this he could not have
believed —but this was the principle, this the generosity, this the
honour of Mr. Robert Lowe. (Cheers.) He should not detain
them much longer. When twenty-five years ago he devoted
himself to public life; he knew full well the vicisitudes of
public opinion to which it was subject, and he was prepared to
encounter them. He knew well enough the proverbial incon-
sistency of the popular gale ; that the breeze which filled his
flowing sheet to-day, might be a head wind to-morrow, (Cheers.)
He knew that the misdeeds of public men are engraven on
brass, whilst their virtues and their services are traced in sand*
(Cheers.) He knew the popular man to-day, the benefactor of
his country and his kind, might be the despised exile of to-
morrow. (Cheers.) He knew too, that in a shifting population
like this, where opinions and interests were perpetually chang-
ing, that he was particularly obnoxious to an event of this
description. But with all this knowledge of the fate to which
public men are so often subjected, he fearfessly submitted
himself a second time to the ordeal of their opinion. From
that tribunal he knew there was no appeal; but he was content
to rest upon the merits of his public life. If they considered
that that life had been devoted to their service, that his labours
had been fruitful of good to the country, they would not now
leave him in the lurch. (Cheers and cries of No, no.) But
whatever they thought proper to do with him, let him charge
them never to forget their tried, their devoted, their indefati-
bable friend, William Bland. (Cheers.) No man had ever
served his country in a purer spirit of patriotism than he had,
no man more deeply deserved the gratitude of a generous people.
(Cheers.) They might by their votes cause it to be written on th 0
tomb of his friend and himself ‘* Here lie the rejected of Sydney.’,
but he would venture to predict posterity would, in juxta
position to this epitaph, add these words—“ Who gave those
who rejected them the Liberty of the Press, trial by jury, and
constitutional right of electing their own representatives,


(Tremendous cheering.) They might put it out of his power to
serve them again, but they could not erase from memory the
services of the past. (Cheers.) He could truly say the love of
his country had been the master-passion of his life. No man’s
heart heat with a louder love of country than his own; and it
was on his own soil that he then stood. From boyhood up to
manhood he had been devoted to its service—had watched over it
as a mother over her cradle child-—its welfare had through life
been the object of his devoted love and affection, and was still
the object of his highest hopes and aspirations. (Immense
cheering.) With these observations he would conclude by
thanking them for their patient hearing, but his last charge to
them was—do what they liked with him, but respect his friend.”
(Mr. Wentworth retired amidst enthusiastic cheering.)
When the news of the death of Mr. Wentworth reached this
colony, Sir James Martin moved, —“ That a Public Funeral be
accorded the remains of the deceased patriot. The speech which
the hon, gentleman made was characterized by much fervour of
expression and generous thought. It is epitomized as follows .
Sir JAMES MAETIN (who on rising was received with
cheers) moved, —“ That this House is of opinion, that in
order to manifest its deep sense of the eminent public services
of the late William Charles Wentworth, the honours of a public
funeral ought to be accorded to his remains, as soon after their
arrival in the colony as suitable arrangements can be made for
the purpose.” He said: I feel persuaded that there is no
member of this House, whatever his political views may be, but
will be of opinion that the motion I have now submitted is one
which ought to have the unanimous approval of this House.
(Cheers.) There are amongst those who constitute this House
hon. members who knew Mr. Wentworth in his early days (hear,
hear), and there are some who knew what manner of man he
was. It may not be unnecessary to refer—not at very great
length—to the extent of the services which I am of opinion, will
justify the course I have invited the House to take upon this
occasion. Mr. Wentworth was for very many years the most
conspicuous public man not only in this colony, but in this part
of the world (cheers), and was longer before his countrymen as a
public man than any other we have experience of. In 1813 he
was associated with Messrs, Lawson and Blaxland in a successful


attempt to explore a route over the Blue Mountains. Tip to
the time when these gentlemen discovered the route over these
mountains the colony of New South Wales was for all practical
purposes confined within the River Hawksbury. There is a
hook in the library of the House containing a map of what was
termed the colony of New South Wales. This was no other
than the county of Cumberland. (Hear, hear.) That map was
published in 1810. Of course at the present period we are
scarcely able to understand the difficulties which arose in the
way of an exploration of this character. This exploration was
however carried on with great ability and perseverance, and it
resulted in the discovery of Bathurst Plains, and of the outlet
to what now comprised the finest part of New South Wales, the
Great Western interior of the colony. Well, that was the first
service he had an opportunity of rendering to the colony, and for
that service he was rewarded by a grant of land. He himself
once told me (Sir James Martin) it was the only grant ever
made to him. (Hear, hear.) This was the grant of Mount
Yernon in the Camden district, which still belongs to his family.
Well, Mr. Wentworth after his trip to the Western interior, was
sent to England, and studied at the University of Cambridge for
some time: and he there distinguished himself by writing a prize
poem, the subject of which was “Australia.” After a distin-
guished University career he was called to the bar, and came to
the colony at a time when the late Francis Forbes held the
position of Chief Justice, in which capacity he displayed an
amount of ability, love of liberty, and impartiality, which
eminently fitted him in all respects for such an important office.
There could be no doubt that, had he remained in England, the
highest professional honours would have been within his grasp.
(Hear, hear.) It must have been a piece of singular good
fortune that the people of the colony obtained the services of
an advocate like that. (Cheers.) It might naturally be sup-
posed that a gentleman of Mr. Wentworth’s ability and high
legal acquirements would be irritated at finding himself settled
in a community which had no kind of free institutions, which
was governed by a sort of paternal despotism—the Governor,
the Queen’s representative having almost absolute power. One
might suppose that a spirit like Mr. Wentworth’s would chafe
under the restraints such as existed in those days. (Hear, hear.)
We could hardly realise what the state of his mind must have
been to have to be subject to a domination of this sort.
Accordingly we find that Mr Wentworth, from the very earliest
period, when there were not more than 20,000 or 30,000
inhabitants here, began to struggle for the goncession of the


rights which we now enjoyed. (Cheers.) We did not know what
these struggles were, and what they had cost him and other
persons engaged in them. It was then that Mr. Wentworth
made the name that was so dear in after times. Then we had
no trial by jury. Persons were tried for all kinds of offences
by military juries. Criminal law was administered in the most
arbitrary manner. We had no trial by jury at all, and we had
no right to elect persons to make laws for us, the Governor for
the time being almost absolute. With other gentlemen, Mr.
Wentworth started an agitation to secure the right of trial by
jury. He had to struggle for that right, year after year before it
was conceded. The persons who struggled with him were some
of them men of no mean mark and of great ability, and have
lived to very recent times. I refer to Dr. Bland, Mr. Sydney
Stephen, and numbers of others, whose names will be familiar
to those whom I now address. With these gentlemen Mr.
Wentworth commenced an agitation for trial by jury, and he
was assisted as far as he could be assisted in an agitation of
that sort by Sir Francis Forbes. In the struggle for con-
stitutional rights Mr. Wentworth distinguished himself. He
was a man opposed to tyranny of every sort. He had an
instinctive horror of any exercise of arbitrary power.
After the struggle for the concession of the right of trial by
jury, he took partin an association called the Prtriotic Asso-
ciation, the object of which was to win for himself and his
fellow-colonists the power of making their own laws. That to
us seemed a simple thing to ask for. But it was asked for year
after year in vain. Not only were there writers of great ability,
but large sums of money were paid, not by the Legislature, but
out of the pockets of the parties who were struggling, to enable
them to pay a party in the Legislature of the mother country
to advocate the claims of this colony to this right. Of ths-
association Mr. Wentworth was herhaps the leading member;
he certainly wss the ablest. Though I was only a very little
boy at the time, I remember hearing him speak, and he dis-
played an animation and energy which we all khow he displayed
at a later time. The struggles to which I have referred
extended over a period of somewhere about twenty years, from
1823 to 1843. Although in that period there was a Council to
advise the Governor in making the law, and although that
Council consisted of men of great respectability, yet it never
occurred to any Governor, or to any Secretary of State for the
Colonies to offer Mr. Wentworth a seat in that House. It never
occurred to any Governor to make him even a Justice of the
Peace until 1838, These two facts are to«.show tbe
19


kind of combination to which the colony was subjected in those
days—when a man of Mr. Wentworth’s ability, education, and
standing, was not even offered a seat in the Council of his
country, and was not even put into the commission of the
Peace until a late period. We may, therefore, judge what these
people had to struggle against. In 1842 the old City Council
came into existence, and so desirous were the people of this
country to take part in the representation of their fellow-
citizens, as one of the highest privileges, that some of the first
men in the country were elected to the City Council, or
endeavoured to get elected ; and the contest for seats in that
body was something surprising. It is much easier to get into
the Legislative Assembly now than it was to get into the City
Council then. Mr. Wentworth’s aim did not lie in that
direction. But in the following year, Mr. Wentworth became a
candidate for a seat in the old Council, of which two-thirds
were nominated, and one-third were elected by the people. The
constituency he sought to represent was the principle one in
the country. I can very well recollect that struggle, I was
one who took an active part in canvassing the city (Hear, hear),
from door to door, on that occasion, and there was not a house
left unvisited. There was an opposition to which I will not
refer, further than to say that there was one life lost and some
others were endangered. Mr. Wentworth was returned at the head
of the poll. His field of exertions then became changed. He then
found himself, rather late in life, in a position in which he could
display his abilities more to the advantage of his country than
he could have done previously to that. He then had an active
share in making the laws of the country. From the Opposition
benches he exerted himself to reform the abuses of government
and injustice wherever it might appear to him. In that Legis-
lature he remained somewhere about ten years. The history of
the legislation from 1843 to 1848 was a history of one continued
struggle against illegality and unconstitutionalism from the first
to the last, (Cheers.) It was in that early part of Mr. Went-
worth’s career that he was brought into antagonism with the
Governor of the colony, Sir George Gipps, a most well meaning
man, but who looked upon everything from an Imperial point
of view. His sympathies were not with the colonists but with
those who sent him here. Well, Mr. Wentworth had many
battles to fight in resisting what appeared to him to be uncon-
stitutional views of the Ministers in the mother country and the
unconstitutional way in which they were bound to be carried out
by the Governor here. It is almost incredible, but the Secre-
tary of State sent out -police magistrates, qlerks for the Custom


Houses, and other departments, to receive high salaries while
our own youth had not the slightest chance of getting into even
the most inferior places. Mr. Wentworth was one of those who
struggled more manfully than any one else against grievances of
this sort. But to give a history of all that Mr. Went-
worth did during the ten years of his Parliamenty life would
occupy too much time, and was unnecessary. When Mr. Went-
worth started in his Legislative career in 1843 he was unques-
tionably the most popular man in this country; but in the
course of a few years, from causes to which I need not par-
ticularly refer, that popularity waned; and at the second
general election he was opposed by no less a person than Mr.
Lowe, now Chancellor of the Exchequer. On that occasion a
very fierce struggle took place for the representation of Sydney,
and Mr. Wentworth then justified, by the remarkable eloquence
and independence which he showed, the eulogium of his friends.
Up to that time it was said that he had been too careless to
display his powers; but on that occasion Mr. Wentworth did
display his talents and his independence, and he showed that
he possessed abilities of the highest order. (Cheers.) On that
occasion Mr. Wentworth made a speech which, if it had been
made in the mother country, would have been cited as oue of
the choicest pieces of oratory. (Hear, hear.) I did not hear
that speech. I was at Hartley, seeking my own election at the
time ; but I remember that when the report' of the speech was
brought to the courthouse at Hartley the polling was deferred
for two hours, with the consent of the Returning-Officer and the
unanimous consent of all the parties, until that speech was read.
The very distinguished man who was opposed to Mr. Wentworth
at that time succeeded in being returned and Dr. Bland was
rejected ; but I think that Dr. Bland might feel some degree of
consolation that it took a man like Mr. Lowe to beat him, for
even in those days we were aware that Mr. Lowe possessed the
abilities which he has since displayed in the Imperial Parlia-
ment. I myself have listened to speeches made by that gentle-
man here; and, judging from the reports of his speeches
elsewhere, those which he made in this Chamber were very
much abler than any he has delivered in the mother country.
He displayed all those remarkable powers here, and therefore
that Dr. Bland should have been defeated by a gentleman of
such eminent ability must, at all events, have afforded him some
degree of consolation. No one can tell the advantages which
have resulted from even forty or fifty educated young men going
out from the University into the community every few years ;
and Mr. Wentworth I think is entitled to gratitude for having


placed within the reach of the youth of this country opportunities
quite equal to those which they can obtain elsewhere. Another
service which he rendered was in the framing of the Constitution
Act. Mr. Wentworth had a singular knowledge of constitu-
tional principles. He was well read in the constitutional
history of the mother country, and particularly in that period
in which the foundations of its liberties were laid. He might
be regarded as the compeer of men who were conspicuous in the
Long Parliament—of such men as Hampden and Eliot. Mr.
Wentworth was a man of their stamp. He went back to first
principles as they did, and spoke of them with as much Anglo-
Saxon eloquence as any of them could have given utterance to.
His desire was to give us as much liberty here as we could enjoy
if we were in the centre of the empire ; and with that freedom
to which every one was entitled he sought to combine those
checks and counterpoises without which freedom degenerated
into license. He may have been mistaken; but he wished to
prevent anything like an opening to tyranny either on the part of
the people or their rulers. In the course of his senatorial career
there were, as one might suppose, many occasions which called
forth his indignation; and I remember one particularly when a
struggle was going on which required that all the friends of
constitutional reform should be united. In those days there
were six gentlemen who sat up here for what was then called
the province of Port Phillip, now the colony of Victoria. The
most conspicuous was Mr, Benjamin Boyd. Although Mr.
Boyd was at the head of a very largo concern, having the
disposal of hundreds of thousands of pounds in the course of
years, he was what might be called a local politician. He
thought it was his duty to struggle for the local interests of the
district which sent him ; and he moved on one occasion that
all the revenue realised in Port Phillip should be spent there.
Those who were associated with him here did not think fit to
concede that; an dbe was then unwise enough to threaten that
he and the other Port Philip members would go over in a body
to the Government, and vote with the Government as they
desired. Mr. Wentworth combated this view; and towards
the close of his speech on that occasion he denounced this con-
duct in terms he had heard described almost with enthusiasm
by a gentleman who had had the opportunity of hearing some
of the greatest speeches in the House of Commons. I did not
hear that speech myself, but I had a conversation about it with
Mr. (now Sir) Roger Therry, and he told me that he never
heard anything in his life that stirred him more than that. In
those days we had no shorthand reporters; but, notwithstanding


that, the reports of the speeches were tolerably good. I have
taken the trouble to seek out a few passages in that speech to
which I refer, and I hope the House will bear with me while I
quote a few sentences from it. (Hear, hear.) I quote them to
show not only the vigorous nature of his intellect, but the
thoroughly sound English he was wont to employ when
his energies were called forth. I quote from the Sydney
Morning Herald of the 14th December, 1844:-—“As to the
threats which have this night been uttered, I regret that
they should have been uttered before the House—before the
world. I, for one, should be ashamed to have given public
expression to them. If such a negotiation as suggested could
have been entered upon by honourable men, then it should have
been entered upon in private ; and honourable gentlemen who
could propose it should not have outraged the feelings of others,
or risked outrage on their own, by such an open offer as
has been made. I will not say that no honourably-minded
man could make such a proposition ; but I will say that no
honourable men could accede to it. So far from such threats
influencing me to vote in favour of the proposition before the
House it will confirm me in my opposition to it. It has been
said that the battle that has been fought by me and others
in this House has been a battle of personal feeling. I deny
it. I have fought the good battle for my country ; for pos-
terity. If I and those who have fought with me are now
menaced with desertion; if honourable members —if the con-
stituents of honorable members—are base enough to act in such
a way, on them be the consequences. If they will choose
the peril which must follow conduct so base, let them do so.
If I am again reduced to the trammels I have formerly endured,
and confined in the political dungeon which I and my country-
men have known, I shall know that the act was not mine ; I
shall have the consolation of knowing that I have done my
duty. Those who will share this degradation will know that
they have merited it; that they have brought it on themselves
and on all around them. But what can the miserable authors
of such a proposition expect from it ? Do they think that the
Colonial Secretary in whose hands they threatened to place the
nomination of six members of the House—do they think that he,
who has told them that their cry for separation is ‘ bunkum
do they think that honourable member will ever, on any terms,
get up in this House, at any time, however distant, and support a
motion for separation ? However regardless other members may
be of decency, I know the hon. gentleman too well to believe
him capable of such an act. The very hope in which this base
23


surrender of our hard gained rights is tendered is futile—it is
to be degraded without achievement of that thing wished.
Whatever the consequences may be, the threat will not intimi-
date me. I have had but one object in view—the benefit, the
liberty of the constituents of the colony; and if those who
have hitherto supported me and my friends choose now to
desert us because we will not truckle to their selfishness, their
local prejudices and purposes, why let them do so, let the
gratification of desertion be theirs. I am convinced that
ignominy and dishonour would be theirs also now and'forever.”
Well, Mr. Roger Therry more than once spoke in the highest
terms of that particular passage ; and many of us will remember
that it was no uncommon thing for Mr. Wentworth to deliver
himself at times as energetically as he spoke on that occasion.
He was a man of that stamp that he was capable of going to the
front in the largest arena; and he must to a certain extent
have felt himself trammelled in a sphere which would be
looked upon now as a kind of parish business. But parish
business it was not—(hear, hear) —because small as our num-
bers were, they were the beginning of a very great nation, of
what was already a most important community—(hear, hear) —
and the same questions which agitate a people consisting of two
or three hundred thousand will in a constitutional and large
point of view be as important as the same questions agitating
the minds of millions, (Hear, hear.) Mr. Wentworth had not
the. same spur to his ambition, not the same incitement to put
forth his intellectual powers, which he would have had had he
been placed in the House of Commons. If he had been there in
early life, with all the aids to information, all the spur to emu-
lation, and all those excitements which at times make a person
even surpass himself, he would have been perhaps, in the eyes
of the world at large, very different from what he has been.
Not in our eyes, because we saw him, and know what he
was capable of. It is because we have had a man among us of
this character that I think we are called upon now, as a duty we
owe to ourselves and the country we represent, to step out of our
way—for it is stepping out of our way—and receive his remains
with all the honour we can afford to them. (Hear, hear.) In
this place where I now stand all his Parliamentary speeches
were delivered, We can remember how he stood in his
old gray suit of tweed (for he always encouraged local industries)
in sometimes an ungraceful attitude, but at all times showing
the powers he was possessed of, and I think it is proper for us to
receive, in a national kind of way his body, and accompany
it to its last resting-place, so that it may not be said that we
are unmindful of our duty to the greatest of Aiiatmlia’aarma.


[Advertisement.]
wxw x;]!Vxi!BPBr»i:
FOB THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
Stanbarb storks fat tkrgaast^olk
Splendidly Illustrated, Bound Complete, (not in numbers) at GREATLY
By this arrangement, the Purchaser gets possession of
his Book at once, and pays for it afterwards by
SMALL MONTHLY INSTALMENTS.
NOTE THE LIST OF WORKS!
COLLINS’ ILLUSTRATED FAMILY BIBLE.
BROWN’S ’’ ’’ ”
FLEETWOOD’S LIFE OP CHRIST.
BUNYAN’S SELECT WORKS.
D’AUBIGNE’S HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.
BURNS’ AND SCOTT’S POETICAL WORKS, 2 YOL8.
SHAKESPEARE, 2 VOLS.
ALL ROUND THE WORLD, 2 YOLS.
CASSELLS’ NEW POPULAR EDUCATOR, 6 VOLS. in 3.
THE FAMILY ALTAR.
COLLINS’ NEW HOUSEHOLD DICTIONARY.
&c. &o. &c.
SOLE AGENT FOE NEW SOUTH WALES
FIRE & LIFE ASSURANCE AGENT.
448, G-EOEGB STEBET,
(NEARLY OPPOSITE LASSETTER’S,)
TO SUPPLY
FIRST-CLASS
REDUCED PRICES, by'an easy mode of payment.
J. R. HAMILTON
Sydney,
Printed bj JOHN FERGUSON, 426, George Street, Sydney.
