

SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
COMPILED FOR THE BENEFIT OP A BAZAAR
HELD AT THE OPENING OP THE NEW
CHAPEL IN PIRIE-STREET,
ADELAIDE.
JAMES BONWICK,
AUTHOR OF “ GEOGRAPHY FOR AUSTRALIAN YOUTH,”
ETC., ETC.
ADELAIDE : 403 f t% I
PRINTED BY T. STRODE, GAWLER-PLACE. |




WESLEYAN METHODISM
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
COMPILED FOR THE BENEFIT OF A BAZAAR
HELD AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW*
CHAPEL IN PIRIE-STREET,
ADELAIDE.
JAMES BON WICK,
AUTHOR OF “ GEOGRAPHY FOR AUSTRALIAN YOUTH,”
ETC., ETC.
ADELAIDE :
PRINTED BY T. STRODE, GAWLER PLACE.




PREFACE.
A desire to add Ms quota of voluntary
effort to meet the building expenses of the
New Chapel in Pirie-street, Adelaide, in-
duced the writer to prepare the following
sketch of Wesleyan Methodism in South
Australia. As a detailed history of the
Society could not be given within the limits
of these few pages, it was determined to
present the general aspect of the cause at
three different periods,—in 1841,1846, and
1851.
Though sensible that the work has been
but imperfectly performed, it is hoped that
this-little production may induce others who


PREFACE.
have more time and ability than the com-
piler, to prepare records of their respective
churches in the colonies, while the early
days are unforgotten, and the infant
struggles have not lost their interest.
North Adelaide,
October 13, 1851.


WESLEYAN METHODISM
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Fifteen years ago a vessel was sailing on
the open ocean. To a common observer
there was nothing to distinguish that ship
from others. Yet it contained the germ
and elements of an empire. Its destination
was the Continent of New Holland. The
object of its passengers was the establishment
of the colony of South Australia.
The principle of authority was there in
the person of the Governor and his officers.
A band of emigrants was there, to form the
basis of a flourishing settlement. The
representative of piety was there in a small
gathering of faithful ones. The first class
discussed the method of procedure in the
organization of the future colony. The
A 2


second laid plans of labour, which were to
result in the acquisition of wealth. The
third contemplated the rearing of an altar
to their God in the wilds of the distant
land.
They enter the Gulf. They disembark
in the Bay. All is activity and confusion.
The ruling body proclaims the country, and
exacts obedience to British law. The Agri-
culturalist is anxious to commence his toil,
and the Speculator to execute his designs..
Goods are unshipped, the country is ex-
plored, the land is surveyed, and the tent or
mud hut is raised. The echoing woods
resound with the blow of the axe, and the
loud laugh disturbs the silence of the strange
land. But who are they who may be seen
in the solitary place at the close of the day,
with their eyes lifted up toward heaven ?
These are the representatives of the Church
of God j—that Church, unconfined to-
nation, or to creed. The real flock of
Christ are to he found scattered in many
earthly folds, and true charity leads us to
discover many of the Lord’s hidden ones in


other tents than those of Jacob’s. The
voice of prayer arose in the grove of gum-
trees, and the still air of the plains vibrated
with the notes of praise. The sands of
Glenelg received the impress of the feet of
those bringing glad tidings, and the banks
of the Torrens were honoured with the first
Temple of the Lord of Hosts. And as the
furrow of civilization was traced among the
beautiful vales of our mountain ranges, the
sweet spirit of Christianity sought a new-
abode in those higher regions.
It was not long before some individuals,
who had been members of the Wesleyan
body at home, met together to organize a
Church after the model of that they had
loved and left behind. In fact, the friends
who arrived in the first vessels, before the
formal foundation of the colony by the
Governor Hindmarsh, were accustomed to
meet together for prayer and encourage-
ment. Two worthy men, still associated
with the Society in South Australia, Messrs.
East and Boots, were fellow labourers on
Kangaroo Island. In a carpenter’s shop at


Kingscote, Divine Service was performed
as early as the close of 1886.
The Governor arrived at Glenelg on
December 28,1836. The first sale of town
allotments in Adelaide was toward the end
of March. Some settlers remained at the
Bay in their tents, while others came up at
once to locate themselves near the site of
the future capital of the colony. They
spread their canvas dwellings, or erected
their mud huts, in the Park Lands near the
river, extending from the back of the present
Government House up to where the gaol
now stands.
In a little memorandum-book occurs the
following interesting entry :
“ 15 th May, 1837.—At a meeting held
this night at the dwelling-house of E.
Stephens, Esq., for the purpose of establish-
ing a Religious Society, to be called the
Wesleyan Methodist Society, the following
persons gave in their names as desirous of
becoming members.” After this comes a
list of fifteen members.
We see, then, that immediately upon the


formafion of. the settlement, and before any
house could be erected upon the surveyed
allotments of the town, arrangements were
made by the Wesleyans to establish their
communion. This was the first organized
Christian body in South Australia. Mr.
Lillecrapp was the first Secretary, and
Messrs. East and Jacob Abbott were the
first class leaders. The first class meeting
was held by Mr Abbott on the 15th of
May, in a rude hut belonging to Mr Isaac
Jacobs, on the banks of the Torrens. The
first preaching of the Adelaide Methodists
had been in the open air, under the
brightest sky that ever canopied a country.
The first place of worship was a reed hut, the
next was the kitchen of the house of Edward
Stephens, Esq. This dwelling was an Eng-
lish wooden building situated in the Park
Lands, behind where the present Council
Chamber is.
At a Society’s meeting in the month of
June, upon the reception of certain friends
as Local Preachers on trial, it was stated,
“ They had each spoken in public several


times, and had been questioned as (h their
views on spiritual subjects, and the doctrines of
Methodism.” The Officers of Society Steward
and Poor Steward were afterwards elected.
Tims much for order and discipline.
Ine affairs of the Church greatly pros-
peied. The building of a commodious
chapel was determined upon. Mrs. E. Ste-
phens laid the foundation-stone of the first
South Australian Chapel, and in the month
oi March 1838, the Hindley-street Wes-
leyan place of worship was opened. The
Rev. T. Q. Stow, Independent Minister,
conducted one of the first Sabbath services.
The room in which Mr. Stow labored at
that period was situated in North-terrace,
and was constructed in rather an original
manner of canvas, reeds, and wooden
paling. The foundation of the first Inde-
pendent Chapel was laid in Ereeinan-street
in December 1839.
On Christmas Day, 1837, Trustees were
chosen. It was upon that occasion deter-
mined that there should be preaching three
times each Sunday. As there was then no


one particularly regarding tire religious in-
terests of the poor aborigines, the Wesleyans
felt it to be their solemn duty to exert
themselves on their behalf. At a members’
meeting on April 4th, 1838, the following
resolution was passed “ That William
Lillecrapp be taken on the plan as an accre-
dited Local Preacher; his labors to he
devoted principally to the natives.” Is it
not delightful to notice that, in the first
twelvemonth of the Society’s existence, a
missionary was appointed for the important
work of enlightening the heathen occupants
of the soil ? This furnishes one of the best
proofs of the spiritual progression of the
little band. There being no ordained mi-
nister of the denomination, it was thought
advisable that one of the Local Preachers
should be chosen each quarter to officiate
as Superintendent, and to administer the
Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. At the
Quarterly Meeting held on June 2nd, 1888,
the Quarterly Collection and the Monday
Evening Prayer Meeting were appointed.
At this period of the Society’s history,


there were 6 Local Preachers, 7 Class
Leaders, about 50 members, and 100 Sab-
bath School Children. But the want of a
shepherd was felt by the little flock in
Adelaide. As individuals they had prayed
for the coming of a minister; but now
they set apart seasons of especial prayer to
the Lord of the harvest, that he would
please to send forth a laborer into this pro-
mising field. Their supplications were
heard. An accident, as some would call
it, —a providence, as the Christian friends
considered it, brought them the aid which
they desired.
The Rev. William Longbottom had, for
several years, been endeavouring to enter
the heathen fastnesses of India with the
banner of the Cross. The toil and anxiety
of his missionary career had undermined
his constitution in that unhealthy climate,
and the enfeebled servant of Christ sought
the recovery of his bodily strength in the
salubrious atmosphere of Australia.
He had been appointed to Swan River.
There being no vessel going direct to


Western Australia, lie had to sail to Ho-
bart Town. At this place he took a pas-
sage for Mrs Longbottom, his son, and
himself, in a small craft of 40 tons, called
the Fanny, bound for Swan River After
some days the vessel ran ashore in En-
counter Bay, on the 16th of June, 1888.
The captain, the four seamen, and the mis-
sionary family took shelter on the other
side of the sand-hills, going each day to the
ship for provisions and water. The charts
and nautical instruments were missing.
They were perfectly ignorant of their po-
sition, and utterly helpless as to any means
of escape. Eor one long month did they
remain in this forlorn condition, upon a
wild sandy coast. The natives were useful
to them in procuring fuel.
At length, a party of white men ap-
peared. They represented themselves to
be shipwrecked mariners. Their vessel,
the Elizabeth, had struck the rooks about
one hundred miles lower down. Their
wretched appearance at once indicated their
sufferings from hunger. They had for


some time subsisted upon shell-fish. But
they had one advantage over the people of
the Fanny, —they possessed a compass and
a chart. Mutual assistance was proffered :
food by one, and guidance by the other.
All were now occupied in building a boat,
by means of which they might reach the
home of civilised man
On the morning of August 16th, 1838,
they set off from their melancholy sojourn
in the desert. The boat was carried a mile
over the sand-hills, and launched upon the
dreary salt waters of the Coorong, a long
narrow lake uniting itself with Lake Vic-
toria. Here they were sheltered by the
high bank of sand from the violence of the
sea-breezes. The frail bark passed across
the channel of the noble Kiver Murray, and
the servant of God stood on dry land on
the western shore of the lake. For fear of
the natives, the whole party walked during
the night a distance of twenty miles to the
station of the Whale Fisheries upon En-
counter Bay. Here they were most hos-
pitably treated,


In tlie meantime, tlie captain of the Eliza-
beth had started off on foot, and, reaching
Adelaide, communicated to E. Stephens,
Esq., the fact of the shipwreck of the Wes-
leyan missionary family. A vessel was im-
mediately sent for the unfortunate voyagers.
They parted with their rough, hut kind-
hearted friends, the whalers, and were soon
the objects of universal sympathy and re-
gard in the rising settlement of Adelaide.
The dwelling house of the Company s
Banker became their home. Subscriptions
were opened for the purchase of clothes and
other necessaries for the family, and of
books to supply the lost library of the
minister.
Mr. Longbottom at once entered upon
his work. To his astonishment he found
a well-organised, flourishing, and united
society, of fifty-two members, with a Sun-
day School of one hundred and twenty
children, meeting in a substantial edifice
erected by their zealous efforts. The
preaching of the good man seems to have
been blessed to many, and his gentle spirit


exerted an agreeable influence upon all
around him. But it was soon observed
that his missionary labours in India had
hopelessly injured his health, and his
nervous system had received a shock which
the climate of Australia could not heal.
The Wesleyan body had cause, however, to
rejoice that the wife of their pastor was
possessed of those Christian graces which
made her indeed a helpmeet to her suf-
fering husband.
The cause increased. The boundaries
were too confined. The necessity for a
larger place of worship became apparent;
and well did the little band set about this
important business. That stanch friend
of early Methodism in the Colony, Mr. E.
Stephens, commenced the effort by the
presentation of a piece of ground in Gawler-
place; and he further incited the people
to liberality by making a handsome dona-
tion towards the building. The walls of a
large and convenient chapel arose, and
another tabernacle of Jehovah was opened
in Juno 1839. But the ill health of Mr.


Longbottom continued, and his physical
energies were at times thoroughly para-
lysed. The good man had written for
assistance, but the aid came not. After
about a year and a-half’s sojourn, he left
his people, and went to Hobart Town, to
wait upon the Hey. J. Waterhouse, then
Chairman of the Van Diemen’s Land Dis-
trict, and General Superintendent of the
Australian and Polynesian Wesleyan Mis-
sion.
As Tasmania Was nearer to us than New
South Wales, the Adelaide Methodists
wished to be included in the district of that
island. The General Superintendent wrote
home to the Conference recommending the
same. But the English authorities thought
it more advisable to regard the question of
geographical position as of less consequence
than the system of centralization in Syd-
ney, the capital and oldest settlement of
Australia. Since the year 1841, therefore,
this colony, as to its Wesleyan connexion,
has been included in the Australian or
Sydney District.


The Rev. John Eggleston was sent to
take charge of the Adelaide Circuit in 1840
by the Rev. John Waterhouse. This
zealous servant of the Church had arrived
in Hobart Town but a few months previous
to this change. Though, physically speak-
ing, not of a robust constitution, he was a
most energetic preacher, and a most inde-
fatigable pastor. The amiability of his
disposition, the heartiness and constancy of
his friendship, and the affectionate interest
he took in the affairs of the humblest of his
people, endeared him in a peculiar manner
to the Christians favoured with his society,
and to the community blessed with his
labours. No man could well have com-
menced his labours under more fortunate
circumstances, and nobly did he avail him-
self of those advantages. The position of
the Wesleyan Society in 1841 was a
flattering one, and, in relation to the future,
a hopeful one. It is with the liveliest plea-
sure that the historian of South Australian
Methodism can pen the account of the aspect
of the Society in 1841.


There were then three chapels belonging
to the Wesleyan connexion, besides above
twenty private houses in which Divine
Service was held. Gawler-place Chapel,
South Adelaide, had an attendance of nearly
400 every Sunday. In the little chapel
of Franklin-street, toward South-terrace,
about 100 assembled. The cost of the
building was £247. The small chapel of
Bowden, a village a mile from the town,
bad been erected in this year. It cost
£146, and was 32 feet in length by 20 in
breadth.
The building in Gawler-place cost £2,400.
The old chapel in Hindley-street was dis-
posed of to the Baptists, then under the
pastoral care of Mr. McLaren, Manager of
the South Australian Company. A pur-
chase had been made of land in Gawler-
place, with a view of establishing Mission
premises. There was a weather-board house
upon the ground at the time, consisting of
three small rooms and a kitchen. The cost
of the whole amounted to £SOO. The sum
of £385 which had been collected for the


Centenary Fund, was allowed by the Home
Committee to be appropriated to meet this
purchase. It may be interesting to state,
that the first residence of the Wesleyan
Minister was a tent, in which Mr Long-
bottom stayed for three months, until a
pisee house with a calico ceiling was obtained.
Sir Eggleston afterwards occupied the same
uncomfortable building. Beside the Ade-
laide property, land had been presented to
the Society at Walkerville, and also at
Nairne.
At this time the number in connexion was
277, though the hearers regularly attending
the ministry were many more. Mr Eggle-
ston was ably assisted by twenty-five local
preachers. There were then eleven sabbath
Schools, in w'hioh -were 580 children re-
ceiving instruction from fifty-five teachers.
In the Wesleyan financial year, ending
September 1841, Mr Eggleston reported an
increase of 117 members, beside thirty on
trial; almost all of w'hom were, as he says,
gathered out of the world. The total num-
ber of members was 277. The gross income


for the year was £3OO. The pulpit duties
of Mr. Eggleston were eminently successful,
especially with young people. The “ South
Australian Magazine” remarks of him:
“ His aptness for teaching and pungency of
appeal, were too apparent to admit a doubt
of his preaching being of a superior order.”
When reviewing the progress of Wesley-
anism up to this period, and the general
aspect of the cause in 1841, we are de-
lighted and thankful.
WESLEYAN METHODISM IN 1846.
Five years pass away—five important years
in the history of South Australia. A little
cloud appeared at the edge of our glowing
and beautiful sky, and rising gradually but
portentously, it hid from our gaze the
serenity and loveliness which had smiled
upon this land of our adoption. Anxiety
and gloom brooded on countenances that had


beamed with cheerfulness and hope. The
monetary pressure came. The latter end of
1841, and the years of 1842 and 1843 were
times of sadness in all the Australian Colo-
nies. No emigration came to these shores
for three years. So truly depressed was
the colony, that a member of the English
Parliament spoke of us as a pauper popula-
tion.
All this could but have an influence
upon the condition of Christian Churches.
There was a paralysis of benevolent exertion.
For the quarter ending June 1848, the
amounts raised at Grawler-plaoe Chapel was
less than one-third of what had been raised in
June 1841. In North Adelaide Chapel there
was collected the sum of thirteen shillings
for one quarter. The income of the Wes-
leyan Society throughout South Australia,
for the quarter ending September, 1843,
amounted to nineteen pounds only !! Thus
the expense rested wholly upon the Mission
Committee of England. It was at the
quarterly meeting of that memorable Sep-
tember, that a memorial was drawn up,


addressed to Governor Grey, representing
the badness of the times —the inadequacy of
ministerial assistance—the pressure of a
debt now amounting to £IBOO on the
chapel, and concluding with an humble
supplication for Government aid in support
of religion.
But other causes than mere commercial
embarassment tendered to produce the ex-
traordinary monetary decline. This is a
point of history to which the writer is con-
strained by faithfulness, not inclination, to
allude. The feeble health of Mr Eggleston
obliged him to remove from a station where
there was such a constant tax upon his time
and exertion, to one where was more minis-
terial strength, and where he could hope for
opportunity to recruit his physical frame.
He left for Hobart Town. The Rev. J. C.
Weatherston was appointed to succeed him,
by the Chairman of the Australian District.
He arrived in July 1842, and remained till
June 1844. It was during the period of
his pastorate that considerable disagreement
appeared, and eventually a rupture in the


Society occurred. What with the monetary
crisis, the departure of many families to the
neighbouring colonies, the removal of mem-
bers in the formation of the Australian
Methodist Society, this period is altogether
the darkest in the Wesleyan, as it is in the
Colonial, History.
The conflicting accounts from the preacher
and from the people so bewildered the Syd-
ney Chairman, that he knew not how to
act. The opinion of the New South Wales
Ministers was that the Adelaide folks were
a very factious community. What was to
be done ? It seemed expedient that Mr.
Weatherston should retire and that some-
body should take his place; but no one
would come to the Colony. Such, in fact,
was the dislocation of the Society, that the
Missionary Committee and Conference con-
sidered it necessary to remove Adelaide
from the list of places occupied by their
preachers; and, accordingly, we find no
mention of that Circuit in the Minutes of
Conference for 1844. But the prayers of
the faithful earnest ones were heard once


more. Their petitions to the Good Shep-
herd for an earthly pastor were answered.
The man who came in the hour of need
before was to return and revive the work ;
and this was brought about in rather a
singular course of providences.
Mr. Longbottom had been settled in that
charming district of beautiful Tasmania—
New Norfolk. Though often incapacitated
for ministerial exertion, he had somewhat
rallied amidst the enchanting scenery and
with the salubrious air of the banks of the
Derwent. At the Hobart Town District
Meeting he had been appointed to the
chaplaincy of the penal settlement of Port
Arthur, as the Rev. J. Manton was leaving
that station, and the much-esteemed Rev.
Nathaniel Turner was prepared to go to
New Norfolk, the recruiting circuit.
Many years before, the Wesleyan So-
ciety had arranged for one of their mis-
sionaries to reside on Tasman’s Peninsula,
to afford religious instruction to those who
so much needed it, —-the exiled criminals
of Britain. At Port Arthur were con-


gregatccl some hundreds of the worst felons
of Tasmania; and it was to these chained
and degraded ones that the Wesleyan Mis-'
sionary was sent, that he might soften the
hard heart, and comfort the agonised spirit,
by the exhibition of the love of a crucified
Saviour. Mr. Manton’s narrative affords
us the gratification of knowing that such
labor was not in vain. The English Go-
vernment considered it right to sanction
the formation of a Wesleyan Chaplaincy at
Port Arthur, and the payment of the mis-
sionary from Government funds.. This
system continued for several years. At
last, a change took place; and orders came
out that no one but a clergyman of the
Church of England should be appointed to
the office. It was not until after Mr.
Longbottom had determined upon going
there, that the Governor of Yan Diemen’s
Land received this communication from the
Secretary of the Colonies.
The veteran missionary then removed to
Sydney in the early part of 1844. He
entered the town in the midst of the discus-


sion upon the Adelaide affairs, and professing
bis confidence in South Australian Wes-
leyanism, offered himself to go to that scene
of moral disorder. His offer -was readily
accepted; and upon one Saturday evening
in May this servant of God once more
entered the City of Adelaide. In the
morning he proceeded to the House of
Prayer; hut he was particularly grieved to
find hut one-tenth of the congregation he
had known assembled within those walls.
Mr. Weatherston departed, and the
elements of peace and order gradually
gathered together. The gentleness and
kindness of their old friend induced many
at once to repair to their deserted pews.
It was not long before the rival Association
became absorbed into the parent Society.
But the effects of the disunion were apparent
for years.
The statistics of the Wesleyan financial
year, terminating in June 1846, may be thus
described. The income which had been
£3OO in 1841 was now but £217. There
were two chapels in South Adelaide, and


one in Bowden, as before. A small one
had been raised in Kermode-street, North
Adelaide; another at Walkerville (since
much enlarged), and others at Nairne and
at Happy Valley. There were also ten
other preaching places. There was chapel
accommodation for 1030 persons. There
had been no new purchase of mission pro-
perty. A debt of £IOO rested upon the
land purchased in Gawler-place. Upon Mr.
Longbottom’s second visit there remained
an incubus upon the chapel of £I3OO. His
great desire was to reduce this obligation.
At the suggestion of Mr. E. Stephens a
number of persons undertook to subscribe
five per cent, of their annual income toward
the liquidation of the debt.
WESLEYAN METHODISM IN 1851.
We now approach a period of increased
interest. We have not to picture scones of
colonial distress, nor detail the calamities
of a declining Church. The tempest is over


and gone. The heavens are-clear, and the
fields can smile again. No longer has the
historian to describe a struggling, much
less a retrograding, cause. The Society is
now established upon a firm basis. It is a
well organized and flourishing community.
Notwithstanding those defects which may
have been observed in its machinery, those
signs of weakness, indicative of the feeble-
ness and frailty of everything human, the
friends of Methodism have reason to thank
God and take courage, as they regard the
stability of their system, and the spiritual
success with which it has pleased their
Father to crown it.
The new era commenced about the time
of the discovery of the Burra Burra Mine.
The Bev. John Haroourt, called out into
the work of his Master, while resident in
Hobart Town, came to Adelaide in June,
1846, as assistant to Mr Longbottom. He
was a laborious minister. There is one
important duty to which he directed his
attention. He made it his business to go
on board the emigrant vessels as they arrived


in the harbour, in order to exercise a moral
influence at once upon those, who, upon
coming to a land of strangers, so often make
shipwreck of their faith. He remained in
the colony about a year and a-half.
The Rev. D. J. Draper came here from
Sydney in October, 1846. To the labours
of no man is the Society in South Australia
more indebted than to this minister.
The subsequent statement of the progress
of Wesleyanism will fully substantiate
this remark. His eye regarded the
religious interests of the whole province.
He had unqualified faith in the Colony.
He believed that its resources would ulti-
mately make it a powerful and thriving
community; and he resolved to adopt such
a course as would ensure spiritual agency
proportionate to that population which he
foresaw would so rapidly flow to these
shores. The prudence of his plans are
evidenced in their striking result. The
first object to which his energies were
directed, was the obtaining of more minis-
terial aid. But that work with which his


name will always stand most intimately
associated with his people, was the Building
of Chapels. In connection with this im-
portant object, the promptitude and sagacity
of his counsels were not more conspicuous
than the zeal and perseverance of his efforts.
The immigration of many faithful Local
Preachers, and the general prosperity of
the Colony, enabled him the more success-
fully to accomplish his projects for the
advancement of the Society.
The next preacher introduced into the
Colony, was Mr. J. G. Thrum, from Sydney,
about the latter end of 1847. After
eighteen months engagement ill-health com-
pelled him to retire from the service.
In December 1847 the Adelaide friends
received a visit from one of the fathers
of Australian Wesleyanism, the Reverend
Nathaniel Turner. This beloved minister
was for many years a successful missionary
in New Zealand and the Tonga Isles.
After being for several years in Tasmania,
he was removed to Sydney in 1846.
Messrs. W. Low r e and W. C. Currie came


from Melbourne to Adelaide in September
1848. They had previously laboured in
New South Wales. The former has been
stationed at the Burra Burra, and the latter
at Willunga. The Eev. J. 0. Symonds
arrived from Melbourne in June 1849, and
after being useful at Kapunda, was removed
to the capital. The Eev. E. C. Flockhart
was introduced with the Wesleyan Ministry
at Hobart Town, where his occasional
preaching had been rendered very accept-
able. He has been two years in the Pro-
vince, and is now striving to win souls at
Kapunda. The Eev. T. T. N. Hull ar-
rived here from England on March 31st,
1850. He has been for 25 years engaged
in the work of rebuilding the walls of Zion.
For 10 years he was at the Missionary
Stations of Malta and Gibraltar. He comes,
therefore, to this Colony with matured
judgment and considerable experience. As
a man of education, and as a preacher of
elegance and power, he has commanded that
respect and regard which genuine ability,
when combined with high Christian cha-


racter, will always secure. Mr. J. Dare, of
Mount Barker, has only been recently ad-
mitted on trial into the Ministry.
But this is now the place to refer to our
old and esteemed friend Mr. Longhottom.
Upon Mr. Draper taking charge of the
Circuit, the poor invalid was offered the
opportunity of returning to the land of his
fathers. He preferred, however, remaining
in South Australia. Yet disease increased
upon the cessation of his ministerial engage-
ments. The derangement of his nervous
system grew worse; and, at length, on the
29th of July, 1849, the troubled spirit
rose to the land of rest.
The question of State Aid to Religion is
so identified with the history of South
Australian Wesleyanism, that it seems
necessary to allude to it However, as the
Legislative Council has thought proper to
determine that such aid shall be no longer
granted to religious se6ts, it is to be hoped


that fraternal regard and united effort will
be established as heretofore among the Pro-
testant denominations.
As early as the days of Colonel Gawler,
this idea of Government Aid was enter-
tained by our authorities. The first Act
was passed in 1846. An amount of two
shillings per head was to be paid to the
several religious communions, according to
their numbers as furnished by the census.
In 1847 there was a new law, by which it
was enacted, that the state should grant a
certain amount according to the number of
seat-holders in the several places of worship,
provided that amount did not exceed £2OO ;
and that it should also render assistance
towards the erection of churches, chapels,
and ministers’ houses, in donations of sums
not less than £5O, nor greater than £l5O,
and this in proportion to the amount of
voluntary contributions.
The subject was discussed in Gawler-
plaoe School Room, in January 1847,
January 1848, and April 1848. As the
majority were for receiving the Grant, the


Grant was received by the Wesleyan con-
nexion. From that period up to July 1851,
the sum of £2236 has been thus obtained
towards the erection of chapels, £293 for
mission-houses, and £1260 for the ministry.-
The last-mentioned monetary aid, in addition
to the salaries received by the preachers from
the Society here, formed a fund out of which,
not only were the several ministers main-
tained, but mission furniture was bought,
the travelling expenses of the Itinerant and
Local Preachers were met, an increase of
ministerial labor was supplied, the mission-
house at the Burra Burra was partly built,
and debts upon other mission residences
reduced. No portion of the money received
from the State has ever been sent to Eng-
land or elsewhere out of the Colony. Not
one penny was ever received from that
source towards the erection or enlargement
of any Wesleyan Chapel in North or South
Adelaide. No money has been received
from England towards the support of the
mission here since 1846.


Some sketches of the operations of the
Society out of South Adelaide will not be
uninteresting, particularly to our country
friends.
From the earliest times of the Colony, a
Wesleyan cause has existed in North
Adelaide. Messrs. Bentham Neales and
Nonmus presented the site of the present
Chapel in 1837. The foundation stone was
laid, but no further progress was then made,
owing to the conviction that a place of
worship ought not to be situated so far in
the hush. For this rfeason a little chapel
■was erected in Kermode-street, the centre
of the North Adelaide population. The
Christian friends afterwards determined to
raise a Chapel upon the hill. As the
building was erected mainly by the labour
of one individual, it was twelve months
before ready for occupancy. The opening
services were held in October 1847. The
congregation, which had averaged under 40
in the old place, increased immediately to
100. A Sunday School which had pre-
viously maintained a struggling existence,


became at once a powerful andl useful
auxiliary of the Church. With an iinorease
of population came the demand for an
enlargement of the House of Prayeir. The
reopening took place in September;, 1850;
since which time there has been a con-
siderable increase of hearers. The simpli-
city, convenience, and neatness of the
interior of the Chapel, present an agreeable
appearance to the spectator. Nearly 400
persons may be now accommodated with
seats. The whole of the Chapel building
cost £7OO.
The important interest at the Burra
Burra sprang up in 1846, and wa;s coeval
with the discovery of the Monster Mane. A
few friends of Jesus were in the company of
those who left the Kapunda Copper Mine
to seek engagements at the new works to
the northward. Mingled with tlhe wild
revelry of the Creek might be occasionally
distinguished the voice of prayer, the hymn
of praise. A very large number; of the
miners had been associated with Wesley anism
in Cornwall; but the moral difficulties of


the voyage, and the novelties, the unsettle-
ment, the temptations of their new home,
operated most disastrously upon the souls of
many. It has truly been said, that South
Australia is filled with backsliders of all
denominations. Mr. Harcourt visited the
north in October, 1846, and gathered the
Society together, in number eight persons.
Mr Draper laid the foundation of the Burra
Chapel on March 5, 1847. The room was
36 feet by 22. At the time of opening the
building for Public Worship there were 50
members. The work has been going
forward. The Chapel was enlarged in 1849,
aud it now contains 450 persons. There is
also a school room 36 feet square, besides
a convenient class room. In 1850, a Chapel
was erected at Redruth, adjoining the
Kooringa township.
If there were space, much could be written
about the interesting Mining District of
Tungkillo, or Reedy Creek, 45 miles east of
Adelaide. The township may be said to be
almost wholly a Methodist one. Out of a
population of 300 souls, about 200 attend


the ministry of Wesleyans, and eighty are
united in Society. It is only occasionally
that they receive the visit of an Itinerant
Minister. The friends there have the ad-
vantage of the co-operation of the worthy
Church of England Catechist, Mr Martin.
That gentleman performs Divine Service in
the morning, while the Wesleyans hold their
meetings in the same Chapel in the evening.
It was long a matter of deep regret that
so important a place as the Port should
have been unprovided with Wesleyan means.
When, h owe ver, Mr. C. 11. Goldsmith, of L aun-
ceston settled there last year, he opened his
house for worship, and commenced a class.
Mr. Cave’s school room was then lent for
service. On October sth, 1861, the present
beautiful stone Chapel was opened. The
building is 45 by 25 feet clear, and cost,
together with the land, £BOO. Of the
purchase money, the proprietors of the
ground, Messrs. Hart & C©., generously
remitted the noble sum of £lOO.
A few more illustrations of the signs of
progress may be mentioned. At Mount


Barker township, within twelve months,
the number meeting in class has increased
from 9 to 45, and the Sabbath attendance
at worship from 40 to 200. At Brompton,
near Adelaide, there were four years ago,
five members,; now there are eighty. A
flourishing school exists, and a large and
an attentive congregation assemble at the
new and cemmodious Chapel. Kensington
possessed no Wesleyan Chapel until May
in the present year. Up to that period
there was an attendance of about 20 persons;
but since the opening of the beautiful house
of worship, that number has increased to
200, and eighty children meet in the Sab-
bath school. The little village of Payneham
presents, if possible, even more interesting-
features. Until a few months ago, only a
week night’s service was held once a fort-
night. Now a chapel has been built and
paid for, 150 people meet for worship, and
nearly fifty are in the Society. The use-
fulness of Mr Currie has been acknowledged
at Willunga; in one month forty persons
were led to enter the good old path of plea-


santucss. Mr Plockhart also has been
favored to behold the fruit of his ministry at
Kapunda.
The writer would here take the oppor-
tunity of referring to the disinterested and
valuable labours of the Local Preachers.
To these zealous men the Society owes a
deep debt of gratitude. Through their
agency thinly populated districts and neg-
lected neighbourhoods have heard the news
of salvation. Their exertions on behalf of
their fellow creatures have been greatly
honoured by their Divine Master. This
branch of Methodist economy, so useful in
all places, is peculiarly adapted to the cir-
cumstances of a young colony.
Perhaps the best means of exhibiting the
progress of Methodism in South Australia
is by drawing a comparison between its
position in 1846 and that in 1851. In the
first period there was but one minister, now
there are seven. Then there were but
seven Chapels, now there are twenty-nine.
Then there was accommodation for 1030
persons; now there is the same for 5730,


Then there were 800 Sunday Scholars;
now there are 1800. Then there were 250
members ; now there are 1215.
In addition to this it may he mentioned
that there are now 80 Local Preachers,
82 Class Leaders, and about 240 Sabbath
School Teachers. During the past twelve-
month, twelve Chapels have been erected;
280 children receive instruction in the
Wesleyan Day Schools. In the Adelaide
Circuit there are 16 Chapels, 40 Local
Preachers, 1000 Sunday Scholars, and 650
members. In the Burra Burra Circuit there
are 2 Chapels, 18 Local Preachers, 400
Sunday Scholars, and 250 members. In
the Willunga Circuit there are 4 Chapels,
10 Local Preachers, 100 Sunday Scholars,
and 150 members. In the Kapunda Circuit
there are 2 Chapels, 6 Local Preachers,
180 Sunday Scholars, 150 Members. In
the Mount Barker Circuit there are 4
Chapels, 6 Local Preachers, 120 Sunday
Scholars, and 120 Members. Before Janu-
ary, 1849, there was but one Circuit in the
Province.


LIST OE CHAPELS.
Pine-street, South Adelaide ; built, 1851 ; 88
feet by 53.
franklin-street, South Adelaide; small chapel.
North Adelaide ; built in 1847, and enlarged in
Walkerville; built in 1841, and enlarged in
1849.
Brompton; built in 1850, in the place of the
old chapel at Bowden ; 45 feet by 25.
Thebarton ; built in 1847.
Tam o’Shunter's Belt; built in 1851.
Port Adelaide ; built in 1851 ; 45 feet by 25.
Montagu ; built in 1851 ; 30 feet by 20.
Plympton ; built in 1847.
Brighton; built in 1847 ; requires enlargement
Norwood and Kensington ; built in 1851; 45
feet by 25.
Payneham ; built in 1851 ; 33 feet by 21.
Unley ; built in 1851 ; 30 feet by 20.
Gander Town ; built in 1850 ; 40 feet by 25.
Kapunda ; built in 1848 ; requires enlargement.
Kooringa, Burra Burra ; enlarged in 1849 ; at-
tendance 450.
Redruth ; built in 1851.
Kersbrook, Chain of Ponds ; built in 1850.
Willunga; built in 1847 ; enlarged in 1849.
Cherry Gardens ; built in 1848.
Clarendon ; built in 1851 ; 36 feet by 20.


23. Mount Barker; built in 1851 ; 45 feet by 25.
24. Nairne ; a larger building to be erected.
25. Callington ; built in 1851.
26. Woodsido ; built in 1851.
27. Happy Valley.
Two other chapels are used by the Preachers,
though not the property of the Connexion.
MISSION HOUSES.
1. Gawler-plaee, South Adelaide ; built in 1847.
2. Lefevre-terrace, North Adelaide'; built in 1850,
3. Kooringa, Burra Burra; built in 1850.
4. Kapnnda; built in 1850.
LANDED PROPERTY OF THE SOCIETY.
1. Burra Burra, 20 acres.
2. Mount Barker, 12 acres.
3. Woodsido, 12 acres. -j.
4. Albert Town, 4 acres.
5. Walkervilic, 1 acre; used as cemetery.
6. Macgill, small allotment.
7, Gawler Town, 3 half-acres.


8. Salem, near Kapunda, 1 acre.
9. Wool Sheds, near Kapunda, 1 acre,
10. Willunga, 1 acre, for Mission Houses.
11. MacLaren Yale, 2 acres.
12. Noarlunga, small allotment.
13. Meadows, 2 acres.
14. MacLaren Flat, I half-acre.
15. Little Hampton, small allotment.
16. Strathalbyn, 1 acre.
17. Echunga, small allotment.
Exclusive, therefore, of ohajpel ground,
the Society possesses about 610 acres of
landed property.
The proximate value of the (chapels and
mission premises in ' South Australia be-
longing to the Wesleyan Methodists is
£12,500. The proximate value of the land
is £2500 additional. The amomnt of debt
remaining upon the whole of this property
is about £4OOO. Of this, £2OOlO is on the
New Chapel in Pirie-street; £6lOO on pro-
perty at North Adelaide; and £2400 at the
Burra Burra. No Governmemt Aid has
been received for the buildings at the
Burra Burra. A debt only of ££looo rests
upon the other 24 chapels.


PIRIE-STREET CHAPEL.
This noble and handsome edifice is
situated in Pirie-street, South Adelaide.
The Foundation Stone was laid by his
Excellency Sir H. F. Young on the 16th
July, 1850. The Chapel is 88 feet in length
and 58 in breadth in the clear; the height
to the ceiling is 31 feet. The height of
the whole to the top of the bell-turret is 72
feet. Although galleries are not yet erected,
yet such arrangements are made as will
render it easy to add them hereafter without
disturbing the walls. Two spacious school
rooms are attached to the rear, and there
are also two vestries or class rooms. The
style of the edifice is Gothic. The mould-
ings dividing the ceiling into pannels are
clasped with tastily designed Early English
bosses. At least 800 persons could be
accommodated with room in this Chapel;
but with the galleries 1500. The total
cost is about £4OOO, exclusive of the ground
site, which cost £6OO. Considerably above
one half of the amount has been already


raised. The architect was the late lamented
Mr Stuckey. The builders are Messrs.
Perryman and Son. The trustess arc
Messrs. Colton, Hawkes, Goss, Ma'Guire,
Mitchell, Collins, Coke, Hutchins, Johns,
Maslin, and Hack.
The old chapel in Gawler-plaoe has
rcocntly been sold. After paying the
mortgage of £5OO, the surplus, about £B5O,
is devoted to the funds of the new building.
We cannot take leave of the old Place of
Worship, without expressing the regard
which hundreds feel for that Sabbath Home
in days gone by. Those walls have often
echoed back our voice of praise. Prom that
pulpit we have heard many a faithful word.
In that house many a tear of penitence has
fallen. And there, too, have many.souls
been recalled from the thorny ways of the
world into the pleasant pastures of the
Shepherd of Israel. We love, then, the
Old Chapel. It stands the monument of
sweet and hallowed times. It is associated
with what is pure, and elevating, and


delightful. As we gaze upon it we are
reminded of the joys of past communion,
and of the vows of past devotion. We
cherish the memory of those scenes, we are
thankful for our privileges, and we look
hopefully forward to the future.
The other Chapel stands before us. It is
new and beautiful. We are invited to enter
cheerfully within its gates. And though
we may have been negligent of old, yet we
now have a new house in which to begin a
new course. We have here no ivy covered
walls, no moss clothed turrets. There
are no yew-trees in the churchyards of South
Australia, no ancient monuments of the
dead, no rough memorials of the olden time.
Here are freshness and novelty,—newly
quarried stone with sharp angles, —clean
wood, and bright paint. We have neither
romance nor mysticism here. We see our-
selves surrounded by ungainly gum trees,
we are directed to the stern reality of things,
and we are associated with a class of men,
as colonists, whose common sense leads them


to repudiate that which belongs fsimply to
sentiment, and whose right heairtiness of
feeling is exhibited toward somethiiug better
than mere dumb show.
Though simply recording the (difficulties
and p’-ogress of one denomination of
Christians, the writer cannot but express his
hearty sympathy with the early trials and
struggles of other religious bodiies. It is
delightful to witness the development of
noble and generous impulses. As men
recognizing one common Saviour, it is at
once our duty and our pleasures to feel as
brethren. At a time when so many are
renouncing their allegiance to thee Prince of
Peace, it becomes all loyal siubjects to
observe the strictest unity of heart and
action.


OPENING OK THE PIRIE-STREET CHAPEL,
October 19 th.
The Rev. J. Eggleston came from Sydney to take
part in the opening services, in which he was assisted
by the Rev. J. Gardner, of the e ® t i u !, ch ’
Rev. D, J. Draper, and the Rev. T. T. N. Hull,
collections at the first Sunday of opening were £144
and at the second £4O; from the Tea Meeting and
collection at a public meeting, £io ; net proceeds of
Bazaar, £500; subscriptions promised at the meetin 0 ,
£603 ; total, £1360. The entire cost ot erection
was £4900, and the present debt is £lOOO.


COLONIAL EDUCATIONAL
WORKS,
JAMES BONWICK.
GEOGRAPHY FOR TUB USE OF
AUSTRALIAN YOUTH.
Price, 3s. 6d. Containing Five Maps. Second Edition.
INTRODUCTION TO THE GEO-
GRAPHY.
With Copperplate Map of Australia. Price, Is.
Phis is suitable for Primary Schools and Junior Pupils.
GRAMMAR FOR AUSTRALIAN
YOUTH.
Stiff Covers, Is. Cloth, Is. 6d.
The Exercises are designed to convey information to
youth. A Chapter is given upon the Origin of Language.
The important subject of English Composition receives
extensive notice. The Book also contains a sketch of the
Grammar of the Australian, New Zealand, and Polynesian
Dialects.


COLONIAL EDUCATIONAL WORKS. 2
To be shortly published,
PART I.
READER FOR AUSTRALIAN
YOUTH.
Price, 2s. 12rno.
The Contents of the Work will be :
Extracts from approved Authors.
Selections from the writings of Australian Explorers.
Easy Scripture Stories.
Illustrations of Moral Training.
Sketches of Colonial History and Discovery.
The Appearance of the Stars (a dialogue on an emigrant
Productions of Australia.
Familiar Lessons on Geology.
Natural History of Australia.
How does a Plant grow ? (A dialogue.)
Notices of English History.
The World’s True Heroes.
Life in the Bush of Australia,
PART 11.
Will treat more extensively of Geology,—Astronomy,—
Animal, Vegetable, and Agricultural Chemistry,—Mining,
—Natural History,—and the History of the Australian
Colonies.




