

WESLEYAN METHODISM
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY AN OLD METHODIST.
FALMOUTH, ENG.:
PRINTED BY FRED. H. EARLE.
1879.
*


«JL pi i iaL-JL*_ h
21
22
23
24
REQUESTS TO TYPISTS
1.
Type in double spacing within the ruled area, stopping lines close to the right-hand
breaking words at the ends of lines.
margin. Avoid
2.
Hit the space-bar twice when indenting new paragraphs, once between full-stops and
new sentences.
3.
Type initials and
names close up without spaces (J.Gutenberg, not J. Gutenberg).


WESLEYAN METHODS
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY AN OLD METHODIST.
FALMOUTH, ENG.:
PRINTED BY FRED. H. EARLE.
1879.




*6* 5 -77
WESLEYAN METHODISM
NEW SOUTH WALES.
A) MSS/} r ,01 9/
In reading the history of the Church of God it is painfully
observable that man has always been prone to run counter to the
will of his Maker, so that the people from time to time, after various
revivings, have sunk from a lively sense of their duty to Him, first
into a senseless state of formality, then to a disregard of the divine
ordinances, and from that into heathenism. This has been .the
conduct of the human family ever since the creation of man. Very
little is known of his history before the Flood, but there is enough
recorded in the Bible to show that ever since the Fall he has in all
ages had a tendency to degenerate from good to evil. We have the-
history of his creation and fall, and the awful consequences of the
fall and its effects, manifest in the conduct of the first of woman
born, in the murder of his brother by his own hands. From the
time of this sad catastrophe there is no record of but one revival of
the work of God in the heart of man, from which he again fell until
he had become so desperately wicked that “ every imagination of the
thoughts of -his heart was only evil continually ” ( Gen. vi. 5), and
because of this climax of wickedness, God determined to destroy
man with every living thing from the face of the earth, with the
exception of Noah (who only was found righteous before Him) and
his family, and a small number of living creatures of every kind to
preserve seed alive
The early Bible history tells us that the worship of God was
instituted by sacrifices soon after the fall. Both Cain and Abel
offered their sacrifices to God. Abel’s was offered in faith and was
accepted, but Cain’s was formal and was rejected by the Divide > A A -.
Being.


It appears that the human family very soon after the creation
became forgetful of God, for it is said of Seth, that “ To him was a
son born, and lie called his name Enos. Then began men to call
upon the name of the Lord” (Gen. vi. 26 ). By this record we
perceive how soon a forgetfulness of God prevailed in the human
family. It is evident that in this early age of the world but few, if
any, were worshippers of Jehovah, as it is said “ Men began to call
upon the Lord.” In all probability this was in the days of Adam,
for he lived 565 years after the birth of Enos, and Enos lived but
240 years after the death of Adam. It was during the life of Enos
that there was a revival of religion in the Church of God. Whether
it was before or after the death of Adam, history does not tell us.
This is the only revival of religion of which we have any record
before the Flood.
The progenitors of the new world began well, for the first thing
that is recorded of Noah and his family after they left the Ark is,
that “he (Noah) buifded an altar unto the Lord, and took of
every clean beast and of every clean fowl and offered a burnt offering
unto the Lord ” (Gen. x. 22 ). The Lord was pleased with this act
of worship, so that He gave a gracious promise that He would never
again destroy the inhabitants of the earth with the waters of a
flood. Though man began well after the destruction of the world,
from this period we have no record of the worship of God until
Abram is referred to. We learn from the Bible history that there
was a general departure from Him when man began to build the
Tower of Babel. It appears that before the days of Abram idolatry
was prevalent, and that there was not a man upon the face of the
earth but he, who consecrated himself to the service of God, though
the generation who had lived before the flood had not passed away,
as Shem did not die until after the birth of Abram ; thus, we see
that those who had witnessed the destruction of the world for the
sins of man did not either by precept or example deter their posterity
from idolatrous worship, for it is said of Abram’s ancestors that
“ they worshipped false gods ” (Joshua, xxvi. 2 ). Abram was faithful
in the discharge of his duty to Jehovah, and in order to preserve a
seed in the earth to serve the Lord, God called him out into a strange
country from his idolatrous relations and caused him to dwell among
strangers.
Abraham remained faithful to Jehovah, for which he was desig-
nated “ the father of the faithful.” For two generations his posterity-
followed his good example, but they did not prevent their house-
holds from idolatry. Such is the propensity in human nature to
depart from God, for even Jacob’s beloved wife, Rachel, stole her
father’s idol gods, doubtless to worship them; and before he went
to Bethel, by God’s directions, he built an altar, and he endeavoured
to purify his household from idolatry by “ taking their strange gods
them and hiding them under an oak ” (Gen. xxxv. 4 ). It
cannot be supposed that such grievous departures from God were
rimmm 111 I 11


sudden. Doubtless the fall commenced in the heart before it was
shown in the outward conduct, and Satan takes the advantage
of the darkness of the human mind which was occasioned by the
fall of man, so that, in order to accomplish his nefarious designs, he
suggests something new on the established ordinances of religion.
Not unfrequently these new forms ard ceremonies have been intro-
duced by sincere worshippers of the true God, in order that they
may have something visible to their senses to remind them of their
duty to their Maker; which ultimately leads to the worship of the
creature instead of the creator —hence comes the worship of idols.
But more frequently the departure from God proceeds from the
vanity of the human heart, producing discontent with the forms and
usages in which their father worshipped God, persuading themselves
that some other forms are “ more honorable ” than what they and
their fathers had been accustomed to ; thus, by “ inventions sought
out,” they attempt improvements on the forms of worshipping God
until their worship becomes altogether formal. Others attempt to
improve their personal appearance by decorating their bodies in such
unseemly habiliments as are unbecoming the followers of the meek
and lowly Jesus.
One of the first instances which are recorded in scripture of an
attempt to improve on the ordinances of religion, which led to
idolatry, after the children of Israel had received God’s law from
Mount Sinai, is recorded in the xvii chapter of the book of Judges.
A man whose name was Mica stole some silver from his mother,
but after some time he returned it to her again; upon the receipt of it
she said, “ I had wholly dedicated it to the Lord, to make a graven
and a molten image.” Out of this silver she accomplished the
design. From this beginning, which this woman intended as a
service to God, Mica got “ a house of gods.” After he had hired a
Levite for his priest, from the tribe which Moses had consecrated to
the service of the sanctuary, he said, “ Now I know that the Lord
will do me good, seeing I have a Levite for my priest.” Instead of
the images inciting to the worship of Jehovah, as it appears was first
intended by both Mica and his mother, he very soon esteemed the
images as his gods, for when a portion of the tribe of Dan took them
from him, he said, “ye have taken away my gods.” This small
beginning, which commenced in sincere ignorance, did not stop in
that family, for from that beginning a whole tribe followed the evil
example for hundreds of years, until idolatrous Israel was carried
into captivity unto Babylon. Thus, we see the danger of attempting
to improve on the established ordinances of religion which are known
to have been a blessing to tens of thousands of souls. Other
instances under the dispensation before the Christian era, might be
referred to, in proof that man is given to change so as to alter the
forms of the ordinances of religion so as to be more in accordance
with the spirit of the world, but this is not necessary to my purpo'se,
as enough has been said already to show that he is prone to back-
sliding.


We learn that in this respect, human nature was not improved
under the clearer dispensation of gospel light. Many instances are
recorded in the New Testament, where the conduct of the professed
followers of Christ brought on themselves sharp reproofs by the
apostles of our Lord for thein disorderly walk and conduct. None
of them who wrote epistles to the Christian churches which we retain
in our scriptures but sent sharp reproofs to the fallen churches, who
“ did run well,” but had departed from the purity of the gospel, and
in all Church history we learn that many of the professors of religion
have been bent to backsliding. Such was the case during one period
of some hundreds of years in the Christian era, that so little interest
was taken in Church affairs that no records of .the Church were kept,
so that the world is in utter ignorance of its state during that time.
No doubt, there were then some holy men of God who were the
pillars of the earth, otherwise, we might reasonably suppose that a
just, holy, and righteous God would have consumed the whole human
family because of their abominations. But these holy men must
have been a few obscure people, like the “ seven thousand in Israel,”
in the days of Elijah the prophet, who had not “ bowed to the image
of Baal.” Probably, they had to retire into “dens and caves of the
earth,” because of the wickedness of the people by whom they were
surrounded. There is no doubt these grievous departures from God
commenced with small beginnings, which shows us the danger of
diverging in the’ least degree from the usages of the Church of God
in its earliest establishment.
As there is such a propensity in the human heart to backsliding,
it is the duty of every servant of God to try to find out the causes
in order to check them in the bud. The most common causes of
departure from God are not the most flagrant, such as coming in
contact with the openly profane and vicious ; nor even those of a
painful character, such as poverty, bodily affliction and persecution.
These may have the unhappy tendency of turning a few out of the
way, but while these may have slain their thousands, others, which
are not directly sinful in themselves, have slain their tens of thousands.
It is not often that religion faints in the day of adversity, but she
often falls from the pinnacle of prosperity. The vain and empty
gewgaws which often accompany wealth and prosperity frequently
beguile even the children of God, so that they are drawn into the
whirlpool of fashion. The professors of the religion of Christ ought
to endeavour to mould the people of the world by their conduct into
the image of God ; but it is a lamentable fact, that they often conform
so much to the conduct of those who are “ without God in the
world,” that conformity to the world stands forth prominently in the
Church.
As there is such a propensity in man to depart from G-od, it is of
the utmost importance that the first indications should be detected,
and the danger avoided. I will indeavour to show what I believe to
be the first symptoms of decline in religious life which show them-


selves. First, it may be seen that there is a less hungering and
thirsting after rightousness than there was for some time after
receiving the witness of the Spirit that they were the children of
God ; and they are less regular in their attendance on the public
ordinances of religion, and they are less frequently found in their
closet at prayer, and they manifest less pleasure therein. The com-
mencement of a fall either in a single individual or a whole Church
is generally the same. It commences in the root before it is seen in
the branches. In our fallen nature even after we have been renewed
by divine grace, the effects of the fall of man still remain so that
there are tendencies to decay which, if not discovered by the
individual and checked, will lead to destruction ; hence, both our
Lord and His disciples exhorted their followers to watchfulness and
prayer. It is often with those who have been brought from darkness
to light, and from condemnation to a sense of the favor of God, that
for some time they are influenced by a feverish excitement, and are
full of zeal for the glory of God and the salvation of souls; but as
this highflown feeling does not always last long, not unfrequently
darkness comes over the mind, and the young Christian is beset with
temptation, and for a while he will lose much of his enjoyment in
divine things and suffer a degree of coldness. This season of trial
is often before there is any falling from grace ; and if those who get
into such a state are not very watchful and prayerful, Satan will take
the advantage of their mental depression, and tempt them to the
neglect of duty and conformity to the world. There will be an
association with those who know not God. These are generally the
first indications of a fall from grace. This state not unfrequently
shows itself in dress. The newest fashions are followed, so that
there is no distinction between the people professing godliness, and
those who are without a change of heart, and they live in full con-
formity to the world, and do not make any profession of the religion
of Christ as being His followers. It may be reasonably inferred that
this was the case in the days of the apostles, which led St. Peter to
say in reference to women, “ Whose adorning let it not be the out-
ward adorning, plaiting the hair and wearing of gold, or of putting on
of apparel, but let it be the hidden man of the heart in that which
is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit,
which in the sight of God is of great price.” (1 Peter, iii. 34 v.)
It appears from Scripture that a delight in vain show and dress has
been predominant in all ages of the world to such an extent as has
been very displeasing to God. When Isaiah the prophet denounced
God’s judgments against His people for their wickedness, he particu-
larized gay clothing and ornaments on their persons more than any
other sins, and threatened to remove from them these vanities in
which they delighted, and inflict on them punishments of the severest
kind.
When pleading with them for their departure from God, and
denouncing His judgments, he said, “ The Lord saith, £ Because the


daughters of Zion are haughty and walk with stretched forth necks
and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go and making a
tinkling with their feet, therefore the Lord will smite with the scab
the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion [the church-going
women] and the Lord will discover their secret parts. In that day
the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments
about their feet, their cauls and their round tires like the moon, their
chains, and their bracelets, and the mufflers, and the bonnets, and
the ornaments of the leg bands, and the tablets and the earrings and
nose jewels, the changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles ancLthe
wimples and the crispinpins, and the glasses, and the fine linen, and
the hoods, and the veils. And it shall come to pass instead of a
sweet smell there shall be a stink, and instead of a girdle a rent, and
instead of well-set hair baldness, and instead of a stomacher a girding
of sackcloth, and burning instead of beauty. The men shall fall by
the sword and the mighty in the war.” ( Isaiah , iii. 13, 25 v.)
Thus we see that the Most High takes notice of the outward tokens
of vanity and condescends to particularize them, with a threat to
deprive the women of their ornaments in which they delighted, and
expose their nakedness to their shame, and to inflict the most violent
deaths on the men. From this we see how terribly displeasing to
God are these tokens of the vain disposition of the mind.
Mr. Wesley deplored the fondness of dress and vain show in his
day, though he was not sent to denounce the judgments of God in
this world for the sins of the people as was the prophet whose words
I have cpioted; but he felt so much on the subject in reference to
his societies that he wrote a treatise under the head of “ Advice to
the people called Methodists with reference to Dress.” And at
another time, not many years before his death, when his mental
faculties and his religious experience were in their most matured
state from long experience and observation, he wrote a sermon on
the subject, founded on 1 Peter, iii. 3, 4. Those who have read Mr.
Wesley’s opinion on the subject must have observed that he particu-
larly recommended to all who professed to be his followers that their
dress should be plain and inexpensive. He said “it should be plain
as becometh godliness ; and inexpensive that they might be fruitful
in good works.” He would except none, not even the wealthy, for
he considered that whatever was unnecessarily spent in clothing the
body was robbed from the needy, and that those who lavished on
themselves what should have been given to the poor were so far
doing themselves an injury, as the Word of God declares that
“ every man shall be rewarded according to his works.” The reward
for these works of charity, if done from a pure motive, would be an
increase of eternal happiness ; but the only reward for adorning the
body by unnecessary expenditure would be but a momentary gratifi-
cation which would perish in the using. “ Verily they have their
reward.” What would Mr. Wesley say were he now laboring in his
holy vocation if he saw the Methodists of New South Wales 1


The word of God says to all who make a profession of the religion
of Christ, “ Be not conformed to the world, but be ye transformed.”
I wall ask, where is the line of demarcation as it regards dress
between the Australian Methodists and those who make no profession
of religion ] They, with a few exceptions, follow the new'est fashions
without regard t.> utility, propriety, modesty or decency. They put
on gold and jewels of the most expensive kind as far as the means
within their reach will enable them ; and I have no doubt by so
doing they not only waste their Lord’s money, which ought to be
given to the poor and the spread of the gospel, but in not a few
instances they impoverish themselves and their families, and in some
instances bring a scandal on the cause of God.
In order to cut off all grounds of argument in favor of such lavish
expenditure in decorating the body, Mr. Wesley said, “ Let not any
of you who are rich in this world endeavour to excuse yourselves
from this by saying, ‘O, I can afford this or that!’ If you have any
regard to common sense, let not this silly word proceed out of your
mouth. No man can afford to throw away any part of what God has
committed to his trust. No man can afford to throw away any part
of that food and raiment into the sea which was lodged with him
on purpose to feed the hungry and clothe the naked. And it is far
worse than simple waste to spend any part of it in gay or costly
apparel.”
I have so far quoted Mr. Wesley’s -words, but I advise all who call
themselves Wesleyans to procure and read his “advice to the people
called Methodists with regard to dress,” and also his sermon to which
I have referred.
With regard to wearing ornaments to beautify tin* person, whether
they be of gold or any other material, it is hut following the habits of
the most savage communities in the world. I suppose there is not a
country in the work! which is inhabited by savages where the people
do not adorn themselves in something the same manner as the
people do in the most refined society. I have seen New Zealand
cannibals with sharks’ teeth, others with clay tobacco pipes, and
others with other kinds of materials hung on to the ears ; and I have
read of savages in New Guinea who hang on the tusks of a boar in
order to adorn their persons. People in refined society wear gold
rings, sometimes inlaid with sparkling stones, hung on their ears, or
on their fingers. This habit is followed by many who call themselves
Christians, no doubt supposing that they thereby beautify their
persons by “ the putting on of gold ” ; but I think it very doubtful
whether any one, even those who wear them, think another who
wears them is the more beautiful in person for wearing them. They
may admire the ornaments, but not the person the more for wearing
them.
With reference to the fashions of wearing apparel, they often
change, and wealthy fashionables, and many aspiring ones without


wealth, will adopt the newest, when any particular one has been
taken up by the lower orders of the community ; but it is not
altogether the same with golden ornaments in the ears and on the
fingers, for I have known many of both sexes wearing them who could
not write their names. Though they are worn by some of the most
vulgar, many of our Methodists and otherwise respectable people
wear these useless tokens of the vanity of the human mind, contrary
to the command of God by the apostle. . As it regards the clothing
necessary for covering the body, how ridiculous are the fashions,
especially by the female portion of society ! Witness the substitutes
for bonnets. How different are the habiliments of New South Wales
to what thejr were in England in Mr. Wesley’s days; and yet he
complained against some of his followers in reference to dress, and
raised his voice against vain and expensive show. In Cornwall, only
about fifty years since, the Methodists were generally “ plain and
inexpensive in their dress,” without any superfluous adorning. None
wore “gold or costly apparel.” No adorning the head with curled hair
or artificial flowers ; no rosettes on their bonnets or caps. All the
dress of the Methodists then was plain. However show}'- their
dresses might have been before they began to seek a change of heart
(which alone will prepare the soul for heaven), it was all cast aside
then. One would no more expect to see these superfluous ornaments
or showy dress than he would expect to see a crown of gold studded
with diamonds on the'head. There was no conformity to the world
in dress, as there was a complete distinction between those who made
a profession of religion as Methodists, and those whose maiu object
in life was to seek happiness in carnal amusements and worldly
gratifications, to the neglect of the salvation of their souls. Such
was what Mr. Wesley endeavoured to impress on his followers.
As there is such a degeneracy in dress from that which the apostle
enjoined on Christians, and what Mr. Wesley endeavored to impress
on the minds of' his followers, is it not the duty of those who call
themselves Methodists to endeavor to stop this current of vanity by
showing a better example ? Are there any among us who have
moral courage and energy enough to dare to be singular in the
matter of dress, so as to return to primitive Methodism as was
recommended by its founder ? Some may argue that the change has
been so established by custom that it cannot be reversed. By
indulging such opinions evil habits may become so general in a
community as to cause the destruction of temporal prosperity and
the soul’s everlasting destruction. A portion of the spirit of Elijah
is required to come out boldly in public to oppose either a torrent of
iniquity or even a little dribbling stream at-the commencement of a
fall. Were there but a few of this spirit in a community we might
expect to see spiritual prosperity as in days of yore, when there
were a few only of such faithful souls in the sacramental host who
dared to be singular, so as to show an example of plainness, and
devotedness to the service of Christ.


There has been a work published by a “ Wesleyan Minister,” but
the author’s name is not given. The title is “ Temporal Prosperity
and Spiritual Decline, or Free Thoughts on Methodism.” The author
says, “ Changes often take place slowly, stealthily, gradually, and
like the moving hand of time, almost imperceptibly ” ( page 4 ).
The same author says, “ Old Methodism was so established by what
was more than man’s wisdom in her far-seeing founder, that it would
seem that it could hardly change. Yet, her countenance, contour,
and her general garb may so change and cast aside her old chrysalis
covering, and she may appear clad in so altered and gay costume
that her companions and friends may hardly know her again. And
well may they be perplexed to recognize her. Should she or her
people ever become more akin to the bespangled butterfly, fluttering
about in the sunbeams, than to the busy bee working in the hive,
then she will need a little more discipline ; and it may be said to
her as is often said to new recruits, ‘As you were ’ ” ( page 15 ). It
appears that the discipline referred to new recruits is much needed
amongst the Methodists of New South Wales. I would advise all
who wish to retain Wesleyan Methodism in its original purity to
procure the book referred to and read it. It can be had at the
Wesleyan Book Depository in Sydney.
It may be said, with reference to dress, that there is no sin in the
habiliments which we wear. True, but it has often been said with
accurate propriety that the habiliments of the body are in general a
sure index of the mind. If the changeable and vain fashions of the
world are followed in dress, there can be but little doubt the heart
runs after them and that there is but little spiritual life in the soul.
In the early history of Methodism in New South Wales several of
its leading members were naturally light and trifling, which was
manifested in their conduct after they had professedly chosen the
Lord for their portion, and taken upon them the high vocation of
preaching the gospel. Many of the most prominent members who
followed, imbibed the same spirit, which they exhibited in their
general life and conduct. This was the case, not only by way of
accommodation in the company of those who made no profession of
religion (which I presume no true Christian will attempt to justify),
but at the Sunday School anniversaries and other select meetings of
the members of the Church. This was not for the amusement of the
children; but for the gratification of the teachers and other adult
friends. Instead of spending the time while they were together in
spiritual, or interesting secular conversation, reading interesting
books, singing and prayer, or any kind of occupation which would
improve the mind or elevate the soul to God, and increase the grace
of the Holy Spirit, the time that they were together was spent in the
most frivolous and ridiculous amusements for men and women to
engage in. Sometimes some of them would rant around the chapel,
jumping over the seats, and even tearing each other’s clothes, and act
in every other respect in a manner quite unbecoming the professed


followers of the meek and lowly Jesus. Only a few years since I
spent an evening at a friend’s house after a Missionary Meeting, where
several of the ministers were assembled, and though the conduct of
the party was not of that rowdy character, the amusements with the
singing were so theatrical and unbecoming the Christian character as
I never expected to see or hear among Methodists, and one of the
principal speakers in the meeting was one of the chief to engage in
these songs of vanity. After the party had separated I asked one of
our young ministers who had lately come from Cornwall, if he had
ever seen the like there in a party of Methodists, and he said, he
never had, and I am happy to say that he did not join in these vain
amusements.
On one occasion after there had been a quickening in the Church
in Sydney, when several young persons had been converted and
joined the Church, a party was formed for a pleasure*. excursion to
Parramatta, where they met at a friend’s house. There they entered
into amusements some of which I was informed were of the most
ridiculous kind, in which some of the oldest and leading members of
the Church were the leaders. Two of our ministers were in the
party, one of whom joined in the amusements, so as to induce an
old lady to take the liberty to pin a handkerchief to the tail of his
coat to excite a laugh. Could it be possible that this was done “to
the glory of God,” among the “ whatever things ye do,” which is
commanded to be done from that motive. The other minister did
not appiove of such conduct, but he did not use his influence to
suppress it. There were two young ladies in the party who had
recently been converted ; one of them told me that she expected a
profitable religious meeting, but it was of that character that it made
her and her friend quite unhappy. I am sorry to say I believe it
was the means of their falling from grace. One of them has been
long since dead, and I believe she “ died in the Lord,” but she had
a severe struggle for salvation in her last illness before she could
again rejoice in God’s pardoning love. The other is still alive. I
believe she has never enjoyed anything of the love of God since,
though the time referred to is more than forty years since. I have
been informed that she now says, It was a delusion; so great was
her fall!
Not long after my arrival in this country a young man came from
Cornwall, who had been brought up among Methodists, but he had
never been converted to God. On his arrival he was introduced to a
number of young people who were members of the Methodist Church,
and he associated with them in their social meetings, where their
amusements were of such a vain and frivolous character that it made
him very uncomfortable. He said, that had these young people made
no profession of religion, he could have enjoyed their sports with
them; but as they professed to be Methodists, enjoying the love of
God, he thought they ought to have conducted themselves quite
differently. He was one of those few who have always a playful',


inoffensive joke for every occasion when required, so that he could
humourously reprove them without giving offence. He said that he
often told them, “If they had been in Cornwall, they would be
cashiered.”
It produces anything but a pleasure to my mind to refer to such
improprieties of a portion of the section of the Church of God with
whom I have enjoyed so much of the religion of Christ; but a sense
of duty impels me. It seems to say “Cry aloud, spare not, lift up
thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgressions.”
(Isaiah , lviii. 1 .) My only desire and motive for referring to these
improprieties is a hope that it may produce such reflections in the
minds of some as will have a tendency to check such conduct in the
professed followers of the meek and lowly Jesus. I am glad to say
that of late years I have not heard of such improprieties at the social
meetings of the members of the Methodist Church, but still, not
unfrequently, members of our church seek for pleasure in amusements
which would have been grievous to the Methodists of fifty years ago.
Knowing this, I wish to raise a warning voice against such vain
amusements, lest in a time of religious depression of the church its
members should again lapse into such a state of impropriety so as to
seek for happiness in such ungodly exercises—for what has been may
be again.
Though there has been a great improvement of late years in this
colony in reference to these things, pleasure is still sought after by
many of our Church members in some amusements which lead to a
direct violation of the command of God. The followers of Christ
are commanded to “ come out from the ungodly, and be separate from
them.” Association with the ungodly should be avoided as much as
possible, lest the professed followers of Christ should be contaminated
by the evil influence of such examples. One amusement to which I
refer is Cricketing, and there are others.of like character. In the first
place, the company is not restricted to any particular class. The
most thoughtless and unconcerned about their souls’ salvation, and
even the most profane, mingle with professors of religion in these
amusements. As the word of God says, “ Come out from the
ungodly and be separate from them ; ” these associations are a direct
violation of this command.
Then again, the pleasure which is derived from these amusements
is of a quite different character from that which is derived from the
love of Christ in the heart, and the ordinances of the Christian
religion. Pleasure cannot be derived by the same person from both
sources at the same time. The love of God in the heart will ex-
tinguish all the pleasure which may be derived from such amusements,
or the happiness and pleasure which may be derived from such
amusements will eradicate the love of God out of the heart. Any
who think that they can derive happiness from both sources at the
same time are deceiving themselves. Fire and water would as easily


amalgamate as happiness derived from carnal amusements and the
love of God in the heart.
In support of the practice of such amusements it is argued that
the exercise derived from cricketing is conducive to health. It may
be so in a few cases where men are confined to sedentary employ-
ments, and is justifiable where no other exercise is available which is
less conducive to dissipation and to draw the mind from heavenly
and divine things. But let it be observed that these are not those
who generally seek bodily health from that exercise, but more
commonly young men who have quite as much bodily exercise in
their daily avocations as is required to produce bodily health. Many
such young men who make a profession of religion unite with hand
and heart in these doubtful amusements, regardless of the associations
into which they lead them ; and those who are engaged in sedentary
employments from day to day should seek for bodily exercise where
the associations would not necessarily lead into the company of those
who know not God. But instead of this, members of the Methodist
Church unite with the ungodly in these sports, and join in dinner
parties and such-like carousings with many who look at consistent
members of the Church of Christ with contempt. Of two evils the
least would be to sacrifice bodily health than to run the risk of
imbibing the principles and feelings of the godless. The Prophet
Amos said, “ can two walk together except they be agreed,” therefore
those who participate in such pleasures and enjoy the company of
such associations cannot have “ the mind of Christ ”; and the apostle
said “ If any have not the spirit of Christ, ye are none of His.”
Where there is a desire of heavenly things, such a course of conduct
has a natural tendency to produce in the mind the spirit of the
ungodly and lead to the love of the world, which is absolutely
forbidden by God ; for the followers of Christ are commanded not to
“love the world neither the things of the world,” and it is added
“If any man love the world,-the love of the Father is not in him.”
Though I have known more than one of our ministers who
have joined too freely in these doubtful amusements, I wish it to
be understood that they have been but few, and as a body of
ministers connected with the Church of God, I know not of any who
according to my opinion of Christian ministers, live up more strictly
to the precepts of the New Testament than they do; yet, their
presence has not always that suppressing effect on such improprieties
as is to be desired. And even now, though such degrading conduct
is not so prevalent as in years long past, some of our leading members,
even some of the ministers, join so freely in unprofitable amusements
as to become stumbling blocks to the young. Not long since, a
young man who had been brought up among Methodists and in their
Sunday Schools in England, but was not converted till after he came
to this country, said that he attended a Methodist Sunday School
anniversary here, when the amusements were such as he thought were
contrary to Christian propriety; but as one of our popular ministers


joined heartily in them, he thought that if there was no impropriety
in a Christian minister joining in them he thought he might join also.
But though he did join, he was not satisfied, and his conscience
was wounded thereby. Thus the conduct of the minister was a
stumbling block to this young Christian. People should “ put away
childish ” amusements when they become men and women ; particu-
larly ministers of the gospel of Christ. In reference to cricketing and
some other amusements too often sought after by those who profess
to be followers of Christ, they are not altogether objectionable for
those to seek pleasure from who do not profess to have, nor are
seeking after the mind of the Son of God ; but Christians should
follow after those things which will have a tendency to lead to God.
They should choose the most excellent way, even in their recreations
in seeking the relaxation of the mind from severe study.
In reference to the conduct of the members of the Methodist
Church in New South Wales, I am happy to say that in many
respects there has been a great improvement on what it was when I
first came to the colony ; as it regards dress, and some of their
amusements they are at the antipodes of original Methodism ; and
there is a disposition to change from our forms and usages, particu-
larly in many of the young. But many of the oldest members of
the Church think those changes which have been introduced have no
tendency to increase the spirituality of the Church ; particularly, as
many think that most of them have been prompted by the vanity of
the mind, and an ambition to what they think is “ a more honour-
able ” position in the Christian world, as was said by the editor of a
Wesleyan periodical. Changes may be introduced which may not be
sinful in themselves, but are so if prompted by vanity.
Some of the old Methodists think this has been particularly the
case by the introduction of the word Church by which to call our
places of Worship, instead of the word Chapel, which has been in
use in our fatherland for ages. Many object to its adoption for this
purpose because they think it was prompted by the vanity of the
mind from an ambition to rank in this respect with our National
Church, which some contend for, as “more honourable’' than the
word Chapel. Although the houses in which dissenters generally
worship God are called Chapels, we believe that the dissenting
sections of the Christian Churches in England are as truly the
Churches of God as the National Church of England ; but being
under the impression that the desire for the change was prompted
by an unhallowed motive, we utterly object to its adoption. But
some of our young Ministers seem determined to carry their point to
the exclusion of the word Chapel, or any other more appropriate
term.
I will observe that, as far as I can learn from observation and
enquiry, the use of the word Church, instead of Chapel, among
the Wesleyans in Australia, was introduced by some of our most


talented young ministers who, though eloquent in oratory, have not
been the instruments of the greatest good as Christian ministers ;
but it is these young men who are most persistent in carrying out
their wishes in opposition to the wishes and feelings of the aged.
True, some of these strenuous advocates for the change have arrived
at a more mature age now, but they generally carry their early
prejudices with them, and by all the influence they have they are
forcing it upon the people.
In order to realize their wishes, the editors of the Wesleyan
periodicals in these colonies (who have generally been young men)
have published several articles in support of their views on the
subject. Some of the oldest Methodists, who thought they might
have occupied their space in their little paper with more useful
matter, wrote replies to some of the articles, hat these young editors
refused to publish them. An old and respected Local Preacher, who
had been a member of the Methodist Church for more than sixty
years, sent an article for publiciation in the Christian Advocate aiid
Wesleyan Record (Sydney), but the editor would not permit its
publication. He said, “It might provoke controversy.” This was
an injustice to those who had “ borne the burden and heat of the
day ” of Methodism in the colonies. If the opinion of the editor
could not be sustained by reasonable argument, it ought not to have
been published. Such a rejection of the opinions and disregard of
the feelings of the aged could but be unsatisfactory to those who
thought as the old members did. After this the subject was dropped
for several years, as those who held different opinions to our young
ministers could not be heard unless they went into print in some
other organ.
After this, two other young ministers were appointed to the
editorship of the Wesleyan Record. The word Church , as applied
to a material building was still held out prominently to view. Hoping
that a communication in opposition to the opinions of the young
editors might meet with more favor than it did with the former
editors, another old Methodist sent them a letter, of which the
following is a copy:—“ Rev. Sirs, —I perceive that of late years there
has been a growing disposition in some of the leading members of
the Wesleyan Church to call our great houses in which our section
of the Church of God worship— Churches, which, as far as lam
acquainted with that people, by far the greatest number of the oldest
members of that Church not only consider inappropriate, but a
profanation of the sacred term. Such impressions have given pain
to many of that body, believing it to be a derogation from the
simplicity of the gospel. I must confess that I agree with those
who object to the use of that word to express such a meaning. I
cannot see that there is any scriptural authority for it. I believe
there is not one passage in the whole canon of Holy Writ where it
will unmistakeably bear that interpretation, but it is so many times
applied to an assembly of people for the purpose of worshipping


God, that I think it unnecessary to refer to one passage of scripture
to prove ic, presuming that no professed Christian will deny that
fact.
“ The word which was translated Church in our scriptures is well-
known to have been translated from the Greek ; in which language
it signifies “An Assembly, met either for lawful, or unlawful pur-
poses hence, by way of distinction the apostle Paul, on various
occasions, called the Christian church “ the Church of God,” &c.
I cannot learn that it has any other signification in the Greek
language than an Assembly. In reference to the Saxon word Church ;
some of the most learned say that its origin is doubtful, but I do not
see that it is necessary to argue on this point on the present occasion.
I shall deal with it only as it is used in the New Testament. I know
not that there i 8 a word in the whole of the scriptures, except
Jehovah, which is so sacredly used as the word under consideration.
We read that the apostle Paul called the Church, “ The body of
Christ.” {Col. i. 24.) He also said “We are His flesh and His bones.”
(Eph. v. 30). “He is the head of the body, the Church .” (Col. i. 18).
And our Lord views the Church as His own body, for he said to the
persecuting Pharisee, “ Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me 1”
(Acts, ix. 4.) Can anything be more sacred? Is the word Jehovah
more sacredly applied to the Supreme Being than the word Church
is applied to the Saviour of the world ? If so, is it not profane to
apply it to an earthly structure ?
“ It has been said that the evil is not attached to the expression of
the words, but to the meaning which they are intended to convey.
The same argument has been used by the most wicked characters in
justification of their profane language. If the utterance of such
expressions cannot be justified by such arguments of the profane
swearer; neither can the term Church in applying it to such
structures.
“It has also been said that such a use of the word has been
sanctioned by apostolic use. Ido not believe it, for in consulting
the New Testament and ancient history, I cannot find that it was
used to express such a meaning till about the middle of the second
century of the Christian era : but if it had been at an earlier date,
it would not justify such an application, unless it could be proved
unmistakedbly that it was sanctioned by scripture authority ; for we
find that grave errors crept into several of the Christian Churches in
the days of the apostles, which brought sharp reproof from them ;
how much more might this be expected after their death.
“ At an early age in the history of the Christian Church after the
apostles’ days we read that superstitions of a grave kind were
entertained by it, and as far as we know, existed without reproof.
So gross were their opinions, that they thought the 1 elements of the
Eucharist would operate of themselves independent of the disposition
of the communicants.’ There is proof of this in relation to a


‘ sucking girl among the Cyprians who so violently refused to taste
the sacramental wine, that the deacon was obliged to force open her
lips and pour it into her mouth.’ On another occasion it was said
‘ they esteemed it a sin to kneel to pray on Sundays.’
“ The first instance that I can find recorded in history that an
edifice was called a Church was for an idolatrous purpose. It is
said that ‘ Paulus Samosatemus, the heretical bishop of Antioch,
ordered certain women to stand in the middle of the Church
and sing psalms to his praises.’ It appears that such was the
state of the so-called Church of Christ when the word was first
applied to a place of worship. As far as I can learn from history
the use of this sacred word for such a purpose is following the
example of these heretical and superstitious professors of religion,
and originally, only these, for I cannot learn that such a use of it
was derived from any other source. Then shall we continue to follow
such examples 1 or shall we return again to the simplicity of the
early gospel day 1
“The calling a place of worship by this name is un-Wesleyan.
Mr. Wesley appeared to have scrupulously abstained from such an
application of the word to the places of worship among his people.
Nor can I learn from that comparatively recent publication, ‘ Smith’s
History of Methodism,’ nor from any other, source, that it has been
sanctioned by Wesleyans in England ; but to the grief of many of
the oldest members of that Church in these colonies, some of her
young members have taken upon themselves to force it upon the
people, being prompted to it by vain ambition (as we think) to be
more like our National Church.
“ The word Chapel has been objected to by some of those who
contend for the word Church, because of its alleged superstitious
origin, as they say. Now, I have no objection to call a place of
worship by that name, and I have no fear of its producing an
idolatrous effect, as its origin is doubtful ; yet, I do not contend for
its use, and I am quite willing to abandon it for a more appropriate
term for the accommodation of any who think it had an idolatrous
origin. Why not call a house which is solely appropriated to the
worship of God, a Sanctuary. Such a course would be following the
example of the apostle when he became ‘ all things to all men,’ and I
think there ought to be some respect paid to the feelings of the aged.
I Cannot find that the word Sanctuary is used in scripture only to
express a place set apart for the worship of God, or a sacred place,
and sometimes a place of protection. I cannot see what objection
can be raised to the use of. that word for this purpose, as it is in
accordance with its original use.
“ It has been said that ‘ it is honourable to call a place of worship a
Church' I cannot see why it should be thought so, unless it be from
a long perverted use of the term, which has for ages been applied to
our ‘ National Church ’ buildings, to which go most of the great and


nolle of our fatherland, to whom worldly titles of dignity are
attached. But ‘ hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in
faith.’ ( James ii. 5.) To call an earthly structure a Church, is a
degradation of the word. It brings ‘ the body of Christ ’ on a level
with stones and mortar. Why not abandon the word in its perverted
use and apply it to its only proper signification. But it is very
hard to throw off errors confirmed by the great and learned, and a
great part of the Christian world for many ages ; but it is not
sufficient to justify the perversion of a sacred word because it has
been sanctioned by antiquity and general consent. Nor can it justify
the continued use of it because many of the wise and good have
used it without thinking of its sacred origin and use. Ido not
condemn those who have used it, for the apostle said ‘ The times of
ignorance God winked at,’ but (when the people were better informed)
‘He commandeth all men everywhere to repent.’ From a long and
general thoughtless habit it has almost become second nature, but, I
repeat it, this does not justify its continued perverted use ; and all
innovations connected with the Church of God ought to be abolished
though they may be as ancient as the apostolic day. Tertulian said
in reference to some evil habits which were practiced in his day, £ If
it ought to have been done, it would have been enjoined by the
apostles.’ So say some of the old Methodists in regard to the word
Church as used to express a house set apart for the worship of God ;
and I repeat it, there is not a passage in all the scriptures which will
unmistakeably bear such meaning. If this be correct, let the word
Sanctuary, or some other more appropriate word be used in its stead.
It cannot be legitimately objected to, as its primary signification in
the Church is applicable to a house in which people assemble for the
purpose of worshipping God. By so doing, much satisfaction will
be given to many old disciples. —Yours, &c., An old Methodist.”
The editors published a reply to the foregoing letter in a leading
article of the same number of the Wesleyan Record in which the
letter was published, which I here transcribe. The article is as
follows :
“ CHAPEL versus CHURCH.
“ Our readers will find in another column a letter from an £ Old
Methodist ’ deprecating the use among the Methodists of the new
and more imposing word Church, in the place of the old, and more
familiar word. Chapel. We attach very small importance indeed to
those discussions about names, and regret to find that our senilis
emeritus has been so deeply pained by tendencies to alter our eccle-
siastical nomenclature. Warring about words wastes time and
exhausts energies which are worthy a higher vocation. We are not
of those who think that the Methodist section of the sacramental
host will largely improve its efficiency by adopting the latest innova-
tions of ecclesiastical uniform. We quite believe it to be more than
a little awkward to be obliged to announce from the Methodist


pulpit that the Church meeting will be held in this Church, &c., or
that the Church steward will be in attendance in the Church to let
and relet pews and sittings. Archbishop Trench has shown that
words like these must be looked at historically as well as etymologi-
cally. Many words like many people have doubtful origins, but
they come to be rich in deeds and classic associations. There are
thousands of Methodists who feel that they cannot call a Chapel by
any other name, nor would it sound as well. What does it matter
to them that the birth of the word Chapel a long time back had
anything to do with St. Martin’s cap. They have used the word
Chapel all their lives and their fathers before them used it also.
The place and name which stands for the place are to them identical
and indissoluble. The Chapel as such is the place where they first
found God, and where all their lives they have been accustomed to
meet with God. They tell us frankly that they cannot change ; and
further, that in their opinion changes are fraught with much mischief,
and that we had better, not like Uzza rashly meddle with the Ark
of God.*
“ ‘ Old Methodist,’ however, is of opinion that changes will occur.
He would give up Chapel. His objection is not to this, but to the
introduction of the word Church, which we are gravely informed is
the New Testament word for the company of the faithful; and to
apply such a word to stones and bricks, (fee., is a serious commission
indeed. Now it is quite true that the New Testament word
‘ ecclesia ’ (assembly) stands in our English version for 1 Church,’
but an ‘ Old Methodist ’ does not seem to be aware that this is by
accommodation chiefly, or entirely. According to the best entitled
to speak on such subjects, our English word Church has grown out
of two Greek words, Kurias (Lord) and Oikos (house). By construc-
tion Kurias and Oikos, become Kurikos, or house of the Lord. In
the two places in which the words are used in the New Testament, it
signifies “ belonging to the Lord in 1 Cor. xi. 22, the reference is
to the Lord’s supper, and in Rev. i. 10, to the Lord’s day. From
Kurikos, Kyrkie, which in Scotland is Kirk, in England, Church. If
House of the Lord be just the meaning, which we gather from the
origin and history of the word Church, we cannot see why objection,
or what desecration there can be in saying Church if we choose to
do so and he means the House of the Lord. There are few words
which have not their primary and secondary meaning, and it by no
means follows that a word is falsely used in a primary sense, because
it is truly used in a secondary one. It is quite true that we think
ecclesiastical edifices are not called churches in the New Testament,
and for the very obvious reason, that Christians in the New Testament
times had strictly speaking no ecclesiastical edifices to be called by
this or any other name. Kurikos (the Lord’s house, or we should say
the Church) was used in the designation of buildings for Christian
worship. Hitherto no word has universal adoption among the
*Good reasoning.


Methodists. Not long since the term most frequently used was
Preaching-house, a phrase which now by common consent rests in '
peaee. Mr. Wesley’s known pi-eference, as is well known, was for
that designation, ‘ House of the Lord,’ which is but a longer way
of saying Church. Our ‘ Old Methodist ’is in favour of Sanctuary.
By all means we say let him say Sanctuary if this word pleases him
better than any other. For ourselves we must confess that we some-
times use Sanctuary, sometimes Chapel, and at others (we hope the
£ Old Methodist ’ will forgive us) Church. But when we are asked to
use the word Sanctuary and no other we respectfully decline.
Among the Jews the Sanctuary was part of the sacred edifice visited
by the priests only, and therefore does not fully convey the place
intended for a popular assembly. Among the Roman Catholics it is
that part of the Church reserved for the altar. A. Sanctuary is not
necessarily a house at all. Any place of refuge has by immemorial
usage been designated, Sanctuary. We cannot see in this mere
matter of verbiage, where neither the Bible nor the Conference has
legislated for us, there should be a dead level of rigid uniformity.
Nor can we see on what grounds any one can say to us, these are my
opinions about such matters, and those who refuse to adopt them are
departing from the purity of the simplicity of early Methodism.
This is a style of reasoning which is neither modest nor just. The
truth is, all things human are ever shifting their standing ground
and appearing in other phases. To assert unchangeableness is but
another way of asserting infallibility. No man can say that the
ecclesiastical relations of Methodism are now what they were a
hundred years ago. Our places of worship are still Preaching-houses,
but that is not all; our ministers are Preachers of the Gospel still,
but the flock of which they are overseers demand more than that,
and not unfrequently much more than is possible to give, and still
for association and convenience we may hold fast the designation of
Methodist Societies, but it cannot be said that a Methodist Church
of the present day is in connection with the Church of England.
We did not dissent from the establishment like other nonconforming
bodies. We had the door closed in our face. Who does not know
that when proposals were made to the Bishops of the Church of
England to recognise the Methodist Society, the Bishops declared
that there should be neither recognition nor toleration. The schis-
matics are not necessarily those who separate from the Church, but
those who are the cause of the separation. It must needs be that
offences come, but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh. We are
frequently asked, why the Methodists left the Church of England ?
Our answer is this —the Methodists were compelled to go. And now
that more than a century of Church life is gone and Methodism is
become numerically at least the largest voluntary Church in Christ-
endom, with her own orders, her own sacraments, her own institu-
tions ; it is complained that in little matters such as saying Church
or Chapel we are drifting from the practice of our forefathers. We


might as well complain that time is moving on, and that the world
is a hundred years older, or that the customs and costumes of infancy
are cast off by children of larger growth. It would seem that in
America the Methodists have passed through the Church stage, and
that Chapel is rising from its ashes. And we have also observed
that in England there are symptoms of two separate styles of eccle-
siastical architecture ; the one called ‘ Chapel,’ the other £ Church.’
It was announced a short time ago that a certain number of the
.opening services in connection with the new place of worship would
be held in the £ Old Chapel,’ the others in the £ New Church.’ In
all probability the £ New Church ’ was a Gothic structure ; the £ Old
Chapel’ would be ‘Corinthian.’ When it is necessary to correct
these little inconsistencies and to establish a general custom of saying
Church or Chapel as the case may be, no doubt the fountain of
authority among us will make a deliverance on the subject; until
then, £ let every man be persuaded in his own mind,’ and Methodism
will have nothing to fear while she stands to the motto, £ in all
things essential, fidelity; in things non-essential, liberty; in all
things, charity.’ ”
Thus far is the leading article on the subject in the. Christian
Advocate and Weslzyan Record in reply to the ££ Old Methodist. He
was not satisfied with the reply. He thought the style was flippant
and unbecoming a young man (though a Reverend) to one who was
old enough for his father, and whose head had become gray with
age after he had joined the Methodist Church in his youth. This
young minister treated with jest what the old man held sacred.
Several sentences were sarcastic, ironical and insulting; some of
which would naturally lead the reader to the conclusion that he had
made statements which he had not, such as the following : “ We are
gravely informed that the word Church is the New Testament word
for the faithful, and to apply it to stones, brick, &c., is a very serious
commission indeed.” This is nothing less than sarcastic irony.
Then again, “ The £ Old Methodist ’ would give up the word
Chapel; his objection is not to this, but to the introduction of the word
Church .” In another- place he says, “We cannot see why there
should be a dead level of rigid uniformity.” Where is the “ dead
level of rigid uniformity ” recommended 1 as the “ Old Methodist ”
was willing to retain the old word Chapel, or that the speaker or
writer might use his discretion and call it Chapel or 'Sanctuary, or
call it by any other name that was not prompted by the vanity of
the mind, nor such as is sacredly used in Scripture to express the
body of Christ. Where is the consistency between “rigid uniformity ”
and liberty to choose one word out of several 1 The editor also said,
“ We cannot see why in this matter of mere verbiage, where neither
the Bible nor the Conference legislates for us, there should be a dead
level of rigid uniformity.” In reference to this I will observe that
the legislation of Conference has no weight on some subjects with
some of our young ministers in Australia if my information is correct,


to which I may hereafter refer. It cannot be supposed that Con-
ference will legislate for every word in its various acceptations ; and
though the Bible does not legislate, thus minutely, it lays down
unmistakeable rules, and if rightly considered will be a sure guide
in such matters. St. Paul “We that are strong ought to bear
the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves .” ( Homans,
xv. 1,2.) Again in 1 Cor. viii., a principle is laid down for the
guidance of the wise and strong, in reference to things which are of
no importance in themselves but fraught with fearful consequences
to the weak and ignorant when the wise will act without regard to
the “ weak brother.” Then certainly it was the duty of the reverend
editor to pay some respect to the feelings of the “ Old Methodist,”
if in this case he thought it was a weakness, particularly as he said,
“it was a matter of mere verbiage.” In this case I can but think he
should have followed the apostle’s advice, “ lest that by any means
this liberty of his become a stumbling-block to the weak, and through
his knowledge his weak brother perish for whom Christ died.” If
the reverend editor had followed that rule he would have accommo-
dated himself to the infirmities (as he appears to think) of thousands
of Old Methodists.
The editor goes on to say, “We attach very little importance
indeed to discussions about names, and we regret to find that our
senilis emiritus has been so deeply pained by tendencies to alter our
nomenclature.” This looks like irony and sarcasm, for with all his
regret he sticks t*> his opinions and contends for them with more
than a page in his periodical, in a leading article on the subject to
which he said he “ attached but very little importance indeed though
the minds of thousands of Old Mpthodists might be pained thereby.
With such views, would it not have shown consistency, wisdom, and
Christian charity, if he had published the communication of the “Old
Methodist ” for the satisfaction of those who did attach importance
to the subject, and have devoted his leading article to some subject
which he thought of importance 1 I have no doubt it would have
given satisfaction to the Old Methodist and others of like mind had
he shown that the Old Methodist was in error in believing that the
word Church was first applied to an earthly structure when the
Christian Church was in a fallen state, and that it was applied to such
a building to gratify a heretical bishop.
Though so much was said by the reverend editor of the Christian
Advocate, he did not adduce one argument to show that any good
would result from the use of the word in the way that he contended
for, though he must have been convinced that it produced positive
evil in the minds of many old Methodists.
With regard to the birth of the word Chapel in connection with
“ St. Martin’s Cap,” the Old Methodist thought it would be best to
let the Cap rest with St. Martin himself, though the tale had been
thrice told in two Methodist Journals in the Australian colonies.


But the Old Methodist proposed the word Sanctuary or some other
word which would not profane “ the body of Christ ” for the
satisfaction of any, if such there be, who could not say Chapel
without defiling their consciences, as the editor of our Journal said
the word was idolatrously derived from St. Martin’s Cap. As St.
Martin’s Cap has been brought before the public the third time in
the Methodist organs of these colonies, I will ask from whence has
this ridiculous legend been derived. Was it from an authentic
history, or a groundless tale ?
In reference to the English word Church, the editor of the
Advocate said, “ According to those who are best entitled to speak
on these subjects it has grown out of two words ‘ Kurias ’ (Lord) and
‘ Oikos ’ (house)” Now, I beg to say that the most learned whose
works I have had the opportunity to consult say that its origin is
doubtful. This was the opinion of the late Dr. George Smith, of
Camborne, Cornwall, England. I suppose there was not a man
better capable cf judging in this matter than he, as he had read
more extensively on Church history than any other whose works I
have consulted. Dr. Adam Clarke said, “Itis a Metonomy, in
which the building is put for the people who worship therein.” I
can but think that this is taking an unjustifiable liberty which no
one, has a right to do with such a sacred word as is used in the New
Testament to express “the body of Christ.” Bishop Jeremy
Taylor writes —“ Any word by consent may signify any thing ; but
by Church, we mean that society which is really joined to Christ,
which hath received the Holy Ghost, which is the body of which
Christ is the Head ; that is, the true servants of Christ only are the
Church.”
A certain writer said, “ That which may please the few may offend
the many.” This has often been the case at first with changes in the
Church of Christ. In some cases they have thought to increase the
sanctity of the worship thereby, but in their final results have led to
error and superstition by the multitude until the so called Church of
Cod has become altogether corrupt ; but in many instances, such as
the introduction of the word Church by which to call our places of
worship, it is to be feared that the prompting motive for the change
has been an unhallowed desire to add worldly dignity to the sect to
which the parties introducing them belonged. The author of “ Tem-
poral Prosperity and Spiritual Decline,” said, “ Nonconformity
thinks it grand, to be a little like the old Church.” We think the
prompting motive referred to for the change from Chapel to Church
is a vain desire to be like the great and noble of our father-land who
call their places of worship Churches. I have never known of any
arguments advanced in support of such a word by its promoters than
that “it is a better word, and more honourable.” Even the editor
of the Wesleyan Record in Sydney, who published such a lengthy
sarcastic leading article in reply to his correspondent, the “ Old
Methodist,” did not produce one reasonable argument in favor of the


change. We think that the advocacy of the change proceeded from
a vain aspiring to what he thought is more honourable in the eyes of
the world. Such a motive is very objectionable to most old Method-
ists, and it was this persuasion which prompted the “ Old Methodist ”
to investigate the original and legitimate meaning of the word
Church ; and it was in these researches he discovered its sacred
application to “ the body of Christ.” It was in these researches
also that he discovered that the first application of the word to an
earthly structure was assumed by a heretical bishop and for an
idolatrous purpose. Had he not thought that our young ministers
were forcing it on the Methodists of these colonies from an unhallowed
motive he might have called such earthly structures by that name to
the end of his life as his fathers had done in the innocency of their
ignorance from generation to generation, as tens of thousands do to
this day, without thinking of its sacred import. It was this
impression which induced him to oppose it in the public press. The
old Methodists are generally too firmly grounded in the usages, and
even the nomenclature of old Methodism to be satisfied with changes
therefrom ; unless it can be shown that some benefit will be conferred
on the Church which cannot be derived from the .old customs and
usages. After having tasted of the new forms, they think “ the old
is better.” There is a danger in departing in any respect from old
Methodism, lest by the changes new Methodism should “ wane from
its primitive power, its spiritual might, and vital and earnest
simplicity.” In the use of these forms the children of God in
connection with the followers of Mr. Wesley have for generations
felt refreshed and strengthened, so that they have gone on their way
rejoicing in the salvation of God. The most sincere and most
devoted Christians among them, and those who have been the
instruments in the hand of God in converting souls to Himself desire
no new forms of speech in connection with His service, different to
those which were introduced by their venerable founder, believing
that he was actuated by the Divine Spirit, and in many instances
against his own preconceived opinions.
The Old Methodist thought that he was entitled to the publication
of a rejoinder, as the editors of the Advocate had not done justice to
his communication. He sent a letter to them supposing it would
have been published : but no ! In reply he received a note from one
of those young editors absolutely refusing to publish it.
After the editors of the JVesleyan Record had refused to publish
the rejoinder of the Old Methodist to the leading article referred to,
the subject lay quiet for several years; but with a manifest deter-
mination of these young men to carry their point by calling our
Sanctuaries Churches, regardless of the feelings of the aged. It
might have rested without any further public notice but for the
conduct of another young minister, who was just out of the minority,
at a committee meeting where arrangements were being made for the
erection of a new chapel. At this meeting there were some very old


Methodists who, under the impression that the word Church for such
a purpose had been prompted by vanity, had a particular objection
to it. This young minister, who was the secretary of the committee,
repeatedly called the building a Church. And not only so, but often
repeated the word, looking at these old men with a sarcastic smile,
and coolly saying, “ I suppose we must not say Church.” These old
men felt the insult but made no remark. In the next publication of
the local newspaper, tenders were advertised for the erection of a
“ Wesleyan Church.” At this the feelings of one venerable local
preacher, who had been a member of the Wesleyan Church for more
than sixty years, were aroused. He at once went to this young
minister and spoke in such a determined manner, that after some
conversation the young man promised that the advertisement should
be altered the following week. The old gentleman said that the
young minister was very warm at first, but when he discovered he
had such a determined character to contend with, he softened down
into a milder mood. There was another old member of the Church
at the committee meeting referred to, who had been a member for
near fifty years, who felt the insulting sarcasm, but he made up his
mind to make nothing of it publicly, though he thought that a word
of such sacred import ought not to be so lightly used, but at the
same time he resolved never to attend another committee meeting
while the Chapel would be in course of erection, though he was one
of the largest contributors to the building.
Is there not a danger in diverging from original Methodism - even
in little matters, such as forms of speech, when there can no possible
good result from the change ? I believe God raised up Mr. Wesley
for the express purpose of invigorating the declining Church of
Christ ; and after he was ruthlessly ejected out of the section of it
in which he was nursed, and to which he was strongly attached, and
when the doors of her sanctuaries were closed against him, he was
mysteriously led by the Divine Spirit so that old Methodism
introduced by him “ had in her elements and salutary discipline all
that is necessary in church government, so that in these respects it
would appear that it could hardly improve by change. Yet, have
there not changes taken place so that her old friends can scarcely
recognize her 1 ?” If so, is there not a danger in modifying
Methodism even in her forms of speech, and thereby sliding
imperceptibly into a state so as to deprive her of her soul-saving
power 1 Is there not a danger in little changes which in themselves
appear to be of no importance, of engendering antagonistic feelings
in the Church which may result in fearful consequences ? “ How
great a matter a little fire kindleth !” Was not the conduct of the
young minister in the committee productive of evil? Is it not
evident that it caused painful feelings in the minds of some old
church members, who had labored to spread Christianity through the
influence of Methodism long before this young man was born lls
it not then the “ more excellent way ” to let things remain as they


are, rather than introduce such changes as cannot in any way tend to
the furtherance of the gospel 1 Is there not a danger in meddling
with the Ark of the Lord even in little matters ? The touch of the
hand may be the cause of death ! The concluding argument in favor
of the change from Chapel to Church, which I first saw published in
the Melbourne Chronicle (a Wesleyan paper), and copied into the
Sydney IVesleyan Record , was that “it is more honorable.” I will
ask in what sense 1 Is it because it tends more to the furtherance of
the gospel in the salvation of souls ? JSlo, but it is coming nearer to
the Church of England in its nomenclature. Do not these young
ministers who contend for such changes think that it is great to be a
little like the old Church 1 If worldly honor is the prompting motive
for the change in the name of our Sanctuaries, ought it not to be
rejected, seeing that evil is the result 1 One of our old and much
esteemed local preachers said that he thought the reason why the
work of Q-od did not prosper more in our Societies in this Colony
was, because the conduct of many of the leading members of our
Church was prompted by motives of vanity, in proof of which was
the determined manner of forcing on the public the word Church
instead of Chapel; and some other changes which could not tend to
its prosperity. . It is not simply the use of the' words that is so
particularly objectionable to the old Methodists ( as any word by
consent may mean anything), but it is the importance which those
tvho contend for the changes appear to attach to them as it regards
worldly honor; therefore, we think it is the safest to adhere to old
Methodism as it was left by its venerable Founder.
There is also a change in the forms of Wesleyan Church worship
which has been introduced of late years, which is not altogether so
offensive and objectionable ; nor do I believe that it is so strongly
tainted with evil, and in favor of which more can be said than of The
introduction of the word Church to express a material building. I
refer to reading the whole of the verse of a hymn at once iif our
congregational singing. .As I have been in the habit of joining in
the worship of prayer and praise in the Wesleyan congregations’ for
about sixty years, and as I have during that time taken particular
notice of the various systems of conducting that service in their
places of worship, I will give my opinion on the subject. I will first
describe the different forms among the Methodists of conducting the
service of singing at different periods from the first time I united
with them, and afterwards refer to the different effects produced by
the different forms, and then give my opinion as to what system of
conducting the service of song is most conducive to spiritual worship
About sixty years ago it was the usual custom in the Methodist
places of worship that I attended for the minister first to announce
the page, and after that read the whole hymn, while those who had
books found the hymn. After that he read two or three lines at a
time, as the congregation sang the verses which the minister selected.
About fifty years since, the practice of reading the whole hymn was


discontinued as far as my observation went, and the first verse only
was read after the page had been announced; and after that two or
three lines were read at a time by the minister, mid they were sung
by the congregation without a select choir. This was continued in
the Methodist congregations until within the last few years, when
some (young people generally) thought they could improve on the
service by singing the whole of each verse through without a stop
for the minister to read the last two or three lines of the verse
(according to the rhyme and length of the verses) before it was sung.
The argument which is generally brought in favor of singing the
whole of each verse without stopping is, that it retains the con-
nection of the sense better than it does when the second part is read
by the minister after the first part has been sung. Now this appears
to me to be quite a mistake, nor can I see any force in the argument.
When .a whole verse has been read before any part has been sung,
there are but very few who can remember the whole of the verse so
as to connect the sense in singing, unless the memory be refreshed
either by hearing the last part of the verse read again by another, or
by looking into a book. Where then is the advantage of the sense
of the whole verse having been brought to the recollection by looking
into a book after the first part has been sung, over hearing it expressed
by another ] I think the sense of the whole verse is more easily
connected by hearing it from another, as it requires a less effort of
the mind than to refer to a book to retain the connection. After the
first part had been sung, the minister officiating should follow with
the second so closely as only to give reasonable breathing time to the
singers while he is reading the words which may connect the sense
of the whole verse together with the music; and is more deeply
impressed on the minds, not only of those who have not books, but
of those who have, and more impressively retained. When the whole
verse is read before a part of it has been sung, and afterwards sung
through without a break, the sense of the sacred song is lost to most
of those in the congregation who cannot read or have not hymn
books, as they cannot join in the delightful service of singing the
praises of the Triune God; and the comfort and benefit of the
unlearned should be one of the first considerations, as was the case
with Mr. Wesley ; and I know not that we can do better than follow
his example. Without believing him to be infallible in his judgment,
I believe that he was so led by the Holy Spirit that the methods
which he adopted in the government of the Church of which he was
the founder have never been improved upon : yet, there have been
many who have attempted to set aside his church government and
usages, which he was led to adopt from providential circumstances
contrary to his early prejudices, and which he confirmed in his ripe
old age and experience.
As far as I have known changes in our church government and
rules, they have been introduced by comparatively young men only,
who had never been instrumental in the conversion of many souls,


nor ever noted for their zeal in the cause of Christ, but often very
zealous and very determined in promoting changes. I have never
known an old Methodist propose or contend for any alteration
diverging from Mr. Wesley’s rules and usages : but many of the
young members of our Church, some of whom are talented ministers,
are very persistent and determined in following their own inclinations
regardless of the opinion of Mr. Wesley and the feelings of the aged
in our congregations. Such conduct in young men, whether ministers
or lay members, shows that there is a want of that respect and
veneration for the aged which God has enjoined on account of their
age, irrespective of any other consideration; for He said, “ Thou
shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old men, and
fear God.” ( Leviticus, xix. 32.) The fear of God and reverence to
the aged are here put in conjunction by Himself. It is to be feared
that but few of these young men to whom I refer have ever properly
considered their duty in this respect to the aged and to their God.
As a proof of this I will refer to two young men who were very
determined in effecting the change in the service of song which Mr.
Wesley adopted in his congregational worship, and was followed by
his followers for over a century, when great success attended the
ministry of the word through the instrumentality of Methodism ;
much more so than it has of late years, considering the number of
labourers employed in the vineyard of the Lord. One of the young
men to whom I refer was something over twenty years of age, but
the other was several years younger. Though they were so young
and inexperienced, both in things of the world and religion; I have
known an old man who had grown grey-headed as a member of the
Methodist Church before these young men were born, read a part of
the verse for the congregation to sing, intending to read the other
part after the congregation had sung the first part; but these youths
have sung through the whole verse without even a stop to draw
breath at the end of what had been read, as if they had resolved
that the old preacher should not follow the dictates of his own
feelings. They have done this through the whole hymn, showing
their contempt for the old minister’s intentions, which by his conduct
they must have known, regardless of his hoary head and Mr.
Wesley’s rules. This was their manner whoever might be in the
pulpit conducting the service.
As far as I have observed, when these changes have taken place,
though they have been introduced by such young men, though the
old men have thought the old usages best, they have submitted to the
change without attempting to prevent it. An old minister said that
he preferred the old usages ; but as his children preferred the change
he did not like to oppose them. Now, I can but think that such
concessions to the caprice of children and youths are wrong, and that
the fancy of youth carries more weight with such people than the
feelings of the aged, Mr. Wesley’s opinion and practice, or considering
the utility of the change. It is well known that Mr. Wesley most


strenuously impressed on his congregations that they should unite in
the service of song. Congregational singing was what he endeavored
to establish, and he would never tolerate any thing that would deprive
the humblest members of his congregations of joining in that part
of divine worship. Doubtless, he was convinced that without reading
the verses in parts, congregational singing would not be generally
adopted in the Church, and this impression led him to adopt that
system contrary to the usage of the Church in which he was brought
up, and to which he was devotedly attached, and as far as I know,
contrary to the usage of every other Christian Church in Britain in
his day.
It will be remembered by those who have read the preceding pages,
that the young editor whb wrote the flippant, sarcastic reply to the
letter of the “ Old Methodist,” said, “ When it is necessary to correct
these little inconsistencies, and establish a general system * * *
no doubt the fountain of authority among us will make deliverance on
this subject.” I will observe, that such “ deliverances ” carry no
weight with our young editor and those like minded. For when such
deliverances have been made they have been disregarded; for if the
information which I received from more than one of our ministers
is correct, sometime about the year of 1860 there was an order issued
from the English Conference that the ministers of our congregations
should read the verses in parts as they were sung according to the
system which Mr. Wesley adopted.
I have also been tolcl by some of our ministers that at one of the
Conferences held in Melbourne (Victoria) the subject was warmly
discussed. The old ministers contended for the old custom and the
young men for the new. As they could not satisfactorily decide
which rule should be followed, they passed a resolution that ministers
should adopt in all our congregations that which the people in each
preferred. This resolution was worse than nothing ; for there were
but very few if any of our congregations who would be all agreed in
the matter. And as the advocates for the change were so zealous for
it as if the stability of the Church depended on the solution of the
question, on its being decided according to their wishes; and as they
were not troubled with an over supply of such modesty as becomes
young people, they were more persistent in following their own
inclinations than were the old Methodists, so that now it appears
they have carried their points in opposition to the order of the
English Conference. In reference to these changes and innovations
the old men have been too much like good old Eli, who, instead of
restraining his wicked sons by using the power with which he was
invested as high priest, said, “ Why do ye such things 1” so they
continued their wicked practices which brought death and destruction
to his family, himself not excepted, and a most heavy calamity to the
whole house of Israel.
I remember seeing some years since a notice of some public meeting
where many of our ministers were present, when the Rev. Dr.


Punshon addressed these fathers in Israel to the following effect.
“ Why is it, reverend fathers, that the same effects do not follow our
ministry now which did in the early days of your ministry V’ I
think it is not difficult to account for the want of the good effects of
preaching the gospel. If the changes referred to are not the cause,
there is pretty clear proof that in many of our leading members
who introduce them, there is a great deficiency of the life and power
of godliness, so that the preaching of the gospel to such people by
the most holy and devoted servants of Christ falls powerless on the
congregations, being deadened by the influence of these lifeless
professors. These lifeless professors are surrounded by such a dead-
ening atmosphere that it destroys the effect of gospel preaching. Well
might Dr. Punshon, and others likeminded, adopt the language of
the prophet and say, “ Who hath believed our report, and to whom is
the arm of the Lord revealed V’ Many acknowledge that Mr. Wesley
adopted a different rule to give those who could not read, or were
without hymn books, an opportunity to unite their voices in the
service of singing ; but they say this is not necessary now as most of
the people can read ; and some have said, that it is a shame to those
who cannot, with the present facilities to learn, and a hymn book can
be procured at such a low price that none need to be without it. This
argument is almost as groundless now as it was in Mr. Wesley’s day ;
for though the facilities both here and in England to learn are greater
there are many who can sing who cannot read, and numbers of them
should not be blamed for their ignorance, as their parents may have
neglected to have them taught early in life ; and in the Australian
Colonies, many are located at such distance from Schools that they
could not attend to be instructed, so that their being unable to read
is not their fault, but their misfortune. I could name several of this
class, but it would be invidious to do so.
At a chapel in a country village in this circuit a good man attends
the services who has been blind from his infancy. When the verses
were given out in parts he sang and he was a good singer. At this
place some of the people were in favour of reading the whole of the
verse at once, which one of our ministers told me he did, to please
them. But as he saw the blind man did not sing when the verses
were read through at once, he read them in parts, which enabled the
blind man to sing again. I have no doubt this is what Mr. W esley
would have done under similar circumstances. It must have been
gratifying to that minister to know that it was in his power to give
comfort to a man who by a mysterious providence of God had been
deprived of his sight, by affording him the privilege of joining in the
sacred song. I have no doubt there are many good people in the
Church of God who are afflicted in various ways and are thereby
deprived of the pleasure of joining in this sacred and hallowing
service of praise when the whole of each verse is read at once before
any part of it has been sung. And there are also many occasional
attendants in Wesleyan sanctuaries that do not carry hymn books,


who can sing when they know the words which they cannot remember
when the verse is not read in parts as it is sung. I was present on
two occasions recently when this was very perceptible. On one
occasion the two first verses of the hymn were read in parts, in
which a large number of the congregation joined heartly in singing.,
the third and following verses some of the leading singers sang
through the verse without permitting the minister to read the second
part after the first had been sung. There was at once a very percep-
tible falling off of the voices, so that the singing became comparatively
dull. Many ceased to sing and sang no more at that time, though
the whole of each verse was read before it was sung. The loss of
the voice of but one good singer in a small congregation makes a
considerable difference to the music. On the following Sunday there
was a somewhat similar circumstance which resulted in similar effects.
When the whole of the verse is read at once by the minister those
who cannot read, or have not books, cannot join in this sacred and
delightful service, so that congregational singing, such as Mr. Wesley
was earnest in establishing, contrary to the usages of his day, is
generally perverted. In some of our “ little sanctuaries ” in country
places, where they have harmoniums, the person who presides is
frequently the principal singer, and without his or her voice the
music sustains a great loss. They have to attend to both the words
and music, and as but few can do this at the same time, particularly
when the verse is long, so that they cannot sing. I have heard more
than one say they would not play if the verse were not given out in
parts as it was sung. For this reason, the reading the whole verse
at once is a great means of doing away with congregational singing.
There was a perceptible change in the manner of worshipping God
in the chapel where I was accustomed to attend as soon as the people
began to sing the whole verse through without a break after singing
the first lines. Before the change, nearly the whole congregation ;
not only the members of the Church, but those who were not, kneeled
during the time of public prayer ; but from that time, the congrega-
tion generally, the Church members included, irreverently sat while
the minister was addressing the great God on their behalf. One
thing is clear, either the people had lost their reverence for God
before the change; or the change produced it.
I have observed that such irreverence is not confined to one people,
place, or country, among the Methodists. This is evident from the
manner the seats, &c., are constructed in our recently built sanctu-
aries. Hot a few of our chapels have no convenience for kneeling,
either for the congregation or minister. I can but believe that this
is a proof of the degenerate state of our Church.
A short time since I received a letter from a friend in a distant
colony, in which he said that on a certain Sunday just before he wrote
he preached at a certain place where the congregation sat during
public prayer. He added, that “he was almost disposed to leave the


chapel at once for he could not feel satisfied to be the mouth-piece to
address the great King for such an irreverent congregation.” It may
be that among our young ministers some one may be found to defend
the conduct of the congregation referred to, as one did on another
subject, when he said, “ We might as reasonably complain that time
is moving on and the world is a hundred years older than it was (in
Mr. Wesley’s day), or that the customs and costumes of the infancy
(of Methodism) are cast off by children of larger growth.”
Would it be becoming a petitioner to sit in the presence of an
earthly king while he urgently petitioned for a favor which if not
granted would be ruinous to him 1 How much more becoming is it
for those who have sinned against God, and in consequence have
exposed themselves to everlasting punishment, to sit in a careless
position while they are supplicating mercy and forgiveness from the
King Eternal, who will cast into hell if forgiveness is not obtained.
I know not that there is one example recorded in Scripture where
one sat while he made prayer to Almighty God. I know not of but
two instances recorded in Scripture, and that was a parable, where any
other position in prayer was referred to, but kneeling, except when
the petitioner was in extreme distress, when they more humbly
prostrated themselves on the ground. The Pharisee stood when he
addressed God to extol his own goodness, and the Publican, who was
ashamed to look up t<? heaven also stood while he imploringly cried
“ God be merciful to me a sinner.” King Solomon kneeled when he
uttered that most pathetic and comprehensive prayer. St. Paul
repeatedly referred to that position as it regarded himself and others ,
but it would appear that many of the Methodists of the present day,
and some of the ministers not excepted, think they are at liberty to
“ cast off' this children’s form of early Methodism and clad themselves
in the costume of children of larger growth,” and sit while they pray
to God in the public congregation.
There is a manifest difference in the earnestness of the Methodists
in prayer now, except in times of revival, to what there was in the
earlier days of Methodism. What hearty responses were heard from
the people to the petitions offered by the minister. But now rarely
is to be heard a feeble “Amen.” It was not so in the days of early
Methodism, nor is it so now when the people are much alive to the
importance of the religion of Christ in times of revival. God
commanded the children of Israel that on important occasions “ all
the people should say Amen.” What a burst must that have been when
over two hundred thousand men , besides all the women, said “ Amen ”
at the same time. But now, multitudes of our fastidious so called
Christians are shocked at such impropriety in the congregations as to
say Amen aloud. There is reason to believe that in all ages of the
Church of God, when it was in its purest state of life and vigour, all
the true worshippers of Jehovah said Amen aloud at the end of each
petition. There is but little reason to doubt that this was the case
in the Church of England ; but when religion had so declined from


its life and power that there was not any who would respond to the
minister ; one in the congregation was hired and paid out of the
Church rate to perform this important duty, regardless of his spiritual
qualification. I think it was the first time I received the sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper in the Church of England, the mercenary clerk
who said Amen, was drunk before he came to the Sanctuary. I am
glad to say that the good clergyman withheld from him the memorials
of the death and sufferings of Christ, but his conduct did not
disqualify him for the performance of the sacred duty, as he continued
in office. How far the congregations generally are satisfied with such
proxy prayers, I know not, but I shoukl be afraid to trust my eternal
salvation to such Ordinances. As it regards the mercenary hirelings
who say Amen to the prayers as proxy for the congregations, they do
it for a money consideration. “ Verily, they have their reward.”
As I have been incidentally led to a digression from the subject
about which I was writing, I shall now return to it again. Congre-
gational singiug was general in London, when I was there in 1838, as
well as in the country parts. 1 heard no other in City Road, Great
Queen’s Street, nor any other Chapel in the City. After the minister
had announced the page and read one verse, those in the congregation
who had hymn books, would find the hymn while the minister was
reading the verse. After that he would read two or three lines at a
time, according to the rhyme, when a precentor, who sat in a raised
desk in front of the pulpit, would raise a tune in which the congre-
gation would join, and sing the part of the verse which had been
read by the minister, and then he would read two or three lines
which would generally include all the remaining part of the verse ;
and in this way they would sing as many verses as the minister
would read. There was no musical instrument nor set choir of
singers : and as there was no instrumental music to drown the sound
of the words, they were distinctly heard so that all could join in the
sacred harmony of praising God in the sacred song. And though the
singers were scattered all over the chapels, I do not remember of
hearing a discord in one instance.
I will observe that I believe that there is more than one cause
which has a tendency to prevent congregational singing. One cause
in many places is a select choir in one end of the Chapel, with either
a band of instruments, harmonium, or an organ. lam not opposed
to either when the music is not so loud as to prevent hearing distinctly
the words uttered by the singers, which I think should be heard in
singing the praises of God in the congregations of his worshippers.
When the instrumental music is so loud that the words uttered by the
human voice cannot be distinguished plainly, it prevents to a great
extent that sacred influence of the song which the singing of a
congregation should produce. A scientific choir with instruments
have a tendency to affect the passions just the same as the music of
an opera does, and it passes off leaving just the same effects. The
heart is not affected as it frequently is when the congregation joins


in the sacred song. The isolated choir has not the effect of elevating
the soul to God as congregational singing has. I think it is more
than possible that Mr. Wesley saw the danger of unsanctified music
when he composed the 204th hymn in our hymn book. This is
evident from the strain of the whole hymn, particularly where he
says—
“Still let us on our guard be found,
And watch against the power of sound
With godly jealousy,
Lest haply sense should damp our zeal,
And music’s charms bewitch and steal
Our hearts away from Thee.”
It has been said that the power which the ancients possessed of
affecting the passions by instrumental music has been in a great
measure lost. I have either heard or read that there was a musician
among the ancients who by instrumental music could excite any
passion, from extatic joy to the deepest sorrow, even to furious
madness. It was said that a certain King hearing of his wonderful
ability sent for him to exercise in his presence. Soon after he
commenced, the king was excited to a state of bitter weeping. The
performer then altered the tone of his music and the king was
transported into a most extravagant fit of laughter. After this the
musician changed his tune, and the effect on the king was such that
he fell into a most furious rage so that he snatched the sword out of
the hand of one of his attendants and slew a man therewith.
Now, though I cannot go to the length on this subject as to believe
all that is represented in this tale, I do believe that the passions may
be excited by music to a very high pitch, even to hysterics and
faintings. I have been credibly informed that from eighty to a
hundred years since a company of musicians came from London to
Truro in Cornwall to perform. When they first struck off the music
it so excited the audience that there were shrieks and faintings all
over the house. Soon after I arrived to this colony, I was told .by
one of the early colonists, that while Governor McQuarie held the
reins of Government, a concert was got up, which was performed in
Parramatta Church. One piece had reference to the Judgment of
the last Day. After a pause in the music, the trumpets sounded a
most solemn blast, which caused such an excitement and shrieking
that induced the governor’s lady to rush out of her pew to put a stop
to the music lest serious consequences should be the result. I can
refer to a somewhat similar circumstance which came under my own
observation. I took a German flute and began to play some sacred
music in the presence of a little girl who had not been accustomed to
hear instrumental music. And though I was never a great proficient
in the art, it had such an effect on her feelings, that she jumped, and
skipped and laughed and cried alternately with excitement. Such
was the effect of instrumental music on her sensitive feelings.
On this subject I can affirm from my own personal feelings the
exciting effects to some extent which instrumental music has upon


the animal passions without affecting the heart. From infancy I had
a great passion for music. I was much excited on'only hearing the
twang of a fiddle string, when only touched by the finger to try the
sound, so that it would cause every joyous feeling to vibrate. And
after I became a man when less sensitive, a volume of music on my
ear would produce such an effect on my nerves, which I think must
have caused an overflowing of blood to the head so that the skin on
it felt so tight as if much contracted, and as if every hair stood as
erect as the quills on the back of an enraged porcupine. Such are
the effects on many minds quite independent of any religious feeling,
and it is quite possible that others less affected might be so pleased
and charmed with the sounds so as to lose the religious feelings which
had been produced by the other ordinances of divine worship ; hence
Mr. Wesley saw the danger of “ music’s charms stealing the heart
from God.”
Having given a description of the different systems of conducting
the service of song in the Wesleyan Churches for the last sixty years
under my own observation, I will now give my opinion as to which
I believe to be most conducive to spiritual worship.
Of all the systems which have come under my notice, I think with
Mr. Wesley that there is not one equal to congregational singing. In
order to promote this, set choirs of scientific singers should be dis-
pensed with. I wish it to be understood that I would not dispense
with all science in singing. By no means. I would advise that those
in the congregation who can sing meet occasionally for practice. By
so doing, discord would be prevented, which would occur without it,
as some tunes are sung differently in different places of worship; and
by such a practice, new tunes might be introduced occasionally ; but
the practiced singers should be scattered through the congregation
promiscuously during divine service, which would be naturally done
were the singers to sit in their family pews. This practice would
induce many to sing who otherwise would not if there were not one
or more singing near them who could sing with a degree of confidence;
for there are many who have good voices but have not sufficient con-
fidence in themselves to stand isolated in a congregation and give
vent to their voices. I have known this practice followed with good
effect in English congregations.
Though I have been passionately fond of instrumental music, I
could not recommend much of it in divine service. A single -instru-
ment of not a very loud tone might be a help in small congregations
where there are but a few singers ; but I cannot conceive that it is
so conducive to spiritual worship as the human voice. I have never
known nor heard of one soul converted to God through instrumental
music. Not so in “ singing hymns, and psalms, and spiritual songs,”
which have been the means of the conversion of many. I know not
one passage of Scripture where God has commanded instrumental
music to be used in divine worship, though a positive command is
given to use trumpets for the calling of the assemblies and for war-


like purposes. Instrumental music charms the ear and excites the
passions, which the music of an opera will do, but the heart is not
religiously affected thereby. Though but few enjoy instrumental
music more than I have, I can but wish that it had never been intro-
duced into Methodist Chapels. I believe the organ was first introduced
into a chapel in Leeds between fifty and sixty years ago, in conse-
quence of which hundreds, if not thousands, left our Church. I well
remember the excitement it caused in many of the Wesleyan Churches.
A few years since I was told that many who left on that occasion
went back again, some joined other Churches, and “ many went
back into the world.” The thought of that is grievous. It is not
improbable that many are now in eternal misery through the
introduction of the organ into that chapel. “ Offences will come but
woe unto him through whom they come.” {Luke, xvii. 1.) “ I
beseech you mark them which cause divisions and offences contrary
to sound doctrine which ye have learned of me and avoid them.”
[Rom. xvi. 17.; It is better never to hear the sound of instrumental
music than that it should, be the means of the destruction of one
soul. The use of musical instruments was not prohibited under the
ceremonial and figurative dispensation ; but there was a woe ! de-
nounced on them “ who chanted to the sound of the vial, and invent
to themselves instruments of music as David did.” {Amos, vi. 1. 5.)
“ All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient.”
(1 Cor. viii. 12.) “If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no
more flesh while the world standeth lest I make my brother to offend.”
(1 Cor. viii. 13.) 0 that all professing Christians were possessed of
the same spirit as the apostle Paul.
As I am an advocate for congregational singing it will be under-
stood that I am opposed to singing anthems in congregational
worship. Not because the music is not pleasing to the ear so as to
charm the hearer; but because a few only of the congregation can
intelligently join with the practiced choir, hence, the worship and
praises of God, which should come from the heart, are lost in the
sounds listened to. Let easy tunes be sung to the hymns, then those
members of the congregation who can sing, and are desirous to join
in this delightful service, will be able to join with the practiced
singers, and their aspirations after a heavenly feeling will ascend
from the singers to the throne of God, and a blessing will descend.
But if the congregation cannot join, the people may be pleased with
“ music’s charms,” but it is not likely that they will be profited.
I have seen some remarks by the Eev. Henry Ward Beecher on
the singing of the Wesleyans, which I think are worthy of being
published again, as he aptly described what Methodist singing was
when Methodism was in its most prosperous state, and the effect
which it had on the people, while he deplores the degenerate style of
the present day. He said, “By the way, yesterday. morning I was
in a Methodist Church here. A very pleasant room it is, and lam
told a very worthy society occupies it. But I have a most weighty


charge to bring against the good people, of musical apostacy. I had
expected a good hearty treat of good singing. There were Charles
Wesley’s hymns, and there were the good old Methodist tunes that
ancient piety loved and modern conceit laughs at! Imagine my
chagrin, after reading the hymn up rose a choir from a shelf at the
other end of the Church, and began to sing a monotonous tune of the
modern music book style. The patient congregation stood up to
be sung to, as men stand under rain when there is no shelter.
Scarcely a lip moved. No one seemed to hear the hymn or care for
the music. How I longed for the good Methodist thunder ! One
good burst of old fashioned music would have blown the modern
singing out of the windows like the wadding from the gun. Men
may call this an improvement, and genteel! Oentility lias nearly
killed our Churches, and it will kill the Methodist Churches if they
give up to its false and pernicious ambition. We know very well
what good old-fashioned Methodist music was.. It had its faults
enough doubtless against taste. But it had an inward purpose and
religious earnestness which enabled it to carry all its faults, and
triumph in spite of them ! It was worship. Yesterday’s music was
tolerable singing, but very poor worship. We are sorry that just
as our Churches are beginning to imitate the former example of the
Methodist Churches and to introduce melodies that the people love,
our Methodist brethren should pick up our cast off formalism in
Church music. It will be worse with them than with us. It will
mark a greater length of decline. We could hardly believe our
eyes and ears yesterday. We could hardly persuade ourselves
that we stood before a Methodist Church. We should have supposed
it to be a good old Presbyterian or Congregational Church, in which
the choirs and pulpit did every thing and the people nothing. Our
brethren must not take these remarks unkindly. They are presented
in all kindness and affection. The choir sung better than many choirs
in the city Churches, but no one sang wfith them. The people were
mute. They used their ears and not their mouths. But alas !we
missed the old fervour, the good old fashioned Methodist fire. We
have seen the time when one of Charles Wesley’s hymns, taking the
congregation by the hand, wmuld lead them up to the gate of heaven.
But yesterday it only led them to the choir, about ten feet above the
pews. This will never do. Methodists will make magnificent
worshipping Christians, if they are not ashamed of their own ways,
but very poor ones if they are. Brethren ! you are in the wrong
way. It will never do for you to silence the people. Your fire will
go out if you take it up under the ashes of false refinement. Let an
outsider, but a wellwisher, say these plain words without offence.
The Methodist Church has laid the Christian world under a great
debt by its services in the cause of Christ, and we have a right to it,
and an interest in it as common Christians, too great to suffer us to
see signs of degeneracy in it without sorrow and alarm. We hope
that God means to do great things by it yet for oui land. But it


will not be by giving up heart and soul, zeal and popular enthusiasm
in worship, for the sake of sham propriety and tasteful formalism,
that the Methodist Church will become yet more efficient. We hope
to see such a revival of religion among them as will come like a
freshet on their Churches and sweep out the channels of song, and
carry away the deadwood and trash which have already dammed up
the current of song, and made the congregation stagnant. 0 that there
may be a rain of righteousness upon them, which shall swell their
hearts to overflowing, and cleanse their sanctuary from all formalism,
and especially from the formalism of pedantic music !”
The Rev. H. W. Beecher is not the only one who sees the danger
that the Methodists are exposing themselves to by departing from
the original simplicity of Methodist music in their congregational
singing, though they have not the same quaint way of expressing
their thoughts. Not a few old Methodists mourn over the changes
which have taken place, under a conviction that • they have been
generally brought about by inexperienced young men and others
who attach greater importance to scientific singing, and other unne-
cessary changes, than they do to get souls converted to God.
In the various departures of the human family from God, as far
as the origin can be traced, it has commenced in small matters, unob-
served by the church generally, and where the particulars are
referred to individuals, it will be found that in most instances the
young were the first to advocate the changes, and it is said in
Scripture, that even “ the young men made the Lord’s people to
transgress.” This did the sons of Eli, and the sons of the prophet
Samuel “ did not walk in the ways of their father,” but it is not
necessary to our purpose to trace the falls of God’s people in all ages
to their origin, nor could it be done but in a few cases, as church
history on the subject is so brief in the Scriptures ; but enough is
recorded in the New Testament, and from observation in our own
day, to show that the fall of an individual or a church commences
with small beginnings. There is at first in the commencement of
decay a loss of spiritual strength. Not unfrequently it is seen in
dissatisfaction with the established ordinances. A change is desired,
or some obsolete rule should be renewed, sometimes by sincere wor-
shippers of. God, as was the case in the apostles’ days (Acts, xv), but
injurious to believers; and if not checked at the commencement, it
may subvert the whole gospel of Christ. By a reference to the second
and third chapters of the Revelation of St. John, we may discover
that the Churches to which he wrote did not fall suddenly into sin
so as to be forsaken of God, but they fell by degrees. God, seeing
their fallen and falling condition, in mercy inspired the apostle to
warn them of their dangerous states, if haply they would repent
before He would remove from them the privileges of the gospel. Many
good things remained in several of these Churches at the time, and
if they had taken warning from the apostle, and their successors had
remained faithful, no doubt their cities would have remained to this


day, and they would still have been lights in the world. But it
appears, from their present state, that they did not take the warnings,
and that the threatened judgments fell on them, so that for many
ages their Christian privileges have been removed from them and
these Churches have been extinguished, so that there is not a vestige
left of these ancient and once faithful Churches, and but for the
Scriptures it would not be known that they ever existed.
How necessary is it, then, that the first departure from God should
be detected and checked in the original embryo !
It can be seen in church history that the first establishment of tho
Churches of God have been the most pure and holy seasons. After
a while, changes have been introduced which have gone on increasing
until the institutions have become so changed and corrupted that, in
some cases, there has been scarcely any semblance of what it was in
its original state.
Before any changes should be sanctioned in church government or
the forms of worship, it would add to its safety to ascertain from
whom the propositions originated. If it were with those who had
been conspicuous in their lives for devotedness to the service of God
and had been instruments of spiritual good to others, and are known
to be judicious in matters pertaining to the Church of Christ, there
would not be so much danger in supporting their views as if the
changes are proposed by inexperienced young men : but even then,
changes from the usages of a Church when it was in its purest state
are attended with a danger of corruption ; for the most devoted
servants of God are not so perfect as to be free from error.
In reference to the changes referred to, as far as I can trace their
origin they commenced with the young, and in most cases when the
Church was in a low state of grace ; or, at least, the promoters of
the changes were anything but conspicuously useful members of the
Church, and as there did not anything appear decidedly sinful in
some of the changes proposed, those of a better mind submitted to
them without a hearty opposition or remonstrance, though they were
contrary to Mr. Wesley’s rules and the long-continued usages, and
the more recent resolutions and instructions of the English
Conference, “ the fountain of authority.”
It was not long after the resolution in “ the fountain of authority ”
referred to, that some of the young ministers of these Colonies pro-
posed the change at the Melbourne Conference, which was carried
after much contention. The change was effected in the chapel in
which I worshipped by two presuming young men, regardless of
former usages, resolutions of the Conference, and the feelings of the
aged. When these forward youths were so persistent in singing the
■.verse through without a rest, the ministers submitted to it without a
remonstrance ;in doing so I can but think they erred. It clearly
shewed a disregard for the feelings of many of the aged, some of
whom they knew were strongly opposed to the change; showing


more consideration for the caprice of the young than the long-con-
firmed opinion of many of those who had “ borne the burden and
heat of the day.” Had our ministers openly stated from the pulpit
the rule and resolutions of the Conferences, and the desire of many
of our congregations, I believe they might have prevented such an
insulting course of conduct; for, with all the effrontery of these
young men, I am persuaded that they would not have so insulted our
ministers as to persist in such a course after a remonstrance from
them. In confirmation of my opinion I will refer to an instance
when a congregation sang through a verse without a rest. The old
man who was conducting the service requested that the singers would
permit him to read the verses in parts as they sang, and his request
was attended to without apparent offence.
In another chapel the congregation repeatedly sang the verse
through without a rest. Perceiving their apparent determined per-
sistence, he suddenly closed the book in such an abrupt manner that
the singers appeared to be taken by surprise. I believe that on this
occasion if the old man who was conducting the service had requested
them to attend to the ancient rule they would have done it. I have
no doubt that if all our ministers had a sincere respect for Methodism
as Mr. Wes It-y left it, and the recent resolutions of our Conferences,
and had opposed the change from the pulpits, the breach of this
establisned rule would have been checked at its commencement. I
do not wonder at nor blame other churches following their rules,
who from custom from generation to generation are attached to the
usage of their fathers in this matter. Nor do I think it strange that
even Methodists who have been accustomed to it for years should
prefer it (for even evil habits will create attachments) rather than
return to good old Methodist rules ; but I repeat that 1 cannot think
it is “ the most excellent way,” and that it is one of the first imper-
ceptible steps of a declining Church, when they are desirous for a
change.
Then again, as it regards the introduction of the word Church,
instead of chapel, the writer of these lines Would never have thought
of opposing it, had he not thought the change was prompted by the
vanity of the mind. In this instance it was introduced by young
men. As far as I have been able to ascertain the change first became
general among the Methodists in Victoria. And if the state of- the
Church there were such as the late Rev. Robert Young represented it
to be, I do not wonder at their “casting off the garments of the
children of early Methodism and adopting the fashions of the children
of larger growth.”
When that reverend gentleman visited these Colonies as a deputa-
tion from the English Conference, he said that he found the Methodist
Church in Melbourne in such a deplorably low state, that he thought
something must he done to arouse it from that state into which it
had fallen; and as there were no authorised means to which he


could have recourse, he took upon himself the responsibility of taking
one of the ministers from his circuit in Sydney, in the middle of the,
year, contrary to rule, as he thought he was the most likely person
to arouse the languishing Church. Whether the desired end were
answered or no, I know not. His stay there was short, as he returned
to Sydney again after one year.
Is there no possibility of causing a reaction and in some measure
leading Wesleyans back to the simplicity and godly sincerity of old
Methodism ? How can this possibly be done ? I can conceive of no
way but by the most earnest. Methodists and devoted Christians in
that section of the Church of God, rising up and by both precept
and example stem the torrent. But where are there any among the
most earnest Christians in our church who mourn over these depart-
ures, that have sufficient resolution to dare to be singular ? Are
there any among the female part of the Wesleyan Church who have
sufficient courage to be so singular as to depart from the vain con-
formity to the world of fashion, and to return to the simplicity of
the dress of the early Methodists? Are there any among our
ministers who have courage enough to stand up and contend for the
usages of ancient Methodism ? Are there any among them who will
oppose the vanity of using the word Church instead of Chapel because
(as it was said by the reverend editor of the Melbourne Chronicle),
“ the word is more honorable ?” If there are any who have courage
enough to oppose these innovations and changes, let them stand up
and “ fight the battles of the Lord ” valiantly.
But some may say, “ Why attack these petty things which are of
no importance, such as saying Church instead of Chapel, or reading
the whole verse of a hymn at once, or reading but a part, and be
silent on the gross sins ?” In reply I would say, it is often easy to
stop the dribbling of a small stream, but it is generally .impossible
to stop it when it becomes a torrent. Noxious weeds are more easily
eradicated out of the ground if the seeds can be found and destroyed,
or when the plants have not acquired strength by growth. The oak
was once but a delicate plant which sprung from an imperceptible
living germ in the acorn, which might have been easily destroyed
when first developing itself as a plant; but by growth without a
check it becomes a sturdy tree that resists the violent blasts of the
rao-iim storm. So in church matters, diseases may be more easily
checked when the first symptoms appear than when they have become
Chronic. Great evils result from small beginnings, which might
have been prevented, easily, in the early stages, that are impossible to
overcome after they have acquired strength—hence, I wish to com-
mence with the seed and destroy the germ. The Rev. H. W. Beecher
said “ The devil seldom tempts a real Christian to outright wicked-
ness’. The evil commences in what appears indifferent. The heart
would revolt against open vice, but he tempts them to the basest
deeds by beginning with innocent ones, gliding to more exception-
able, and when the mind is lulled to sleep by them, he tempts them


to positively wicked ones. The beginning and end are fatally con-
nected together with almost imperceptible attraction. The first steps
to wickedness are imperceptible. That part of the garden which
borders on innocence is carefully planted. ”*
The reverend gentleman’s opinions are as applicable to Churches
as to individuals, so that it is necessary to watch the symptoms in
order to detect the commencement of a decay, and check it before it
becomes irreparable. Had this been done in the earlier ages of the
Christian Church, there would not have been any corrupted sections
of it as there have been and still are ; nor would there have been so
many divisions, but all who believe in Christ Jesus as the Saviour of
sinners would have been of one heart and soul.
In tracing the divisions which have taken place in Christian
Churches, it appears evident that it has generally' been when tli3y
have been in a low state of grace and in a falling condition. Good
men have seen and deplored it, and because they have not been able
to effect a reform in it, they have separated from the main body and
preached the gospel under a reformed system. There is no doubt
among Protestants that this was the case when Luther and his asso-
ciates separated from the Church of Rome. But few enlightened
Christians will deny that this was the case when Wesley, Whitfield,
and their associates, were driven from the Church of England ; and,
as far as I have been able to ascertain, other separations which have
taken place have been from the same cause, unless when it has been
occasioned by different opinions or doctrines. The Rev. Dr. Adam
Clarke saw something of this in his day, which led him on one
occasion to say, in the pulpit in City Road Chapel, that “he felt
assured that, as there were such changes in Methodism, not long
hence there would be a great schism in that Church,” and he exclaimed,
with tears in his eyes, “ May God grant that I may not live to see
it.” His prayer was answered ; but not long after his death the great
separation took place which was headed by the Rev. Messrs. Everett
and party. I have no doubt these ministers held the same view on
the subject. I had never any acquaintance with either of them, but
I was told by one of our ministers, who now (in 1877) labors in New
South Wales, that Mr. Everett was a good man. He saw errors
creeping into the Church, which he endeavored to correct; but as he
could not do it in the old section he resolved to separate from it, and
endeavor to effect a reform in a new section. When these divisions
are occasioned by good men, in the end they effect a great good.
But in general, in the first separation there are a great many who
join them that would not benefit any section of the Christian Church,
but I cannot conceive that any argument can be derived from this in
proof that the leaders are in error, for there are none who can dis-
cover defects in others sooner than barren professors, hence they are
among the first to discover errors in the church, though it is frequently
* Lectures to Young Men.


the case that many of those who most readily discover defects in
others are more defective in their own conduct than those of whom
they complain. These are often the most zealous in the secession,
and it is generally some years before the new sect is purified of them,
but they mostly drop off before long, and while this state of things
lasts there is rarely any increase to the number of seceders, but when
it is purified of these weeds the sect often prospers, so that I believe
these secessions do good in the end. In the first instance they
remove unprofitable and useless professors from the original church ;
the faithful are stirred up to watch over those that remain ; they
labor more diligently and earnestly for conversions from the world ;
and it prevents the ruling members from exercising undue authority
over their brethren. The Pew section labors also for an increase of
numbers in the salvation of souls, so that ultimately great good
results from what at first are painful schisms.
For many years some of the old members from our fatherland have
apprehended a declension in the Wesleyan Church in Hew South
Wales. They have thought that the changes which have taken place
have proceeded from unholy desires. Not that they thought there
was evil in all the changes, if they had been prompted by proper
motives; but as they thought that the motives which prompted
them proceeded from an impure principle, evil would be the result.
As I have already referred to these unprofitable changes, I shall not
enter into details again, but will name a few of them without further
argument.
First, there is a full conformity to the world in dress, by following
the newest fashions however ridiculous. In connection with this,
carnal amusements are followed with avidity. This leads to unprofit-
able associations. With but few exceptions there was no separation
from those who knew not God ; no “ coming out ” from the ungodly,
no zeal manifested for the salvation of souls, no godly “ shining
light.”
Then there is the alteration in the nomenclature of our. church
buildings, such as from Chapel to Church, because “it is more
•respectable.” These things may be thought by some to be of too
trifling a character to be taken notice of, but do not trifles constitute
perfection. Some of our old Methodists thought from the beginning
that these changes were prompted by vanity, as they were adopted
and contended for by the young professors only, who were never
conspicuous in the Church for usefulness.
Then again, there is the reading the whole of each verse of a hymn
before any part of it had been sung, instead of reading and singing
one part first and afterwards reading and singing the other part for
the benefit of those who cannot read or have not hymn books, as Mr.
Wesley, in his clear discernment for good, adopted contrary to all
former precedent. I will again repeat that I do not believe that
there would be any evil in such changes did they not proceed from


an unholy motive, which is productive of evil from first to last. As
it regards reading the whole of each separate verse without a stop,
though it might not be sinful under some circumstances, I believe it is
never “ the most excellent way ” at any time, because of the unlearned
in the congregations and those who have not books. Many good
people like it, and they innocently think it the best; but this is no
conclusive argument that it is so, as from habit people may become
so attached to any form in preference to another which would be
more conducive to spiritual prosperity. I have no doubt our ministers
did not apprehend any danger of evil resulting from the changes,
though they must have observed that they were introduced by inex-
perienced young men, some of whom were devoid of the saving
power of the religion of Christ. This should have been a sufficient
reason to induce them to oppose all such changes and innovations,
which would not be likely to be conducive to the spread of the
gospel and the salvation of souls. But, instead of this, they conceded
to the caprice of the young, regardless of the feelings of the aged
who had borne the burden and heat of the day for over fifty years.
They did not so much as say, “ Why do ye these things 1” They
seemed to possess too much of the spirit of good old Eli, who, rather
than exercise the authority which he possessed, suffered the young
men to have their own way, though the consequences might result in
evil which they would not anticipate. The commencement is like
“ the letting out of waters.” This is clearly seen in the present day.
Those who are given to change are not satisfied with these minor
changes which have taken place ; they must go further, so that now,
in these Colonies, they are contending for giving up class-meetings as
a test of membership, with many other changes. It is not only the
private members of our church who propose these changes, but some
of our ministers also. The changes which were proposed in the
last district meetings (in 1877) in the various districts of the Aus-
tralian and New Zealand colonies, if carried out, would leave our
Church almost without the semblance of old Methodism. This is
now seen and deplored by some of bur more aged ministers, and the
proposed changes were opposed by them in the last Conference, so
that one may hope that the changes proposed (which one of our aged
ministers said were “ terrible ”) will not be effected. The cause and
effects of the present state of things appear to be apprehended by
our ministers generally. They discover the effects as seen in the
decrease of the number of church members year after year, with
increased numbers of chapels and ministers, and the arrival of tens
of thousands of immigrants, many of whom were members of the
Methodist Church in our fatherland. The good President of our
Conference for the present year (1878) in his pastoral address, sor-
rowfully referred to the decrease of Church members. He said, “In
reviewing our work in the past year, we have much to call for our
gratitude to the great Head of the Church, and that encourages us
in our ministerial labors; but we find one fact which causes us mucfi


sorrow and discouragement. New churches are built where none
previously existed, and larger and more suitable ones supply those
which had become inadequate; commodious parsonages are multi-
plied ; the number of our Sunday-schools is enlarged ; new congre-
gations are gathered, and in many instances old ones are augmented ;
but those who are truly saved are not added to the Church in the
same proportion.* Many conversions have taken place through the
year, but they have not been sufficiently numerous to supply the
vacancies in our ranks by death and other causes ; and in consequence
we have to report a small numerical decrease. The fact we deeply
deplore : it has led to many searchings of heart, and, we trust, to
true humiliation before God. The course of the Methodist Church
in this colony, with few exceptions, has been a progressive one ; and
any decrease in this respect causes much regret. But we trust that
this decrease does not really indicate a decline in our spiritual power or
Christian zeal, either in us or you ; for we deeply feel that no amount
of external prosperity will in any way compensate for the loss of reli-
gious life. Both the Church and its ministry exist for the salvation of
men; and if this great end is not secured they utterly fail in their
mission.”
Our worthy President righteously mourns over the decrease of
Church members in the past year ; but he did not enter into statistics
nor refer to any other year since the last Intercolonial Conference,
which was five years before. Had he done so he would have had
other causes for sorrow ; for during the five years of separation
from the other colonies, in several of these years,' with an occasional
small increase of a few members, at the end of these years there
were sixty eight members less in number than there were five years
before. The editor of the Wesleyan Advocate (the only Wesleyan
organ in this colony) entered minutely into the statistics of 1873 and
1878, the first and last years of the quinquennium, from which I
extract the following, from the number of March 23rd, 1878.
The editor says, “ The last Intercolonial Conference was held in
Sydney in 1873, and it was cheerfully anticipated that the new order
of things would bring in a fresh tide of prosperity. ' Leaving the
Missions out of consideration, we find that the two colonies (New
South Wales and Queensland) had sixty nine circuits with ministers
appointed to them. This year there are seventy six, an increase of
seven in five years. In the stations for 1873 we find the names of
90 ministers, supernumeraries, and preachers on trial, this year we find
107, an increase of 17. This teaches us that ministers are increasing
faster than circuits. There is an increase of four supernumeraries,
which reduces the increase of ministers in active work to thirteen.
“ The membership returns of 1873 are 6238, with 559 on trial,
while to the late Conference there were 6170 with 548 on trial. This
* This is “Temporal prosperity and Spiritual decline.”


is a pitiful outcome of five years’ labor in two prosperous and growing
colonies.
“At the Conference of 1873 the district meetings reported for the
two colonies an aggregate of 276 Church and 418 other preaching
places—a total of 685 congregations. This year they report 310
Churches and 381 other preaching places—a total of 691 congrega-
tions, only a net increase of six congregations in five years. During
that quinquennium both colonies have enjoyed a high degree of
prosperity. Can any one then say that an increase of six congregations
measures the possible aggressive energies of the Church during that
period 1 Who is prepared to make such a pitiful confession of our
organic weakness as that ? We are not. Methodist theology preached
with apostolic fervour and with the assurance of the power of the
Holy Ghost, will do now what it has done in former days ; it will
do here what it has done elsewhere. Methodist ordinances lovingly and
faithfully administered will be found as suited to conserve and culture
spiritual life, and to stimulate religious activities in these two colonies
as in other parts of the world. The figures we are now lamenting
say nothing against our Church, but do they say nothing against us ?
In 1873 the District Meetings of New South Wales and Queensland
report to the Conference a total of 355 local preachers; this year
they are reported 351, a decrease of four preachers in five years.
Here is a positive decrease. How is this ? Does not God call men
to the work in these days and in this colony 1 Surely he does ! Is
there not a grand and widening sphere for lay preaching in a country
which is being populated ? Is there a better field for this kind of
work in the world than is afforded in the Australian colonies ?
Returning to the statistics, it is satisfactory to find that there is an
increase of 43 Churches [Chapels]. The preaching places have
decreased 37.” I cannot see that the increase of “ Churches ” says
anything in our favor. They might be as numerous as Mosques in
Turkey ; and as many members as there are Mahometans, or as the
members of any fallen, superstitious Christian Church; but this
would be but an evil in the world if we had not an increase of
spiritual life ; of living members having Christ formed in their heart
the hope of glory.
Our editor adds, “We have seen that there is a quinquennium
decrease in the full and accredited membership of 68 ; we might gather
therefrom that there would be a decrease of class leaders. Against
411 in 1873 we find only 362 in 1878, a decrease of 49 ! This is a
startling fact—a sensational one if you will. To pass lightly over it
would be ta show ourselves utterly incapable of appreciating a
condition of the Church which ought to provoke our most solemn
thought and fervent prayer. We submit that when among the fruits
of a great denomination there is a falling off in spiritual workers—
the lay preachers, and class leaders, the lay pulpit and lay pastorate
—it is impossible for intelligent men to feel an exaggerated anxiety.
Turning to Sunday Schools we find 265 in 1878 against 276 in 1873


—a decrease of 11. But the decrease is redeemed by an increase of
2,135 scholars, the total being 15,532 in 1573, against 17,667 in
1878. Taking the whole contrast it is an unfavorable one. The
anticipations which were entertained when the annual Conferences
were established have not been realised.”
Thus far I have quoted from the statistics in the Wesleyan organ
in this colony. I might continue to quote further showing an increase
of the number of “ Churches” (Chapels), the reduction of Church
debt and other minor considerations ; but what avails that, if souls
are not saved. There must be a cause for such a falling off in the
statistics. As our editor says, “ Methodist theology preached with
apostolic fervour, and with the assurance of the power of the Holy
Ghost, will do now what it has done in former days. It will do here
what it has done elsewhere.” As a proof of what it can still do when
the ordinances are faithfully administered by the agents of Methodism,
we have only to refer to what has been done in our Churches under
the direction of the English Conference. In one of the committee
meetings held in London just before the Conference of 1376, Sir
Francis Lycett said, “ Ten years since there were 42 ministers in the
Metropolis ; now there are 105. Then there were 14,000 members ;
now there are upwards of 23,000.” As a further proof of the
efficiency of Methodism, I will also refer to the increase of the
number of Church members returned to the English Conference, which
in the last two years was 25,000. I will ask, —what is the cause of
the decrease of Church members in these colonies within the last
five years 1 Great Britain and Ireland have sent forth hundreds of
thousands of emigrants within that time, doubtless many of them
members of the Wesleyan Church ; thus deducting from the numbers,
and with all, there has been an increase of tens of thousands added
to the Church members. During the same period thousands upon
thousands have been added to the population of these colonies by the
arrival of immigrants, many of whom were Wesleyans before they
left their native lands. Our population has also increased consider-
ably by the number of births over the number of deaths in the same
time, and with all, we have a decrease in the number of our Church
members. * •
In 1873, the combined districts returned 459 on trial for the last
quarter of the year, and 548 returned on trial to the last Conference.
Taking an average of these two years,, those who were admitted
on trial in the last quarter of each year would be over 550. Taking
the average of the four quarters to be equal to the last quarter of
each year, the return of each year would have been 2,200, making
the total number in five years, 11,000. According to rule no member
should be kept on trial over three months, so that for the numbers
admitted on trial there should have been admitted into full member-
ship in the five years that number (11,000). Allowing for the deaths
which took place, which would be but few compared with the numbers
admitted on trial, all these should have been an increase to our


Church. With all these and those who came from Europe as
Wesleyans, and others who should have been gathered in from
among the immigrants who came to the colonies unconnected with
our Church, we had 68 less in 1878 than in 1873. AVhat has become
of them 1 Have they gone back into the world ? This is a most
startling and grievous question. They are gone from us and why ?
We ought to have had an increase to our Church members of as many
as had been admitted on trial during that time ; for the number who
came to the colonies as Wesleyans should have made up the loss by
deaths, but instead of an increase, we have a decrease. Why is this
the case ? We have gospel preaching and people’s hearts have been
affected, which is evident from the numbers who have been admitted
on trial for Church membership, but they have left us. Have they
been properly shepherded 'l Have they been rightly taught after they
have joined our Church 1 I fear in many instances they have not.
Carnal amusements have been too much encouraged by some of our
ministers. They see no harm in seeking pleasure in that which is
not spiritual. They not only do not discourage that which, though
not directly sinful, has a tendency to deaden the mind to spiritual
things ; but they join in these questionable amusements with the
uninitiated, by which they are “ led captive by the devil at his will.
It has been often said, “ What harm is there in such innocent
amusements 1” That question should never be asked by a Christian.
It should be asked, What good is there in them 1 . And the “ more
excellent way ” should be followed \ and that which is doubtful snould
be discarded. But this has not been done ; hence the loss of strength
and success in our Church.
Injury is not only done thereby to our young members, who have
been recently brought into our Church ; its evil effects may be seen
among our ministers also. W hat else is the cause of so many having
left our Church 1 Some have gone into other Churches, others have
entered into secular engagements, and I fear some have become
supernumeraries while they might have efficiently preached the
gospel without injury to their physical system, and while retired
from the ministry I believe some of them have engaged in profitable
secular employments. With the abilities with which God had
endowed them, ought they not to have felt, like the apostle Paul,
when he said, “ Woe unto me if I preach not the gospel.” Had they
felt so, they would have used the talents which God had given them
in endeavoring to win souls to Christ as long as their physical strength
would enable them.
Though I thus write, I wish it to be understood that I believe some
of our ministers have continued preaching the gokpel when then-
physical state of health would have justified their retiring for rest
to stop the progress of decay and to renew their strength.
Seeing we are retrograding as a Church, let. us try to discover the
cause. We want a baptism of the Holy Spirit, but I believe that
will not be given until the members of our Church be convinced of


the evil of indulging in the doubtful amusements, not a few of which
are sanctioned by some of our ministers and other leading members
of the Church. Let all who deplore this state of things pray ear-
nestly that God may pour out the Holy Spirit on our drooping
Church, so that its members may receive a baptism from on high,
and that it may be invigorated and raised to its original sincerity
and earnestness. Then we shall see prosperity as in the days of yore.
Those who have observed the declining state of our Church must
have observed that in proportion as its rules and usages have been
departed from, so has spirituality declined. Amusements have not
only been sanctioned by those who should have been watchmen in
the Church of God, and have checked every deviation in the bud,
but they have been encouraged both by precept and example, which
have been the means of the present deplorable state of our Church.
Being convinced of this, I can but urge upon its members the neces-
sity of returning to its original usages and practices, as Mr. Wesley
left them. Without it, I can have no hope of seeing prosperity
return.
Since writing the foregoing, an article has appeared in the Weekly
Advocate, of July 13th, 1878, on “ Amusements.” After representing
Christians of the old stamp as “ an austere class, who condemn and
adjure all amusements,” the writer adds, “ Happily the religious sen-
timent on this subject is becoming marked with a more robust
common-sense.” After making this statement, he refers to various
amusements which it appears he would recommend that professors
should mix with their religion. He says, “ A man now may take
part in a cricket match without being regarded as fallen from grace ;
he may go out with his gun in the morning, and attend a _ prayer-
meeting in the evening, without being suspected of hypocrisy ;he
may row, run, bowl or bat, and not be shunned as a son of Satan.
This has been and is the religious sentiment of many of the leading
Methodists of New South Wales, and the consequences are now seen
by many in the want of success in our Church and increase to our'
numbers. Some of the old Methodists from our fatherland have
deplored this state of things for many years. More than forty years
since a Methodist from England saw the drifting of our Church, and
he was so affected by it that he raised a warning voice against it in a
letter on the subject to the late Rev. Joseph Orton, urging the neces-
sity of putting a check on such amusements as were followed by our
Church members, lest that state of things should come to pass which
we now see. All professing Christians should be “ followers of God.”
Can it be supposed that if Christ were now upon earth as He was in
the days of His humanity, that he would follow these amusements of
the “ robust kind” with “ ball, bat and gun,” which have been
recommended in our Methodist Press 1 And if not, no professed
follower of Him should take part in them. Good Major Vandeleur
said, in reference to himself, “ Let me never be found where I could
not expect to meet my Saviour if here still a man on earth ; where I


could not ask Him to be present in spirit now ; where I could not be
occupied in seeking an opportunity offered to win souls to Him, or
where I should like Him to find me when coming suddenly.” This
good soldier of the cross was some years under a cloud in respect to
amusements after he had known something of the love of God in
Christ, before he saw clearly what was his duty in respect to them,
but after having been fully convinced of his duty, he resolutely went
in the straight path.
Captain Hedley Vicars said, “ I tell you, candidly and solemnly,
that I would willingly part with every earthly pleasure for life, for
one hour’s communion with Jesus. There is no delight in this
world equal to that which we feel when the Saviour is near.” These
are the feelings of all who are right with God; and in order to keep
them alive they will be constantly “ looking to God their souls to
keep, and watching unto prayer,” and they will eschew all such
amusements as have been recommended by the writer referred to in
the Weekly Advocate, and will seek healthful exercises in something
more profitable to both body and soul, and where they cannot be
contaminated by the company and example of those who know not
God.
From reports which we have received through the press, there is
great reason to believe that many hundreds will be added to our
church in the colonies during the present year. From the latest
accounts which have been published we have been informed that
great numbers, both in the New South Wales aud Victorian circuits,
have been added in the special services which have been held. We
rejoice over it, but our joy is greatly marred by the apprehension of
a falling back. For many years there have been special services held
in various chapels, where numbers have joined our Church rejoicing
in God j but with all, at the end of each year there has been little or
no increase to the number of our Church members, which is seen in
our statistical returns. With the many thousands who have joined our
Church within the last five years, at the end we have had a decrease.
I have lost all hope of seeing a'permanent increase until there be
different opinions instilled into the minds of the members of our
Church than those which are encouraged by those who contend for
the religion which they say “ is becoming marked by a more robust
common-sense ” than old Methodism, so that a professor “ may row,
run or bat without being shunned as a son of Satan.” These amuse-
ments, with some of a like kind and some much more ridiculous, have
been followed in this colony for many years, and I have no doubt
they have been the cause of the want of prosperity. Encouraging
them among the members of a Christian Church is like throwing
water upon a kindling flame. Though there may be no sin in some
of them in themselves, they are so much in accordance with the
spirit of the world that they have a tendency to draw the heart from
God and heavenly and divine things ; hence, the only safe way is to
avoid everything that does not tend to some good and is without a


danger of imbibing a spirit which is averse to the religion of Christ,
and seek all necessary bodily exercise in that in which there is no
danger of imbibing the spirit of the world. In order that the
children of Israel should guard against idolatry, they were commanded
to “ make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be
heard out of their mouth ” ( Exodus , xxiii. 13). I do not expect to
see prosperity again, such as we ought to expect from our numbers
and appliances, until we return to original Methodism as Mr. Wesley
left it.
After I had written most of the foregoing, I handed the
manuscript to the ministers of our circuit to read, that I might
have their opinion, lest for want of a clearer discernment, I should
have made statements which cannot be borne out by fact, and which
lam willing to alter if it can be shewn that lam in error. I got no
opinion expressed but by one (who is a good man) who gave his in
writing, with much of which I agree, but he also said (with which I
cannot agree), “ That for Methodism to have remained as Mr. Wesley
left it would have been a huge calamity. By this time it would have
dwindled into a very insignificant sect, exercising little or no influence
in the world; while the vast work which Methodism has accom-
plished and is accomplishing would either have been left undone, or
would have been done by other and wiser men.”
This was a startling statement to me, as I believe quite the con-
trary. I believe that had Methodism remained as Mr. Wesley left it
it would have accomplished far more good than has been done, and
would be more efficient in accomplishing good, now and in future,
than it has with the changes which have taken place. Though some
of them may have been beneficial, I believe that the good which has
been accomplished by them, has been more than counterbalanced by
the injury which has been occasioned by the changes which have
taken place. It appears that most of these changes which have been
effected since Mr. Wesley’s death, have been done in conformity to
the world, or to be like some other Church, like Israel of old, who
would have a king like the nations about them ; and in some cases
to gratify some young inexperienced persons with but little of the
love of God in their hearts, and, in not a few instances, not any. I
can remember attending Wesleyan ordinances to within twenty years
after Mr. Wesley’s death, and I know not of any rule which he
adopted or recommended which I think would have benefited the
Church had it been repealed. As far as he went, I believe he was so
guided by an overruling Providence that his plans could not be altered
for the benefit of the Church. If he had lived till now, I have no
doubt he would have added to his rules and effected changes as altered
circumstances would have suggested, but, would not have reversed
any rule or usage which he had previously adopted.
I have been tolcl that there have been great changes in the Mother
Church in England since I left it, especially in conformity to the world
in dress, by which there has.been a great departure from Methodism


as Mr. Wesley left it. Some of our ministers contend for it by saying
that “ they have put off the garments of childhood, and clad them-
selves in a more manly costume,” as one said in reference to other
changes. If there have been such changes in the land of both my
natural and spiritual birth, I wish to raise a warning voice against
them, and will venture to say that unless they return to original
Methodism, in a few years the same consequences will result from
the changes that are mourned over here. The door into the Church
may be thrown open for the admission into it of all who wish to call
themselves Methodists, so that the number may be increased tenfold ;
but its power to convert souls from sin to holiness will be diminished.
Until there be a baptism of the Spirit of God there will be no
prosperity.


6i6Lto
Fio^i
A/ ccij^
~ Zfr
FRED. H. EARLE,




