

Handbook No. 6
AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
HANDBOOK,
WITH MAP.
ISSUED BY THE
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.
Note I.—This Office has been established under the supervision
of the Colonial Office for the purpose of supplying intending
Emigrants with useful and trustworthy information respecting
Emigration to the British Colonies. The information issued to the
public is mainly obtained from the various Colonial Governments
and their representatives in this country. No pains are spared to
make the information as accurate as possible, but the Committee of
Management cannot undertake to hold themselves responsible for
the absolute correctness of every detail.
Note 2. —The figures given in this Handbook do not always
correspond with those given in the Australasian Colonies Circular,
which should be read with this. The circular is revised quarterly.
LOND O N :
PRINTED FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
BY EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE,
PRINTERS TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
And to be purchased at the Office, 31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.; or from
EYRE and SPOTTISWOODE, East Harding Street, Fleet Street, E.C.; or
ADAM and CHARLES BLACK, 0, North Bridge, Edinburgh ; or
HODGtES, FIGGIS, & Co., 104, Grafton Street, Dublin,
April 1889.
Price One Penny .
uHfiisTiAN knowledge sooiet '








AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
HANDBOOK,
WITH MAP.
ISSUED BX THE
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
31, Broadway, Westminster, SW.
Note I. — This Office has been established under the supervision
of the Colonial Office for the purpose of supplying intending
Emigrants with useful and trustworthy information respecting
Emigration to the British Colonies. The information issued to the
public is mainly obtained from the various Colonial Governments
and their representatives in this country. No pains are spared to
make the information as accurate as possible, but the Committee of
Management cannot undertake to hold themselves responsible for
the absolute correctness of every detail.
Note 2.— The figures given in this Handbook do not always
correspond with those given in the Australasian Colonies Circular,
which should be read with this. The circular is revised quarterly.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
BY EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE.
PRINTERS TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
And to be purchased at the Office, 31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.; or from
EYRE and SPOTTISWOODE, East Harding Street, Fleet Street, E.C. ; or
ADAM and CHARLES BLACK, 6, North Bridge, Edinburgh ; or
HODGES, EIGGIS, & Co., 104 Graeton Street, Dublin,
April 1889.
Price One Penny.




WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Western Australia was first settled in 1829. The colony is Description,
bounded on the east by South Australia, and on other sides by
the ocean. It has an area of about 1,000,000 square miles, or
about eight times as large as that of Great Britain and Ireland,
There are six land divisions—viz., South-West, Gascoyne,
North-West, Kimberley, Eucla, and Eastern.
The coast is more or less rocky from West Mount Barren to Eucla
Cape Arid, between which a few small streams flow into the sea. Division.
The interior of the division has been partially explored, and some
salt lakes discovered; but for the most part it is unknown and
uninhabited. There are some considerable pasture lands in the
neighbourhood of Esperance Bay, and behind the clitfs that con-
nect C. Pasley with Israelite Bay; the Hampton plains are also
said to be fit for pasture.
The vast central part of this division is a desert. So far as it The Eastern
has been explored it appears to be a level expanse of sandstone Division.
with some granite elevations and depressions forming hills and
pools, the surface being covered by what is locally known as
spinifex, and thinly wooded with belts of mulga and other shrubs,
and occasional white gum trees near the pools of water. No
rivers water these extensive regions, which offer but little at-
traction to settlers. On the western side of this district is
situated what is called the Lake District. It consists of an
undulating surface of granite rocks, interspersed with lakes of
greater or smaller extent according to the rainfall. A considerable
portion of this district is after rains richly grassed, and has been
utilised for grazing sheep and cattle, but as rain falls at very
irregular periods and often at long intervals, it is unfit for agri-
cultural purposes. Long belts of a thick but low growth of small
Eucalypti are found crossing it at intervals. It may probably be
found hereafter rich in minerals. The extreme western border of
the Eastern Division is separated from the South-West Division
by the elevated watersheds of the rivers, the valleys of which open
to the coasts of the Colony. Here again there are some consider-
able stretches of land which afford good pasturage for sheep,
cattle, and horses. No wheat or other cereals are grown.
/ 58419.


The Murchison is a large river for Western Australia. In its
lower and middle courses it winds through an irregular valley rich
in minerals for more than 100 miles in a direct line without an
affluent. In the upper valleys it has several affluents, the San-
ford, Impey, and Roderick, the valleys of which have an extent
of from 100 to 200 miles. In ordinary seasons the Murchison is
dry or consists of occasional pools of water; but in times of flood
a great volumn of water is poured down to the sea. The plains
above the head waters of the Murchison and to the east of the
Greenough are being rapidly occupied by sheep farmers. There
is not much grass except near the rivers, but there is plenty of
salt-bush and mulga on which sheep do well; there are also
large numbers of horned cattle and horses. Scarcity of water
and want of cheap transport are two of the difficulties to be
reckoned with. The basin of the Upper Gascoyne is marked
by high and rocky hills; it is rich in minerals, and has many
available pastoral locations; it may present an irregular curved
area of 200 miles long by 60 broad. The Lyons joins the
Gascoyne about 75 miles from the sea, and they flow on together
into Sharks Bay. About the mouth there is much good pastoral
land, which has been mostly taken up. Vessels drawing 14 feet
can enter the harbour at the mouth of the river. From the
Murchison a barren sandstone plain extends to the coast near the
mouth of the Ashburton, broken only by the lower course of the
Gascoyne, and supposed to be waterless. Carnarvon at the mouth
of the Gascoyne is the principal port; coasting steamers call here.
The rainfall is only about 6 inches, and the mean temperature 72°.
With the valley of the Ashburton the pastoral district of the
North-West Division commences, and extends for 300 miles to
the De Grey. Throughout this district from Exmouth Gulf the
coast is generally low and covered with mangroves, while to the
west it is bold and rocky. The principal rivers, the Ashburton,
Fortescue, and De Grey, have their sources among the granite
ranges of the interior. Although much of the land is very fertile,
yet as the rainfall is uncertain, and often at long intervals, this
district is not well suited for agriculture; but as there is water for
stock, and the natural grasses are permanent, it has become one
of the most important grazing districts in the Colony.
The Ashburton and Fortescue are each about 200 miles long,
and 100 yards wide at their mouths, and have good alluvial land
and well-grassed plains throughout their courses. To the north-
east of the Fortescue and beyond the De Grey are plains
covered with spinifex unsuitable for pasture. But there is some
good land in patches on the De Grey and Oakover, with scattered
white gums and other trees. There are large numbers of sheep
in these districts, besides horned cattle and horses.
Cossack (rainfall only about 6 inches, mean temperature 78°)
is the principal port of the district, and is connected by steamer
with Fremantle and the other coast towns; Cossack, Roebourne,
and Sharks Bay are the centres of the pearl and pearl-shell
fisheries. Fever is not uncommon, mainly owing to the utter
absence of proper sanitary arrangements.


The Kimberley Division covers an area of about 134,000 square
miles, of which some 33,000 are leased from the Crown, and the
remainder is open to selection on pastoral lease. Those who settle
here must be fully prepared for a very much hotter and less
healthy climate, and, even in the best parts, a far scarcer supply
of rain and running streams than we have in England, as for
several months in the year there is no rain at all. No wheat or
other cereals are grown here, but vegetables grow fairly in parts.
Meat is cheap, milk Is. a quart, bread 9d. a 2 lb. loaf; imported
articles also are dear, as bacon L<?. 6d., cheese 25., butter 2s. 6d.,
tobacco ss. Qd. a pound. For wages see p. 23.
A townsite “ Derby ” has been surveyed on the Eastern shore
of King Sound, and a Government Resident for West Kimberley
is stationed there ; it is becoming rapidly built upon, and the
population of the district is now over 200. The mean temperature
is about 81° and the rainfall 39 inches.
At the head of Cambridge Gulf, the natural outlet of East
Kimberley, there is a fine harbour ; near it a townsite “ Wyndham ”
is being laid out, and the Government Resident for East Kim-
berley is stationed there. There are a few general stores already
oxisting.
The country on the Ord River has been surveyed, and an
extension of the survey to the westward is in progress ; a con-
siderable number of horses, sheep, and cattle have been sent to
this part of the district, and it is being speedily settled. The
banks of the streams are generally thickly clothed with vegeta-
tion ; mainly acacias, palms, small bamboos, &c. Running streams,
the largest of which are the Margaret and Ord Rivers, are
numerous in the northern portions of this district; most of these
usually contain, even in the dry season, very welcome supplies of
water in reck holes and small pools.
Good alluvial plains exist in the valleys of the rivers, which it
is hoped may be suitable for tropical culture. The Government
give, under certain conditions, a bonus of 500 acres to anyone
who produces in the Kimberley Division a certain amount of tea,
sugar, cotton, tobacco, &c. (Crown Land Regulations, 1887,
section 112). Other portions—mainly those in the south—consist
of very rough rocky and hilly country for the most part covered
with spinifex.
Gold has been discovered in this division. The nearest ports
to the gold-fields are Derby (350 miles) and Wyndham (300
miles). The road from Derby is the best, but that from Wyndham
is the shortest. Provisions are scarce at both these ports, and
the route lies by very bad roads and creeks, through very rough
country, which will not in itself supply much food except in the
dry season, when game might be obtained. The journey, which
is generally made on horseback, is expensive. The natives are
numerous, and have on many occasions shown themselves hostile.
A strong party, tvell equipped, is absolutely necessary to do any-
thing in these districts, not only with any chance of success, but
with any reasonable safety. According to the last reports the
reefs are payable, but work is greatly hindered by want of


capital, and results have been disappointing. Prices of food per
lb. are : Flour Is. to Is. 3d., tea 45., sugar Is. 6d., salt Is. 6d.,
rice Is. 3d., meat from 4 d. There is often a good deal of sickness
caused by the hot climate and hard fare. There is but little
machinery in use at present. There are about 400 to 500 persons
there.
This covers the best part of the Colony, and it is here that the
principal population is settled. It has three natural divisions-.
Firstly, we have on the east the line of elevated watershed of the
rivers of the West and South coasts dividing the more settled
part of the Colony from the unoccupied regions in the interior;
secondly, the great forest land extending to within from 10 to
15 miles of the sea; and lastly, the coast districts of the south
and west. The first is the course taken by the railway from
Albany to Beverley with its great southern outlet, King George’s
Sound; the second contains not only a vast expanse of the finest
timber, but in the upper and middle valleys of the rivers agri-
cultural and horticultural areas still unoccupied, besides the
mineral wealth of the hills, which awaits development; the third
is probably the best suited of all the lands in Western Australia
for European settlement, and is the outlet for the export of the
staple products of the whole district. The land is well suited both
for agriculture and pasture.
The whole of this district, nearly the size of France, is mainly
level, but often undulating. The Darling Range runs parallel to
the west coast at a distance of 10 to 25 miles, and rises to a height
of between 2,000 and 3,000 feet. The western coast is generally
rather flat country of a sandy character. The whole country
from north to south, except where it has been cleared for
cultivation, is heavily timbered with trees and bush. There are
occasional open sandy plains, covered with shrubs and flowering
plants of great variety and beauty, and in the north and east low
scrubby trees and bushes often take the place of timber. There
are good roads and bridges in most parts. The agricultural
land available for settlement is limited, but is not yet nearly-
taken up. Farming is fairly remunerative, but the farmer has
to contend with several difficulties, such as want of farm hands,
poorness of soil, poisonous plants, denseness of forests, and the
scarcity of water.
In the northern part of the South-Western Division, between
the Murchison and the Irwin, is situated the Victoria District,
This is said to be about the best part of the Colony for pastoral
purposes. There is some rich pasture land about the Greenough
River, and there is generally a very fair supply of water. Wheat
also grows well, and from Geraldton to Dongara at the mouth
of the Irwin is a succession of good farms. The chief towns in
the Victoria district are Geraldton, Northampton, Greenough,
Dongara.
Geraldton (1,200) is the centre of the Champion Bay district,
and is about 290 miles from Perth. It is the chief port of the
north; the principle export is wool. The climate is hot. Some
small lead and smelting works have recently been started. There


is a good harbour here, and fortnightly communication by sea
with Perth. The mean temperature is about 67°, and the rainfall
nearly 16 inches. There is a railway (34 miles) from here to
Northampton, which is the chief town of the northern mining
district of the Colony. Lead is the chief mineral that is worked,
but copper is also found. There appear to be considerable
quantities of ore, but from w r ant of capital it is only partially
developed. The Narra Narra mines are 20 miles east. Greenough
and district has a population of 2,200; it is the centre of some
good agricultural and pastoral country, and is doing fairly well.
Communication with Perth is by coach, or by rail to Geraldton,
and thence by steamer. Dongara (rainfall about 15 inches) is
245 miles from Perth, with which it is connected by sea. In
the Irwin district the country for about 70 miles south of
Dongara is a desert plain with occasional low bushes At
New Norcia, 82 miles from Perth, there is a Spanish Roman
Catholic Mission station for the natives. Guildford, the capital
of the Swan district, with a total population of 1,674, is a pretty
town at the confluence of the Helena and Swan, surrounded by
fields and vineyards, and is nine miles by rail from Perth. York,
Northam, and Newcastle are other pretty towns, with gardens
and large fields of wheat and oats and barley in the neighbour-
hood. The rainfall is about 14 inches, mean temperature 64°.
They are connected by rail with Perth (80 miles from York) and
through Beverley with Albany. Water round Beverley is not so
plentiful as further west. Most of the sandal wood found in the
Colony comes from this district.
Perth (8,000), the capital of the Colony, is prettily situated on
the river Swan. Most of the houses are built of stone and brick,
bricks being made at Perth, Fremantle, and Guildford. There
are here many churches of all denominations, buildings necessary
for business and amusement, a mechanics’ and working men’s
institute, high school, and hospital. It is proposed to carry out
some harbour improvements. There are some pleasant gardens,
and small manufactories.
Fremantle (population about 5,000) is 12 miles from Perth,
and is connected by rail and river ; it is the chief port on this
coast, and its harbour is being improved. There are some
manufactories in the town, and the sea breeze makes it cooler in
summer than Perth. Vines, &c., grow well in the neighbourhood.
Bunbury (population about 600) is the principal port of the
Southern districts; it is about 112 miles south of Perth, and
connected with it by a mail coach (fare 25.?.) and by sea. The
country in the neighbourhood is good for cereals and stock, and
tin is said to have been found there recently. Rainfall is about
38 inches; mean temperature 61°.
Busselton, on the Yasse (30 miles from Bunbury, connexions
by sea and coach), is the capital of the rich but small agricultural
and pastoral district of the Vasse; draught horses have much
improved during the last few years, but the breed of cattle is not
good. The jetty is now finished. The extensive forests in the


neighbourhood are now being worked for timber, but the timber
trade in 1888 was inactive (rainfall 29 inches). Coal is said to
have been lately found at the Donnelly.
Albany (population 1,000) is prettily situated on King George’s
Sound, 261 miles south-east of Perth, with which there is now
connexion by rail; fare, about 365. The P. and 0. and Orient
lines from England call here. Being the terminus of the railway
from Perth, and the principal port of the Colony, it is likely to
become an important town. The climate is pleasant, and cooler
than that of Perth.
Throughout the South-Western Division there is a natural
abundance of grapes, melons, figs, oranges, &c., but they receive
little cultivation as a market is wanting. There are also ex-
tensive forests, which are being cut down for timber. Port
Augusta, 190 miles south-west of Perth, Rockingham, 25 miles
south of Perth, and Busselton, all connected by coach and sea
with Perth, are some of the chief centres of the timber trade.
There are considerable saw mills also.
The climate of the South-Western portion is said to be one of
the finest in the world, and, throughout, the Colony is generally
healthy in spite of the bad sanitary arrangements in most of the
towns. In a country extending from 13° to 35° of south latitude,
there is a great range of climate, but even in the farthest north
there is an absence of • the malarial fevers common to the tropics ;
the heat is dry, though very oppressive in the Kimberley Districts,
but the nights are tolerably cool; in the central portions of the
coast region the climate is like that of Southern Italy. The
South-Western corner is, however, the most salubrious, being
seldom too hot, except during the three months of summer, or
too cold, and having regular and temperate seasons. Throughout
Western Australia the traveller camps out at night, generally
without any covering but a rug, and never seems to receive any
injurious effects. The regularity of the sea breezes in the summer
tempers the heat of the sun. The summer is much hotter and
the winter brighter and not nearly so cold as in England. The
average mean of the thermometer at Perth is 65°. The seasons
are divided into wet (winter) and dry (summer'), the former
commencing in April and lasting till September; a greater part
of this time of year, however, is bright and clear. In 1887 the
highest temperature at Perth was 100° in the shade in December,
and the lowest 35° in July. The dry season is occasionally, but
rarely, visited by showers or a thunderstorm. The severe droughts
and heavy floods experienced in the other Australian Colonies are
rare in the S.W., but are common in the northern and central
parts of the Colony. The average rainfall at Perth is 32 inches.
In 1887 there were 105 wet days; 37 inches of rain fell altogether,
of which 10 were in July. In Albany, in 1888, there were 36
inches, and in Beverley 16.
No disease can be said to prevail here ; influenza visits the
Colony occasionally, and is at times severe, especially among the
aboriginal population ; the glare and dust also hurt the eye unless
care is taken; the climate is favourable to consumptive persons.


The chief harbours are Port Wyndham on Cambridge Gulf, and
Port Derby on King Sound in the north, and Fremantle and
Albany (King George’s Sound) in the south-west. Other ports
are Champion Bay, Yasse, Bunbury, and Port Walcott (Cossack).
Vessels from England generally go to Fremantle (12 miles from
Perth) or Albany.
During 1887 the number of ships outwards and inwards
together numbered 514, of which Albany claimed 238, Fremantle
124, and Port Wyndham 103.
Steamers run monthly from Melbourne via Adelaide, Albany,
and other ports to Fremantle. P. & O. and Orient steamers
arrive at Albany in alternate weeks from England and from
Sydney via Melbourne and Adelaide, making almost a weekly
mail service from the Eastern Colonies.
There is a regular steam service generally about once a fortnight
between Albany and Champion Bay (Geraldton), touching at
BusseJton (the Yasse), Bunbury, and Fremantle; also about
once a month between Fremantle, Cossack, and Derby (King
Sound), and, less frequently, Cambridge Gulf (Wyndham) ; all
these services touch at Geraldton, Sharks Bay, Gascoyne (Car-
narvon), Ashburton (Onslow), and Cossack.
In addition to these there is a steam service every two months
from Fremantle to Singapore via Geraldton, Sharks Bay, Carnar-
von, Ashburton, Cossack, and sometimes Derby.
Among the principal firms which send vessels to Western
Australia from England, with their London Addresses, are
Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation Co., 122, Leaden-
hall Street, E.C,
(N.B. —Steerage passengers are not taken by this line.)
The Orient Steam Shipping Co., 5 and 13, Fenchurch
Avenue, E.C.
Trinder, Anderson, & Co., 4, St. Mary Axe, E.C.
C. Bethell & Co., 110, Fenchurch Street, E.C.
The two first lines, every alternate week, run to Albany; and
the two latter generally to Fremantle, and at longer intervals.
The Passenger Act, 1855, and other Acts require passenger
ships carrying emigrants to be seaworthy, have proper accommo-
dation, furnish good and sufficient food, provide medicines, and
on large ships a surgeon, and in other ways protect the interests
of emigrants. Short summaries of these regulations are posted
up in every ship; emigrants who find that they are not being
treated fairly should immediately complain.
The following are the present regulations for emigrants’
passages.* All applications for assisted passages must be
* These frequently change. The quarterly Australasian Colonies Circular
issued gratis by this office should always be consulted on the latest changes
as to passages, and demand for labour.


made to the Crown Agents for the Colonies in Downing Street,
London.
(a.) Free passages, none.
(A) Assisted passages can at present only be granted to
farmers, agriculturists, millers, wheelwrights, and others likely
to be useful in country districts, and they must be possessed of
some small capital. The amount required in each case will be
decided by the Crown Agents for the Colonies, and must be de-
posited with them. As a rule, a single man will be required to
deposit not less than 100/., and a married couple not less than
150/., and 25/. for each child over 12 years of age. The deposit
will be repaid to the emigrants immediately after their arrival in
the Colony. Each adult emigrant will be granted 10/. towards
his passage money, and 51, for every child between 1 and 12 years
of age.
Each intending emigrant above the age of 15 years desiring
to obtain an assisted passage must undertake to conform to all
regulations established on board ship during the voyage, and to
remain in the Colony for at least twelve months from the date of
arrival.
(c.) Nominated passages. —lmportant to those who have friends
in the Colony.
Assisted passages are granted to a limited number of emigrants
nominated to the Immigration Board by persons residing in the
Colony, or to the Crown Agents by Western Australian colonists
resident in England. They must be either—(i.) Artizans, farmers,
agricultural labourers, vine dressers, miners, shepherds, and gar-
deners, under 45 years of age (and, if married, their wives and
families) ; or (ii.) single female domestic servants or widows, not
exceeding 35 years of age, and must in all cases be approved by
the Crown Agents for the Colonies. The nominors or the
emigrants must pay 71. towards their passage.
N.B. —All nominations lapse at the expiration of twelve months
from emigrants receiving notice from the Crown Agents.
(d.) Unassisted passages (fares liable to change ). From
London to Albany or Fremantle.
By Sailing Vessel (about 90 days)
By Steamer (35 to 40 days to Albany
occasionally.
50 to Fremantle.
3rd class, from about 14/. 14s. to
16/. 16s.
3rd class, from about 14/. 14s. to
Fremantle (occasionally), and
17/. 17s. (fortnightly), including
ship-kit to Albany.
2nd class, from about 30/.
Ist class, from about 52/. 10s.
2nd class, 21/.
Ist class, 36/. 15s.
Children under 12
years of age,
half price ; under one year, and
sometimes one child under three years, free.
In addition to the above, any person in good health who is not
likely to become chargeable to the Colony may be allowed to
engage a passage in any ship chartered by the Crown Agents for


the Colonies for the conveyance of assisted and nominated emi-
grants at such contract rate of passage money as may be in force
at the time being, on signing an agreement to conform to the
rules to be observed on board ship.
Persons receiving nominated or assisted passages or passages at Employment,
contract rate, are not called upon to repay their passage money,
and are perfectly free to work in the Colony, where and for whom
they please.
The above fares, whether assisted, nominated, or unassisted, Ship-kit.
include food and berths, but all third class passengers pay 1/. extra
for kit, i.e., mattress, blankets, knife, spoon, &c., unless otherwise Luggage,
stated. Each third class passenger is generally allowed 15, and
each child I\, cubic feet of luggage free. Two boxes, each 2\
feet long and 2 feet broad and feet deep, make up 15 cubic
feet, but any sized boxes will do, so long as 15 cubic feet are not
exceeded. Luggage required for use on the voyage should be
labelled u Wanted,”
Particulars as to the despatch of vessels are advertised in the Sailings,
daily newspapers, or may be obtained from the shipping agents.
No large outfit is necessary, nor need it be new. Emigrants Outfit,
having knives, forks, spoons, bed and table linen, kitchen utensils, Household
sewing machine, light tools, and other small articles or ornaments, 9oods-
should take them, but not heavy furniture nor rough common Tools-
tools, as free luggage is limited. Emigrants should take all the
clothes they have, but not less, if possible (assisted and nomi-
nated emigrants must not take less), than the following for the
voyage and subsequent use. For males, two pairs of boots, one Males.
strong suit, two pairs of white or cool trousers, and one jacket of
similar material, one cloth cap, and one broad-brimmed straw hat,
one pair canvas shoes, and one overcoat, and six articles of each
kind of underclothing. For females, two pairs strong shoes, one Females.
warm and two cotton gowns, one broad-brimmed straw hat, and
one close-fitting hat, one pair slippers, one cloak or shawl, six
articles of each kind of underclothing, and sewing materials. For Children ,
children , one warm cloak or great coat, four flannel waistcoats,
two pairs strong shoes, two warm suits, and six to nine articles of
each kind of underclothing. Two or three flannel shirts for men,
and an extra supply of flannel for women and children, will be
very useful. If the emigrant is going by sailing ship, extra warm
clothing will be required. There are not many opportunities of
washing clothes on board.
The best time for arriving in the Colony is September. De- Best time for
cember to February are the summer months, the seasons being arriving,
nearly the opposite to what they are in England.
There is no depot for the reception of any kind of emigrants, Arrangements
except one at Fremantle for the reception of “ selected” emigrants, for reception
none of whom, however, are now being sent out. But all persons 011 an m °'
seeking employment may apply to the Labour Registry Office in Labour regis-
Perth, 12 miles from Fremantle, at the office of the Board of tnes> 1 c>
Immigration ; they should also communicate with that office
beforehand, and any friends they may have in the Colony, men-
tioning their trade and the ship they are coming by.


The Immigration Board of the Colony consider that no special
inducement can be held out to persons of the legal or medical
professions, teachers, male or female, chemists, surveyors, tele-
graphists, railway, or other civil servants. Appointments must,
as a rule, be applied for in the Colony itself. For full information
on these and other professions, see the Professional Handbook,
issued by this office, price Id.
1,529 emigrants (27 less than in 1886) were introduced by tlxe
Immigration Board during 1887, and the expenditure was 23,547/.
Of these, 142 were nominated emigrants, viz., 27 artisans and
mechanics, 16 agriculturists and labourers, 8 female domestic
servants, and 91 wives, children, and others. Most of the others
were brought out under agreement with the West Australian
Land Company. The estimates for 1888 included a sum of
5,820/. for immigration.
The population on 31st December 1887 was 42,488; there
were 7,126 more males than females; on the 31st December 1888,
however, the estimated population had decreased by 351. The
inhabitants are settled mainly along the coast, and within
100 miles ot it. The population of Perth and Fremantle comprise
nearly a third of the entire population of the Colony. The
native population is not large, and in the more settled districts
they are fast disappearing. They are very useful to the pioneer
settlers, as shepherds, stock-riders, and general station hands, and
settlement is very much assisted by their aid, though they
sometimes take to sheep-stealing. In the Northern Districts
they are largely utilised as pearl-shell divers.
The constitution will probably become this year more fully
representative. At present the Government is administered by a
Governor appointed by the Crown and assisted by an Executive
Council, appointed also by the Crown, consisting of the Colonial
Secretary, the Attorney General, the Colonial Treasurer, the
Commissioner of Crown Lands and Surveyor General, and the
Director of Public Works and Commissioner of Railways; under
the Royal Instructions, power is given to the Governor also to
appoint two unofficial members to the Executive Council. There
is a Legislative Council consisting of the members of the Execu-
tive Council, with the exception of the Colonial Treasurer, four
nominees of the Governor, and 16 elected members. The Council
is presided over by a Speaker.
The franchise for electors is 100/. freehold or householders of
10/. annual value, or lessees of Crown Lands to the same amount
annual rent. The qualification for members is the possession of
1,000/. freehold beyond encumbrances.
The city of Perth and the towns of Fremantle, Geraldton, and
Albany have corporations, presided over by a mayor; and in most
of the towns there is a municipal council, presided over by a
chairman. The management of the areas within their jurisdiction
is entirely entrusted to these bodies, who are elected by the rate-
payers. The roads of the Colony are likewise managed by roads
boards, elected by the people (Roads Act, 1888),


The Supreme Court' is presided over by the Chief Justice and
one puisne judge. In the country districts there are Quarter
Sessions, presided over by a magistrate ; and, when occasion re-
quires, the judges go on circuit. There are also local courts of
civil jurisdiction in most of the districts monthly, and police
magistrates’ courts daily. Justices of the peace have jurisdiction
over the whole Colony, and not for particular districts.
Every religious body has its own church or chapel as in
England; there is no established church, but each body manages
its own affairs. There are two Bishops of Perth, one belonging
to the English Church and one to the Roman Catholic. About
half the population is Church of England, a quarter Roman
Catholic, and the remainder Nonconformists.
Government Schools exist all over the Colony, and are governed
by district boards working under a central board. Attendance
is compulsory, the teaching is purely secular, and small weekly
fees are generally charged. There are also 16 assisted schools (of
which 15 are Roman Catholic and one Church of England), which
are subsidised by the State, and a High School. There is a
High School for girls under the direction of the Anglican Bishop,
and another conducted by the Sisters of Mercy. There is also a
Church of England Collegiate School at Perth, for teaching the
Christian religion, and giving a sound liberal education.
The following are four banking institutions in the Colony,
with their London addresses, viz., the Western Australian Bank,
31, Lombard Street, E.C. (Bank of South Australia); the
National Bank of Australasia, 149, Leadenhall Street, E.C.;
the Union Bank of Australia, 1, Bank Buildings, E.C.; and
the Bank of New South Wales, 64, Old Broad Street, E.C.
Branches or Agencies of these banks are established in several of
the country towns. British and Australasian money is used
throughout the Colony.
Persons are recommended not to take their money in cash, but
by means of one or more Money Orders payable to themselves
at any Post Office in the Colony. The rates are for 21. and under,
6d.; 21. to 51., Is. ; 51. to 11., Is. 6d. ; 11. to 10/., 2s. Large
sums should be transmitted through one of the above banks.
There is a Post Office Savings Bank at Perth, with several
branches in the country. The balance on December 31, 1887,
was 31,373/., showing an increase over 1886.
The revenue for 1888 was 361,428/., as against 377,903/. in
1887; and the expenditure 385,129/. as against 456,897/. in
1887. The Public Debt at the end of 1887 was 1,280,700/.
The imports in 1887 were of the value of 832,213/. (of which
351,459/. were from the United Kingdom, and 465,788/. from
British Colonies); and of the exports 604,656/. (of which
382,072/. were to the United Kingdom, and 166,041/. to British
Colonies), as against 758,011/. imports and 630,393/. exports, in
1886. The exports and imports in 1887 show an increase of
trade between Western Australia and the other Colonies, and
a decrease between it and the United Kingdom.


All the principal items of export in 1887 show an increase as
compared with 1886, except lead and copper, which decreased
from 8,021/. to 5,175/., and guano, which decreased from 66,024/.
to 20,527/. Among the increases are, —leather and hides, from
6,251/. to 17,709/.; pearl shells, from 104,964/. to 108,375/.;
timber, from 50,092/. to 78,384/.; wool, from 332,579/. to
333,785/.; sandalwood, from 27,450/. to 34,532/.; while gold
appears for the first time as an article of export, the amount
being 19,492/. The most important increases among imports
were flour, meal, and grain, which were more than three times
what they were in 1886, and railway materials, which were twice
as much.
There are several Friendly Societies in the Colony. Members
of Friendly Societies in England should apply to their own Society
for letters of introduction to the corresponding society in the
Colony. There are Mechanics’ Institutes, and Working Men’s
Associations in almost every district.
There is a Hospital at Albany, Bunbury, Fremantle, Toodyay,
Champion Bay, Guildford, Perth, York, Vasse, Derby, Wynd-
ham, Williams and Roeburne ; Protestant Orphanages at Perth
and Guildford, and at Perth two Roman Catholic; and two
Poor Houses at Perth with 181 inmates in 1887. During the
same year 2,140 persons received temporary out-door relief
throughout the Colony, as against 1,695 in 1886. On
31st December there were 176 destitute children maintained by
Government.
Postal arrangements embrace the whole of the settled portion of
the Colony, both by inland services and by steamers on the coast.
The postage to and from the United Kingdom (the mails go
every week) is 6d. per ounce for letters, postcards 3d., or by the
long sea route, letters 4 d., and postcards 2d. ; Id. per 4 ounces for
newspapers ; and for parcels by Parcels Post, Is. 6d. for the first
2 Jbs., and 9 d. per lb. afterwards up to 11 lbs.
There is telegraphic communication throughout the settled por-
tions of the Colony and with other parts of the world. A telegram
from any part of the United Kingdom to Western Australia costs
9s. 2d. or 9s. 4 d. a word.
Most of the railways are under Government; the gauge is 3 feet
6 inches. The line from Albany to Beverley was completed
April 1889, so that now there is direct communication by rail from
Albany to Fremantle. The principal stations are Mount Barker
(39 miles), Broome Hill (105 miles) for the Eticup district,
Katanning (116 miles) for Kojonup, Wagin Lake (151 miles), and
Narrogin (180 miles) for the Williams district, Pingelly
(207 miles) for the Moorumbine country, Beverley (242 miles),
York (265 miles), Spencer’s Brook (283 miles) whence a branch
of 6 miles runs to Northam, Clackline (293 miles) whence another
branch of 14 miles runs to Newcastle, Guildford (334 miles),
Perth (342 miles) and Fremantle (354 miles). The lowest fare
from Albany to Fremantle is 1/. 16s.
Other lines open are —Geraldton to Northampton, 34 miles,
and to the Greenough, 20 miles; Bunbury to Timber Ranges,


15 miles ; Cossack to Roebourne (Tramway), 8 miles ; and a line
from Guildford to Walkaway, about 290 miles, is projected.
The Timber Companies have about 50 miles of railways or
tramways for bringing timber from the ranges to the sea.
The lowest railway rate is id. a mile.
The following are the principal goods admitted free of duty:— Customs Act,
Animals, live, except horses, horned cattle, pigs, and sheep. 1888.
Books, printed, not being account, including music and charts.
Fire-engines.
Machnery for boring for water and coal.
Immigrants’ tools and instruments of trade, not exceeding
10/, in value, per immigrant.
Personal baggage (not including vehicles, glassware, china- Immigrants’
ware, silver and gold plate, and plated goods and furniture baggage.
other than cabin furniture), which is imported with and by
passengers, immigrants and travellers bond fide for their
own personal use and not imported for the purpose of sale.
Plants, seeds, and bulbs. Surgical or scientific instruments.
All other goods are charged with a specific duty, or an ad
valorem one of 5, or 20 per cent. Details may be had at this
office.
Marriage with a deceased wife’s sister is lawful. Marriage.
Licenses of various kinds to sell liquors are obtained from the Spirituous.
Licensing Magistrates, who are the Resident Magistrates, a Police Liquors.
Magistrate, and the J. P’s for the district; in the Kimberley
Division from the Resident Magistrate sitting alone (Act of 1886) ;
and on Gold Fields from the Warden (Goldfield Licensing Act,
1888). A publican’s general license costs 50/, a year in Perth
and Fremantle, and 40/. elsewhere. No liquor may be sold
(unless to bond fide travellers or lodgers) on Sunday, Christmas
Day, or Good Friday, or on any week day except between 4 a.m.
and 10 p.m. from October 1 to March 31, and between 6 a.m. and
10 p.m. from April Ito September 30. A fine of not more than
50/. is imposed on any person selling adulterated liquor. No
wages may be paid by any one to his workmen, &c. in any such
licensed house, except those paid by the licensee himself, nor
may any liquor be sold to a person under 14 (W. A. Wines, Beer,
and Spirit Sale Acts, 1880, 1884, and 1386).
A labourer or servant who breaks his or her engagement in any Masters and
way with his or her employer may be summarily fined by two jus- Servants Acts,
tices to any amount up to 50/., and in default of payment may be 1868 and 1886
imprisoned up to three months. The labourer or servant has
similar summary rights against his or her employer for ill-treat-
ment, non-payment of wages, &c.; the employer may, under pain
of distress, be ordered to pay such wages, not exceeding six
months, and to make further amends.
Vaccination is compulsory by the Acts of 1878. The penalty Vaccination,
for the first offence is 51., and the penalties are cumulative.
All occupiers of land are compelled by law to destroy all rabbits Eabbit Acts,
on their land. If they do not, Government inspectors may 1883 and 1885,
enter upon the land and themselves destroy the rabbits by poison
or otherwise.


Crown Land Crown Lands are managed by the Commissioner of Crown
Regulations, Lands. The principal regulations are as follows :
1 Q 0 *7 X X O
. Western Australia is divided into the South-West, Gascoyne,
Land Divi- North-West, Kimberley, Eucla, and Eastern Divisions. For the
positions of these divisions, see the Map.
Fees on Crown For preparing every Crown grant there shall be charged one
Grants. uniform fee of 205., and 10s. for recording ; both fees to be paid
Town and sub- with the purchase money or the last payment of rent,
urban lands. Towns and suburban lands are sold by auction.
Modes of ob- Other lands may be obtained (1) by purchase with deferred or
taming other immediate payment; (2) by lease.
land ‘ Land from 100 to 1,000 acres in the S.W. Division may be
Conditional obtained by anyone over 18 years, inside or outside specially
Imd b lB6 ° proclaimed agricultural areas, at not less than 10s. an acre,
deferred pay- payable over 20 years. The purchaser must (1) fence the whole
ment in S.W, of the land, one-tenth of it within two years: (2) spend an amount
Division. on improvements, in addition to the fencing, equal to the whole
of the purchase money; reside on the land, or, if not, must
pay double instalments of purchase money, but not any further
sum on improvements by reason of such condition of double
purchase money. If he fulfils these conditions within or before
20 years the land becomes his own ; if not, it is forfeited.
Purchase of Land from 100 to 1,000 acres within, and from 100 to 5,000
land by imme- acres without, specially proclaimed agricultural areas may be
• i J a^P a y ment applied for by anyone over 18, to be sold at not less than 105. an
Division, acre; 10 per cent, payable on application, and the balance within
one month of the application being approved of. The purchaser
must fence the land within three years from date of survey, and
within seven years from that date spend ss. an acre in improve-
ments, but he need not reside on the land. If these conditions are
fulfilled the land becomes his own; if not, it is forfeited.
Purchase of In the Kimberley, N.W., Gascoyne, E., and Eucla Divisions,
land in other Crown land, from 100 to 5,000 acres, in certain specially declared
Divisions. areas, may be conditionally sold to anyone over 18 years, at not
less than 10s. an acre, payable within 10 years. The purchaser
need not reside on the land, but he must fence it within two years,
and within the 10 years also spend on it in improvements an
amount equal to the full purchase money.
Vineyards, For the encouragement of planting vineyards, orchards, and
orchards, and gardens Crown land in all divisions may be sold in blocks of sto
gardens. 20 acres, at not less than 205. an acre, on conditions of fencing
and cultivation.


Pastoral leases are granted as fellows :
Division.
Size of smallest Yearly Kent per 1,000 or part of
Block sold.
a 1,000 Acres.
South-west
Gascoyne -I
Eucla - - j
3.000 acres
20.000 „
10s. for each of the first seven
years.
12s. 6 d. for each of the second
seven years.
15s. for each of the third seven
North-west -1
Kimberley - J
20,000 „
years.
10s. for each of the first seven
50,000 acres, if on a
water frontage,
otherwise 20,000
years,
15s. for each of the second seven
years.
20s. for each of the third seven
acres.
Eastern
20,000 acres
years.
2s. 6 d. for each of the first seven
years.
ss. for each of the second seven
years.
7s. 6 d. for each of the third seven
years.
All leases end in
1907. All
lessees.
except those in the S.W.
Division, must, within seven years, under penalty of payment of
double rent, stock their land at the rate of ten head of sheep, or
one of large stock per 1,000 acres, or spend in improving the land
61. per 1,000 acres. Lessees in the Kimberley and Eucla Divisions
have their rent reduced one half for the next nine years if their
land is within five years from 2nd March 1887 stocked with 10
head of sheep or one of large stock per 1,000 acres, or if in
the Eucla Division 8/. per 1,000 acres have been spent in wells,
tanks, &c.
A lease for 21 years of not less than 300 acres of poisoned land Poisoned lauds.
may be obtained at a yearly rent of 20 s. per 1,000, on condition
of (1) paying expenses of survey; (2) fencing; (3) eradicating
poisonous plants. On fulfilling these conditions the land becomes
the property of the lessee.
Improvements are to consist of wells of fresh water, reservoirs, Improvements,
tanks or dams of permanent character, fences, sheds, buildings
erected for farm, shearing, or station purposes, not being dwelling-
houses (except where such dwelling-houses exist upon a pastoral
lease), cultivation, subdivision fences, clearing, grubbing, drain-
ing, ring-barking, &c.
When a pastoral lessee is deprived of his land by effluxion of Compensation
time or otherwise, he receives from the Government, under for improve-
ordinary circumstances, the fair value of his improvements. ments.
Purchasers of land as above must, in addition to the price of Purchasers of
the land, pay (within five years) for any improvements existing laud to pay for
on it at the time of purchase. existing im-
Any adult male person may, on approval and on payment of 1/., Proveiliellts-
obtain a permit to search, for a period of one year, for minerals in
any Crown lands. During this time he may remove not more t { iaif g old
I 58419. B


than five tons of ore for purpose of testing, but may not hold more
than one permit at the same time.
Mining leases Leases of mineral land, from 20 to 200 acres, will, on applica-
tor seven tion to the Commissioner of Crown Lands, be granted for pur-
years - poses of mining for any metal or mineral, excepting precious
metals, for a term of seven years, at a rental of ss. per annum for
each acre.
Forfeiture of If the holder of any mining lease allow the minerals to remain
lease. unworked for a period of 12 months, such lease shall be liable to
forfeiture.
Purchase of Any holder of a mining lease who shall show to the satisfaction
mineral lands. 0 f the Commissioner of Crown Lands that he has erected on the
land held under such lease all the plant, buildings, and machinery
necessary for the due and proper working of the mine, or who
shall enter into a bond, with sureties, to put up such permanent
buildings and machinery within a certain time, shall be entitled to
a Crown grant of the land, to be not less than 20 acres, on
payment of 31. for each acre, or, if desired, in three annual instal-
ments of 1 1, an acre.
License to A license to quarry rock, soil, &c. on Crown lands costs not
quarry. less than ss. a month.
Timber Any person may cut and remove timber, sandal, and other
licenses. wood on Crown lands on payment of the following fees per
month ; viz., timber for piles or baulks, 31. a man ; other timber,
firewood, fencing, or shingles, ss. a man; sandalwood outside
proclaimed areas, and wattle or other bark, 2s. 6d. a man. Such
licenses are not issued for a period less than one or more than
12 months, and are not transferable.
Special timber Special licenses may be granted for one year to fell, remove,
licenses. and se q the timber growing or being on any particular Crown
lands, other than logs and piles, at a rent of 20 1, per annum for
any quantity not exceeding 640 acres, and 40/. per annum for any
quantity exceeding 640 but not exceeding 1,280 acres.
Small holders Holders of 200 acres or less in fee simple may obtain leave to
of fee simple cu t down timber or unimproved Crown lands for domestic uses
timbeT 7 CUt onl y> for buildin S s > &c.
Goldfields Act A miner’s right entitling him to mine for gold costs 20s. a
1886. ' year; leases up to 25 acres may be had for 21 years at 20 s. an
acre. Goldfields are under the jurisdiction of a warden, who
administers justice and decides disputes; for auriferous lands
not proclaimed, see Regulations, Feb, 1888.
Land Transfer This Act, sometimes known as the Torrens Act, has been in
Act. force several years, and is of great importance as affording an
easy and cheap means of dealing with land. Ail Crown grants
are issued under its provisions.
Products and These have been touched upon in the account of the different
Industries. districts; they are now treated more in detail.
(1.) Forests These are perhaps the most important physical feature of the
and timber. South-West portion of the Colony. They cover an area of some
30,000 square miles.


The Colony is celebrated for its timber, and especially for the
“Jarrah.” This timber is easy to work, and, when properly
seasoned, well adapted for piles for jetties, wharves, and bridges,
for buildings, railway sleepers, and all purposes requiring dura-
bility and imperviousness to the white ant and the teredo navalis.
The Karri abounds along the south coast, west of Albany,
and grows to a height of over 300 feet. It is larger and stronger
than Jarrah, and is specially adapted for engineering purposes,
railways, upper parts of bridges, &c., and possibly for marine
works.
There are a great many other woods, Eucalypti, Banksias,
and Acacias. The sandalwood tree has a wide range throughout
South-Western part of the Colony, but is principally found in or
near the county of York. It is by no means an inexhaustible
product, but the export will continue for several years to come.
There is a duty of ss, per ton on all sandalwood exported; for
Exports, see p. 14.
There are several goldfields besides those in Kimberley (g.) Gold.
Division, for which, see p. 5. The Yilgarn fields are situated
about 200 miles east of York, by a road difficult from want of
water. The Warden’s Report of February last states, that no
rain had fallen for months, and a complete stoppage of work was
threatened; some tanks had been completed, and, if water could
be secured, several claims promised well. The Government have
voted 10,000/. to be spent on boring for and storing water. At
Pilbarra, 80 miles east of Roebourne, in the north, some 250 men
are mining and prospecting, and some are doing well. A new
small field w T as discovered in January at Egina, 15 miles from
Roeburne.
Coal has been found on the upper branches of the Irwin, N.E. (3.) Coal and
of Geraldton. The seams vary in thickness from 3to 8 feet, and other minerals
are very easily worked, but the expense of carting the coal to a
port is at present almost prohibitive. In spite of this the find is
most important, and should it prove of lasting value, will give an
immense impetus to the whole Colony. In the neighbourhood of
Northampton (see above) and in other localities fine lodes of lead
and copper are found, and have been for many years worked on
a very limited scale, but the production is decreasing. Tin is
said to have been recently found near Bunbury. The chief stone
quarries are at Fremantle and in the South-West, and some white
sandstone suitable for building purposes is obtained near
Geraldton. -
During the last few years the small population of the Colony (4.) Agricul-
has had so many outlets for its energy, in the prosecution of the ture.
timber industry, pastoral pursuits in the new districts to the
north, pearl fisheries, &c., that there have not been sufficient
people left to conduct the cultivation of the soil. As a con-
sequence, cultivation and farming employments, being the least
tempting and requiring the greatest amount of manual labour,
have had the least attention. A valuable commission on agri-


culture is now sitting in the Colony; its final report has not yet
been issued.
Nearly everything that is required by the working man can be
easily grown, and by perseverance and frugality he can be
certain of securing a good living for himself and his family.
Agriculture is confined entirely to the portion of the Colony
south of Geraldton.
From 200 to 300 acres is the size of an ordinary farm; im-
proved land would cost from 21. to 4 1, an acre and upwards, a
further sum of 200/. to 300/. would be required for working
capital. The price of clearing land varies much ; some lightly
timbered land will cost only 1/. an acre to clear, other land 3/. to
3/. 10s., heavily timbered land 8/., 11/., and sometimes even 15/.
Such clearing as that costing 15/. is seldom attempted unless the
timber is valuable. There is also a machine used for pulling
down the trees. Water may generally be obtained by sinking
wells 12 to 20 feet deep. The West Australian Land Company
have a large quantity of land to sell within some miles on each
side of their railway from Albany to Perth. The land varies in
quality, some of it near Albany is heavy and well suited for
potatoes, &c., and in many parts for fruits ; further up it is sandy
and better suited for vineyards, and in parts, as at Pootenup,
Eticup, &c., for farming ; the prices vary from ss. to 21. an acre
according to quality and situation ; or the land may be rented.
In some districts there are no good local markets; in the south,
Albany and the large steamers which call there every week would,
make a good market for vegetables and fruits. At present cereals,
vegetables, &c., are largely imported by the Colony.
In 1887 there were 105,582 acres of land under cultivation (an
increase of 19,334 over 1886) out of a total area of 678,400,222
acres. Of this nearly a fourth part was wheat and another
fourth part hay. The largest crops of wheat were at Toodyay
and York, where the average per acre was 10 and bushels, and
round Greenough, where the average was only The largest
crops of barley were round Greenough, but the average per acre
was only 8 bushels. The best average for barley was 20 bushels,
which was obtained along the coast between Perth and Bunbury,
but this was only on some 150 acres. Of oats the largest crops
(605 acres) were raised round Toodyay, and the average per acre
was 16 bushels. Out of about 26,000 acres under hay in the
Colony, Toodyay and York claim 10,500, having an average of
2 and tons per acre respectively. Out of 474 acres of potatoes
in the Colony some 160 are round Bunbury, the average produce
per acre being tons. Busselton district comes next with 72
acres and an average of 4-| tons per acre.
In 1888-9 the harvest round Northam, a good district a little
S.E. of Toodyay, was satisfactory, and farmers were better off
than in previous years. Wheat averaged 12 bushels, oats and
barley 20, and hay 15 cwt. to 20 cwt. per acre; prices per bushel
were wheat 55., barley 3s. 6d. to 3s. 9 d., oats 3s. 9 d. to 4s. Round
Busselton and Bunbury also the season was very good both for


stock and agriculture ; the district is well suited for root crops and
green food for stock, and the lands £re being improved by fencing,
&c. The ordinary yield in England is much more than most of
these averages; but land costs more, and more money is spent in
manuring, &c.
To the north of Geraldton, the country, as will have been seen,
is used almost exclusively for pasturage, and is suited for horses,
cattle, and sheep. The principal drawbacks are the presence of
poisonous plants in many parts of the Southern portions of the
Colony, and the scarcity of water. The largest squatting pro-
perties are now to be found in the Northern, Gascoyne, and
Champion Bay districts of the Colony; and pastoral pursuits are
successfully followed there by enterprising colonists, but the
quantity of land taken up for pastoral purposes has been gradually
decreasing since 1882-3. At the end of 1887 there were
1,909,940 sheep in the whole Colony, and the estimated export of
wool in that year was 6,675,713 lbs,, valued at 333,785/.
At the end of 1887 there were 41,100 horses in the Colony.
The 447 horses exported during that year (as against 291 in
1886) chiefly to Colombo and Singapore, fetched on an average
13Z. each. At the end of the same year the Colony possessed
also 93,544 horned cattle, 6,171 goats, and 23,627 pigs. All the
above figures are higher than in 1886, except those for pigs,
which show a slight decrease.
Licenses to remove deposits of guano existing on any island
within the territory can be obtained from the Commissioner of
Crown Lands; the ordinary royalty is 13s. per ton on the regi-
stered tonnage of the ship. A reward of 10 per cent, of the
amount actually received by the Government as royalty will be
paid to the discoverer of any new deposits over 2,000 tons,
during five years after the discovery and report. No royalty is
charged on guano intended for use in the Colony. For exports,
see p. 14.
The vine grows luxuriantly throughout the southern portions
of the Colony, and fruits of all kinds, both English and tropical,
abound. In 1887 there were 672 acres under vines, producing
an average of 185 gallons of wine to the acre, showing in both
respects an increase over 1886. More than half the vines are in
the Berth, Fremantle, Guildford, and Toodyay districts. The
soil and climate are admirably suited for their production, and
the profits after the first three or four years are large. There is
probably no industry which offers so many openings for a man
of small capital and some experience. Very fair wine is already
made, and with improved methods of making should command a
ready market outside the Colony. Comparatively little fruit is
grown at present as a marketable article, but its production is
easy and will probably largely increase in time. It requires a
little capital as the land is expensive to clear, and the grower
has to wait three or four years until he gets a return from his
outlay. The following is a list of several species of the fruits
grown and their marketable value.


Local Name.
When Ripe.
Value.
Grape
Apple
Orange
Lemon
Pear
Fig
Peach
Apricot
Cape Gooseberry
Plum
Loquat
Banana
Quince
Strawberry
Melon (Water)
Melon (Rock)
Mulberry
Pomegranate
Gooseberry -
Currants
Cherries
Almond
Medlar
Guava
Olive
December to April
January to July
June to October -
December to August
December to March
December to May
December to February
All the year
January to March
September to October
January to July
February to March
October to June
January to March
Do.
Do.
February to March
January
Do. -
February
Do. -
Do.
June and July
8 1, to 16?. per ton.
18s. per cwt.
Is. 6 d. per doz.
id. per doz.
Is. per doz.
Id. per doz.
3d. per doz.
6 d. per doz.
j- 6d. per quart.
10s. per cwt.
Is. per doz.
s d. per doz.
6 d. per lb.
j-4s. per doz.
9 d. per quart.
8c?. per doz.
| Small supply.
15s. per cwt.
j-Very few grown.
No market value.
None of the above fruits are produced in sufficient quantities to export
Along the north-western coast from Sharks Bay, especially
round Cossack, the pearl oyster abounds, and pearls and pearl-
shells are obtained. No ship may be employed in the pearl-shell
fishing without a license. (Acts of 1873-87.) The value of the
export for 1887 was, pearl-shells, 108,375/., the average price
being about 125/. a ton, Sharks Bay shells, 2,050/., the average
price being 51. a ton, and pearls (nominally) 15,000/. The
exports of pearl-shells are yearly increasing. The divers are
almost all natives. There is an export duty of 41. a ton on pearl-
shells, except on the small pearl-shells of Sharks Bay ; on “ dead
shells ” 1/. per ton is charged. Mullet, especially in the Murray
estuary (40 miles south of Fremantle) where there is a fish-
preserving factory, bream, whiting, cray-fish, schnapper, and
other fish are caught along the coast ; and crabs and prawns
principally in the rivers and estuaries. Rock oysters are found
in great quantities all along the northern coast, and the mud oyster
in King George’s Sound.
These are very small at present. The chief are (1) flour mills
in nearly every agricultural district; (2) saw mills in timber
districts in the south west, &c. ; (3) railway carriage and boat-
building works at Fremantle ; (4) small manufactories of various
kinds, chiefly in Fremantle and Perth.
In most of the principal towns Volunteer Companies are
found, and the total number of officers and men in the Colony is
640.


Weights and measures are British Imperial.
The average rent of a three-roomed house in towns is Bs., in
country, ss. per week, of a five-roomed one 12s. in towns and 9s.
in the country. The cost of hoard and lodging for single men is
los. to 255., and in Kimberley 30s. a week; for farm labourers see
note 1 below.
The retail price of provisions per lb. at Perth is roughly as
follows; at the Kimberley gold-fields and other distant places it is
generally highest:
Bacon - Is. to Is. 6 d. Milk, per quart - Ad. to (>d.
Beef - - 6c?. to B d. Mutton - - s d. to 7 d.
Bread - - 2d. Potatoes - - 1 \d. to 2d.
Butter - -10 d. to 2s. Sugar - - 2d. to A\d.
Coffee - - Is. to Is. 6 d. Tobacco - - sc. to ss. 6 d.
Cheese - - Is. 2d. to Is. 6d. Tea - - is. 4c?. to 2s. 6d.
Clothing in the large towns is 10 to 20 per cent, dearer than in
England, especially at country stations, but less is required than
here owing to the warm climate.
The rate of wages in the towns is roughly as follows, in the
country districts slightly lower
1. Without board and lodging—per day :
Blacksmiths, Fitters, Printers, Tailors, Wlieelwrights,
7s. to 8a; Boat-builders, 21. 10s. to 3/. per week.
Engineers, Bs. to 10a
Bricklayers, Carpenters, Joiners, Masons, Painters,
Plasterers, Plumbers, 7s. to 9s.
Gardeners, General Labourers in Town, 6s. to 7s.
Lumbermen, Miners, Platelayers, Strikers, Brickmakers,
Navvies, Shoemakers, and Quarrymen, 6s. and upwards.
In the Kimberley Division Gardeners get 21., Saddlers
and Gold-miners 41., and Wheelwrights and Butchers
5/. a week; Blacksmiths 20s. to 305., and Carpenters
20s. a day; general labourers 2s. an hour ; female
servants (scarce) 305., and farm hands 21. a week and
found.
2. With board and lodging :
a. Per week :
Farm Labourers, Ploughmen, 15s. to 20s.
b. Per year:
Shepherds, Stockriders, generally useful men on stations, SO/,
to 45/.
Married couples, servants on farms and stations, 50/. to 701.
Cooks and general female servants, 12/. to 28/.
Note 1, Farm labourers are usually boarded and lodged; and
single men preferred to married men with families.
„ 2. A high rate of wages does not necessarily imply a
demand for labour.
„ 3. Navvies work eight hours a day, most other trades
nine hours ; a few, 10; farm hands, sunrise to
sunset in the season.


There is some opening for farmers with capital, and a good
demand generally for female servants, milliners, and dressmakers.
Farmers should get experience of colonial farming before taking up
land. There seems generally little demand in the Colony at the
present time for more male emigrants from this country, unless
they have capital. A return received in January from Albany
states that there is a fair demand for farm hands at 21. to 4 1, a
month and board : and another from Mourambine states “no farm
« or station hands, or general labourers to be got, every one very
“ short-handed,” but adds “very few can give permanent employ-
« ment all the year round, as they are too poor.” These should
be prepared to turn their hands to all kinds of farm and station
work, or to cut down timber, or use a pick and shovel, and to
rough it in the bush and country districts. Even then they may
not obtain permanent work. Probably if the Midland Kailway
works are commenced there will be some demand for navvies.
Townsmen and mechanics are not wanted, and, if they go, must
never refuse to work outside their own particular trade. Gold-
miners may, with luck, do well in mining districts, but the
journeys are generally expensive, and the life is hard.
The resources of the Colony are no doubt great, and will be
developed in time. The last harvest was good, the wool market
is advancing, the Irwin coalfields and the Pilbarra goldfields pro-
mise well in the future, some public works are being carried out
on a small scale, and the probable advent of responsible govern-
ment may stimulate the Colony to fresh exertions. The comple-
tion of through communication between Albany and Perth is an
event of great importance, and should materially benefit the
Colony by opening up fresh land for settlement. Fair crops of
cereals and vegetables are grown, and the North supports large
numbers of stock. But the best opening probably lies in the
production of wine and fruits, for which both soil and climate
seem especially suitable.
Further information will be found in the Blue Book for Western
Australia, 1887, from which most of the figures in this handbook
are taken; in various official reports; in the Year Book for
1887; and in the Statistical Abstract for the several Colonial
and other Possessions of the United Kingdom, 1873 to 1887,
price 11 d. (Eyre & Spottiswoode, Fast Harding Street, E.C.).
Useful information may also be obtained from the excellent
“ Australian Handbook ” (Gordon & Gotch, St. Bride Street,
London) ; and the “ Colonial Office List 1889” (Harrison & Sons,
59, Pall Mall, London). The “Handy Guide to Emigration”
(S.P.C.K., Northumberland Avenue, London), price B d., post free
4c?., contains a list of the names and addresses of the various
emigration societies, &c.
Further information on Western Australia may be obtained from
the Crown Agents for the Colonies, Downing Street, London,
S.W., or from the Chief Clerk at the Emigrants’ Information
Office, 31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.


Note. — (l.) The committee of management will be glad to
receive suggestions and information, more especially from
Colonists. Any such communication will, if desired, be treated
as confidential.
(2.) The committee of management cannot return excess of
stamps sent for Handbooks; nor accept damaged stamps,
(3.) Revised editions of this Handbook are issued in the spring
of every year. The committee cannot undertake to insert in the
Handbook changes which occur during the year.


Agriculture, 19.
Albany, 8,9, 10.
Area of Western Australia, 3.
Arrival, best time for, 11.
Ashburton river, 4.
Banks, 13.
Beverley, 7.
Books, 24.
Bunbury, 7.
Busselton, 7.
Cambridge Gulf, 5, 9.
Carnarvon, 4.
Cattle, 4,5, 21,
Champion Bay, 6.
Climate, 8.
Clothing, 11, 23.
Coal, 19.
Cossack, 4.
Cost of living, 23.
Customs, 15.
De Grey river, 4.
Demand for labour, 18,
Derby, 5.
Divisions, Land, 3.
Dongara, 7.
Eastern Division, 3.
Education, 13.
Emigration in 1887, 12.
Employment, 11.
Eucla Division, 3.
Exports, 13.
Fares from England, 9.
Fisheries, 22.
Food, price of, 23.
Forests, 18.
Fortescue river, 4.
Fremantle, 7,9, 10.
Friendly Societies, 14.
Fruits, 8, 16, 21.
Gascoyne Division, 4.
Geraldton, 6.
Goats, 21.
Gold, 5, 19.
Government, 12.
G reenough, 7.
Guano, 21.
Guildford, 7.
INDEX.
Health, 8.
Horses, 4,5, 7, 21.
Hospitals, 14.
Imports, 13.
Irwin river, 6.
Minerals, 17, 18, 19.
Money, 13.
Murchison river, 4.
Oakover river, 4.
Ord river, 5.
Outfit, 11.
Passages, 9.
Passenger Acts, 9.
Pastoral, 17, 21.
Pearls, 22.
Pearl shells, 22.
Perth, 7.
Pigs, 21.
Poisoned lands, 17.
Poor Houses, 14.
Population, 12.
Port Augusta, 8.
Ports, 9.
Post, 14.
Products, 18.
Justice, Administration of, 13
Kimberley Division, 5.
King Sound, 9.
King George’s Sound, 9.
Labour Kegistry, 1 1 .
Land Transfer Act, 18.
Land Regulations, 16.
Liquors, 15.
Luggage, 11, 15.
Manufactures, 22.
Marriage, 15.
Masters and Servants Act, 15.
Mechanics' institutes, 14.
Nark\ Karra mines, 7.
Natives, 12, 22.
New Norcia, 7.
Northampton, 7.
North-West Division, 4.
Professional Persons, 12,


Rabbits, 15.
Railways, 14.
Religion, 13.
Rent, 23.
Revenue, 13.
Rockingham, 8.
Roebourne, 4.
Sailings, 11.
Sandalwood, 19.
Savings banks, 13.
Sharks Bay, 4.
Sheep, 4,5, 21.
Ship-kit, 11.
Shipping, 9.
South- West Division, 6.
Summary, 24.
Swan river, 7.
TeLEO-KAPHS, 14.
Timber, 8, 18.
Tools, 11.
Vaccination, 15.
Vasse, 7.
Victoria District, 6.
Volunteers, 22.
Wages, 23.
Weights and Measures, 23.
Wheat, price and yield of, 20..
Wyndliam, 5.
Yokk, 7.


London: Printed by Etke and Spottiswoode,
Printers to the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty.
For Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
[1340.— 2500.—5/89.]




The following Publications are drawn up for the use of
Emigrants by the Emigrants’ Information Office: —
Price.
1. A Poster—exhibited in all Post Offices - - Free.
2. Quarterly Circulars on Canada, and the Australasian
and South African Colonies - - - Free,
And the following Handbooks :
1. Canada. Handbook, with Map - - hi
2. New South Wales. Handbook with Map - hi
3. Victoria. ~ „ ‘
4. South Australia. ~ » "
5. Queensland. „ »> '
G. Western Australia. „
„ - fa
7. Tasmania. „ « " FA
8. New Zealand. „ „ *
9. Cape Colony. „ » * FA
10. Natal. o >»
11. Professional Handbook dealing with Profes-
sions in the Colonies - - - hi
12. The above 11 Handbooks, bound together in
stiff cover, with 10 Maps - -1.?. 6d.
All the above may be obtained post free from the Chief Clerk,
Emigrants’ Information Office, 31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.
The Handbooks may also be obtained, either directly or through
any Bookseller, from Eyre and Spottiswoode, East Harding
Street, Fleet Street, E.C.; or Adam and Charles Black, 6, North
Bridge, Edinburgh; or Hodges, Figgis, and Co., 104, Grafton
Street, Dublin.
