

Western Victoria
in the Forties
Reminiscences of a Pioneer.
CHARLES ML GRAY
who landed at Port Philip in 1839.
Reprinted from Hamilton “ Spectator,” 1932.


'
■
■
■


Western Victoria in the Forties
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.
By Charles M. Gray who landed at Port Philip in 1839.
Mr. Oharles Gray, the author of these reminiscences, was horn
in Anstruther, Fife, Scotland, in 1818. He comes of naval and mi-
litary stock, but being of an adventurous spirit he decided to try his
fortune in Australia rather than take a commission in the Royal Ma-
rines, in which regiment his father advanced to the rank of major.
An uncle in the Royal Marines was captain in the contingent
which went to the relief of Lucknow, and whose name is on the obe-
lisk on Southsea Parade (England).
On Monday of the last week of January, 1839, I left Anstruther for
Edinburgh by the Balcarras coach (driver, John Beverige), and on the
second of February sailed from Leith in the barque “Midlothian’’
(Captain George Morrison) for Victoria, then known as Port Phillip. This
was the first ship that had left Great Britain for Port Phillip direct. I
only now (in 1890) know of two persons alive, who were my fellow pas-
sengers, one a first, the other a second class.
The passage from Leith to the Downs was extremely rough and un-
pleasant, so I and my fellow voyagers felt somewhat pleased upon cast-
ing anchor at Deal, with a prospect of remaining there for some days for
change of wind. Most of the passengers went on shore every morning
during the time we remained, and greatly enjoyed having our feet on
land again after the tossing about we had had. After five days’ detention
the anchor was again raised, and sail set for the promised land. With
the exception of one night we had pleasant weather during the whole of
the voyage.
In passing within a short distance of the Island of Trinidad, on
which we had been told there were wild pigs, I and a few others of the
passengers prevailed upon the captain to give us a boat that we might land
and try to bag some of the porkers. After a longer pull than we expec-


ted to have, the first mate (who was in charge of the boat) failed to dis-
cover a safe landing, so we returned to the ship without having commit-
ted slaughter. We were 135 days from our leaving Leith until sighting
O'ape Otway—the high land generally first seen.
In 1839 there were no charts published of Hobson’s Bay—so that al-
though our captain saw an opening in the land which he believed to be
the entrance, he hesitated to venture in until after standing off, and for
some time he espied one of the small craft then engaged carrying sheep,
cattle, flour, etc., from Tasmania to the new settlement, making for the
opening. Having seen this vessel enter, the captain thought he might
follow, which he did successfully.
There were no pilots at Queenscliff in those days, or buoys at the
channels, so that although safely inside the Heads there was nothing to
note our course to Williamstown. The captain, therefore, anchored near
what is now the quarantine ground, that he might wi+h a boat explore the
bay and learn the depth of water, which, having been done, he determined
u,pon the course to be taken next morning. The sun having set and dark-
ness gathered round us the gleam of a fire on the shore at no great dis-
tance was observed, and what seemed to be the dusky forms of aboriginals
flitting round it. Though anxious to land and interview the occupants of
the camp it was now too late for this, so we curbed our curiosity as best we
could, and turned in for the night.
All were astir early, and many willing hands assisted the sailors to
heave up the anchor. The breeze was favourable for the course the cap-
tain had decided upon taking, so our ship held on very well for a time,
but at length the lead showed the water to be gradually shallowing, which
ended in our getting aground on a sand-bank. However, the ground being
soft and the weather calm, our ship received no damage, and an anchor
and warp having been put out it was easily heaved off on the tide flow-
ing again, and we were soon anchored in the same position as last
evening.
To pass the time while the eaptairr again explored the channel, some
of the passengers got a boat and rowed to shore in the direction of where
the fire of last evening was seen. Upon landing from our boat and walking
a little distance inland we found that instead of a tribe of blacks, the fire
had been made by two Tasmanian expirees, who were engaged lime burn-
ing. They had prepared their supper of kangaroo steaks and damper, of
which we were asked to partake. Having broken bread for the first time
in Australia and eaten marsupial flesh, we embarked to return to our ship,
taking with us in their boat the two lime burners, whom we hoped might
be able to give our captain some information regarding the channel. In
return for the hospitality we had received the captain gave our hosts some
salt beef and biscuits, which they seemed to prize highly.
Next day we met with little more success than on the former one, for
before proceeding far through the channel we got aground and had again
to warp our ship off and east anchor for the night. Many of the pas-
sengers spent the afternoon on shore at the opposite side of the bay.
Here we sighted a herd of cattle, which we greenhorns thought to be wild
ones, so set about stalking, but this w T e fortunately did not accomplish,
otherwise might have got into a sad scrape as, at that time, cattle were
2
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


very valuable in Port Phillip. After shooting a few gaudy plum aged par-
rots we returned to our ship.
On the fourth day after reaching Hobson’s Bay, and whilst still at
anchor, a small schooner was sighted coming from Melbourne. Our cap-
tain sent a boat to her. and from the captain received a rough chart of the.
Western Channel, through which we had been trying to sail. Hoping now
to accomplish our voyage, we got up anchor once more and set sail, but
had only proceeded a short distance when we again felt ourselves aground.
When we had for the third time got into this unpleasant fix, a large
barque with all sails set passed through te Heads, and made for the
eastern channel. 1 w T as at the time standing beside our captain, who,
stamping the neck in an unpleasant mood, said to me “that fellow will
come to grief before long.” He had scarce uttered these words when we
saw that the ship had run aground, not in the cautious way we had, so
that it could be warped off again, but had with all sails set. gone hard and
fast on the sand-bank. This mishap to the rival ship, was, I fear, not
regretted by, but rather a solace to our captain, who, after getting his
ship fairly afloat, again resumed his usual cheerful manner, but was un-
decided as to whether he should try the passage to Williamstown again or
reave Hobson’s Bay and go on to Sydney.
This ill-fated vessel (the name of which I have forgotten) had run
aground hard and fast. She was, I believe, lightered by several small
craft sent from Melbourne, and at length got off, taken up the river Yarra
and patched as best could be done there then. She left for Sydney, but
must have foundered at sea, never being heard of again.
It was reported by some of the early stockmen at Gippsland that one
or more white women were living with one of the aboriginal tribes in that
district. If such was the case they were likely to have been the ladies who
were passengers by, this ill-fated vessel.
Whilst our captain was considering what he had best do, a whale
boat was seen approaching us. In it was a Captain Bowden, who had
been whaling on the coast for years and trading between Port Phillip and
Tasmania. He was now keeping a small inn at Williamstown and offered
to pilot us to the anchorage, which we reached next day, and were pleased
that our annoyances were at an end.
A boat was soon got and a party made up to land. We visited Captain
Bowden’s hostelry and partook of his liquor, which was not at all palatable
after the good tipple we had been accustomed to on the voyage- Mrs.
Bowden was, however, prevailed upon to give us a loaf of bread, which we
conveyed on board for the ladies, who had not tasted soft bread during
the whole voyage.
Williamstown, now a flourishing municipality with jetties, docks, rail-
way, etc., consisted in 1839 of Bowden’s public house and three or four
mud huts.
AVe returned to the ship for the night, and, after breakfast next morn-
ing got a boat and rowed across to Sandridge, now known as Port
Melbourne, three miles from Melbourne proper. At the time I write of
there was not a single building of any sort on it; now it is a large,
bustling place with jetties, railway, bonded stores, etc., and has generally
a fleet of the finest vessels in the world loading and unloading.
3
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


We followed a foot track, believing it to lead in tire direction of
Melbourne, and soon found ourselves in sight of it. An old man who
seemed to be earning a living by ferrying people across the Yarra Yarra
Elver, in a small boat, took us over. It required but a short time to ex-
plore Melbourne in those days, as Collins-street was the only one marked
by a few small wooden buildings and tents. The city now covers; an area
of many miles and has in it some of the finest and loftiest buildings in
the world.
Some three days after reaching Williamstown two of my fellow
passengers, Mr. W. Eussell, Mr. Thomas Horsburgh, and myself arranged
for a passage to Geelong in a small schooner named the “Lapwing.” We
were a night on the passage, which we spent 'sitting in the cuddy of the
little craft- Having spied a quarter of mutton hanging to the rigging of
our vessel, we, although supplied with a hamper of eatables and liquor
upon leaving the “Midlothian,” suggested to one of the crew that
picking a chop might help to pass the time. This he agreed to do, and
at once got down the meat, and on the deck set about cutting it into
chops with an old rusty knife and a wood axe. It was then transferred to
a grimy looking frying pan, and when cooked brought to the cuddy in a
rather dingy tin dish. I asked whether any salt was procurable. ‘ ‘Plenty,”
was the prompt reply. Having watched the cutting up of the mutton, I
was curious to know where the salt was brought from, so, ascending a few
steps to the companion ladder, I saw our caterer take a lump of rock salt
from behind some ropes, and with the woodaxe chip a piece off and pound
it on the deck until about the size of buck shot, then gathered it into
his hands, brought it down and threw it qn the table, saying “there’s
plenty of salt for you.’ ’ We reached Geelong early the second day. W©
were rowed from the schooner in the dinghy by one of the crew, who carried
us to the shore on his back.
At this time Geelong was a very small place with not more than six or
eight small huts, and the only place of entertainment was a two-roomed
■slab hut of the roughest description, kept by an eccentric individual of
the name of McNaughton. None but small vessels of light draught could
get near Geelong. The bay was too shallow. Now, by dint of dredging,
large vessels can be brought to the wharves and leave heavily laden with
wool and other produce. Geelong is now a city with a large number of
inhabitants. In it is a large custom house and other Government buildings,
besides many large places of business, stores, wool warehouses, and round
the bay are many handsome residences.
In Geelong we met a young settler who was to start next morning
with his light cart and one horse to journey somewhat in the direction of
the run of Mr. George Eussell (brother of my companion of that name),
which was our destination. The horse had as much in the cart as he could
draw, so we had to walk the whole twenty miles (a long journey for men
just off shipboard). It was late when we arrived at where we were to
stop for the night—an out-station of the lower Leigh, belonging to the
Derwent Co., and, strange to say, the overseer there, Eobert Wilson, was
brother of a schoolmaster I had known at Arncroach, near Anstruther,
Wilson made me and my two companions as comfortable as possible in
his small hut, and I need not say that after our long walk we all slept
4
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


■soundly. After a good night’s rest and a hearty breakfast of mutton
chops and damper, we started for Golf Hill, Mr. Russell’s station, on the
River Leigh.
A GRAY MEMORIAL.
“Chas. Gray camped here, Sept., 1840,” states the inscription on this cairn
A bush fire had, in the previous summer, swept the country of grass,
which had, however, grown again by the time of our visit, and was
beautifully green. There was not a hoof print, or a broken piece of ground
to be seen, so that I and my associates declared the valley of the Leigh to
be the prettiest place we had ever seen. We found Mr. Russell at home,
and received from him a true bushman’s welcome. This run Mr. Russell
had found and occupied only a short time before our arrival, and had not
had time to erect more than a hut for his men and store for his provisions,
in which he was living. When evening came we were given some blankets
each and made our beds on top of the flour sacks, where we all slept
■soundly until awakened by the “Settlers’ Clock” (the laughing Jackass)
and the sweet note of the magpie- After resting a few days and getting
our feet, which were much blistered by the journey, tolerably sound, we
assisted Mr. Russell in various ways, principally in trenching ground for a
garden in front of where Mr. Russell proposed building his permanent
house.
5
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


After being at the Leigh for a few weeks, Mr. Eussell, his brother and
I started one morning to visit a station that had been taken up near the
township now known as Camperdown. Having got somewhat out of our
course and prolonged the journey, but for the thoughtfulness of the person,
we were about to visit (Mr. Henry Gibb) in lighting a large tire and
throwing lighted sticks into the air to attract our attention, we could not
have reached our destination that night.
During our sojourn with Mr. Gibb we visited many beautiful places
on that tine richly grassed country. Notable amongst these was the lake
(extinct crater) now named ‘ ‘ Bason Banks,” the trees around which were
all alive and green, the ground covered with a luxuriant crop of kangaroo
grass, which could have been mowed and made into hay. After spend-
ing four days with Mr. Gibb we started for home, making a detour which
occupied two days.
I remained with Mr. Eussell until the month of November, when
hearing of a small lot of sheep for sale I wrote to two of my fellow-pas-
sengers, Mr. W. E. Scott and Mr. John Marr, who had agreed to join me
in the purchase of stock and to squat together for a time. Mr. Scott
joined me at Mr. Eussell’s, and werod© together to where the sheep for
sale were running, purchased them, to be delivered after shearing, the
Ist January, 1840. Upon getting the sheep we removed them to a small
run which had been previously occupied by two brothers of the name of
Watson, who had removed to the Hopkins Eiver near Mirrang, now the
estate of Mr. Eobert Hood. We remained on this small run until Sep-
tember, when we took a run on a tributary of the Hopkins Elver, the first
known as Bald Hill Creek, afterwards as Nareeb Nareeb. 1 may men-
tion that upon leaving our first run we sold it to an adjoining squatter
for fifty ewes.
Whilst at our first squattage I went out kangaroo hunting one day
with Stephen Ewing, who had just occupied a run near us, and *G. W.
Craig, who had been one of my fellow passengers. Galloping after a
“boomer,’’ my horse got both feet into a deep hole, which was so covered
with long grass that he could not see it. We both performed a somersault,
I lighting on the back of my head a considerable distance in front of him.
When found by my two companions they thought I was killed, as for some
*The “G. W. Craig” mentioned above may be G- N. Craig, one of the
early holders of that part of the Grangeburn run, known as Grangeburn
No. 2, on part of which Hamilton is built. Mr. A. S. Kenyon, kindly
writing in another connection, stated: “George Napier Craig, born in
Edinburgh and trained as an accountant, arrived in Port Phillip in June,
1839. Early in 1840 he took a position with Stephen Ewen, of Marida
Yallock, and a little later became a partner with him in a run nearby.
The district, between Colac and the Hopkins was then known as Taylor’s
country. In 1841 he was in business as a merchant in Little Collins-
street. In July, 1847, along with his brother, Douglas Bannatyne Craig,
of whom I have no particulars, he acquired the licence of Grangeburn No.
2, the name being altered to Prestonholme in comparatively recent times.
, , . After the goldfields G. N. Craig went to Bendigo, where he be-
came a prominent mining man and legal manager. He died there in 1907.”
—Ed. “H.S. ”
6
REMINISCENCES OP A PIONEER.


time I showed no signs of life. However, after loosening my necktie and
bathing my temples with water I recovered somewhat, and was lifted on
to my horse and taken home. There was no doctor or druggist from whom
I could procure a liniment to rub my neck, which became very stiff and
sore. I did not recover from my fall for several weeks. When suffi-
ciently recovered from my fall, there being some good timber for split-
ting near us, we thought it might be well to occupy our time by getting a
few slabs to build a hut on the run we were to occupy, so myself and a
young gentleman of the name of Ingram (son of a clergyman in the Is-
land of Uvst), who was living Avith us, started off on a splitting expedi-
tion. Neither of us had seen a tree split, so were ignorant of how to go
about it. Seeing a tree that had been clipped and tried, probably by
some old bushman, we thought it well to begin with it, so with axe and
crosscut saw soon had it doivn and cut to the length required for slabs.
Having accomplished this we received a visit from two men aaTio were en-
gaged splitting near us. Pipes were lighted, and after a short yarn one
of our visitors examined the log and said “that ought to go well off the
back.’’ “Yes,” said my mate, “we were thinking so.” Our Ausitors hav-
ing left I asked my companion what could be meant by ‘‘off the back”
“Oh! goodness knows, but let us go at it.’’ So at we went, and with
our iron wedges to start and open the slab, and a number of long wooden
ones Ave managed to get slabs, some of which were nearly three feet broad.
The usual method is to split the log in half and quarters, then take the
slabs of whatever sort of stuff may be required from these quarters..
Having got as many slabs as we thought necessary they were carted to our
hut and adzed doivn thin that they might be light and handy for carting
to the neAV run.
Eiding over the run one day, I came upon the scene of one of the nu-
merous conflicts Fred Taylor was said to have had Avith the natives, Avho
were numerous and daring in this district. The blacks seem to have de-
camped suddenly, leaving their spears, waddies, etc., behind. These had
been thrown on a fire and rendered useless. Some very fine spears, one
of which must taken many weeks, perhaps months, to make, seeing
that the natives had nothing better than flints and shells to cut and
scrape with, were burned in two, leaving the jagged top which made one
shudder to think the dreadful Avound it would have inflicted if put through
a person’s body. Several of these spear heads I collected and sent home
to my friends in Scotland.
I must not omit to mention a short ride undertaken by Mr. J. G.
Ware, a neighbour occupying a run some five miles off, and myself. We
thought to discover within a short distance of home a nice piece of coun-
try, lake or pond of fresh water. About sunset we made the Hopkins,
near to Mirrang, which has been previously mentioned. Seeing smoke
from a native encampment on the bank of the river, we thought it well
to drive the darkeys away before we lay down for the night, so discharged
a pistol, which made them decamp. When they had gone, curiosity led us
to examine the mia mias in which, along Avith the usual aboriginal parapher-
nalia, we discovered a Day and Martin’s blacking tin. How it had got
there sadly puzzled us, as at this time.no one nearer than Geelong (some 120
miles off) used blacking. The tin must have been handed from tribe to
7
REMINISCENCES OP A PIONEER.


tribe; still those between the Hopkins and Geelong were not then upon
friendly terms. But there the tin was. I regret exceedingly not having
put it in my pocket, as it would now have been considered a curiosity.
Whilst at this, our first run, a hut keeper belonging to a neighbour was
killed by the blacks, and the flour, tea, sugar, blankets, etc., in the hut
carried off.
About this time I had to make a journey to Geelong with a cart and
two horses for the purpose of procuring provisions. During the night
that I camped at a chain of ponds called the ‘ ‘ Wardeyallock,’ ’ the wild
dogs, which were then very numerous, kept up a howl during the whole
night round my cart, over which 1 had thrown a sailcloth to form a tent
to sleep under. From the noise made there must have been a pack of 15
or 20.
After remaining at our first run until August, Mr. Scott, Mr. Ingram
and I went out in search of a run, and after seeing various places chose
“ Green Hill Dreek,” now known as “Nareeb Nareeb, ” a tributary of the
Hopkins, and took possession by putting our sheep on in the following
month of September. We carted the slabs from the station we had left
and erected them in a temporary manner, making a shed to shear our
sheep in, and covering it with a sailcloth.
After finishing the shearing and sending the wool to Geelong, Mr.
Scott went there and sold it. Meanwhile, Mr. Ingram and I occupied our-
selves cutting timber for and erecting a hut with the slabs we had split.
Soon after Scott’s return, he and I went to Melbourne and purchased
a small herd of cattle to put on our run. We purchased the cattle from
Kirk and Harden, of “Glen Yale,” on the Plenty Eiver. In driving the
cattle from Melbourne we had good weather, so got on pleasantly until
after crossing Taylor’s Eiver, at what is now the township of Darlington.
Before we had time to prepare supper it commenced to rain and blow
great guns, and as there was not a bush about with which to make a
breakwind we had to withstand the full force of the storm. Before the
storm had reached its worst I had collected a few small sticks, intending
to boil a pannikin of water to make tea, but just as the bubbles began
to rise in the pot the sticks under it gave way, it toppled over and drowned
out what little fire there was, so we had to abandon all hope of warm tea
and content ourselves with a piece of dry bread and drink of water. It
was now raining very heavily and dark as pitch, so, having got the river
between the cattle and where they had been brought from, we thought it
best to leave them until morning. There was no fire or shelter of any sort,
so I covered myself with my opussum rug and lay under it until it was so
■wet and heavy that I was glad to throw it off and sit without it. We spent
a most uncomfortable night and were delighted when day-dawn appeared.
The cattle we found all safe, so after eating a piece of damper and taking
a drink of water we started on our journey, wet as if we had been in a
water hole, but as there was no hut within many miles where a fire could
be found there was nothing for it but to move on, letting our clothes dry
on us. Next night was fair and, as there was lots of wood, we got good
fire and plenty of warm tea, which cheered us.
8
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


Our next stage was Hopkins Hill, which some ten months previously
had been taken up by Henry Gibb for Captain Wood and Hr. Officer, of
Tasmania, and stocked with sheep brought from there. Next day we
reached home, and were pleased that our troubles were at an end.
I now set about finishing the hut begun before starting for Melbourne.
We were at this time visited by Mr. G. D. Bourisquot, who was afterwards
proprietor of ‘‘The Melbourne Daily News.” He assisted me in building
the chimney of the hut. The only tools we had were an old broken axe
and a trowel made of a piece of thin split wood. Mr. Scott undertook to
look after the cattle, riding round them two or three times a day until
they were settled on the run. Being principally dairy cattle, consequently
quiet, they were not troublesome. With a couple of men I now set about
splitting slabs for a hut for our men and building a wool shed.
Having again occasion to visit Geelong for stores, I started with the
bullock team and driver, it being necessary then for two to travel with a
provision dray that one might remain to protect it from the blacks, whilst
the teamster went to look after his bullocks. We got on very well as
far as the “Wardeyallock” (the chain of ponds formerly mentioned),
hobbled the bullocks and turned them down by the creek for the night,
put the cover over the dray, boiled our quart pots, had our supper and
turned in. Getting up at daylight, I set about making a fire to boil our
teapot for breakfast, whilst the bullock driver took my horse to fetch his
team. He rode up and down the chain of ponds for a considerable distance,
returning about midday with my horse nearly knocked up. I then went
and soon picked up the tracks of the bullocks, which, after following for
some time and seeing the direction in which they were heading, the country
being a plain, I thought it well to canter on in the likelihood of overtaking
them. This, however, I failed in, and as it was getting dark and my
horse knocked up, there was nothing for it but take the saddle off and
secure him for the night by hobbling with a stirrup leather. Having done
this I thought to solace myself with a whiff of my pipe, but found upon
rummaging my pockets that there was flint and steel (a knife), but no
tinder (there were no matches in those days), so had to tear a piece of my
shirt and rub it in the dry ashes of my pipe, by which means I hoped a
spark from the flint would ignite the rag. After striking the flint with
my knife for a considerable time without succeeding, the rag got so cold
and damp from the dew falling that I had to put it next to my skin and
allow it to remain there until dry from the heat of my body, then giving
another rub in the dry ashes of my pipe I set t« work striking the flint
with my knife, and at length succeeded in getting a light, with which my
pipe was started, but as there was no timber near I had to do without a
fire. Smoking was kept on until I became so thirsty that, having .no water
near, the pipe had to be abandoned. Whilst sitting shivering and thinking
of the wretchedly cold, uncomfortable night in prospect for me, I heard
the clink of hobble chains at a considerable distance and felt certain that
it proceeded from my bullocks, which I must have passed whilst they were
lying down in some ravine or other place where I could not see them- I
could hear my horse eating and hobbling about, so .I picked up my saddle
and bridle to carry towards him, fearing that if left where I had been
sitting they might not be found in the dark.
9
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


To catch my horse, put bridle and saddle on, take the stirrup leather
off his legs and put the stirrup to the saddle was soon accomplished. I
then mounted and made my way across the plains in the dark to where I
heard the hobbles and at length got ahead of my renegade bullocks. A
few faint stars were visible, so, selecting one which I thought would lead
in the direction of the dray, I started to drive my deserters, but soon came
on water, which, fearing to cross lest it should be deep or boggy, I had to
go round, and by so doing lost sight of my guiding star. This sort of
annoyance happened several times, but I managed to keep a tolerably
correct course, having made the “ Wardeyallock” very near to where the
dray was. During the night and early next morning I crossed several
deep ravines on the plain; in these the mist was so dense that I could
scarcely grope my way through it, and having only a calico shirt on and
no coat I felt bitterly cold. When after a cold, weary ride (the bullocks
being in hobbles they could only be driven at a snail’s pace) I reached
the dray as the morning star was appearing, called the bullock driver and
desired him to get some water to make me a pot of warm tea. Upon re-
turning from the creek he said, “No wonder you are cold, sir, I broke ice
on the water a quarter of an inch thick before filling the pannikin.” Soon
after we had breakfast there was light enough to yoke the bullocks and
put them to the dray. Seated on the dray, with my tired horse led behind,
we pursued our journey, reaching Golf Hill (Mr. Russell’s) in the afternoon.
I need scarcely say that I was thoroughly knocked up and slept soundly
that night. Our journey to Geelong and return home with our supplies was
accomplished without further annoyance from the bullocks, which were
hobbled very short and closely watched.
The natives and wild dogs were somewhat troublesome for a time, and,
for several of the first years of my squatting life I slept with a loaded
pistol under my pillow, and frequently, when I heard the sheep in the yard
restless, knowing that either blacks or dingoes were about, had to rise of
a cold, wet night and with nothing on but the garment I was sleeping in,
run round the folds, generally discharging a pistol, which would frighten
the dingoes if they were about, and let the blacks know that I was on the
alert, should they be “mutton stalking.” When the blacks had become
a little civilised, understood a few words of English, and I knew somewhat
of their language, a considerable number of them were about the station
one day when I was the only white man left there. An old lubra came
close to me, walked round and round, eyeing me very intently, then drum-
ming on the skin side of'her opossum rug, commenced frisking and jumping
about round me exclaiming at the pitch of her voice “ Tirrootmerrie —Tir-
rootmerrie Wurr-r-r-r. ” This drew the whole tribe round me, who joined
in the cry “Tirrootmerrie —Tirrootmerrie Wurr-r-r-r.’’ Not knowing what
this disturbance meant and being alone amongst these excited savages, I
did not feel comfortable. However, after succeeding in getting them
calmed somewhat, I learned that the lubra who commenced the uproar had
discovered in me her long lost “coolee” (or husband). The aborigines of
Australia believed implicitly that after death they would return to earth
as white people (jump up White-fellow). “Tirrootmerrie” was my name
when roaming the forests with a rug for my wardrobe, a waddy in my
hand and a bundle of spears over my shoulder. It was not the lubra alone
who recognised the “dear departed”—the whole tribe were equally con-
10
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


vineed of my identity. My daughter, Annie, is aware that .by the natives
on the station I was as often styled “ Tirrootmerrie ” as Mr. Gray. When
Madame “Tirrootmerrie” visited the station from time to time I gave
her some flour, tea and sugar, thinking it well to favour the delusion,
which it doubtless was, as whilst my neighbours’ sheep were being stolen
and their shepherds speared, no harm was done me—and I became a great
favourite with the tribe. Matters progressed pleasantly between my
former better half and I until at one of her visits she brought with her
three or four picaninnies and presented them to me as my offspring.
This entailed upon me a somewhat larger contribution of flour, etc., but I
thought it well not to repudiate the relationship.
One of the most helpful and faithful of the natives ivas one called
Timour, who was head of the tribe. When he died at an advanced age he
was buried in the station graveyard at Nareeb Nareeb. The ceremony was
carried out by members of his tribe, I providing a large gum tree from
which two pieces of bark were cut. The body was laid between the pieces
of bark and secured by thongs of kangaroo sinew.
Before we were able to fence a paddock for our horses one was
generally kept tethered with a long rope, and the grass was then so lux-
uriant that, the tether being removed to fresh ground three or four times
a day, a horse did very well. By keeping one tied, particularly if it wa*
a leader, the others would remain with it, or if they strayed a short dist-
ance one was left to look for them on. Upon one occasion the tethered
horse slipped the rope and they all went off. Mr. Marr and. I went in
search of them on foot for two days without success. On the third 1
got upon their tracks, ran them out and found the absconders several
miles from home- A quiet old mare allowed me to catch her, but having
no bridle I could not ride through the thick bush without something to
guide her. So to accomplish this I put a piece of stick about the thick-
ness of my thumb and seven or eight inches long, and round this at each
end I cut a notch into which were tied the ends of my neck scarf which
was half of a large square of black silk cut on the bias or angle thus
making it a considerable length. The stick was put in the mare’s mouth
as a bit, and with my neck-tie as reins I mounted and galloped home,
driving the other horses before me.
After Mr. Scott, Mr. Marr and I had been together for about six
years we agreed to separate, Marr and I purchasing Scott’s share of the
stock. To enable us to do this we resolved to sell the cattle, and as the
only market then for such stock was at Adelaide, we determined to drive
them there. Mr. Marr remained on the station to look after the sheep,
whilst I went with the cattle. I started in the month of September, by
which time there had been a great deal of rain and the country was m a
very boggy state. There was scarcely a fair day during our journey,
everything on the dray with our bedding and provisions got wet. I had
frequently to get a man to take one end of my blanket to wring the water
out of it before I turned in to sleep. Upon getting as far as the Eiver
Murray I left the cattle in charge of the men and rode on to Adelaide to
look for a purchaser. This I was not long in finding.
I must mention a rather unpleasant adventure which occurred to me
when returning to deliver the cattle. There is a range of hills between
Adelaide and the Murray, with a creek at the foot of them named “The
11
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


Brimmer/’ which, after rain, runs very rapidly, and is dangerous to
cross. Upon reaching the crossing place I observed tracks, as if of per-
sons having crossed that day. So I spurred my horse into the water, soon
to find that he could not swim, but went almost completely under in mid-
stream, so, with long thigh boots and heavy pea coat I had to throw my-
self off and swim ashore. To make matters worse, the dreadful horse
turned and made for the side he came in at, so I had to do the same. This
shows that, like myself, every boy should be taught to swim. Beaching
shore, and having caught my horse, I examined the tracks which I had
thought were of some one crossing that day, and found that they only
went a very short distance into the water, turned, and went out on the
grass. Following the tracks down the creek, I found a party of stockmen
crossing. They had a light rope, which a black boy swam across with, ancf
when this was attached to the horse’s neck he was drawn across. When
this party had all crossed I got the use of the rope, with which my horse
was taken across, but as he could not swim with me on his back I pre-
ferred having the roge brought over and tied round my waist that I might
be pulled across also. I was so wet from my first ducking that a second
would make me no worse. Having got across, my garments were tho-
roughly soaked, and my long boots full of water, so, as the best means of
emptying them, I laid myself on the grass and got one of the party to lift
my feet, put me on my head, and so ran the water out of my boots.
My intended resting place for the night was a small public house on
the Murray, some fifteen or eighteen miles off. In my wet state and the
weather bitterly cold I felt that the journey would be too much for me,
and longed for a resting place where there was a fire to dry my clothes
and warm me. After having ridden a couple or three miles I had the good
fortune to come upon an out-station, a very small slab hut. Biding up to
the door, an old Scotch woman came out. I told her in “braid Scotch”
the misfortune I had met with, and asked her to let me remain for the
night, if only to sit by the fire. Seeing the sorry plight I was in, she
told me to secure my horse, and that she would do the best she could for
me. The kind old woman gave me some of her husband’s dry clothes to
put on, then she and I wrung the water out of mine and hung them up to
dry. Towards evening the two shepherds (one the husband of the old
Scotch woman) arrived with their flocks. We had supper, with the inevit-
able pipe and a stiff yarn about Port Phillip, where the married man had
been. When bed time arrived I was told that the only sleeping place
they could offer me was in the box with the watchman (the unmarried
shepherd). This watch box, in which a man sleeps to guard the sheep
from blacks and wild dogs, is a skillion shaped box six feet long by two
feet three inches wide, on four short legs, with handles at each end like a
hand barrow, so that it can be easily carried arid placed near the sheep-
fold. The walls of thin boards are three feet in front and two behind.
In this box, lying head to feet with the watchman, I spent the night—and
glad I was to get such good quarters—where I slept soundly. Hext morn-
ing I was up betimes, had breakfast, thanked, and rewarded the old
Scotch woman, mounted my horse, and made my way to the Murray Eiver,
which I crossed, and soon joined my men with the cattle.
12
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


The purchaser of the cattle arrived in a day or two. They were de-
livered, and I returned to Adelaide, where, after spending fourteen days
visiting the famous Burra Burra copper mine and other places of interest, I
took passage for Melbourne in a small barque called the Tigress, comman-
ded by Captain Scott, whose father I afterwards found had been a captain
in the same corps of Eoyal Marines as my father.
Before leaving Adelaide I sold by description another herd of be-
tween six and seven hundred belonging to my friend, Mr. Bussell'. Upon
arriving in Melbourne by the Tigress I purchased a horse to ride to Na-
reeb Nareeb, spending a night with Mr, Bussell to arrange about lifting
the cattle.
Nareeb Nareeb Homestead.
Finding that Mr. Marr was getting on satisfactorily at Nareeb Na-
reeb, I started for Melbourne, purchased horses and other things for my
journey, rode to Mr. Bussell’s with the men I had engaged, took delivery
of the cattle, and started. During the first part of the journey I had
considerate trouble in watching the cattle at night, as they were rather
wild, and, notwithstanding my vigilance, the men allowed a few to escape,
but the weather being fine during the journey I had a pleasant trip. Ar-
rived at the place for delivery, I left the cattle and rode into Adelaide to
report my arrival to the purchaser, who soon came out, took delivery, and
gave me bills in payment.
After spending a few days in Adelaide I started to ride home, accom-
panied by a man, one of a party who had driven cattle from Sydney. My
13
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


agent spoke to me of this man, whom his employer said was a decent fel-
low, so I was glad to have his company during my journey. All went well
until the first night we camped in the scrub at “McGrath’s Flat, ’’ where
there was a well. We made our “wirley” (breakwind of boughs), had
supper and a pipe, spread our rugs on the ground, and lay down. Soon
after getting to sleep I was awakened by my companion making a strange
noise, and his body seemingly shaking. Throwing some gum leaves on the
fire to make light that I might see what was the matter I discovered that
my companion was in an epileptic fit, foaming at the mouth, etc. I called
to some blacks who were camped a short distance from me, and at length
succeeded in getting one of them to bring a pot of water with which I
bathed the sick man’s temples and hands, and washed the froth from his
mouth. Sitting on the ground all night with his head on my lap, I longed
for daybreak, which seemed as if it would never appear. By the time it
did my companion was slightly better, but still insensible and unable to sit
up. In my unpleasant predicament I resolved to send a message to a Mr.
Giles, who had a station on the edge of the scrub some miles away. So
took a leaf from my pocket diary, wrote a pencil note to him, which a
blackfellow, under promise of some tobacco, agreed to carry to Mr. Giles,
who, upon hearing the sad plight I was in, sent a light cart, into which
the invalid was lifted and sent to the station. Having got rid of my trou-
blesome mate, I saddled my horse and proceeded on my way.
After journeying three or four days alone in the scrub, where the note
of a bird is never heard, I reached a station near the South Australian
and Victorian boundary, and in a few days more reached Nareeb Nareeb,
where I found that in my absence my partner, Mr. Marr, had got the sheep
shorn, etc.
After remaining at Nareeb Nareeb for some time assisting in the
usual work on the station, finding that the bills taken in payment of cattle
had not been honoured upon reaching maturity, I determined to ride over
to Adelaide. For several days of the first part of my journey I had sta-
tions to call at and stop the night, but on leaving the last of these
“Lawson’s’’—l omitted to get a piece of cooked meat and damper. This
I did not discover until several miles on my journey, so did not return,
hoping to get fish from the blacks when I reached the “Coorong’’ (an
arm of the sea which from Lake Alexandrina runs inland for many miles.
In this, however, I was disappointed, as, upon reaching the water I found
that the natives, with the exception of two old lubras, had gone inland on
a hunting expedition. I rummaged in the beenaeks (food bags) of these
old dames to find only one small fish, which was so decidedly “high’’
that even after two days and nights without food T could not eat it. So
had to content myself with my pipe and pannikin of tea. I had the best
part of two days more of enforced fasting. However, aided by the tea
and tobacco, I managed to reach Mr. Giles’s station, where I remained the
night, and fared sumptuously on mutton and damper.
Starting after breakfast I rode as far as the Eiver Murray, crossed
on a small punt, which with the weight of myself and horses seemed to
bend about like a sheet of thin tin on the water. Stopping the night at
the only house of accommodation there was (a two-roomed hut built of
reeds cut on the river), I started after breakfast, taking the road for Ade-
14
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


laide, which led past the hut of the old Scotch woman who was so kind to
me after my ducking in the “Brimmer” Creek. After a yarn and panni-
kin of tea with my humane hostess, I pursued my journey, and upon reach-
ing Adelaide saw the agent (Mr. John Baker), who had sold the cattle
and prevailed upon him in consideration of a pretty stiff commission to
take up the bill and give me cash for the amount of it. At this time ex-
change between Adelaide and Melbourne was extremely high, owing to
there being no overland mail or even steamships running.
After the large amount paid the agent, I was averse to being mulct
in a further sum by way of exchange, so took gold for the amount of the
bill (several thousand pounds), had it put in a bag and tightly rolled in a
rug to prevent its jingling. It was then strapped on to the saddle of my
led horse, and off I started for Nareeb Nareeb. I got as far as the Mur-
ray the first day. The next three nights I had to camp out, and regretted
being overtaken by three men, who were journeying so far in the same
direction. I would rather have been alone than in the company of stran-
gers, but there was no help for it. Upon reaching the end of our day’s
journey I used to take the saddle off my pack horse, throw it on the
ground in the most careless manner, so that upon parting from my fellow
travellers after our three days’ companionship they, I am certain, had not
the slightest idea of what my led horse was carrying.
After one night in the bush alone with wild dogs howling round me,
I had stations to stop at every night during the rest of my journey, but
was glad to reach Nareeb Nareeb, rest a day, get a fresh horse, and pro-
ceed to town with my gold.
Mr. Marr and I continued our partnership until after the first dis-
covery of gold at the Pyrenees (1849).
A shepherd on the-station of Messrs. Hall and McNeill found a consi-
derable sized nugget, which he took to Melbourne and showed it to two
jewellers named Brentano and Duchesne. One had a shop in ' Collins-
street, the other in Elizabeth-street. A party was made up, who, accom-
panied by the shepherd who had found the gold, went off in search of
more, but they did not succeed in finding any. I happened to be in Mel-
bourne when the first nugget was exhibited in a hotel in Little Collins
street, near where McEwan and Co.’s premises now stand, and went to see
it along with a Mr. Coghill. The owner of the nugget was repor-
ted to have taken it to Superintendent Latrobe and claimed a reward.
At this time shepherds, or rather men of all sorts, were extremely scarce,
and had not Mr. Latrobe acted wisely in giving the shepherd sufficient
money to induce him to leave the colony without saying more of his dis-
covery, the stations wmuld have been deserted and sheep left to the mercy
of blacks and wild dogs. As it was, the discovery got wind, and many
shepherds left their sheep to try gold digging. I had for some time to
tend two flocks on horseback, Mr. Marr looking after the hut and cooking
for me. As there was no second discovery of gold at the Pyrenees, men
soon returned to their former employment.
About this time the great event of the year for the young settlers
was the Port Fairy races. All went, bent on enjoying themselves. No
end of tricks were played upon the good-natured town people, such as
milking Dr. Hume’s cows, which were generally found grazing in the early
15
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


morning on the streets, where there was ample food for them. The milk
was carried to the hotel, ‘‘The Merrijig,” where rum and milk was par-
taken of before turning in to sleep. Visiting the doctor upon one occa-
sion the day previous to the races, I was surprised at seeing the quantity
of adhesive plaster he had manufactured, and that was hung about the
surgery to dry. Asking him the reason of his having prepared such a
large stock, “Oh!” said the doctor, “Rutledge’s countrymen are certain
to have a few fights during the race meeting, resulting in broken heads,
etc., so I must have a stock ready for the occasion.”
Mr. William Rutledge, one of the principal residents of the township,
a very kind, hospitable man, wdio at time of the races generally had two
or three of the young squatters to dine with him, was very proud of the
extremely cool claret produced at his dinner table. It was discovered
that this claret was cooled by the bottle being tied to a long string and
lowered into a deep well in the garden alongside the house. It occurred
to some of the bad boys from the bush that a “lark”’ might be had with
“Billy” (as Rutledge was generally styled) over this wine. So when it
was known that the party were safely seated at the dinner table, some of
the rogues went to the well, drew up the bottles, unloosed the strings, and
carried them off. When the servant sent for the claret returned to say
there was none in the well, the scene with Rutledge (who was an excit-
able, fussy individual), the boys who were there, and probably knew
what was to be done, was described as most exciting and not to be soon
forgotten.
In 1850 my partner, Mr. Marr, and I agreed to separate, we dividing
the run and sheep equally, Mr. Marr getting the few cattle that were left
in lieu of the buildings erected on the original homestead, which I was to
get.
The sixth of February of the following year (1851) was the memor-
able “Black Thursday,” when the whole country seemed to be on fire,
and an immense amount of damage was done, and several lives lost. I
Avent from Geelong to Melbourne by the steamer Aphrasia on that day.
The heat even on the AA r ater Avas most intense. The burned leaves, AAdiich
were Avafted from the land and over our ship formed what seemed a black
cloud betiveen us and the sun. Upon reaching Melbourne it was to find
every house and shop closed. I and a few of those who had voyaged Avith
me from Geelong, managed to effect an entrance into “The Royal,” but
though suffering much from thirst, Ave could not get anything fit to drink.
Ice Avas not manufactured in Melbourne in those days. Enduring the
heat and thirst until some time after sunset, Ave all sailed out and made
for the river, Avhere there Avas a primitive bathing place. After cooling
ourselves somewhat in the water, avc returned to the hotel, and managed
to partake of dinner.
About ten days before the memorable “Black Thursday,” there Avas
a day almost as hot, the grass for a great many miles round my run Avas
completely burned up. Within sight of my hut enough grass could not have
been gathered to fill a hat; and, worst of all, I had great part of a fine
flock of young eives burned, which Avas then a great loss to me. And it
was with the greatest difficulty I succeeded in saving my hut, in which was
16
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


my bedding, clothes, etc.; also my store, which contained the supplies —
flour, tea, sugar, slop clothing for the men, etc., for the year. This severe
loss taught me a lesson, and induced me to devise a method of warding off
bush fires, by which I effectually secured my run. This was done by
ploughing round the run two sets of furrows of five each two chains apart.
When the heat of the sun in summer had sufficiently dried the grass for
it to be burned between the furrows, this was done, and a break of suffi-
cient breadth thus made to stop a bush fire- During the many years I
remained at Nareeb Nareeb I never again had my run burned. These
furrows had to be renewed every year, so that this insuring my run against
fire cost a considerable sum yearly, but I was well repaid for my outlay.
Many of my neighbours adopted my system.
Sheep farmers now saw the necessity of ridding the country of wild
dogs that the sheep might bed out on the run instead of being brought
home and folded every evening. So a simultaneous onslaught was made,
resulting in immense destruction of the troublesome “dingo.” The plan
I adopted was to prepare two or three dozen of tempting baits with the
necessary strychnine in them. These were put into an old shooting bag
carried on my shoulder. A piece of offal was tied to a long string, put in
a bag and buckled on my saddle. I then, about sunset, mounted my horse
and rode out on the run until I knew that the sheep were behind me,
having passed where I was on their way to the fold. I then let the offal
fall to the ground and began to drag it in a circle round the sheep folds,
dropping a bait on top of this drag, say, at distances of two or three
hundred yards. The wild dogs following the track of the sheep from the
run found my drag, which they ran along, picking up the baits, which soon
took effect, dead dogs being frequently found by the shepherds when taking
their flocks out to the run of a morning.
The last dogs seen on the run were told me of by a neighbour, who, in
riding to Nareeb Nareeb saw three at a rocky rise known as the ‘ ‘She
Oak Hill. ’ ’ I went out to this hill in the evening with my drag, which I
drew round it, dropping the baits at intervals. In the morning, being en-
gaged with a flock of sheep, I sent a blackfellow to the hill, having de-
scribed to him where the baits were laid- He returned in a short time,
bringing with him two brushes, and doubtless the other dog was also
poisoned, as another was never seen on the run. Getting rid of these
troublesome dingoes was a great relief to sheep farmers, as they destroyed
a large number of sheep; besides, the flocks had to be brought home and
folded every night.
In 1851 I resolved to build myself a cottage (having up to this time
lived in a slab hut built by myself in 1840-41), but, as almost every blade
of grass between Nareeb Nareeb and the forest where sawn timber could
be got had been burned, there was considerable difficulty in getting the
required timber carted, and but for my own exertions, aided by my
bullock-driver, Paddy Crawly (a Tasmanian expiree—one of the best and
truest servants I ever had), materials for a cottage could not have been
collected, but Paddy and I stuck to the work and succeeded in bringing
the timber required a distance of about twenty miles. The cottage of four
rooms, when finished, proved snug and comfortable, and when a flower
garden had been fenced and planted in front, looked rather well for those
times.
17
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


By this time (1851) my sheep had increased to ten thousand, and, as
shown by the number of prizes taken at our local pastoral and agricultural
society’s shows, which were instituted about the year 1860, were the best
in the district.
As the grass got parched in summer and was insufficient for working
horses, I, some years previous to this, had commenced to grow oats for
hay, and used to plough, sow and mow the ground myself every year. I
had now a good many cows, so was well supplied with milk and butter;
also with vegetables of all sorts.
A married couple whom I engaged on their arrival in the colony—the
wife as housekeeper-made me very comfortable. She talked very broad
Scotch, so that many on the run could not understand what she said. I
told her one day that it was fortunate she did not engage with an English-
man, as he would have scarcely understood a word she spoke. Her reply
was “Weel, do ye ken I’ve often thocht that, od they English folks unka
«toopit. ”
Matters went pretty smoothly with me now. My stock increased
yearly, and I continued to stick to work closely. With the exception of a
yearly visit to Melbourne and an occasional trip to Port Fairy (Belfast),
I seldom left the station. Quail were at this time very numerous, so that
when in season I could have an hour or two shooting at any time. Ducks
and wild turkeys were also plentiful.
On the 19th March, 1857, I took unto myself a wife. After spending
a few weeks at Nareeb Nareeb, we visited Sydney and were there at the
time of the wreck of the ill-fated Dunbar, when only one of the crew was
saved, he being washed by a wave high up into the cleft of the rock on
which the ship was driven.
Before returning to Victoria we visited Wollongong-Kiama, and various
other places, of which my wife brought home with her several pretty water-
colour drawings. Soon after returning to Nareeb Nareeb I commenced
sheep shearing, and got through the work very satisfactorily.
My wife and I usually took a walk of an evening when the shepherds
were coming home for the night. One of these, Robert Drysdale (“Old
Bob’’ as he was generally named), we frequently met. Upon one such
occasion Bob said he would like much to get a kangaroo steamer; would
I be kind enough to bring in to the cook at the men’s hut the hind
quarters of a nice doe, which I promised to do. This “steamer” is made of
kangaroo flesh minced and mixed with fat bacon. There is not a particle
of fat about a kangaroo, so it must be mixed with some other flesh.
Meeting Bob some evenings afterwards, I asked him if he had got the
steamer. “Oh, yes,” he said, in a drawling sort of way, which showed that
the dish had not been to his liking. Upon urging him to tell me what was
amiss with it he said, “The fool of a cook had not put any port wine in
it.” I agreed with Bob that this was a great mistake on the part of the
cook, but promised that another marsupial should be brought home and
that I would see the proper condiment was added to the dish.
The hindquarters of another doe were brought to the men’s quarters
and instructions given to the cook to let me know when he was making
the steamer, as I wished to put something in it. Notice was accordingly
given me, and I went with three parts of a bottle of port, which was put
in the steamer. Next time we met Bob, upon asking him how he liked the
18
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


second steamer, Re rubbed his Rands together, and evidently Rigßly
pleased said, ‘ 1 OR, man, it was grand, it was grand. ’ *
In 1861 my run was thrown open for sale and selection. This wenti
on from year to year until the whole twenty thousand acres Rad been
secured.
My daughter Annie (born in 1858) became, like most bush girls, fondJ
of riding at an early age. She would catch her Shetland pony and with
nothing but a halter on its head, jump on and gallop all over the paddock.
When she was able to manage a larger mount we rode out almost every
afternoon. I took great interest in teaching her to sit and manage her
horse well. She acquired a fine seat, and when ten years of age was a
good and fearless rider.
By 1868 kangaroos had increased very much on my run, eating and
destroying a large quantity of grass, so with a view to reducing their
number Annie and I had almost daily slaughter amongst them, and used of
an afternoon to kill eight, ten, and even as many as twelve large ones.
We had six good dogs, two of which were always in trim to run, not
having been fed the previous evening. It was all the largest marsupials
we killed. I became so expert at ham-stringing that our dogs never got
cut, and consequently were not afraid to “tackle the boomers.” When
it was seen that the dogs were about to pounce upon their game, Annie
rode alongside of me and took hold of the reins of my bridle. I jumped
off, took a sharp knife out of my pocket, opened it and placed the handle
between my teeth, ran at the kangaroo, got hold of his tail, threw him
down, took the knife from between my teeth and cut the ham-strings,
which prevented him injuring the dogs. If this ham-stringing is not done,
dogs get terribly cut, even killed by the claw of the hind foot. Men have
often been injured or had their clothes torn off. I was on one occasion
when on horseback run at by a big fellow, which left the marks of his
claws on my trousers and the pommel of my saddle, but my horse was
going too fast for him to get hold of me. Some of the “boomers,” as
they were termed, are a great size, standing, when at bay, nearly seven
feet. Our dogs killed every kangaroo they went after, so that we succeeded
in reducing their number considerably.
I must mention a narrow escape my two eldest daughters and I made
upon one occasion. At the township of Glenthompson, twelve miles from
Nareeb Nareeb, a church had been built, for which I had promised to pro-
vide a pair of pulpit lamps. These had arrived from Melbourne, and my
two eldest girls, who had reached home from school for the midwinter
holidays, were anxious to drive to Glenthompson with them. There was
then no road formed or bridges erected between Nareeb Nareeb and
Glenthompson. A great deal of rain had fallen, rendering the ground
very boggy, almost impossible to drive over. However, we .resolved to
attempt the journey with four horses and a waggonette. Off we started —
Annie on the box seat beside me, Emily and the groom with the lamps
behind- Great part of the way we ploughed through the soft ground,
mud nearly to the axles. When within some three miles of Glenthompson
we reached a very deep, but narrow creek, which had been bridged by
putting a few logs across and some sods on top of these. I had previously
seen this primitive bridge and expected to find it crossable. When the
horses reached the bank of this creek and found the ground sound under-
19
REMINISCENCES OF A PIONEER.


foot they pricked up their ears and went off at a trot. It was only whenl
we were within a few yards of where this bridge had been I saw that
the floods had, with the exception of two, washed all the logs away.
Those left were not more than seven inches thick. To turn was impossible,
and as the logs left seemed to be the width apart of the wheels, I
guided as accurately as I could, and succeeded in crossing. The leaders
cleared the gully at a bound, then the wheelers, and we were safe. Annie
was the only one who, with me, had seen the danger we were in. She did
not speak or show sign of fear, but put her little hand on my left arlm
as if to nerve me for meeting the danger my children were in, but when
the wheels had cleared the chasm and we were galloping up the opposite
bank, she, with a sweet smile on her countenance, looked at me and said
‘‘That wasn’t bad, Papa.” These words were so impressed upon me that
I will never forget them.
As formerly mentioned, my sheep were probably the best in the
district, in proof of which I was awarded by the Hamilton Pastoral and
Agricultrual Society, from 1864 to 1886, 35 first, 18 second and 11 third
class prizes for sheep exhibited at their annual shows, one gold and 13'
silver medals. Besides these, I was adjudged one special prize of £2O,
four of £5/5/ each, and five ordinary champion prizes-, three for rams and
two for ewes, being the best ram or ewe of any age exhibited. In 1873 —
the first year of the grand champion show, open to the Whole of the
colonies, I was awarded the champion prize of £5O for the best ram exhibited;
next year I took the second prize of £lO. This competition was afterwards
discontinued- By the Australian Sheep Breeders’ Association I was, in
1884, awarded first prize of £5 for the best grass-fed merino ram of any
age, and Messrs. Dalgety, Blackwood and Co.’s special prize of twenty-
flve guineas for the same sheep. By the same society I was awarded, in
1885, £5 for the best conditioned sheep carrying heaviest fleece off their
natural pasture. My grass-fed sheep having been frequently brought into
competition with those which had been to some extent artificially fed, I
decided, as advised by the person left in charge of Nareeb Nareeb during
my absence in England, not to risk the reputation of my flock, so did not
exhibit so frequently or take the same interest in the -shows as formerly.
I returned to Victoria in 1876 by steamer from Liverpool to New
York, thence by rail to San Francisco (visiting Niagara, Salt Lake City,
etc.), thence by steamer to Sydney and on to Victoria, expecting that
my wife and daughters would follow me in a few years. They returned
in 1881, but stayed only a year. As the old house was almost beyond
repair, I resolved to make myself comfortable by building a snug cot-
tage-, with broad verandah to shade from the sun, which proved all that
could be wished for, but I felt so lonely during the long winter nights,
and being then close on eighty years of age, and having no son to suc-
ceed me, I decided in 1886 to rejoin my family in England. I therefore
sold Nareeb Nareeb, parting with it with deep regret, but relieved to be
free from the annoyance now being caused by sheep shearers and others.
20
REMINISCENCES OE A PIONEER.


■V
>
7
' ' ! . ' '
V
.
■;vV


