

INSTRUCTION PAMPHLET
No. C2
JANUARY, 1930
CROSS
COMPOUND
STEAM DRIVED
AIR
COMPRESSORS
WESTINGHOUSE BRAKE COMPANY
OF AUSTRALASIA, LTD.
CONCORD WEST, N.S.W.


This Book is the property of the South
Australian Railways Commissioner, and
is loaned to the undersigned, who hereby
agrees to return it to the Director, Rail-
ways Institute, when called for, or upon
leaving the employ of the Commissioner,
or pay 1 /- for same.
Name. Position.
tte. CUL r&Mi
A:
ff


WESTINGHOUSE
CROSS COMPOUND
STEAM DRIVEN
AIR COMPRESSORS
INSTRUCT lON TAHITI L IST
No. C 2
JANUARY, 1930.
[COPYRIGHT]
PRICE: Single Copies, 1/6.
WESTINGHOUSE BRAKE CO.
OF AUSTRALASIA, LTD.
CONCORD WEST, N.S.W.


CONTENTS
TITLE I’AGE '
BCiucli Cross Compound Air Compressor <•
Description 8
Operation 1?
Air Strainer •• • • 18
Insinuation and Operating Instructions 21
Repair Shop and Road Tests
Disorders 35
Maintenance! 38


Fig. 1. 8½-Inch Cross Compound Compressor From View


CROSS COMPOUND AIR COMPRESSORS
NOTE —The reference numbora shown herein are for convenience
only and are not to ho used when ordering repair parts. See Part Catalogue
giving piece numbers, etc.
It is generally recognized that the duty imposed upon
the locomotive air compressor has very largely in-
creased from year to year, but the extent, of this in*
crease is more fully appreciated when the following
factors are considered
(a) The development of locomotives of great
weight and tractive power and in consequence
longer trains of heavy, large capacity cars.
(b) The large brake cylinders and reservoirs
required for the heavier cars, the longer brake pipe
due to the longer trains hauled, and the greater
number of flexible connections and fittings where
leakage may occur, combine to demand normally a
larger volume of compressed air than ever before.
(e) The growing use of many pneumatically
operated auxiliary appliances, such as boosters,
automatic ash pans, engine reversing appliances,
Pullman water raising system, etc., which take,
their supply from the air compressor.
(d) The necessity of avoiding delays at termi-
nals where traffic tends to congest, by a prompt,
charging of long trains. Present day service con-
ditions demand a compressor of ample capacity to
secure maximum brake efficiency.


8½-INCH CROSS COMPOUND
AIR COMPRESSOR
The great increase in emu pressor capacity called for
in modern service has resulted in a much more careful
consideration of the matter of steam consumption than
formerly, and as a result the Westinghouae B|-inch
Cross Compound Compressor was developed for the
specific purpose of combining maximum capacity and
highest efficiency, by compounding both the steam sup-
plied and the air compressed to the extent that, while
this compressor has a capacity nearly three times as
great as the well known Klin, x lOg-in. single stage
compressor, the steam consumption per 100 cubic
feet of air compressed is but one-third.
The Si-inch compressor is now available in two
sizes. The 8 J-inch —150, ordinarily used in steam road
service, has a normal displacement of 150 on, ft, when
operating on '2OO lbs. steam pressure. The 8-J-ineh—
-120 was designed to operate on a lower steam pressure,
and has a normal displacement of 120 cu. ft. when ope-
rating on 160 lbs. steam pressure.


The following table gives the principal dimensions,
weight, etc., of the Si-inch compressors:
81" —150 Si"—l2(l
Diameter of High Pressure Steam Cyl. .. 81 in. 84 in.
Diameter of Low Pressure Steam Cyl. ... 141 in. 14 in.
Diameter of High Pressure Air Cyl 9 In. 81 in.
Diameter of Low Pressure Air Cyl 141 in, 131 in.
Length of Stroke 12 in. 12 in.
Diameter of Steam Admission Pipe D in. 11 in.
Diameter of Steam Exhaust Pipe 11 in. 11 in.
Diameter of Air Admission Pipe 2 in. 2 in.
Diameter of Air Delivery Pipe. 11 in. 11 in.
Designed for Steam Pressure of 200 Ihs. 160 lbs.
Wnrj ring against an Air Pressure of .... 140 Ihs. 140 Ihs.
Normal Speed, single strokes per minute,
under above conditions 131 131
Displacement, cubic feet per minute, under
above conditions 150 120
Overall Dimensions; Height 52 in. 52 in.
(Approximate) Width 37 in, 37 in.
Depth 184 in. 181 in.
Average Net Weight 1500 lbs. 1500 lbs.
Weight, boxed for shipment 1750 Ihs. 1750 lbs.
Lift for Air Valves 3-32 in, 3-32 in.
SIZE OE GOVERNOR, STEAM VALVE AND PIP-
ING FOR. TWO COMPRESSOR INSTALLATION
81"—-150 and 81" —120
Governor 11 in.
Steam Valve ip,
Steam Admission Pipe
Main Pipe 11 in.
Branch Pipe 1} in.
Steam Exhaust Pipe
Main Pipe 21 in.
Branch Pipe 11 in,
Air Admission Pipe
Main Pipe 21 in.
Branch Pipe 2 in.
Air Delivery Pipe
Main Pipe 2 in.
Brandi Pipe 14 in.


DESCRIPTION
As in the ease of the .standard Westinghouse Single
Stage Air Compressors, the steam cylinders are placed
vertically above the air cylinders and connected by a
common center piece, see exterior view, Fig’. 1.
The diagrammatic views, Figs. 14 and 15, serve to
illustrate the simplicity of this design and emphasise the
fact that the cross compound compressor is a serial
arrangement ol: two standard single stage compressors,
actuated by the same controlling mechanism, and with
pistons moving uniformly in, opposite directions. These
cuts also show the few moving parts employed, which
comprise (a), the high pressure steam low pressure air
pistons, connected by a Nickel-Chrome steel piston rod
drilled for the reversing valve rod which operates the
reversing valve, and which in turn moves the main pis-
ton valve controlling the admission of steam to and the
exhaust from both, the high and low pressure steam cyl-
inders and (b), the low pressure steam and high pres-
sure air pistons connected by a solid Nickel-Ohrome
steel piston rod having no mechanical connection with
the valve gear.
Figs. 12 and 13 are sectional views showing the
porta and passages, also reference numbers by means
of which the various parts hereinafter referred to can
be readily identified.
Fig. 2 shows partial sectional views of the center
piece of the compressor, illustrating the provision made
for draining off from the center piece the water which
drips from the stuffing boxes. The water which thus
accumulates is drained through passages a' and o' to b’


and thence through the drain pipe connection cm the
lower flange to .some convenient, point, hs between the
engine frame.
The Governor is located in tin? piping to the .steam
inlet, Fig. 4. Steam entering passes through port, a
lo the top head, and thence through ports a and k, Figs.
12 and 12, to the reversing valve chamber (' and main
valve chamber, Fig. 12 ; e is the exhaust passage leading
to the steam exhaust pipe. As it is difficult to follow
the ports in these cuts, we have prepared two diagrams,
as shown in Figs. 14 and 10, in wliieh the piston valve
and reversing valve are turned !H) degrees horizontally
from their actual, position in order to make the ope-
ration more easily understood, and all ports and pass-
ages are connected in the simplest possible manner,
without regard to the actual construction of the com-
pressor.
Ilei’erring to Fig. 34,, passage a, communicating with
cavity ('• and the two chambers b and y, conveys the
steam from the source of supply to the operating valves,
of which there are two, namely; the reversing valve and
the piston valve. The piston valve is a multiple piston
device, consisting of a large piston at one end, a small
piston at the other, with three intermediate pistons of
uniform size, which will he referred to hereinafter as
numbers 1,2, and li, numbering from the small piston
end of the piston valve.
It is evident, that, with five pistons mounted on a
common rod and working in a cylinder, we have, includ-
ing the ends, six separate chambers, in this particular
construction, five of these chambers have permanent
connections as follows:


SECTION TAKEN AT B-a-B-B
Fig. 2. Partial Sectional Views of Centre Piece, Showing Drainage.


The first chamber, e, behind the outer end of the
.small piston, to the atmosphere.
The second chamber, b, between the small and No, 1
intermediate piston to passage a.
The third chamber, i, between the No. 1 and No. 2
intermediate pistons, to the lower end of the low pres-
sure steam cylinder.
The fonrlli chamber, h, between the No. 2 and No. d
intermediate! pistons, to the upper end of the low pres-
sure steam cylinder.
The fifth chamber, y, between the third intermediate
and the inner side of large piston, to passage a.
The reversing valve 22 moving vertically on its seat
in chamber C, controls the admission and exhaust of
steam from cavity D, behind the outer end of the large
piston of the piston valve, causing it to operate hori-
zontally, the intermediate piston moving as follows:
Intermediate piston No. 2 crosses a port connecting
with passage 0 controlling the How of .steam to the up-
per end of the high pressure steam cylinder, and also
the exhaust into the upper end of the low pressure
steam cylinder.
Intermediate piston No. 2 crosses a port connecting
with passage e, controlling the exhaust of steam from
either end of the low pressure steam cylinder.
Intermediate piston No. 1 crosses a port connecting
with passage g, causing steam to be admitted to the
lower end of the high pressure steam cylinder or ex-
hausting the same from this cylinder into the lower
end of the low pressure steam cylinder. A. passage, z,
leading from the upper end of the high pressure steam
cylinder is the means of supplying pressure to balance
the reversing valve rod.


OPERATION
'When the high pressure steam piston has nearly com-
pleted its up stroke, the reversing l valve plate 18 comes
in contact with the shoulder on the reversing rod, forc-
ing said red 21 to its uppermost position, carrying with
it reversing valve 22, the movement of which, in turn,
not only blanks port to passage m, thereby cutting off
means of exhausting steam from cavity behind the large
end of piston valve, but also opens port to passage n,
filling this chamber, I), with live steam from passage a.
The pressure, thus exerted on the outer side, of the large
piston added to the pressure on the inner side of the
small piston is now greater than the pressure exerted
against the inner side of the large piston,.and the piston
valve moves toward the left, or in the direction of
chamber E. The small piston valve cylinder head 35 is
provided with a bush having six elongated grooves,
three of which are shown in Fig. 13. (All of
these grooves have been considered for the sake of sim-
plicity as combined into one groove, Figs. 14 and 15.)
As the piston valve moves toward the left and uncov-
ers these grooves, live steam from chamber b by-passes
to chamber E back of the small end of the main valve
piston. At the instant these grooves are cut off by the
further movement of the piston, port o leading to the
exhaust is also blanked which enables the small piston
to compress the steam in chamber E, thus providing a
high cushioning pressure. This movement of the main
valve piston admits steam, to the upper end of the high
pressure steam cylinder starting the high pressure
steam piston on its downward stroke. All parts have
now assumed the position shown in Fig. 13,


A direct communication is now established where-
by live steam is supplied through passage a, chamber y,
and passage c to tin; upper end of the high pressure
steam cylinder, forcing downward the high pressure
steam piston and low pressure air piston to which it is
rigidly connected by the piston rod, that is free to move
in the necessary stuffing boxes. Tin; movement of the
piston valve to the left, as described above, has opened
passage g to passage f through cavity i, thus permit-
ting the steam in the lower end of the high pressure
steam cylinder to expand into the lower end of tin*
low pressure steam cylinder. The latter being of ma-
terially larger volume than the former, it will bo seen
that the steam is thereby made to do its work expan-
sively in the low pressure steam cylinder. At the same
time—
(a) the. low pressure air piston, !), is compress-
ing air in the lower end of the low pressure air
cylinder and forcing same through the intermedi-
ate valves 40, and passage u into the lower end of
the high pressure air cylinder, and —
(b) air at atmospheric pressure is being drawn
into the upper end of the low' pressure cylinder,
through the air strainer, upper inlet opening, and
inlet valve 117.
It will ho observed that the steam exhausted into the
lower end of the low pressure steam cylinder and the
low pressure air forced into the lower end of the high
pressure air cylinder act simultaneously on the lower
sides of their respective pistons. The force thus exerted
results in an upward movement of the low pressure


steam and high pressure air pistons. The upward move-
ment causes the high pressure air piston 10 to compress
the air in the upper end of the high pressure air cylin-
der to its final pressure, and to discharge it through
passage v, discharge valve 41, and passage w into the
main reservoir. Steam is exhausted from the upper end
of the low pressure steam cylinder through passage d,
chamber h and passage e to the atmosphere.
After the low pressure steam (high, pressure air) pis-
ton has completed its upward stroke, as explained, the
lower end of the high pressure air cylinder, is of course,
filled with air compressed from the lower end of the
low pressure air cylinder, and the lower end of the low
pressure steam cylinder is filled with steam exhausted
from the lower end of the high pressure steam cylinder.
However, just as the low pressure steam (high pressure
air) piston has completed its upward stroke, steam is
by-passed through three hy-pass grooves x from the
lower to the upper side of the low pressure steam pis-
ton, thereby preventing an accumulation of hack pres-
sure iu the lower end of the high pressure cylinder.
At this stage of the cycle, also, the upper end of the
low pressure air cylinder is tilled with air at atmo-
spheric pressure and the upper end of the high pressure
steam cylinder is filled with live steam; hut just before
the high pressure steam (low pressure air) piston com-
pletes its downward stroke, reversing valve plate 18 en-
gages the button end of the reversing valve rod, moving
it downward and carrying the reversing valve to its
extreme lower position, thereby closing port leading to
passage n, cutting off the supply of live steam to chain


her D, and connecting passage m, cavity q and passage
1, thereby exhausting steam from cavity D behind the
outer end of the large piston of the piston valve. Since
the pressure against the inner side of the large piston
is now greater than the pressure exerted against the
inner side of the small piston, the piston valve moves
to the right or in the direction of chamber 1), and all
parts arc in the position shown in Fig. 15.
Live steam is now supplied from passage a, through
chamhcr b, and passage g, to the lowin’ end of the high
pressure steam cylinder, forcing upward the high pres-
sure steam piston which, as already explained, carries
with it the low pressure air piston. At this time also,
steam is exhausted from the upper end of the high pres-
sure steam cylinder, through passage c, chamber b and
passage d, into the upper end of the low pressure steam
cylinder. At. the same time—
(a) the low pressure air piston is compressing
the air in the upper end of the low pressure air
cylinder and forcing same through the intermediate
valves 7(5, and passage, u, into the upper end of the
high pressure air cylinder, and-
(b) air at atmospheric pressure is drawn into
the lower end of the low pressure air cylinder,
through the air strainer, lower inlet opening, pas-
sage r and lower inlet valve 88.
Again it will be observed that the steam in the low
pressure steam cylinder and air in the high pressure
air cylinder act simultaneously against their respective
pistons, steam being exhausted from the upper end of


plate attached to the high pleasure steam piston coming
in contact with the shoulder of the reversing valve rod,
which in turn, actuates the reversing valve, and the
cycle ol: operation already described is repeated,


AIR STRAINER
The “No. 54 Air Strainer’’ is regularly supplied with
all cross compound air compressors. The largo capacity
of this strainer permits the air to be drawn through it
gently and without compelling the compressor to
“pull" hard to get it. The dust and dirt is thus
stopped at the miter surface of the strainer proper and
most of it is Hum jolted out. at the lower speeds with
the engine moving.
As will be seen from
Fig, 8, this is a very large
double cylindrical strainer
(overall dimensions ap-
proximately 10"x.1.4") with
an inner strainer of per-
forated sheet steel, galvan-
ized, and an outer strainer'
of coarse galvanized wire
mesh, the intervening
space being well packed
with curled hair, A gal-
vanized iron shell 8 en-
circles the strainer proper,
preventing dirt, oil and
water from striking direct-
ly against the strainer and
thereby reducing the pos-
sibility of trouble, from
clogging. The strainer
may be quickly and con-
veniently taken apart,
Section AA
No. 54 Air Strainer.
Fig. 3. Sectional View
18
CROSS COMPOUND AIR COMPRESSORS


without disturbing any pipe connections, by removing
tin' nuts from the four studs. This strainer should be.
installed vertically with the. large opening downward
and bolted under the. running hoard at some protected
point so as to draw the cleanest mul driest air available
—never when 1 a probable steam leak will saturate the
intake air.
Only one No, 54 strainer is required per compressor
and this should be connected to the two inlet openings
of the St-inch coin pressor by a manifold specially de-
signed for this purpose. See Fig, 1.
In order to facilitate e,leaning of the strainer be-
tween “shoppings” of the locomotive, some roads use a
“blow-hack” arrangement. This consists of a f-iucli
pipe connected to the main reservoir supply (but not
to the discharge, pipe), in which is placed a f-incli cut-
out cock having a warning port drilled from the outer
end of the key into the cored passage so that a small
amount of air will discharge when the cock is open
and thereby help to guard against it being left open.
Tin 1 cock is placed near the. point at which this con-
nection to the main reservoir supply is made so as to
reduce the liahilhy of delay in case of pipe breakage
beyond the cock. A tec is substituted for the ell at the
strainer, and the blow-hack pipe is connected through
an, ell to the lee opening which points vertically up-
ward so that the blast of air will he downward into
the strainer. To use the blow-back merely requires
opening the j'-inch cock for a few seconds at. any time
when main r’eservoir pressure is at maximum and the
compressor is shut off.


Fig. 4. Installation Diagram of 8½-Inch Cross Compound Air Compressor


INSTALLATION AND OPERATING
INSTRUCTIONS
i he air compressor should ho located on the fireman’s
side of the boiler, forward of the staybolts, low enough
to permit a dear vision of the track from the fireman's
seat box.
Tiie compressor should he supported by a cast stud
bracket with the following precautions taken in its
design and installation. It should be accurately fitted
to avoid twisting strains which would throw the com-
pressor hearing out of true. The surfaces against
which the compressor lugs bear should be finished ami
suitable projection provided, for supporting the com-
pressor on its bottom lugs instead of on the bolts. (See
Fig. .12 for dimensions,) Supporting stud nuts should
have full bearing on the bracket to avoid stud failures.
Removal of the compressor top bead should be possible,
without loosening the compressor on its supporting
bracket.
. Piping. All pipes should be hammered to loosen, the
scale and dirt, have tins removed, and be thoroughly
blown out with steam before erecting; bunds should be
used wherever possible instead of ells, and, all sags
avoided. A suitable compound to make a tight joint
should he applied on the. male threaded portion only,
and never in the socket. Do not use red or white load.
shows the recommended arrangement and sizes
of piping for one BJ-ineh compressor, The size of pipe,


particularly of the steam supply pipe, should never
he smaller than that indicated in order to obtain maxi-
mum el'iiciency from the compressor.
■ Whore that portion of the steam pipe outside of the
eah is.not under the boiler jacket (the most desirable
location) it should be completely covered -with a good
sectional pipe covering ({-inch thick, substantially
secured by metal bands.
When it is necessary to install the steam pipe inside
the locomotive cab, extra strong iron or steel pipe or
copper tubing of standard iron pipe dimensions should
be used.
The steam valve should be located, on driver’s side
of the steam turret, with handle in convenient posi-
tion for operating. Use extension handle if necessary
to accomplish this, bracing same close to handle.
In a single compressor installation the governor
should be located in the steam supply pipe between the
lubricator connection and the compressor in order to
insure its receiving the necessary lubrication,-The lubri-
cator connection consists of a toe, the side outlet of
which connects to the lubricator. In a two-compressor
installation the governor should be located in the main
steam supply pipe between the lubricator fitting and
the steam branch pipe leading to each compressor.
Starting and .Running. The drain cocks (63, 64 and.
65, Fig. 14) are placed at the lowest points of the steam.


passages, as shown, for flu; purpose of draining con-
densed steam when the compressor is stopped and when
starting it. They should always be left open when the
compressor is to stand idle for any length of time.
These! drain cocks are provided with suitable union fit-
ting's, so that drain pipes may he connected if desired.
In starting the compressor, always run it slowly un-
til it becomes warm, permitting the condensed steam to
escape through the drain cocks and the exhaust, until
there is sufficient pressure in the main reservoir (25 to
MO Ihs.) to provide an air cushion. Then dose drain
cocks and open the steam (throttle) valve sufficiently to
run the compressor at the proper speed, according to
circumstances. Kacing or running at excessive speeds
should not he allowed. The compressor governor auto-
matically controls the starting and stopping of the com-
pressor.
To iStou the (ioMURUSsoK. (1) (dose the feed and
steam valves on the sight-feed lubricator, if the com-
pressor has a separate one, or the feed, if supplied from
the locomotive lubricator; (2) then close the steam
(throttle) valve; (M) and open all the drain cocks on
the compressor. Keep the steam valve closed and the
drain cocks open when the compressor is not working.
The main reservoir drain cocks should also he left open
when the compressor is stopped for any length of time.
The compressor should always he stopped while the lo-
comotive is over the ash pit. If permitted to run, ashes
and dust will he drawn into the air cylinder and injure
it, besides clogging up the air strainer.


Lubrication. —Ant Cylinders. On account of the
high temperatures developed by air compression, the
variation between maximum and minimum delivered
air pressures, and the necessity of preventing oil from
passing into the system, one of the vital problems in
efficient compressor operation is to provide a simple
means for supplying lubrication to the air cylinders in
proper quantity and at regular intervals. Non-auto-
matic methods may he employed and satisfactory re-
sults obtained as long as care and attention are exer-
cised to provide just enough lubrication to keep the
compressor in a properly lubricated condition, hut
experience has shown that this is very difficult to ob-
tain. The ideal method is obviously that which involves
feeding the proper amount of lubricating oil to the air
cylinders during each cycle of the pistons and causing
this feeding of oil to cease when the compressor stops
operating. These “automatic” requirements are fully
satisfied by the Type B Automatic Air Cylinder Oil Cup,
with which the only manual operation necessary is that
of filling the cup with oil at the required intervals.
The construction and operation of the automatic oil
cup are very simple, as will be evident from the sec-
tional illustration, Fig. f). There is an oil chamber a
which is filled from the top when the cap nut 5 is re-
moved. The cap nut is provided with vent holes fso
located that when the seal between the can and body is
broken the air pressure is vented to the atmosphere,
thereby permitting the filling operation to be performed
while the compressor is running. The stem portion 3of
the body 2 has a central passage b communicating at


the bottom with the pipe connection leading to the air
cylinder, and at the top with chamber a through the
cavity in the cap nut. This passage has its top outlet
on the.side so as to penult chamber a to be filled with-
out possibility of pouring oil directly into the passage,
which would defeat the very purpose of the lubricator.
Fig. 5. Sectional View of die Type B
Automatic Oil Cup.
An oil. port d of definite .size is located in the stem
and connects passage b to an annular feeding cavity e
which is formed by a recess in the stein and the neat
fitting sleeve, around it. This sleeve has two diametri-
cally placed notches c at its lower end which connect
chamber a with cavity e.


When the compressor makes its upward stroke, air
is forced up through passage b and into the apace above
the oil. in chamber a.
The lubricant in the cup will flow through the notches
■‘(J” into the space between the stem and the sleeve 4
and rise in space e by capillary attraction and will then
enter opening d to passage b, from which, on the down-
ward stroke of the compressor, the lubricant is carried
with the flow of air from the chamber on top of the
oil, through passage b into the compressor cylinder.
This small amount of oil supplied regularly and reliably
is ample to adequately lubricate the air cylinder.
Due to the ability of this type of lubricator to supply
minute particles of oil in uniform quantities to the air
cylinder of the compressor during each cycle of opera-
tion, one filling of its oil chamber will supply sufficient
lubrication to the compressor air cylinder for the aver-
age trip of a locomotive.
A good grade of standard locomotive valve oil only
should be used in the air cylinders. (Superheated oil Is
not recommended for air cylinder lubrication because
it tends to re,strict the air passages, causing the com-
pressor to heat unduly and to wear faster than with the
lighter valve oil recommended.
Luubication -Steam o yljlnueks. The steam, cyl-
inder lubricator should not be started until all conden-
sation has escaped from the compressor and the drain
cocks dosed. After closing the drain cocks, start the


lubricator to feed in ten or fifteen drops of oil as
rapidly as possible, then regulate the feed to about two
or four drops per minute for each compressor. No de-
finite amount can be specified, as the amount of lubri-
cation required depends on the work the compressor
has to do, the quality, of the steam, condition of com-
pressor, and so on. Keep the lubricator feeding while
the compressor is running.
A swab, well oiled, is essential on each piston rod.


REPAIR SHOP AND ROAD TESTS
It Is our recommendation that the compressor shall
be tested for capacity by orifice test as often as con-
ditions may require, but not less frequently than once
each three months.
The test specified is that with a 9-32-iueh orifice to
atmosphere and main reservoir pressure maintained at
60 lbs., the 81-incli compressor must make not more
than 100 single strokes per minute. For altitudes over
1,000 feet, the speed of the compressor may be in-
creased five single strokes per minute for each 1,000
feet increase altitude.*
We recommend the following method for making the
above test:
Before making any test, the main reservoir should
be drained and it and its connections should be tested
for leakage as follows: After obtaining the main reser-
voir pressure corresponding to the governor setting,
close the throttle to the compressor. Then close the
brake pipe cut-out cock under the brake valve and the
cut-out cock in the supply pipe to the distributing valve
and place the brake valve handle on lap. Bleed down
reservoir pressure to about 62 or 6H lbs. Allow the
pressure to leak down to 60 pounds (that is, to settle
♦NOTE—The above figures are for tire 8(4-lnoh—-IBO compressor only.
The use of a 15/04" diameter orifice to atmosphere with the gi/,—120
compressor, other test conditions remaining the same, will provide approxi-
mately the same relative condemning point tor this machine.


down to an equalization of temperatures) and note the
amount of drop from this pressure during one minute.
This drop must not exceed 2 lbs. If a greater leakage
than this exists, it must be reduced to this limit before
proceeding with the compressor test, otherwise the
teat would indicate a poorer condition of the compres-
sor than is the ease, duo to extra labour required to
maintain this leakage.
Fig. 6. Disassembled View and Sectional View of Disc Holder
with Disc.
Al'tov the main reservoir and its connections have
been tested I'or lea lea so as above, the compressor should
bo tested as follows:
The orifice disc is placed in a special holder, Fig.
(I, supplied for this purpose which should he connected
to the main reservoir drain cock, as illustrated in Fig.
•7, with a test gage inserted between the disc holder
and drain cock.


Close the cut-out cock under the brake valve, and
also the cut-out cock in the supply pipe to the distri-
buting valve, and place the brake valve handle on
lap. Then start the compressor and raise the pressure
Fig. 7. Showing Orifice Disc Holder and Gauge Connection to
Main Reservoir Drain Cock.
in the main reservoir to slightly below 60 lbs. Open
the drain cock to the orifice and throttle the .steam sup-
lily to the compressor until the main reservoir pressure
is maintained at, approximately 60 lbs. Then count
the strokes of the compressor required to maintain this
pressure during one minute, This number must not be
in excess of 100.


During the tests it should be assured that boiler pres-
sure is at all times at least sufficient to obtain the re-
quired number of strokes against (10 lbs, air pressure
when the throttle to the compressor is full open.
TEST OF STEAM END.
In addition to the test specified for the air end, tests
should be made to determine whether or not the effici-
ency of the steam end of the compressor is lower than
warrants continuing it in service or after having been
repaired and over-hauled, it is in proper condition to he
returned to service.
The test specifications given hereinafter are based
upon the performance of a number of compressors in
what may he termed a good average condition. It should
be understood that the limits specified are neither those
which should condemn a compressor nor necessarily the
best performance which should he expected from a com-
pressor in the best possible, condition. The condemning
limit should be established by those familiar with exist-
ing service requirements. The tests specified merely in-
dicate the method which we would recommend.
In establishing a minimum passable .performance of
the compressor, it should he borne in mind that, this
limit should not he set too low. This is to prevent, the
compressor getting into such poor condition as to re-
quire expensive repairs. For this reason, we strongly




recommend that the condemning limit should never ho
established below 75 per cent for the steam end of the
tests specified hereinafter, no matter what the service
may he or the apparent ability of the compressor to
meet operating requirements, even with a considerably
lower efficiency Ilian this. 'Where operatin'’’ conditions
demand a more rigid requirement, the. condemning
limit should he raised to an amount determined by the
judgment of those in charge.
The steam end of the compressor should be tested in
the following manner:
The compressor steam throttle should he opened wide
and the main reservoir pressure should be regulated by
means of a cock or valve loading to the atmosphere
until the pressure in the reservoir reaches SJJ lbs. When
this pressure lias been obtained, the locomotive boiler
pressure and the compressor speed in single strokes per
minute should he observed and compared with that
shown on .Pig. H, which represent Avhat the performance'
ought to he if its steam end is in good average con-
dition,
For example, suppose with the steam throttle opened
wide and the main reservoir pressure maintained at 53
His,, by bleeding it to the atmosphere at a given rate,
observations show that a speed of 100 single strokes per
minute is attained with a boiler pressure of 122 lbs. The
curves show that, if the steam end is in good average
condition, the B£-mch-150 compressor operating against
a main reservoir pressure of 53 lbs., with 122 lbs. boiler


pressure, should make 104 single strokes per minute,
ami that the B|-lnch-.120 compressor operating against
a main reservoir pressure of 100 lbs., with 122 lbs,
boiler pressure, should make 111) single strokes per
minute. 11 the observed speed is less than, that indi-
cated on the curves for the given conditions, the judg-
ment ol those in charge should determine whether the
compressor should be over-hauled.
It the combmining limit for the steam end lias been
set at i o per cent ol the performance of a compressor
in good average condition, the speed of the compressor
should not lie less than 7b per cent of the speed called
lor by tlie curve at a point corresponding: to the par-
ticular condition of steam pressure under which the
compressor was tested. For instance, in the case under
consideration, the compressor should have a speed of
not less than 7.b per cent of 104 strokes, or 78 single
strokes per minute.


DISORDERS
Causes and Remedies.
Compressor Refuses to Htart. Cause :—lnsuffi-
cient. oil, due to failure of lubricator to feed properly,
or oil washed out of cylinder by water of condensation;
leaky piston rings in the small end of the main valve
piston; or rust having accumulated during time com-
pressor has lain idle. Remedy:—Shut off steam, take
off reversing valve cap, pour in a small quantity ot
valve oil, replace cap, and then turn on steam quickly.
In many cases when the compressor will not start when
steam is first turned on, if steam is then turned off and
allowed to remain off for one or I wo minutes, and then
turned on quickly, it will start without the use of any
oil, except that from the lubricator.
Compressor Groans. Cause 1, ) air cylinder
needs oil. Remedy:—(l) put some valve oil in air cyl-
inder. Cause; —(2) piston rod packing dry and bind-
ing. Remedy:—(2) saturate piston swab with valve
oil. Cause: —(2) steam cylinder needs oil. Remedy:—
(11) increase lubricator feed.
Excessive leakage past the air piston packing rings,
or past a discharge valve, causes heating, destroys lu-
brication and results in groaning.
Uneven Strokes op the Compressor. Cause: —
probably (1) excessive leakage past air piston packing


rings ami sticky air valve; (2) improper lift of air
valves; (:•}) clogged discharge valve passages; (4)
clogged strainers under upper intermediate valves; (5)
leaky air valves; or (8) binding or cutting of the re-
versing rod. Remedy:—locate cause, if possible, and
correct it by cleaning out (dogged or dirty passages,
air valves and strainers, replacing worn or leaky valves
or rings, or straightening or replacing the reversing
rod.
Snow in Compressing Am. Cause :—(1) leakage
past the air piston packing rings, due to poor fit, or
wear in cylinder or rings; (2) valves and passages
dirty; or, (3) air suction strainer clogged. Remedy:
trouble, obtain about, DO lbs. air pressure, reduce the
speed to 40 or (id single strokes per minute, then listen
at the “Suction Openings” and note if air is drawn in
during only a portion of each stroke, and if any
blows hack. (Note: —Where both suction openings are
connected to a common inlet pipe, it is necessary to
disconnect the suction pipe before making this inves-
tigation). IT the latter, an inlet valve is leaking, IT
the suction does not continue until each stroke is near-
ly completed, then there is leakage past the air piston
packing rings or hack from the main reservoir past the
air discharge valves. Remedy;—(,‘i) clean strainer
thoroughly.
Compressor Heats. Cause: —(l) air passages are
cloggedj (2) leakage past air piston packing rings; or
(2) the discharge valves have insufficient lift. Remedy:


(8) regulate lift of discharge valves to 11-82 of an inch.
A compressor in perfect condition will become exces-
sively hot and is liable to bo damaged if run very fast
and continuously for a long time.
Oomubkhhob Pounds. Cause : —(1) air piston is
loose; (2) compressor not well secured to boiler, or
causes some adjacent pipe to vibrate; (8) the reversing
valve plate 18 is loose; or, (4) the reversing rod or
plate may be so worn that the motion of compressor is
not reversed at the proper time. Bemedy:—repair and
renew worn parts and tighten loose connections.
Comi'BEssok Erratic in Action. Cause; —ln addi-
tion to the causes of erratic action described in the pre-
ceding paragraphs, a worn condition of valve motion,
or leakage past the steam piston packing rings, may
also cause erratic action. Bemedy:—renew the worn
parts,


MAINTENANCE
in connection with the problem of good maintenance
for steam driven air compressors of this type, the heat-
ing of the air cylinders incident to air compression is
perhaps the most, important. The operation of the com-
pressor continuously at high speed or against excessive
pressures inevitably results in high temperatures which
tend to destroy the lubrication, causing the air cylin-
ders to cut, and the groaning of the air compressor, be-
sides filling the discharge passages with deposits from
burnt oil, producing undesirable condensation of mois-
ture in tlie brake system and in general, reducing the
overall efficiency of the compressor.
Under normal conditions, the speed should not ex-
ceed 140 exhaust per minute, and such a speed should
not he maintained continuously for any considerable
time as oven this speed will cause excessive heating.
Continuous running at high speed will cause excessive
heating of the air end of the compressor. Overheating
from this cause is an indication that, a compressor of
larger capacity is required.
It is therefore desirable, first, that; the compressor be
of ample capacity for the service desired (if one com-
pressor does not have sufficient capacity, the obvious
remedy is to install two compressors) : second, that it
he well lubricated and otherwise maintained in good
condition, and, third, that leakage from any source
whether within the air compressor itself or in the
brake system be minimized in every practical way.


One of tlio moist serious leaks is through, the air cyl-
inder stuffing box if the stuffing box packing is not pro-
perly maintained, as it not only greatly decreases the
air delivered, and, with the faster speed required, in-
creases the heating, but it also causes pounding through
loss of cushion. When tightening the packing, do not
bind the rod, as to do so will damage both, the packing
and the rod. Be careful not to cross the gland nut
threads.
With two compressors per engine, the separate throt-
tles should be kept wide open and the speed regulated
by the main compressor throttle. The purpose is to
equally divide the work.
If necessary to replace a broken air valve on the
road or elsewhere not permitting of proper fitting, at
the earliest opportunity have the repairman replace the
temporary valve with another so as to insure the cor-
rect angle and -width of valve and seat contact, the
needed ground joint and the proper lift. The stan-
dard lift for all valves of the S.l-ineh compressor is
8-32 of an inch. When the combined wear of the
valve and seat increases this lift more than -tV of an
inch, the seat is liable to he injured and the valve
broken, with consequent annoyance and delay. For
the purpose of readily determining the lift of air
valves, an Air Valve Lift Gage, as illustrated in Figs.
9, 10, and 11, may he purchased from us.
To determine the lift of the upper air valve, the gage
is first applied to the top flange of the air cylinder, as
illustrated in Fig. 9, and the sliding arm adjusted until
its end rests against the top of the stop on the air


valve, in which position it, is locked by means of the
thumb nut. With the arm thus locked, the gage is ap-
plied to the valve cap, as illustrated in Fig. 10, and if
the valve has proper lift, the under side of the collar
of the valve cap will just rest upon the shoulder of the
sliding arm, as illustrated, if the gage arm fails to
touch the stop on the valve when the shoulder on the
sliding bar rests upon the face of the collar, the valve
Fig. 10
Fig. 9.
Fig. 11.
lias a lift greater than standard by an amount equal to
the distance between the gage arm and the stop. If this
lift is greater than the maximum permissible, a repair
valve having a long stop should be substituted for the


old valve and the stop lowered until the standard lift
is reached, as indicated by the gage.
To determine the lift of the lower air valve, the gage
is first applied to the bottom flange of the air cylinder,
as illustrated in Fig. 9, and. the sliding arm adjusted
until its end rests against the stop in the cylinder, in
which position it is locked by means of the thumb nut.
With the arm thus locked, the gage is applied to the air
valve cage and air valve, as illustrated in Fig. 11, and
if the valve has proper lift, the shoulder on the sliding
arm will just rest upon the upper side of the collar of
the air valve cage, as illustrated-. If the gage arm fails
to touch the stop on the valve when the shoulder on the
sliding bar rests on the collar face on the cage, the
valve has a lift greater than standard by an amount
equal to the distance between the stop and the gage
arm.
In case the cylinders have been counterbored at the
entrance for the valve (‘age and valve and valve cham-
ber cap in such a way as to interfere with the applica-
tion of the gage, as above described, it will be found
necessary, in order to use the gage properly, to file
away the small portion of the ridge so that the cross-bar
of the gage will rest on the refaced surface of the valve
chamber. In doing this, care should be taken to avoid
injury to the refaeed surface.
When replacing valve cages and bushes, screw
threads should be coated with an oil and graphite com-
pound which prevents rusting and facilitates removal.
■ Never remove or replace the upper steam cylinder
head with the reversing valve rod in place, as to do so


will almost invariably result in bending the rod. A bent
rod is very liable to cause a “pump failure.”
'When assembling the sections of the piston valve,
special care should be taken to insure proper alignment
and thereby avoid possible trouble from binding of the
piston in the bushing.
It is evident that a compressor cannot compress more
air than it draws in and not that much if there is any
leakage to the atmosphere about the air cylinder. Bear-
ing this in mind, practise frequently listening at the
“Air Inlet” when the compressor is working slowly
while being controlled,by the governor, and whenever a
poor suction is noted on either or both strokes, locate
and report the, fault.
Any unusual click or pound should bo reported as it
may indicate either a loose piston or reversing valve
plate cap screw or other serious fault.
Any steam leakage that can reach the Air Inlet of
the compressor should be promptly repaired as such in-
creases the danger of water entering the brake pipe.
Keeping the suction strainer clean is of the utmost
importance, as even a slightly clogged strainer will
greatly reduce the capacity where the speed is at all
fast, A seriously or completely obstructed strainer, as
hy accumulated frost, aggravated by rising steam, will
increase the compressor speed and will also be indicated
by inability to raise or maintain the desired pressure.
It is an aid to good operation to thoroughly clean the
air cylinder and its passages at least three or four times
a year, by circulating through them a hot solution of
lye or potash, in the proportions of 2 lbs, of potash to


one gallon of water. This should always be followed
by sufficient clean, hot water to thoroughly rinse out
the cylinder and passages, after which a liberal supply
of valve oil should be given the cylinder. Suitable
tanks and connections for performing this operation
can easily be arranged in portable form. Never put
kerosene oil in the air cylinder to clean it.


The Westinghouse Brake Co. of Australasia Ltd.,
Concord West, N.S.W., Australia
OFFICES
THE WESTINGHOUSE BRAKE CO. OF
AUSTRALASIA, LTD,,
Chancery House, 48S Bourke Street,
Melbourne, C.l, Victoria.
THE WESTINGHOUSE BRAKE CO. OF AUSTRALASIA,
LTD,,
93/107 Feathcrston Street,
Wellington, New Zealand.
AGENTS
ELDER, SMITH & CO„ LTD.,
Currie Street,
Adelaide, South Australia.
HOLMES & CHURCH,
129 Creek Street,
Brisn a n e, Q uee n sla nn.
ASSOCIATED COMPANIES
Westinghouse Brake
& Saxby Signal
Company, Ltd.,
London, England.
Westinghouse Aik Brake
Company,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Westinghouse Traction
Brake Company,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Canadian Westinghouse
Company, Ltd.,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
American Brake Company,
St. Louis, Missouri.
Westinghouse Bremsen
Ghsellschaft, m.b.PL,
Hanover, Germany.
Westinghouse Pacific Coast
Brake Company,
Emeryville, California.
Compagnia Itai.iana
Westinghouse dei Freni,
Turin, Italy.
CoMPACNIE DES FIiRINS
Westinghouse,
Sovran, France.
National Brake & Electric
Company,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin.


7"/80 OU. FT. COMPRESSOR
Publication C-2—Supplement 1
Operation
AIR END—
Same as 8.1 "/.150 Cross Compound Compressor.
STEAM END—
When the high pressure si earn piston has nearly
completed its up stroke, the reversing valve plate 5*2
comes in contact with the shoulder on the reversing
rod 61, forcing it to its uppermost position, carrying
with it reversing valve 18, the movement of which, in
turn, blanks the port to passage n, and connects port
m to exhaust passage 1, exhausting steam from cavity
D behind the outer end of the large piston of the
piston valve. Since the pressure against the inner
aide of the large piston is now greater than the
pressure exerted against the inner side of the small
piston, the piston valve moves to the left in the direc-
tion of chamber D and all parts arc in the position
shown by the upper illustration of figure 16.
A direct communication is now established from
steam inlet port a, chamber b and passage c to the
upper end of the high pressure steam cylinder, forcing
downward the high pressure steam piston and low
pressure -air piston to which it is rigidly connected by
the piston rod. The movement of the piston valve to
the left, as described above, also opens passage g to
passage f through cavity h, thus permitting the steam
in the lower end of the high pressure steam cylinder
to expand into the lower end of the low pressure steam
cylinder. The latter being of materially larger volume
than the former, it will he seen that the steam is


thereby made to do its work expensively in Hie .low-
pressure steam cylinder. At tlio same time—
(a) The low- pressure air piston attached to the
high pressure steam piston is compressing
air in the lower end of the low pressure air
cylinder and forcing same through the
intermediate valves into the Jow-er end of
the high, pressure air cylinder.
(I)) Air at atmospheric pressure, is being drawn
into I lie upper end of the low pressure air
cylinder, through the air strainer and upper
inlet valves.
It will he observed that the steam expanded into
the lower end of the low pressure steam cylinder acts
upon the haver side of the low' pressure steam piston
and the force thus exerted, results in an upward move-
ment of this piston and of the high pressure air piston
connected thereto. Steam is exhausted from the upper
end. of tile low pressure steam cylinder through passage
d, chamber i and passage e to the atmosphere. The
upward movement of the low pressure steam piston
causes the high pressure air piston to compress the
air in the upper end of the high pressure air cylinder
to its final pressure, delivering same through the dis-
charge valve into the main reservoir.
"After tile low pressure steam piston has completed
its upward stroke, as explained, the lower end of the
low pressure steam cylinder is tilled with steam
exhausted from the lower end of the high pressure
steam cylinder. However, just as the low pressure
steam piston has completed its upward stroke, steam
is by-passed through three by-pass grooves x from the
lower to the. upper side of the low pressure steam
piston, thereby preventing an accumulation of back


pressure in the lower end of the high pressure
cylinder duo to leakage past the rings of the high
jiressurc steam piston.
At this stage, of the cycle, the upper cud ol ! the. high
pressure ,steam cylinder is tilled with live steam ; but
just before the high pressure steam piston completes
its downward stroke, reversing valve plate 52 engages
the, button end of the reversing valve roil (il, moving
it downward and carrying the reversing valve 1o its
extreme lower position, thereby opening the port
leading to passage n, thus supplying live steam to
chandler D; at the same time communication is cut
off' from chamber D to atmosphere via ports m and 1
as shown in the lower illustration of figure Ki. The
pressure thus exerted upon the outer side of the large
piston added to the pressure on the inner side of the
small piston is now greater than the pressure exerted
against the inner side of the large piston, and the
piston valve moves to the right in the direction of
chamber E. The small head 11 of the piston valve is
provided with a, bush having elongated grooves p. As
the piston valve moves to the right and uncovers these
grooves Jive steam from chamber b hy-passos to
chamber E at the back of the small end of the main
valve pislon. At the instant these grooves are cut-off
by the furl her movement of the piston, port 0 leading
to Ihe exhaust is also blanked, enabling the small
piston to compress the steam in chamber E, thus pro-
viding a high cushioning jiressurc.
Live steam is now supplied from passage a, through
chamber y, and passage g, to the lower end of the high
pressure steam cylinder, forcing upward the high pres-
sure steam piston which, as already explained, carries
with it the low pressure air piston. At this time also,
steam from the upper cud of the high pressure steam


cylinder lias communication through passage c,
chamber i and passage d, into the upper end. of the
low pressure steam cylinder. At the same time—
(a) the low pressure air piston attached to the
high pressure steam piston is compressing
the air in the upper end of the low pressure
air cylinder and forcing same through the
intermediate valves into the upper end of
the high pressure air cylinder, and—
(b) air at atmospheric pressure is drawn into
the lower end of the low pressure air
cylinder, through the air strainer and lower
inlet valves.
Again it will he observed that the steam expanded
into the upper end of the low pressure steam cylinder
acts upon the upper side of the low pressure steam
piston, and the force thus exerted results in a down-
ward movement of this piston, and of the high pressure
air piston connected thereto. At the same time steam
is exhausted from the lower end of the low pressure
steam cylinder, through passage, f, chamber h and
passage e, to the atmosphere. The downward move-
ment of the low pressure steam piston causes the high
pressure air piston to compress the air in the lower
end of the high pressure air cylinder, to its final pres-
sure, delivering same through the discharge valve into
the main reservoir. When the pistons have moved as
explained, the low pressure steam piston lias completed
its downward stroke; the upper end of the high pres-
sure air cylinder is filled with air compressed from the
upper end of the low pressure air cylinder; and the
upper end of the low pressure steam cylinder is tilled
with steam expanded .from the upper end of the high
pressure steam cylinder. However, just before the low
pressure steam piston has completed its downward


stroke, steam is by-passed through the three by-pass
grooves x' from the upper to the lower side of the low
pressure steam piston, thereby preventing an accumu-
lation of back pressure in the upper end of the high
pressure steam cylinder due to leakage past the rings
of the high pressure steam piston. At this stage of
the cycle also, the high pressure steam piston has com-
pleted its upward stroke; the lower end of the low
pressure air cylinder is filled with air at atmospheric
pressure; and the lower end of the high pressure steam
cylinder is filled with live steam. Here again tin?
compressor is reversed, hy means of the reversing
valve i)late attached to the high pressure steam piston
coming in contact with the shoulder of the reversing
valve rod, which in turn actuates the reversing valve,
and the cycle of operation already described is
repeated.
REPAIR SHOP & ROAD TEST—77BO C.C.
COMPRESSOR,
AIR END TEST: Same as for 83,7150 C.C. Compressor
(Pages 28-31 ) except as follows:
“The test specified is that with a iV orifice to
atmosphere and main reservoir pressure maintained
at (10 lbs., the 7"/80 C.C, Compressor must make not
more than 100 single strokes per minute. For altitudes
over 1,000 feet, the speed of the compressor may bo
increased five single strokes per minute for each 1,000
feet increase altitude,”


STEAM END TEST: (I’agc.s 111-lid)
The .speed test recoin mended for the 7"/ SO C.C. Coin-
pressor is the .same as shown on I’iig'e 112 for the
8i"/l'2() eu. l!t. Compressor,
Tin* following table gives the principal dimensions
of the 7"/ SO Cross Compound Compressor:—
Diameter of High Pressure Steam Cyl 7 in.
Diatnetcr of Low Pressure Steam Cyl 12 in.
Diameter of High Pressure Air Cyl 7i in.
Diameter of Low Pressure Air Cyl 12 in.
Length of Stroke 12 in.
Diameter of Steam Admission Pipe 1 in,
Diameter of Steam Kxhanst Pipe li in.
Diameter of Air Admission Pipe 2 in.
Diameter of Air Delivery Pipe li in.
Designed for Steam Pressure of 200 Hi.
Working against an Air Pressure of 140 11 >.
Overall Dimensions (approximate) ;
Height 53 in.
Width 32 in.
Depth 16) in.
Lift for Air Valves >ik in.


70-80 Cross Compound Air Compressor, Outline and Section Views.


Fig. 16—70-80 Compressor, Diagrammatic Section.


Fig. 12. Horizontal Section of Reversing Valve Chamber.


Fig, 14, 8½-Ich Com
0 high pr
Fig. 13. 8½-Inch Cross Compound Air Compressor, Outline end Section Views,


Fig- 14. 8½-Ich Compressor, Diagammatic Section. Downward stroke
o high pressure steam (ow pressure air) piston.
Fig. 15. 8½-Ich Com
high pres
and Section Views.


Fig. 15. 8½-Inch Compressor, Diagrammatic Section. Upward stroke of
high pressure steam (low pressure air) piston.


' Fig. 12. -Horizontal Section of Reversing Valve Oiamber. ;
Fig. 13. Bj-InchCross Compound Air Compressor, Outline and Section
Views.
Fig. 14. Si-Inch Compressor, Diagrammatic Section. Downward stroke
of liigli pressure steam (low pressure air) piston.
Fig., 15. Compressor, Diagrammatic Section. Upward stroke of
higK- pressure steam (low pressure air) piston.
