

TA F p
8)0
WESTMINSTER ABBEY
A Service of
Memorial and Thanksgiving
for
The Right Honourable Harold Edward Holt
C.H., M.P.
Prime Minister of the Commonwealth
of Australia
BORN 5 AUGUST 1908
DIED 17 DECEMBER 1967
Thursday
18 January 1968
at 12 noon


Before the Service there shall he played :
Gloria tibi Trinitas (vi)
William Blitheman
Fantasia in C minor (in five parts)
Voluntary No. 4 in D minor
/. S. Bach
William Walond
Paul Hindemith
Siciliana (Sonata 2)
Chorale Prelude :
/. S. Bach
Vor deinen Thron tret’ ich allhier
Drummers from the Royal Military School of Music
(Kneller Hall)
by permission of the Commandant
Director of Music : Lt. Col. Basil H. Brown, m.b.e., a.r.c.m.
Timpani : Student/Bandmaster M. Butcher,
Royal Australian Air Force
Side-drum : Student/Bandmaster T. G. Cooper,
Royal Horse Guards (The Blues)


ORDER OF SERVICE
At 11.55 a.m. the Representatives of Her Majesty The Queen, His
Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth
The Queen Mother,Her Royal Highness The Princess Margaret Countess
of Snowdon, Their Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester,
Her Royal Highness Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent and Her Royal
Highness Princess Alexandra, the Honourable Mrs. Angus Ogilvy,
will be received at the Great West Door by the Dean and Chapter and
will be conducted to their seats in Quire.
At 12 noon the Procession will move from the West Door of the
Church into the Quire while the Sentences following are sung :
I AM the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord : he that
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live :
and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die.
St. John 11. 25, 26.
I KNOW that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the earth : and though after my skin
worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.
Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and
not another. Job 19. 25-27.
WE brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can
carry nothing out. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath
taken away ; blessed be the name of the Lord.
William Croft (1678-1727) 1 Timothy 6. 7. fob 1, 21.
Organist of Westminster Abbey, 1708-1727
Then, while all remain standing, the Flag of Australia shall be borne,
to the beat of drums, from St. George’s Chapel to the Sacrarium,
where it shall be received by the Reverend Christopher Hildyard,
Sacrist of Westminster Abbey.
Then shall the Psalm following be sung by the Choir ; the Congregation
staniin Z : Psalm 121
I WILL lift up mine eyes unto the hills : from whence cometh
my help.
My help cometh even from the Lord : who hath made
heaven and earth.
He will not suffer thy foot to be moved : and he that keepeth
thee will not sleep.
Behold, he that keepeth Israel ; shall neither slumber nor
sleep.
3


The Lord himself is thy keeper : the Lord is thy defence
upon thy right hand ;
So that the sun shall not burn thee by day : neither the
moon by night.
The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil : yea, it is even
he that shall keep thy soul.
The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in :
from this time forth for evermore.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the Holy
Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be :
world without end. Amen.
Sir William McKie (b. 1901)
Organist of Westminster Abbey, 1941-1963
Then shall all be seated and the Lesson shall be read by
His Excellency the Honourable Sir Alexander Downer , k.b.e.,
High Commissioner for Australia.
Revelation xxi, 1-7
AND I saw a new heaven and a new earth : for the first heaven
and the first earth were passed away ; and there was no
more sea. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming
down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for
her husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying,
Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be
with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe aw T ay all tears
from their eyes ; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain : for the former
things are passed away. And he that sat upon the throne said,
Behold, I make all things new r . And he said unto me, Write :
for these wmrds are true and faithful. And he said unto me, It is
done. lam Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I
will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the w T ater of
life freely. He that overcometh shall inherit all things ; and
I will be his God, and he shall be my son.


Then shall all stand and , while the silent prayer of commemoration is
made , the Choir shall sing
The Contakion of the Faithful Departed
GIVE rest, O Christ, to thy servants with thy Saints : where
sorrow and pain are no more ; neither sighing, but life
everlasting.
Thou only art immortal, the Creator and Maker of man :
and we are mortal, formed of the earth, and unto earth shall we
return : for so thou didst ordain, when thou createdst me, saying,
Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return. All we go down
to the dust; and, weeping o’er the grave, we make our song :
alleluya, alleluya, alleluya.
Kieff Melody Tr. from the Greek by
Ed. Sir Walter Parratt William fohn Birkheck
Then the Congregation shall sit and an Address shall he made by
the Reverend W. P. Baddeley , m.a., Rector of St. fames’s, Piccadilly ,
and until recently Dean of Brisbane.
The A ddress ended , all shall stand and join in singing the hymn
402 E.H.
HE who would valiant be
’Gainst all disaster,
Let him in constancy
Follow the Master.
There’s no discouragement
Shall make him once relent
His first avowed intent
To be a pilgrim.
Who so beset him round
With dismal stories,
Do but themselves confound—
His strength the more is.
No foes shall stay his might.
Though he with giants fight:
He will make good his right
To be a pilgrim.


Since, Lord, thou dost defend
Us with thy Spirit,
We know we at the end
Shall life inherit.
Then fancies flee away !
I’ll fear not what men say.
I’ll labour night and day
To be a pilgrim.
English Traditional Alelody John Bmyan (1628-1698)
The Prayers shall follow, the Congregation kneeling.
Let us pray.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ , have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
OUR Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name;
Thy kingdom come ; Thy will be done ; In earth as it is in
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our
trespasses. As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation ; But deliver us from evil. Amen.
V. Enter not into judgement with thy servant, O Lord ;
R. For in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
V. Grant unto him eternal rest;
R. And let perpetual light shine upon him.
V. We believe verily to see the goodness of the Lord ;
R. In the land of the living.
V. O Lord, hear our prayer ;
R. And let our cry come unto thee.
O MERCIFUL God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is the resurrection and the life ; in whom whosoever
believeth shall live, though he die; and whosoever liveth, and
believeth in him, shall not die eternally ; who also hath taught
us, by his holy Apostle Saint Paul, not to be sorry, as men
without hope, for them that sleep in him : We meekly beseech


thee, O Father, to raise us from the death of sin unto the life
of righteousness ; that, when we shall depart this life, we may
rest in him, as our hope is this our brother doth; and that, at
the general resurrection in the last day, we may be found
acceptable in thy sight; and receive that blessing, which thy
well-beloved Son shall then pronounce to all that love and fear
thee, saying, Come, ye blessed children of my Father, receive
the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.
Grant this, we beseech thee, O merciful Father, through Jesus
Christ, our Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.
ALMIGHTY God, Father of all mercies, deal graciously we
beseech thee with those who mourn a husband and a father,
and those who mourn a statesman and a leader of a great nation,
that casting every care on thee they may know both the consola-
tion of thy love and the fortitude which is thy blessing on a
people who put their faith and trust in thee ; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
ALMIGHTY God, whose sovereign purpose none can make
void : give us faith to stand calm and undismayed amid
the tumults of the world, believing that thy kingdom has already
come near to us in Jesus Christ thy Son, and looking to the day
when thy righteousness shall wholly prevail in thine eternal and
glorious kingdom, where with the same Jesus Christ, in the
perfect charity of the Holy Spirit, thou livest and reignest,
world without end. Amen.
LORD, bless we beseech thee our Commonwealth of nations,
and especially at this time the people of Australia, that there
may be peace within its gates and prosperity in all its borders.
Preserve it from corruption. Defend it in trouble. Grant that
it may render a patient service to the concord of the world.
Write thy law upon our hearts and bind us together in a covenant
which can not be broken. All this we ask in the name of him
who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Jesus Christ our
Saviour. Amen.


Let us thank God for Harold Holt and join together in
A General Thanksgiving
ALMIGHTY God, Father of all mercies. We thine unworthy
servants do give thee most humble and hearty thanks
For all thy goodness and loving-kindness To us, and to all men ;
We bless thee for our creation, preservation, and all the blessings
of this life; But above all, for thine inestimable love In the
redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ; For the
means of grace, And for the hope of glory. And, we beseech
thee, give us that due sense of all thy mercies, That our hearts
may be unfeignedly thankful, And that we shew forth thy
praise, Not only with our lips, but in our lives ; By giving up
ourselves to thy service, And by walking before thee in holiness
and righteousness all our days ; through Jesus Christ our Lord,
to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory,
world without end. Amen.
THE grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, be with us, and with our
brethren in Australia, now and evermore. Amen.
Then all shall stand and Join in singing the hymn
579 A. & M.R.
I VOW to thee, my country, all earthly things above,
Entire and whole and perfect, the service of my love ;
The love that asks no question, the love that stands the test,
That lays upon the altar the dearest and the best;
The love that never falters, the love that pays the price,
The love that makes undaunted the final sacrifice.
And there’s another country, I’ve heard of long ago.
Most dear to them that love her, most great to them that know ;
We may not count her armies, we may not see her King;
Her fortress is a faithful heart, her pride is suffering;
And soul by soul and silently her shining bounds increase,
And her ways are ways of gentleness and all her paths are peace.
Gustav Holst Sir Cecil Spring-Rice
All shall kneel for the final prayer and Blessing , the Dean saying :
ARM us, O Lord, with the whole armour of God, with the
shield of faith, the sword of the Spirit, the helmet of salva-
tion, the girdle of truth, the breastplate of righteousness, that


we may be able to stand in the evil day ; And let our feet be
shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace, that having
done all, we may stand in the same, now and for ever. Amen,
GOD the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost bless
preserve and keep you : and may the souls of the faithful
through the mercy of God rest in peace.
Amen
Orlando Gibbons
Then shall all stand and sing
The National Anthem
GOD save our gracious Queen,
Long live our noble Queen,
God save the Queen.
Send her victorious.
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us :
God save the Queen.
Nor on this land alone—
But be God’s mercies shown
From shore to shore.
Lord, make the nations see
That men should brothers be,
And form one family
The wide world o’er.
The Flag of Australia shall be returned to the Bearers.
The Bells of the Abbey Church shall then be rung , half-muffled.
The Trumpet Voluntary by Henry Purcell shall be played as the
Collegiate Body and the Visiting Clergy leave the Sacrarium.
After the Service there shall be played on the Organ :
Crown Imperial .. .. .. Sir William 11
Sir William Walton
The Congregation are requested to remain in their seats
until directed to move by the Stewards


THE HOVE
SHIRLEY
PRESS LTD
