

Western Hustralta.
HE State of Western Australia covers the vast
area of 975,920 square miles, or 624,588,000
acres. Some idea of the size of the State can
be imagined when it is considered that the
United Kingdom, Germany, France, Hungary,
Norway, Italy, Portugal, Switzerland, Denmark,
and Belgium could all be put inside the boun-
daries of Western Australia. It extends North and South
about 1,200 miles from Albany, in the South (in lati-
tude 35deg. 02min.), to Wyndham, in the North (in latitude
15deg. 27min.). Necessarily within such limits there is a great
variety of climate and soils; a variety that renders possible the
CITY OF PERTH.
production of any fruit, flowers, vegetables, and grains peculiar
to tropical, semi-tropical, or temperate climates. It is hoped
that those who are at the present time looking around for
chances of employment will be convinced that Western Aus-
tralia presents a field for the exercise of energy and the in-
vestment of capital surpassed by few other countries in the
world. Good land is obtainable on easy terms and conditions,
and of a type which will yield a substantial return for the
capital invested—always assuming that ordinary prudence and
intelligence are observed in its expenditure.
Opportunities of the State.
Western Australia offers great advantages as a held for
settlement. Her territory is enormous; the rainfall regular;
droughts in South-West portion are unknown. The climate
is mild. All products of the temperate zones thrive in a con
genial soil. Stock keeping is profitable. A home market
competes for every kind of crop and stock, while an increas-
ing export trade is being opened up. The land laws are very
liberal. A Free Homestead Farm of 160 acres can be secured
by new selectors on payment of fees amounting to £B, and
larger grants can be had for 10s. per acre, payable in 20
years without interest. The choice of country that is offered
to the selector is of wide range and differing capabilities,
so that the orchard-
rst, wheat-grower, vig-
neron, dairyman, and
market-gardener can
each find a location
having the best
natural conditions for
his vocation. The Ag-
ricultural Bank, on
behalf of the State,
lends money cheaply
to settlers on long
terms of easy repay-
ments by instalments.
Railways intersect
the agricultural dis-
tricts, and are fed by
good main roads. The
Government expends
annually a large sum
in the making of new
roads, and in many
other directions the
Government is ac-
tively fostering the
development of the
land. The Goldfields
Water Supply is pumped right through the Eastern Dis-
tricts, and settlers at small cost may tap the pipes. Schools,
Agricultural Halls, and Post and Telegraph facilities are
widely distributed. Children are carried by train to school
free of charge. There are Experimental Farms for
raising and distributing early-maturing wheats, other
special seeds, and stud stock. Students are trained in
these agrarian colleges. - The Department of Agricul-
ture has an expert staff at the service of the public, in
eluding the services of an Analytical Chemist who, on pay-
WESTERN AUSTRALIA TO JOHN
“Look at this ! We are Importing all' s t ve J ears
Annually, which can easily be grown advised;
Lands. Why don’t you send out ye'd lo !* 3 within
Daughters to help us to produce this e( ! ua l to


ment of a small fee, informs the settler as to the composi-
tion of his soil, and the kind of fertiliser that will produce
the best result. Moreover, the Entomologist of the Depart-
ment has (in conjunction with the Department of Agricul-
ST. GEORGE’S TERRACE, PERTH, 1908.
ture, California) been sent on an extended search for insect
parasites, especially of the natural enemy of the fruit fly.
The transport of produce is becoming cheaper owing to the
Government’s vigorous policy of constructing light agricul
tural railways. Frequent and rapid communication is main-
tained with the outside world by the splendid steamers of
TERRACE TAKEN FROM THE SAME SPOT
14 YEARS AGO.
U'ient, Mcssagcries, German, White Star, and
terstate steamship companies likewise have
liue steamers trading regularly between the various ports of
Australia. In a word, land settlement is a matter of vital im-
portance in the national policy of Western Australia, and
in inviting settlers she is able to make the invitation well
worthy of acceptance.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES, CATHEDRAL AVENUE, PERTH.
The Products of Western Australia
are : sheep, Cattle, Wheat, and all Cereals, Fruit, and
Wine, Timber, Pearls and Pearl Shells, Gold, Coal, and other
minerals.
SOUTH PERTH
Western Australia needs: Farmers,
Orchardists, Vignerons, Agricultural Labourers, and Indus-
trious Men of all kinds who are able and willing to work on
the land.
Western Australia claims that no other
State has a better or more healthy climate than is found in
her Agricultural areas, or has so excellent a local market for
all Agricultural produce and fruit. Nor is there any State
which does more, if so much, to give practical encouragement
to settlers on her Lands.
Western Australia gives evident
proof of the value she places upon Land Settlement and
of her bona fide desire to increase her Agricultural expansion
by the unique concessions she grants.
Climate.
To the emigrant the climate of a country to which he is
attracted is naturally an all important question. Western
Australia’s climate is most salubrious. The records of Perth
may be taken as fairly representative of the South-West
Division. The highest recorded shade temperature at Perth
was 116.7 on the 25th of January, 1878. In 1909 the aver-
age maximum day temperature for December (the hottest
month), in Perth, was 86.7. The seasons are equable, violent
changes being practically unknown. The dry season generally
extends well into April, when the first rains fall; the greater
CATTLE WATERING AT YATHEROO, MIDLAND LINE
part of the rainfall occurring between May and September,
when heavy showers are succeeded by bright weather. The
annual average rainfall at Perth is 33 inches, and farther
south along the coast it reaches 40 inches. In 1909 the
average maximum day temperature at Perth during July
(the coldest month) was 61.5, and the average minimum at
night 45.1. The thermometer in the shade rarely falls below
freezing point. Spring-time is very enjoyable, the ther-
5


mometer ranging from about 70 in the daytime to 50 at night.
During that part of the year wild flowers of infinite variety
and brilliant colours bloom luxuriantly. Passing inland from
Perth, the climate changes rapidly, the summer days becom
ing hotter and the winter nights colder. In December, 1909,
for example, the mean maximum day temperature was 86.7
at Perth, 93.4 at York, 95.9 at Southern Cross, and 91.7 at
Goolgardie. In winter the coldest regions extend from
Southern Gross in a more or less south westerly direction.
Thus the mean minimum night temperature in July, 1909,
was 45.1 at Perth, 34.0 at Southern Cross, and 40.1 at Katan
ning. hi these parts frosts at night are not infrequent;
yet snow and ice are very rare. Farther north the summer
heat is very great. The mean maximum day temperature at
Cue, on the Murchison, was 101.5 in December, 1909. North
of latitude 28deg. the summer is warm; the winter months
are, however, enjoyable and healthful.
Western Australia possesses natural conditions which
make it an ideal health resort, particularly for persons who,
from a prolonged residence in hot and trying climates such
as that of India, require a rest and change of air in order
to recuperate.
Rainfall.
The Kimberley District, which is utilised mainly for
cattle, sheep, and horse-breeding stations, in the extreme
north, has an annual average rainfall varying from 20 to 27
inches, due mainly to summer thunderstorms. The wettest
IN THE DARLING RANGES, 15 MILES FROM PERTH.
portion of the whole State is the south-west corner along the
coast, where the annual average is 50 inches, decreasing
northwards to 19 at Geraldtun. Eastward the rainfall lessons
to 35 at Albany, 35 at Esperance, 15 at Israelite Bay,
and 10 at Eucla. From the west coast inland it decreases as
follows:—From 19 at Geraldton to 9 at Yalgoo; from 33 at
Perth to 21 at Newcastle, 16 at Northam, and 9 at Southern
Gross. A similar diminution occurs eastward from Buubury,
starting with a register of 37 inches. The fall in the Dar-
ling Ranges is much heavier, amounting at the Canning
Waterworks to 39 inches.
The Soil.
The soil of Western Australia is, as a rule, poorer and
less uniform in quality than that of the Eastern States of
the Commonwealth, yet its deficiency in these respects is
more than compensated for by the regularity of the seasons.
Although some years arc drier than others, the State has
never had, and, from its geographical position, never can
have, devastating droughts, and it is a rare thing indeed to
find the crops suffering from want of rain for a continued
period.
DONNYBROOK DAIRY HERD, SOUTH-WESTERN LINE.
SOUTH-WESTERN DIVISION.
The South-Western Division of the State is the most
suitable portion for all agricultural purposes. It enjoys a
perfect climate, the average temperature for all the year
round being 63 degrees Fahrenheit. It possesses a richness of
varied soils which no other part can boast, and it has a
regular and sufficient rainfall, with an average of 13 to 40
inches annually, the dread drought being unknown here. The
salubrity of the climate of the South-Western Division is
due to the fact that on the western side, for its whole length
of from 500 to 600 miles, it is bounded by the Indian Ocean,
while the Southern Ocean washes its southern shores. The
area of this stretch of country is nearly 80,000 square miles
(not acres), sufficient in itself to form a good sized State,
and within the Division land is open to free selection with-
out any restrictions as to boundaries, except within the sur-
veyed agricultural areas and repurchased estates, most of
which, on account of the quality of the land and their fav-
ourable situation, have been already selected.
Mr. Catton Grasby, Editor of “Garden and Field,” and
a well known authority, reporting on this portion of the
State, said: —“From what I have seen of the country, ex-
tending from Northampton, in the Victoria District, to
Katanning and Broomehill, on the Great Southern Railway,
I have no hesitation in saying that I consider it one of the
finest wheat belts in the world. The climatic conditions, as
I understand them, are as nearly perfect for wheat-growing
as can be found. The rainfall is good, without being heavy,
and is wonderfully regular. The rain falls almost entirely
during the cereal-growing period, and every condition points
to the accuracy of the statement made by the old-established
farmers that drought is unknown, devastating storms and
floods practically so, and a general failure of the crops an
unheard of thing.”
Prominent Liberal Provisions in Land Laws
and Concessions to Settlers,
A HOMESTEAD FARM OF 160 ACRES.—
Conditions: Personal residence for six months in each
of the first live years, or residence within 20 miles on
rural lands held by the same person. Improvements:
Expend within the first two years 4s. per acre; within
the next three years Gs. per acre; within the last two
years 4s. per acre —making an expenditure of 14s. per
acre in all; of the total prescribed value of improvements,
only £3O for a house is allowed to count. Fence half the
land within five years, the whole within seven years.
CONDITIONAL PURCHASE LANDS. -From 100
acres to 1,000 acres at from 10s. per acre, payable in 40
half-yearly instalments. Where the land is surveyed
before selection, the first three years the half-yearly in-
stalment of purchase money for the land shall not exceed
threepence an acre, even if the purchase money exceeds
ten shillings per acre. Subsequent half-yearly instalments
will be proportionately increased. Conditions: Personal
residence for six months in each of the first five years
from date of survey, of which the holder is duly advised;
fence one-half the land within five years, the whole within
ten years. Expend in improvements an amount equal to
8


one-fifth of the purchase money in every two years of
the first ten years of the lease. Half the value of a great
and small stock-proof fence, or two-thirds of a rabbit or
dog-proof fence on the boundary may be allowed in esti-
mating value of improvements. Conditional Purchase
Lands may also be selected without the conditions of
residence, in which case the expenditure required on im-
provements shall be a sum equal to the purchase money,
with 50 per centum thereof added thereto.
CONDITIONAL PURCHASE BY DIRECT PAY-
MENT.—P rom 100 acres to 1,000 acres at from 10s. per
acre. Terms; 10 per cent, deposit, balance payable by
four equal instalments within 12 months. Improvements
to. the value of 10s. per acre required in addition to ex-
terior fence. To be fenced within three years. Improve-
ments to the value of 10s. per acre to be effected within
seven years or sooner.
GRAZING LEASE CONDITIONAL PURCHASE.—
Prom 500 to 5,000 acres at from 3s. 9d. per acre. Price
per acre fixed according to classification by an Inspector.
If applicant withdraws his application after inspection
and before approval, he is charged cost of inspection.
Purchase money payable by 40 equal half-yearly instal-
ments. Expend in improvements an amount equal to one-
fifth of the purchase money 7 every two years for the first
ten years of lease. Fence the whole land within ten
years. (Except where surveyed before selection grazing
leases have been temporarily withdrawn from selection.)
LAND FOR ORCHARDS, VINEYARDS, OR
GARDENS.— Fi ■om sto 50 acres, from 20s. per acre, pay-
able in three years. Improvements, including fence, to
be completed within three years.
SUBDIVISION BEFORE SELECTION. The sys-
tern of having land surveyed into blocks before being made
available for selection, introduced more particularly dur-
ing 1906, has since been vigorously carried on. Up to dale
some 50 separate areas in various Land Agent’s districts
have been surveyed, the areas of which in the aggregate
total no less than 1,265,600 acres. Of this immense area,
about 500,000 acres are, or shortly will be, available for
selection, and a staff of 36 surveyors is engaged in survey-
ing other areas.
The great advantages in selecting land already sur-
veyed are that the applicant can see exactly what kind
of land is within the boundaries of his selection; he will
have the benefit of water supply in the shape of excavated
tanks or wells, which are provided by the Government
in the drier localities at convenient distances apart; armed
with a copy of the plan he can proceed to the
district and inspect blocks for himself, spending as much
time as he desires over the matter; he is saved from delay
in obtaining approval notice of application, as this gener-
ally issues within a few days from time of lodgment of his
application; and as it is the practice now when throwing
open surveyed lots to state the amount the Agricultural
Bank will advance on each, he has the great advantage
of knowing exactly what assistance he will be able to
obtain from that institution,
In the case where a special date is appointed for
throwing open of an area and there should be more than
one applicant for the same block, the matter is referred
to a Land Board for decision as to whom the block shall
be allotted, usually within a week from date appointed
for lodgment of applications.
SURVEY FEES.— (a.) The cost of survey in areas
surveyed before selection is added to the price of the land,
and payments bearing 5 per cent, interest per annum are
extended over twenty years.
(b.) For unsurveyed land before selection: —One
quarter of fee with application, balance by 40 half-yearly
instalments with purchase money together with 5 per cent,
interest per annum.
(e.) For Homestead Farms:—One-quarter of fee
with application, balance with 5 per cent, interest per
annum in three half-yearly payments.
(d.) For Direct Purchase Land: —One-quarter with
application, balance with 5 per cent, interest in quarterly
instalments with purchase money.
(e.) Where several adjoining blocks are held by the
same person, the Survey Fee on external boundaries only
will be charged.
A Lease Fee of Ten shillings is payable with every
application.
VINEYARD ON THE SWAN, 12 MILES FROM PERTH.
THE AGRICULTURAL BANK renders monetary
assistance to enable settlers to effect improvements, to
pay off mortgage already existing on the land, and for the
purchase of stock.
« « «
a selector proceeding to any district for the purpose
of selecting land, the nearest Land Agent will supply
all information, plans, and pamphlets. Similar informa-
tion may also be obtained at the Head Office, or at the
Information Bureau, Perth. In the event of an applica-
tion for land being made with the necessary deposit, a
refund of Railway Fare may be obtained, if the deposit
on land selected is equal to 50 per cent, more than the
amount of the fare, and provided that the application
for refund is supported by 7 a certificate from a Govern-
ment Land Agent stating the place from which the selector
proceeded for the purpose of selecting.
CLIMBING THE RANGES.
The Railway 7 Department grants a special concession
in the way of fares and freights for a new selector’s
family and goods on production of a certificate of bona
fldes from the Lands Department. The selector of an
area of not less than 500 acres may obtain from the Lands
Department an order for railway tickets and freight for
his family, goods, and chattels from the station nearest
his present or late residence to the station nearest the
land selected. Such order will entitle the selector to a
reduction on the usual charge of the Railway Department.


XE he . Department of Agriculture employs experts, who
visit the various Agricultural Districts, delivering
lectures and advising settlers. In addition, an entomolo-
gist is almost constantly employed in travelling round the
world to watch the latest methods of combating farm and
orchard pests.
There is a Royal Agricultural Society of Western
Australia, with headquarters at Perth, and a permanent
Show Ground at Claremont, near Perth; in addition to
which there are about 80 Associations dealing with every
branch of agriculture.
The Agricultural Bank.
THE SCOPE OF THE BANK.
'7T' HE Agricultural Bank has been the means of largely
developing the agricultural industry of the State, and
also of assisting many farmers to succeed on their holdings,
where they would otherwise have had a hard struggle to
surmount the initial difficulties incidental to getting virgin
lands into a reproductive condition. Advances are made to
assist farmers, on the security of Conditional Purchase,
Homestead Farm, or Freehold Land, to improve their hold-
ings; and in the cases where they have improved them, to
pay off existing mortgages, to purchase breeding stock, and
locally-manufactured machinery.
Advances may be made of an amount not exceeding £4OO,
to the full value of the improvements proposed to be made.
Further advances may be made of an amount not exceeding
£250, to one-half the value of the additional improvements
proposed to be made, the improvements recognised being
ringbarking, clearing, fencing, draining, and water conser-
vation.
HOW THE MONEY IS REPAID.
Money is lent by the Agricultural Bank at 5 per cent,
per annum and unusually long terms for the repayment of
the principal. The borrower is called upon to pay interest
only for the first five years his loan is in existence. At the
expiration of that time he starts to repay the principal and
interest at the rate of 7 per cent, per annum payable half-
yearly. The loan thus extends over thirty years, a much
longer term than is allowed by the ordinary mortgagee. Hav-
ing to pay interest only for the first five years, the borrower
is able to surmount the worst part of his difficulties, and get
his property into a reproductive condition by the time the
redemption period of his loan falls due. He is then usually
in a position to pay his half-yearly instalments of loan with-
out difficulty.
A BENEFICIAL ARRANGEMENT.
The holders of Unimproved Conditional Purchase Lauds
experience great difficulty as a rule in raising money from
the ordinary financial institution. The Agricultural Bank,
however, advances principally for the development of that
class of security. All that is required when making an ap-
plication is a living area of good virgin country. The cost
of improvements are determined by the Bank and the amount
which it is agreed to advance is paid over in instalments as
the work proceeds.
The maximum amount that can be advanced to any one
person is £750. Advances may be made up to £lOO to pur-
chase breeding stock or for the purchase of locally-manufac-
tured machinery.
The Bank has been the means of assisting, to a large
extent, in the settlement of the agricultural lands of the
State, and in enabling farmers to make the celebrated
“two blades of grass’’ grow where only one would have
grown.
BUSINESS DONE.
Number of applications for Loans received during
1906-7 was . . . . . . . . . . 1,970
Number of applications for Loans received during
1907-8 was . . . . . . . . 2,598
Number of applications for Loans received during
1908-9 was . . . . . . . . . . 21,915
Amount Advanced 1906-7 was . . £131,271 2s. 7d.
Amount Advanced 1907-8 was . . £218,420 17s. 6d.
Amount Advanced 1908-9 was . . £261,076 14s. sd.
Total Amount Advanced up to 30th
June, 1909, was . . . . £1,004,675 Bs. 6d.
THE CAPITAL OF THE BANK IS £2,000,000.
ON A STATE FARM, BRUNSWICK, SOUTH-WESTERN LINE.
The Experimental Farms.
West Australian Government has established an
Experimental Farm five miles from Narrogin, on the
Great Southern Railway (162 miles from Perth), where
students receive a practical training and are instructed in
the cultivation of cereals; root and fodder crops; the hand-
ling and breeding of stock, including horses, cattle, sheep,
pigs, and poultry; and in dairying.
BRUNSWICK STATE FARM, SOUTH-WESTERN LINE.
The course extends over two years, but students are not
compelled to remain the full term. They are expected, how-
ever, to stay at least six months.
The fee is £lO per annum (which includes board and
lodging, but students have to find their own bed-linen, etc.).
In return for their instruction and maintenance, they are
required to do all kinds of farm work and to observe the
necessary regulations by which the Farm is governed.
The establishment of this Farm offers to newcomers un-
acquainted with Agriculture, but desirous of settling on the
land, an opportunity of acquiring Colonial knowledge and
experience of the highest value.
Students availing themselves of the unique opportunity
here offered are expected, when leaving the Farm, to be in
a position to take up land on their own account.
Three other State Farms have, besides, been created to
demonstrate the capabilities of the land under widely dis-
similar climatic conditions.
14


These farms have been cast on a basis that is intended
co make them self-supporting, and also, at the same time,
to carry out experimental work of value to the settlers and
the State alike. Thus clean seed wheat, seed potatoes, and
others true to name are grown and sold at market value.
Pure stud sheep, pigs, cattle, and poultry are bred and sup-
IRRIGATION PATCH, STATE FARM, BRUNSWICK,
SOUTH-WESTERN LINE.
plied to settlers at reasonable prices. Seeds and roots of
fodder and other introduced plants of economic value are
raised and distributed.
In this way the State Farms are made to benefit not
only the agricultural student, but also all those concerned in
the development of the agricultural resources of the State.
Fruit Growing.
FRUIT FOR EXPORT.
The advantages possessed by Western Australia for
fruit-growing are always conceded. Slit has the right soil,
rainfall, and climate for producing all European fruits, ex-
cept perhaps the cherry, which, as a rule, only bears well in
the extreme South-West districts. Besides the natural ad-
vantages, her geographical situation is most favourable for
an export trade when the local demand has been overtaken.
Fremantle is much the nearest Australian port to London,
which is a matter of great advantage in the shipment of the
perishable products of garden and vineyard. The high
quality of the fruit produced, and the better condition, on
account of the shorter voyage, in which Western Australian
consignments should arrive in England, guard against any
Xlamger of the over-planting of choice and good-keeping
varieties of apples and pears.
ORCHARD, MT. BARKER, GREAT SOUTHERN LINE.
TAXATION.
(By E. T. Owen, Commissioner of Taxation.)
Western Australia, like other States of the Common-
wealth, has a Land and an Income Tax, but the rates of
taxation arc lower than those prevailing in the other States.
The Land Tax is at the rate of Id. in the £ on the unim-
proved value of land which has not been improved within
the meaning of “The Land and Income Tax Assessment Act,
1907,” and %d. in the £ on the unimproved value of land
which has been improved within the meaning of the said
Act. The Income Tax is at the rate of 4d. in the £, no mat-
ter how great the income may be.
LAND TAX.
If the land held by any person does not altogether ex-
ceed £5O in unimproved value, such person is exempt from
land tax, and improved lands outside a municipality which
are used solely or principally for agricultural or pastoral
purposes; in other words country lands which are used as
farms, orchards, sheep and cattle stations, and which are
improved within the meaning of the Act, are entitled to an
exemption of £250; that is to say, the first £250 of unim-
proved value is free from taxation. It may be explained that
country lands are deemed to be improved within the mean-
ing of the Act if the improvements thereon equal in value
one pound per acre, or one-third of the unimproved value of
the land.
Town lands are deemed to be improved if the improve-
ments are equal to one-third of the unimproved value of the
land.
In order to encourage new settlers to take up and culti-
vate land, a special provision has been inserted in the Act
exempting them from taxation during the first five years
from the date on which the land was granted to them by the
Lands Department. This concession is withheld only in
cases where the settler has large holdings of land in the
State.
If the person who owns land in the State, which is sub-
ject to land tax, resides permanently outside the Common-
wealth of Australia, he is liable to a tax 50 per cent, greater
than that payable by a resident.
INCOME TAX.
The Income Tax, as previously stated, is at the rate of
4d. in the £, and is payable only on incomes earned or pro-
duced in the State. Interest on inscribed stock and on Gov-
ernment debentures of this State is exempt from taxation
altogether. Every taxpayer is free of income tax on the
first £2OO of his income, and every taxpayer is entitled to
deduct from his income for taxation purposes £lO for each
child under 3 6 years of age resident with and dependent
upon him.
Where a taxpayer derives income from the use or culti-
vation of land, and is liable to land tax thereon, the Act, in
order to prevent double taxation, allows the taxpayer a de-
duction from his income tax assessed on the income derived
from such land of an amount equal to the land tax on such
land.
Incomes earned in any other part of the world are not
taxable in this State, but incomes earned in this State by
persons who do not reside within the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia are liable to a tax 50 per cent, greater than that pay-
able by a resident.
EDUCATION.
Some people hesitate to go into the bush owing to hav-
ing doubts about the standard of education their children
will receive, or possibly the lack of education. The Govern-
ment has given the matter most careful and earnest con-
sideration, and the fact that many of the country children
have distinguished themselves not only in their school work
but afterwards, should be sufficient guarantee of the quality
of the work done in the country schools. Usually the school
area is large, and the children either ride to the school on
17


horseback or tw r o or three settlers combine and send their
children in a cart, the horse being turned loose in the horse
paddock adjacent to the school grounds. Where the settlers
are near a railway the children have free train carriage and
everything is done to meet their varied wants.
MAIN PORTION, STATE SCHOOL, JAMES STREET, PERTH.
The facilities afforded by the Education Department for
the establishment of Schools to meet the requirements of
sparsely scattered population are all that could be expected
by new settlers. Wherever an attendance of fifteen children
within a radius of three to four miles can be secured, schools
are already established. All over the settled portions of the
State such schools as these are established and placed under
INFANTS’ PORTION, PRINCESS MAY STATE SCHOOL, FREMANTLE.
efficient supervision, being regularly visited by Inspectors,
and the same standard of education maintained as obtains in
the more thickly populated portions of the State. Isolated
families are also provided for under a very liberal provision
of the Education Act for the establishment of Special Schools
in which the Government really contributes towards the
maintenance of a private tutor.
Where an average attendance of ten can be maintained,
the whole cost of the school is borne by the Department.
Where a smaller number than ten are collected, and a suit-
able room is provided, the Department will pay £4 10s. per
annum for each child —the payment being based on the aver-
age attendance for each month. The parents must find a
suitable teacher approved by the Department, and must guar-
antee to make the salary up to £6O per annum at least.
Bee Culture.
This is an industry that can be made payable with
comparatively little effort.
Mining, Timber Cutting, Pearl Fishing, etc.,
Offer a wide scope for capital and enterprise.
Note these Figures.
following startling Figures will give Farmers and
others desirous of settling in Western Australia some-
thing to think over, and prove how real is the opportunity to
make a success of Farming, Fruit Growing, or Dairying in
Western Australia.
In travelling through the State, one cannot but be struck,
with the frequency of small schools dotted about in localities
in which they would hardly be expected, and also with the
The following is a list of some articles of Farm and
Dairy Produce imported to the State during 1908: —
general intelligence of the teachers and the up-to-date ap- Butter, 6,960,718 lbs., value £366,339
pliances for imparting sound practical education and some Cheese, 1>191>336 lbg> value 38,534
knowledge of useful arts, such as carpentry, horticulture, ’, ’ ’ ’ ,
, ~ ... . ~ 1 , . . Flour, 46,577 centals, value .. . . .. 21,259
oud Athor cm hmatc! miro w n rnn ovninomr onb /inwi ran Intvi 777
. 1 • J- , • n , 1 -1 • -i 1 . . XJ.UUI, ttU.cM / L/Clll/Ctib, Vdi Uc . , • • • •
and other subjects outside the ordinary school curriculum,
which tends to fit the children to become useful settlers on Potatoes, 12,807 tons 19 cwts., value . . . . 58,174
the land, and thus form a valuable asset to the State. Onions, 2,341 tons 9 cwts., value •- . • • 15,453
MW
-
Points for Settlers.
Farming.
No Country in the world has come move rapidly to
the front for Agricultural Settlement, has better Home | || w
Markets, or brighter prospects than Western Aus- I r JHHBki '
, ~ Wf* Iff «
tralia.
Fruit and Vine Growing. '' tV ,
There are unequalled opportunities here. Fruits of ail
kinds grow in profusion, and of a quality unsurpassed.
The Wine Industry has a great future. Very little has
yet been attempted in dried fruits.
Dairying.
There are no better openings anywhere. The local
demand for all Dairy Products is greatly in excess of
the Supply, and, owing to the expansion of the State,
is increasing.
Sheep and Cattle Raising. prize stock, Ayrshire, “maud ii.,” royal show, 1909.
Grazing Lands may be obtained at Low Prices, and on
Easy terms. There are great areas in various parts of Green Fruits, value £29,241
the State particularly suitable for raising Sheep and Bacon and Hams, 2,854,297" lbs., value .. .. 109,553
Cat * le - . Oatmeal, 2,185,243 lbs., value 18,831
Poultry Rearing. Poultry,’ value’ .. .. " ’ £3,317
Fowls, Ducks, Geese, and Turkeys thrive splendidly, iioqqqr T7 oW hr 3R7
Eggs, 1,129,996 doz., value .. .. . . 55,357
and then, is a nad\ maiket. Concentrated and Preserved Milk, value .. 81,135
Pig Breeding. ' . Hops, 234,908 lbs., value 11,404
To men ot small means, who understand the business, , joioa
10 men or small means, wno unaerstana me Business, _ . , , . o , no
„ , nn - , ’ . . Oats, 143,665 centals, value 48,198
failure should be out of tlio question, the seope being £ p„U ar d, and Sharps, 183,034 centals, value 46,762
practically unlimited.
19
20


% '■*' % i: . ~M.
m. w *
'
-' ;: : ■ I
CHAMPION MERINO, ‘ ‘ PANTHER NO. 23,” ROY AI, SHOW
The following table shows the value of Agricultural
Produce imported into Western Australia in 1908 to bo the
enormous sum of £1,412,353, every pennyworth of which
could be produced in the State if there were sufficient
Farmers on the land:
Agricultural Produce £297,926
Fruit and Vegetables 174,321
Wines 36,547
Live Stock 135,113
Farmyard and Dairy Produce . . 768,446
Total Imports of Produce during 1908 . . £1,412,353
PRIZE STOCK, HOLSTEIN BULL, ‘ ‘ WELLINGTON, ’ ’ ROYAL SHOW,
Comparison of Wheat Yields
A comparison of the wheat yields of the Australian
States, taking a period of ten years ending 1907-8 as a
basis, shows that Western Australia is well able to hold its
own, finding ns it does second place on the list.
HARVESTING, WYOLA
This is accounted for by the
and the uniformity of the crops
remarkable feature about them.
~"" T *
A WHEAT FIELD, MIDLAND LINE.
EASTERN GOLDFIELDS LINE.
regularity of the rainfall,
in this State is the most
The forecast for the 1909-10 Season gives the average
of 13.40 bushels per acre.
HARVESTING AT YORK, EASTERN DISTRICTS, GREAT SOUTHERN
LINE.
The following table gives the average wheat yield o !
the Australian States for a period of ton years ending
1907-8:
Western Australia . . 11.21 bushels.
New South Wales . . . . 9.75
Victoria . . . . . . 8.63
South Australia . . . . 7.03
Queensland . . . . 13.34 „
NEWMARRACARRA, FROM HOMESTEAD, YALGOO LINE.
23


One Solid Fact is worth a Bushel of
Theory.
HMOST important item those who intend to settle in
any new country should consider is the question of
SELLING
at a Profit. If there are good Markets available, and a
farmer can dispose of his
PRODUCTS
at a satisfactory figure, he has nothing to fear; but unless
he can sell
AT A PROFIT
neither the yield per acre nor the enormous amount of fruit
he can grow will avail him much. Beyond all doubt, the
PURE-BRED HACKNEY STALLION, “MATCHLESS MATHIAS, 7 7
FIRST PRIZE, ROYAL SHOW, 1909.
land in Western Australia will produce almost anything, and
(he facts and figures quoted in these pages will prove
absolutely that a settler can,
ON THE SPOT,
sell his Farm and Dairy Products, his Poultry and Eggs, his
Bacon and Cheese, his Fruit and Vegetables at really good
figures, for the Local demand is greater than the supply.
after the moist heat of the tropics. I was also pleased to
note the great improvement in, and extension of, the Har-
bour and town of Fremantle, and the developments in the
commercial and residential parts of Perth and its Suburbs.
The Swan River was still the centre of attraction, as it could
KING 7 S PARK, PERTH.
not fail to be, with its broad reaches and bright waters, but
the King 7 s Park, at the West end of the City, which, when
1 knew it first, was a hill of sand and scrub, and the Queen’s
Park, at the East end, formerly a tipping ground for refuse,
were an astonishment to me, as they have now become beauti-
ful pleasure resorts, which on Sundays and holidays are
thronged with crowds of well-dressed and prosperous people.
Leaving Perth, after a short stay, I went into
To Prospective Settlers.
The Country,
visiting some of the chief agricultural and fruit-growing
Mr. E. T. Scammell, who recently resigned his position centres of the State. My journey took me along the South-
t, ~ . ttt i a i .. Western, Great Southern, and Eastern Railway lines, which
as Emigration Commissioner for Western Australia , , ~, 7 , 7 . , ■ . , / 7
1 left at various places, in order to judge for myself the
in London, writing in April, 1908, says: progress which had been made in “the back blocks/ 7 and
the prospects of land settlement off the main lines of rail-
1 Lave just paid a three months visit to Western ways.' Here I met a number of settlers who had come from
ways. Here I met a number of settlers who had come from
Australia for the purpose of seeing how the country has Great Britain in recent years, and in every case I found that
progressed since I was last there in 1898, and of ascertain- where the problems of life in the bush had been faced with
iug how some of the British settlers, who had been induced energy, even quite recent settlers were doing well,
to leave their homes by the information given to them in
the old country, were faring.
On arriving at Fremantle I
struck with
Beauty of the Climate
The Brightness and
NORTHAM A COUNTRY TOWN.
In the Eastern Districts, as elsewhere, I met a number of
New Settlers
who had come from the old country. All of them had had
their difficulties, a few their grievances', but in no case did
I find a failure where the new comers were industrious and
frugal, and were willing to learn of their neighbours, and
to accommodate themselves to their surroundings. It is true
I saw many who had taken up land far from the railways
and townships, but they recognised that this was only a tem-
porary difficulty, for, as the lands were being taken up, small
townships were being formed, and the extension of the
railway system would ere long bring many of these settle-
ments within easy reach by the rail. I found small School
Houses, Churches, and Agricultural Halls in outlying parts
of the country, showing that the Government and the people
themselves were doing their best to provide for the wants of
the growing agricultural community.


T had the opportunity of visiting a number of
Apple Orchards
Never have 1 seen such splendid promise of fruit, although
the season was generally not so good, T was told, as last year.
The Orchards of Bridgetown and districts were a sight to
see, many of the trees having to be supported on account of
their heavy crops. Peaches, nectarines, and all stone fruits
grow well in this district, so that, although there was a fall-
ing off of the relative supply this year, there had been sent
from Bridgetown 1,100 more cases of stone fruit than last
year, and at excellent prices. The total export of all fruits
from Bridgetown for this season will b'e about 40,000 eases,
while it is expected to reach 60,000 next year. I am satis-
fied from what I saw, as well as from the statements of
Government experts, that the whole district from Bridge-
town to Mt. Barker—a distance of nearly 150 miles —is
specially suited for apples and kindred fruits. In Mt.
Barker I saw one of the finest orchards in the State, in
which are some trees over 40 years old. Erom this orchard
900 eases of apples have just been sent to Hamburg, via
Albany, as a trial shipment. There is no doubt that in a
few years a very large export trade in apples will be done
with the United Kingdom and Europe.
Oranges and Grapes.
In certain districts oranges and citrus fruits generally
may be grown to great advantage, and when the local de-
mand has been met there will be unlimited scope for ex-
port. The orange groves of the Harvey Estate, for example,
were well worth a visit. Here I met a number of British set-
tiers, all of whom spoke well of their prospects. The grape
VIRGIN BUSH LAND, KELLERBERRIN, EASTERN GOLDFIELDS LINE.
yield, as I saw in a number of vineyards, is very large. All
kinds of table and win,e grapes, are grown, and special at-
tention is being given to the cultivation of the kinds best
suited to the sort of climate. When this industry lias been
further developed, and the means for the production of.
raisins and currants is better known, there will be a, great
future for this class of culture.
But Western Australia
is also becoming a, great
Wheat Growing
and Pastoral Country.
In the Eastern Districts of the South-West, and beyond,
there are immense areas suitable for the growth of wheat
and the raising of sheep and cattle. Maize and oats and
other cereals do well also in the moister districts, but a light
and certain rainfall, such as that which is possessed farther
East, is specially adapted for wheat production. I visited
some of the land far back from the Great Southern and along
the Eastern Railway lines, and from what I saw, I am satis-
fied that there is no exaggeration in the statements made in
the literature issued by the Government as to the great
capabilities of that part of the country. There the land can
be easily and cheaply cleared of timber, and within a season
or two the settler may obtain some return for his labour and
capital. Special attention is being given by the Government
to the subject of the Pastoral Industry in the South-West,
especially as the question of suitable grasses, both native
and imported, is coming to be better understood.
I am prepared therefore to say, from what I have myself
recently seen and heard, that Western Australia is
A Land of Great Promise
for the man of industry and capacity, especially if he pos-
sesses some knowledge of agriculture, and has some funds
with which to make a start. In the larger towns and cities
there are practically no openings for men. Labourers, except
they are skilled in agriculture or its allied industries, are for
the present not in demand in any part of the State, and
this fact should be fully recognised by intending emigrants.
But agriculturists of every kind, who are.prepared to face
the new conditions of a new country, where the soil and
seasons are so different from those which obtain in the older
countries of the world, may find excellent and remunerative
openings equal, if not superior, to those which are offered in
any part of the British Empire.
My visit has been a very pleasant and instructive one,
and fully confirms the opinion I had formed on previous
visits, that no country can offer better prospects for land
settlement, under favourable social, and climatic conditions,
than Western Australia.
What Western Australian Settllers
say.
David Mclntosh, arrived from England on 30th July,
1908, writes from East Narrogin:—“l am doing well on rhy
contract (clearing). It pans out from 10s. to 12s. per delay.”
G. D. John, arrived per E.M.S. “Omrali ’’ on 25th Mlarch,
1909, writes from a farm near Katanning: —“I am getting
along splendidly myself at 15s. a week, and like it first rate.
Two cousins also have good jobs and are doing well. 1 ’
T. H. Exton, arrived from England on 16th July, 1908,
writes from near Busselton: —“We are getting on very well,
we have a bit over three acres cleared and under cultiva-
tion, and about 60 acres fenced in a paddock.”
Harold Stanbridge, arrived from England per E..M.S.
“Orotava” on Bth April, 1909, writes from a station near
Carnarvon: —‘ 1 I have much pleasure in informing you that
I have at last settled down. I am working on the above
station, as cook; and if I stop in this position, shall soon be-
gin to think of taking up land for myself. Am thinking more
of this country every day. ’ ’
John Walshaw, who landed from E.M.S. “Omrah” in
March, 1908, and settled in the Kojonup district, has written
a series of letters to the Home papers, in one of which lie
says: —“1 am glad they have been of service to the Gov-
ernment, as they have treated us well since we came out,
and more than fulfilled all the promises held out to us. It
is no use reiterating what has appeared in your papers, but
1 content myself with saying that we like the country, the
climate, and the people, and I only wish I had come over
here ten years ago. Of course there are drawbacks, but the
advantages so outweighs them that we put up with them
without a murmur.”
29


G. E. Bunney, arrived per E.M.S. “Orotava” 17th De- progress.” A later letter of Mr. Carder contains the follow- Assisted Messrs. John Bogie and C. Ewen, farmers at
comber, 1908, writes from near Guildford: ‘ ‘ Well, we are ing:—“As to my being bona fide, I have been here one calen- by the Bast Pingelly,. writing on 14th July, 1909,
doing all right. Mr has just got me a fresh situation dar month to-morrow (17-2-09) and I have put up a three- Agricultural way;—“l see by the ‘Producers’ Review’ that
at , and I expect my brother will take my place roomed house (weatherboard) and verandah, built in my Bank. persons who wish to get their relatives here
here. I am to have. 455. per week, cottage and firewood, so
that when I. get my wife and little ones out I shall be very
comfortable. 1 might say that my master has been very good
to me, he told me that if 1 looked after his interests he
would look after mine, and he has done so. Also we have re-
ceived every kindness from the Immigration officials all
through. ’ ’
kitchen stove, with stone, put up a cart shed, 16 chains of
fence along my road front, grubbed out about 10 acres of
‘poison.’ laid out a vegetable garden in which I have radish,
beetroot, cabbage, cauliflower, peas, and beans all showing
above ground, and the garden is securely fenced with wire
netting to keep out the boodies and various pests, which are
usual to virgin bush land. 1 think one of the best signs that
can obtain passages at half the ordinary fare,
such advances to be repaid within six or twelve months,
according to the amount advanced. We are anxious to get
our parents here before the land is all taken up beside us,
but unless we get your assistance we are unable to do so.
1 may state that my step-brother and 1 came from Scotland
four years ago, with only a few pounds when we landed here.
T am getting on is, that Guide always brings selec- We worked with another farmer for about one year, then
tors looking for land to my place and introduces them to
us, and he explains when I came
and our progress. As to
our land, 1 am perfectly satisfied that we can make a home
R. IST. Woodhams, who arrived on 11th March, 1909,
writes from West Narrogin:—“Now 1 am slipping into fal-
and a good living eventually; but it will be very hard work
lowing; the crops are looking very good round here so far,
lowing; the crops are looking very good round here so tar, f or two or three years, but 1 came prepared for that; you
and X am very pleased with farming in general.' Well, 1 am must perfectly understand that 1 have not employed any
very happy and have a real good man to work for. I am outside labour; all the above-mentioned work has been done
coming up to town to meet my father and mother in a few
coming up to town to meet my father and mother in a few p y my two boys and self. I believe that any man with
weeks’ time. X hear from my friend who is at Beverley with energy, and a determination to work hard, and a knowledge
Mr , and he likes it and is doing very well. We are 0 p farming, can do well here.”
going to select after a few months, but want to see a full
season through first.”
Benefited J- B- Diederich, who came from India and
under settled at Jandakot, writes on the XBth October,
Clause 5. 1909: —“X am in receipt of yours of the 12th
instant, together wdth cheque for £25 as a bonus
MAKING A START, PINGELLY, GREAT SOUTHERN LINE.
Making w - M - Carder, who came from South Africa in
Fine December, 1908, writes from Moodiarrup:—“We
Progress, are making fine progress here.” (Here begins a
long description of work done). “The Bank
has approved of a loan, and we have found the Government
of W.A. true to their advertisements —barring the ‘poison.’
When X tell you X have had no help except my two lads, aged
14 and 10, I think my wife and X have done very well. Trust-
ing X have not tired you, but I promised to let you know our
in return for passage money. X am extremely thankful for
your generous consideration towards me. It fully demon-
strates how anxious the Government of this State is towards
the welfare of immigrants. X will take the earliest oppor-
tunity to make same known to my friends and others in
India. Once more, sir, 1 beg to tender my heartfelt thanks.”
STOCK RAISING, STRATH ALBYN, MIDLAND LINE.
we went on our own selection, and with the assistance of the
Agricultural Bank we now have 1,430 acres, which is nearly
all fenced, 300 acres cleared, 160 in crop, four-horse team
and four young ones, and all our machinery is paid for, ex-
cept the harvester. We are well satisfied what the land will
do if well worked.”
Never Mr. James Hill writes on 26th January, X9XO: —■
regretted ‘‘ X am, very pleased to say I have never regretted
coming coming out here a little over two years ago, and
out. am fully convinced there are more opportunities
here than in England either for a working man
or a man with capital, especially experienced farmers.
X have had no difficulty in getting plenty of work at
good wages. I am at present manager for a dairy of 40
cow's. X bought 500 acres of land and received every assist-
ance from the Lands Department in getting the transfer fixed.
X have fenced all and ringbarked 280 acres and have cleared
about 12 acres.
Thanking you and your Department in genei al for the
courtesy and assistance 1 received. ’ ’
Mr. W. A. Wood, of East Narrogin, writing on January
18th, 1910, to the Western Australian Government Agent,
Melbourne, says:—“You will recollect that in June, 1908,
I saw you at your office regarding Western Australian Grown
lands, and about a month after my arrival in the Western
State I selected a block of wheat country east of Narrogin,
on the Great Southern line. After eighteen months’ experi-
ence- I have no hesitation in saying that the land and climate
are specially adapted for wheat and sheep raising. I am
now returning to New Zealand for the purpose of disposing
of my property at Taranaki (N.Z.). As soon as this is
effected I will return with my wife and family to take up my
permanent residence in the West. During my stay in West-
ern Australia X had an opportunity of seeing the new selec-
tors at work—the man possessed of small means and others
32


with ample capital. And where these men have displayed
the necessary energy and intelligence they have all been
eminently successful.
To anyone who is anxious to embark in the wheat and
sheep raising, I would not have the slightest hesitation in
recommending their taking up land in Western Australia.
Although the character of the country is somewhat patchy,
owing to the regular and seasonable rainfall and the easily
worked lauds success is assured to the energetic man. Prob-
ably no one can say with any authority wdiat the value is
for wheat growing purposes of the lands which at the pre-
sent time are looked upon as second and third class. The
opinion among many of the settlers there at .tlm present is
that this land will prove a highly payable investment for
cereals.
SHIPPING TIMBER AND PRODUCE AT BUNBURY, THE PORT
FOE SOUTH-WESTERN DISTRICT
So far as the Government is concerned, speaking for
myself, I can only say that every possible assistance was
given to me to obtain suitable land, and it is doubtful
whether any country in the world is offering more practical
assistance to new selectors than the Western State.
There is any amount of work offering in the farming
districts for experienced farm hands in Western Australia at
wages ranging from 30s. to 355. a week and keep; without
keep, Bs. a day. Men on contract work, fencing, ringing, and
clearing, can make about £4 to £5 a week. ’ ’
Pleased Mr. E. Savege writes on the 11th April,
with his 1908: —“Over twmlve months ago I came to
Lot. this State, and I am perfectly pleased with
my lot. My desire is now to bring my wife
and child, aged 12 (a boy), over here.”
EXPERT OPINIONS.
Mr. C. Churchill Tucker, one of the New South Wales
representatives at the recent Fruit-growers’ Conference,
writing from Sydney, says: —“1 have been asked to give
my impressions of my recent trip to Western Australia. To
commence with, I like the country well. Of course, I saw
some of the best parts, and the time of the year was fav-
ourable, the weather being all that could be desired. I saw
quite enough to make me believe that in agriculture as well
FIRST PRIZE CLEVELAND BAY, “POTTO LAIRD, ’ ’ ROYAL SHOW.
1909.
as in mining Western Australia has a good future before her.
By agriculture I mean wheat farming and fruit culture.
Both these branches of industry are going to play an im-
portant part in the future of Western Australia. As to min-
ing, it seems that there is still a lot of country unprospected
and it would not surprise anyone, I think, to hear of further
rich finds, not only in gold, but also in other minerals. The
principal staple products, however, I believe will be wheat,
wool, and fruit. I was much taken with the fine wheat lands
about York and Northam and other places along the rail-
way. The quality of the sheep exhibited at the Royal Show
amply demonstrated that Western Australia is well able to
produce really good stud sheep; and though the fruit season
was well nigh over, some of the samples from cold storage
that were exhibited in the Government cold storage section,
and also the exhibits of oranges and lemons at the show, go
to prove the suitability of Western Australian lauds for
fruit cultivation.
Mr. V. C. Redwood, -who represents Toowoomba in the
Legislative Assembly of Queensland and who is a member
of the Committee of the Royal Agricultural Society of his
town, in an interview in October, 1908, said:-—'“l arrived
at Albany on September 23, and came by rail to Perth, being
most favourably impressed with the country through which
I passed. I had the pleasure this week of visiting the Nor-
tham Show, and was received with the greatest hospitality
by the president and members of the local agricultural
society. The products of the soil on exhibit, more especially
the wheat and barley, were excellent, some being equal to
anything I have ever seen. The draught horses were excep-
CHAMPION CLYDESDALE, ‘ ‘ BONNIE CHARLIE, ” ROYAL SHOW, 1909.
tionally good. The blood horses were also good, but the dairy
cattle I saw at the Show were not up to the standard I have
been accustomed to see in our own shows. Northam is an
exceedingly pretty town, and I am glad that I had the op-
portunity of visiting it. Since then I have visited Bunbury,
where I met a number of people, from all of whom I re
ceived nothing but kindness. I can honestly say that I am
much impressed with Western Australia as a cereal-producing
country. You have a regular winter rainfall, which is so neces-
sary to ensure good cereal crops. With your climate also 1 am
delighted. I believe your Government is earnest in its desire
to introduce immigrants and to foster a rapid agricultural
development. Your State is practically in the same position
as Queensland, and what we want to do to make both coun-
tries progressive States is to introduce a vigorous immigra-
tion policy as well as a vigorous railway policy, which must,
of course, mean also a vigorous land policy. Let me say in
conclusion that my thanks are due to the Premier and other
members of the Ministry for the kindly way in which they
35


have treated me. On every hand, indeed, I have been hos-
pitably received, and am going away to-morrow having thor-
oughly enjoyed my stay here, and with a great opinion of
the resources of this State —a country of immense poten-
tialities. ’ ’
CHAMPION THOROUGHBRED, ‘ ‘ CRENELLE, ’ ’ ROYAL SHOW, 1909.
Mr. J. Reid, Chairman of Directors of Hutton’s Pro-
prietary, Ltd., who belongs to Queensland and is entitled to
the distinction of an expert in the dairying and pig indus-
tries, speaking in May, 1908, said;—“One must be greatly
struck with the growth of this place, and with the enter-
prise and courage of a comparatively small population. Perth
is quite up to date, and in my opinion ahead of some of the
other cities which, considering their population, should be
leading the wmy. The railway system here and the general
aspect of the place is distinctly American in its progressive-
noss. The shipping facilities at Fremantle impressed me very
favourably. It was pleasing to see that the P. & O. and
Orient, and other large steamers were able to berth at the
wharves there with the least possible inconvenience. When
one considers these harbour improvements, together with
the splendid growth of the towns, and the arrangements
made for water supply for the interior, he cannot but be
impressed with one idea—and that is ‘wonderful Western
Australia.’ There is every reason why the settlers in West-
ern Australia should devote some time to the pig industry.
Whether a man is a wheat grower or a dairyman, he will
always have a lot of by-products which are unprofitable un-
less he can dispose of them, and the most profitable means
of doing so is through the pig. The climate here is eminently
suited for the breeding of such an animal as the pig. What
struck me particularly was the splendid optimistic feeling
regarding agriculture. The people seem to recognise that as
the mines decline in value and their importance as labour
absorbing factors becomes less, attention must be devoted
to the more stable industries of agriculture. One is struck
with the fact that Western Australia is destined to be a
very large producer, especially in cereals. I understand that
the South-Western country especially is favoured with a
good rainfall throughout the year, and, that being so, there
is no reason why dairying should not become one of your
best industries. It usually happens that those countries
wdiere much attention is devoted to dairying are also the
best and most successful in pig raising.”
Mr. J. Toohey, from Victoria, a prominent auctioneer and
business man and a councillor of twelve years’ standing,
speaking on the 22nd May, 1908, said: —“In the first place,
I have come over for the good of my health, in the teeth of
all opposition. You might not think I need a change, but I
do, and feel better already, after only a fortnight here. It
was partly curiosity as well that brought me to this State.
I can toll you I was never so surprised in my life at what
I saw. They told me at home that this was a senii-barbaric
country; that it was impossible even to get any vegetables
here. Yet, on reaching Albany, I found a pretty little town,
and was quite surprised to be served at the hotel with all
the vegetables I could have had in Melbourne for this time
of the year. And on arrival at Perth, instead of (as I had
IN KING’S PARK, PERTH.
been led to expect) little wooden buildings, with shaky ver-
andahs, .crooked streets, and so on, I found buildings equal-
ling anything in the Commonwealth; clean, well-paved streets,
and in place of an ill-formed, undersized little township I
found a flourishing, handsome, well-laid-out city, and thor-
oughly modern in every respect. And the hospitality of the
people beats anything I ever heard of. I’m afraid they
would not spend money on strangers in that way on our
side. You want to know what awakened my curiosity. Can-
didly, I wanted to see the country that they told me would
not even feed a goat; that would never be any good, and
would soon be a desert again. Well, I would just like to see
a few of those detractors here now. They’ll hear something
from me when I get back. The country has been grossly
misrepresented. I believe you can get the very best of land
here for a mere song at the present time, and I shall never
cease to wonder what the people over my way are doing to
let these opportunities go by. They told me the bottom had
fallen out of this State, but when I go back I shall let every-
body know that it is going to ‘top’ them all.”
Extract from the ‘‘West Australian” Newspaper dated
31st December, 1909.
Questioned yesterday by a representative of the “West
Australian” as to the progress of land settlement and its
prospective trend in view of the recent liberalisation of the
Land Act, and also of the Agricultural Bank Act, the Min-
ister for Lands and Agriculture (Mr. Jas. Mitchell, M.L.A.)
said:—
‘ ‘ What I would especially desire to impress upon the
people is that it is the birthright of everyone in the State
to acquire land. And I often wonder if people really grasp
the actual meaning of the opportunities that are towards
us just now in this State of ours with its liberal land laws
and generous assistance, financial and otherwise. Do they
realise, and do parents in particular realise, that time is
passing, and that there is less land available to-day than
there was yesterday? The legislation of the past session in
the direction of liberalising the Land Act, and also the Agri-
cultural Bank Act, have surely brought it
Within the Reach of Every Citizen
to secure land. It must not be overlooked that under the
provisions of the altered Land Act the selector cannot be
called upon to pay more, during the first three years of his
lease, than fid. per acre per annum, and that any balance
above the fid. is carried forward and spread over the re-
maining 17 years of his lease. Under this system a man can
secure 1,000 acres of first-class land by paying £l2 10s. per
half-year, irrespective of the price charged for the land, for
the first three years. At the end of that time, if he has ex-
pended the money advanced by the Agricultural Bank wisely,
Ins property will have attained the producing stage, and he
will encounter no difficulty in meeting the increased pay-
ments extended over the remainder of the terra.
38


“The amended Agricultural Bank Act, which increases
the limit advanced from £5OO to £750, provides for a full-
value advance against the work done to an amount of £4OO,
that is, work connected with ringbarking, clearing, fencing,
and water conservation. A further sum of £250 for the same
purpose may be advanced on the 50 per cent, basis, or £lOO
of this may be utilised for the purchase of breeding stock,
draught mares, sheep or cattle, while £lOO is provided for the
purchase of machinery that has been locally manufactured.
‘ ‘ Under the new system of
Survey Before Selection
(by the way, we have now half a million acres surveyed on
this principle) we are enabled, first, to classify the land;
secondly, to set against each block the sum which the Agri-
cultural Bank will advance; and, lastly, to provide roads
and water supply. Let me emphasise the gratifying fact
that in wheat, in fruit, in meat and wool, in the products of
intense cultivation, vegetables, potatoes, and so on, we quite
hold our own in quality with the products of any other part
of the world.
To Parents Who Have Sons
to provide a career for I would point out the advantages
that the land holds out. 1 doubt if even the professions can
offer so great an opening, and assuredly a young fellow set-
ting out to make his way in the world would be well advised
to avoid a clerical life in the town and to secure a sufficient
area on which he can live in comfort, and out of which he
can make a competency for himself and for his children after
him.”
NEW SELECTOR’S HOME, WYOLA, EASTERN GOLDFIELDS LINE
The Timber Industry.
TIYTIESTEEN Australia possesses resources of great wealth
in its forests of splendid hardwoods. The export
trade has already grown to large dimensions, and the hard-
woods of the State are in demand wherever great strength
and durability are required in constructive works.
JARRAH FOREST, WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
The area occupied by marketable timber, such as Jarrah,
Blackbutt, Red Gum, Karri, Tuart, etc., is 20,400,000 acres.
The value of the timber exported for the year ended 30th
June, 1908, was £833,710, while 4,600 men were engaged in
the industry. Value of plant and tramways was £697,903.
A TIMBER MILL, SOUTH-WESTERN LINE.
Gold Production.
HS a Gold-producing country Western Australia stands
ahead of all the Australasian States. There is ample
scope for fresh discoveries, as on account of the great size
of the country, only a limited area has so far been pros-
pected.
The undermentioned figures show clearly the extraor-
dinary growth of the gold-mining industry:
Value.
Quantity of Gold.
fine ozs. £ s. d.
260-17 1,147 12 2\
4,359-37 18,517 8 6J
3,124-82 13,273 7 10
13,859-52 58,871 9 11|-
20,402-42 86,663 19 s|-
27,116-14 115,182 0 10
53,271-65 226,283 11 8,1
99,202-50 421,385 8 84
185,298-73 787,098 19 6
207,110-20 879,748 4 2J
251,618-69 1,068,808 5 2
603,84644 2,564,976 12 9-i-
-939,489-49 3,990,697 13 10
1,470,604-66 6,246,731 10 7|
1,414,310-86 6,007,610 13 44
1,703,416-52 7,235,653 9 1
1,871,037-35 7,947,661 9 7f
2,004,801-40 8,770,718 17 0J
1,983,23007 8,424,225 17 3J
1,955,315-88 8,305,653 18 54
1,794,546-60 7,622,749 8 7
3,697,553-59 7,210,749 6 2f
1,647,911-13 6,999,881 10 IQi
1,595,269-41 6,776.273 14
21,606,967 61 91,780,564 10 6
DIVIDENDS.
paid from West Australian Gold Mining Companies from
1886 to 31st December, 1909, amount to £20,248,010.
43


KALGOORLIE,
GOLDFIELDS WATER SUPPLY
MUN DARING WEIR —GOLDFIELDS WATER SUPPLY —MAIN
RESERVOIR.
THE GOLDEN MILE, BOULDER.
This picture gives a view of the reservoir which sup-
plies the Eastern Goldfields and many Country Districts with
a plentiful supply of fresh water. It holds 4,600,000,000 gal-
lons, and supplies 22 towns. The weir seen in the picture is
the highest overflow weir in the world. The water has to be
pumped 375 miles, to a point 1,210 feet higher than the Man-
dating reservoir. The water is raised by eight pumping
stations along the principal main, which is BOin. in diameter.
The delivering capacity is five million gallons daily, whilst
the average daily consumption is at present 1,886,000 gallons.
This great work, the cost of which was over £3,000,000,
was begun in 1896, and finished in 1903.
Cheap Passages.
The Government of Western Australia grants assistance
towards the passages of persons desirous of settling on the
land or engaging in farm or dairy work, or work of a simi-
lar nature and to domestic servants and others who can
satisfy the Agent General in London or the Colonial Secre-
tary in Perth that they will make suitable settlers.
CONDITIONS.
Assisted 1. Assisted Passages from £6 and upwards
Passages. will be granted to suitable persons who are
possessed of a capital of £5O, or who are in re-
ceipt of an income of such amount as may be deemed suffi-
cient by the Agent General. In the event of there being more
than three children in one family under twelve years of age,
the applicant must possess a further sum of £25 for each
additional child.
Farm 2. Passages at £5 will be granted to suitable
Labourers. Single Farm Labourers upon their depositing
with the Agent General (in addition to the
passage money of £5) the sum of £lO, which will be refunded
to them upon arrival in the State.
Domestic 3. Passages at £5 will be granted to suitable
Servants. Domestic Servants upon their depositing with
the Agent General (in addition to the passage
money of £5) the sum of £5, which will be refunded to them
upon arrival in the State.
All applications witli reference to Clauses 1,2, and 3,
must be made to —
The Agent General for Western Australia,
15 Victoria Street, Westminster,
London, S.W.
Nominated 4. Persons resident in Western Australia
Passages. may nominate their relatives or friends in the
United Kingdom or Europe for passages at
prices ranging from £6 to £lB 10s., according to the line of
vessel and class of berth required.
Part 5. App roved persons emigrating to this State
Refunded from countries other than the United Kingdom,
Passages. Europe, and Australia, may obtain a refund of
half the cost of passage money up to £9 10s.
per adult (children half rate), provided that on arrival they
take up land from the Government and settle thereon. This
rebate is only obtainable when the applicant has been settled
upon his land for such period as the Minister may decide.
In order to take advantage of this concession it is necessary
for the applicant to notify his intention of applying for it
before emigrating to Western Australia.
44


Advanced 6. Settlers and others who have left their
Passages. wives and families in the Eastern States of
Australia, New Zealand, and elsewhere can, with
an approved guarantor, obtain an advance of passage money,
including railway fares from port of landing to destination,
repayable within a given time with interest at 5 per cent.,
to enable them to bring their relatives and friends to the
State. This system is also extended in some cases without
guarantee to farmers who have taken up land in the State
but who are not yet resident thereon.
All applications with reference to Clauses 4,5, and 6
must be made to —
The Honourable the Colonial Secretary,
Perth, Western Australia.
Certificates of health and character will be required in
connection with Clauses 1,2, 3, and 4.
Reception on Arrival.
Those who have availed themselves of the cheap passages
before mentioned are met and welcomed on arrival in the State
by officers appointed by the Government. At Fremantle the Gov-
ernment Immigration Agent goes out in the pilot steamer and
boards incoming mail boats some hour or two prior to the
arrival of the vessel at the wharf, and is thus able to make
himself acquainted with the various needs of the passengers.
VICTORIA QUAY, FREMANTLE.
It is this officer’s duty to assist new comers in every possible
way by helping them to clear their luggage through the Cus-
toms authorities, baggage agents, etc., and to introduce them
to the various Government officials likely to be of use to
them in selecting land and obtaining employment. Similar
arrangements are made for the reception of passengers by
the AVhite Star Liners at Albany.
IMMIGRANTS’ HOME.
The Government has recently established a receiving
Home for assisted immigrants, where newcomers may pro-
ceed immediately on landing. The buildings, which arc situ-
LOADING WOOL AT FREMANTLE FOR LONDON.
ated in Pier Street, Perth, are comfortable and commodious.
Immigrants are provided with three days free board and
residence, and if their stay should exceed three days a small
QUEEN’S GARDENS, PERTH.
sum is charged to cover cost of maintenance. No one is al-
lowed to stay in the Home for more than ten days, except
under special circumstances, and in the event of such con-
tingency arising, an increased charge is made for mainten-
mice.
Cards of admission, containing the rules of the Home
are handed to Immigrants on the steamer at Fremantle by
NEW ARRIVALS AT THE HOME.
the Immigration Agent, and they must then advise the Agent
if it is their desire to obtain admission to the Home.
It is advisable for Immigrants to enter the Home on
arrival, as they are then more readily able to get in touch
LITTLE IMMIGRANTS.
with the Government officials who are waiting to advise and
assist them in every possible direction.
Nominated Immigrants are not admitted to the Homo.
Arrangements have been made by the Government with a
reliable firm of baggage agents to convey and store immi-
grants’ baggage at a low cost. Price lists can be obtained
from the Immigration Agent at Fremantle.
47


HOW TO GET TO WESTERN
AUSTRALIA
Western Australia is well served in the matter of ship
ping facilities, and vessels of all the principal companies
doing business with Australia call either at Fremantle or
Albany.
A WHITE STAR LINER —THESE VESSELS CARRY NOMINATED PASSENGERS.
Steamship Lines.
Passengers from England can travel by either of the
following lines: —
The Orient Line. —Every alternate Friday, from Tilbury
Docks, London, calling at Plymouth the following day.
Ordinary fare, £l7 and upwards.
The Peninsular & Oriental. —Every alternate Friday,
from Tilbury or the Eoyal Albert Docks, London. First and
second class only. £3B and upwards.
R.M.S. ‘ ‘ OTWAY ’ ’ AN
The Nord-Deutscher Lloyd.—Monthly from Antwerp,
calling at Southampton. Ordinary fares, £l5 and upwards.
The Messageries Maritimes—Every four weeks from
.Marseilles, with through railway ticket arrangements from
London. Fares from £22 upwards.
The White Star. —Monthly from Liverpool. Ordinary
fares, £l9 and upwards; one class only.
All the Australian Steamship Liners, with the exception
of the White Star, go via the Suez Canal
and land their Western Australian pas-
sengers at Fremantle, twelve miles
from Perth. The White Star Liners
go via the Capo and land their passen-
gers at Albany; but their rates include
through bookings to Perth and Fre-
ship Companies whose large and well
appointed vessels trade between Fre-
mantle and Ports in the Eastern States
of Australia,
India, and the East, etc,
ORIENT LINER.
The steamers of this line carry assisted and nominated
passengers. (See page 45.)
»xr jt ’
There are a number of other Steam-
Companies whose large and well
Government Information Bureau.
There is a Government Information Bureau on the Vic-
toria Quay at Fremantle, right opposite the mail steamers’
berth, where travellers passing through the Port can obtain
any information which they require on all matters concern-
ing the State.
Travellers are cordially invited to call and spend a few
minutes in the Bureau inspecting samples of Western Aus-
tralian products which they will there find exhibited. In-
formation and literature relating to the State will be freely
given on application.
An officer from the Bureau visits all incoming vessels in
order to give any information which may bo desired to the
travelling public.
GOVERNMENT INFORMATION BUREAU, VICTORIA QUAY,
FREMANTLE.
Conclusion.
It is impossible in so small a work as this to do more
than merely rhake a passing reference to the various resources
of this vast State of Western Australia, but should it hap-
pen that anything contained in the pages of this pamphlet
has excited in any degree the curiosity of the reader, let him
without hesitation at once make written application for
such information as he may desire, resting assured that the
most prompt attention possible will be given to his request.
50


A few Comparative
Statistics . . ,
Showing- the development made during
the last 19 years, since the granting
of Responsible Government.
Population
46,290 Population
270,908
Revenue
■£414,314 Revenue
=63,816,271
Savings Bank De-
posits ... ... =£34,616
Savings Bank
Deposits ... =£3,052,531
Miles of Govern-
ment Railway
constructed ...
Miles of Govern-
ment Railway
constructed ... 2,045
Revenue fro m
Govern m ent
Railways
Revenue from
<; oyern ment
.£45,113 Railways ... £1,503,430
Imports
<£874,447 Imports (1908) ... £6,178,197
Exports (190 S) ... .£9,51.8,020
Exports ... ... ,£671,813
acres acres
Area under Crop... 73,408 Area under Crop... 586,489
(Season ended 29-2-09)
bushels bushels
Wheat Yield ... 504,902 Wheat Yield ... *2,460,823
(Season ended 29-2-09)
acres acres
Area under Wheat 35,507 Area under Wheat *285,011
(Season ended 29-2-09)
tons tous
Hay Crop... ... 24,394 Hay Crop... ... *170,008
(Season ended 29-2-09)
Gold production... £86,663 Gold production ... £6,776,274
Gold Mining Divi-
dends ...
Gold Mining - Divi-
dends ...=81,359,115
,£1,250
* Forecast for Season 1919-1910 : Wheat Yield, 5.978,829 bushels ; area
under Wheat. 446,155 acres ; Hay Crop, (Wheaten, Oaten, and
Barley), 186,777 tons.
THERE ARE STILL ABOUT 60,000,000
ACRES OF LAND OPEN FOR SALE.


Conditions of Land Selection under “ The Land Act, 1898,” with amendments to 1906, and “ Agricultural Lands Purchase Act.”
Section No. of Act and Class
of Holding 1 .
Sec. 55—Conditional Pur-
chase with Residence
within or without an
Agricultural Area.
Sec. 56—Conditional
Purchase without
Residence.
Sec. 57 — Conditional
Purchase by direct
Payment.
Sec. 60—Conditional
Purchase. Lands for
Orchards, Vineyards,
and Gardens.
*Sec. 68— Conditional
Purchase Grazing
Lands.
Sec. 74- - Free Homestead
Farms.
Agricultural Lands
Purchase Act.
Maximum area
1,000 acres
1,000 acres
1,000 acres
50 acres
5,000 acres
160 acres
1,000 acres.
Minimum area
100 acres
100 acres
100 acres
5 acres
General cases 500ac.,
special cases 300 ac.
10 acres
Minimum price per acre ...
From 10s.
From 10s.
From 10s.
From 20s.
Minimum price: from
3s. 9d. per acre
Varies.
Time over which purchase
may extend
20 years
20 years
12 months
3 years
20 years
20 years.
Minimum time in which
Title may be obtained
5 years
5 years
At any time, if pur-
chase money is paid
and conditions ful-
filled
At any time, if pur-
chase money is paid
and conditions ful-
filled
5 years
12 months, by making
the prescribed im-
provements and
paying 6s. per acre
At any time, if pur-
chase money paid
and all conditions
fulfilled.
Annual payment per acre,
exclusive of survey fee
Sixpence per acre for the first'three years.
Subsequent instalments are increased when
purchase money exceeds 10s. per acre
Minimum pay m en t
per acre : 2-^(1.
Varies.
Value of improvements
enforced
Same amount as pur-
chase money. Ex-
pend - every 2
years
Same amount as pur-
chase money with
50 per cent, added.
Expend } every 2
years
10s. per acre
doth of area planted
as a Vineyard, Or-
chard, or cultivated
bond fide as a Vege-
table Garden
An amount equal to
full purchase money.
Expend - every 2
years
4s. per acre first 2
years ; 6s. per acre
next 3 years; 4s.
per acre last 2 years;
14s. per acre in all
Time allowed for making
improvements
10 years
10 years
7 years
3 years
10 years
7 years
10 years.
Period of residence
6 months in each of
the first 5 years
after survey; by
wife, parent, or
child over 16 years
6 months of 1st year ;
9 months of next 4
years by self, agent,
or servant of lessee
6 months each of the
first 5 years after
survey
6 months in each of
the first 5 years.
Time in which fencing of
external boundaries is to
be completed
\ within 5 years ;
1 he whole within
10 years
- within 5 years ; the
whole within 10
years
3 years
3 years
10 years
i within 5 years ; the
whole within 7 years
- within 2 years; the
whole within 6
years.
Note. —Survey fees on easy terms must be paid by applicant in all cases.
Note. — No more than 2,(.00 acres in the aggregate, including a Homes)end Farm, can be beld by one person under Sections S5, 56, and 57 ; or its equivalent in grazing lands, i.e., 5,(00 acres ; or cultivable and grazing land mixed. If husband bolds
2,000 acres, bis wife may hold an additional 1,000 acres under Section 56.
Note. —In the case of holdings under Sections 55, 56, 67, (8, and 71, half cost of a Great and Small Stock-proof Fence or two-thirds of a Babbit or Dog-proof Fence may be allowed towards the improvements.
* Except where surveyed before selection, Grazing Leases have been temporarily withdrawn from selection.


VKs, Wl l c
o K
JMI VoU3
For General Information relating
to WESTERN AUSTRALIA
apply ;
WESTERN WESTERN
AUSTRALIA AUSTRALIA
IN LONDON
to the Agent General for Western
Australia, 15 Victoria Street, West-
minster, London, S.W.
IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA
to the Lands and Agricultural Depart-
ments, Perth ;
To the Government Information Bureau,
Victoria Quay, Premantle.
IN MELBOURNE
To the Western Australian Government
Agency, 517 Collins Street, Melbourne.
For Information re CHEAP
PASSAGES apply;
IN LONDON
to the Agent General for Western
Australia, 15 Victoria Street, West-
minster, London, S.W.
IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA
to the Honourable Colonial Secretary,
Perth.
\ Perth
Fremantle
Govt. Print.
Issued by direction of
The Hon. J. D. CONNOLLY, M.L.C., Colonial Secretary
of Western Australia.
By Authority : Fred. Wm. Simpson, Government Printer, Perth.
1910 Edition
1910 Edition
