

m
* WESTERN PIONEERS
m
I THE BATTLE WELL FOUGHT
‘By Jesse E. Hammond
W.W ' ' ' ’ .* : * ' v • / ' \ VV 1 .S. U ,‘ ' *v -■ .V. :V 3
IAL
M.








WESTERN PIONEERS


Dedicated to
THE MEMORY OF MY DEAR WIFE
who shared with me the hardships and joys of the
pioneering days, and my intense love for Western
Australia and its people.


WESTERN
PIONEERS
THE BATTLE WELL FOUGHT
c ßy J. E. Hammond
EDITED BY OSLAND K. BATTYE
COPYRIGHT
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA BY
IMPERIAL PRINTING COMPANY. LIMITED
397 HAY STREET, PERTH


HOWLtrrij j | PootS Vacant Swamp /and
a 355K | ! l AAe o/ p rasenf CenfrB/ to*** s '- w, °”
. .'." ;.:: 1 ." .~ avi-ll)N?Tia"-i * v : .. =L f —. *
\' /°/ h get d 12 v j „
A>/ g HJ | j | S
X/ < j l| i- 8 1 £ s u S « I ? 8 c
W s t S - B? u | -s 5 o 2 L y.i 5 n I J * h-
P' 4Vp - 1 £ a j gft o o P to I j Ci rjfofjSI I- 1 *00
V) A C S d Sg h( ► 3 to to Jii§tojj<oSo > « i [h
v ' /O <r t* LU D T? J 5: -J > 3tt5°-ri«QOV: fj- 3 0 ““
A? S S 0 * |n x CO u. * i £ , id & o
_i A- *a ■ b m MfJ ■ m ss m m b m. —« jl_m «l_h— al,.,
u MURRAY
-i.-i : —— ■ ' ■ ,n m ■ ]..■— - - -m — — r a a— rvi,,
\ S £ g Id 3 WESLEY HAU g|z -22 S J I S “
ft \ £ g AotJtfiS'- OLD WtSLSv CHUM* wj | J> S f? £ < ,
V V ° ? r « £ o 5g\ » 0 1 Jeabmer-Ol y>*, « rs5? I o „ u h-
«0 r ri u * Sk ** V , w J: u\* 2x j*
° JX . 5 s t t 2 z ci -I I I ? rs f 3 $; e|s S s 3 S t . 3 Lvj
Ui < o . 3 3 S s i 51 6 I 5 d f S I ?s Iv, S s 5 ; g ; r S g 2 IS
o \ o * vio2° ® SK * 5 2 3 i I? 5 5p|j<lcS 31; 2s
2 I I 8 , a _JB « E .a id L . -ML si__h_js. ■ ~n --n*m. k— a— a ■ a_js a a n r- h l_js
--. -~ JT. b A~ Y ..„~ ..~ . n r
\y\, \ l i 5 c ” S v T | ii £g FT fs| 3 Fl 1?
\\ V - 1 2 2f ? 0 stebissodcudJ 2 ; Z iSli||»: v | § I Is g| y
XX r- IM *1 . s Jt Ifhjl 5 n?2' *31 -111 Is 2 -’s <
I Ss S' * 5s 9,? “ 52 zllS° ri
"MILITARY hospital 2 "j b *533* s £ * 1 3 " 5 S ““ S |i B 's 55 2" 2
\ -2— a — ■ a— n — J L* M. u ■ a. L ■ ■ , ■ b u m B
raR rack5) 1 SAINT GEORGE '5 TERRACE
// /— 7 sm — tb— r— *— <* — rnr-Ts— a— a-Hiif ■ H_iP f 2FTr, B « g ir g « —~ <
\S / «oSr.A N / / M '’2'o 0 -X 0L ‘ 5 l ‘" re " c »»tjon I 1 I z S Its? g | I |f *5 f.; ?
/£./ / / I !■'■Tomlinson i > ° e $ sj 5||Si“ S-S 6 — .Jsgg 56 „ I I a iS it :? 5 c2
/ / £ (0 || SS 1 «j ?o 5 “ W G 53 3 M«"n«MDi s gk 50* «
/ / / ■ M ttuE I * 3 §e i bs t,! S 2® « T g"p
X/vA 2 1<VATao „ ; Jjf XEG if 5 iw “ 9 ' EW8r 3 S
/v / / - / \X x -i — J llsz'iiig ia 1 " ?°2< I
/q\/ / \/a\ u! JiuwntNC! A |lj| J r5 “ jjT I _f « W£u mvcamcrom missJones
/„'■>/ / / \4S\ > _.BICNELL '"i 2i§S2«sSS / V»J - ll E3
/?/ ef / / Te _ , fMo 39 |K s|sS| “Is IS /
/V/ / / \ \ £ I ij \ /
/ /, / ♦ john 5ton\ n \ a J a b a ?.VE. C . ■ U ■ a. a ■—«-«—
// \\ BAZAAR TERRACE X'
STANLEY j l
S' LAQy Stirling" ngs up yy yy
y' S' LJ J £ TTY /r


U, / / 8 s SI I f
s J I 5 S3 p •
CO HO ? 0 lO h
. -— — I M ® 0 W — ® —'—“ ■ .> -f- ri r r - —r
WELLINGTON _ h T R t L I
r~! s>i 11 m i £
0 J / *o * r so
° I > "> /QT/b o £ i l "' s I UJ
s , o * « s s . la i ■> I _ « 1 s
Jv i & s ;irh i n ?2 « i 1st a
J; „* 3 5 s s J ; 5 I / \ 2 5 I 5 £ 5 2
“ 5 3 -sfl Li n ° n VICTORIA * j J is L - - M
'* "jn” j"” j7 ° 'V 11 * S 1 BSRc.cMMfOKAi Ci O I) E R I C H 5 T R H E T
rj»—gp-W r® E B r -rTT-TT-f
|J < '3 J 3 RAYSOMS $ »• j f vi k . f J 5 >. e [SQUARE J
l,;;i 2 < >. HOTEL ,<S £ lu £ ? ; , a I S J t \ / x
H:--S|S i * 5 Si j s« § a * 3 J S j N ' S /
o .«? , * I w5 n a fi *■ uj * “ ? * * oo SJ a /
y i *S I E 31 * n o' J. ? 0 BISHOPS 8 I - f— /
ky 5 j||1* 2>i/ I I - § — E BfiCSCHOOL 0ff » 5 J //
| V/t“ “• “» o » «» ; . „OLt) CONVTNT B \l_y Z.
k ■—*-—-* II e J > 1 n“o— W~ T— r i\ s i » . e r
r- w rui ~T a ■ ’ ■ 7jM<| Z* - |uj
’OWN M&SON'C CLUB / | OR WHITE g g >j J j 5n
I v,ALl - MUSEUM y,. 8 3 - t Z i >; J .If z 2 s
’ MECHANIC?. IN5T ■ jJ BBRlDCt5 * I a ii 0 J H J o ar Z.
CL POLICE COURT ' BRIDCE S , - “a 0 5_ I J « d S * « “• * r
public Bouomcs «ac/T.j/v.' // _a 0 5 z m S a J >■<?,/ <uj 5 —•i n Qi5*
<*J 5TGfoRf.f,s ' M “ EtA,TV i ? o S 10 u | lj "' J S * e Si i § S
aK — a a « 5 J t < g “ “ i: I t t i j "
q.CQVEl'HT OPPjCLS DEANRRv| etf- I" I - - L2zJ_ « < | I S J “ 5 02
ST 0 E O R O EjS_ IJE R R A C E V % ( t f*T 5 i ' r ' ' T - E R R JsTC-T
<\ OLD POST o«1cE ■ » r~" « ■• *> » "
I Cli V I
03 I C3B P'RST government z h u gScioz
1 H° U3E . 8 5 g
GOVERN MCNT . ms PRESENT government h- te „ » u -, *s J n
I HOUSE g m 1 O ®3 <
GARDENS | O < ® 3 “
I ui 3 ”
I
H Ji)PC£Mt Court - ' —
commissariat police ~ —»
oc* co
// PIES CI ■
II ~rr c
Map of Central Perth, east of Barrack Street, in 1871-1872. (Prepared from memory by the author.


kb J»
■■.-. ...•■.
THE AUTHOR


EDITOR'S NOTE
Those who are interested in the history of
Western Australia will find in this book a record
of personal experience so typical of the early life
of the colony that they will be able to visualise
very clearly just how the men and women of the
early days lived and worked. In his 79 years of
very active life ? IMr. Hammond has visited many
parts of this State, and his breadth of vision and
remarkable memory —coupled with the most
complete patriotism I have ever encountered
have enabled him to set out a most comprehen-
sive study of old times, paying a tribute to those
who were the founders of the State.
While this book is not intended to be a work
of literary distinction, it can claim to be the first
in which the intimate lives of the early settlers of
the colony, their homes, their hardships and their
pleasures, have been described. As Mr. Ham-
mond says in later pages, he had little schooling,
for he was earning his living before he was in his
’teens. For this we, of later generations, should
be thankful: for if he had stayed longer at school
he might have missed a good many of the adven-
tures he now relates, and we should have been
the poorer. For my part, I would have hesitated
to detract from the sincerity and simplicity of the
narrative by attempting to impart to it the flow-
ing periods of the essayist.


A large number of the people whose work
helped to develop and build up the prosperity of
Western Australia are mentioned by name in the
following pages. In every case care has been
taken to verify Mr. Hammond’s lists, but in some
few instances no record could be found and only
memory could be relied upon.
It would perhaps be as well to explain that the
book has not been divided into chapters in the
ordinary sense of the word. The first part, which
deals mainly with events during the author’s
youth, is in the form of a letter to his cousin,
William Leeder. Mr. Hammond told me that
he found it easier to express his thoughts if he
could visualise some person for whom he was
writing. I decided, therefore, to insert cross-
headings at various points throughout the letter,
rather than subject it to arbitrary division into
chapters; and the same practice was adopted for
the other two sections of the book.
When Mr. Hammond first began this work he
realised that he was undertaking a task that, with-
out the encouragement he subsequently received,
was a very difficult one for a man unused to
writing for the public. He therefore wishes me
to express, to those who so willingly extended
their help, his deep gratitude; mentioning especi-
ally Miss Thelma Ritchie, who typed the manu-
script, Messrs. Courthope and Olifent who, as
her employers, made her services available at all
times, Mr, P. M. Hasluck, and my wife, whose
assistance in the preparation and collation of the
work was invaluable both to the author and to
myself.


My work in connection with the book is now
complete, and it only remains for me to commend
to you this sincere and plainly-told account of an
observant man’s adventures in a golden land
which the pioneers brought to a great prosperity;
a prosperity that will, I trust, grow many times
greater in the better years to which we look for-
ward.
OSLAND K. BATTYE.
Perth, May, 1936.
Addendum. —Just before this book went to the
publishers, it was announced through the Press
that the author had been made a Protector of
Aborigines for the State of Western Australia.
This recognition of Mr. Hammond’s work on
behalf of the natives carries the more weight
when it is known that apart from a doctor who
is connected with the Aborigines Department,
and Mrs. Daisy Bates, who is no longer in this
State, Mr. Hammond is the only person upon
whom the title has been conferred.
OSLAND K. BATTYE.


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Perth Waterfront in the ’Seventies . • • Facing Page 14
An Aerial View of Modern Perth . . • • ” ” 15
Plan of Pinjarra in 1865 . . • • * ” ”
Mechanics’ Institute, Perth, in 1860 . • • ” ” 3 *
Bullock Teams in South-West Timber Country . 46
Perth from Mount Eliza, 1871 . • • • ” ”
Sandalwood Ready for Shipment, 1864 . . ” ” 62
The Mail under Escort, 1889 . . • • ” ”
Central St. George’s Terrace, 1862 . • • ” ”
Old Jetty at Mill Street, opened 1842 . . ” ”
Champion Bay (Geraldton) . • • • ”
Mr. and Mrs. Hammond . . • • • ” ”
The Clarkson Party . • • • * ” ”
Complete G.P.O. Staff, 1863 . • • • ” ” 126
127
Miss Daisy Locke . . • • • • ” ”
Supreme Court and Waterside Lock-up, 1861 . . „ „ 142
The Pipe Organ built by Mr. Cecil Clifton . . „ „ 143
Perth General Hospital, 1860 . . • • » ”
The Round House, Fremantle, 1831 . • • »
An Early Scene of the Town and River Bar, Fremantle . „ „ 190
Native Prisoners on Rottnest Island . . • » ”
A Collection of Native Instruments . . • Page 216


CONTENTS
Page
The Author’s Letter to William Leeder ....
The Journey to the Murray ...... 3
A Prolific Garden .......
Bright Hued Birds and Flowers ..... 10
A Miscellany of Farm Implements . . . . .15
The Natives’ Fish Trap ...... 17
We Return to Perth ....... 21
An Encounter by the Way ...... 24
How the Baker’s Boy Worked ..... 27
How the Worker Fared ...... 32
Dairying in the ’Seventies ...... 35
A Pioneer Family ....... 38
Mr. Allnut Maxes Jam ...... 39
How the Women Played their Part ..... 43
Old-Time Musical Instruments ..... 45
Early Mineral Exports ...... 47
Native Murders ....... 50
Working in Geraldton ...... 54
Pioneers of the North-West ...... 55
Benefits of Pearling ....... 57
The Toll of the North-West ...... 59
The Owners of the Land ...... 62
Transport Changes ....... 63
Farm Implements Improve ...... 64
Some Notable West Australians ..... 71
The Hamersley Family ...... 82
A Pioneer of Carnarvon ...... 85
The Mitchell Family ...... 88
Mr. and Mrs. Thompson Logue ..... 89
The Clifton Family ....... 89
Geraldton in the ’Seventies ...... 90
The Clarkson Disaster in 1874 ..... 97
The Greenough Flats in the Early ’Seventies . . . 105
Dongara and the Upper Irwin, 1881 .... 107
Busselton in the Early ’Seventies . . . . .110
York from the Sixties’ to the ’Eighties . . . .116
Northam in the Early ’Eighties . . . . .119
Toodyay in the ’Seventies and ’Eighties . . . .122
Mandurah in the ’Sixties . . . . . .125
Cooper’s Mill at Mandurah . . . . . .127
Bunbury in the ’Seventies . . . . . .131
The Birth of Denmark ...... 133
Albany in the Early ’Seventies . . . . .135
Brookton and Beverley in the ’Eighties . . . .136
The Pingelly District . . . . . .137
Women in Pioneering Work ..... 140
Two Women’s Organisations ..... 142


Women in Public Life ...... 143
Mrs. Cowan ........ 144
My Experience of Prospecting ..... 147
A Link with Waterloo . . . . . .152
The Causeway and Some Early Homes . . . . 155
Queen’s Gardens, Perth . . . . . .161
Two Eventful Voyages . . . . . .165
The Arrival of the “Rockingham” . . . . .168
Doctors in the ’Seventies . . . . . .171
The Old Perth Public Hospital . . . . .173
Young People of Yesterday and To-day . . . .174
An Explosion in Hay Street . . . . . .177
The First Railway in Western Australia . . . .179
A Dinner Party ....... 181
Memories of Perth’s Waterfront . . . . .184
Early Tradesmen of Perth . . . . . .188
Boat Building ....... 191
Builders and Contractors . . . . . .192
The Bootmaking Trade ...... 198
Material for the Building Trade . . . . .201
A Word for the Natives ...... 203
Native Speeches in Public ...... 209
Fremantle in the ’Seventies and ’Eighties . . . .211
A Word in Conclusion ...... 217


INTRODUCTION
I have often been asked by old colonists, and
by people who know how familiar I am with
events in this colony since the very early ’sixties,
to write my experiences down in some form for
the benefit of those who had not been fortunate
enough to share my knowledge.
These colonists well know that, from the time
I was a boy less than 10 years of age, I have
earned my own living, and that this has enabled
me to gather a very wide knowledge of a large
portion of Western Australia, particularly that
portion between Albany and Northampton, from
the ’sixties to the ’eighties. During those years
I travelled a good deal about the colony, when
everything both inside and outside the house
had to be done by hand. My sympathy for the
people who fought hardship and privation would
never allow me to forget the things I saw, and I
am sure that everyone who knew them will
remember those grand old men and women
whose lives were a constant struggle against the
greatest disadvantages.
When quite a young man I commenced busi-
ness as a builder and general contractor. I have
traded in both Perth and Fremantle in that capa-
city and I have built, between Albany and
Northampton, churches, schools, public halls,
stores, public houses, barns, sheep-dips and many
private houses. This work brought me in many
cases into direct contact with the old pioneers,
and I have often sat with them at their fire-sides


talking about the old days. Practically all of
them knew my parents well. In later years I
have met with many of those old folks, and the
main subject of conversation between us has
always been the old times. The same thing
happens to-day when I meet descendants of the
pioneers; they, too, like to talk about early times.
Thus my memory is constantly being refreshed,
and my recollections of the things I saw and the
people I met is still very clear.
Many of the descendants of the old colon-
ists have attained very high positions in various
walks of life, despite the fact that schools and
colleges were not of a high standard, and by no
means numerous. Great changes have taken
place since those days—though some of them, I
think, should not have occurred until 15 or 20
years hence. This book was written to give the
future generations some idea of what their fore-
fathers had to endure before those changes came,
and to make them proud of the country in which
they live.
Although I have written, in the pages of this
book, of many of the pioneers I met in my travels
up and down the colony, there are still many
others, some of them among my personal friends,
who have not been mentioned. All the people
in the colony were doing their bit and sharing
the hardships of those whose names appear, and
had space permitted I would have liked to make
my lists of residents more complete.
Gwenyfred Road, J.E.H.
South Perth, W.A.
May, 1936.


PART ONE
WESTERN PIONEERS
The battle Well Fought
The Author’s Letter to William Leeder;
Being a Description of the Early Life
of the Colony of Western Australia
Gwenyfred Road,
South Perth,
Ist January, 1936.
Dear Cousin Bill Leeder,
I am going to write a very long letter to you,
to tell you all about Western Australia and how
much I have seen of it, and how I have spent my
life since I last saw you on William Street jetty
in 1872, when you left Western Australia for
Adelaide.
To give my full lifetime I must go back to
1862, the year of the great flood in Perth. I was
then six years of age. You will remember I was
born on the water-front, in our home next door
to Mr. Ogden’s Pier Hotel, which was near
William Street jetty. Father and mother had,
as you know, grandfather Leeder’s place at
Monger’s Lake, as well as the home on the water-


front in Perth; we had both places until 1863,
when father decided to go to Pinjarra. I think
you were living at the Pineapple at the time, and
afterwards at the Limekilns. I can remember
ail these things just as if they happened yester-
day, and I am going to describe some of the places
and events of those times, as I am sure it will
interest you to hear of them again.
Father had a red cow named Bloss —short for
Blossom —among his milch cows, and one of the
things I remember particularly well is that Bloss
tossed me over the fence one morning just as the
late Mr. Thomas Buckingham was going to milk
her. My sister Hannah, who was standing near,
caught me in her arms and saved me from being
hurt much.
We had to go to and from Monger’s Lake very
often, as we had two homes and a total of 13 in
a family of seven hoys and four girls. Both homes
were occupied.
I can well remember the great flood of 1862.
It has always been very vivid in my memory,
because I used to sit or stand at the top window
of our home watching different objects floating
down the river. On one occasion I saw a black
thing go down the river and cross to the point at
the Narrows, just near the old mill at South
Perth. A Mr. Green, a very little man who was
staying at Ogden’s Pier Hotel, saw it and thought
that there might be someone on it. He got out
a boat and went after it, only to find that it was
an empty cask. So Mr. Green abandoned his


chase. But he could not get his boat back against
the wind and tide, and had to take it before the
wind and land at Crawley. From there, after
pulling the boat up on the beach, he walked back
to Perth. So much for kind intentions.
The William Street jetty was submerged in the
flood of 1862 for several days, and passengers by
boat from Fremantle had to be landed straight
on to the shore at the foot of William Street.
I will never forget the crowds of natives who
came around as soon as the water went down,
especially near Monger’s Lake. At that time
they all wore the kangaroo skin lt
was quite a hard job to get to and from Monger’s
Lake for some time after the flood, as all the
little swamps were connected by the flood waters,
right from Monger’s Lake to where the railway
yards are to-day.
THE JOURNEY TO THE MURRAY
It was on account of these conditions that my
parents decided to go to Pinjarra, on the Murray
River, and try to make a home there. I can
clearly remember the day when my father and
mother and I made a start for the new home in a
small cart, with one horse named Traveller. This
was long before you went to the late Henry and
Summers Birch’s butcher shop to work. A five-
storey building stands now where the old butcher
shop was.
We had a heavy load on the cart for one horse.
* Cloak made of skins sewn together with sinews.


We made an early start and crossed the cause-
way, which was in a bad condition after the flood,
just as the sun rose. As soon as we left the cause-
way we got into a heavy sand road until we
neared the Canning, when the road became
sticky clay and bog. We passed through the
Canning and saw some of the settlers’ homes
along the road as we drove along. lam sure,
Bill, that you will remember their names —Mr.
Wallace Bickley, Mr. George Gibbs, Mr. Harris,
Mr. White, Mr. Dellard, Mr. Edwin Cockeram
and Mr. Cronan.
We stayed two days with Mr. Cronan. Mrs.
Cronan was a friend of my mother’s and I can
recall them talking together more than half the
night about the flood and the hard times it had
caused. The home was near the bridge over the
Canning at Kelmscott (it was all called Canning
in those days). Some of Mr. Cronan’s descend-
ants are on the land to-day, near Katanning.
While staying at his home we met Mr. H.
Martin, Mr. Fancote, Mr. Sam Salter and Mr.
Alex. Buckingham, of the Pioneer timber saw-
mills, which were located in that part of the
Canning.
Our next stage before coming to another
settler’s home was only about three miles. This
was the old Narrogin Inn, which was kept by
old Mr. Foster, who, it was believed, was mur-
dered in mistake for a woman. The name, “Ye
Olde Narrogin Inn” was given to this place many
years later. You will remember the horses that


took the monthly Royal Mail coach to King
George’s Sound were changed there as well as
the horses that took the Perth-Pinjarra-Bunbury
mail coach twice a week.
In later years I knew the late Mr. Foster well.
His name will never be forgotten by any old
West Australian who knew him. We stayed
one day and night with Mr. Foster, who was very
kind to us. Our next stopping place was at
Wongong Brook and Bee-nyup, where the homes
of the late Mr. G. Lasenberry, Mr. Shakespeare
Hall and his brother, Anderton Hall, and Mr. E.
Thorpe, who were breeders of stock in this dis-
trict for many years, were situated. We did not
stay long at these homes, but had to partake of
the usual hospitality of all the old settlers along
the road before we left. We passed through
Mundijong, visiting the homes of Mr. Edward
Cockeram and Mr. Mark Mead. Mr. Cockeram
kept an inn, and Mr. Mead owned the Whitby
Falls property. I remember Mr. Mead had some
pomeloes growing in his garden. He gave my
mother two of these and we took them to the
Murray River with us. As father wanted to
reach the Serpentine that day we did not stay
long at Mundijong, but pushed on and reached
the Serpentine Bridge just before nightfall and
stayed with Mr. J. Chuck, who lived near the
bridge and and kept the post office there.
The horses that took the Perth-Pinjarra-Bun-
bury mail coach down twice a week were again
changed at Serpentine each way. The coach


from Perth only went as far as Pinjarra the first
day and stayed there for the night, and the coach
from Bunbury also stopped there the night, each
coach returning early the following morning.
Thus the Bunbury letters that left on the Mon-
day could be received in Perth at about 5 p.m.
the next day. The residents of Serpentine were
more fortunate, as they could receive their mail
on the day it left Perth for Bunbury.
The residents of Serpentine in those days
included Messrs. John Wellard, Christopher
Armstrong, Baldwin and Batt. Mr, Batt had a
flour mill driven by water from a brook in the
hills near Serpentine Bridge. He ground his own
flour and that of his neighbours.
There were many natives passing the bridge on
their way to the hills to get “ad-jeeko”* (wild
roots). All this part of the country along the
Serpentine River, both in the hills and down to-
wards the coast, was a good provider of aborig-
ines’ food of all kinds, A few years later I came
to know a great deal about this district and the
native foods.
We stayed only one night at Serpentine and
then went on to Keysbrook, the home of Mr.
Edward Key, who five years later married one of
my sisters. We stayed one night there. It was
a bachelor’s home, but we were made very com-
* This is not an arbitrary spelling, but conveys the idea of the
natives pronunciation. Mr. Hammond, who speaks the language of
the South-West natives fluently, pronounces the word with the accent
on the first syllable, and makes an almost imperceptible pause between
that and the next syllable.—Ed.


fortable. Mr. Key had a good run of stock in the
hills, and grazed about 200 cattle at that time.
During 1863, just before we arrived there, six
Americans prospected Keysbrook for gold and
found colour on Mr. Key’s property and also in
Drakesbrook, three miles nearer Serpentine.
These were probably the men who formed the
Wanless Company, which obtained a concession
for cutting and exporting timber from Jarrahdale
about 1869 and 1870. You might remember the
great rubber-wheeled steam tractor, which be-
longed to the Jarrahdale Timber Company,
bringing 13 tons of flour from Fremantle to
Perth. Many people thought it would crush
down the North Fremantle bridge, but Mr.
Capps, who drove the tractor over the bridge,
said that it would have been safe with twice the
load unon it.
A
A PROLIFIC GARDEN
To return, though, to my journey to the
Murray River, we left Keysbrook, and our next
stop was at Mundup, five miles further on, where
the late Mr. Willie Pollard lived with his family
of three boys and three girls. The youngest boy,
Willie, was about the same age as myself, and we
were soon good friends. It was a beautiful home,
built at the foot of a hill and facing a running
brook about 15 feet from the door. Some 50
yards from the house there was a beautiful
garden of flowers, fruit and vegetables, and there
were roses climbing on the verandah posts and


trellises. The largest red stocks I have ever seen
grew at this home. Some of the bushes were
quite two feet across, and a mass of colour. An-
other great sight in the garden was the Prince of
Wales’ Feathers. They had many kinds of
flowers, and it was the blooming season when we
were there; there were also many kinds of fruit
trees, but all the fruit except the citronel, a kind
of lemon, was out of season at this time. Potatoes,
pumkins and onions were stored everywhere, and
I saw many little kegs of butter which would be
sent to Perth for sale with vegetables and other
produce. Mr. Pollard had 150 head of cattle,
and used to send some to Mr. John Liddelow,
the butcher in Perth.
It was at Mundup that I first saw and ate the
natives’ wild roots. A large number of natives
camped just up the brook from the house, roast-
ing and eating the roots, and the Pollard boys
took me up to see them. The natives gave me
some to eat.
The Pollards wanted us to stay a few days
longer, but we were then only 10 miles from the
Murray and all my brothers and sisters, who had
left Perth in a bullock wagon some time before
us, were already there. So we made a start on
the last stage of our journey, and joined the other
members of the family about the middle of the
afternoon. My parents had bought a house
there, but it was too small for our big family and
the first thing we had to do was to enlarge it.
My father, with the help of my elder brothers,


built two more rooms, making the walls with
earth and strong clay rammed between two
boards about 14 inches apart. The roof was
covered with rushes from the swamps, where
they grew up to six feet in height. These
rushes were easy to thatch with and made a good
roof, warm in winter and cool in summer.
The Murray River townsite had quite a large
number of settlers when we arrived there. There
was some very good land in the district, and the
scenery along the road from Perth made the
journey well worth while. The road itself was
very bad; it consisted only of a track cleared by
cutting down trees, rolling off stones and logs and
other obstacles, and rough crossings had been
made with logs and blackboys over the brooks
and streams. The bridges over the Canning
(now Gosnells), Narrogin, Wongong, Serpentine
and Dandalup Rivers were strong, but very
rough. They were all made of heavy timber,
some of it with the bark still on it. With one or
two exceptions of a mile or so, the whole distance
was through bog, sand or water. A good deal
of improvement was made later by convict
workers; better bridges were built and some
draining was done.
The distance from Perth to Pinjarra was about
56 miles, and it used to take the bullock team
from 10 days to a fortnight to do the return jour-
ney —longer if any of the bullocks happened to
get away at night. They had to be released to
feed at night, and a couple of them would some-


times make for home. I knew of a case when
several of the bullocks got home long before the
rest of the team. The care of the bullocks at
night was a big task for the driver if a settler’s
home could not be reached by nightfall; a settler
would always find a paddock and some food for
the bullocks for anyone travelling along the road.
Sometimes the bullocks could be found, but could
not be caught, so a rough yard would have to be
made to catch them in. Much time was lost on
the road if young bullocks had to be taken, but
this sometimes had to be done to make up the
strength of the team if the road was very boggy.
Bad as the road to Pinjarra was, it had to be used
to supply the people of the settlement with the
necessities of life, for it was many years before
any other means of transport was available.
BRIGHT-HUED BIRDS AND FLOWERS
There was always something interesting and
charming to be seen along that bad road, how-
ever, in the early days. Gorgeous wild flowers
of every description, trees, scrub and bushes,
grew everywhere, and there were many of the
softer flowers, kangaroo paws and orchids of all
kinds. Everlastings and red and blue runners
climbed the trees to a height of 20 or 30 feet, and
there were thousands of other small flowers. The
Christmas tree grew thickly in the bush right
from the causeway to the Narrogin Inn, giving a
wonderful light to the forest that nobody could
tire of looking at. In the season, the black wattle


often brought me to a standstill with its beauty,
but this has now almost disappeared, for its bark
was used extensively for tanning. Those that
were not killed by the removal of the bark have
been grubbed out as the land has been cleared
gradually. At a place in the Pinjarra road, about
four miles south of Mundup, there was a dense
thicket of blackboys covering an area of about 10
acres. In the blooming season long sticks, some
of them quite 10 feet in length, grew from the
tops of blackboys, green at first then white with
tiny blooms. Hundreds of parrots and little par-
rokeets came and settled on the sides of the sticks
to get the honey from the blooms, and they made
a wonderful sight.
All this sort of scenery gave the travellers from
Perth to Pinjarra some compensation for the
hardships of the long journey. If the people of
to-day could see the floral beauty of the W estern
Australia of those days they would undoubtedly
say that this State is the best place in the world
for wild-flowers.
I don’t think, Bill, that you ever saw a jarrah
forest, except those near Perth. There are, in
fact, no real jarrah forests near Perth, only some
jarrah trees interspersed with many other kinds.
Some of them were good enough to cut up for
timber to be used in the old pioneers’ buildings,
but all the timber that was used for bridges and
jetties had to be brought from the hills. Your
good father did not have a chance of using the


high-class timber of this State; he left the colony
too early for that.
I will never forget the jarrah forest at Jarrah-
dale. I think it was one of the most wonderful
natural sights I saw, before the Wanless Timber
Company put their mill there and cut it all out.
Such a sight will never be seen again in Western
Australia. Although the forest at Jarrahdale was
not by any means the largest jarrah forest in the
colony, I have heard many times from old mill
hands that it had by far the greatest average of
big timber; and having seen for myself nearly all
the jarrah country in the State I should say that
they were correct.
While I was at Pinjarra in the early ’sixties a
mounted volunteer force was formed, under the
captaincy of the late Mr. Fawcett. There were
about 40 men in the force. I can well remember
the amusement the Pinjarra people got from
watching them as they learned their sword drill
in the road, just in front of the court-house, from
Mr. Archdeacon (father of Mr. A. Archdeacon,
of Perth). Many of the settlers came to see the
drill and see the mistakes the volunteers made,
and to hear the lectures they received from their
instructor, who was a grand military man and
bore a number of sword cuts as souvenirs of the
wars he had fought in.
When the Duke of Edinburgh visited Western
Australia, about 1869, a contingent of the Pin-
jarra mounted volunteers went to Perth for his
reception. They made a gay show when they


mustered at the end of the bridge on their horses.
They wore red tunics with white braid facings
and white buttons, black trousers with a broad
red stripe, high boots and long spurs, and cocked
helmets with tassels. It was a big day for Pin-
jarra when they started for Perth, and I think
everybody in the district must have come in to
see them off. It has always been said by the old
timers that the Pinjarra volunteers were the most
“showy” of all the contingents in Western Aus-
tralia. The names of some of the first members
of that force were as follows: —Messrs. F. Faw-
cett (captain), George and David Murray,
Thompson Logue, James, William and George
Paterson, James and Sandy Adams, H. J., J. C.
and R. C. Clarkson, J. E. Hammond (my father),
John, Edward and Hector McLarty, William and
Andrew Cornish, W. J. Moore, John Pollard,
James Thomas, Jack Wallace, Thomas Cooper
(owner of the old mill at Mandurah), Thomas
Oakley and Burnett Bedingfield (son of Dr. Bed-
ingfield). All these men have passed away now.
The force was raised in 1862, and existed for 20
years, during which four members of my family
served in it.
During the few years I lived there, I got to
know every boy and girl in Pinjarra and Man-
durah. Since growing up I have met with many
of them all over the State —some of them I knew
later as grandparents, and I have even met some
of their descendants who were grandparents.
Three of the boys, all of whom are now dead,


became my best playmates: James Armstrong,
son of Mr. Christopher Armstrong, who came to
Western Australia in the “Gilmore”; Phil. Out-
field, and Ben Almond, my cousin. We all met
daily at a large bend in the Murray River, almost
a peninsula. Duffield and Armstrong were both
minding cattle, one for Mr. Joseph Cooper and
the other for Mr. Beecham, and Ben Almond and
I were minding sheep for Mr. H. J. Clarkson.
We all put our stock into the neck of land form-
ing the peninsula, every morning, and all we had
to do was to see that they did not stray out of
the neck. So we spent our time, until we had to
take the stock home, swimming in the river,
catching fish with hooks and lines and spearing
them with spears. Some of the spears we made
ourselves, and others were given to us by the nat-
ives, who showed us how to use them. Some-
times other boys, on a visit to relatives on the
river, would come with us, and they never forgot
their days at the peninsula —the happy days spent
in fishing and swimming would be the first sub-
jects of conversation at meetings 50 years after-
wards.
I missed a lot of things that other boys had
while I was living on the Murray, but in that
time and since I have gained something that
many others have not —a good knowledge of my
own country and many friends all over the State,
from Albany to Northampton. I value these old
friends very much; they help to make my life a
happy one to-day, for in meeting with them I


"
I ~~,ss* ■**',„ ■■•.-■■■■■ "-«'->■'■■■ --■'■■■ - - y-,. — — ■ " ■■■—..
The Waterfront in the ’Seventies. William Street in course of construction.
The author was born in the room which is indicated by the second window from the right on
the upper storey.


An Aerial View of Modern Perth. Photo, by courtesy of Stuart Gore, Applecross.


find an enjoyment that nothing else could give
me at my time of life.
A MISCELLANY OF FARM IMPLEMENTS
Spades, shovels, hoes, or anything that would
break the surface of the ground, were employed
in planting the first wheat crop I saw sown. The
actual sowing was done literally by hand, and
the seed covered with the various implements I
have mentioned. Some of the settlers managed
to construct rough wooden ploughs, like the one
that can be seen at the Public Library, and they
were always willing to lend them to others who
could not make them, perhaps through lack of
suitable tools. Those who had these improvised
ploughs were able to sow 10 or 15 acres, which
would be quite a big field for those days.
It seldom happened that the farmers had to
wait after the beginning of May to start breaking
the soil, for the land that was chosen for wheat
growing did not require much rain to soften it,
and had to be suitable for the wooden ploughs
and other implements used to get the crop in.
The greatest task in farming in those days was the
clearing of the land for the plough. All roots
and stones had to be taken out to a depth of at
least four inches, otherwise the plough could not
be used; the first root or stone it bumped against
meant the end of the flimsy plough. This class
of clearing made the use of hand implements
much easier.
The trouble often did not end with the dear-


ing of the land, for many of the fields, though
very small, had to be drained of flood waters as
well. When the wheat or barley was ripe, it had
to be reaped by hand with reaping hooks or
sickles, usually by all the members of the family
who were able to work, but sometimes by natives.
It was placed in stocks for a few days, then
carted and put into a stack like a haystack, near
a place where it could be threshed with hand
flails. The chaff was cleaned out by holding dish-
fuls of grain up in the wind, the chaff blowing
away and falling some distance from where the
wheat fell. When this operation was finished
the wheat, which was allowed to fall on to a
ground sheet, usually made by sewing cornsacks
together, still contained a little grain with husks
on it. These were sifted out with a sieve. When
the sieve was shaken the grain with husks on it
came to the surface and was scooped off by hand.
This was a slow job, as it had to be repeated
many times before a clean sample was obtained
and bagged for the mill or for next season’s seed.
The wheat grown in the Pinjarra district in
and before the ’sixties was ground at the mill near
Mandurah, owned by Mr. Thomas Cooper. The
mill was driven by wind, and I once saw it grind
three bags of wheat for my father. Father got
four different classes of meal from that grinding.
One was flour, one was called “sharp,” the third
was pollard, and the fourth bran. When bread
was made, the “sharp” and the pollard were
mixed with the flour.


THE NATIVES’ FISH TRAP
One of my most interesting boyhood experi-
ences was watching the natives catch large num-
bers of fish in what they called a “mun-g-ah,” or
trap. They closed the river across from each
bank with sticks and bushes, leaving a narrow
space in the centre. Here a race was constructed
with parallel rows of stakes in the river bed, and
the bottom of the race was filled with bushes
until there was only a small depth of about eight
inches of clear water above the bushes for the
fish to swim through. A platform was made
about two feet six inches below the surface, on
each side of the race, and on this the natives
stood and caught the fish by hand as they swam
through the race. They threw the fish to the
land, where others took them away, roasted them
and ate them. The settlers used to go down to the
“mun-g-ah,” which was constructed in a narrow
neck of water about eight miles from the settle-
ment, and buy from them a cartload of fish, for
which they paid half a pound of tobacco (then
only ss. a pound), a few pounds of flour and
some tea and sugar —less than 10s. in all. When
asked to, the natives would open up the fish and
take out the entrails for the whites, for they
placed a great value on the fish fat, which they
used for many purposes.
As soon as the fish were cleaned, the settlers
packed them in salt in the carts, with rushes,
straw or green bushes, hurried home and smoked
them. When smoked, the fish were hung up


threaded on long sticks like native spears, and
left in a dry place, where they would keep for
almost any length of time. The fish caught in
the blackfellows’ “mun-g-ah” played a big part in
feeding the settlers in those early days of the
Murray River settlement, especially in the winter
when fish could not be caught higher up the
river on account of the fresh water from the hills.
It was the salting of the fish by the whites that
gave the natives their first experience of salt.
Some of the white people had more salt fish than
they could use, and gave them back to the blacks.
After awhile the natives did not object to the salt,
and later became quite fond of salt pork.
Many of my experiences at Pinjarra were very
valuable to me later on, when I grew up and had
to face the trials of life. I can look back to-day
and see the advantage of many of my early exper-
iences, particularly in my travels up and down
the land of my birth. Nothing seems to escape
your notice when you are interested, particularly
if you have seen something similar before. It is
the same with things heard about during boy-
hood —when you are interested it is easy to
remember places and events. I have always had
a great interest in everything to do with Western
Australia; not only because it is my own country,
but because I have seen so much of it and heard
so much about the parts I have not seen from my
parents and from the pioneers who opened up
much of the land. lam going to relate some of
the trials and troubles of those early days from


personal experience, and you can take it as quite
authentic that all the old settlers had similar
experiences to my own.
While on a visit to the late Mr. and Mrs. Key,
of Keysbrook, in the early ’sixties, I went to Fre-
mantle in a bullock wagon with Mr. Key, with a
load of shingles. They were for the late Mr. J.
Harwood, a builder and contractor, who kept a
hotel in High Street (now the Cleopatra Hotel).
Two of Mr. Harwood’s sons, both retired, are
still living. We left Keysbrook at daybreak, the
usual time for starting on a journey in those days,
and arrived at the Serpentine plains, a distance of
about 15 miles, to find the plains all under the
water (as they usually were in the winter). To
make matters worse, it started to rain and kept
raining all night. We could not make a fire and
had to sit up all night getting what shelter we
could under a swamp oak tree. We had no tea
either, as it was too wet to open anything up.
The bullocks could only be taken off the pole
of the cart and not released, because they would
have made off and left us there. However, we
were able to make an early start in the morning,
and as soon as we got out of the water we let
the bullocks go with yokes so that they could
have a feed, but not get away. We had break-
fast—this time we were able to make some tea —
and after an hour or so we made a start for
Rockingham, arriving there at sundown. We
stayed the night at the home of Mr. Key’s father,
and left for Fremantle the following day just


before sundown, reaching our destination at
about noon the next day. We had travelled all
night, taking 18 hours to do a journey of 18 miles.
I will never forget the bullocks crawling along
the road between Rockingham and Fremantle. I
was sitting on top of the load of shingles all night,
with a keen easterly wind blowing on me. I was
numbed with cold and stiff as a log, and I could
not speak all night. Mr. Key walked some of the
way when the road was clear enough, but he was
too cold to use the whip on the bullocks, or even
to swear at them!
When we arrived at Fremantle the load was
soon taken off the cart, the bullocks taken out
and fed, and we went to a refreshment room kept
by a Mr. Downs, who was a baker. The dinner
I ate there put me in good fettle for the trip
home. Mr. Key soon got his return load on, and
we started for home at about 4 o’clock. The load
this time was only a small one, and the bullocks
travelled much more quickly. The return jour-
ney was a good deal easier, for we could shelter
ourselves from the cold wind, and lie down to
sleep in the cart.
The travelling conditions I have described
were experienced by all the old settlers, but in
many cases they were even worse, for a lot of
people had to travel much longer distances than
that from Keysbrook to Fremantle.
A fortnight after I made this journey I went
to Rockingham and stayed with Mr. Key, snr.,
for about three weeks. While there I visited all


the settlers’ homes with Mr. Key’s son. The
names of the settlers living in the district at that
time were as follows: —Mr. Bell, who kept a
hotel, Mr. Day (some of whose descendants are
still at Rockingham), Mr. George Posten, Mr.
Daniel Hymus, Mr. A. Thorpe, Messrs. Adam
and George Armstrong, and Mr. Key. The
Armstrongs came to the colony in the ship “Gil-
more,” and the others came in the “Rocking-
ham” with my mother (then Miss Feeder) in
1830. Rockingham took its name from the ship,
which was stranded at Clarence, between Fre-
mantle and the present site of Rockingham.
WE RETURN TO PERTH
On my return from Rockingham, my parents
told me that we were going back to Perth, and
after a few months we left Pinjarra. We had
now had some five years’ experience of the dis-
trict, and my parents had come to the conclusion
that the place was a failure so far as making a
living or any advancement were concerned. The
trouble was that all the good land had been taken
up. Many settlers went to the district in Peel’s
time, and the good land was taken up then, much
of it in large blocks. Fortunately, however, a
townsite had been laid out at a very early stage,
so that close settlement was made possible. The
people who went there some 20 years before we
did were breeding stock —that was the only thing
that returned a profit, except roofing shingles and
butter, for the stock could walk to the market.


Fruit and vegetables were not worth sending to
market, for there were sufficient grown near
Perth and Fremantle to supply the residents. The
people on the Murray River only grew enough
for their own requirements. It was not worth
while to grow more, for they were unsaleable,
and as wages in those days were small —3 s. 4d. a
day without keep —something like stock-breeding
had to be carried on for profit.
As it was there were very hard times for some
of the Pinjarra people in 1862. My parents were
told that in that year many of the settlers had
to go without bread for a month after the
floods, for the roads were so bad that no flour
could be transported from Perth or Fremantle.
Boiled wheat or potatoes were used instead of
bread. Tea and sugar were also scarce on the
Murray. It was a long time before Pinjarra made
any appreciable advancement, and even to-day it
is far behind most of the other inland towns in
development, although it is one of the oldest.
Some 40 years after I left Pinjarra I went back
to build a store for Mr. W. Taylor, and before I
could begin the building I had to remove two
large trees that I had seen planted by Dr. Beding-
field in 1864. I could then recognise all the old
buildings of the ’sixties that had not been demol-
ished, and some of the old settlers were still
there. Others had left the district, and some had
gone to the Great Beyond.
We returned to Perth in 1868, making the
journey in a bullock wagon owned and driven by


Mr. Key, who was by then my brother-in-law.
The weather was fine and we completed the
journey to Perth in four days. I did the same
trip recently in a motor car, in two hours!
Three of my brothers went to work with the
Jarrahdale Timber Company, and they took me
with them. We took a horse with us, and a
saddle and bridle. One day when I was in the
store, the secretary of the company, Mr. Wicks,
said to me: “I think you’re man enough to go and
get the mail from the coach at the Serpentine
Bridge.” My brothers were quite willing for me
to go —the distance was only four or five miles—
and on the following Monday I made a start. I
got the horse out, one of my brothers saddled it
for me and put me on it, and off I went, a full-
blown mail man. I was in good time to catch
the coach, and collected the bag and started back.
The only thing I was afraid of was that I might
not get back before dusk, for the road was a new
one and not very plain. However, I landed back
at the company’s office with the bag, and received
so much praise for my work that I considered
myself well paid. On the following Thursday I
had to take a bag with me and collect a very
heavy one from the coach. When I got back to
the office the secretary told me that my pay
would be 3s. a day for each of the mail days, with
an allowance of 2s. 6d. a week for using my horse.
That made my pay Bs. 6d. a week, and I will
never forget going to the office each week to
draw my pay, before I was in my teens.


When I had been doing this work for three or
four weeks the late Mr. David Forrest came to
Jarrahdale and joined the workshops. He
brought a saddle horse with him, and as he could
not spare the time to look after the horse he
gave me 2s. 6d. a week to attend to it for him.
That brought my pay up to 11s. a week. I did
think I was a man then.
At Jarrahdale I first saw a railway built, and
an engine running on the rails, and the great
rubber-wheeled traction engine pulling logs out
of the forest. Some of the logs were 60 or 70
feet long and up to seven or eight feet in
diameter. The only accident I saw was the break-
ing of the big chains that dragged the logs. If
the chains held fast the logs had to come when
that engine was pulling. The sight of the saws
going through the great logs was a thing that few
boys saw in the early days. It is hard to imagine
that a huge tree standing half a mile or a mile
away from the mill in the morning could be seen
stacked as sawn timber by nightfall. Many of
the operations I saw at the Jarrahdale mill were
useful to me later in the contracting business.
AN ENCOUNTER BY THE WAY
About half-way between Jarrahdale and Ser-
pentine a Mr. Batt, one of the old pioneers, lived
with his two sons and two daughters. The sons
were both employed at the mill, with their
bullock teams. Sometimes the two teams had to
be “doubled up” on a big log, and I have some-


times seen as many as 24 bullocks drawing one
log. This often happened when the traction
engine was being used to put the logs in place at
the mill.
One day when I was going for the mail I over-
took Miss Edie Batt, who was about 18 years of
age and a fine big girl of 11 or 12 stone. She
asked me if I would give her a lift.
“I don’t think I can,” said I.
“Yes,, you can,” she said. “You get down and
let me get on, then you can sit on my lap.”
What was troubling me was how I was going
to get up again when she was in the saddle, but
Miss Batt solved the problem for me by lifting me
up by the arms. She took the reins and we set
off, returning in the same manner. Miss Batt
was well used to riding horses, but did not ride
astride, and I was glad when I put my passenger
down, although I had a little more confidence on
the return trip and did not feel so shy. You will
have some idea of how big I was at that time,
when Miss Batt could lift me up on to a horse by
the arm. I have often thought of that little
experience since, when I have been asked for a
lift along the road.
After I had spent four months as a mail man
at Jarrahdale my father took me away and sent
me back to Perth to go to school. This broke
me up, for I was seeing and had seen much that
interested me, and I did not want to go to school.
The schoolmasters in those days were Messrs.
W. Atkinson, Hussey and W. Cousins. Soon


after I started going to school Mr. Atkinson left
and a Mr. Trotter took his place. It was some
time before I got used to the boys at school, but
when I came to know them better, and to help
them fight the school battles, I was much more
content. A lot of the boys lived at the same end
of the town as I did. My parents moved from
the water-front to Goderich Street, East Perth,
about that time.
A large number of boys who lived in the Pen-
sioners’ Barracks went to the Catholic School,
which is still standing facing Victoria Avenue
and adjoining the old convent in Hay Street.
Every afternoon when the schools came out the
Catholic school boys came along in a combined
force to attack the Government School boys, and
a pitched battle took place, books and slates on
the ground, coats off, and the light of battle in
every eye. It usually ended up without anyone
being hurt. Then challenges would be made for
a boy from one school to fight someone from the
other, each boy having a good many backers. A
good hand-to-hand fight would take place, some-
times finishing with a bleeding nose or a black
eye or two. Many of these boys are old men
now, and remember with great pleasure the
battles of their schooldays.
On one occasion two boys were fighting in
Barrack Street, just off St. George’s Terrace,
when the police magistrate, Mr. George Leake,
senr., came round the corner. He said to them;
“Come on, boys, I will give the winner half a


crown.” He stood and watched the boys, and
cheered first one and then the other, and then
s topped them and said the fight was a draw. He
gave the boys Is. 3d. each and went on. A few
minutes later the two boys were on their way to a
lolly shop to spend their money, and all the
others who had watched the fight had a share of
the proceeds.
All these boys were the best of friends. They
used to go down to the river, fishing and swim-
ming together, and would help each other in all
things, excepting on school days. I suppose you
saw quite a lot of this sort of thing in the old
days, Bill, and perhaps had a hand in some of it.
HOW THE BAKER’S BOY WORKED
After my short schooldays I went to learn the
art of baking bread and then, just as I was settling
down to my work, my employer asked me to
deliver meat. This was done on horseback,
carrying the meat in a basket, and the round had
to be started at 6 o’clock every morning. I could
not get to bed until 10 o’clock at night, and often
later. Sometimes it was after 2 a.m., as I was in
the bakehouse and had to wait until the bread
was out of the oven before I could get to bed,
so that I often had only about four hours’ sleep.
These conditions went on for about two
months, when I decided to give up the idea of
learning to make bread, as the hours were just a
little bit too long, and my instructor was just a
little bit too hard. I told my employer that I


could not stand the night work, but that I would
deliver meat in the morning and bread in the
afternoon. To this he agreed. My work then
began at 5 o’clock in the morning, and the meat
round finished at mid-day. I was able to take a
little pleasure in this new job, because I got a
great deal of riding about on horseback, all
through the town. Although, when I left the
butcher’s shop, I would have a heavy basket of
meat resting on my leg, with my arm through the
handle, I soon learnt to canter along with my
load.
As soon as I had delivered that basketful I
returned to the shop for another load, and so on
until all my customers were served. This early
experience of riding was a great help to me a few
years later, when I joined an overland party to
the De Grey River, in the North-West. I was
then in the riding saddle constantly for two years.
The meat round, however, was only half my
day’s work. As soon as I had had lunch I would
have to harness up the horse in the bread cart,
load the cart up with bread, and start off on the
round, which was a very hard and slow job.
The cart was very high, and it was hard for me
to get up and down. Most of the roads were
heavy sand, so that the horse could only travel
at a slow walking pace, which made the work
very trying on hot days. I could never finish
my round before 6 o’clock, and by the time I had
put the horse into the stable and fed it, and had
my own tea, it was 7 o’clock.


After tea I had to go into the office with the
book-keeper and give him the tally of the bread
delivery, which averaged 400 loaves, and pay in
for my cash sales, which sometimes amounted to
as much as 255. It was usually after 10 o’clock
when we got the books finished.
The late Mr. William Adlam was the book-
keeper (a sister of his is living in Nedlands
to-day).
After 12 months of this work I was relieved
by a man, who did not stay a fortnight. My
next job was to take meat to Guildford and the
Upper Swan. A number of convicts was camped
there building a bridge, and my employer, the
late Mr. W. Osborne, had the contract to supply
them with meat, which had to be delivered on
two days each week —Tuesdays and Saturdays.
After the first week my work was increased, as
I had to stop an extra hour and serve meat at
Guildford, where there was no butcher in those
days.
There were 11 men at work rebuilding the
Guildford church, which was blown down in the
early ’seventies, and I had to supply them with
meat as well as some of the residents of Guild-
ford. The contractor who was rebuilding the
church, the late Mr. Matt. Wallace, of Perth,
was very kind to me and gave me a good deal of
help. He sometimes came into the little shop at
Guildford to help me serve the meat out, and
afterwards his son, James Wallace, the late ranger


of the W.A.T.C., came to help me if I happened
to be running late.
The load of meat was always put on the cart
for me, which sometimes included two quarters
of beef (not cut up) and some mutton for small
orders. The beef was for the convicts’ camp,
and they lifted it out of the cart for me.
I had to be on the road by 6 o’clock in the
morning and would arrive back in Perth any time
up to 8 o’clock at night. Although the hours
were long I liked my job. You know, Bill, what
long hours were worked by butchers in those
days, when the slaughtering was done just out of
the town by the shop hands. After all the
delivery of meat had been done and the shop
cleaned up, there was a hard afternoon’s work
killing three bullocks and from 12 to 16 sheep,
and two or three pigs. Nothing of this kind is
done to-day by the shop hands.
One afternoon as I was returning from the
Swan I called in at Mr. William Jones’ home at
Guildford. He was my uncle and, of course,
yours, and had a very large bee farm, the only
one in the colony in those days. He was a
cooper by trade, and made little kegs to put his
honey in, and casks for the colonists who made
wine. He came to the colony in 1830 in the
“Rockingham.”
That afternoon he gave me a swarm of bees,
which he secured —as he thought —in a box with
some honey. I went off with this in the cart and
when I came to a stretch of smooth road over


Tf '
l
• " O
* , ’,K.^ / \ -J|L
j. Cooper- H"', Patterson Jlaceccvorse
\ AndrevvSi Hi 1 ,
j Hammond Srf-, lft ue en s Hote I <:XC ' V
\ T Bat eS *■ * If" Mamews
\ WiMson I «|ScKool 'X 0
v Dr Tj
sScWool a I
vpev. Prtc,® -J*, 5) « IH.5 Clarkson. 5fore
— Ctol3m.gr, — r
jr rowe
'-ToBUNBUW Police Slat ‘ c ° o n r^ 5 h I « (f I
l^ecKa ne-*j* ,-\\ ■ TjOakley
Captain Fawcett
/ X
£?/
PLAN OF PINJARRA IN 1865
Sketch of Pinjarra, 1865 (the Townsite only), showing all the houses and the names of all the residents in that year
within a radius of a few miles. An additional number of houses and residents can be mentioned: Mr. Cowcher, Mr, John
Murray (magistrate), Captain Thomas, Mr. Arthur Birch, Mr. Levy Green, Mr. Beecham, Mr. Pumsrey. (Drawn from
memory by Mr. Cowcher and Mr. J. E. Hammond.)


The Mechanics’ Institute. 1860,


the Helena River bridge I started the horse into
a trot, and the jolting of the cart upset the box
of bees. They came out and attacked me in
thousands, and I had to jump out of the cart and
run. Fortunately for me there was a tree with
a very bushy top, which had just been cut down,
lying nearby, and I crawled among the leaves for
shelter. I could hear the horse galloping away
with the cart, but did not dare to move.
After half an hour or so I could not hear any
more buzzing, so I crept out of my shelter and
went after the cart. My face, neck, hands and
arms were swollen up to an enormous size and
I was in great pain, but I had to keep on after
the cart.
At last I met a man coming to look for the
driver of the cart. He had caught the horse
close to the late Joseph Hardey’s home and tied
it up. His name was Barnden, and he later gave
his name to Barnden Hill (now Rivervale Cross-
ing). He took me back to the cart and cleaned
out the smothered bees, and then took me to
Perth. Three days later I was quite well and
back at my work again.
About this time, however, I became discon-
tented with my work, and decided to have a
change —partly through the fright I got from the
bees. I told my father that I wanted to change
my job, and he saw some of the master builders
and contractors to try to have me apprenticed to
a trade. My luck was in. A Mr. Platt wanted
an apprentice for bricklaying, so I gave up my


meat and bread round and started my apprentice-
ship on the last portion of the pensioners’ bar-
racks in George Street. This portion of the
building was a very large room and tower, to be
used as a ball alley for the pensioners. I took
a great liking to my work, and my employer and
all the workmen took a keen interest in me, so
that I got on well. I soon found myself laying
bricks and earning 7s. 6d. a week —all I was
supposed to have for the first year.
HOW THE WORKER FARED
To my great surprise, at the end of three
months Mr. Platt gave me 15s. a week and said
he was pleased to do it. This made me more eager
to learn and to work harder. The hours worked
then were from 6 a.m. to 8 a.m., with an hour
for breakfast; then from 9 a.m. to noon, and from
1 p.m. to 6 p.m., making a total of 10 hours a day
or 59 hours a week. The week’s work finished
on Saturday at 5 p.m.
Everybody had to walk to and from work in
those days, for it was a long time before there
were trams, or even bicycles.
The hours I have given were worked in the
summer time, and these were changed for the
winter, from April 21 to September 21, when
work would begin at 7 a.m. and finish at 6 p.m.,
with an hour for dinner.
Wages were then Bs. a day for bricklayers and
plasterers, 4s. 6d. a day for labourers, and 7s. a
day for carpenters and painters. I cannot remem-


ber at any time a discussion about the rate of
wages before a workman started. If a man was
employed he went to work and when pay day
came he received just the same as the other work-
men in his section of the trade, and was satisfied
with it. There was very little difference in the
quality of workmen in those days; they were
nearly all experienced men.
I worked in Perth in the early ’seventies, and
saw many of the old homes built then. Sixty
years afterwards I saw many of them demolished
to make way for larger or more modern buildings,
yet there are many of the old homes that I can
recognise now, even in St. George’s Terrace.
After working in the building trade as an
apprentice for nearly two years I left it, in 1873,
with the consent of my employer, to go to the
North-West with a large number of stock. This
gave me some additional experience of the South-
West, for all the stock had to be selected and
purchased in the southern districts, and in order
to ascertain where and how many head of stock
could be obtained, all the country between
Albany and Perth had to be traversed. This
took some months, as many of the settlers did
not know how many of their stock they could
sell until they had made a muster, and this
caused a great deal of delay.
Nearly all stock were running in the bush in
those days and it was sometimes hard to find
them. As soon as we found out how many
animals we could buy, and from whom, we made


a start at Albany. This gave me an opportunity
of going to many of the settlers’ homes in that
part of the State, and of getting a good insight
into the very trying times some of them experi-
enced, even in the ’seventies, 40 years after the
birth of the colony.
I stayed a fortnight at Augusta, where there
were two old pioneers, Mr. Brady and Mr. Ellis,
close to Colonel Molloy’s old residence. Their
nearest place of business was the Vasse, 70 or 80
miles away; they never saw a newspaper until it
was months old; they never saw another white
person except when they went to the Vasse for
supplies, or up the Blackwood River some 50
miles. Very occasionally someone from the
Upper Blackwood went down that way hunting
stock.
These settlers both had cattle and horses, and
we bought from each of them. They had good
gardens in which they grew plenty of vegetables,
especially potatoes, for their own use. Wild
game was most plentiful and it was no trouble for
them to catch all the fish they wanted. Kangar-
oos were there in great numbers, and with the aid
of dogs could easily be caught in the coast hills.
Wild duck were often shot from the door at
night.
It was only necessary, therefore, to go to
the Vasse for supplies five or six times a year,
for only a few of the necessities of life had to
be bought. The living conditions were hard, but


the loneliness of the life was its greatest draw-
back.
Mr. Brady showed me the saw-pit in which the
timber was cut for Colonel Molloy’s home at
Augusta, which was then about 33 years old. I
am told that the pit can be seen to-day.
While I was staying at Mr. Brady’s home I
was thrown from a horse, and had my collar-bone
broken. I had to ride on horseback 20 miles,
leading a second horse, to the late Mr. John
Brockman’s dairy farm, Ber-annup, as there was
nobody at Augusta who could come with me. I
arrived at Ber-annup safely, but had a very trying
time on the road. Mr. and Mrs. Brockman
bandaged up my arm, and were very kind to me.
I stayed the night at their home and the next day
I was taken to the late Mr. A. P. Bussell’s home,
where I stayed until my arm was quite better.
I have not forgotten the kindness and attention I
received from Mrs. Bussell and her daughters
then.
DAIRYING IN THE ’SEVENTIES
Mr. and Mrs. Brockman were milking a large
number of cows and making butter for market.
Their dairy was about 20 miles south of the Mar-
garet River. The process of making butter in
those days was to place the milk in large open
tin dishes and let it stand for 24 to 30 hours, and
then skim the cream off with a skimmer made for
the purpose, and keep it until there was suffici-
ent to churn about 20lb. of butter. In the full


milking season, when 50 or 60 cows were being
milked, the cream was put right into the churn
from the dishes and churned up as soon as possi-
ble so as not to have too much cream waiting to
be churned. It took a great many milk dishes to
run a dairy with so many cows, because they had
to stand for so long before the cream was
skimmed and they could be made ready for use
again.
The churn was made like a cask, with a crank
handle at one end attached to a spindle with
beaters for churning the cream. The churning
was difficult and the churns took a long time to
clean after they had been used, the actual time
of cleaning being lengthened by the necessity for
carrying water by hand and heating it. This
was very hard work and could not be done until
all the other work in connection with the dairy
was finished. Moreover, the cleaning had to be
done by a certain time in the day so that it would
not clash with the outdoor work, such as feeding
the calves with skim milk before milking time in
the evening.
Then there was the domestic work. The
baking of bread in a camp oven was almost a
daily task; yet the work of this dairy farm was
done by one woman and two native girls, with
the occasional help of a man. It was not a per-
manent home, but was a place built just to run
the dairy in the butter season where there was
plenty of grass for the cows. There was no feed


grown for milking cows in the South-West in
those days.
The living quarters at the dairy were built with
straight poles cut from the bush close by, and
these were better than sawn timber for the pur-
pose. They were used for the walls, and the
roof was covered with jarrah bark and paper-
bark, neatly done and quite weather-proof and
comfortable. The dairy was fitted up with light
straight poles for benches for the milk dishes to
rest on and fixed so that there would be three or
four dishes one above the other. This saved
quite a lot of floor space, so that the size of the
shed could be reduced. A little shed was made
a few yards away for cooking and dining in fine
weather, and there a fire could be made to sit
by at night.
When the day’s work was finished a dreary
night followed, as the old-fashioned lamps were
not suitable for use in places of that sort. How-
ever, these conditions only lasted about four
months in the year and the rest of the year was
spent at the permanent home, where the workers
had some comforts and much less work. The
work was different and not so urgent.
After the butter had been sent to market and
the calves branded, the work still went on, for
the stock had to be closely watched in the dry
season. There were no paddocks to enclose them
and they could wander about the country and
mix with animals belonging to other settlers, so
that it sometimes took a month to find them. To


guard against the danger of this sort of thing the
stock had to be well looked after, which meant
days of riding on horseback through all sorts of
rough country and bad weather. I know how
this sort of work tires one, Bill, for I had a good
deal of experience of it in the country while we
were buying and mustering stock for the North-
West.
A PIONEER FAMILY
The domestic work even in the permanent
home was heavy, and had to be done without the
assistance of a single appliance of modern days.
There were no sewing-machines for making
clothes, and bread had to be baked in an iron
camp oven. Casks were cut in half and used for
wash-tubs; water was carried in heavy buckets;
needle-work was done by the poorest of light.
Very few people in these days realise the hard-
ships of farm life in the early years of the colony,
and few have seen as much of the pioneers and
their struggles as I have, not only in the South-
West, but in other parts of the colony.
The Bussells, who lived on the Margaret
River, also kept a lot of cows for making butter
as well as for breeding stock. Mr. Bussell’s
dairy was on a large scale for those days and four
of the Misses Bussell did all the important part
of the dairying, the rough and outside work be-
ing done by aborigines and two white men. The
milking commenced at 4 a.m. and finished about
10 a.m. The milk had to be carried a long dis-


tance to the dairy and strained into the dishes,
and the buckets taken back to the milking yard.
All the calves, sometimes as many as 60 in num-
ber, had to be hand-fed with skim milk and boiled
mangel-wurzels. Mr. Bussell grew tons of
mangels to help in the feeding of the calves,
which was most important as the calves were
wanted to build up the numbers of the stock.
Pumpkins were also grown and boiled with the
mangels. This class of food, however, did not
last out the full season and if the crops of mangels
and pumpkins were not good the calves would
have to be fed on skim milk only. The great
trouble in making butter in those days was the
shortage of feed. It was only while the bush
feed was in its prime that it was worth while try-
ing to make butter in large quantities, for where
the stock were running near a dairy in large
numbers the feed would soon be cropped off for
some distance away and the cows would have too
much travelling and not enough feeding time to
give a good supply of milk. Artificial feeds other
than those I have mentioned could not be grown
in those days. At the same time stock did make
a steady increase in number.
These hard conditions will never again be felt
in Western Australia, but as they had to be I am
glad to have seen so much of them, and to have
seen the changes take place that put an end to
them.
MR. ALLNUTT MAKES JAM
I am going to tell you, Bill, about the first jam


that was made for market in Western Australia.
I had heard a good deal about Mr. John Allnutt,
of the Blackwood, and his wonderful orchard,
and the time arrived when I was able to see it.
The fruit was not in season at the time, in fact
nearly all the foliage was off the trees, but I was
surprised to see the size of the orchard and the
number of different trees in it. Two or three
years later Mr. Allnutt had an enormous amount
of fruit, but he had no market for it as he was
so far away from Perth and Fremantle, and with-
out any means of transport except bullock or
horse teams. To try to get some return from
his orchard, Mr. Allnutt started a jam factory
and made 1-lb. tins of all kinds of jam for the
market. Unfortunately, there was not a large
sale for his jam. His appliances, although crude,
had cost him a large sum of money to begin with,
and he had many difficulties to contend with.
For one thing, the sugar obtainable in the colony
was almost black and spoilt the colour of the jam,
which turned out the same colour no matter what
variety of fruit was used in it. I think it was
the appearance of the jam that spoilt the sale of
it, and, of course, the long distance to the market
was a great disadvantage and would have been
so even with good roads. Mr. Allnutt soon
found out that the factory was a failure and
closed down. The old factory can still be seen in
the main street of Bridgetown.
Just a few years later when the timber mills
started in the South-West he would have found


a market close at hand and might have been able
to continue. However, he did market a large
quantity of dried fruits of high quality.
His orchard was beautifully laid out and well
kept. The position of it, and of the surround-
ing orchards, has not yet been equalled in the
State, yet in those struggling days many orchard-
ists had losses and very few had gains. Not only
did Mr. Allnutt struggle for many years with
his orchard, but he spent a large sum of money
building up his home.
I knew of another settler, a Mr. Arthur Birch,
on the southern end of the Mandurah estuary,
who saw 30 years of these hard times. I stayed
with him for a few weeks at different times in
the early ’sixties and I saw the hard work of that
home in reality. There was a family of nine
children to provide for, and Mrs. Birch had no
assistance from them until the eldest was 10 years
of age.
Flour was very scarce and often they could not
obtain it at all. Very often at night Mrs. Birch
(who was an aunt of mine) ground wheat in a
small pepper-mill and sieved it, taking out the
coarse meal to make porridge and the fine meal
to make bread. It was there I first ate meal
bread.
Rye was sometimes used in place of wheat.
This went on until about 1866 when sufficient
wheat was grown to keep the home supplied with
flour, and some estimate can be made of the


amount of labour necessary before the bread
reached the table.
With the exception of bread, the home was
well supplied with the necessities of life so far
as food was concerned. There was an abundance
of vegetables of all kinds: butter, milk, wild game
and fish. The natives kept the home well
supplied with kangaroo meat.
The family of nine reared in this home all grew
up to be fine men and women, and they have
done their part in building up the colony.
I could mention many other cases where even
greater hardships were endured, because the
properties were not so capable of production as
Mr. Birch’s place. Some of the settlers had
larger families to provide for, and one of the
greatest troubles was to find the money to buy
clothing, or rather the material to make clothing.
All the making had to be done by hand. Very
little women’s and children’s clothing was im-
ported in those days. Men’s clothing, however,
could be bought ready-made. This was imported
in fairly large quantities, especially the “Crim-
ean” shirts. These were of all designs and
colours, the outstanding colours being red, blue
and white. These shirts were on the market for
several years, and the natives would do anything
to get one, new or old. They would even wash
them to keep the colours bright, though they
would never bother to wash anything else.
The “Crimean” shirts were made of flannel of
good quality and, if I remember rightly, cost 11s.


6d. each. They were mostly used as working
shirts. The ready-made trousers were of good
quality, there being moleskin, corduroy and
fustian in two grades and two colours. The first
quality cost 12s. 6d. and the second Bs. 6d. a pair.
Both the shirts and the trousers were extremely
valuable to the settlers because they lasted well.
HOW THE WOMEN PLAYED THEIR PART
Returning to the domestic work of the women
—we can only wonder how they got through the
work they did. Some of them even went out
and helped their husbands with their work. Had
it not been for the work and encouragement of
the women many of the pioneers might have lost
heart to keep up the struggle. I can remember
seeing women helping their husbands to clear the
land, and I once saw a woman clear a ten-acre
block, only a mile from the Pinjarra bridge. This
woman had five children to care for as well as
her husband, who had to go out to earn the liv-
ing, and she not only cleared the block of land,
but fenced it as well. This was not an isolated
case, but perhaps an exceptional one for Pinjarra.
I have seen such work done by women in other
parts of the colony. For every man who put one
stone upon another in building the foundations
of the colony, there was a woman to put the
mortar between the stones to keep them together.
The trials of the old pioneers lasted some 40
years. They were not over in the late ’sixties,


and I saw a great deal of them myself in different
parts of the colony.
I have remarked the assistance the women gave
their husbands. I must now tell you, Bill, of the
help that the boys and girls gave their parents
as they became old enough to do so. At a very
early age the boy would come to be a great help
to his father, much of whose time he could save in
such ways as bringing in cows at night, shutting
up the pigs, and carrying in the wood for the fire.
The companionship of the children relieved the
loneliness of the parents greatly, and the boys and
girls were always ready and willing to do their
little jobs about the home and to make their con-
tribution towards happy family life.
As they grew up so the help increased, and
knowing many of these boys and girls, and how
they stuck to their parents, I can always lift my
hat to them when I meet them to-day. They
worked from sunrise to dark, and it was often
said in those days that the sun went down too
soon. Nobody was asking for shorter hours —
they all wanted longer days.
Although the work was hard and the living
hard, it made no difference. Progress was slowly
made. At the end of a season a few more head
of stock could be counted; a little more land had
been cleared; a little improvement had been made
to the home —perhaps a couple of doors had been
fixed, or a window and a piece or two of furniture
provided to make a little more comfort in the
home.


Hard work and hard living did not depress the
old people, and they often had some enjoyment
at night playing cards or some other table game
that helped to pass the time. If there were a
place or house suitable for a dance, the settlers
would come miles to it. No matter how far
away they lived, they made an effort to come
along and dance to the music of the concertina
and accordeon, both of which took a big part in
providing music for the settlers. I have had the
pleasure of playing an accordeon at many of the
dances in the ’seventies —in fact I am afraid I
played too well, because I missed many dances
myself through having to play.
Sometimes the fiddle, as it was called in those
days, was used for dances, but there were not
many who could play it. I have also known the
tin whistle to be used for these friendly gath-
erings. Those who did the Irish and Scotch step
dances seemed to like the tin whistle better than
anything else. Some good old Irish and Scotch
comic songs were usually given to make the
evening more enjoyable.
Some of the girls and boys of those days are to
be met with to-day in their seventies and eighties,
and it is always a great pleasure for them to meet
someone who can talk over the entertainments
of the old times.
OLD-TIME MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
I have been in many places where people had
to make their own amusement. The Narra Tarra


lead mines, about 30 miles north-east of Gerald-
ton, was one of them. In the ’seventies there
were about 100 men, women and children living
near the mines, and these people not only made
their own enjoyment, but made some of the
instruments to supply music, A triangle, a drum
and a tambourine were made by the workmen
employed in the mines. Two fiddles, a piccolo,
an accordeon, an English concertina, a drum, a
tambourine and a triangle constituted the orches-
tra, and some really good dance music was
played. Dancing and singing was kept up till well
after midnight, and this little group of people
lived for their monthly entertainments.
I and my friend, Mr. C. Buggins, son of the
late Mr. Buggins whose memorial tablet is to be
placed in the Methodist Church in the near
future, used to visit Narra Tarra once a month
from Mount Erin, a distance of eight miles. We
used to walk in on Saturday afternoon and
return on Sunday night. Although there was a
door fee of 6d. for the monthly socials, my friend
and I were never allowed to pay, so we did some-
thing else to help them. As the room used for
the Saturday night’s entertainment was also used
for the church services on Sunday mornings, it
had to be cleared up and put in order, sometimes
by 7 o’clock in the morning if a Roman Catholic
service was to be held. We saw that this was
done.
Many of the people who stayed at the dance
until 3 or 4 o’clock in the morning were back


A Bullock Team Hauling a Log from the Forest at Wellington, South-West.


Perth from Mount Eliza, 1871.


there for the service by 7 a,m. The Roman
Catholic, Anglican and Methodist Churches
each held a service at the Narra Tarra mines once
a month.
The Northampton people were somewhat
better off for entertainments, for Northampton
was a larger place. There were several pianos,
violins and other instruments such as brass cor-
nets, concertinas and accordeons, which helped
to provide amusement.
A large number of workmen on the lead mines
were Cornishmen, and they were very fond of
singing. These men really could sing well, and
occasionally they held an open-air concert which
was well appreciated. Once, soon after the
Geraldton-Northampton railway was completed,
I remember a contingent of these Cornishmen
going to Geraldton by train and giving an open-
air concert. The programme consisted mainly
of sacred songs. The Geraldton people gave
them a great reception, and would not allow them
to go away until they had shown their apprecia-
tion. This was the first time a party of enter-
tainers travelled by train in Western Australia,
for the Geraldton-Northampton railway was
completed some three years before any other
passenger line was begun in the State.
EARLY MINERAL EXPORTS
While in Geraldton, I had a chance of seeing a
good deal of what was being done in the out-back
districts of that part of the State. I went down


the lead mines at Narra Tarra to a depth of 80
fathoms and saw the miners at work. The
speedy descent in the cage occasioned me some
unpleasant thoughts of the hereafter, and I was
glad when I reached the surface again, although
I was most interested in what I saw down the
mine. The miners were going about their work
just as if they were on the surface.
The teams that carted the lead ore to Gerald-
ton reminded me of the old sandalwood teams,
hut while you could hardly notice any load on
the lead wagons, for the ore is very heavy, it
was possible to see the sandalwood team with its
load half a mile away.
I saw many ships leave Geraldton loaded with
lead and copper ore taken from the Geraldine and
Narra Tarra mines. In one case I helped to load
a ship. No ships could come alongside the jetty
in those days. They had to be loaded and un-
loaded by lighters. I undertook to make one of
four to load this ship with lead and copper ore,
and it fell to my lot to be steward on board the
lighter. As steward, however, I did not escape
having to handle the 200lb. bags of ore.
I had just returned from an overland stock
expedition and was without decent clothes or
money. My brother (now deceased) was with
me. We had to wait until dark before we could
go into the town because our clothes were so
worn and dirty. We, like the others who returned
from the Clarkson expedition after the tragedy,
which I will describe later, had left all our clothes


and boots with those who remained to go on
with the stock to the De Grey River.
While we were with that expedition the trav-
elling was slow and wear and tear on clothes was
tremendous, so that all our things had to be worn
down to the last thread. It was very seldom that
we could wash them, partly for want of fresh
water, and partly because we had little time to
spare for washing and drying. One of our hard-
est tasks was carrying wood and baking “johnny”
cakes, and it sometimes took all night to bake
enough to carry on with for the next two or three
days. This left us no time to worry about
washing clothes —and in any case this would have
been rather a dangerous proceeding because it
would have meant more wear and tear on them
than they had on our backs.
I will always remember the night I put on a
new suit of clothes after returning from the over-
land trip. My brother and I went to the late
Mr. M. Hosken’s hotel. We were afraid of
meeting anybody at the front entrance, so we
went to the back and asked for Mr. Hosken. He
was having his tea, but he came out at once. As
soon as he saw us in the lantern light he called
out, “Who are you? Be off, or I’ll have you
locked up! Be off!”
My brother spoke up, and said that we were
returned members of the Clarkson party and
wanted to stay there for a time. He had hardly
finished speaking before Mr. Hosken came down
from the verandah two or three steps, took hold


of each of us and led us into a room where he lit
a lamp. As soon as he saw our condition he
went away and in a few minutes returned with
Mr. Harry Smith, the manager of a store next
door.
Mr. Smith took us to the store, and before long
we were out of our old bush clothes and into
beautiful new suits, with boots, hats, socks, ties
and collars. He showed us into a little room at
the back of the store where we could clean off
the dust and grime of the journey, and we put
on our new clothes before we left the store.
Then Mr. W. Hepburn Gale, one of the partners
in the business —the store was kept by Scott and
Gal e —came in and had two more suits done uo
4
for us to take away.
After we had been rigged out in new clothes
we went back to the hotel, where our tea was
ready for us. Quite a number of people had
gathered at the hotel to hear the news of the
Clarkson expedition’s disaster on the Gascoyne.
We spent a long evening telling the story of the
Clarkson brothers. We were very tired and
weary, because we had walked most of the way
from the Upper Murchison to Geraldton, and
even on that day we had walked 20 miles. We
would have been ready for bed at any moment
that night, and it was only the excitement of
telling our story that kept us going.
NATIVE MURDERS
The story we had to tell concerned the murder


by natives of H. J. and W. W. Clarkson, who
were our half-brothers. The tragedy took place
about 60 miles from our main camp. The two
Clarksons had gone ahead of the rest of the party
to look for water, and were to have returned on
a certain day. As they did not put in an appear-
ance a search party was sent out to look for them.
After three days’ searching this party was driven
back to camp by shortage of water, having found
no trace of the missing men. I was one of the
second party that went out and, after travelling
some 60 miles, found complete evidence that the
missing brothers had fallen into the hands of the
natives.
The party could not wait to search for the
Clarksons, as their horses had then been three
days without water and it was doubtful whether
they would be able to get back to the main camp
safely. It was pitiful to see the poor animals,
suffering as they were, let alone expect them to
carry us back to the camp in safety. However,
we arrived back one night about midnight and
broke the sad news to the rest of the party, and
the next morning it was decided to report the
tragedy to the Geraldton police.
My brother, John Evett Hammond, and the
late Mr. John Knapton took the report to Gerald-
ton, and it was nearly a month before they
returned to the camp with police assistance.
Inspector (then constable) Lawrence and the late
Mr. John Rowland, of Dongara, were among
the party, as well as two brothers of the unfor-


timate men. The third party then went out, led
by my brother, and found the remains of the
missing men.
The brothers who were present at the finding
of the bodies broke down and had to be led away,
so great was their distress. After some unpleas-
ant duties had been performed by Mr. Rowland,
the remains were placed in leather pack-saddle
bags and brought into the main camp. There
they were re-packed to be taken to the Green-
ough Flats, some hundreds of miles away. A
few days elapsed before coffins could be made,
and then the remains of the Clarkson brothers
were buried in the Greenough Flats cemetery.
From the time they were found until they were
buried everything was in the hands of Constable
Lawrence.
The journey from the Upper Murchison to the
Greenough Flats with the bodies of the two men
is not easily described, but it may be imagined
when I say that everything that had to be taken
back to Geraldton had to be carried in one cart,
and at a slow walking pace.
My brother Evett went out with each of the
two parties, to Geraldton and back with the
report, and then with the police party to the
scene of the tragedy. Fie returned to the main
camp with the party and then went back to
Geraldton.
The time taken up by this very trying work
was just a little short of three months. Fie was
hardly ever out of the saddle, he was never out of


his clothes, and he had to sleep on the ground
just where he happened to stop, using the seat of
his saddle as a pillow. He had nothing to eat but
“johnny” cakes and anything he may have shot
or caught, such as pigeons or rock kangaroos.
He had to watch his horse most of the night in
case it strayed away and was lost. The horse
was the guardian of his safety and he did not
dare to let it out of his sight. At the same time
the horse had to be fed as well as the man, and
every chance had to be given it of getting the best
kind of feed. His life depended upon the strength
and staying power of the animal.
He certainly had someone with him all the
while, but his companions changed several times
during that period, and his anxiety was keener
than theirs, for the lost men were his half-
brothers. I do not believe any man has had three
months of such hardship as John Evett Ham-
mond had with the ill-fated Clarkson party near
the Gascoyne River in 1874.
My own trials and troubles were bad enough,
but I did not go through half as much as my
brother during that time. So it can well be
imagined how we felt when we were taken from
Scott and Gale’s store, bathed and dressed up,
and given a sumptuous tea in a hotel. Tears were
often in our eyes when we thought of how we
were going to get home to our parents in
Perth and of the good old mates we had
left hundreds of miles away, battling along
eating their “johnny” cakes, sleeping on the hard


ground at night with saddles for pillows, perhaps
short of water or drinking bad water, but cer-
tainly not short of flies or mosquitoes.
Although our mother had heard the sad news
she had not heard it from us, a fact we both felt
very much. The kindnesses we received from
the people of Geraldton added somewhat to our
feelings both for those at home and for those
who were still carrying on with the stock. We
felt that we were having the good things while
they were in all sorts of danger, with some hun-
dreds of miles yet to travel and six hands less to
assist them. But by the good hand of Providence
a very heavy thunderstorm flooded the country
ahead of them and made it possible for them to
proceed without any further trouble.
WORKING IN GERALDTON
The people of Geraldton did everything they
could to make us happy, and for that reason I
will never forget the town or the people who
lived there in March, 1875. We could not get
home for some time, for there was only one
steamer running then —the “Georgette”—and
she had just left Geraldton when we arrived
there. It was another five or six weeks before
she went out again, so we went to work.
My brother, who had been trained as a carpen-
ter, got a job with the late Mr. W. Triggs,
builder and contractor, and I was employed in
Scott and Gale’s warehouse. My pay was 6s. a
day and my brother received Bs. a day. As we


had this enforced wait our earnings were very
useful and we were able to live without breaking
into the money we had already put aside for our
passages and for something to land with in Perth.
The meeting with our parents, which we had
awaited, was another trying time for us all. We
had left our home 12 months before, full of
ambition and joy and looking forward to great
things in the future, but we returned with a great
loss and found in our home mingled grief and
pleasure —grief for the loss of two sons and
pleasure in the safe return of two.
We avoided giving our mother details of how
the bodies of the brothers were packed and
carried over those hundreds of miles to the bury-
ing ground, as it would only have added to her
grief.
PIONEERS OF THE NORTH-WEST
There was still another half-brother of mine,
the late Joseph C. Clarkson, who was pearling in
the North-West and whose safety was causing a
great deal of anxiety on account of the willy-
willies and the many wreckages that had been
reported that season. The North-West boats
could not venture out on account of the very
bad weather, so that there was an interval of
some months before Joseph Clarkson heard of
the death of his brothers.
Two years later he became ill and had to leave
the North-West. He had equipped a complete
pearling fleet and had bought Karratha Station,


in the Roebourne district, but his ill-health per-
sisted and he was never able to return to the
North-West. He went to England and Germany
for medical aid without gaining any benefit,
returned to Western Australia, and after 12
months’ illness died in Perth, leaving his wealth
—which amounted to many thousands of pounds
—to his relatives.
His brother, the late Mr. R. C. Clarkson,
managed his business during this long illness and
for some time after his death, but eventually he
also fell into ill-health and died. The Clarkson
boys paid a heavy price for the privilege of taking
part in the development of the North-West.
Joseph Clarkson went to the North-West in
1873, just after the floods in Perth. He made
good headway, and after a few months bought a
schooner and began pearling with native divers.
He was very successful for quite a long time. It
was thought that he took a sun-stroke and never
got the better of it.
During the time he was ill in Perth Mr. Clark-
son built two large brick buildings. One, which
he named “Pearl Villa,” stood at the corner of
Murray and Milligan Streets, and was demolished
a few years ago to make way for large business
premises. The second building faces Weld
Square and is known as “Tower House,” the
name he chose himself. He erected these build-
ings with money he had made in the pearling
industry in 1874.
He and Mr. Matt. Price, who is a resident of


South Perth to-day, were the first men to take a
boat into King Sound in search of pearls. They
both narrowly escaped being murdered by nat-
ives. They landed in King Sound and while
they were on the shore a number of natives came
running down the hills with spears, but fortu-
nately they saw the natives some distance away
and still had time to run to the dinghy and pull
away out of range. Even then a number of natives
went into the water and swam out after the
dinghy, but Clarkson and Price were able to be on
board the schooner and get their guns. They
fired a few shots towards the natives, who turned
back to the shore, and the schooner was moved
further out into safety.
The two men stayed in King Sound several
weeks. They spent a few days looking for pearl
shell and then were fortunate enough to find a
wonderfully good patch. They left King Sound
with 26 tons of shell and many valuable pearls.
It was a most profitable trip. The value of pearl
shell in those days was from £BO to £IOO a ton,
and they found many pearls that were worth over
£IOO each. They had five native divers with
them from Cossack, and the divers’ wages were
their only expense on that shipment of shell,
which was the first that ever left King Sound.
BENEFITS OF PEARLING
Much could be said about the benefits that the
pearling industry conferred upon Fremantle and
Perth —especially Fremantle —in the ’seventies.


Nor’-Westers, as they were then called, used to
come down and spend large sums of money enter-
taining their friends, enjoying themselves at balls
and parties, and travelling about the country,
from about March to September. Many of them
had boats built, both large and small, and a good
deal was spent in repairs to their schooners. The
money for these repairs alone ran into thousands
of pounds, and in addition the pearlers bought
large quantities of stores, both food and supplies
and hardware, to take back with them for the
six months pearling season.
Storekeepers, boat-builders, saw-millers, black-
smiths, ships’ carpenters, sail makers, painters,
tailors, butchers, bakers, and even the owners of
the old horse buggies used to look forward to the
coming of the Nor’-Westers, who put life into
business as well as into pleasure. The relative
importance of the North-West to Perth and Fre-
mantle in the ’sixties and ’seventies, when pearl-
ing was practically the only industry, was the
same as it is to-day with the many industries of
the north.
The pioneering work of these industries was
being done in the ’sixties and ’seventies. Among
the pioneers were Messrs. Walter Padbury, John
F. Hancock, McKenzie Grant, A. E. Anderson,
Charles Harper, H. J., J. C, and R. C. Clarkson,
the Withnells, George Paterson, James Fisher,
Nairn, McCourt and the Woolhouse brothers.
It is to be regretted that many lost their lives
in the early days of the North-West in their


efforts to make headway. Most of them were
young men, and many of them I knew. Some of
these men spent their last pound to get there,
and after a few years lost everything they
possessed. Stock and all were washed away in
a flood caused by a very heavy thunderstorm.
The principal sufferers from the effects of that
storm were the Woolhouse brothers, who lost
almost every head of stock they had on their
station and had to leave the North-West with
nothing.
The rivers overflowed their banks, and some
of the unfortunate animals which were washed
away were found hanging in trees after the flood
waters went down.
Much sympathy was felt for the Woolhouse
brothers, but there was nobody who could assist
them, for the outlay of the other settlers had also
been heavy, and they now found it hard to face
their own obligations. The Woolhouse brothers
returned to the south and tried other occupa-
tions, but success never seemed to attend their
efforts.
The great majority of pioneer station owners
had many years of hard work and heavy expendi-
ture before they received any return. Some of
them began in the ’sixties, and it was well into
the ’eighties before the returns of some of the
stations showed a credit balance.
THE TOLL OF THE NORTH-WEST
Quite a large death-roll could be given of those


who came to an untimely end in the North-
in those days. Many of them were murdered by
natives, others were lost in the bush and perished,
and a great many more were drowned at sea
coming and going between the North-West and
the southern towns. Heavy loss of life was also
caused by the wrecking of pearling boats in bad
weather, a lot of the boats going down with all
hands. In some cases the sinking of these boats
also meant a loss of property to those who had
assisted in equipping them for the industry.
The North-West was always spoken of as “the
new country” in those days, and many more
people would have gone there but for lack of
means. Money was very scarce in Perth and
Fremantle in the ’seventies, and there were not
many who could equip boats for pearling for that
reason,
A great change took place in the North-West
when the steamers found their way there, for it
meant that many more people were able to get to
the pearling grounds. The country soon became
over-populated with undesirables, their numbers
increasing year by year till at length they began
to dictate and create conditions that made the
pearling industry hardly worth following. I
know of some young men who spent all the
money they had to equip a pearling boat, and
after 25 years or so of hard struggling came away
from the pearling grounds without a pound note.
The principal reasons were the hard conditions


under which they had to work, and the dishon-
esty of the workmen.
The laws that were made for the pearling
industry did not improve matters, for they could
not change a dishonest diver into an honest one.
There were many ways in which the divers
could deceive their employers. The chief method
was for the diver to tell his employer that the
spot where he was diving was exhausted, when
actually the shell was most plentiful. The boat
would he removed to search for another ground,
which might take some days to find; and as soon
as the diver went ashore, or at the first chance he
got, he would leave his employer and receive a
large sum of money from another pearler whom
he was able to lead to the fruitful spot.
This kind of thing caused a great loss of time
and money in many cases. It did not pay a diver
to he honest when he could make money so easily
by being dishonest. The diver’s money was paid
at the end of his engagement, but if he was dis-
charged before then he had to be paid an addi-
tional sum, so that the diver got the best of the
deal quite easily when he set himself out to do so.
The pearlers suffered this dishonesty for quite a
long time without realising it.
Although the steamers were the means of
taking the undesirable population to the North-
West, which was not in the best interests of the
pearling industry, at the same time they were
also the means of opening up the whole of the
country, from which millions of pounds’ worth


of goods have been produced. Work has been
found for thousands of men and women, who
can now live under comparatively comfortable
conditions.
THE OWNERS OF THE LAND
But while the service of the steamers was of
great benefit to the white people, it was a disas-
trous blow to the black population of that part
of the country. While the whites were taking
thousands of pounds’ worth of produce from the
land and sea the black people lost their country
and their natural ways of living, and were forced
into conditions that brought about disease, star-
vation, immorality and loss of life. Another out-
come of these conditions was the appearance of
a large number of half-castes, a class of people
which has cost the country enormous sums
already and will continue to be a drain on our
resources for all time.
All this was certainly hastened on by the easy
transport to the North-West, for many white
people came, taking up the country and driving
the natives off. These things have happened in
other parts of the world, but the people who
have had their country taken from them have
been more adaptable types and have been able
to get over their troubles in the course of time.
But as time went on the troubles of the North-
West natives increased, and they in their turn
have created endless problems for Governments,
now and in times to come.
The NorthWest has been badly neglected by


,
-
Sandalwood at the foot of William Street, ready for shipment to China, 1864.


The Royal Mail Coach from Perth to Albany in the 'Eighties,


a long succession of Governments from the
natives’ standpoint. Large leaseholds have been
granted for stock runs, no provision being made
for the real owners of the land. They were
deprived of their living and hunting-grounds, and
forced to mix with other tribes, which was con-
trary to their principles and added still more to
their misery. The white men could take all
their meat, food and water, as well as their land,
but the natives could not say one word in their
own defence. What should have been done to
help them?
TRANSPORT CHANGES
A big change of any kind always means mis-
fortune to some. When the railway was built
between Perth and Fremantle all the boats and
small steamers trading between those towns and
Guildford were put out of action, and those who
had built cargo boats to bring the goods up the
river from the ships at Fremantle had to scrap
them and submit to heavy loss. Among those
who lost most was the firm of Randell, Knight
and Co., which had taken over a fleet of steamers
and lighters previously used by Mr. George
Randell.
The same thing happened with road traffic.
All the horse cabs, buses and carts running be-
tween Perth and Fremantle and Perth and Guild-
ford were put out of commission by the railway.
This meant a heavy loss to the late Mr. A. Dc
Leitch, who kept a large number of horses for


hire, as well as those he used for his coaches,
carrying mails and passengers. We old-timers
thought in those days that the consequences of
the building of the railway meant great injustice
to us, taking away our work. To-day, we see
the owners of motor trucks, buses, taxis and cars
at loggerheads with the railways and trams. We
cannot tell what is going to happen in the future.
FARM IMPLEMENTS IMPROVE
I have always been keenly interested in changes
in the life of the colony as they came along, par-
ticularly changes in agricultural machinery. The
reaper and binder, the harvester, the drill, the
winnower, the cultivator, the power chaffcutter
and all the other modern machinery has taken
the place of the old hand farm implements that
I have seen and used during my life. The change
from the old to the new in farm implements has
lessened the work of the farmer tremendously.
The old-time implements were heavy to use and
it was hard to keep an edge on them. Those
who used them were on their feet all day, in the
summer on the hot sand, and in the winter ankle-
deep in water and mud. They worked like this
for 10 or 12 hours a day.
The first to receive the benefit of the improve-
ment in farming machinery was the workman, for
it reduced his work by 75 per cent. To-day,
instead of being constantly on his feet, he can sit
on a comfortable seat to do a great deal of his
work. ,


Where the old wooden ploughs were blunted
or broken by stones and roots left in the ground,
the modern stump-jump plough is not hampered
by such obstructions, which can now be cleared
away little by little and burnt or disposed of dur-
ing the slack season, allowing a slower and
cheaper clearing of the land. It is only 35 years,
however, since the improvement in these imple-
ments became marked, and many of the old pio-
neers were passing on and did not see the change.
While in Geraldton in the ’seventies, I under-
took to build some sheep-dips in the ground for
Mr. Sewell, whose home was about 40 miles east
°f Geraldton. Xo get there I had to travel by
wagon, staying one night on the road at the
home of Mr. Davis, of Tobradden. Mr. Davis
had a fine large house built of stone, with a nat-
ural water supply, and there were springs that
enabled him to grow all kinds of vegetables and
fruit, especially oranges. At that time he had
three of the largest orange trees I ever saw in
this colony, although Mr. Gallop, of North Perth,
had some trees over 20 feet high. A Mr. Lester,
a green-grocer of Geraldton, paid a lump sum of
£BO for the fruit on these trees and gathered it
as he wanted it. The Geraldton-Northampton
railway line was then being constructed, and Mr.
Lester sold the oranges to the workmen and
others along the line for sd. each, or 5/- a dozen.
They were of a very large variety, the best I
have ever seen either here or in the Eastern
States.


After having a good look over Mr. Davis’s
place, I continued my journey to Mr. Sewell’s
homestead, Sand Springs, where the first thing I
noticed was a large flock of sheep which had been
brought in from the runs. It was the lambing
season, and the sheep had to be mustered for
earmarking and tailing, but these operations were
not carried out until I had completed the dips.
This work took me a fortnight, and Mr. Sewell
helped me with it. There were four dips in line,
and they were placed so that they had a natural
water supply from springs, and so that the liquor,
after use, could be let out of the dips to run away
by gravitation.
While the sheep were being held up at the
homestead waiting for attention great numbers
of eagles came after the lambs. One morning
Mr. Sewell had the sheep held up by the shep-
herds and some natives while he put down some
poison baits, and in a short time he had des-
patched four large eagles. During the next fort-
night he killed a dozen more.
While working together on the sheep-dips Mr.
Sewell and I struck up a very warm friendship
and I accepted his invitation to spend a week
with him after I had completed my work. I will
always remember the kindness he and Mrs.
Sewell showed me. Mrs. Sewell is still alive.
When the ear-marking and tailing of the lambs
began, of course I had to have a hand in the work
of catching the lambs. The job took about four
days and the experience I gained then was very


valuable to me years afterwards when I had a
farm and kept sheep of my own. Mr. Sewell
took me over his sheep runs on horse-back and
showed me a good deal of the surrounding
country. He had a very fine country home for
the ’seventies. His outbuildings and sheep yards
were most convenient and were all made by him-
self with the assistance of natives. He spoke
very well of the natives who were a great help
to him in checking the advances of the dingoes
and eagles among his sheep.
Mr. Sewell had to cart his wool 40 miles into
Geraldton, over a very rough and unmade road
through the bush. Any other business he had
to do throughout the year necessitated the same
journey, which took two days. This, even, if
only to post a letter. To-day the same distance
can be covered in a couple of hours. He was the
first pioneer to go so far from Geraldton in that
direction and his nearest neighbour was 12 miles
away.
In the early ’eighties I went to York to build a
number of cement tanning pits for the late
William and Ronald McKay, who bought the
tanning business from the late Mr. Lilley. The
McKay brothers built up a large business, and
after three or four years sent some coloured and
fancy leathers to the French Exhibition, where
they secured one first and two second prizes.
Unfortunately, the distinctions were not of much
value to them for they had paid a high price for
the dyes to colour the leather and were after-


wards unable to buy any more of them. The
McKay brothers were the first to produce fancy
leather in this State.
York in those days was a very pretty place
with the Avon River running right through the
town and through the hills around it. The
buildings and the inhabitants I will mention later,
when I am describing places and people of the
colony.
I hope, Bill, that this letter has recalled to your
memory some of the good times we had together,
some of the things we saw and the people we
met, and that the stories of places and people
that follow will help to keep those memories
green.
Your affectionate cousin,
Jesse E. Hammond.


PART TWO




MEMORIES OF PEOPLE AND PLACES
Some Notable West Australians
The author of a work of this nature would be
failing in one of his most important duties if he
did not make special mention of a number of out-
standing men who were born in this State,
had their education here and later made their
mark in the history of the State. These men can
be looked up to with pride and admiration for
the good work they did towards the advancement
of the colony. They battled along to fit them-
selves for the important work they were to do,
and carried out that work in a manner that was
a credit both to the colony and to themselves.
In the absence of good schools and colleges to
assist them, the young men of the early days had
to settle down to hard study to prepare them-
selves for their future positions. Some of them
did go out of the colony to finish their education,
but many did not.
We have one West Australian who was cre-
ated a peer, in the late Lord Forrest. He dis-
tinguished himself as a surveyor and explorer,
and he was Premier of this State and acting Prime
Minister of Australia. Few men have earned
higher honours.


The late Sir Edward Stone was also a son of
Western Australia. He studied law and began
practising as a solicitor in the early ’seventies,
and later became Chief Justice of the State and
also Lieutenant- Governor. Sir Edward was the
first West Australian Lieutenant-Governor and
Chief Justice, Sir James Mitchell being the second
to fill the vice-regal position. In his long career Sir
James has been manager of a branch of the West-
ern Australian Bank, a member of Parliament for
many years, Minister for Agriculture in the State
Government, and Premier. From boyhood he
has shown a keen interest in the State, and his
ability to handle public affairs kept him in Parlia-
ment for nearly 30 years.
I do not propose to give a history of each indi-
vidual West Australian, but will mention briefly
some of the identities of the past 50 or 60 years.
Sir Henry Parker, a barrister, was for many
years a member of Parliament, and introduced
the first Bill for responsible government. He
was Mayor of Perth on several occasions.
Sir Walter James, K.C., one of the State’s
most able barristers and at one time Premier, has
also held the office of Agent-General for Western
Australia in London.
The late Sir George Shenton was one of the
members of the Legislative Council nominated by
the Imperial Government before responsible
government was introduced. He remained in
Parliament for many years, and was also Mayor
of Perth several times.


The late Mr. Richard Shell filled the office of
Deputy Postmaster-General, in which he had a
very trying time during the gold rush of the ’nine-
ties. He had an inadequate staff of trained men
and a shortage of accommodation and machinery,
but accomplished his work in a capable manner.
The same may be said of the late Mr. Richard
Hardman, who later filled that office and had a
similar experience on the goldfields. Mr. Sholl
and Mr. Hardman each served in the post office
for over 50 years.
Several men born in the ’forties later became
magistrates. As well as carrying out their duties
in the police and local courts, the late Mr. A. R.
Roe, the late Mr. Maitland Brown, the late Mr.
Fairbairn and Mr. James Cowan, who is still
living, were asked to do important work in other
departments.
I would like to make special mention of two
of the schoolmasters of those days who were born
in Western Australia. I think it was admitted
on all sides that Mr. Stephen Gardiner was never
equalled as a teacher. He rose to the rank of
major in the volunteer corps, in which he was
keenly interested.
Mr. Alfred Carson was born in the ’fifties, and
began teaching while very young, as a monitor.
In the ’seventies he was sent to Geraldton as a
head-master. Geraldton in those days had about
the third highest school attendance figures in the
colony. After a few years as schoolmaster Mr.
Carson bought the Geraldton Express and be-


came a journalist. Later he became editor of “The
Western Mail” and then a leader-writer for “The
West Australian.”
Dr. Alfred Waylen, who was born in the
’thirties, was the first West Australian to become
a doctor. The O’Connor brothers, sons of the
late Mr. O’Connor of Toodyay, were also among
the first doctors in the State.
The late Mr. Alexander Forrest played a big
part in surveying work in all parts of the colony,
particularly the North-West and the Kimberleys.
He was a very prominent member of Parliament.
The late Mr. Henry Ranford surveyed a great
deal of the eastern and south-west districts. He
was sent to England to lecture on Western Aus-
tralia. Many others could be mentioned whose
work is perpetuated in the plans of the Lands
Department. Some of the maps drawn by the
late Mr. C. Y. Dean and the late Mr. Joseph
Hope will be in use for many years to come.
Apart from those holding government posi-
tions manv could be mentioned whose work was
of moment in the building of the colony. Among
them was the late Mr. Septimus Burt, who was
a member of Parliament before and after respon-
sible government. He was the State’s leading
barrister. The late Mr. W. E. Marmion and the
late Mr. W. S. Pearse did much valuable work
for the town of Fremantle, both in and out of
Parliament, and especially before responsible gov-
ernment.
The late Mr. H. W. Venn, who was a member


of the old Imperial Government, was one of the
first to receive a portfolio under responsible gov-
ernment. The late Mr. D. K. Condon held a
seat in the old Parliament and after responsible
government was introduced was twice Mayor of
Fremantle. The late Mr. William Paterson had
to vacate his seat in Parliament when, as the first
manager of the Agricultural Bank, he occupied
an office of profit under the Crown.
I can remember many of the men who held
seats in Parliament when the Legislative Council
sat in the old council chambers in the Town Hall.
They were as follows: —Sir Luke Leake, Sir
Thomas Cockburn Campbell, Sir James Lee
Steere, and Messrs. J. G. C. Carr, Wallace Bick-
ley, T. Burges, A. P. Bussell, George Randell,
Carey, J. H. Monger, F. P. Barlee, W. E. Mar-
mion, William Silas Pearse, Alexander Forrest,
S. H. Parker, Charles Crowther, George Glyde,
H. W. Venn, Walter Padbury and D. K.
Condon.
It may be interesting to mention that members
of Parliament in those days did not receive any
payment, nor were there any railways for them
to travel upon, free or otherwise. Those mem-
bers who lived a long distance away had to come
in their own conveyances and pay for the upkeep
of them in town while Parliament was sitting,
as well as for their own living. Some of* the
members coming from Albany or Geraldton had
to spend at least a week on the journey each way,
which added to the cost of being a member of


Parliament in those days. We who lived among
such men and were governed by them are justly
proud of their work.
The men and officers of the old Imperial Forces
played a big part in the affairs of the young col-
ony. One of the earliest names I can remember
is that of Colonel Bruce, who died in the build-
ing on part of the land now occupied by Foy and
Gibson’s in St. George’s Terrace. I was then
living next door to the Pier Hotel on the ground
where Temple Court stands to-day. Where the
Western Australian Bank stands to-day in Wil-
liam Street there was a vacant block, and I
remember going with my parents to that corner
to see Colonel Bruce’s funeral go past. Perhaps
Perth has never seen so long a funeral procession,
for all the military men from Perth and Freman-
tle, except those required for duty, and police and
civilians from all parts, took part in the proces-
sion.
Colonel Bruce had taken up land in several
parts of the colony, and one of his blocks was in
North Fremantle between the road and the river.
I erected a cottage on that block during the
’eighties. Other Imperial officers I remember
were Major Finerty, Captain Burke, Major Phill-
more, Drs. Johnston and Lapsley, and Colonel
Harvest.
I served in the volunteers under Colonel Har-
vest, who acted as Lieut.-Governor of Western
Australia several times.
The late Mr. Donnelly, the military bugler,


was a musician and taught several of the young
men of those days to play the cornet.
The young men of my time had the same grit
as their parents, and set out on their careers while
they were young. Many took up farms, some
did mechanical work, and others went into the
pearling industry, sheep and cattle raising or boat
building. Distance was no consideration; they
went where they thought the possibilities were
best.
Messrs. Frank and Edward (later Sir Edward)
Wittenoom went to the Murchison in 1870 and
took up farming. Their station was the largest
in the colony in those days. They had to cart
their wool and the station supplies about 200
miles. I know what the country was like where
they were, for I travelled over it myself in 1873-
1874. The sinking of wells for water and the
making of sheep pens and yards were no small
tasks for the two young men, but they stuck to
their undertaking and made a success of the
station. Their food was damper and salt meat,
or wild game, and tea without milk, and the life
was hard for these young men who had come
from comfortable homes. I have just heard with
deep regret of the death of Sir Edward Witten-
oom in his 83 rd year.
Another sheep station about 60 miles closer to
Geraldton, between the Greenough and Murchi-
son Rivers, was owned by the late Mr. M. Mor-
rissey, of Mt. Erin. This station was started in
the early ’seventies, and when I knew it there


were 13,000 head of sheep on it. With a party of
six I stayed at that station for a week or so. We
had some trouble with our stock and it was hard
work to get them away from the station. There
was only one man there at the time, Bob Me-
Quilton, who was in charge. He was very kind
and killed a fine sheep for us and gave us some
good camp oven bread. These were a great treat,
for we had not seen mutton or bread for some
weeks.
Mr. Morrissey was one of the pioneers of
Geraldton, and is said to have landed in Western
Australia with one penny, which his relatives
have to-day. His station at Mt. Erin was about
32 miles north of Geraldton, and I believe he had
about 30,000 acres. He had a very fine house
built of stone, and in 1877 the late Mr. C. Bug-
gins and I went to Mt. Erin to assist in building
some additions to it. The old kitchen was about
30 feet long and 20 feet wide, and had a tremen-
dous fireplace. There was a table right down the
centre of the kitchen which seated all hands at
shearing time. I have seen two sheep eaten at
that table at one meal.
In later years the Government bought Mt. Erin
for sub-division. Since then I have not seen it,
but I know some of the good old folks who were
born there.
Mr. Morrissey’s son Tom was very fond of
throwing stones with a sling in his schooldays.
One day, near the corner of Victoria Avenue and
Hay Street, I allowed him to throw a stone at me,


Central St. George's Terrace, 1862.


I 1 : :
The old jetty at the foot of Mill Street, opened 1842.


never dreaming that he had any chance of hitting
me; but the stone struck me on the head and I
fell down. I was soon all right again, except that
I lost some blood.
Another of the pioneers of the ’sixties in stock
and station was Mr. John Fitzpatrick, who settled
on the Moore River to breed stock. His hold-
ing was a good one, having a plentiful supply of
feed and water and plenty of room for runs.
Mr. Fitzpatrick imported a stud horse named
Vanguard, whose progeny proved a most useful
type of horse for the work required. Several of
the progeny were sold for stud purposes, and
when Mr. H. L. Clarkson was passing through
the station in 1873 he bought Vanguard for the
De Grey River station owned by Grant, Ander-
son and Harper. Some of the finest breeding
cows we saw on that tragic journey to the North-
West were also bought from Mr. Fitzpatrick.
While passing through the Moore River with
the Clarkson party I was nearly drowned. I
had to go some distance up the river with the
pack-saddle horse that was carrying the supplies,
in order to cross at a point where the provisions
would not be in danger of getting wet. I was
to cross and then go back and wait for the rest
of the party, with the stock, to cross the river to
where I was. All went well until I was near
the point where the others were to join me on my
side of the river, when the pack-horse saw them
and galloped off towards them. I tried to hold
the halter, for I knew it would cross the river


again and wet the supplies, and I was quite close
to its head when we all went down a steep bank
and headlong into the water. Right under the
water we went, and I lost my horse and struggled
to the opposite side, where I clung until I was
rescued by Nannup, one of the natives in the
party. The pack-horse and my saddle horse were
washed down the river some distance and man-
aged to get out safely, but the food was all
thoroughly soaked. We had no tea that night
and no breakfast the next morning, but by dinner
time we were enjoying a good feed of John Fitz-
patrick’s salt pork, “johnny” cake and billy tea.
The late Edward Clarkson, a relative of the
Clarksons previously mentioned, was among the
sheep farmers of the early days. He took up
land east of Toodyay in the early ’sixties, with a
boy named Hackett. The two met great hard-
ships, for they were continually being attacked
by natives and their food and water supply was
scanty. Clarkson built a stone barricade to pro-
tect himself from night attacks by natives, but
was at length killed in the most tragic circum-
stances, leaving young Hackett —then about 14
years old —to fight his way back to civilisation, a
distance of over 100 miles.
By travelling mostly at night Hackett managed
to evade the natives, though they nearly caught
him on one occasion. He heard them close upon
him and hid himself until they had passed on
and it was too dark for them to track him. He
then made off in another direction and by travel-


ling all that night got well away from his pur-
suers and eventually reached safety. He lived
for many years to tell of the pioneering days in
Western Australia.
The late Mr. George Gouch came to me when
I returned from my overland trip to the North-
West. He asked me for information about the
class of country I had seen and details about
water supplies and so on, and wanted me to join
him in a cattle station. I was then about 19 years
of age, and he was 21. I told him that I had no
money to start a cattle run, and that I would have
to turn the proposition down. I had seen enough
of cattle in that part of the State to last me some
time.
However, George Gouch was a son of pioneers
who had left their mark in the history of the
State. He took up runs and stocked them with
a small number of breeding cows and one stud
bull. He worked with courage, endurance and
patience, and in a very few years was in the front
rank of successful cattle breeders.
The late Mr. Charles Blythe was born in Bun-
bury, and in the late ’seventies, when he was
about 15 years of age, he went to the far North-
West with his father. He helped his father
until he was 19, and was then given a lease of
country and some stock. That season he made
his start breeding cattle. He had no money, so
he had to earn enough to keep himself while his
stock increased. He told me that he was rather
fortunate as far as the sex of his new calves was


concerned. At calving times he got a good per-
centage of heifers, and when his steers were 18
months or two years old he was able to exchange
them for heifer calves. In this way he found
himself after four years with a herd of stock that
he could not manage without assistance. The
need to earn money to maintain himself had now
come to an end, and he was on the road to pros-
perity. Finally he sold his station in 1911 for
£44,000, and bought my home at Kelmscott.
THE HAMERSLEY FAMILY
Mr. Edward Hamersley, 8.A., came out to
Australia in the later months of 1836, too late
to take up land under the conditions that had
been offered to early settlers up to the time he
left England. Several friends who were with
him decided to go on to the eastern colonies or
to return to England, as they considered that they
had been duped, but Edward Hamersley re-
mained to make a closer acquaintance with the
country.
He soon found that many who had obtained
land could do nothing with it through lack of
funds, while some wanted to return to England.
He purchased very extensively in almost every
settled part of the colony and set to work to
develop his properties on lines suited to the con-
ditions in each district. His home, “Pynton,”
on the Swan just out from Guildford, was a big
place where great hospitality was the rule. On


the opposite side of the river was Governor
Stirling’s property.
Mr. Hamersley bred horses on a property at
the Williams River, and at “Culham,” Toodyay,
where he was in partnership with Mr. Phillips.
Each year horses from these places were brought
to “Pynton,” where they were held in readiness
for shipment to the Indian market. The founda-
tion of these places was good English blood
stock. In later years Mr. Maitland Brown took
some of the Hamersley horses to start the Glen-
garrie and Newmarracarra stations, and the
Woolhouse brothers took their supply from the
same source when they started Yarraloola. From
all these stations many shipments of horses went
overseas, and this trade was the means of paying
for a large quantity of imported goods necessary
to the young colony.
In those days there were few roads, and goods
were carried mostly by pack-saddle because of the
heavy sand in places along most of the routes.
The trade up the river from Fremantle to Perth
was done in barges or flat-bottomed boats.
Mr. Hamersley had a family of six sons and
two daughters. Edward Hamersley inherited
Wilberforce and Woodsick (near York), Charles
the large property called Richmond, at the
Williams, which included the store and hotel
(this property was afterwards owned by Messrs.
F. and C. Piesse and by the Cornwalls). Hugh
and George Hamersley received property at the
Greenough, Swan and Beverley; Samuel R. Ham-


ersley received land at Toodyay, Guildford and
North Beach; Bevan Hamersley some land at
Beverley; Margaret (afterwards Lady Forrest)
land at York and Perth; and Flora (Mrs. North)
land at Northam and Swan.
Much money was spent in the development
of all these properties, and the distribution of
that money among the workers helped many to
establish themselves and gave a great deal of en-
couragement to others in pastoral pursuits. Many
settlers around Wanneroo were assisted by
money they earned when the home at North
Beach, known later as the “castle,” was built.
There was extensive paddock accommodation on
that property, and the building of the old-
fashioned four-rail fences, all constructed of split
timber, employed a large number of hands.
Most settlers in the early days found it practi-
cally impossible to market their surplus produc-
tion, and for many years everything stagnated
and the outlook was gloomy indeed. At one
time there was talk of abandoning the country,
and many people did, in fact, leave this part of
Australia, but the foresight of those who re-
mained was justified when the discovery of gold
led to better times throughout the colony.
Cattle were established on most of the Flam-
ersleys’ properties, and as wire fences were then
unknown cattlemen and shepherds had to be em-
ployed. Great care had to be exercised because
of the inroads made in the herds by poisonous


weeds, while the dingo played sad havoc among
the animals at times.
The same open-hearted hospitality and kind-
ness that was extended to all who visited “Pyn-
ton” was amplified and continued for many years
at “Wilberforce” by Edward Hamersley and his
wife and family, and there are many in the State
to-day who have happy memories of their visits
to that hospitable home.
Mr. Vernon Hamersley, a son of Samuel R.
Hamersley, was born at Guildford in 1871. He
started farming operations under his father
at York in 1889, but found many obstacles to
prevent rapid advancement in that industry.
When gold was discovered he spent a short time
in prospecting, and then returned to York. He
inherited the property on the death of his father,
and has since had considerable success in mixed
farming. The enthusiasm he showed in agricul-
tural matters, from the old-time ploughing
matches to the agricultural shows, he later
brought into his parliamentary work. He has
held a seat in Parliament for many years, and is
a prominent member of the W.A. Historical
Society, to which he has given much assistance.
A PIONEER OF CARNARVON
The late Mr. Julius Brockman was a personal
friend of mine up to the time of his death. Few
men have done more for the colony than he. One
of the earliest pioneers of the North-West, he
was a breeder of all kinds of stock in many of the


northern districts, but mainly at Carnarvon,
where he made his home. He was interested in
the pearling industry, and assisted several others
to buy and equip boats. Few men knew more
about the colony and its possibilities than he did.
During the early ’nineties he collected many
kinds of West Australian woods, including
banksia, sheoak, pear-wood, jam-wood, mountain
oak, sandalwood, quandong and many others that
I cannot remember. He had all these woods
worked up into ornaments, and was very pleased
with the work. He said that the grain of the
woods was very beautiful and that some day they
would be used for furniture and decoration. To-
day we find these timbers used in furniture and
show pieces, as well as in tram cars —in fact, West
Australian hardwoods are now famous all over
the world.
Mr. Brockman travelled the coastline of West-
ern Australia from Eucla to Darwin, and through
a large part of the interior of the colony. He went
twice round the world, and other trips took him
to Java, Singapore and Batavia, whence he
brought many kinds of tropical fruit trees and
seeds. All of these he grew at his home in Car-
narvon, where they flourished as well as in their
native lands. He also grew many varieties of
fruit which he took from Perth. He told me
that tropical fruits could be grown for profit in
many parts of the North-West, and no doubt if
his health had not failed him he would have
carried out his experiments on a much larger


scale. This might have influenced people who
had money in those days to turn their attention
to tropical fruits as well as stock-breeding.
One of the descendants of the old pioneer boat
builders is Mr. Samuel Lawrence, who is now
past his 80th year and is still carrying on the busi-
ness his father began 80 years ago. Mr. Law-
rence is the only surviving son of the late Mr.
W. Lawrence, and has built boats from his boy-
hood days. To-day he is able to give the names
of all boats that were built and used between the
North-West and Fremantle, not only by his own
firm, but by other firms in Perth and Fremantle.
Mr. Lawrence’s history of boat building in the
old days is worthy of record, as boats played a
very important part in the growth of the colony
from the ’sixties to the ’eighties. All cargo
brought to Fremantle from overseas was taken
from Fremantle to Perth by water until the rail-
way was built in the ’eighties. I can remember
many of those boats being built on the water-
front between Barrack Street and Spring Street
by the late Mr. W. Lawrence and Sons, the late
Mr. C. Watson, the late Messrs. C. and M. Read,
and Mr. T. Hamilton, who is still living.
The boat-builders of Fremantle were the late
Mr. James Storey, the late Mr. W. A. Chamber-
lain, the late Mr. Spenaway Houston, and the
late Mr. Robert Wrightson. Several large three-
masted schooners were built in the early days.


THE BERKSHIRE VALLEY PIONEERS
Nothing but hard work and close attention to
what they were doing enabled the people of the
early days to make their living from the land,
especially in places far removed from both mar-
kets and sources of supply. Mr. James Clinch,
one of the pioneers of Berkshire Valley, put an
enormous amount of work into the building of
his home, making the roads around the estate
himself and building a large stone barn and a flour
mill, all of which are standing to-day, though
they are little short of 100 years old. Mr. Clinch
used a bullock team for his transport. These
teams did well if they covered 2\ miles in an
hour —less in particularly bad country —and Mr.
Clinch’s team had further to go to reach market
than any other in the colony at that time.
Others who went far from civilisation in the
early days were the Broad brothers, Mr. Leake,
who took up stock land some 160 miles east of
Northam, and Mr. John Adams, whose property
was about 190 miles east of Northam. All of
these men bred stock. The homes of Mr. Leake
and Mr. Adams were passed by teams leaving
Northam for the goldfields, before the railway
was built.
THE MITCHELL FAMILY
The Rev. W. B. Mitchell, an Anglican clergy-
man who came to the colony in the ’thirties,
settled in the South-West. He lived to the age
of 84, and his wife lived to the age of 76. They


had a large family of seven boys and five girls.
The boys were Ernest, Wallace, Graves, Valen-
tine, Andrew, Clement and Owen. They all
settled in the South-West, and for over 30 years
were outstanding producers of cattle, sheep,
horses, butter, wool, vegetables and fruit. The
daughters all married, their married names being
Mrs. I. T. Logue, Mrs. S. Courthope, Mrs. S.
Nicholson, Mrs. F. Compton and Mrs. C. Evans.
MR. AND MRS. THOMPSON LOGUE
Mr. Thompson Logue took up land at Cooker-
nup, in the South-West, in the very early days
of the colony. He bred stock and carried on
mixed farming up to the time of his death in
1931, at the age of 93 years. Mr. Logue lived
at Cookernup all his life. He was a Justice of
the Peace for the district for over 30 years, a
church warden, and chairman of the road board
for many years.
Mrs. Logue, who is still living, was a school
teacher in the South-West for nearly 40 years,
and it is still one of her greatest pleasures to meet
people —some of whom are elderly now —who
were her pupils in the old days. The Logue
home at Cookernup was known by all the travel-
lers between Bunbury and Perth for its hospital-
ity, and for many acts of kindness to others in the
district when hard times came along.
THE CLIFTON FAMILY
Both in private and in public life, the Clifton


family, who have lived all their lives in the South-
West, have been associated with the develop-
ment of the colony. I can remember members
of the family selling sheep to the butchers in the
South-West as far back as 1864, and in 1873 they
sold a large number of cattle and horses to go to
the North-West for breeding purposes.
Members of the family I remember included
Mr. Waller Clifton, of the Police Department,
Mr. Worsley Clifton, of the Customs Depart-
ment, Mr. Cecil Clifton, Mr. A. Clifton, who
was a magistrate and warden on the goldfields,
and Mr. Leonard Clifton, manager of the West-
ern Australian Bank. Mrs. Leonard Clifton is
still living, and takes a lively interest in the work
of the W.A. Historical Society.
GERALDTON IN THE ’SEVENTIES
The construction of the railway to Northamp-
ton marked the beginning of progress for Gerald-
ton in the ’seventies. I went to Geraldton for
the second time early in 1877, and during the
interval of two years that had elapsed since my
previous visit great changes had taken place. A
railway to the lead and copper mines was then
under construction and this led to a general im-
provement in conditions. Everybody was busy,
buildings were being put up, storekeepers were
increasing their stocks, two additional banks were
opened, the Point Moore lighthouse was about to
be built, overseas ships were coming into the har-
bour for lead and copper ore, wool, wheat and


sandalwood, and this was all hastened on by the
railway.
Some horse teams and a few workmen were
displaced by the railway, but they soon found
work that suited them better than carting ore
from the mines to the township over roads that
were worse and heavier than I have seen in the
colony since.
Money flowed into Geraldton, and this at-
tracted people from all parts of the colony. To
give some idea of the size of the town in those
days I am including a complete list of the resi-
dents and their occupations. Geraldton was a
very happy little town to live in, and I spent two
of the happiest years of my life there. There
were many visitors to the town from the sur-
rounding country, including the Northampton
lead mines, the Narra Tarra mines, the farms on
the Greenough Flats, and the sheep and cattle
stations. Many boats called from the pearling
grounds of the North-West, as well as overseas
boats, so that Geraldton was one of the most
important places outside Perth.
In those days the town was not beautiful, and
sand hills and high scrubby bushes hid the view
from the south-west. Few homes were fenced,
though several had stone walls built around them
to stop the sand drift. Timber fencing was ex-
pensive, as there was no suitable timber growing
within a couple of hundred miles of the town.
The jarrah used for houses was shipped to Ger-
aldton in small schooners, in the very early days.


Some of the timber was cut in the Canning hills
by the late Mr. Ben Mason, taken to Fremantle
in small boats, and shipped to Geraldton in the
schooners “Geraldton” and “Dongara.”
Bunbury and Lockeville soon came on the
scene and took much of Mr. Mason’s timber busi-
ness with Geraldton away from him. There
was a great saving in the handling of timber at
those places, as it was loaded straight into the
Geraldton boat, and the extra distance by sea
made little difference. Mr. Mason, however,
soon got all the business he wanted in Perth and
Fremantle. The schooner “Belle of Bunbury”
traded between Lockeville, Bunbury and Gerald-
ton until the steamer “Georgette” came on to the
coast in the ’seventies.
All timber used for mechanical purposes had
to be shipped from Fremantle, except the jam-
wood used for fencing farms and York gum for
cart and wagon building. These grew on the
back flats, about 18 miles away. The jarrah piles
and all other heavy timber used in building the
first jetty at Geraldton was taken there by the
“Helena Meana,” owned by the late Mr. J. H.
Monger and the late Mr. George Shenton. The
“Helena Meana” was built for the overseas trade,
taking sandalwood away and bringing back gen-
eral cargo for the owners, who had large stores.
Mr. James Leighton, who assisted in the shipping
of the timber for the Geraldton jetty, is still
living and is 86 years of age. Messrs. Noonan
and Brophy, of Perth, were contractors for the


jetty. My brother, John E. Hammond, who
was working on the jetty, cut his foot nearly off
with an adze, and was disabled for six months.
Only two of the cross streets in Geraldton were
made of limestone, and that for only five chains
in each street. The terrace along the foreshore
had a ribbon road made for about 2\ miles. If
my memory does not fail me, I think there were
only two roads leading out of Geraldton: one to
the Greenough Flats and the other to the Ger-
aldine mines, Northampton, and Narra Tarra.
Neither was smooth enough for pleasant driving
in the old-time vehicles, wagonette, buggy or
spring trap. On hot nights, however, the long
jetty provided a very pleasant promenade.
One or two events worthy of mention occurred
during my stay in Geraldton in the ’seventies. I
went with about 12 others to the White Peakes
quarry for a trainload of stone for a school that
was being erected in Geraldton. The train was
loaded and a start was made. The grade was
downward, and before the train had gone quarter
of a mile it was out of control and could not be
stopped. It would be hard to say what speed it
reached, but it was very fast. We were all in
the one truck, and some thought of jumping out,
for they were frightened that the engine would
leave the rails. But a Mr. Stewart, who was
with us, thought that our chances were better if
we stayed on the train, for if it kept to the rails
it would stop on an up grade between the Chap-
man River bridge and the township. Luckily


for us, we took his advice, and the train stopped
less than half a mile from the Geraldton station.
Except for the shock of the experience, and some
bruises through being bumped about in the
truck, we were not affected.
One Saturday night 13 large black fish, a spe-
cies of whale, got inside the reef in Grey’s Bay —
just south of Geraldton —and killed themselves
on the rocks, trying to get out. They were
washed up on the shore. Some of them measured
25 feet in length and eight feet through the body.
Mr. Richard Burton, who is alive to-day, found
the fish and cut his brand on them. A company
was formed to extract the oil from the fish, but
owing to lack of fuel and large vessels for boiling,
the attempt had to be abandoned. One of these
fish was inside the reef in the bay at Geraldton,
then known as Champion Bay. Captain Henri-
etta fitted up a boat, chased the fish and har-
pooned it. The fish pulled the boat around the
bay for several hours before it was killed. It was
finally landed upon the shore half way between
the Point Moore lighthouse and the town, and
there decayed away.
The following is a complete list of the residents
of Geraldton in the years 1877-1878:
G. Eliot Resident Magistrate
C. B. Elliott Doctor
C. Crowther, snr., M.P., J.P. Merchant
Charles Crowther, jnr. Storekeeper
A. Carson Schoolmaster
Maitland Brown Police Magistrate
Henry Gray, snr. Merchant
Charles Gray, his son Storekeeper
M. Cummerford Postmaster


.
I
- '' j
An Early View of Champion Bay (Geraldton)


Mrs. J. E. Hammond and the author, Mr. J. E. Hammond (taken nearly
60 years ago).
THE CLARKSON PARTY
Left to right (standing): Eugene Locke, William Bryan, John Hancock,
John Knapton.
Left to right (sitting): William Wilberforce Clarkson, Henry James Clarkson,
Tommy Cattle (front).


Joseph Griffin Assistant Postmaster
A. De Boulay Solicitor
The Rev. H. Lawrence Anglican Clergyman
John Youard Painter, and Lay Preacher
Hepburn Gale Merchant
De Courcy Hillman Bank Manager
Harry Smith Store Manager
Martin Hoskcn Retired
William Hosken Hotel-Keeper
William Woodman Hotel-Keeper
The Rev. W. Worth Methodist Minister
Alfred Pead Butcher
J. Ridley Baker
J. Duffield Baker’s Assistant
J. D. Booker Bank Manager
John Glaskin Baker
W. Jose Store Assistant
Fran* Kelly Store Assistant
Isaac Walker Accountant
Alfred Walker Contractor
Robert Creswick Builder and Contractor
Frank Armstrong Coach-builder and Wheelwright
Dan Marsh Wheelwright and Blacksmith
George Baston Retired
D. Hepburn Carpenter
Phil. Duffield Store Assistant
Alex. Gregg Store Assistant
Richard Burton Fisherman
F. Gibson Saddler and Harness-maker
C. Hanlon Inn-keeper
R. Smith Boarding House Keeper
Mrs Carson Boarding House Keeper
Morgan Blacksmith
J. Toller Ban* Manager
J. Matthews Ban< Manager »
J. B. Hale Tailor and Fitter
Connolly Tailor and Fitter
Robert Hale Tailor
Robert Grimshaw Contractor
Dan Crawford Carpenter
Henri Jeweller
W. Trigg Contractor and Publican
H. E. Kenny Store Assistant
Neal Bootmaker
A. Miller Carpenter
J. Kelly, snr. Bootmako*
John Sinclair Carpenter .
George Stone Compounder at the Hospital
J. E. Hammond Builder »
Htenry von Eggerson Saddler’s Assistant
H. Phipps Saddler’s Assistant
William Hale Carpenter
C. V. Dean Draughtsman
Warricker Labourer
M. Downs Merchant
M. Rosenthal Storekeeper


Palmer and Sons Railway Contractors
H. Levy Railway Contractor
T. Carr Bootmaker
Alex. Stewart Builder
J. J. Kirkham Labourer
R. Patton Sergeant of Police
Frank Dunn Police Constable
T. Wall Mounted Constable
Green Water Policeman
Dan McGillvray Fireman
Greenhart Engine-driver
T. Jarrat Boarding House Keeper
Williams Miner
William Armstrong Butcher
Thomas Stroud Accountant
Mrs. Campbell
Mrs. Tracy
John Moore Seaman
W. Davies Master of a Schooner
John Burke Constable
Paterson Master of a Schooner
Phil Hustenade Stockman
C. Winter Water Policeman
W. Mason Store Assistant
Thomas Delucy Barman
H. Snook Bank Assistant
E. Sherwood Civil Servant
W. H. Timperley Police Inspector
R. Miller Carpenter
F. Platt Plasterer
George Chappie Stonemason
Bennett Stonemason
James Stokes Saddler
Collins Miner
Joseph Adlam Carpenter
Mrs. F. Pead Librarian at Mechanics’ Institute
W. Bell Tea-shop Proprietor
Thomas Caisley Painter
Mrs. Smith -
Stephen Stout Journalist
Bristow Stonemason
Charles Hicks Station-master
J. A. HicKs Store Assistant
Last, but not least, Mahomet, a Turkish gar-
dener. His garden was in the sand hills between
Champion Bay and Grey’s Bay, and he was the
first to grow tomatoes, water melons, flowers and
vegetables for sale in Geraldton. He lived to a
great age, and was supposed to have left a large


sum of money hidden in the sand hills near his
home.
THE CLARKSON DISASTER IN 1874
The Clarkson party was organised by the late
Henry James Clarkson, who went to the North-
West in 1872. After some little time there Mr.
Clarkson was commissioned by Messrs. McKen-
zie Grant, A. E. Anderson and Charles Harper
to go to the South-West to buy stock for their
stations. In order to gain some knowledge of
the route he decided to travel down overland,
which he did in company with the late John Han-
cock.
This journey was considered a brave under-
taking in those days, as the natives were at their
worst. One incident of the trip I would like to
mention: Mr. Clarkson contracted quinsy and
after a few days was scarcely able to speak. Had
it not been for the wonderful aid of his compan-
ion he might have died. This happened within
a few miles of where he perished on the return
trip with the stock.
Mr. Clarkson realised that the task of getting
stock overland that season was a big one, as both
feed and water seemed very scarce. When he
left Perth for the South-West I joined Mr. Clark-
son, who was my half-brother. After searching
the South-West thoroughly to get the number
and type of stock that was required, we started
to buy cattle at Albany and Kendenup and sev-
eral other places until we arrived at the Black-
wood River. By this time about 500 head of


stock had been purchased. Crpssing the river
at a point near Augusta, the stock was rushed
into the water and had to swim across. It was
a sight I shall pever forget to see so many heads
bobbing about on the water.
After leaving Augusta we reached the Mar-
garet River, where a long stay was made at the
home of Mr. A. P. Bussell. Quite a large num-
ber of stock was purchased in that district. While
staying there I was asked to make a journey of 56
miles to Busselton (then known as the Vasse),
for medical aid for Mrs. Bussell. I went on a
little pony, under 14 hands high, selected by the
Bussell girls as the most capable of the scores of
horses they owned. The journey was begun at
3.45 p.m. and I arrived back at 7.15 a.m. Most
of the journey was made in the dark. One can
well imagine the delight of those Bussell girls
when they saw that their little pony had done
>vhat they asked of it, covering the journey of
112 miles in so short a time.
After some days of mustering we made a start
for Busselton, where a further large number of
stock was bought. The total pn leaving this
district was about 800 cattle and 70 horses, all for
stud purposes. After leaving Busselton we had
some trouble in getting the herd along without
picking up stock pr leaving any behind. This
continued until we had passed Perth.
On leaving Perth we had 970 cattle and 113
horses. Quite a number had been purchased from
the late Mr. S. Pearce, the late Mr. Edward Hig-


ham and the late Mr. H. Hall. The final start
was made for Geraldton, a journey of nearly 300
miles, in wet weather. It rained consistently,
and we had to sleep on wet rugs. Our food was
wild game and “johnny” cakes twice a day. It
took us one month to get to the upper Irwin,
when the stock was made up to 1,153 head of
cattle and 173 horses. A halt was made to re-
organise for the start for the North-West.
The party consisted of 17 members, who were
as follows; —Henry James Clarkson (leader);
William Wilberforce Clarkson; Jesse E. Ham-
mond (in charge of stores and armoury); John E.
Hammond; John Knapton, of Busselton; William
Bryan, of Busselton; Thomas Scott, of Busselton;
Edward Brady, of Augusta; Valentine Hester, of
the Blackwood River; Eugene, Felix and J. B.
Locke, of Lockeville; D. Poole, of the Irwin
River; W. Pearse, of Greenough; three South-
West natives.
Besides a quantity of patent medicines, axes,
picks, ropes, etc., and a large case of boots and
clothing, the following equipment was carried for
the journey:—23 riding saddles j 9 pack saddles
and harness, 19 shotguns, 21 revolvers, 21 boxes
of cartridges, 150 lb. of shot, 42 canisters of
gunpowder, 21 boxes of gun caps, 1 waggon with
6 heavy draught horses, 1 dray with 2 heavy
draught horses, 3 tons of flour, 7 bags of sugar,
3 bags of rice, 2 boxes of tea, 3 boxes of dried
fruits, 1 box of soap, l£ dozen bottles of brandy.
We made a start for the De Grey River, but


before we had gone 30 miles along the Green-
ough River we found ourselves in a terrible
plight. The stock split up into mobs and went
in all directions, some of them turning back. It
took days of mustering to recover our numbers,
before we could continue our journey.
This was brought about by the hostility of the
last lot of cattle we purchased on the Irwin. We
had trouble crossing Mr. M. Morrissey’s sheep
station, which was situated between the Green-
ough and Murchison Rivers. Water was obtain-
able only from wells, and the task of watering
such a herd of cattle can well be imagined.
Finally we found this job beyond us, and had
to make a desperate struggle to reach the Mur-
chison River, some 25 miles further on. Fortun-
ately a small clay-pan was discovered by the
leaders of the herd, which gave some two or
three hundred a drink. After these had been
satisfied they were good leaders for the rest of
the journey, some 11 miles.
On reaching the Murchison at a place called
Ballinu we found a pool of good water some-
thing over half a mile in length, and a fair
amount of good feeding country, so it was
decided to remain there for some time to rest the
stock, as some of them had travelled over 700
miles. Travelling seemed slow.
As there was a likelihood of flour running
short the wagon was sent down to Collallie, a
distance of 60 miles, for another two tons.
From this point we were travelling by a chart


drawn by the late Mr. E. T. Hooley. According
to this chart we had a drive of 60 miles to the
next watering place. Mr. Clarkson decided to
take this part of the journey in two stages. We
could only go about 10 miles a day, for our riding
horses could not stand the work. In fact, one
night at midnight both men and beasts were
brought to a standstill from exhaustion, and the
leader of the party said prayers for us. Early
next morning we were awakened by Mr. Clark-
son, and there were no cattle to be seen.
It was a saltbush flat and, pointing in a north-
erly direction, one of our natives said he could see
some cattle. They must have been quite a mile
away. We managed to get to the place, and
found the stock standing in water in the bed of
a river. The water was very bad, but it saved
their lives and ours, too. The cattle had smelt
this water during the night and had made off to
it. We ourselves knew there was fresh water
about because of the presence of wild game, and,
of course, we got better water by digging in the
sand. That evening we followed the river up
and got better water for the stock and quite good
water for ourselves.
The next day we decided to follow the river
instead of taking a short cut across the bend of
it, as in the chart. This proved of great benefit
to us in the end. Meebiddie, marked on the chart
as a large clay-pan, was found after two days.
This was full of rain water, and was a grand
sight.


Our next problem was to get the horses strong
enough to go back to Ballinu to bring up the
other stock. After giving the horses four days’
rest, some of the party set out* leaving Felix
Locke and me to look after the number we had so
far. Mr. Locke and I were left with 14 days’
supply of flour, tea and sugar. Instead of being
relieved in the appointed time we were there for
30 days, when we decided to leave our post and
go back to meet the party. Our horses were
well rested and in good condition. We started
off and, after travelling about 25 miles, we met
them. Felix Locke and I had then been 12 days
without the staff of life. This did not make
much difference, for at the best of times we lived
principally on “johnny” cakes and wild game.
Fortunately we always had plenty of wild game.
Two days later we reached Meebiddie.
We decided to rest the stock there as long as
the water lasted. Ten days later another start
was made. Good conditions prevailed until we
reached the junction of the east branch of the
Murchison. Here the water supply was abund-
ant, but the feed was hot Very plentiful. This
point was reached on December 18, 1874. We
were all happy and content, as the outlook
seemed bright. Although the next water supply
was very uncertain we were in safety and all
hands had meals together for the first time since
leaving Albany some 15 months before.
A few days later preparations were made for
Christmas dinner. On Christmas Eve we shot


two turkeys and 24 wild duck, and some three
dozen mallee hen eggs had been found and num-
bers of wild pigeons shot. Our Christmas dinner
menu consisted of wild turkey, wild duck and
pigeon, batter pudding, boiled rice and fruit. A
very happy day was spent.
In the evening a programme was drawn up for
the next advance. It was decided by Mr. Clark-
son, our capable leader, that the country should
be explored beforehand, so H. J. and W. W.
Clarkson went ahead, taking a native of that
country with them to show the watering places.
Things were fairly satisfactory until they
arrived at Hooley’s Well, some 40 miles away,
when the native took them in an easterly direc-
tion about another 40 miles without leading them
to water. At night this native stole away and
left them, with one of their horses played out
with the need of water. It appeared that the
Clarkson brothers tried to reach the main camp
on the other horse, but William Clarkson be-
came exhausted some 25 miles east of Hooley’s
Well and could not travel further, so his brother
had to leave him and try to reach the well.
The unfortunate man had travelled only three
miles from his brother when his horse gave out.
He thought he might reach the well by walking.
He filled his water bags and walked for a couple
of miles, and then sat down to rest under the
shade of a bush, where he dropped off to sleep.
Some natives had evidently seen him pass, and
when he fell asleep pounced on him and killed


him. Although he had a fully loaded revolver,
he did not have a chance to use it. Ido not
think he could have saved his brother’s life even
had he not met this fearful end, for I firmly be-
lieve William Clarkson perished from exhaustion
and thirst soon after his brother left him.
It was six days after the Clarkson brothers left
the party before any search was made for them.
This delay was because Henry Clarkson had said:
“If we are not back in four days you can be sure
we have found plenty of water and are looking
for a good camping place for us all for a month
or so.” This remark prevented any suspicion
that there was anything wrong.
The search party consisted of W. Bryan, John
E. Hammond and J. Knapton. They took with
them as much water as they could carry on horses
but after three days they were compelled to re-
turn to camp, not having been able to find any
water for the horses. The next day the same
men made another attempt on fresh horses and
succeeded in finding the spot where Henry
Clarkson tied his horse to a tree, on which he
had pinned a note. The note read, “Isabelle has
knocked up. I will walk to the well and return
again if I can. Henry.” This showed clearly
that something serious had happened, and a fur-
ther search revealed that the horse had been
taken some little distance away and killed. The
saddle had been broken up and parts were miss-
ing. The search party by this time was feeling


the approach of exhaustion, and had to return to
the main camp.
It was decided to report to Geraldton, and
John Hammond and J. Knapton took the report.
A fresh party was made up in Geraldton, con-
sisting of the late E. W. and R. E. Clarkson,
brothers of the two missing men, the late Inspec-
tor Lawrence and the late Mr. John Rowland,
of Dongara, with Hammond and Knapton sworn
in as special constables. It was nearly three
weeks before this party reached the main camp.
They were led to the spot where the note was
pinned on the tree, and to where the horse was
killed, and soon discovered the remains of
William Clarkson about three miles east of where
the horse was left. Three miles west of that spot
the remains of Henry Clarkson were found.
Their bodies had to be taken back to Geraldton,
and were laid to rest in the Greenough Flats
cemetery. A few details given to our party by
natives who were captured confirmed our sus-
picions about the fate of the Clarkson brothers.
Fortunately, a few days afterwards, a violent
thunderstorm flooded the country and the party
was able to move on. Mr. J. Brockman over-
took the party and took the stock to their destin-
ation.
THE GREENOUGH FLATS IN THE EARLY ’SEVENTIES
About 16 miles south of Geraldton is the area
that was known as the front flats, a strip of land
18 miles long and about three miles wide. This


stretch of country has always been considered
to be among the best wheat-growing land in
Western Australia.
The front flats country was all taken up in the
early days of the colony, and was soon under
cultivation and cropped with wheat. For many
years there were no dividing fences between the
properties, but deep, wide ditches were made
along the boundaries. lam unable to say how
long these conditions went on. The Greenough
Flats was where red rust first made its appearance
in West Australian wheat crops, about 1865.
At that time all farm work was done by hand,
but the work of clearing the land was not costly
for there was no large timber on the flats. By
standing on top of a small hill (called the Boot-
enall) on the north end of the flats, it was possi-
ble to see all the way to the south end.
During the early ’eighties the Greenough Flats
were flooded to a considerable depth, although
not a drop of rain had fallen along that strip of
country. The flood was caused by a heavy
thunderstorm which broke over a place called
Nundamarra, 40 miles up the Greenough River.
The water came down through the flats at night
and flooded some of the houses to the roof-tops.
Four lives were lost and a great deal of damage
was done to property. The farmers all suffered
heavy losses and had to be assisted by the Gov-
ernment. (This was, as far as I can remember,
the first time in the history of the State that such
assistance was given.)


During my stay in Geraldton in the early
’seventies I often visited the flats and made many
acquaintances, and gained a good knpwledge of
the place and the settlers. The late Mr. John
Maley I had known when he was serving his
apprenticeship with Mr. Solomon Cook in Perth
many years before. Mr. Maley ground all the
flour required in the flats, and in Geraldton and
Northampton. Other residents in the flats in
those days included Mr. apd Mrs. Duncan (Mrs.
Duncan is alive to-day, in her nineties), and
Messrs. W. Waldeck, Stokes, R. and Y. Morrell,
Stephens, J. Stone, Pat McGinnes, the Adlam
family and many others including Mr. C. Gray,
who opened the first store in the flats in the
’sixties.
The business of the Greenough Flats people
was done through Geraldton. All wool, wheat,
sandalwood, etc., was carted to Geraldton to be
shipped. There was no timber in the area suit-
able for mechanical or building purposes, except
York gum which was used for building carts and
wagons. All thp timber used for building had
to be shipped from Fremantle and carted out to
the flats. In the very early days the little homes
were built of sun-dried bricks and very rough
bush timber, which had to be carted many miles.
DONGARA AND THE UPPER IRWIN, 1881
In the early ’eighties I spent two years at the
upper Irwin, building a large stone house for the
late Mr. Sam Phillips, whose property was about


eight miles east of Dongara. Mr. Phillips owned
about 2,000 head of cattle and between 200 and
300 horses, and a large number of sheep, and 22
farms averaging about 300 acres. These farms
were let on the share system. The property was
originally that of his father, who lived at “Cul-
ham,” and was known as “Squire Phillips.”
Mr. Sam Phillips was interested in another
stock station some seven miles further east on the
Irwin River, known as Burges and Phillips’s sta-
tion. The late Mr. Sam Burges died young.
This was the first station in that part of the State,
and the home was known as Irwin House. I
have visited the home many times. It was a
great place for growing vegetables and all kinds
of fruit all the year round, and these were mainly
grown for their own use. The home was sup-
plied with fresh water from springs that covered
about two acres of the most wonderful soil.
During recent years I have met many of the
friends I made on the upper Irwin, all of whom
were farmers, in the ’eighties.
On the 22 farms owned by Mr. Sam Phillips
the machinery consisted of the old-fashioned
mower, the horse rake for raking up loose hay,
the double and single-furrow ploughs, the win-
nower for cleaning corn, the hand and horse
power chaffcutter, and the old West Australian-
made stripper. My half-brother, E. W. Clark-
son, of Dongara, made many of these old-
fashioned strippers. This class of machinery is
not used much to-day.


While I was erecting Mr. Phillips’s building he
placed two horses at my disposal, and I took ad-
vantage of this to visit the settlers and see the
country. I was thus able to meet all the people
for miles around, including those of Dongara,
where there were many old pioneers. Among
them were Messrs. John Rowland, Frank Pearse
(storekeeper and farmer), Sam Moore (store-
keeper and farmer), William Criddle (farmer and
hotel-keeper), E. W. Clarkson (farmer), Brand,
John Smith (contractor), William Linthorne
(hotel-keeper), John Walker (farmer), Joseph
Ridley (surveyor), and his brother John, who
was a farmer.
For many years most of the trading between
Dongara and Fremantle was done by the vessels
“Minnie” and Gem.” The “Minnie,” a schooner,
was captained by the late W. Waldron, and the
cutter, “Gem,” by the late Captain Littlejohn,
who went down between Rottnest and Fremantle
in the late ’seventies, with his schooner loaded
with wheat from Dongara.
Some few months before I left the Irwin I sent
for my wife to join me there, and we later booked
our return passage to Fremantle on the schooner
“Planet,” which was loaded with wheat. We
sailed from Dongara about 4 p.m. and after we
got a few miles out to sea it became calm and the
ship rolled all night, making no headway. At
mid-day the wind freshened up, but from the
wrong quarter, and blew us well out to sea. It
then died down and left us rolling about from one


side to the other, so that it was a hard job to sit
or lie still. My wife and child were dreadfully
seasick from the time we went on to the boat
until we arrived at Fremantle. After two days
of calm the wind started up again with great
force. The captain ordered half the sails to be
taken in and he ran the ship before the wind till
midnight. By that time the boat was 100 miles
out of her course. The next change of wind
was in our favour, and so it was till the end of
our journey. We were driven around the south-
west end of Rottnest, and as we got abreast of
the settlement we passed the steamer “Macedon.”
She was to land some passengers at the settlement
and in a short time we saw that she was in
trouble. While we were all watching she went
on a reef. All the passengers were saved, but
the vessel remained there until she became a total
wreck.
BUSSELTON IN THE EARLY ’SEVENTIES
When I first went to Busselton in the early
’seventies I stayed at a little old-fashioned house
kept as a hotel by a Mrs. Ernshaw. There may
have been six or seven rooms in this little build-
ing, but few more. It was surrounded with fruit
trees, and flowers grew right up to the walls,
which were not more than eight feet high, so
that the trees almost obscured the hotel from the
road. Nevertheless it was a comfortable and
homely little place to stay at, and Mrs. Ernshaw
was like a mother to all her guests.


The population of Busselton was very small
in those days. The town was very pretty, and
seemed to stand in a dense thicket of peppermint
trees. I stayed two or three days in Busselton
alone, and was then joined by my brother, who
was buying stock to take to the North-West. We
went through the township and district selecting
stock, and were thus brought into contact with
almost all the residents of Busselton, some of
whose names I will give later.
It did not take long to become acquainted with
the settlers, for our business took us to many of
their places three or four times. Here I would
like to say something of the hospitality of the
old timers. As soon as you arrived at a home
you were asked to get off your horse and come
inside, and you were told “So-and-so will take
your horse to the stable.” Within a few minutes
the best in the house was provided for you, even
if you had come only four or five miles from
another homestead. You found that nothing
was more disappointing to an old farmer than
your refusal to accept his hospitality. For my
part, I soon found that it was necessary to keep
a little storage room. A slice of camp oven
bread that would almost cover an old-time dinner
plate, with butter placed on it like cheese, a large
piece of salt pork or kangaroo, or both, and a
couple of big cups full of tea, was regarded
as a mere snack between meals. This generosity
was to be met with from north to south, even


though many found it difficult to provide suffici-
ent for themselves at times.
Having travelled all through the country be-
tween Busselton and Albany, selecting stock, we
then began to buy and muster. For a couple of
days we bought together, and then my brother
went on ahead to get the stock ready for me to
pick up as I came along. We worked on this
plan all through the South-West, where the work
of mustering stock in those days in the heavily
timbered country was very trying, especially in
wet weather. We rode all day soaked to the
skin, and found it difficult to make a fire to get
a pannikin of warm tea. Sometimes we came to
native camps and found the blacks huddled to-
gether for warmth, with their dogs among them.
They would boil a pannikin for us while we had a
warm at their two-piece wood fire, but we would
have to give them some tea and sugar and wait
while they made and drank pannikins of tea
themselves. This, however, was no hardship,
and it was quite interesting to see them packed
together like sardines in a tin, and to listen to
their jabbering about our being out in the rain all
day. They were all dry and warm and usually
had in the camp a day or so’s food supply, includ-
ing wild game, roots and bardies. The horses
were not so pleased at these stops at native camps,
for they had to stand and shiver in the cold.
As the number of stock purchased became
larger the work of mustering increased, and I had
to have the assistance of a native, one of the


settlers’ workmen, who kept me out of the thick
timber when travelling across country. This boy
showed me some of the wild roots and fruits
eaten by the natives, and I found them very pala-
table and satisfying. I have eaten these things
ever since when I have come across them. (I
have given a description of these in “Winjan’s
People.”)
This buying of stock caused a good deal of
money to change hands, and some of the largest
cheques cashed in the South-West up to the ’sev-
enties were paid to the settlers. It also bright-
ened the prospects for stock breeders, and in a
few years the number of stock bred in the South-
West was more than doubled.
About 1870 it was known that something like
700 head of cattle, bred from animals lost in the
thick bush and heavily timbered country by pio-
neer settlers, were running wild in the South-
West. Licenses were issued for the shooting of
these wild cattle, but it was provided that some
use had to be made of the carcases. This came
to an end just before 1873, a very short time
before I reached the Margaret River and
Augusta.
While travelling through the Busselton district
I had a second opportunity of going over the
Yelverton jarrah sawmills, which were opened in
1866, about the same time as Ben Mason’s saw-
mills near the Canning. If I remember rightly
Yelverton sawmills were about 20 miles out from


Lockeville, whence the timber was shipped to the
overseas market, mainly Calcutta.
Comparing the old sawmills of the ’sixties and
’seventies with those of to-day, very great im-
provements are to be noticed, particularly in the
handling of long and heavy logs. To-day the
largest logs are taken to the saw from the skids
in a few minutes, but in the old days this job was
a day’s work, or more. It was interesting to wit-
ness the ingenious handling of those huge logs
on to the saw, three feet from the ground.
The rails of the 20-mile railway line from the
sawmills to Lockeville were of jarrah, and served
their purpose well for some years. Jarrah rails
were also used at Ben Mason’s sawmills, and at
Jarrahdale. Horses were used at first for hauling
timber on the lines (except at Jarrahdale, where
a locomotive was used), from where the timber
was cut to where it was shipped. The hauling
of these logs by bullocks, which were later em-
ployed, interested me. It was a wonderful feat
to get through the forest with a long team
of bullocks and a long log behind them, turning
and twisting about among the trees and black-
boys. The crack of the long-handled whip could
be heard as far away as a gunshot, and many a
lurid oath rang through the bush as well. Every
bullock seemed to know its name if it had a dash
of colour in it.
The loading of the boats with timber at Locke-
ville was done by manual labour in those days,
and was a slow job. The timber had to be hoisted


with a ship’s windlass, which was worked by
from four to six men. The ropes or chains that
were used for the hoisting of the timber were
fixed to the rigging of the ship, and when the
timber was hanging from the rigging it looked as
if loading was a dangerous job.
While I was staying at Mrs. Ernshaw’s hotel
in Busselton a Captain Yarnell, from one of the
timber ships, was there while his ship was in har-
bour. He told me that on a previous trip he had
shipped two special jarrah logs for exhibition
purposes. The logs were 100 feet long, 2 feet
in diameter at the bottom end, and 10 inches at
the small end. The first of these was loaded
successfully and the second was hanging in the
sling ready to be lowered beside the other, when
the slings broke and the log fell. A man who
was standing between the logs to guide them into
position had the top of his head taken off as the
logs came together.
Ships of 400 or 500 tons burden took up to
three weeks to load in those days; to-day ships of
4,000 or 5,000 tons are loaded by machinery in a
few hours. Time has indeed worked great
changes in the timber industry.
Lockeville, on account of its timber export, was
one of the most important towns in Western
Australia in the ’sixties and ’seventies. It took
its name from John Locke, who started the mills.
I stayed at Mr. Locke’s home for a fortnight in
the early ’seventies, and when I left for the
North-West three of the Locke boys—Felix,


Eugene and Justus —came with me. e travelled
together to the Gascoyne River.
I have often been back to Busselton since the
’seventies, and as recently as five years ago. Many
of the good old pioneers, who made their mark,
are gone. I miss them, but I have not forgotten
them. Among them were the following: —The
Geerhan family, the Layman family, Mrs. Ern-
shaw, Mrs. Knapton and her son John, and
Messrs. J. Cross, Bovell, Tom Scott, W. Bryan,
Bramwell, G. Simons, George Thurdle, Smith,
Heppingstone and Lochard.
YORK FROM THE ’SIXTIES TO THE ’EIGHTIES
The land in the district of York is some of the
best in the colony, and the attractions of the
district led many of the old pioneers to take up
land there. Some of them took money into the
district and used it wisely. Their homes were
of a good class of building and became assets to
them in a few years. Many of them are to
be seen to-day. Those who started by putting
their money into bricks and mortar were looking
well ahead.
In no other settlement in the colony were the
people grouped so closely together as in York
from 1860 to 1880. This led to the opening of a
number of business places, all of which flourished:
a condition that led to the people of York living
more comfortably, on the whole, than those of
other districts, for they were less frequently


obliged to go to Perth or Fremantle, and had
more time to work on their farms.
Social life flourished in the settlement. The
people found that they had good reason to be
proud of their little isolated civilisation; the hard
struggling days were coming to an end, and as
the population increased so did business increase.
The settlers of York were a happy and united
band, and did everything they could to assist each
other and to attract other settlers and visitors to
the district. They organised what was called
the “York Fair,” which was held once a year
and lasted for five days. The programme in-
included horse racing, ploughing matches, and a
number of evening entertainments. The “York
Fair” became very popular, and hundreds of
people went there from Perth, Fremantle and all
the neighbouring towns.
Some of the visitors stayed to see the end of
the five days’ programme and thus a large amount
of money was taken to York and spent there.
This was a great help to the settlers. During the
fair accommodation for visitors was a long way
short of requirements, and two additional hotels
were built, as well as other places of business.
The success of the fairs was responsible for
many people taking up land in and around York,
some settlers going out as far as 15 or 20 miles
from the township. Sandalwood was plentiful,
and many settlers turned their attention to the
trade in this commodity. There was a good de-
mand for it, and a good price was paid. Numbers


of the newcomers bought teams and paid for
them with sandalwood (York was not the only
place where I have known this to be done).
Wheel-wrights, blacksmiths and harness-makers
soon found their way to the district, and more
and more workmen were employed in these
trades.
I have seen and known York for many years,
and many of its early settlers were relatives of
mine. Some of them have told me how their
wives cleaned the bark off the sandalwood while
they were carting it into Perth or Guildford.
These good wives did much of that sort of work
to assist their husbands, but at the same time
never forgot that they were mothers and had
other duties to perform. Husbands and wives
lived for each other and worked for each other,
for their children, and for their adopted country.
Before closing this little history of the early
days of York I would like to mention the names
of some of the people I knew there. They were
as follows:—Messrs. Stephen Parker, J. H. Mon-
ger (known as “The Duke of York”), John Lott
(who imported the variety of wheat which bears
his name), W. G. Lukin, Delaccar, D. Gallop,
Gragg, Marwick, Little, Davis, G. Edwards,
Bailey, Duckam, Inkpen, Thorne, Stewart,
Dempster, Gregson, S. Burges, William Wilkins,
Bower and Thomas Horton. All of these men
have now passed away.
Horton’s son, Tom, drove the mail coach be-
tween York and Perth for 54 years, and was then


stopped by the completion of the railway, which
carried the mail and passengers. During those
54 years his passenger list was built up to over
15,000 the number of persons carried on each trip
varying from one to eight. Born in Western
Australia, he had travelled a greater number of
miles than any other person in the colony. This
was not an official record, but he and others knew
that it was a record. His average distance per
week was 200 miles. The late Mr. James Cooper,
of Mandurah, who was not a West Australian,
also put up a very fine performance. He drove
the mail between Pinjarra and Mandurah for
nearly 60 years, covering 48 miles per week. One
of his horses travelled just under 30,000 miles on
this mail run in 20 years —more than the distance
round the equator!
NORTHAM IN THE EARLY ’EIGHTIES
My first visit to Northam was in September,
1880, when I was one of the nine delegates repre-
senting temperance bodies in Perth and Freman-
tle to a Good Templars’ conference held there.
This, of course, was long before the railway was
built, and we travelled in a wagonette drawn
by four horses, leaving Perth at 8 a.m. and arriv-
ing in Northam at 7 p.m. With the driver there
were 10 on the wagonette besides a good deal
of luggage, and on the unmade roads it was a
good performance for those days. In contrast
to the 11-hour journey people now think nothing
of having their breakfast in Perth, going by car


to York, Northam or Toodyay, and returning for
luncheon.
Long journeys in those days meant great hard-
ship and considerable loss of time, for the old
bush roads wound round the hills and through
the forests, over logs and stones; and the travel-
lers did well to cover five, or even four miles per
hour. They sat under the rays of a scorching
sun in summer, or in pelting rain in winter, and
had to camp at night. Under the best conditions
that could be devised, very few of the old pio-
neers escaped these trying journeys to transact
their business in Perth or Fremantle. Thousands
of people travel over the same roads to-day for
pleasure, perhaps without one thought of the pio-
neers who blazed the tracks one hundred years
ago.
I knew many of the settlers that pioneered
these roads. To-day we find that many West
Australians writing of old times are more inter-
ested in the settlers around Perth and Fremantle.
This was because they have always lived in the
towns themselves and have not known or seen
what the settlers in the country had to go
through. In those days, as at present, it was the
country people that kept the towns alive.
I have had the pleasure of transacting business
with many of the grand old pioneers before they
went to their last resting place, and since then I
have done business with some of their descend-
ants in and around Northam. Some of the finest
men and women who came to the colony


pioneered Northam, and left their sons and
daughters to carry on the work they began,
which they have done capably and well.
Northam is a very pretty little place, with its
two rivers joining in the centre of the town. In
1884 there were only 44 homes in the township.
The hills on the east and west sides of the town,
and some rises between, provide many beautiful
building sites, of which full advantage has been
taken, making Northam the most attractive in-
land town in the State.
Before leaving Northam, I feel I should men-
tion the late Mr. Fred Morrell, who was one of
the earliest settlers in the colony, and who did
much for its advancement. Mr. Morrell was
everybody’s doctor, and a real friend of those in
need. He kept a store in Northam, and would
get out of his bed at any time of the night to
serve anyone with medicine. Although he was
never taught music, he played and led the singing
in the Anglican Church for over 40 years, and
frequently walked a distance of miles to the
church to practise hymns and chants for the ser-
vice. He was over 70 years of age when he gave
up this work. Up to the ’eighties Mr. Morrell
often took the services himself, in the absence of
a minister.
I believe the time has now come when the
names of the earliest settlers should be placed on
record. Certainly they have a greater right to
be remembered than those who came to these
shores for a few days and then sailed away, never


to return. Among the first settlers in Northam
were the following;— Messrs. W. Chidlow, John
T. Smith (grandfather of Dr. Eric Smith), J.
Lockyer, John Gregory, Charles Taylor, George
Taylor, William Morgan, Charles Wilkinson,
John Hancock, W. Forward, John Farmer, Sea-
brook, N. Cook, John Martin, H. York, Jessop,
Moses Beard, Fred Morrell, D. Morrell, Brock-
man, Christmas, J. Giblett, James Connell, Cot-
ton, Mears, James Byfield, John Byfield, George
Throssell, John Bonser, H. Feeder, John Lloyd,
James Mitchell, A. Madden, John Sermon, and
the Hammond brothers.
Northam was a busy little town when the gold
rush broke out, and at the first intimation that a
railway was to be built to the goldfields it awoke
to the realisation of its own importance. It has
since taken its place among the leading inland
centres of the State.
TOODYAY IN THE ’SEVENTIES AND ’EIGHTIES
My first visit to Toodyay was in the ’seven-
ties, when my stay was only a short one. A
number of my own people were living there then,
and I quickly became acquainted with many of
the other residents, some of whom were as fol-
lows: —Messrs. D. B. and James Clarkson, Davy,
Dan O’Connor, James Hazel, James Tevine,
Donegan, C. Morgan, W. Feeder, Sinclair, C.
Marris, John Hardie, Ruth, Bull, Stephens,
Cousins, S. Viveash, C. Wilkinson, S. Douse, M.
Lawlers, Penny and Purcell. There were, of


course, many other settlers whom I did not meet.
All of them were on the land, much of which
was taken up by their parents when sandalwood
was plentiful.
The Toodyay district in those days was a most
picturesque part of the colony, especially along
the hanks of the Avon River, which runs
through the township. The very fine pools of
fresh water in the river in the summer time
made the whole district very suitable for raising
stock of all kinds. For miles around the little
town there are beautiful grassy hills, and from
the tops of them can be seen large stretches of
good country suitable for mixed farming—in fact
this land is some of the best of its type in the
State.
The pioneers of Toodyay were among the first
to fence their land with what is known as the
“bush fence.” This was constructed by driving
pairs of jam timber posts about 15 inches into
the ground, with a space of about 12 inches be-
tween the posts and about six feet between each
pair. The spaces between the posts were then
filled with sticks and brush, and the pairs of posts
were tied at the top to keep the material in place.
There was a tremendous amount of labour in
building these fences, but the material cost
nothing, and some thrifty farmers, when getting
the sticks and brush for the fence, used to take
them out by the roots, thus helping to clear the
land at the same time.
This class of fence served its purpose for some


years and was proof against anything but bush-
fires, which caused a good deal of trouble in those
days. Later a better type of fence, known as the
“Harper” fence, came into use. The posts were
used in much the same way as for the “bush”
fence, but they were heavier and went deeper
into the ground. They had a space of about six
inches between them, and this was filled with
round bush timber to a height of about two and
a half or three feet, with a top rail about 12
inches above that. This was a good solid fence,
and was less likely to be destroyed by fire. Some
of these fences, now over 70 years old, are to be
seen in Toodyay, Beverley and Greenhills.
The road between Guildford and the Tood-
yay district was very bad, and anyone who has
travelled that old cart road knows what it meant
to take a two or three ton load over such coun-
try. Many hundreds of loads of sandalwood
came from Toodyay over that road in the ’sixties
and ’seventies. If a load of goods was bogged
in bad weather it stayed bogged until assistance
came, for the goods, unloaded, might have been
destroyed by the rain.
Sometimes three or four neighbours would
arrange to go to Perth together so that, in case
of trouble, they could assist each other out of
bogs or up steep hills. This neighbourly spirit
was not, of course, confined to Toodyay; and the
people of Northam, York and Beverley had to
combine in the same way to traverse the bad
roads through the hills. Horses were often lent


to those who had not enough of their own for a
long journey. The settlement at New Norcia
had the largest number of animals, and these
were always available for farmers who needed
them. Sometimes it would take a whole day to
go for the horses or bullocks they borrowed, and
another day to return them afterwards.
Many of the descendants of the old Toodyay
pioneers are still living in the district. It is inter-
esting to talk with them about the old days and
about what their parents did before them.
MANDURAH IN THE ’SIXTIES
While I was living at Pinjarra in the early ’six-
ties I saw and heard a good deal of Mandurah,
of which I will try to give some description.
Mandurah is on a very large inlet, about 32
miles long and lying about north and south. The
average width is about six miles, and generally
speaking the water is very shallow, but good-sized
yachts can be sailed over a large part of the estu-
ary. The outlet into the sea is a river about four
miles in length. AH round the shores of the estu-
ary are little bays. At low tide, some of these
consist merely of beaches up to a quarter of a mile
wide, with very shallow water for quite a long
distance out into the estuary.
In the early days, then, the estuary provided
an enormous feeding ground for wild game.
Ducks of all kinds, swans, pelicans, shags, gulls
and snipe were to be seen in countless numbers,
and I have seen them on the wing, in a mob so


dense that they made a shadow like a cloud pass-
ing overhead. It was the same with fish; from
porpoises down to the smallest varieties, all kinds
of fish swarmed in the estuary. It is not easy to
give an idea of the enormous numbers of fish
around Mandurah in the early days, because most
people would be inclined to doubt what is
nothing but the truth. However, sea mullet and
pilchard could be seen in the estuary and in the
Murray and Serpentine Rivers in masses. Both
these rivers emptied into the estuary, and all the
tributaries, brooks and creeks from the Serpen-
tine to the Harvey River found their way into
the southern estuary, providing good drinking
water for wild birds.
Mandurah itself had not many attractions,
although there were some very pretty places
nearby, along the Serpentine and the Murray.
The bush round about contained an interesting
variety of timber, including jarrah, red, blue and
white gums, tuart, banksia, sheoak, wattle, ti-tree,
paper-bark, cabbage (or Christmas) tree, pear
tree, cork-bark tree and many smaller kinds, in-
cluding the spear-wood that was used by the
natives for spears and other weapons and tools.
Zamia palms could be seen in the Mandurah dis-
trict with butts up to nine feet in height and
three feet in diameter, and leaves seven or eight
feet in length.
The palms grew thickly all through a large belt
of country and provided a good deal of food for
the natives, as I have described in my previous


The Complete G.P.O. Staff, 1863,


Miss Daisy Locke (later Mrs. Shillington) Champion Rider of the South-West.
Won Gold Medal for Horsemanship against Professionals.


book, “Winjan’s People.” Within a radius of
12 miles from Mandurah there was a larger
variety of wildflowers than I have seen in any
part of Western Australia.
The pioneers of Mandurah included Messrs.
Thomas Peel, C. Tuckey, James Cooper, Tom
Cooper, Moffatt, Halliday and Sutton.
In the middle ’sixties a boat foundered a few
miles out to sea while passing Mandurah on a
trip from Bunbury to Fremantle. On board was
the father of the late Sir George Shenton, and
seven others. All but two of these, Paddy
Skillen and a man named Stinton, were drowned.
Both could swim, but Skillen was much the better
of the two, and assisted Stinton for a long time.
Stinton then showed signs of exhaustion and held
tightly to Skillen, who threw him off and made
for the shore. He climbed a sandhill and, on
looking out to sea, saw Stinton still struggling
towards the shore. No others were in sight, and
Skillen went out again and brought the other man
in to the shore.
COOPER’S MILL AT MANDURAH
In the year 1837 the late Mr. Joseph Cooper
and his father walked from Fremantle to Man-
durah, taking their pack on the back of a cow.
They had arrived in the colony in the ship
“Warrior,” in 1830, and spent the first seven
years in Fremantle and the following 10 years
in Mandurah. About 1847 Mr. Cooper, snr.,
built the flour mill that can still be seen on the


shore of the estuary at Mandurah, but unfortu-
nately he never saw the mill working, for he was
killed by a runaway bullock team at Clarence just
as the work was completed.
Cooper’s two sons carried on the work of the
mill, but they found that it had been built before
its time as a paying concern, for the wheat grown
at Pinjarra and Mandurah was only sufficient to
keep it working for short periods. It was many
years before enough wheat was grown in the dis-
trict to keep the settlers supplied with flour for
bread. In my own recollection of Pinjarra in
the early ’sixties there was only one man who
had as much as 12 acres of wheat crop to harvest,
and that was Mr. Joseph Cooper, jnr. Some of
the settlers only had half that area; others had
none at all, and by the time seed wheat and grain
for other purposes was put aside from what was
grown there was usually very little left to go to
the mill. I have known as little as one bag of
wheat to go to the mill to be ground.
Many conflicting statements have been made
regarding the origin of the mill at Mandurah.
Some say that it was built by Robert Peel, and
others say that the convicts built it. Actually it
was erected many years before any convicts came
to the colony. The Beecham family, the oldest
residents of Mandurah, were living only two
miles away when the mill was built, and they
can give the true history of it. Some of their
descendants are still living there.
In the early days the settlers of Pinjarra had


to go to Mandurah to cross the river on their way
to Fremantle, and the mill stood where the road
crossed the Murray. This was before a bridge
was built across the river. There was another
crossing about 2\ miles above Pinjarra, near the
spot where the famous “Battle of Pinjarra” took
place between the natives and the whites. This
crossing was used by settlers going from Pinjarra
to Perth.
Joseph Cooper, snr., was a wheelwright, and
had a workshop at Redcliffe, near Pinjarra. In
my own recollection of Pinjarra in the early ’six-
ties his son, Joseph, conducted that business.
Mr. Cooper, senr., left other things to mark his
memory besides the flour mill. In 1838 he
planted two grape-vines at Redcliffe, and these
vines, now nearly 98 years old, are still alive and
bearing good fruit. In the ’sixties Mrs. Cooper
gave me some grapes from those vines. Miss M.
A. Cooper, who is still living and can remember
70 years back, tells me that the vines never had a
spade near them and were never watered except
by the winter rains. I think these must have
been the first vines to bear fruit in the colony.
I can also remember a vine, quite three inches
through the trunk, which grew at the back of
Shenton’s printing office in St. George’s Terrace.
It was planted in the ’sixties, and had a brick
floor around it for a good many feet, so that no
cultivation was done for many years. It grew to
be the largest vine I have seen in the State.


EARLY MEMORIES OF GUILDFORD
In my early youth I had a number of relatives
in Guildford, and I often went to stay at their
homes, so that I saw a good deal of Guildford
and its people in the ’sixties and ’seventies. When
the late Mr. W. Padbury was having a large store
built about 1869, two of my brothers were work-
ing on the building, and I stayed with them for
two months. Guildford was then a very small
place, and it did not take long to go over it and
get to know the people. Much of the business
done there was with travellers going to and from
the eastern districts, though in those days very
little was actually produced in Guildford except
grapes and some citrus fruit, most of which was
grown along the banks of the river between
Guildford and the Upper Swan bridge; but every-
body grew enough fruit and vegetables for their
own use.
The population was very small—l think less
than 100, not counting children. There were
three hotels in the town, one kept by the late Mr.
Mallie Meares, one by the late Mr. Wheatley,
and the third, I think, by a Mr. Jakes.
Here something can be said about the class of
building in Guildford in those days, both homes
and business premises. Good materials were
used, except in a few of the homes erected in the
very early days. The bricks were made, and
timber grew close at hand, and was cut for build-
ing purposes, probably with a saw-pit. The
quality of the jarrah used is shown by the fact


that all the columns, beams and girders erected
in Mr. Padbury’s building in 1869 and 1870 are
still in good condition, and perhaps have to resist
more strain now than they did when they were
first put up. A few months ago I noticed several
cottages covered with the old-fashioned sheoak
shingles. The late Mr. Oliver Jones told me that
the shingles had been on those roofs for 60 years
to his knowledge.
Guildford was always a pretty place, right
from the early times, and its beauty has been
very much increased by the good buildings and
the ornamental trees that have been planted, and
by the fruit trees studded through the town.
With the Helena River on one side and the Swan
River on the other, and the Darling Ranges in
the background, I think Guildford takes first
place for beauty among all the suburban towns.
The following are some of the pioneers of
Guildford; —Messrs. Jonathan Jones, William
Jones, de Burgh, Carson, Sainsbury, Mallie
Meares, Robins, Wheatley, George Wans-
brough, I. Woods, T. C. Gull, John Allpike,
Thomas Jecks, C. C. Fauntleroy (who was secre-
tary of the Guildford Agricultural Society from
1869 to 1883), and Dr. A. R. Waylen.
BUNBURY IN THE ’SEVENTIES
I first saw Bunbury in the early ’seventies,
when it was a very small town. I arrived there
just at sundown, and stayed the night at a hotel
kept by a Mr. Delaport, whose greeting to me at


the door was, “Well, nipper, what do you want
here?” I told him I wanted to stay for the night,
and he had my horse taken to the stable, showed
me to my room and was very attentive to me.
I did not venture out that night to see the
town, for it was very dark and only a few dim
lights were to be seen. I got up early in the
morning and went down to the little jetty, where
there were three or four small boats. Two of
them were schooners and another had only one
mast, so I supposed it was a cutter.
Bunbury certainly did not look like a town in
those days. There were a few buildings near the
hotel, several of which were stores, and the
houses were very scattered. Only cart roads led
up to the houses.
On my way to Bunbury I was very interested
with the Australind road, a smooth limestone
road about a chain from the shore of the estuary
and extending about seven miles from Bunbury.
There was a good view of the estuary, and I could
see quite a number of natives out in the water
spearing fish. I walked my horse the full length
of the road because I saw so much that interested
me. There was plenty of wild game except
where the natives were gathered together. On
the other side of the road there were some splen-
did trees, where thousands of crickets could be
heard, though I did not see any.
Bunbury in those days, in its natural state, was
one of the prettiest towns I have seen. As I
have never had to stay there more than a day,


I have never made the acquaintance of many of
the settlers. At the same time I knew some of
the old pioneers, including Drs. Sampson and
Lovegrove, and Messrs. Teed, Blythe, Spencer,
Flaherty, Carey, Read, Delaport, Mitchell,
North, Forrest, Moore and Haywood. When I
was a boy at Pinjarra in the ’sixties I met many
of these people travelling from Bunbury to Perth.
In those days Bunbury had only one member
of Parliament —Mr. Carey, I think —but since
then the town has produced three men who lived
to be premiers of the State, and the present
Lieut.-Governor (Sir James Mitchell) was born
there.
THE BIRTH OF DENMARK
Denmark in 1873 was without a settler, so far
as I know, and I passed through it on two occa-
sions that year. The country was heavily tim-
bered with many kinds of trees, especially karri.
This grew mainly on the north-west side of
Wilson’s Inlet, where some of the largest karri
in the State have grown. The jarrah forests
near Denmark were not as good as they were
further north.
Where Denmark stands to-day the bush was
studded with very large karri trees. The Millars’
Timber and Trading Company erected their mill
on that site, cut out all the marketable timber
first, then cleared the site of all other timber and
built about 40 workmen’s cottages. These formed
a little township, which has been absorbed into


the Denmark of to-day. They were soon occu-
pied by families and the necessity for a church
and a school soon arose.
The machinery for the Denmark sawmills was
taken there before the railway was built. It was
hauled from Albany to Young’s Siding on the
south end of Wilson’s Inlet, loaded on to large
flat-bottomed boats built for the purpose and
transported across the inlet and about two miles
up the Denmark River. When the machinery,
which included two large boilers, was unloaded
from the boats it had to be taken about 200 yards
up a steep rise, where it was erected. The mills
worked for about 18 or 20 years before closing
down, and some of the remains of the machinery
are to be seen about the town to-day.
Some of the workmen took up land and
settled permanently in the district. A Mr.
Randell, who drained a lake by cutting a drain a
quarter of a mile long and 16 feet deep in the
centre, made one of the largest and finest potato
plantations in the State. The work of excavating
the drain was all done by hand, and the sand was
carted away in wheelbarrows. This plantation
and drain, which is near the camping ground at
the bar of Wilson’s Inlet, is well worthy of in-
spection. Mr. and Mrs. Randell still live there
with some of their large family.
All through the period when the mills were
working, and for some years afterwards, Den-
mark was without a hotel. Travellers did not
care to visit the district as there was no accommo-


dation, and the town was slow in developing
because it missed the publicity and money that
follows tourists and business people. Tourists
and travellers are now finding their way there,
however, for the climate and natural scenery are
unsurpassed in the State.
ALBANY IN THE EARLY ’SEVENTIES
When I first saw Albany in the early ’seventies
there were only a few small stone houses scat-
tered about the town, most of them along the
shore of Princess Royal Harbour, as it was called
in those days. Several of these houses are to be
seen to-day. My stay at Albany on that occasion
was very short —only one and a half days —so
that I did not have an opportunity to become
acquainted with the settlers. The first big mail
boat I ever saw was at Albany.
I was there long enough to see that the people
were very proud of their little town, and not
without cause. Then in almost its natural state,
Albany was a very attractive place, with its
pretty little harbour and entrance, and the
splendid mountain views on all sides.
The productive land in the Albany district was
not made use of in the pioneering days because
there was no market for anything except what
could be taken away by the few ships that called,
or the whaling boats that sometimes found their
way into the harbour. Since the building of the
Great Southern railway, however, the district has
become quite an important centre, producing


fruits of all kinds, vegetables, butter, livestock,
wool and wheat. In addition Albany is now one
of the most popular health resorts in the State.
BROOKTON AND BEVERLEY IN THE ’EIGHTIES
Chiefly because it was further away from the
agricultural markets than most of the other
country centres, Beverley made little headway
until quite late in the ’eighties. Before the land
was cleared the country seemed too wet and cold
to grow wheat at a profit, but as farming meth-
ods improved the district went ahead, and Bev-
erley now ranks among the best agricultural
centres in the State.
Among the problems that the early settlers
had to solve were bush poisons and dingoes, both
of which were very bad for many years. Shep-
herds had to be employed to watch the stock
and a great deal of money was spent in efforts to
eradicate the poison.
The farmer is living on the land which has to
support him and he will always gain the experi-
ence he needs at the point of the sword as the
old pioneers did. If people could take up land
to-day with as few restrictions as the pioneer
farmers had, their lot would be easier, for I am
afraid the government has helped more farmers
into trouble than out of it. It is no wonder to me
that farmers have to ask for government assist-
ance in the face of the restrictions under which
they have to work their farms.
The town of Beverley is a pretty little place


with good buildings and the district supports
some of the best sheep farms in the State. lam
not acquainted with many of the old settlers but
would like to mention the few that I do know.
They were the Hamersley family, Mr. H. Whit-
tington, Mr. Smith (inventor of the “stump-
jump” plough), Mr. Messingham, Mr. A.
Strange, Mr. J. Rodgers and Mr. Brown.
I first went to Brookton to erect a building for
Mr. John Whittington, a farmer of East Brook-
ton, and while there I was given the work of put-
ing up two other buildings in the district. It
took me about nine months to complete the three
and I had a good opportunity to examine the
district and to meet the people living there.
Many years later I went there again, to assist my
two sons, J. C. and C. W. Hammond, in estab-
lishing a sheep farm. This was in West Brook-
ton, and there I built a stone house and a
barn. I was then able to renew some of my
acquaintances, who included Messrs. Crawford,
Shepherd, John, James and Sam Whittington,
Mcßride, Cummings, J. J. Thompson, Montgom-
ery, King, and many others.
Quite a large number of good sheep are bred
in Brookton. The town itself is not attractive,
but there are some beauty spots nearby. The
land, on the whole, is good and a large amount
of produce leaves the district every year.
THE PINGELLY DISTRICT
As far as production is concerned, the Pingelly


district is very similar to the country around
Brookton. The town itself is a pretty place and
contains some good buildings, nearly all of them
being stone or brick. A few of the stone build-
ings that were erected in the early days are still
to be seen, as in the York, Beverley and Tood-
yay districts. Although I have been to Pingelly
many times, I have never had any business to do
with the residents, and I am not able to mention
any of the old settlers’ names.
Not much of historical interest can be said of
the country lying between Pingelly and Albany,
for that part of the colony was not extensively
developed before the Great Southern Railway
was built —though many of the pioneers’ descend-
ants made their homes along the railway line.
The majority of those who took up land in the
districts that were later traversed by the railway
were from the Eastern States or from overseas.
Among them was Lord Brassey, who imported a
large tractor to break up the land near Torbay.
After working for a few days the tractor was
bogged and had to be abandoned, and its remains
can be seen near Torbay to-day.
Before the great Southern Railway was built
there was no direct route to Albany. The old
coach road was used, and this branched off the
Perth-Bunbury road at Narrogin (now at Arma-
dale) and went through Williams, the Arthur
River, Kojonup, Mt. Barker and Torbay, to
Albany. This road was very rough and heavy
until some of the convicts were employed to re-


condition it. They started on the stretch of
sandy track through Victoria Park to the Can-
ning. The convicts worked in small gangs, im-
proving the heaviest and roughest parts first.
This made the work of the coach horses much
lighter and gave more comfort to the passengers
who travelled in the mail coach.
If my memory serves me rightly there were
about 40 horses used in carrying the mail between
Albany and Perth, and they took about five days
to do the journey one way. Nevertheless this
was good travelling considering the length of the
journey and the condition of the roads.
Horse feed was also a great problem in the old
coaching days, for it was before the time of the
chaffcutter —which meant that the horses had
to be fed on loose hay —while very little corn or
bran was available. This, of course, took up more
time, and the horses did not do so well on the
long feed. Even the handworked chaffcutter,
when it did arrive, was not very satisfactory, for
it cut the chaff about an inch long and this was
even harder to eat than the long hay. When
it was mixed with corn and bran, however, the
horses did better and this kind of feed was not so
bulky to carry.
There were many stretches of picturesque
country between Perth and Albany, where forest
timber, wildflowers and some fine running
streams could be seen. Much of that country is,
however, of a poor class, and this no doubt
accounts for some of the large gaps between


settled areas, for the old pioneers had plenty of
good areas to choose from and did not attempt
agricultural work on land that was obviously
unsuitable. At the same time that part of the
colony contained some of the best type of
country, where many of the old settlers made
their homes.
WOMEN IN PIONEERING WORK
I feel that among the good deeds done by the
women of this colony since the ’sixties mention
should be made of my dear wife, to whose mem-
ory this book is dedicated. We were married on
September 7, 1879, and shared each other’s com-
panionship for 552 years. She died on January 3,
1935, when our eldest child was 54 years of age
and our youngest 35. Mrs. Hammond reared
four daughters and two sons and had 21 grand-
children and three great-grandchildren.
Her early experiences as a mother were sad.
We lost the first, third and fifth children. The
first one Mrs. Hammond carried about on a
pillow for six months, day and night, never com-
plaining, and fighting the battle for its life as only
a mother can do. When the second baby was
lost Mrs. Hammond and another of the children
were both ill with measles. She was unable to
see either of them, and had only been out of bed
two days when the baby boy passed away. Five
years later we lost another child.
When our youngest child was only two years
old Mrs. Hammond used to set out at any time


of the day or night, in a sulky driven over cart
roads through the bush, to go to the assistance
of the sick. The nature of the case or the colour
of the patient made no difference to her —black
or white, maternity cases, broken limbs, wounds
or organic troubles—she would just snatch up her
bag and go off to do her bit. Children were her
special interest.
In many homes she found conditions very bad,
and it was this lack of necessities and her conse-
quent efforts that led to the endowment of the
first child’s cot at the Northam Hospital.
She was very interested, too, in the education
of children, and managed to arrange schooling for
many. Sometimes there were children in their
’teens who had never had any schooling before.
Mrs. Hammond never allowed a hungry man to
pass her door if she were aware of his need. She
used to say that for every loaf of bread that was
given to those in need, two were sent back to
you.
On many occasions she advised me well on
business matters. She was a true wife, a loving
mother, and a good friend to the sick, to those in
need, and to all children. Her work for the good
of humanity was her religion to the end.
In the ’seventies the German captain of a ship
that used to call at Fremantle for many years, had
a stroke. He recovered temporarily, and was
appointed lighthouse-keeper at Rottnest. He sent
to Germany for his wife and his daughter, Erna,
but shortly afterwards died of consumption.


About nine months later his wife died of the
same illness, and Erna, who was then about seven
years old, was left to the care of my wife, who
adopted her.
She looked after the girl for 10 years or so, and
then lost her to the disease that had carried off
both the parents. Our first daughter born after
that was named Erna. She is now Mrs. Whit-
tington.
TWO WOMEN’S ORGANISATIONS
The first women’s organisation in the colony
was started by the wife of the late Canon Allen
in 1884. She was a sister of the late Mr. F. P.
Barlee, the Colonial Secretary.
The following were some of the Charter mem-
bers: Mrs. Allen, president; Mrs. Hensman, vice-
president; Mrs. R. A. Sholl, treasurer; Mrs.
Allen, secretary; Mesdames Atkinson (of Messrs.
Atkinson and Law, railway contractors), J. E.
Hammond (my wife), Rudd, Day and Misses
Vincent and White. The meetings were held
at the Allen’s home in Aberdeen Street.
I believe the Women’s Christian Temperance
Union was the second women’s organisation, but
I am unable to give much information about its
foundation, as I was then in the back country for
some time and out of touch with the city. How-
ever, I was present at the W.C.T.U. tea on
Mothers’ Day recently and there I recognised
many women I had known as girls in my youth.
I was keenly interested to hear from the speakers


The Supreme Court and Waterside Lock-up, 1861. Barrack Street in course of construction.


Pipe Organ built by Cecil Clifton, 1875 —a West Australian
born boy under 25 years of age.
See Page 182


of the great amount of good work done by the
Union during the last 33 or 40 years.
WOMEN IN PUBLIC LIFE
Having spoken of the pioneering work done by
women as home-builders, I must say a little about
their work in public life. It can safely be said
that the late Mrs. Thomas Farmer was the first
to interest herself in temperance work. In the
early ’seventies she worked very hard to get men
and women to join the Good Templars, and she
attended all the meetings and did all she could to
make them a success. In this way she provided
social gatherings for Perth residents for some
years, not only for adults, but also for children.
The whole of the Farmer family were temper-
ance workers.
A Band of Hope was organised for boys and
girls and Mrs. Farmer superintended the meet-
ings, which were held in the old Wesley Hall in
William Street. The membership roll grew quite
large under her administration.
When Matthew Burnett and his wife, who
were great evangelists, came to this State late in
the ’seventies, they started their “Blue Ribbon”
crusade, which was also a temperance movement.
Mrs. Farmer’s large body of Good Templars and
Band of Hope children were able to give the
evangelists a good reception. Matthew Burnett
was a good singer and he led the singing of pop-
ular hymns at his meetings, which were always
crowded. There were no admission tickets—


only a silver coin collection at the door or a plate
handed round inside. This always met the
financial demands of such meetings in those days.
MRS. COWAN
Mrs. Cowan, whose fame has spread far be-
yond the shores of this country, was another
whom I knew as quite a young girl. She was a
woman among women, and has left a gap among
workers for humanity that can never be filled*
She was a member of many women’s organisa-
tions, a member of Parliament, and a Charter
member of the W.A. Historical Society. She
was a friend of fallen women and girls and was
very interested in child welfare. Her death was a
loss not only to Perth but to the whole State.


PART THREE




MEMORIES AT RANDOM
MY EXPERIENCE OF PROSPECTING
Like many of the other “old-timers,” I have
had a hand in prospecting, though my own
experience was not a profitable one. Represent-
ing a syndicate in Kelmscott, I joined in the rush
to Bullfinch in 1910, arriving in Bullfinch on the
eighteenth day of the rush.
I left Perth by train in an eight-passenger com-
partment into which 13 people —each of them
accompanied by a good deal of luggage —had
crowded. We had to take it in turns to sit down
and nobody got a wink of sleep all night. We
arrived at Southern Cross feeling like smoked
herrings, for the compartment had been in a
cloud of cigarette smoke all the time.
I was held up in Southern Cross for a whole
day trying to get my luggage from the railway
station, and trying to get a seat in some kind of
conveyance that would take me to Bullfinch.
Eventually I went in a four-wheeler, paying 50s.
for the 20-mile ride.
On the road out hundreds and hundreds of
people were making their way to the field, in all
kinds of conveyances; on horses, camels, donkeys;
on foot or on cycles; some pushing wheelbarrows


loaded with tools and food. There was a con-
tinual rush of people, all going as fast as they
could. Three or four roads had been made by
the heavy traffic, and each of them was fully
occupied for the whole distance; every person
was trying to pass the next one, and the dust
thrown up by the heavy traffic was like the smoke
of a bush fire.
When I arrived at Bullfinch, people were rush-
ing about like ants. I camped there that night,
and found out that all the country between Bull-
finch and Southern Cross, and many miles on
both sides of Bullfinch had been pegged out. I
decided on the direction I would take from Bull-
finch, and turned in to get a good sleep, for I
had not slept on the train. I rose long before
sunrise the next morning, had breakfast and
started off in a north-westerly direction, with one
gallon of water, a miner’s pick, a hammer, a small
tin dish, a shovel, a compass, a magnifying glass,
and one week’s food.
I travelled for some miles through country that
was alive with men digging holes and breaking
stones, until I thought I would never get clear
of prospectors. I kept on, however, till I got clear
of everybody —as I thought —by two or three
miles, and then began to take notice of the type of
country I was in. Then I saw a man upon a
small hill. As I passed him, he called out, “What
are you doing here, Dad?”
“Just trying my luck,” I replied.
“Have you got a miner’s right?” he asked.


I told him that I had. Just then his mates
came up. They were miners from Kalgoorlie,
and told me that the only bit of land worth peg-
ging out was that adjoining their block. They
thought it was better than some of their own. I
decided to peg out the block, and some of these
men came and helped me. “If you find any col-
our,” they said, “bring it along to our camp to-
night, and we will dolly it for you.”
I went on mapping stone until I found what I
thought were indications of gold. I took some
stone over to the camp, and when the men dollied
it they got some good colour. “Go for your life,”
they said, “it looks good.” Two days later I took
some more stone to them, and they treated it and
said it was better than the first lot. The gold
could be seen with the naked eye. Next morning
my friends came over to see where I had got the
stone from.
When my food supply ran out I had to go back
to Bullfinch for more, so on my seventh day of
prospecting I started off. After travelling through
the bush for some miles I came out on the road,
and was soon overtaken by a man on horseback.
“Have you pegged out?” he asked.
“Yes,” I replied, “and I’ve got some colour.”
“I’ll give you £3OO for your claim,” he said at
once.
“No,” I said, “I won’t take that.”
“What will you take?”
I replied that I would let him know at Bull-
finch in three days. I had made up my mind to


go to Southern Cross and wire to my syndicate
for advice. It took me a day to go to Southern
Cross, again at a cost of 50/- for the 20 miles,
and when I got there I found a solid mass of
people, about two chains deep, about the tele-
graph office, waiting to send and receive wires. I
waited from 4 o’clock that afternoon until lunch
time the following day, and might have had to
wait much longer, had I not happened to see Mr.
Hardman, the deputy postmaster, whom I had
known since boyhood, going out for his lunch.
I overtook him and we had lunch together, and
after lunch he took me into the telegraph office
by a side entrance and I was able to get my wire
away, telling my syndicate of the offer and asking
their advice. The following day I received their
reply: “Everything in your hands; use your own
discretion.”
I went back to Bullfinch and there told several
people that I was going to sell my claim. I was
advised not to accept the offer, and it certainly
looked as if something better would come along,
so I decided to go to Perth to talk the matter over
with my partners. I did this, and after a line of
action had been decided upon I returned to Bull-
finch after having been away for six days. Dur-
ing those six days a store had been built of bush
timber and iron, and building blocks were being
sold at £IOO to £4OO each. I believe that two
blocks for a hotel and a bank were sold at £I,OOO
and £1,400 respectively.
I spent two or three days looking for my buyer


but heard that he had gone to Perth, so I went
out to the claim again. I did not make any fur-
ther discoveries, nor did I see any more of the
young men who had treated my stone. I missed
them very much, for they had helped me with
the water supply. I had only taken one gallon
of water with me, as I drank little water then.
I spent another week on the claim and found
nothing better than the first colour. At last two
men came up and asked me whether I had found
anything.
“Nothing very big,” I said.
“No,” they said, “you won’t either. There
has not been half an ounce of gold found with-
in 13 miles of the Bullfinch, and there won’t be
any, except in the shaft. What is more, there
is not a man left on the ground who would buy
£5 worth of gold—they have all gone and left
the ground and nothing will bring them back
again.”
I thought at the time that they were trying
to make me abandon my claim, but a few days
later I found the words only too true. Buyers
had gone, and hundreds of others were leaving
their tools and walking away, their horses too
weak to carry them or pull carts. Some had
smashed their carts, sulkies and cars in the bush,
and I suppose the vehicles are lying there today.
Some very large sums of money had been paid
for claims between Bullfinch and Greenfinch. I
heard of a carpenter who left his work at 12
o’clock one day, went and pegged out 18 acres


between Bullfinch and Greenfinch, and sold the
claim for £IO,OOO the next day. It was this sort
of thing that caused the rush, more than the re-
port of the very rich lode that had been struck
in the sinking of the Bullfinch shaft. My would-
be buyer was a lucky man because I did not accept
his £3OO for my claim, and I was very unlucky
that I did not accept his offer, but at the time
there was such a lot of talk about holding out for
bigger prices that it made me feel like running
with the crowd. My syndicate lost some money,
but not more than £2O each.
I did get something for my money, however,
I had a new experience and I saw more new
country. I saw some land that I wanted to take
up for farming under certain conditions, but the
then Minister for Agriculture (now the Lieu-
tenant-Governor, Sir James Mitchell) thought I
was wrong and would not agree to my proposals.
A LINK WITH WATERLOO
Slightly to the left of the main drive in the Fre-
mantle Cemetery and probably a chain away
from the entrance, is a tombstone marking the
last resting place of one who was Western Aus-
tralia’s link with Wellington’s famous victory
over Napoleon in 1813, at Waterloo. The in-
scription reads as follows:
“Sacred to the memory of William Adams,
one of the heroes of Waterloo, who died on
December 12, 1867, aged 75.”


It is the general belief that the central char-
acter in Snazelle’s witty satirical poem, “How
Bill Adams won the Battle of Waterloo,” was
merely a creation of the author’s imagination, and
never had a real existence. That belief is errone-
ous: the man whose mortal remains are in Fre-
mantle Cemetery was Snazelle’s Bill Adams.
That was established about twenty years ago,
when G. H. Snazelle came to Fremantle, had a
photograph taken of the gravestone —then in its
original position in the former graveyard at Alma
Street —and told in a contemporaneous magazine
the story of how he came to write his famous
poem.
As a child he had listened avidly to tales of the
Waterloo campaign told to him by Bill Adams,
who had a vivid imagination and who, it may be
believed, was more concerned that his story
should be romantic than it should be strictly vera-
cious. When he had grown up and was making
his mark in literature, the tales told him in his
infancy by Bill Adams remained with him and
found expression in the delightful form which
has entertained a generation of readers.
Beyond that Bill Adams arrived in the colony
in 1830 in the emigrant ship “Rockingham,” with
his wife and two children (a girl aged two, and a
girl aged six months), little is known of the life
of Adams in Western Australia. As one of the
Peel settlers, a grant of an area of land on the
Murray River was allotted to him, but he never
took it up. Ten more children, two boys and


eight girls, were born to them in Western Aus-
tralia, and members of the fourth generation of
Adams are residing in Fremantle to-day.
The genuineness of his claim to be a Waterloo
veteran was supported by the fact that he was
wounded in the head at that historic battle, and
thereafter wore throughout his life a silver plate
in his head. At his death he was buried in the
old Alma Street cemetery, but his wife (who was
the first midwife in the colony) survived him by
some years and was buried in the Skinner Street
cemetery, which has recently been closed.
About 1916, the Alma Street cemetery was
closed, and the remains of those buried there
were transferred to the present general cemetery.
The silver plate was then found to be intact, and
though a wish was expressed in medical circles
that it should be removed, the deceased man’s
relatives would not agree, and it was re-interred
with the remains. At the same time his wife’s
remains were removed from Skinner Street and
re-interred with those of her husband.
Bill Adams and his family came to the colony
with my mother and grandparents, William and
Hannah Feeder, in 1830. Four of his children
were born at Monger’s Lake (now Leederville)
and were the first children to be born at the lake.
I did not know Bill Adams very well. He died
while I was at Pinjarra in the ’sixties; but I knew
his wife, a grand woman, who may be called the
“mother of Fremantle.” The years in which
Mrs. Adams attended maternity cases, both in


Fremantle and Perth, saw more new arrivals by
hundreds than any previous period of the same
duration. Many times Mrs. Adams walked to
Perth from Fremantle when there was no con-
veyance available. The distance or the time of
day or night meant nothing to Mrs. Adams. If
she was required for a maternity case she went to
the case and nothing would prevent her. It has
been stated many times that she never lost a case,
although she attended hundreds without the
assistance of a doctor. The Adams family did
its share of pioneering work, and the name will
never be forgotten in Fremantle.
THE CAUSEWAY AND SOME EARLY HOMES
Late in the year 1862, after the first temporary
crossing had been washed away —and with it two
men and horses —the Perth causeway was begun
by Solomon Cook, a blacksmith and wheelwright.
His main staff of workmen consisted of E. W.
Clarkson, Frank Armstrong, John S. Maley, Jim
Burgess, Harry McGlew and W. Wimbridge.
These men were all apprenticed to Solomon Cook
in his business, and he had many other casual
hands working on the causeway. The six I have
named were all very young men and, when their
work was completed, returned to the blacksmith-
ing shop and finished their apprenticeships. All
these young men I knew personally, although
they were all a few years older than I was.
When the causeway was being formally
opened by the Governor (Dr. J. S. Hampton) a


rather amusing incident occurred. Just as the
Governor reached the stage of declaring the
causeway opened, one of Cook’s workmen, J. S.
Maley, galloped across it on a horse. So Governor
Hampton said, “I declare this bridge opened by
J. S. Maley.”
Another of the workmen, Clarkson, was my
half-brother. In after years he went to Dongara
and set up business there as a blacksmith and
wheelwright. Subsequently he went into the
farming business, and became one of the most
prominent farmers of that district. He died in
his 83 rd year. He was a son of Charles Clark-
son, who came to the colony in 1830 in the
“Rockingham” and married Hannah Leeder, the
eldest daughter of William Leeder. Charles
Clarkson built his home on the waterfront, on
portion of the land now occupied by Temple
Court buildings. This house was a two-storey
building facing the river, and I was born in it in
1856.
The site was a bank of strong clay, from which
bricks were made to build the house. When the
bank had been used up and a level place had been
made for the house, about 50ft. into the bank and
the full width of the block, it made a difference
of about 8 feet in the level of the ground between
that block and the next one, which was owned by
the late Mrs. Leake (mother of Sir Luke and
George Leake). This necessitated a retaining
wall being built on the boundary of Mrs. Leake’s
land, so a stone wall about two feet thick was


built right along the block to Howard Street. The
wall can be seen in some of the old photographs
of the riverfront.
Considerably more bricks were made on Clark-
son’s property than were necessary for his home,
and the remainder went into the Pier Hotel. The
back portion of the hotel, however, where the
kitchen and store-rooms were, was built of lathe
and plaster inside and out. That part of the
building was level with the first floor of the main
building because part of the bank had been cut
away to make a level for the main part. The
clay was cut and the bricks were burnt on the
site, and the timber for burning the bricks was
cut and carted from the north-east end of Lake
Street.
The water supply for these buildings was
caught from springs at the back of them. A
chute was made with boards and let into the
bank, the end standing out from the bank to give
sufficient room for a bucket to be placed under it.
Water in those days was carried in buckets for all
purposes. Charles Clarkson, who was the first
to build a two-storey house on the waterfront,
went to the Ballarat gold diggings in the late
’forties, and was one of the missing men, sup-
posed to have been killed. He was never heard
of from that time. He left a wife and a family of
seven, five boys and two girls.
There was another almost vacant block of land
between the Pier Hotel and William Street. It
had a very small cottage on it near the south


boundary and Mr. Houston, a military pen-
sioner, lived in it in 1862.
I can remember the 14th Regiment of soldiers
landing in Perth and piling arms on that block
of land. There was a dense crowd on the jetty
when they arrived, and when the soldiers began
to disembark some of the spectators were pushed
to the edge of the jetty and stood on the kerb in
dread of being pushed into the water. The regi-
ment was housed round near Mt. Eliza in some
stone cottages which were later used as homes for
the old men. Detachments were marched round
the mount into the town for duty, and numbers
of boys and girls used to go round to the barracks
to march back to town beside the soldiers. Some
of the girls, I might mention, were much older
than the boys!
There was a permanent pool on the block on
which Mr. Houston lived, maintained by a spring
of good fresh water. Two horses used to graze
there. If my memory does not fail me they
belonged to the late Mr. George Randell. The
fishing boats used to pull up to the shore in front
of the Pier Hotel and Clarkson’s home, and
would not be more than a chain away from the
front doors. The people in those buildings could
order their fish without leaving their homes.
If some of the present rising generation were
to see the homes of the old colonists they would
find it hard to believe that these fine people were
born and bred in such places and were now living
years beyond their allotted span of life. I would


like to describe some of these homes. They were
built, of course, with many different kinds of
material. Some were built with small round
poles placed close together and let into the
ground about 12 inches, with the crevices be-
tween them blocked up with clay inside and out.
All the timber was round, for it was used as it
was cut from the forest.
The walls were made as smooth as possible by
hand, to receive a coat of whitewash made of
pipe-clay, as there was no lime available in those
days except in the city. The doors in most cases
consisted of corn sacks split down and nailed at
the top, a piece of wood being fastened along
the bottom so that the sack would hang straight.
The windows were made of strips of calico with
round sticks at the bottom so that they could be
rolled up.
Other houses were made in later years, with
what were known as “rammed” walls. These
consisted of two sets of boards with a mixture of
earth and clay rammed down between them, the
timber being smoothed off with pug as plaster.
Still others were made with sun-dried bricks of
clay or earth. Not many people could afford the
time to make these bricks in the early days, but
after a few years they became very popular. Even
in this class of house, though, the settlers had to
use bush timber. The roofs were covered with
bark or thatched with rushes, and were in all
cases quite watertight.
I have seen women making the clay brickbats,


and I knew of one woman who made enough
brickbats to build a five-roomed bouse. It was
many years before the country homes had
boarded floors. The best floor that could be ob-
tained was made with white ant-hills, smashed up
and well levelled down and kept wet for several
days, or strong clay rammed down and made
smooth. Both types of floors made plenty of
work for the rush brooms, which were home-
made with rushes from the bush. String was the
only fastening used on the doors and windows.
Next comes the all-important fire-place. These
differed in size very considerably, and most of
them were 4ft. 6in. to 6ft. 6in. across the mouth,
and up to 3ft. from back to front. They were
built of stones mainly, and served their purpose
very well. In the fire-places the settlers’ wives
would have to bake the camp-oven bread daily
to keep up the supply.
The shortage of cooking utensils and furniture
made the women’s work very hard, for they had
to use some things for several purposes. Meeting
some of these women to-day, with their hair of
silver and hearts of gold, the thought often strikes
me: who knows how much this old lady has done
for Western Australia? Certainly those who do
know cannot forget.
The people of the towns did not have to con-
tend with the same hardships as those far away
in the bush, nor did they see much of the outback
settlers’ early difficulties until these were almost
at an end.


I have seen many of the old homes, now in
ruins, and I daresay there are others who have
seen them but who do not realise the difficulties
their owners faced. Men and women born in
those old homes have lived to over 90 years,
nearly double the average lifetime of man. No
one would decry the modern homes, with their
convenience and labour-saving devices, but it has
yet to be proved that they are healthier than the
homes that saw the birth of the sturdy old people.
Work is healthy for the body and for the mind,
and the modern house may be sparing us too
much.
By the ’seventies, a much better class of house
was being built of burnt bricks and stone in the
townships of York, Bunbury, Pinjarra, Gerald-
ton, Albany, Mandurah, Northam, Guildford
and Beverley. Nearly all the houses in Northam
were built with bricks, but they were of a very
poor class, and no marked improvement in build-
ing took place until the ’eighties. No inland
town has made as much advancement or erected
so many buildings as Northam since the early
’eighties. I have drawn and given to the City
Council a plan of Northam, showing all the build-
ings and their occupants in 1889.
QUEEN’S GARDENS, PERTH
Where Queen’s Gardens are to-day, were the
first clay pits where bricks were made for the
building trade. The first man to make bricks on
the site was Mr. Henry Crane, father-in-law of


Mr. Harry Stitchbom, who was curator of the
East Perth cemetery from the ’fifties to the
’eighties. Stitchborn’s son afterwards filled the
position of curator for a great number of years,
and I believe he was still there when the cemetery
was closed.
The first bricks made by hand in the colony
were called sand stocks, because very fine sand
had to be sprinkled on the inside of the mould, so
that the brick would leave it easily, without
sticking. Sand of the required quality was also
on the site, as well as an abundance of fresh water
which bubbled out of the ground, making quite
a swamp of nearly the whole area at present
covered by the gardens.
In the early ’seventies there were three brick
yards supplying the building trade. One was
worked by Mr. Charles Hewlett, the second by
Mr. Thomas Smith, and the third by Mr. James
Brittain. My father took over Mr. Hewlett’s
yard and worked it for a few years. Brick-making
by hand was a very slow business, especially in
wet weather, and I have seen cottages hung up
for weeks, waiting for a few thousand bricks, on
account of rain. There were no sheds in which
the bricks could be dried.
I can recognise to-day many of the cottages
that were built with bricks from that area in the
very early ’seventies. I can also remember Mr.
Crane, who had to give up work on account of
his age, coming down from his home (which is
still standing) and going among the workmen to


give them advice. His help was most accept-
able, for he was a master of his work and liked to
see other craftsmen reach his own standard.
Both mosquitoes and frogs were particularly
bad, at certain seasons, in that part of Perth. In
the old days the side of the hill between the brick
yards and the cemetery was one dense thicket of
what was called “woolly bush,” in which the
mosquitoes bred prolifically. It was almost
impossible to walk through that thicket, for the
mosquitoes swarmed on face, hands and arms, and
it was useless to try to brush them off. Their
humming could be heard all day and night. The
men working in the brick yards, with their hands
in the soft clay all the time, had to wear veils to
keep the mosquitoes away from their faces and
necks. Even then the mosquitoes swarmed all
over the veils and the men were unable to use
their hands to knock them off. Their only relief
came when a strong wind was blowing, for this
drove the mosquitoes into the thickets for
shelter.
For about three months of the year the thickets
were full of frogs, which made the nights hideous
with their mournful noise.
Perhaps there are some people living to-day
who remember going down to where the gardens
are to gather rushes with which to make candles.
Although there were many places near Perth
where these rushes grew, there were none as
good as at the present site of Queen’s Gardens,
where the rushes could be found up to seven feet


in length. These were cut into lengths of about
one foot. The bark was stripped off and the
core, which was soft and white, was put near the
fire to dry. When dry, the core was dipped in
hot fat and allowed to cool, then dipped again,
and so on till it became as thick as a heavy lead
pencil. It was then ready for use as a candle.
When I pass Queen’s Gardens to-day I often
picture in my mind the desolation and ruins of the
old brick yards after the clay had been worked
out. Old kiln walls were left standing and there
were heaps of brickbats, logs of wood, and piles
of rushes that had been used to protect the bricks
from rain. This unsightly collection did not,
however, include any bottles, and for an interest-
ing reason. The clay-hole at the north end of
the brick vards was excavated much deeper than
the others and had about eight or ten feet of
water in it at one place. Into this hole all the
broken bottles were thrown —as well as many
that were not broken. All the employers at those
brick yards were Good Templars, and they took
every means to keep drink away from the works,
especially on the nights when bricks were burnt,
for the men had to stay up all night to keep the
fires going with heavy logs of wood. There was
always the possibility of accident as well as
neglect of work, and for that reason any bottles
of beer that were found on the works were
thrown into the clay-hole by the employers. I
think it would be possible to dig up some of
Jimmy Stoke’s beer bottles with the corks still


in them, for many full bottles were thrown into
that hole. From what I can remember hearing
of Jimmy Stoke’s beer, it was a very popular
drink. It cost 2s. 6d. a gallon, delivered to the
consumer’s door!
TWO EVENTFUL VOYAGES
Late in the ’seventies the South Australian
Government imported two hopper barges, the
“Kadina” and the “Goolwa,” both of which
passed down the West Australian coast in the
course of their adventurous voyages from
Scotland. I have been able to secure, with the
assistance of the Archives Department of the
Public Library, Museum and Art Gallery of
South Australia, the full story of those voyages.
The “Goolwa” (139 tons) was specially built
in Glasgow for the South Australian Govern-
ment. Her master, Captain Finch, was informed
that the “Goolwa” would steam at the rate of 11
knots, and that she was an admirable sea boat;
but he soon found that her speed under steam
was only 4\ knots. To assist the engines she was
rigged as a schooner, but even with all sails set
her speed could only be increased to six knots.
The “Goolwa” left Glasgow on August 8,
1878, After encountering gales she reached
Gibraltar on August 20 and the Suez Canal on
September 19. Her coal consumption was heavy
and fresh supplies were taken in at Gibraltar,
Malta and Port Said. On October 1 she reached
Aden, where she was again coaled and her


engines overhauled. A fortnight later it was
found that she had sprung a leak, and the men
had to work in three feet of water while getting
out coal for the furnace. She reached Ceylon
on October 25 and was delayed there until
November 1 with her master laid up in hospital.
Instead of receiving the expected assistance of
the trade winds the ship ran into a series of
southerly gales, and it was not until November 27
that the north-west coast of Australia was
sighted. The barge had to fight her way down
the coast against contrary winds, progress being
made the more difficult by the fact that, owing to
her heavy consumption of coal, she was riding
too light. Holes were therefore cut in the side
compartments to take in water ballast, and she
reached the mouth of the Murchison River with
no more than a day’s coal in hand.
A boat was sent ashore to search for wood
fuel, but it capsized in the surf and the crew
narrowly escaped being drowned. The coast
abounded in sharks, some of which were caught
and used in the furnace to raise steam. The decks
were broken up and all bulkheads, ceilings and
other woodwork was pulled down, but even this
emergency fuel was exhausted by the time the
barge made Port Gregory.
The schooner “Ariel” was now sighted on her
way from Champion Bay to Batavia, and for
£6OO her captain agreed to put back with the
news of the barge’s predicament. Lighters of
coal and provisions were sent at once from Cham-


pion Bay, whence the “Goolwa” was then able
to proceed. Three weeks later, on January 11,
1879, she resumed her voyage, but had to take
shelter from a gale in Bunker’s Bay. Putting to
sea again, she encountered more gales, which pre-
vented her from getting past Cape D Entrecas-
teaux and forced her back to Busselton for
supplies of coal, which she had been consuming
at the rate of ll| tons a day. The “Goolwa”
left Busselton about the end of January and com-
pleted her voyage without further mishap,
making Port Adelaide on March 11, 1879.
The other hopper barge, “Kadina” (131 tons),
made a longer, if less eventful voyage under the
command of Captain James Knight. After leav-
ing Glasgow on August 5, 1878, the “Kadina”
met a gale in the Bay of Biscay, and had to shelter
in the Spanish harbour of Ferrol. Gibraltar was
reached on September 6, and Malta on September
20. The barge had to put back to Malta to
escape heavy weather, but succeeded in reaching
Aden on November 2. Here she was beached
and scraped in order to remove the marine
growth which was impeding her progress.
Instead of going direct to Western Australia
it was deemed more prudent to make for the
nearer port of Batavia, where fresh supplies of
coal and provisions were laid in. After leaving
Batavia the “Kadina” ran into bad weather, and
to make matters worse, five of the crew became
ill. Two of them succumbed and were buried
later on Dirk Hartog Island.


Like the “Goolwa,” the “Kadina” used up
most of her fuel and was too light to make much
headway against the adverse winds. A call was
therefore made at Dirk Hartog Island for stone
ballast, 25 tons of which was conveyed at some
risk through the heavy surf in the barge’s long-
boat. After leaving the island further southerly
winds were experienced, and with the coal
bunkers nearly empty, the stock of provisions
reduced to a few tins of soup and bouilli, and the
supply of drinking water down to the last 60
gallons, the position became serious. Finally the
“Kadina” worked her way into Champion Bay,
where she made a long stay for the purpose of
quarantine and in order to take in a full supply of
coal, provisions and medicine.
Sailing from Champion Bay on April 4, 1879,
the barge began the last stage of her long voyage.
All went well until she approached Cape Gorda,
where a heavy sea smashed her deck. She
reached Port Adelaide on May 25 and completed
the misfortunes of her 294 days’ voyage by
crashing into Simpson’s wharf and staving in the
whole of her bow plating.
THE ARRIVAL OF THE “ROCKINGHAM”
The ship “Rockingham” (423 tons) carrying
175 passengers, dropped anchor off Garden Island
on May 14, 1830. The master was confronted
with the problem of navigating the line of islands
and uncharted reefs between the vessel and the
shore, but he was afraid to attempt any of the


passages through the reef in the absence of any
definite information concerning the soundings.
Ultimately a man-o’-war boat came from the
mainland and a naval officer took the ship safely
in to a point off Clarence, about 13 miles south
of Fremantle.
As the vessel lay at anchor the elements rose in
fury against her, and Thomas Peel, who had
brought out a number of emigrants, chose that
inopportune time to begin the work of disembark-
ation. He ordered all the single men to proceed
to Garden Island in four of the ship’s boats, but
the gale was blowing so hard that they were
carried to the mainland beach, where most of the
boats overturned in the surf. The occupants,
however, reached land in safety.
The ship fared no better than the small boats,
and was cast on to the beach broadside on. As
she struck, the quarter-boat, which was drifting
by, was secured and by that means an attempt
was made to land the married men and their
families. Whipped by the wind, the breakers
dashed upon the beach with terrific force, and it
was an anxious moment for everybody when the
quarter-boat overturned in the breakers and scat-
tered its human cargo in the water. A rush was
made by the men on shore to assist those in the
water, and all the passengers were brought safely
to land.
The beach offered no shelter to the castaways,
and no stores or provisions had been brought
ashore. A scanty supply of food was later


obtained from the ship’s stores, but these rations
were soon exhausted and a period of semi-
starvation followed. A wooden house had been
thrown overboard from the ship during the storm
and was secured and erected to accommodate
some of the stranded migrants. The remainder
had to find cover at night as best they could, and
many slept in old casks or other extemporised
shelters. They remained at Clarence for about a
year, waiting patiently for Peel to fulfil his con-
tract to place them on the land, but when winter
came the weaker ones died from exposure and
lack of the bare necessities of life.
Learning of the wretched plight of the “Rock-
ingham’s” passengers, Governor Stirling invited
them to Perth, and most of the survivors
accepted the invitation. With the tools they
had brought for use in the new settlement they
built boats to enable them to reach the capital,
to which at that time there was no road from
Clarence. Having found their way to Perth the
survivors were absorbed into the population of
the colony. So ended the abortive attempt to
found an agricultural settlement under the aus-
pices of Thomas Peel. Deserted by his party,
Peel lived for many years in solitary indigence on
his huge but unproductive estate, and he died
almost a pauper in 1864 His last resting-place is
the little cemetery at Mandurah.
Among those who arrived in the “Rocking,
ham,” which may be regarded as Western Aus-
tralia’s “Mayflower,” were the heads of many


families whose names are well known to-day in
all parts of the State, including Edwards, Pad-
bury, Mews, Glyde, Adams, Read, Tuckey,
Stirling and Leeder. I have many times listened to
the story of the landing of the “Rockingham’s”
passengers, told me by my mother, who came to
the colony on that ill-fated ship. She saw the
hardships at and after the landing of the passen-
gers, but as her father had money she was spared
the worst of these. I have also been told of the
landing by others who came out in the “Rock-
ingham” and escaped the privations that fell to
the lot of some of the passengers. When they
left the “Rockingham” they did not leave their
troubles behind them, for they lived on the land
in other parts of the colony under the most try-
ing conditions, some of which I have already
described.
For the benefit of the children on the ill-fated
“Rockingham” a temporary school was erected
from bush timber at Clarence Road, near the
wreck. The teacher was a Mr. Spencer, who
eventually made his home in South Perth and
who, after fifteen years’ residence there, left with
his family to reside in New South Wales. During
the past four years I have been in communication
with his son, Mr. Herbert Spencer, who is still
living in New South Wales.
DOCTORS IN THE ’SEVENTIES
Some 50 years ago a boy named Jack Thomas
was crossing the traffic bridge at North Fre-


mantle (the original structure) on his way to
school, when he fell from the deck of the bridge.
Grazing the high stone fender wall on the south
end of the bridge, 30 feet from the deck, he fell
on to the stone platform and then into the river.
John Evett Hammond, my brother, who hap-
pened to be on the opposite side of the river,
jumped in and swam across, and assisted in rescu-
ing the boy.
When taken out of the water and examined by
a doctor, the boy was found to have both arms,
one leg, his jawbone and some of his ribs broken,
and much of the flesh torn from his face and
body. He was conveyed to the Perth Hospital
in a buggy, there being no hospital in Fremantle
at that time and no other way of getting him to
Perth. His injuries were so extensive that he
was not expected to reach Perth alive.
In the Perth Hospital the boy was under the
care of Dr. Alfred Waylen, and after about
three months of treatment he was sent home to
his parents quite sound and well again. Jack
Thomas is to-day chief foreman in the railway
workshops at Geraldton, and has had over 40
years’ service with the Government.
Another accident happened in Fremantle 56
years ago, when a man was saved by the skill of
a doctor. Two men, named Box and Clark, were
carrying a large stone on a hand-barrow on the
top scaffold of a two-storey building, the resi-
dence of Mr. J. Bateman, jnr., when a bearer of
the scaffold broke and they were thrown to the


ground. Box fell on his back and one of the
scaffold planks fell endways on his head. It took
his scalp completely off and he died instantly.
Clark received a scalp wound, and Dr. Barnett
put a silver plate over it. Clark had a bad time
for about six months and was then able to go
back to work. He worked for me 12 years after-
wards.
Some time before Clark’s accident Dr. Barnett
broke his leg badly, and had to amputate it him-
self. Trouble set in a few days later, and he had to
take another piece off the leg, this time with sat-
isfactory results. After this he was irritable at
times, but he was a very capable doctor and main-
tained a large practice for many years.
THE OLD PERTH PUBLIC HOSPITAL
Recent discussions about the lack of accommo-
dation at the Perth Public Hospital lead me to
contrast present conditions with those during the
’sixties and ’seventies when, on several occasions
the building, though a large one for its time, was
without a patient. This is the more remarkable
because it was the only hospital in Perth or Fre-
mantle in those days.
In July, 1880, there was only one patient in the
hospital for a few days, and that was my wife.
At that time there was only the matron (Mrs.
Molloy) and one nurse. Ido not remember a
porter being employed. Dr. Alfred Waylen was
in charge of the hospital then.
The building was a very rough one, and


though the furniture was crude it fulfilled the
requirements of the day. Women were accom-
modated upstairs and men downstairs. Water was
obtained from wells with a force pump and car-
ried about in buckets. The first compounder of
medicines was the late Mr. M. Healey, who
served four years in the hospital and was then
relieved by the late Mr. George Stone, whose
duties also included the selection of food supplies
for the hospital. After three years in Perth Mr.
Stone was transferred to the Geraldton hospital
in 1873.
Firewood cut in three foot lengths was deliv-
ered to the hospital by bullock cart up to the
middle ’eighties. It had to be cut up by hand-
saw and axe to suit the open fireplaces, where
most of the cooking was done for a long time.
If my memory does not fail me, Dutch ovens,
made and installed by the late Solomon Cook,
were used. These were also used in many private
homes, and most people liked them for baking
bread and meat.
At the front gate of the hospital there was a
lantern which, I think, burnt whale oil. On
windy nights it smoked and blackened the glass,
so that one could only see what looked like a coal
of fire in it.
YOUNG PEOPLE OF YESTERDAY AND TO-DAY
During the past year I have visited young
men’s organisations, including the Boy Scouts’
Association, the Young Australia League, Toe
H and several schools, to talk to them about the


' ■ W* .piffiKSiffii
Lk ! IB" wnHiiiV .-.*<•!■%,
'^ r ” [' ■ . L. 1L-, I. ' |'~T'"|“ *... g-lTiJr 1. j|
CBQX3E3P» , |
s
■ . i B ""' ; -' 1 1 11'
Perth General Hospital, 1860.


I
I, ■
* : . ... . ;.* ■ ' . . < 4 ..i. , & '$■*..*■!* ■ :.v^3
The Round House, Fremantle, 1831.


boys and girls of the ’sixties and ’seventies. It
was a pleasure to me to see how interested they
were to know something about the boys and girls
of the pioneering days, and about the aboriginal
youngsters.
When we look back upon the disadvantages
those young people faced we can appreciate all
the more the organisations that exist to-day for
the benefit of the growing generation. In par-
ticular, the Young Australia League, organised by
by Mr. J. J. Simons, has been of great educational
value, showing what can be done for the young
people before and after they leave school.
Some of our finest citizens were born in the
’sixties and ’seventies, and grew into splendid
manhood and womanhood in spite of the lack
of educational facilities, but enlightenment
comes to modern youth in an enjoyable and
effective way. At the same time I have found
the young people of to-day anxious to know all
they can about the boys and girls of 70 years ago.
The history of the Young Australia League
goes back over a quarter of a century, and during
that time tens of thousands of boys and, during
the last four years, hundreds of girls have taken
part in its activities. It is the only organisation
created in Western Australia which has branches
and members all over Australia and companion
organisations in other parts of the world.
The League aims at making better citizens.
Boys are encouraged to take a pride in their
State, their country and their Empire, and this


implies that every act of citizenship should be
considered in its relation to all sections of the
human family.
Education by travel is one of the many activ-
ities the League has set in motion. At the begin-
ning, tours were made within the State, but in
1907 the first group of West Australian boys to
leave their native State made a tour of the other
States. Five years later visits to overseas coun-
tries were inaugurated and the first party, like
those which succeeded it, was received by His
late Majesty King George V and the President of
the United States, so that the seal of approval was
placed on the organisation and it attained a
world-wide significance. Boys who went on later
tours were received by the heads of the leading
countries of Europe as well as the heads of
religious bodies, including the Archbishop of
Canterbury and the Pope.
From time to time new activities are added to
the work of the League, and one of the latest
moves has been to encourage interest in the habits
and customs of the aborigines. Some of the suit-
able practices and ceremonies of the blacks have
been introduced to meetings of League boys.
Tribal symbols and ritual have been adapted to
League gatherings, specially valuable work in this
branch being carried out by Mr. Ken Tiller, the
founder of the Perth sub-branch of the League.
The ceremonial observances taken from the
aboriginal lore of Western Australia have also
been adopted by branches of the League in other


States, the idea being that just as some of the
practices of the Druids of England were pre-
served long after the Druids themselves passed
away, so will some of the practices of the Aus-
tralian natives be carried into the future long
after the original inhabitants of the country have
passed away or after their ritual has been sub-
merged by the white man’s civilisation.
That an organisation born in Western Aus-
tralia now embraces boys in well established
branches as far away as Cairns, in northern
Queensland, is gratifying to all good West
Australians.
The magnificent headquarters building of the
League is on a block of land originally owned by
one of the earliest settlers (Mr. Gregory Helms),
and where the home of the late Mr. T. F.
Quinlan, one-time Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly, stood for many years.
AN EXPLOSION IN HAY STREET
One of my most memorable experiences of the
early ’seventies took place just about where
Woolworths stands to-day. The late Mr. R. N.
Bullin, who had an oil and paint store there,
used to buy up old lead and melt it into piglead.
The boys in the town used to collect the spent
bullets from the firing butts on Mt. Eliza and sell
them to him. In those days the artillery used to
practice firing from the Perth water-front at a
target near Applecross, over Melville Water.
Some of the shells fell on dry land without


exploding, and three of them were later picked
up and sold to Mr. Bullin as old lead, for they
had a thin coating of lead on them to prevent
rust.
One day Mr. Bullin bought up about three-
quarters of a ton of old lead, and he asked me to
help him melt it and mould it into pig-lead. A
temporary furnace was made, using a whale-oil
boiling pot. About eight or nine moulds were
filled, and the pot needed replenishing, so Mr.
Bullin put one of the three shells into the pot,
where it floated on the surface. He had a piece
of three-by-one jarrah about seven feet long,
with which he was stirring the molten lead, and
he was holding the shell below the surface when
it exploded, throwing him some distance away.
He fell on his back, with the hot lead falling
on to his face and setting fire to his clothes. I was
also blown into the air, but I landed on my feet
and ran to an outhouse about 10 feet away.
Turning to close the door, I saw Mr. Bullin on
the ground with his clothes on fire, so I ran and
picked up a bucket of water we had nearby and
threw it over him to put out the flames.
By this time there was plenty of assistance at
hand. Fortunately, Mr. Bullin’s body was not
much burned, but his face was badly injured and
he narrowly escaped losing his eyesight. I was
badly burned on the arms and neck, and we both
suffered from shock for some months afterwards.
At the backs of the buildings in Hay Street
in those days, were open spaces where there


was not much that would burn, otherwise there
might have been a great deal of damage done.
However, it was the end of shells being fired
across Melville Water.
THE FIRST RAILWAY IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The first railway to be constructed in the
colony ran from Lockeville to the Layman home-
stead at Wonnerup, near Busselton. It was
owned by the W”.A. Timber Company, Limited,
the shares being largely held by residents of
Ballarat (Victoria). The company’s manager
was George Simpson, a native of Wales, under
whose direction large shipments of timber were
despatched to the Eastern States and to India.
The railway lines were made of jarrah, as were
those used by Mr. Ben Mason, the pioneer of
the jarrah industry. In the development of his
business Mr. Mason was later joined by Mr.
Francis Bird, of Albany, who was a well-known
architect, and by Mr. Henry Hetherington. The
horse-tram lines used by these men ran from their
numerous timber stations in the Darling Ranges
to the landing near Muddy Reach, on the Can-
ning River. From this point the timber was
taken to Fremantle by boat and shipped to Cal-
cutta and other ports in the “Dharwar” and the
“Highflier.” During the convict period, from
1830 to 1867, jarrah tram lines were used exten-
sively in the colony, notably in the vicinity of the
stone quarries at North Fremantle and Point
Resolution.


COCKLESHELL GULLY
On a recent visit to Yanchep I noticed that the
entrance to the caves was not the one I had seen
there 62 years ago. The entrance I saw then
faced east, and was a few chains away from a big
lake. I camped there with 10 others one night
while taking stock to the North-West. There
were many natives about at that time. I recently
mentioned the entrance to a guide, pointing to
where I thought it was, and he said that he knew
of it but that it had not yet been explored.
Further north on our trip during the ’seventies
our party camped for several days at Cockleshell
Gully, also known as the “Diamond of the
Desert.” The usual practice, first thing in the
morning, was for a few of the party to go out for
a kangaroo or two for breakfast. One morning
I went out with three others, working in a north-
westerly direction from the “Diamond,” and we
went about four miles before we killed a kang-
aroo. As soon as the excitement of the chase was
over our attention was drawn to a very peculiar
sound. At first we could not see what was caus-
ing it, and then noticed a small bush bending
backward and forward. On going up to it we
saw that the movement was caused by the suction
and discharge of air from a hole in the ground,
about two feet in diameter. We could plainly
hear the noise of the sea, which could not have
been less than six or seven miles away, and the
force of the air coming from the hole was enough
to blow my hat from my head. Only a few


months before this I had been a short distance
into the Margaret River cave with torchlights,
and I believe that a tremendous cave will he
found some day where that hole is.
I am sure I could locate that hole even to-day.
Cockleshell Gully is also known as Stockyard
Gully, because it runs for two or three miles
down a natural slope into an enclosure the shape
of a horseshoe, with cliffs from 20 to 30 feet high
running all round it except near the entrance,
which is 12 or 14 feet in width. It is in limestone
country, and the water that runs down the gully
disappears under the cliffs inside the “yard,” on
the west side.
A DINNER PARTY
In the early ’seventies Governor Weld gave a
dinner party and dance at Government House in
honour of Mr. (later Lord) Forrest. He
wanted something better than the old-fashioned
oil lamps for lighting the ballroom, so he pro-
vided, at a considerable cost, a large number of
wax candles and a huge chandelier into which the
candles were fixed wherever possible. It was a
very hot night and this, with the heat of the
lighted candles themselves, soon made the candles
bend over and drop hot grease on the heads and
clothes of those who were dancing beneath them.
Among them were several old gentlemen whose
bald heads were well bespattered. It took the
attendants some two hours to clean up the mess
in the ballroom so that the dance could be
resumed.


THE FIRST ORGANS BUILT IN THE COLONY
The first pipe organ to be built in Western
Australia was constructed by the late Mr. Cecil
Clifton, who was later Under Secretary for
Lands. Mr. Clifton bad never been taught music
or carpentry, and had only seen one pipe organ
in his life—the organ in St. George’s Cathedral,
which was then the only one in the colony.
Only the keyboards and the metal pipes were
imported from England. Mr. Clifton could only
work on the organ in his spare time, as he was in
the Government service. The work was begun in
a cottage in James Street, and was finished several
years later in Fremantle, after Mr. Cilfton had
been transferred to the Customs Department.
Few people realise the enormous number and
variety of materials used in the construction of
an organ, but the intricacy of such a job can well
be imagined. Mr. Clifton’s achievement is the
more wonderful when it is remembered that in
those days very little suitable timber was im-
ported into the colony, while good tools were
hard to get and there was no machinery.
I was a choir boy when the organ was being
built, and I often helped Mr. Clifton in taking
measurements of the organ in St. George’s
Cathedral.
This organ was so successful that the members
of the Congregational Church, under the pastor-
ship of the Rev. Joseph Johnston, made a con-
tract with Mr. Clifton to build another organ,
for the Johnston Memorial Church in Canton-


merit Road, Fremantle. Mr. Archie Clifton came
to Perth from the old home at Alverstoke, near
what is now Brunswick Junction, to assist in the
construction of the second organ. He could
work full time. Like his brother, he had had no
training as a carpenter, and knew nothing about
music, but he worked under the direction of Mr.
Cecil Clifton. The organ was finished in about
two years, and after 50 years’ use in the Johnston
Memorial Church it was removed to the Congre-
gational Church in Bunbury, where its sweet
tones can still be heard. The first organ was
used in the Anglican Church in Fremantle, and
was afterwards sold to the Anglican Church in
Guildford.
Before coming to assist in the building of the
second organ Mr. Archie Clifton was doing farm
work, breaking up heavy blackboy country with
a single-furrow plough and a team of six bullocks.
He afterwards became Warden and Resident
Magistrate on the goldfields, and on August 12,
1893, took possession of the East Murchison gold-
fields by hoisting the Union Jack to a sapling tied
to a wheel of his buggy. He marked out the
town of Lawlers, naming it after the prospector
Paddy Lawlers, who first found gold there. (By
a strange coincidence the date August 12 is the
birthday of the City of Perth.) Mr. Clifton also
selected the sites and marked out other towns on
that goldfield, including Mt. Sir Samuel, Wiluna
and Youanmi. Mr. Archie Clifton, who is now
77 years old, lives quietly in Victoria Avenue,


Perth. He tells me that when he saw the organ
in the Congregational Church, Bunbury, last
year (after not having seen it for 40 years) he
could hardly believe that he and his brother had
built it.
In addition to the two already described, Mr.
Cecil Clifton built two other organs —one for the
old Presbyterian Church in Pier Street, and fin-
ally one for his own home in Adelaide Terrace,
which is still in use. In the building of the last
two he was assisted only by Mr. Willie Tchan,
the son of one of the first cabinet-makers in Perth.
He describes Mr. Tchan as a “grand old artisan.”
Mr. Tchan is now 79 years old, and still conducts
a saw and grindery works in Fitzgerald Street,
Perth.
MEMORIES OF PERTH’S WATERFRONT
In my boyhood days I took a great interest in
the traffic on the water-front, which was then a
very different place from the Esplanade and rec-
reation grounds of to-day. The Supreme Court,
police station and commissariat stores were on
one side of Barrack Street near the river, and a
girls’ school was on the other side.
The Barrack Street jetty was known as “King
Cole’s” jetty, and it was used mostly for landing
stone and building materials. The cargo and
produce for town and country were unloaded at
the William Street jetty, and goods to be sent
away were loaded into the boats for transport by
river to Fremantle. Prison labour was used to


make the roads to the jetty, and the stone for the
roads was brought up the river in boats. I have
seen as many as three boats at one time unloading
stone at the jetty. The late Mr. R. Mansfield
owned two of the boats and the late Mr. J.
Kenny, father of the late Mr. H. E. Kenny, of
Geraldton, owned one.
I remember a large cargo boat being built by
Mr. E. Hamilton on the river-front, at the spot
where the kiosk stands to-day on the Perth
Esplanade. The natives used to spear cobblers
between William Street and Barrack Street jetties
before the land was reclaimed for the Esplanade.
The Pier Hotel, owned by Mr. H. Ogden,
stood on the land now occupied by Temple Court
Buildings. It was a two-storey building with a
basement, and it was always well patronised.
Panter, Harding and Goldwyer left this hotel to
go on their ill-fated expedition to the North-
West in the early ’sixties. The fishing boats
used to pull up on the shore facing the hotel, and
many people came to the beach to purchase fish
—a shilling’s worth of fish would provide a large
family with a good meal.
The William Street jetty also had a large
amount of river traffic. The steamer “Lady Stirl-
ing” used to leave this jetty as 8 o’clock in the
mornings, carrying passengers and cargo to Fre-
mantle, and she was always well patronised.
Many drays, belonging to Perth trading firms,
were employed carting goods from overseas after
they had been landed at William Street jetty


from the river boats which brought them from
Fremantle. In busy times, the boats unloaded
the goods much faster than the carts could carry
them away, and quite large quantities were often
left on the jetty overnight without any loss
except that occasioned by children who some-
times helped themselves to dates or biscuits. I
was one of those children.
Sandalwood was brought from New Norcia,
Toodyay, Northam, York and Beverley to the
William Street jetty and stacked ready for river
transport. This was done chiefly in the summer
time, as the roads were impassable in the winter.
The industry gave employment to many men.
The sandalwood, after delivery in Perth or Guild-
ford, was cut into short lengths with hand-saws,
and the men were paid 4s. a ton for cutting and
branding the ends of each log with the initials of
the persons or firms exporting the wood. The
brand was made in the form of a hammer, so that
the initials were cut well into the wood.
There were slips near the W.A. Shipping
Company’s sheds on the river-front for cleaning
and repairing boats. The first boat I remember
seeing on the slips was the “Lady Stirling.” She
was there for some days for painting, and was
returned to the water looking beautiful in red and
white, with a black band just below the deck. The
“Lady Stirling” was a popular river boat (she
was a paddle-wheel steamer) and was often used
for Sunday school picnics.
The Mill Street jetty (or the old stone jetty.


as it was called) had very little use, stone being
practically all that was landed there. Sometimes
timber from Ben Mason’s mill on the Canning
was discharged for Messrs. Watson and Law-
rence, the boat builders.
Further west along the river was the Stanley
Brewery, conducted by J. Stokes and later
owned and worked by Mr. Jones and his sons.
One horse and cart distributed all the beer that
was consumed in Perth (how different from to-
day!). The late Mr. Charles Watson’s boat shed
was near the Stanley Brewery on the west side.
Fie was always a busy man, and built many boats
of all classes. I know some of his descendants,
one of whom is a member of the W.A. Historical
Society.
William Street jetty was the resort of many
pleasure-seekers. Crabbing parties were held on
the jetty almost every night in the season. Others
visited the jetty for the cool breezes, and it
seemed to be a favourite place for courtships.
A regatta was held at the William Street jetty
annually, on June 1, the anniversary of the found-
ing of the colony. The occasion was usually
favoured with good weather. Once, I remember,
the aborigines took part in the sports. Two-
pound loaves of bread stood on sticks at the
water’s edge, and the natives stood 70 or 80 yards
away and speared the bread. Many of the loaves
were won in this manner and the sport was very
popular with the crowd. At that time there
were almost as many blacks as whites in Perth.


The old fountain which is still to be seen in
Mounts Bay Road, used to be the turning point
for Sunday afternoon walks along the river-front.
In the year 1870 there was a road accident on
the Perth side of the place where Crawley Baths
stand to-day. A sulky was being driven towards
Fremantle and the late Mr. J. Noonan, a contrac-
tor, was returning from Fremantle on a very
spirited horse. They collided and the end of the
sulky shaft ran two feet into the horse’s chest.
The unfortunate horse soon died, and Mr.
Noonan sustained a badly sprained leg which
took months to get better. The accident hap-
pened about 11 o’clock at night and some fisher-
men heard the crash and came to the assistance of
the men.
The people who lived on the water-front be-
tween Barrack Street and the Narrows in those
days were the Misses Jones, Mrs. and Miss
Cameron, and Messrs. Hammond, Ogden,
Randell, Poland, Broomehead, Moss, Cresswell,
C. Watson, Webb, the Read family, Manning,
Jackson, Rule and Neason.
EARLY TRADESMEN OF PERTH
It is worthy of mention that from the early
’sixties the demand for mechanics was greater
than the supply, and this accounts for the fact
that many boys were apprenticed to trades of all
kinds. There were very few mechanics coming
into the colony except among the convicts, and
most of them were stonemasons, bricklayers and


plasterers. The few carpenters that were among
the convicts the Government kept, mostly for
bridge-building and constructional work in Gov-
ernment buildings, until they were released from
prison. I propose to deal now with some of the
leading iron- workers, builders and tradesmen
among the free settlers of this period.
The late Mr. Solomon Cook was one of the
first men to start business as a wheelwright,
coach-builder and iron-founder. His business site
was in Murray Street, on portion of the land
now occupied by Boans Ltd. Mr. Cook did not
confine himself solely to his own business, for he
had numerous outside interests. He fitted up
the second steamer which carried cargo between
Fremantle and Perth, he made the first corn-
stripper that was used in this colony, and was the
first man to use a steam hammer. He employed
a large staff, including six apprentices, namely,
Frank Armstrong, E. W. Clarkson, Harry Me-
Glew, W. Wimbridge, John S. Maley and James
Burgess, each of whom completed his term and
started business for himself.
Frank Armstrong started business as a wheel-
wright, blacksmith and coach-builder in Gerald-
ton, but found that the people of the district
were so scattered that business was not profitable.
He had some difficulty in collecting his dues, as
his only means of transport and communication
was horse and sulky. However, he kept up his
business in Geraldton for many years, and became
very popular. He was a son of the late Francis


Fraser Armstrong, who came to the colony in
1830 and who later, because of his knowledge of
the native tongue, was given the position of
native interpreter for the Law Courts.
The second apprentice, Harry McGlew,
carried on his business on the premises that were
occupied by his former employer.
The late Mr. E. W. Clarkson started a success-
ful business at Dongara. He later turned his
attention to farming, and finally became one of
the most prosperous farmers in that district. He
was a brother of H. J. and W. W. Clarkson, who
lost their lives while taking stock to the North-
West. He died at the age of 83, leaving a large
family.
William Wimbridge later joined Mr. John
Summers as foreman. Mr. Summers’ premises
stood on the site now occupied by Levinson’s
shop. In addition to his other business Summers
was also an undertaker, and he owned the first
hearse in the colony. Before that the coffin was
carried on the pall-bearers’ shoulders to the place
of interment.
The late Mr. Carson, father of Mr. Alfred
Carson, of Perth, made the weather-cock on the
spire of Wesley Church, in the workshop of Mr.
Summers. A large number of men were employed
there, and the apprentices included Mr. T. Oak-
ley, who afterwards took over the business but
met with little success.


rrwirr * yy yy 7 JgL
An Early Scene of the Town and River Bar, Fremantle,


■
' ■ ■ . ■ •. \ -
' \
1
%mm _, v ,jf .........
mm m rW% ■■■■■♦■•>*' -v^^, :^.... ..
*•* 3 ■ I mm
I yi s ii »
Native Prisoners on Rottnest Island. 1855


BOAT-BUILDERS
One of the best known boat-builders was the
late Mr. W. Lawrence. He bad five sons, three
of whom learnt their father’s trade. Mr. Sam
Lawrence still carries on the old business, but
now with the aid of one of the third generation.
Many boats were built during the 70 years in
which the business was conducted by the late
Mr. W. Lawrence, and later by Lawrence and
Sons. Among them were three of the earliest
steam boats to be built in Western Australia,
namely, the “City of Perth” (about 100 tons),
the “Advance” (about 90 tons), and the “En-
chantress” (about 100 tons). Among others they
built and ran were the “Lady Orde,” the
“Bessie,” the “Jarranup,” the “Albatross” and
the “Duchess.” Lawrence and Sons built the
first and last pearling boat that plied to the
North-West. The late Mr. Lawrence was a
prominent man in the gold industry. His son
played cricket until he was 68 years of age.
The late Mr. George Randell had a large ship-
ping business and was the first man to run a
passenger service by steam between Perth and
Fremantle. The first boat put to this purpose,
the “Lady Stirling,” was built and fitted up in
England. It began its run on the river in the late
’fifties. Mr. Randell had to do with other
steam boats and also with some of the sailing
boats that were used for unloading cargo from
overseas ships berthed in Gage Roads. The
sailing boats used to bring this cargo to Perth


and land it at William Street jetty. Mr. Randell
was a member of the old House of Parliament
and was Colonial Secretary for some considerable
time. He had five sons, nearly all of whom
assisted their father in his business after leaving
school.
BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS
Dealing with building and contracting, the first
name to be mentioned is that of the late Mr.
James Brittain. He had three sons, all of whom
served their apprenticeship to the building trade
under him. Mr. Brittain did a great deal of
building for the Government.
The three Halliday brothers, James, Alex., and
Tom, were carpenters and contractors. They
were sons of Alexander Halliday who, with
James Brittain, built the old barracks. The late
Tom Halliday became warder of a large number
of convicts working on the streets, and was
Inspector of Works. Halliday’s workshop was
at the corner of William and James Streets.
The late Matthew Wallace, brick-layer and
general contractor, was considered one of the
best brick-layers in the colony. He rebuilt the
Anglican Church at Guildford after it was blown
down by a great storm in 1873. Mr. Wallace
had four sons, all of whom followed his trade. A
number of other young men who later did good
work in the country learnt their trade from him.
The late Mr. C. Buggins was a general con-
tractor and brick-layer. Mr. Buggins built Perth


Wesley Church. The brick work speaks for itself
to-day. Mr. Buggins had two sons, one of whom
served his apprenticeship under him and did a
great deal of work at Geraldton, Northampton,
Bunbury, Albany and other country centres.
The late Mr. Thomas Smith’s line of business
was that of auctioneer, general contractor and
undertaker. He had four sons to assist him. The
late Mr. C. Smith, undertaker, was his son. Mr.
Smith’s premises stood where the Picadilly Tea-
rooms are to-day.
For many years the late Mr. Snowball carried
on business as a carpenter and joiner in Stirling
Street, and did a by-trade with the Government
for joinery and fittings. Mr. Snowball had three
sons. The late William and John Snowball
worked in their father’s shop all their lives and
George Snowball took over the late Messrs. W.
Padbury and Loton’s business in St. George’s
Terrace, where Weld Chambers is to-day.
Another firm to date among early general con-
tractors, carpenters and joiners was that of the
late Joseph Noonan and Brophy. Their prem-
ises were in Pier Street, about half way between
Hay and Murray Streets. This firm built a large
store in Guildford for the late Mr. W. Padbury,
and the old convent in Goderich Street, and also
did a large amount of joinery work for other con-
tractors. Mr. Noonan had a great deal to do
with the carrying out of the plans for the Perth
Town Hall. Four apprentices of the firm were


the late H. J. Clarkson, M. Farley, John Me-
Carthey and John E. Hammond, my brother.
A very big building trade was carried on by the
late David Gray, who employed many men and
apprentices, some of whom are still building in
different parts of the State. The late Mr. Gray
built a two-roomed brick cottage in twelve and a
half hours, with all material on the ground and
more men on the job than could conveniently
work. The floors were finished before the walls
were completed. The roof was on and work
finished by sundown. This was not a case of “go
slow.”
Another builder and general contractor who
did a good deal of work for the Government as
well as work in country towns, was the late J. K.
Churchyard. Apprenticed to him were the late
Messrs. James Hutcheson, Seaborne Jackaman
and Alfred Vayard. James Hutcheson and Sea-
borne Jackaman held a hand-sawing competition
cutting three by one jarrah battens. They
averaged One foot per minute for ten hours and
it resulted in a draw. The late Mr. Churchyard’s
premises were in Beaufort Street, opposite the
Museum.
The late Mr. Fred Platt built the last portion
of the Pensioners’ Barracks, used for a ball alley
for the pensioners. Mr. Platt came to the colony
as a plasterer, but soon learned the art of brick-
laying and became a builder and contractor. Mr.
Platt plastered the Wesley Church and did most
of the first-class plastering of those days. His


workshop was in Beaufort Street. I was the
only apprentice the late Mr. Platt had, and I
began to learn my trade on the Pensioners’ Bar-
racks. I worked at my trade for some years and
then I wanted to join the Clarkson brothers tak-
ing stock to the North-West, and my chief
allowed me to go. When I returned to Perth I
finished learning my trade. When I began to
work for myself, one of the first jobs I did was
building the foundation of Point Moore light-
house at Geraldton, which was the first steel
tower in Western Australia. I was in Gerald-
ton for two and a half years and saw much of
Northampton, Mt. Erin and the Irwin, and did
many small jobs in that part of the country.
The first big job I did in Fremantle was to get
married. I married Annie Retta, the third
daughter of the late Sergeant-Major John and
Mrs. McKay of North Fremantle, at the Johnston
Memorial Church. We were the last couple to
be married without having the banns called. This
was on September 7, 1879.
I built the first block of offices and shops in
Fremantle, at the corner of Henry and High
Streets, for the late W. S. Pearse and Captain
Houston, the agents for Lloyd’s shipping.
It was on that building that I first knocked off
my workmen at 1 o’clock on the Saturdays, in
1881. Before that they had worked on Saturdays
until 5 p.m. While in Fremantle I had four ap-
prentices from one family, named Cook.
After some years in Fremantle I moved back


to Perth and built many houses, including the late
Mr. W. G. Hearman’s residence in Mounts Bay
Road, and the late J. C. Clarkson’s residence,
known as “Pearl Villa,” on the corner of Murray
and Milligan Streets. This has lately been demol-
ished, and its place has been taken by business
premises.
When I had been some years in Perth I went
to Northam to build an Anglican Church. That
was in 1889, and while I was engaged on the
church I thought the future looked promising,
and decided to stay in Northam. I started the
first wire-cut brick machine powered by steam
to be used successfully in the colony up to that
time, but it soon showed a loss through lack of
trade. While in Northam I shortened the work-
ing hours of my men from ten to eight hours a
day, and I raised wages from ss. to Bs. for lab-
ourerers, and from 10s. to 14s. for mechanics.
I also did a large excavating job for the Bewick
Moreing Gold Mining Company at Seabrook, on
which I had 120 men working. I had some
trouble with the manager about the wages. I
was paying my men Is. an hour, and he was pay-
ing only 10d., and he was unable to get men when
I wanted them. However, under the conditions
of my contract I worked on. When I got all
the men I wanted I completed my contract, and
then he was able to employ them.
As there was no machinery for dressing and
finishing building materials in those days it was
harder to keep a polish on the work. The timber


was all hand-sawn, and the bricks hand-made, but
all the same the strength was put into the job
and some of the buildings are left standing to-day
in good condition. Among them are Wesley
Church, the Deanery, Perth Convent, the Town
Hall, Government House and the late Mr.
Stone’s large residence in Adelaide Terrace.
In addition to this mechanical work other work
taken up by some of the young men included
dairying, butchering, baking and vegetable and
fruit growing. These industries, however, had
mainly been commenced by the old pioneers and
carried on afterwards by their sons.
I have spoken of the menfolk who did their
part in building up the colony generally, and in
adding to the prosperity of the city, but I might
add that too much praise could not be given to
the women. Many of them reared families on
less than £2 a week. They had to pay school
fees, which were over 3d. a week for each child,
and some had to meet this expense for as many as
12 children. I think there was a concession
given over a certain number of children. The
mothers had to make the children’s clothing and
their own —it took more than a yard of material
in those days —and this without the aid of a
sewing machine. Their lights were made from
rushes, with whale oil or fat in a tin, while some
used home-made candles.
Washing was no small task, for the old-time
washing tubs were usually hogs-heads cut in
halves. They were heavy to handle, and hard to


keep in order during the hot weather, and water
had to be drawn out of wells with a windlass.
Some of the wells were very deep and the women
drew the water themselves. The women certainly
had the lion’s share of the hardships in those
days, whether married or single, but with it all
it was as hard to get a seat in church on Sundays
as it is to get a seat in the picture shows to-day.
THE BOOTMAKING TRADE
Some interesting stories about the bootmaking
trade from the early ’seventies onwards used to
be related by the late Mr. Houston, of William
Street, who was a son of the late Corporal
Houston, of the old military guard. Mr. Houston
arrived in the colonies in the “Sincelles” on Jan-
uary 26, 1862, from Ireland, and he lived for the
first few years in St. George’s Terrace, on the
block now occupied by the New Zealand Insur-
ance Company. As a boy he went to the school
in Pier Street (where Turkish baths are now to
be had) and afterwards he went to the school
that stood on the site now occupied by the Tech-
nical College. This was under the management
of Messrs. Watkinson, Hussey, Smith and Bell,
the last named afterwards becoming headmaster.
In March, 1870, hearing that a Mr. Christie
wanted a boy to work for him, Mr. Houston went
to see Mr. Christie instead of going to school, and
was given the job straight away. He used to say
he would never forget that day —March 10, 1870
—when he went home with his sleeves rolled up


and told his parents that he was working for Mr.
Christie. Then followed an interview between
his father and Mr. Christie, as a result of which
he became an apprentice for five years, to learn
the trade of bootmaking in all its branches.
The work that is now done by machinery
could not be delivered in those days, when all
bootmaking was done by hand. When the first
stitching machine arrived in the colony it excited
a good deal of comment, and the men said that,
while it might do a bit of straight stitching, it
would never do the hundred and one jobs con-
nected with bootmaking. If they could revisit
the colony to-day, and see the inside of a boot
factory, they would probably wonder what they
had been drinking. The first machine was des-
cribed as a cast-iron affair, all cogs, and it made
a deafening noise when working.
In 1870 the trade was carried on in Perth by a
few “brothers,” as they were called. Bretnall
and Son carried on their business on the site now
occupied by Ahern’s, and afterwards moved to
the site of Betts and Betts, in Hay Street. George
Young had his premises where Caris Bros. Bar-
rack Street shop was until recently, and John
Spence Christie carried on his business in the
premises now occupied by Malloch Bros., in
William Street.
Part of Christie’s factory, originally a six-
roomed cottage with a shed and lean-to at the
back, can still be seen. The cottage was built and
occupied by the Brown family, and its front room


became Christie’s shop. The workshop was
always being enlarged, and in 1873 Christie began
to build a shop up to the footpath line, part of
which now stands. When it was finished, in the
latter part of 1874, the windows were the pride
of Perth, for the panes of glass were 40 inches by
20 inches. Up to that time the largest panes in
the town had been 16 inches by 14, but mostly
they were 10 inches by 8.
John Christie was a very progressive man, and
held an important place in the affairs of the town
in his time. He was a wonderful tradesman, a
good employer and a square dealer.
On leaving his employ in 1875, Houston went
to Mr. Leach, of High Street, Fremantle, for 12
months. Mr. Leach was a fine old man in many
ways, and was one of the prominent men of those
days. His men did not work in a shop as they
did at Christie’s, but each man took so many pairs
of boots away with him and made them up in his
own home, the employer supplying the uppers
and soles. The leather was marked out in the
rough and had to be cut out, and each man made
o 7
the boots from start to finish by himself. Most
of the work done at that time was to order, but
there was always a ready sale for sizes 2 to 6,
some of the stores buying men’s boots by the
dozen pairs. As a comparison with present times,
it may be mentioned that when Christie opened
his new shop in William Street he advertised
that he had on hand 100 pairs of boots and shoes
from which his customers could choose!


MATERIAL FOR THE BUILDING TRADE
Those of the old-time contractors and builders
who are living to-day will remember the first
hardware store established in Fremantle in 1881
by Sandover and Mayhew. This was the first
store that was able to supply the building trade
with tools and many other requirements, which
previously could be obtained only by sending
East.
Up to 1881 there were two schooners trading
regularly between Fremantle and the Eastern
States, the “Cleopatra” and the “Ariel.” These
boats brought most of the goods from the eastern
colonies (as they were then called) and as their
movements depended upon favourable winds the
purchaser could never tell when an order from
the East would be fulfilled. I remember having
sent to Harris and Scarfe’s in Adelaide several
times for tools which were not obtainable here
except in cheap lines which were not good
enough for the better class of work that was de-
manded. Machinery had not then found its
way into the colony, and all mouldings such as
window-sashes, skirtings, etc., had to be made by
hand. Some of the tools necessary for good work
cost as much as £3 each, and a carpenter had to
spend about £65 on equipment and tools before
he could do the work required in a first-class
house.
Sandover and Mayhew put an end to all this
trouble and delay when they opened their big
premises in High Street, Fremantle. They im-


ported hand-worked machinery for drilling, bor-
ing, and morticing, band saws, and other articles,
and the contractors who put these machines into
their workshops soon felt the benefit from their
outlay in a saving of time that amounted to as
much as 50 per cent.
In later years Sandover and Mayhew opened
a branch on the corner of William and Hay
Streets, Perth, and soon afterwards built a store
in the present position of Harris, Scarfe and
Sandovers. This first store was burnt down, and
Mr. Sandover erected another building in the
same place. On the site of the store was a large
jarrah tree, under which Divine Service was con-
ducted in the very early days. (My parents
attended these services.) When the tree was
cut down Mr. W. G. Hearman, who had a large
drapery store just opposite in Hay Street, had
three pieces cut off across the trunk and had them
made into tables, showing the end grain of the
wood. One of the tables was sent to England.
The firm of Simon Hammond and Hubble soon
followed Sandover and Mayhew and opened up
a large business in Fremantle with many new
lines. They supplied tools for all trades, soft
woods, doors, furniture and many other things.
I still have two bentwood chairs I bought from
them in the early ’eighties.
There were many other old established busi-
ness houses in Fremantle. One of the oldest
firms is that of J. 8C W. Bateman, whose attention
was mostly directed towards the requirements of


ship and boat-builders and to shipping generally.
When the pearling industry began in the North-
West J. 8C W. Bateman supplied many fleets with
their equipment. They always had a large stock
of provisions and builders’ materials, and built a
number of houses in Fremantle in addition to
their own stores and warehouses.
A WORD FOR THE NATIVES
While I was in Geraldton in the ’seventies a
Mr. Stokes came out from England to erect the
Point Moore lighthouse. He brought with him
a double-barrelled shotgun and a revolver,
to protect himself from the natives, for he had
been advised before leaving England that they
were savages. He was always asking me about
the 4 ‘savages,” and he would not walk along
the beach between the town and his work with-
out his revolver.
I was assisting in the erection of the lighthouse
which was the first steel tower lighthouse to be
erected in Australia, and I became very friendly
with him. After a few weeks I induced him to
come out to the Chapman River, about three
miles from the town, where a lot of natives were
camped. When we arrived at the camp Mr.
Stokes became very nervous and put his hand in
his pocket for his revolver. I asked him not to
show it for a while, until I had had a little talk
with the natives. I put a 2lb. loaf of bread on a
stick and asked the natives to show how they
could spear it. This gave Mr. Stokes a great


deal of amusement and he began giving the
natives a shilling every time the loaf was hit. In
a short time he had paid out 135., and would have
paid out more had the bread not been knocked
to crumbs by then.
The natives then began to throw their koilies
for us, and Mr. Stokes was amazed at the length
of time they stayed in the air, and the way they
spun for so long. I then got them to give a
demonstration of a corroboree. Mr. Stokes was
very impressed with the rhythm of their so-called
music and the regularity with which it was main-
tained.
The next Sunday he wanted to go to the
camp again. He had changed his opinion of the
“savages” in a very short time. He told me that
he had been warned in England not to go among
the blacks without firearms. Contrary to his
expectations, however, he spent some very
interesting times with the natives, and when he
was leaving Australia he said he would not forget
to tell his English friends about the natives as
they really were.
The blacks were very clever at both fashioning
and preserving their instruments and weapons,
particularly the scoops that were used, among
other things, for carrying drinking water. These
scoops were burnt, little by little, out of thick
logs, and I have often wondered how they got
the logs cut into short lengths to make the
scoops. Some of the largest scoops I saw were
about 30 inches long, 11 to 13 inches wide, and


from five to seven inches deep. They were of
a uniform thickness and the shape, which was
sometimes oval and sometimes like the scoops of
the old-fashioned scales, was always very true.
It was a work of art to make these instruments
and, when made, to keep them from cracking or
splitting. I have never seen a crack or split in
anything the natives made, and I have known one
of their scoops to stand all night, full of water,
without warping. The preservative they used
was the fat from emus, fish or lizards (the kang-
aroo seldom has much fat that can be taken off).
Many of the small animals, such as wallabies, rats,
opossums and bandicoots, get very fat in the
spring of the year and during the summer months,
and the natives used to take advantage of that
time of the year to make their weapons and uten-
sils.
I have often been asked whether the blacks
had any form of religion. Strange to say they
were very much afraid of what the “jingee”
(devil) might do, and went to all sorts of pains
to keep him from undoing anything they did.
They believed that everything they did at a
burial was “kwahba” (good), that they had sent
the deceased away never to be seen again, and
if he or she should appear to them again it was
the work of the “jingee.” They were afraid of
anything that was strange to them, and if it had
life they thought it was a devil and would hasten
to kill it for fear it would harm them.
This was how the blacks regarded the white


men in the first place. They thought he was a
blackfellow who had died and turned white, and
come back as a “jingee” to disturb their peace.
For that reason they first sought to kill the
whites. They soon realised, however, that the
white man was not always a “jingee,” for some
of the whites took a great deal of trouble to show
their friendship.
If a native hurt himself he blamed the devil.
They never thought that the devil was the cause
of death, but they were afraid that it might go
to a grave and disturb the body.
It must be concluded that they had similar
beliefs in good and evil, in some respects, to our
own. I have always been sorry that I did not
question them more closely about their cere-
monies and customs. If I attempted to ask them
about death, or a dead person, or the grave, I
was quickly led from the subject or asked not to
utter the dead person’s name, and for that reason
I was always sympathetic and refrained from ask-
ing too many questions. They always mourned
sincerely for their dead, and I am sure they
believed that death was good.
In the early ’nineties I went out kangaroo
hunting, some 100 miles east of Northam. I was
with a party, and we took with us an old native
who had been born in Kellerberrin about 65 years
before, and who could speak fairly good English.
Sitting at the camp fire one night, he told us a
story about a huge tree in which the eagles used
to nest. Sometimes the eagles came down and


took away the native piccaninnies to feed their
young, and as the natives could not throw their
spears or koilies up to the nests, or climb the tree,
they decided that it must be burnt down.
The natives came from far and near to help in
this task, which took them many moons
(months), for the wood had to be carried from
a radius of half a mile. The old man told us that
he could show us where the tree had been, the
place being about 10 miles from where we were.
We went with him, and he showed us a patch
of ground, the outline of which very much resem-
bled a large tree that had been burnt up. There
was not a vestige of herbage growing inside this
outline, which showed that the tree, if there ever
was one, had been something like 500 feet high
and 70 feet across the branches, with a trunk 17
feet in diameter.
The old man said that nobody knew when the
burning was done, but only that it was done, and
why. No blackfellow ever trod on the mark
there, he said, for fear that the “jingee” might
come. He had known the place all his life and
had never seen any bushes or grass growing on
the area. Nothing ever grew there because
“jingee nal-goo (eat) piccaninny.”
The whole story may have been superstition,
or it may actually have happened a very long
time ago, but at any rate it supports the natives’
policy of destroying evil that good may come. I
have seen many other places where trees have
been burned up while lying on the ground, but


in every case the outline of the tree has been
obliterated in one season by the growth of vege-
tation. The strange part about the place the old
native showed us was that it was not in country
where large timber grew.
I am sure that if a little more sympathy had
been extended to the blacks by civilised people,
we would have been able to see more clearly the
true value of the aborigines. We would have
been able to obtain the complete history of an
interesting race of people —and perhaps more
than one race, for a journey of 600 miles —say,
from Perth to the Murchison —would bring the
traveller into contact with quite a different kind
of native as far as customs, ceremonies and
language are concerned. They were the same
colour and their general methods of living were
similar, but they were unable to converse with
each other and had different names for every-
thing.
During the ’forties the number of aborigines
in Western Australia was estimated as 10 times
the number of whites, which I think was a
reasonable calculation. By the ’fifties there
were 12 5 000 white people in the colony, so that
the number of natives, taking the above estimate
as correct, was in the vicinity of 120,000,
From information supplied by the Aborigines
Department, Perth, I find that the total number
of natives under the department’s protection
in 1934 was 16,442, and it was supposed that
another 8,000 or so were still in their primitive


state in the back country of the far north. This
total of 24,442 aborigines at the present time
leaves a decrease in their numbers of over 96,000
since the very early days.
I can remember, back in the ’sixties, when
far more natives than white people were to be
seen in Perth and around some of the swamps.
They were all full-blooded aborigines, and wore
only the single garment, the “bouka,” which was
made of kangaroo skin.
NATIVE SPEECHES IN PUBLIC
The following is a speech made by a native
called Tommy Pierre at a reception given to Mr.
John Forrest (later Lord Forrest) in the Perth
Town Flail, on his return from the overland expe-
dition in 1874; —
“Well, gentlemen, I am very thankful to come
back to Swan River, and Bunbury, Fremantle and
Perth. I thought we was never to get back
(laughter). Many a time Igo into camp in the
morning going through desert place and swear
and curse and say, ‘Master, where the deuce are
you going to take us?’ I say to him, ‘l’ll give
you a pound to take us back.’ (Cheers and
laughter.) Master say, ‘Hush, what are you talk-
ing about? I will take you all right through to
Adelaide,’ and I always obey him. Gentlemen,
I am thankful to you that I am in the Town Hall.
That’s all I got to say.” (Cheers.)
On another occasion after the same expedition
Tommy gave the following speech at a reception:


“I only black fellow, you know, nothing at all
but just a few words. I ought to give you good
lecture. (Laughter.) Well, gentlemen, lam
very thankful that I got into the City of Perth,
that many people give me welcome and every-
thing. lam always thankful to any person that
brought me into the City of Perth. (Laughter.)
When I speak of City of Perth I don’t speak
wrong at all, what I speak is true and true. Well,
gentlemen, I am very thankful to the people in
Perth at the Town Hall. lam very thankful to
everyone that welcome me. lam always glad to
see white fellow around me. In Bunbury, Gov-
ernor Weld spoke to me and say he left me pre-
sent in the City of Perth and I hope I will get it
too. (Cheers and laughter.) Governor Weld
is a splendid fellow, splendid governor. Well,
gentlemen, lam all thankful. My last word is
I am thankful to you all.”
When the expedition reached the inhabited
portion of South Australia on the eastward
journey the settlers gave its members an enthusi-
astic reception, at which Tommy was asked to
speak. He said: “Well, gentlemen, lam not in
good humour to-night. (Laughter.) lam glad
I got through. We got a capital gaffir (master)
that lead us through, but it wasn’t him that got us
through, it wasn’t ourselves, but God who
brought us through the place and we ought to be
very thankful to God for getting us through.
(Cheers.) lam not in good humour to-night to


speak (laughter), but I will speak when I get to
Adelaide.”
FREMANTLE IN THE ’SEVENTIES AND ’EIGHTIES
I have some very pleasant recollections of Fre-
mantle in the old days. I first saw it when I was
very young, and visited it many times during the
’seventies, finally going there in 1879 to set up in
business as a builder and contractor.
In a short time I found myself a very busy
man. The building trade was very brisk, and
many workmen of various trades were employed
in the business. Large and small boats in great
numbers were being built along the south beach
for the coastal trade, especially for the pearling
industry of the North-West and for the shipping
of timber to the northern ports.
The loss of this kind of business to Fremantle,
caused later by the coming of the steamships, was
felt severely, not only by shipping firms, but also
by many workmen in the ship-building industry.
The steamers also caused the disappearance of
the old sailers that used to anchor out in Gage
Roads. These schooners and their attendant
small boats used to make a very pretty picture
as they lay out in the bay and near the little jetty
—the only landing place in those days except the
jetty just inside the mouth of the Swan River
where the steamer “Lady Stirling” tied up to land
her passengers and cargo.
This little river jetty was a very popular place.
People came down to it to meet their friends from


Perth, or to say good-bye. The jetty was near
what was known as the Fremantle Green, and
people of those days greatly enjoyed their even-
ing constitutionals on the green and the jetty.
Both were sadly missed by the old residents of
Fremantle when this land was resumed for rail-
way purposes. All the town’s cricket matches,
and nearly all other sports, were held there, and
the beautiful stretch of green bordering the
river can never be replaced.
In the early days the shops in Fremantle were
kept open until 10 o’clock on Saturday nights.
High Street was the principal street for business,
and from Higham’s Corner, as it was then called,
to near the tunnel, used to be thronged with
people shopping and promenading. Everybody
seemed to make for that part of High Street, and
it was hard to shoulder one’s way through, as it
is now sometimes in the main streets of Perth.
The south beach was a long, open stretch, and
there were no buildings south of Grey Street.
Early morning swimmers could go about quarter
of a mile along the beach and plunge into the sea
in the bathers Nature gave them.
The social life of Fremantle in the early days
was all that could be desired, but as there was
only one hall —the Oddfellow’s Hall —entertain-
ments, concerts, dances and public meetings all
had to take their turn until the Town Hall was
built about 1887. The Oddfellow’s Hall was well
patronised, for both private dances and the big
public balls were held there. The ball of the year


was the Nor’-Westers’ Ball, and the Volunteers’,
Civic and Masonic Balls were also held there for
many years.
The population of Fremantle was small in those
days, and I can remember the names of the old
residents given below. I have mentioned the town
many times in other places, and I trust I may be
excused for not giving more space to it at this
particular point.
Mr. Slade Police Magistrate
The Rev. J. Johnston Anglican Minister
The Rev. Riley Priest
Mr. W. E. Marmion, M.P. Merchant
W. S. Pearse, M.P. Merchant and Butcher
M. and W. Sampson Spirit Merchants
J. McCleary Merchant
G. Pierce Printer of “The Herald”
E. Solomon Auctioneer
Holman Coffee Merchant
Mason Jeweller
Joshua C. Harwood Publican and Contractor
Joshua, David and George Har- Sons of above
wood
G. Flindell Publican
G. Edwards Storekeeper
Mrs. M. Higham Storekeeper
Edward, Jack and Harvey Sons of above
Higham
J. Beatty Chemist
R. Birch Chemist
S. Pearse Baker
J. Pearse Tanner
G. Pearse Butcher
W. D. Moore Merchant
James Herbert Builder
P. Hagan Publican
R. Subert Publican
Fred Caesar Publican
George Duncan Publican
Alfred Davis Publican
H. Dixon
Walter Bateman Retired
F. Jones Boat-builder and Councillor
John Lewis
Sandover and Mayhew Hardware Merchants
G. B. Humble Schoolmaster
J. and W. Bateman Merchants and Ship-owners


W. A. Chamberlain Boat-builder
J. Storey Boat-builder
Wrightson Boat-builder
R. Houston Boat-builder
John and James Mews Boat-builders
Brown Boat-builder
Brown Blacksmith
W. Brown Customs Officer
Edwin Duffield Cabinet-maker
John Duffield
Samuel Duffield
John Allpike Blacksmith
James Allpike Saddle and Harness-maker
S. Nugent Saddle and Harness-maker
J. J. Jarvis Builder and Undertaker
Joseph Hossack Builder
George Curedale Orchardist and Stone Merchant
Tom Healy Cabinet-maker
James Lilley Ship-owner
J. and S. Ferris Butchers
Fordham Customs Officer
Tom and James Leighton Fishermen
Mrs. “Granny” Adams and
family
C. Anoise Tobacconist
Albert and Son Butchers
Tom Cook Blacksmith
W. Thompson
Sutherland Bank Manager and Captain of
Volunteers
Worsley Clifton In Charge of Customs
W. Beck Customs Officer
George Sweetman
H. C. Holdsworth
N. Waldeck Storekeeper
Sergeant Waldeck
W. Rose Stonemason
Tom and Harry Groves Stonemasons
G. Thorpe Stonemason
E. Thorpe
Godfrey Dickson Carpenter
Robert, W. and C. Cook Stonemasons
T. Cook Carpenter
Charles Annam Accountant
Annam Sail-maker
Chester
James Bums Saddle and Harness-maker
Johnston Blacksmith and Wheelwright
John and Tom Tapper
Harry Jose Accountant
Hayes Customs Officer
Cornelius Hayes Clerk
W. Houston Partner in Shipping Firm
Paisley In Charge of Asylum
Doonan


Henry Monday Stonemason
Fred Monday Carpenter
John Henderson Pawnbroker
L. Henderson Son of above
John McKay Police Sergeant
I. Read
Captain W. Waldron
Captain John O’Grady
Captain Harry O’Grady
A. Francis
William Lovegrove Solicitor
L. Tonkin
Simon Hammond and Hubble Merchants
W. Johns Accountant
Captain Litdejohn
H. Bateman Signwriter
T. de Lucey Hotel employee
Duncan Cumming Hotel employee
Mrs. Cumming Boarding-house Keeper
Mrs. Delaney Midwife
Alex. Quinn Warder
Dr. Barnett
Dr. Charles Elliott
Mrs. E. Key
Mrs. and Misses Rudderways
John Wood
W. Wood Carter
Outram Lime Merchant
Harry and Lall Fay
Beswick Warder
B. Bagshaw
C. Sharp
Brewington
Fothergill
F. Nicholay Painter
D. Baldwin Mason
B. Sinclair
M. Gallagher
Robert Clark Schoolmaster
W. H. Payne Bank employee
John Weedon Fruiterer and Greengrocer
W. Agnew Tailor
Fred Delackar Accountant
Fauntleroy Governor of Prison
Dr. Hope
R. Gibbins Merchant
Philip Webster Auctioneer
Mrs. Morris
James Manning Imperial Engineer and Architect


my MIA A PL SHELTER ABORIGINALS MAP OF
CUTA or TERRITORY TAKEN «#MEKO
CRADLE f° r PICANINNY
y y-VyVVV^\-\'\ / :
v\ WYNJCAH *» SWING ROVJND WITH STRING TO J
M MAKE A HUMMING SOUND i
5. BUNGARRAH for BE ATI N<3 TMM E GORROBORE ES j
g AND OTHER ENTERTAINMENTS-
r
5 SUNNAH WANGEE, IN ENGLISH, LETTER
T STICK -
COGAHX7
§ ASORT^OF^CHOPPER
0 TME HAND SHOWING SPEAR H ELD I N MEKO WHEN
<M GOI NG TO THROW IT
0 WAR SPEAR FOR THROWING LONG DISTANCES
q WOMMERA FOR DEFENCE
5 of wommera V i / / raK HAND
< \ ,y GAME
1 j ‘ f y^<YM^^^AMUSE-
-J KY LI E WAN^ 1 ' j KYLIt
0 , ■ . .. - ; ■• —~r^
WORRA /or DIGGING UP ROOTS ArfOOD & DIGGING GRAVES ETC.
OOWICK -.■-' - -- > FOR THROW I NG
DIAGRAM OF SOUTHWEST ABORIGINALS
INSTRUMENTS AS USED IN SIXTIES - By J.E Hammond


A WORD IN CONCLUSION
Having completed my history of the old
pioneers and given some description of the colony
in its infant stages, I would like now to give my
opinion of its future possibilities.
An enormous amount of wealth has been
produced in this country since the pioneering
days—wealth in the form of gold, wheat, pearls,
wool, fruit, meat, timber and dairy produce —and
much of this wealth has gone to swell the export
trade of the colony. Only a few of the pioneers
lived to have the satisfaction of seeing such
bountiful results from their labours in the early
days, but many of their descendants are alive now
and enjoying the fruits of their fathers’ work;
they, perhaps better than any other others, realise
the possibilities of the future, and they are still
using their energy and doing their part for the
prosperity of their native land.
Most of the first settlers in Western Australia
passed on without seeing even so much as a rail-
way, much less those further improvements in
transport and communications that have come
into existence in comparatively recent years.
Motor transport, electric tramways, electric light,
gas, air services, the telegraph and telephone,
wireless, and many other things that we in these
days accept as part of our daily life, were un-
dreamed of in the old times when the horse and
bullock wagon were the only methods of travel
quicker than walking (sometimes the bullock
wagon was not so quick).


It is obvious now, from the present stage of
progress and development, that this State cannot
help becoming one of the most important and
most prosperous in the Commonwealth; but it
must not be forgotten that these things could
never have come to pass but for the courage,
endurance and energy of the early settlers.
It is to perpetuate the deeds and the memory
of those sterling and intrepid “Western Pioneers”
that this book is written.


That it has been possible for this book to
be printed and published in my own State of
Western Australia gives me much pride and
pleasure. This was accomplished by no mean
effort on the part of Mr. E. S. Watt, of the
Imperial Printing Coy., Ltd., to whom I extend
my sincere thanks.
J. E. HAMMOND.






