

TA- Fy>
Bl o
Christ €lwrd| ®a%hral,
MEMORIAL SERVICE
for the late
RIGHT HONOURABLE
HAROLD EDWARD HOLT
LL.B., PoC. ? C.H., M.P.
Prime Minister of Australia
1966 - 1967
Friday, 22nd December, 1967
12.15 p.m.


ORDER OF SERVICE
HYMN:
Let saints on earth in concert sing
With those whose work is done^
For all the servants of our King
In earth and heaven are one.
One family 3 we dwell in him,
One Church, above, beneath:;
Thou now divided by the stream.,
The narrow stream of death.
One .army of the living God,
To his command we bow^
Part of his host hath crossed the flood,
And part is crossing now®
E*en now to their eternal home
There pass some spirits blest..
While others to the margin come,
Waiting '•their call to rest*
Tosu, be 'thou our constant Guide:
Then, when the word is given,
Bid Jordan *g narrow stream divide,.
And bring us safe to heaven*,
All standing, the Priest shall say!
I am the resurrection and the life,
saith the Lord s he that believeth in
me, though he were.dead, yet shall he
live i and whosoever- liveth and
believeth- in me shall never dio«-
I know that, my-Redeemer liveth,.and
that he shall stand up at the last upon
the earth ; whom I -shall see for
myself, and.mine eyes shall bnho.ld,
and not .another*
We-brought nothing, into this world,
and it is certain we can carry nothing
out. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath
taketh-awayj blessed be the name of
the Lord.
Blessed are they that mourn t for
they shall be comforted.
Let not your .heart be troubled s ye
believe in God, believe also in me.
In my Father’s house are many mansions*
PJAIM 130;
Out of the deep have I called unto /
thee 0 / Lords Lord / hear /my /
voice.
0 let thine ears con--/sider / well:
the / voice of / my com-/pjLci:L n in
If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark
what is / done a-/mi sss 0 / Lord /
who may a--/bide it?
For there is / mercy with / thee:
therefore / shalt / thou be / feared.
I look for the Lord, my soul doth /
wait for / him: in his / word / is
my / trust.


My soul fleeth / unto the / Lords
before the morning watch, I say
be-/ fc re the / morning / watch.
0 Israel trust in the Lord, for with
the / Lord there is / mercys and
with / him is / plenteous
re-/demption 6
And he shall re-/deem / Israels from/
all / his / sins.
Glory be to the Father, and / to the /
Sons and /to the / Holy / Ghost?
As it was in the beginning, is now,
and / ever / shall bes world
without / end, / A-/men.
THE LESSONs Revelation 7s w. 9
HYMNs
Jesus lives? thy terrors -now
Can, 0 Death, no more appal us;
Jesus lives* by this we know
.Thou, 0 grave, canot not enthral us*
■ • Alleluyai
Jesus lives? henceforth is death
But the gate of life immortal;
This shall • calm our trembling breath,
When we pass its gloomy portal,
- -Alleluyai
Jesus liven? for us ho died;
Then, alone to Jesus living,
Pure in heart may we abide,
Glory to our Saviour giving*
Alleluya?
Jesus lives? - our hearts know well
Nought from us his love shall sever;
Life, nor death,'nor powers of hell.
Tear us from his keeping ever,
Alleluya?
Jesus lives? to him the throne
Over all the world is given;
May we go where he is -gone.
Rest and reign with him.in heaven,
Alleluya?
ADDRESS; The Bishop -of Newcastle*
All standing, the Dean shall sa
Man that is born of a woman .hath,
but a- short time to live, and- is full
of misery. He cometh up, and is cut.
down, like a flower; he fleeth as it
were a shadow, and never continueth
in one stay.
In the midst of life we are- in
deaths of whom may we seek for
succour, but of thee, 0 Lord, who for
our sins art justly displeased?
Yet, 0 Lord God most holy, 0 Lord
most mighty, 0 holy and most merciful
Saviour, deliver us not into the
bitter pains of eternal death*
Thou knowest. Lord, the secrets of
our hearts; shut not thy merciful


ears to our prayer 5 but spare us* Lord
most holy* 0 God most mighty* 0 holy and
merciful Saviour* thou most worthy Judge
eternal* suffer us not* at our last
hour* for any pains of death* to fall
from thee*
Almighty God of his great mercy has
taken to himself the soul of our dear
brother* we therefore commit him to His
care and keepings in sure and certain
hope of the resurrection to eternal life
through our Lord Jesus Christy who shall
change the body of our low estate that
it may be like unto his glorious body*
according to the mighty working* whereby
he is able to subdue all things to
himself.
I heard a voice from heaven* saying
unto me* Write* From henceforth blessed
are the dead which die in the Lords
even so saith the Spirit? now may they
rest from their labours*
All kneels
THE PRAYERS
All stands
The Choir will sing the Russian
Contakion of the Departed*
All kneels
THE BLESSING


THE RIGHT HONOURABLE HAROLD EDWARD HOLT, C.H.
Each new phase of Harold Holt's career was greeted almost with unbelief and grudging resentment, and
comments most often heard were like this "I didn't know he could do it''; or doubting queries "How
good is he really?" "What qualifications has he for it?"
It seems an extraordinary comment on our means of mass communication that a man should attain the
highest position in this country, and the qualities he embodied should still be unperceived by many.
Even during the stunning shock of his death, people were surprised at its impact on the world leaders
who had broken through official condolences expected from protocol, and came to express their personal
sorrow at our loss.
When alive, his relationship with the President of the United States and with other leaders was a puzzle
to many, but the close relationships he formed were based on fellowship. Harold met each as man to man, and
all were able to share for a time the loneliness that comes with the responsibility of national leaderships. The
life-blood of leadership is loyalty, and these men recognised a loyalty inherent in his nature a loyalty that
was fostered by School and College, andwhichgrew to embrace the people of Australia, and Mankind.
At the Memorial Service, Australians dramatically realised that there must be some unexpected quality
in the man whose death had drawn the leaders of other nations and races in the Free World to Melbourne just
to show their appreciation of Harold Holt the man, and regrets at our Prime Minister's death. They made our
grief their own.
How was this so?
The temperament and qualities of Harold Holt limited the personal appreciation of so many people.
Primarily he had the apparent ordinariness of a common man—and a character with many attributes that make
up the common denominator of an Australian. People could recognise and acknowledge some part of them-
selves in him, and this limited their judgment and assessment of his qualities through their own limitations.
Harold Holt agreed with, and his life strongly illustrated, Wordsworth's 'The child is father to the man".
His own life and career were a continuous development and training firmly based on his temperament and
character.
At Wesley he came under the influence of that wise old man, L.A.Adamson. Throughout his lifetime,
Harold Holt made no secret of his debt to the influence and ideals of the Headmaster. Character can be a
stronger teacher than the written word, and Adamson taught by precept and wise example. His ideals were
embodied in the ideals of chivalry-to be a "gentle man” with the true meaning of each word. These senti-
ments were honoured through the School Song book. How potent were those melodies and chants!
A phrase of Adamson that Harold took to himself so that it became a part of his own life was "strenuous-
ness and sentiment".
An early lesson in his moral training occurred when he was a Prefect. Two boys were sent to the Head
for punishment—one for having damaged a railway carriage en route to the Boat Races at Geelong, and the
other had perpetrated a practical joke in publicly removing another boy's trousers. The first boy had been
admonished, the other whacked. Harold and the Prefects after earnest discussion went to the Head about the
apparent reversal of justice in the punishments, but the Head had seen the first offence to be against property,
to be reprimanded of course, but the second offence was committed against the dignity of another human
being.
The lesson that the dignity of the fellow human being is all-important remained with Harold all his life,
and is the basis of his respect towards his friends and his political colleagues. This is illustrated in his first
joyous announcement to his wife that he had been elected Prime Minister without having to trample down
friends and colleagues.
At school the virtues of loyalty were stressed in developing character. The potent songs sing of loyalty
to the team, to one's fellows and to the school.
He must have been born with the strong streak of determination that was apparent in the games that he
played. This quality of determination was lauded in the school songs—
" Striving, striving, inch by inch
Never a man to shirk or flinch.
Brave lads all in a desperate pinch "
The ideals of team work to gain the victory, loyalty to the team, to love the game beyond the prize.
These powerful forces were part of him then, and hold the key that can unlock understanding of his work in
Public Life apd Government.
His training and development at school culminated in the traumatic experience at his last Speech Day
on the platform of the Melbourne Town Hall singing the Leaving Song to the hundreds of boys, old boys and
parents. This crystallized for him a reality he acknowledged later, that sentiment was an integral part of his
relationship with others—but always practically, and perhaps pathetically, he thought of himself as "The Cat
that Walks by Himself".
Like most, when he came to Queen's, he moved into residence with his personality and temperament
already set and established, and the wider influences of University fired and tested him. The results best
achieved by reason, common sense and argument—and always the use of nous (that neglected word). The legal
training established for him the ideal of a Rule of Law, and in the arguments of Aldous Huxley, he agreed that
the virtues of compassion and understanding were the only absolute standards to guide him in his dealing with
people.
When at school he met the girl Zara Dickins who later became his wife, and together the high calibre
of their personalities developed and influenced each other.
Always his attitude to life was that of a lover.To give love and appreciation was his greatest happiness.
He could laugh easily and he used his senses and physical prowess to capture life to the full. He accepted for


himself "all experience is an arch wherethrough gleams that untravelled world whose margin fades for ever and
for ever when I move".
He graduated in the Depression—apparently without rhyme or reason, jobs could not be obtained, un-
employment was a black death to the spirit—personal sorrow and hardship struck at many. Then he swore that
when time took away the old ones, and his generation moved on, never again must the impersonal cruelty of
an economic system be allowed to twist and warp our lives. The political parties sought ways out of the
morass and each party had its goals.
Harold Holt was approached by each to join and he finally saw that the Liberal Party offered an
individual greater scope and opportunity to bring about changes and to influence our society than the in-
fighting that was a feature, even in those days, of the Labour boys.
With no money behind him, no strong group to back him but only his own integrity and personality,
he ultimately was elected to the National Parliament.
Long before the word "consortium" had its overtones of political meaning, Harold practised it in his
public life.
When war broke out it was inevitable that he should join up. It is just as inevitable that when Gunner
Holt was placed where his outstanding abilities were being wasted he had to be brought back to Parliament. It
would have been a travesty of all common sense if he had stayed fruitlessly in a job which could be done by
anyone, when at that time our existence as a nation required our maximum skill to re-adjust our capacity to
survive against the imminent threat from Japan.
His training in human relationships stood the new test in his first official contact with peoples of other
races, first as a Minister and then in opposition where his abilities were utilized in the huge sphere of Lend-
Lease activities. He played an equally important role with the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association,
seeing it as a body that could grow as the direct influence of Great Britain weakened in political matters. In
those days it was a forum for nations and communities who believed in and worked for a form of Parliament-
ary Democracy.
When a Minister again in the Government his practical mind was set to solve the problems of Australian
unproductivity, the scarcity of all kinds of consumer goods, and insufficient commodities that were all part of
the Australian way of Post-war Life. Austerity hung like a stench over our economic body, like the stench in a
deserted native village in war-torn New Guinea.
As Minister for Labour and National Service and Immigration, he sought out manufacturers and learned
where shortages of skilled workers or lack of materials bogged down production. Australia was bedevilled by a
continuity of strikes and stoppages, and the law of the jungle was the rule between men and managers, but he
was eventually able to bring the men's representatives and managements face to face around a table. The
considered plan and action of this man alone changed the atmosphere of industrial relations from tensions and
hostility to some understanding of the other man's problems. To an extraordinary degree, he had the fantastic
ability to guide opposing groups of men and interest through the chaotic areas of conflict to common ground.
He obtained concessions from all sides, appealing in common sense for greatest good. His skill throughout the
years in manoeuvring and manipulating these forces was unique.
By the end of the fifties, his relations with Trade Union Leaders, including the militant group on the
waterfront, established a trust based on human understanding.
Typical was his appeal to cartoonists to change their image of the Wharfie from ferocious sub-human
caricatures. He argued that the harm to the men's families, face to face with the beastliness of the image,
constituted a real obstacle to better understanding.
Harold always loved the tropical areas of Australia, and the challenge of primitive living on an Island
off the coast of North Queensland appealed to every romantic instinct of his nature. For a few days of each
year for many years, he was able to explore on land and under water. The beauty and wonder overwhelmed •
him: the dangers were to be appraised, and overcome; danger was a challenge to be faced and lived with. Like
political challenge, he was stimulated, and his sense of living was heightened. He trained himself to regard
jocularly every kick a boost.
His underwater activity over the Great Barrier Reef and at his belovedPortsea during the last decade of
his life was the manifestation of his temperamental determination.
He could recognize people's pretentions but regarded them as disguises adopted consciously or
consciously to protect some weakness.
His generosity towards political opponents was an example of the generous spirit fostered during
boyhood. He fought hard fights to reduce the power of a political opponent, but in victory he has gone out
of his way to help them .
Political life was a life to bring about conditions to make it possible for people to live richer and fuller
lives. For him, leadership gave a man the greater opportunity to put forward ideas, critically examine them,
and argue about their merits. His leadership was not from the heights, but from the midst. He felt there were
more ways to move a mass of people than mounting a white horse in a protest march, however white the
horse may seem.
Many were unable to visualise him as a leader when he became Prime Minister for the real qualities of
his greatness are unsung.
His human qualities were so various that many could not see the shape of the wood for the trees. He
never lost his youthful attributes. His qualities of good humour, wit, appreciation, love, sentiment, compassion
consideration and judgment, tempered by his iron determination, made him the most extraordinary ordinary
man of our times—the epitome of a human being at this stage of Australian history and a man who was loved—
a Right Honourable Gentle Man.
G. Mclntyre.
