

WEST IRIAN AND THE WORLD
KEMENTERIAN
LUAR NEGERI
MINISTRY OF
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
DJAKARTA
REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA




WEST IRIAN AND THE WORLD
THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
DJAKARTA
AUGUST 1954




EXTRACT FROM SPEECH BY PRESIDENT SOEKARNO
ON 17th. AUGUST 1950.
This (Irian) is not a trifling question'; this is a major issue.
I fear that the Netherlands do not yet understand that the
Irian question is a major issue to us.
The Irian question is not a question of ethnology, neither
is it a question of our having reached a sufficient stage of
maturity. As a matter of fact, imperialists have always advan-
ced the argument of maturity, but this argument has never
been a sound one. The Irian question is a question of colo-
nialism or independence. Part of our country is still colonised
by the Dutch. This is a reality, and we do not accept this.
We want the whole territory of our country, from “Sabang
to Marauke”, without exception without excepting the
territory of the Dayaks, without excepting the territory of
the Toradjas, without excepting Irian.
The argument “intelligent or not intelligent” does not hold
good at all. I hope that the Dutch will remember that they
have also applied this argument of “intelligent or not intell-
igent ” to us for dozens of years and thousands of times
without result. Ultimately we got our freedom all the same,
whether we are intelligent or not, because our national spirit
has been set ablaze, because our national will has been arous-
ed, because our national aspirations have taken concrete
shape
Spare us the “mission sacree” argument. It has grown rusty,
it has gone stale and is laughable! However splendid the
motive of “mission sacree” may be in itself, the fact remains
that the Netherlands still occupies West Irian, and this proves
that the Netherlands is still a colonial power.
Do not assert that the Netherlands must stay in West Irian
“for the sake of democracy”, because a nation can only practice
democracy in the absence of colonialism, or can only practice


colonialism in the absence of democracy, but it cannot imple-
ment both at the same time. If, indeed, the Netherlands be-
lieves in freedom, if, indeed, it believes in the “sacred rights
of men and of peoples”, the Netherlands must free West Irian.
This very moment, because you cannot really believe in
freedom while denying it to others.
Mark, I do not advance arguments touching the question
of “intelligent or not intelligent”, of “Irian having the same
blood as we or not”, of “Irian being grown up or not”. I only
base my arguments on the question of colonialism or non-
colonialism, independence or dependence. The former Nether-
lands East Indies in its entirety from Sabang to Merauke
must be freed and included within the framework of the
Indonesian State. This is a moral obligation of the Dutch,
who assert that they have transferred sovereignty to us
unconditionally. This is a national task for us which cannot
be evaded


AN EXTRACT
FROM
THE CHARTER OF THE TRANSFER OF SOVEREIGNTY
The Kingdom of the Netherlands unconditionally and
irrevocably transfers complete sovereignty over Indonesia to
the Republic of the United States of Indonesia and thereby
recognises the said Republic of the United States of Indonesia
as an independent and sovereign State.
With regard to the Residency of New Guinea, it is decid-
ed that the Status Quo of the Residency shall be
maintained, with the stipulation that within a year from the
date of transfer of sovereignty to the Republic of the United
States of Indonesia, the question of the political status of
New Guinea shall be determined through negotiations
between the Republic of the United States of Indonesia and
the Kingdom of the Netherlands.




WEST IRIAN AND THE WORLD
Where and what is West Irian?
This vast territory, whose future is a matter of current
dispute between the Republic of Indonesia and the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, is variously known as Dutch New Guinea,
Irian Barat and West Irian.
The name “Irian”, which is now the only one used for
New Guinea by the 80 m. people of Indonesia, is an Austro-
nesian word with the connotations of “people” and “high
places”. It has been long used in Irian itself, and, under the
driving force of the movement for independence throughout
Indonesia, acquired also the strength of a nationalist rallying
call.
Lying due north of Australia and east-north-east of Java,
the fantastically shaped island of Irian or New Guinea has
for many years been divided into two zones of foreign admi-
nistration. The eastern part of the island is at present gover-
ned under a trusteeship by Australia. Before the First World
War this territory, with its associated and surrounding islands,
was a German colonial possession. In 1918 it was transferred
under a League of Nations mandate to Australia, and in 1947
the United Nations approved its retention in trusteeship by
Australia. The boundary between the Australian Trusteeship
territory and West Irian, the Dutch colonial territory, runs
almost due north at approximately 141 degrees east of Green-
wich.
The total area of the island it could almost be called
a continent is about 850,000 square kilometres and West
Irian is almost half of this with an area of 413,000 square
kilometres (as large as France) and a population, estimated
by air-survey methods, of 1 million. Thus, West Irian is


three times as big as Java and twelve times as big as Holland,
but its population is only one-tenth that of Holland and one-
fiftieth that of Java.
Of the former Netherlands East Indies, which had an area
of 1,900,000 square kilometres, 22% of the total land area
has not yet been freed from colonial rule. That is the essence
of the Indonesian case, and the issue which, since 1950, has
hampered and impeded the development of good and normal
relations between Indonesia and the Netherlands. Like other
disputes between nations which could be friendly, it has a
cumulative irritating effect, and this is reflected in relations
with other countries.
The whole territory is inhospitable in its present unex-
ploited and undeveloped condition. Huge areas of malarial
swamp and marsh and a great backbone of mountains footed
with almost impenetrable jungle make up most of the land
area. Dutch administration has never reached very deeply
into the country or very deeply amongst the people. Even to-
day it is estimated that more than two-thirds of the inhabi-
tants have little or no contact with the Dutch administration
and most of the regions and native villages continue to have
their own autonomous and indigenous administration.
Many different local languages and dialects are spoken, but
amongst the people who have had contact with the outside
world and other parts of Indonesia, Indonesian is the common
general language, now as for long past. The Dutch Missions,
for example, use Indonesian for their services amongst the
population and as the vehicle of communication.
Little has been done to improve health conditions. Tropical
and other diseases are prevalent amongst the people, who are
far removed from the sources and resources of modern medi-
cine, and certainly disease is one of the factors hindering the
economic development of the territory and the progress of
the people. Until the end of the Second World War there
were no facilities for high school education in West Irian and


elementary education was available chiefly from the Missions,
and they, with the best possible intention, were unable to
provide anything like an efficient system or a sufficiently
great quantity.
In spite of its vast area, West Irian is, at this moment, of
little economic importance to the world. In the years 1934—36
inclusive, the average yearly export was only / 631,000 and
the average yearly import only / 1,136,000. In the years
between 1929 and 1936, yearly exports ranged in value
between / 2,264,000 and / 357,000.
The fact is that, although it has for so long been a colony
of Holland, the territory has never been efficiently explored
by modern methods. It is known that there is mineral wealth.
Almost certainly, too, by the use of modern capital equipment
and machinery, much of the swamp could be drained and
the jungle cleared. At the moment, the products of West
Irian, apart from oil, are the products of an unexploited tro-
pical country: timber, some copra, pearls and pearl products,
copal and other jungle and sea products make up the export
list.
For ages West Irian has been almost forgotten by the world
and even by the Dutch, who maintained only a few small
civil service posts on the coast. In the Dutch colonial civil
service, an appointment to West Irian was regarded as being
an act of censure, and only a few “jungle-lovers” sought
employment there. On the maps, West Irian showed large
blank spaces.
There was some trade between the people of West Irian and
the other peoples of East Indonesia. The Irianese brought
birds of paradise, damar and spices to the coast and exchanged
them for trade goods. This trade, however, was of little eco-
nomic significance. Altogether, West Irian has been much
more of a liability than an asset to the Dutch colonial system.
The Dutch had a saying that the only export from Irian was
black water fever.


It is interesting to see that the colonial budget for West
Irian for the year 1954 shows a deficit to be met by the
Netherlands of Fls. 31 m., and this is exclusive of defence
costs.
However, the Dutch administration did find some use for
the malaria-ridden south-east coast. At Boven Digul a con-
centration camp was set up to which many of the Indonesian
nationalist leaders were exiled. This concentration camp was a
somewhat double-edged weapon, for out if it there developed a
nationalist movement in West Irian, assisted and often guided
by the exiles from other parts of Indonesia. Reports and
letters from Indonesian families in West Irian state that,
since 1950, Boven Digul has again been re-stocked with
nationalist prisoners.
After 1935, the economic picture of the territory changed
somewhat. Oil was found in the western part, and it was in
quantities sufficient to make exploitation profitable. A pri-
mary reason for the awakening of Dutch concern was the
fact that other countries, and especially Japan, were showing
an interest in the territory. The Dutch were fully aware that
their grip over the colonial empire would be endangered if
parts of it were obviously maintained as a reserve area.
An oil company, the Dutch New Guinea Oil Company, was
set up by the Royal Dutch Shell, the Standard Oil Company
and the Pacific Oil Company, who participated in the ratio
of 40 : 40 : 20. This company received an option on an area
of 10 million hectares and set up settlements in Baba at
Maccluer Bay and later, after further exploration, at Sorong.
These fields are now in production.
In order to prevent further complaints that nothing was
being done in West Irian, a company was established in
Amsterdam having as its aim the exploration of the Dutch
part of Irian and the exploitation of all resources except gold
and oil. The “Dutch Company for New Guinea” had a capital
of only two million Dutch guilders, although a number of


large Dutch companies with interests in the Netherlands East
Indies participated. Compared with the aims of the Company,
the capital was ridiculously small, and when the war started
its schemes had not got beyond the blueprint stage.
The only other consistent effort to exploit the resources of
West Irian was started in 1933 when the N.E.I. Government
set up a small rubber estate on the north-east coast. This
estate was still under development at the outbreak of the
war, but it was later abandoned. Some small Japanese estates
in the same area met the same fate.
Some exploration was carried out to find suitable ground
for immigrants, especially Eurasians, from Indonesia, but
little except, as usual, for voluminous reports, came of these
efforts.
The discriminatory treatment accorded to those of mixed
blood certainly did not contribute towards the development
of the existing resources. The immigrants had many com-
plaints which could not be met by the Dutch. Later, in 1949
and 1950, the Dutch painted a marvellous picture of what could
be done by Eurasians in West Irian, and large groups migrat-
ed there from Indonesia as a result. In the event, it did not
take long before they were severely disillusioned in the lonely,
inhospitable stretches of settlement along the coast. The
Dutch Parliamentary Mission of 1952 reported on the con-
ditions under which the Eurasians had to live, and their
report was not an encouraging one for white settlers. For
example, even now almost all food has to be imported; rice
from Bangkok, fish, meat, eggs and vegetables from distant
Holland.
It is clear, therefore, that until the transfer of sovereignty
to Indonesia, very little had been achieved in West Irian
except the establishment of some oil fields which were of
little economic importance in peace time.
This was not, however, because of the absence of possibili-
ties for economic exploitation of the territory. There are very
many other potential sources of economic wealth there besides


oil. Various kinds of minerals have heen discovered already
in the Cyclops mountains, and in other parts, and agriculture
will certainly be possible in the plains near the north coast
where rice fields can be laid out.
Nothing, however, can be done without capital and labour.
The population of West Irian, only 1 m. spread thinly in the
huge territory, are not in a position to provide the regular
labour necessary. Even the oil fields could not function if
thousands of workers were not brought from other parts of
Indonesia to West Irian. Of the approximately 10,000 migrants
from other east Indonesian islands in West Irian, about 6,000
work in the oil fields of Sorong.
Some Ethnological, Cultural, Historical and Philological
Considerations.
It must be said at once that the Indonesian claim that the
continued retention of West Irian by the Netherlands is
legally and morally unjustifiable is not based on ethnological
or philological grounds.
Dutch scientists and pseudo-scientists have spent much
effort in proving, at least to their own satisfaction, that the
peoples of West Irian have no racial affinity with the rest
of Indonesia, and that therefore the Indonesian claim to the
territory cannot be admitted.
Even if this were true, and it is the considered opinion
of a large number of scientists with a world reputation that
it is not true the Indonesian claim would in no wise be
altered. The futility of arguing the issue on such lines should
be obvious, for even the Dutch must agree that, whatever else
they may be, the peoples of West Irian are certainly not
Aryan!


There is, in point of fact, strong evidence to indicate the
ethnological, cultural and philological connection between
West Irian and the rest of Indonesia. Historically, the affinity
is indisputable, for West Irian, up to the time when sove-
reignty was transferred to Indonesia, was regarded by Indo-
nesia, by Holland and by the rest of the world as belonging
to the vast complex of islands making up the Indonesian
Archipelago.
West Irian was, in fact, part of the Sultanate of Tidore
throughout most of recorded history, and was repeatedly
recognised as such by the Dutch colonial regime. Even so
late as in the weeks immediately preceding the Round Table
Conference in 1949, the Dutch, in a somewhat typically
negative fashion, recognised this, when they sought to use
certain colonial regulations of the year 1904 to bring about
a separation between Tidore and West Irian. They offered
the Sultan of Tidore 50,000 guilders as the price for the sale
of West Irian. This new version of the Louisiana Purchase
was rejected by the Sultan.
Notone will deny that West Irian has a social structure
which is, in nearly all its manifestations, unique in Indonesia.
Equally, it is not a form of social structure found in Holland.
Obviously, therefore, the numberless Dutch references to the
differences between West Irian society and that of the rest
of Indonesia are, in fact, so many red herrings.
Indonesia’s case in this issue is based upon three pillars:
Anti-colonialism,
Legality,
Nationalism.
The word “Indonesia” is not a racial term, but has exclusi-
vely national and political connotations because it was used
in the national struggle for independence as replacing the
Dutch conception of the “Netherlands East Indies”.


Today, Indonesia contains many ethnic groups, of which
those of West Irian are one part. It is a national and political
unit not an ethnic or racial, a philological, zoological, or
botanical group. All such questions are raised, and no doubt
will continue to be raised, only to confuse the issue. And
that issue is simply the continued illegal colonial domination
of Indonesian territory.
The Present Condition of West Irian.
After many generations of colonial rule by Holland, what
is the present condition of West Irian and its people ? The
short, but the almost complete, answer, is “shockingly bad”.
There have been 126 years of almost continuous Dutch rule,
but there has been, and still is, no sign of willingness to
improve the territory in the interests of the people.
The ethics and the practice of any colonial policy can be
estimated fairly closely by the condition of education, and in
this field, as in the fields of economy, health and security,
the present situation in West Irian is deplorable.
Some statistics of education for West Irian are amongst
the few definite figures concerning that vast area. Until the
end of the second World War there was no opportunity for
the youth of West Irian to acquire education above the
primary level.
Most of the few schools were organised and run by the
Dutch Missions, which in this, as in so much else, have done
sterling work. In 1947 the Missions were running 499 schools,
of which 303 were so-called “civilisation schools” and at those
education in any formal sense was hardly possible and hardly
attempted. There were 188 “peoples schools at a primary
level, and 8 others. The total number of pupils at the Mission
schools was 24,964, and there were 644 teachers, of whom


41.3% were Irianese and 58.7% Indonesians from other parts
of Indonesia. There were no Dutch teachers.
The colonial administration itself provided some schools
6 in all, with 60 teachers and 2,140 pupils.
It is hardly necessary to dilate on the fact that the colonial
administration provided only 6 schools in a territory of more
than 400,000 square kilometres and a population of Im. The
fact speaks loudly for itself, but more loudly still when the
Netherlands, as part of its justification for continued occup-
ation of West Irian, questions whether Indonesia could find
the necessary teachers for the educational advance of the
Irian people.
The medical health of the people is in no better case. An
unhealthy people finds difficulty in making progress; physical
health aids spiritual and mental development. In fact, little
is known of the standards of health in West Irian, and
certainly no reliable statistics are available. However, what
is known is a black picture indeed. It is a picture of neglect
and worse. It is no exaggeration to say that a large part of
the population is awaiting death.
For example, in the southern part of West Irian, between
the Digul River, the border of Australian New Guinea and
the Arafura Sea is the territory of the Marindinese people,
the Kajas- Kaj as. These, for people of West Irian, were
prosperous, for their 43,000 square kilometres of land grew
many coconut trees and sago palms, and the forests and seas
provided other food bountifully. At the beginning of this
century, this happy people was visited by an epidemic of
granuloma venereum, brought by hunters of birds of paradise,
at that time much sought as an adornment for women in
Europe and thus bringing high prices. From then on the
Marindinese were decimated, and there was, and is, the
possibility that the people would disappear from the world.


Some years after granuloma venereum become disastrously
prevalent in South New Guinea, a Dutch Assistant Resident
in Merauke (the local capital) made what is surely a classic
commentary on colonial mentality. This man, whose name
deserves to be recorded in the annals of history, wrote:
“Another question is whether something can still be
made of South New Guinea without its Kajas-Kajas. This
question is difficult to answer, but I am inclined to answer
it in the affirmative. The dying out of the indigenous
population need at least not be an impediment for the
possible progress of the country. What is more is that
sometimes I think that this progress is checked by the
Kajas-Kajas being so very conservative. The large
stretches of coconut groves on the coast could, in
European or other hands, produce much more than is the
case now. Hundreds of coconuts rot away on the ground
as being superfluous. A systematic thinning-out of those
groves, draining, in brief, a proper care, would be to the
benefit of the quantity and the quality.
“Owing to the fact that the Kajas-Kajas is so conser-
vative, has no need of more wealth and luxury, and that
the people has an abundance of food - his sago and
coconuts in the forest, his fish in the sea and his cangerus
or pig in the plains he does not work; he is at peace
with his living conditions.
“The copra trade is ailing because the Kajas-Kajas is
not inclined to exchange more coconuts than he wants
to obtain tobacco and ornaments”.
Mr. M. L. F. Plate wrote that at a time when the decimation
of the Marindinese was already proceeding apace.
These facts on education and health are not adduced to
denigrate in any way Dutch efforts in West Irian. They are
adduced to show clearly that, even when good will is present
and an enlightened, an ethical colonial policy followed, the
Netherlands is incapable of ensuring the progress of the
Irianese.


Before Indonesia became an independent State, little or
nothing - sometimes worse than nothing - was done for the
people of Irian, And yet in those days all conditions were
favourable. Holland had her bases in the Netherlands East
Indies, she had troops, doctors, teachers and all instruments
of State Power. Further, Holland disposed of the fabulous
wealth of the Indies, But little enough was done for the rest
of Indonesia and virtually nothing for West Irian. Today,
Holland is a small country many thousands of miles from her
only remaining colonial base in Asia.
Is it likely that under such unfavourable conditions she can
do more than in the past ?
*
Some Considerations of Defence.
It seems inevitable that, in a world of conflict, questions
of defence and security weigh heavily in the considerations
of statesmen. In this field, West Irian is of perhaps particular
importance. During the Second World War the attempted
Japanese invasion of Australia was halted in the jungles and
mountains of Irian. The invaders were bogged down by terrible
physical conditions. Further, Irian was used as an essential
base and as a spring-board for the eventual victory of the
United Nations in the Pacific area.
But in the present world, West Irian is not only important
for the defence of Australia, but also and even primarily
for the defence of the rest of Indonesia. Because of its im-
portance in any possible future struggle for the defence of
freedom, West Irian itself should first be made free within
the framework of a free Indonesia. West Irian, still colonised
as it is now, is not only itself defenceless, but is also a
challenge to the very principles of freedom.


Irianese from Manokwari in ceremonial dress.


Work in progress in a rice field on Japen Island.


INDONESIA
Population Area
(1950 EST) (SQ. ML.)
JAVA AND MADURA 52.000.000 50.745
SUMATRA 12.000.000 163.557
KALIMANTAN (BORNEO) 3.000.000 288.286
REMAINING AREAS 11.000.000 313.277
78.ooo"ooo 815.865
DISTANCES FROM DJAKARTA (IN NAUTICAL MILES)
LONDON 8515
SAN FRANCISCO 7640
PEKING 2992
TOKYO 3190
NEW YORK 10330
SINGAPORE 525
SABANG (SUMATRA) 1108
BALIKPAPAN (KALIMANTAN) 725
MENADO (SULAWESI) 1275
MANILLA 1560
DARWIN 1700
RANGOON 1560
SAIGON 1025
VLADIVOSTOK 4610
MONOKWARI (IRIAN) 1770
KUPANG (TIMOR) 1130
AMBON (CERAM) 1390
The map shows the strategic and economic unity of the whole Indonesian Archipelago
and the importance of West Irian to the sovereign Indonesian State.


Three men in their traditional warriors dress at a New Year celebration
near Hollandia.


Irianese youth.
Typical coastal jungle. Near Manokwari.


One of the significant lessons of the war against Japan was
the clear proof that a colony cannot be relied upon to resist
an invader. The people of a colony, unarmed and defenceless,
usually politically untutored, fail to see any reason for
assisting their colonisors. Only in a free country is there any
likelihood of immediate and certain resistance by the people.
Equally, it would be wrong, and perhaps fatally wrong, to
underestimate the resistance to an invader of a people freed
from colonial ties and aware that their effort is for the
preservation of their own freedom and human dignity.
These considerations, it seems, are also being weighed by
the Dutch, for in recent months they have concerned them-
selves more and more with defence in Irian. In the event of
a future conflict there, it seems that defence is to be primarily
naval, and, in addition, airbases are being built.
One destroyer is being used, together with some landing
ships to transport marines to otherwise inaccessible weak
points. The small Army is virtually immobilised because
there are hardly even 50 miles of road.
Thus, it seems that the same mistake is being made as in the
past. As, for example, when the Netherlands East Indies was
faced with invasion from Japan. Defence is being imposed on
the people, not built up from the people. The truly
heroic record of resistance to Japanese occupation is being
ignored and the assistance given to the United Nations by the
people of Irian forgotten. This is dangerous to the world and
particularly to Indonesia and Australia.
*
* *
The Judicial And Legal Question.
It is the Indonesian contention that not only is the
continued colonial occupation of West Irian morally unjusti-
fiable, but also that it is legally incorrect.


The Republic of Indonesia is the legal and constitutional
successor to the Netherlands East Indies, of which one part
was West Irian. Article One of the Charter of Transfer of
Sovereignty reads:
“The Kingdom of the Netherlands unconditionally
and irrevocably transfers complete sovereignty over Indo-
nesia to the Republic of the United States of Indonesia,
and thereby recognises the said Republic of the United
States of Indonesia as on independent and sovereign
State”.
(The Republic of Indonesia, a unitary State, was set up in
August, 1950, and is the legal and constitutional successor to
the Republic of the United States of Indonesia).
Almost from time immemorial West Irian has been part of
Indonesia. Politically and legally the entity of West Irian and
Indonesia was recognised afresh by the Dutch rulers when, in
their decree of 24th. August, 1824, the rights of the Indon-
esia Sultan of Tidore (North Moluccas) over West Irian were
again recognised. Further, in all Dutch Constitutions and in
the Constitutions of the Netherlands East Indies, West Irian
was recognised as being part of Indonesia. The Indonesian
claim to the essential unity of the whole Archipelago had
never been challenged until the time of the Round Table
Conference in 1949.
As late as December 1948, when the Security Council in
Paris was discussing the Dutch aggression against the Republic
of Indonesia, the Dutch delegate, Dr. van Royen, said, “As I
explained at the outset, this dispute is not about the question
of whether or not Indonesia will become independent. All
parties agree that what used to be the Netherlands East Indies
should become an independent State as soon as possible”.


It was only in the weeks immediately preceding the Round
Table Conference that the question of the future status of
West Irian was raised. There can be no doubt that Dutch
domestic politics played a large part in the decision to try
to maintain West Irian as a Dutch possession. The agreement
to transfer sovereignty to Indonesia had a very narrow
majority in the Dutch Parliament and there can be little doubt
that the Dutch Government considered it necessary to maintain
West Irian as a Dutch colony in order to get the Charter of
Transfer accepted by Parliament. Thus, the Dutch policy
towards West Irian is one based essentially on expediency, and
was designed to meet the reactionary sentiments of some
Dutch politicians who found it difficult to surrender their
imperial pretensions.
The various agreements signed between Holland and
Indonesia in the years immediately preceding the final
transfer of sovereignty (agreements later militarily abrogated
by the Dutch) confirm this reading of the situation. For
example, Clause 3 of the Linggadjati Agreement of 1946 states
explicitly that the United States of Indonesia shall comprise
the whole territory of the Netherlands East Indies.
Again, at a Conference organised by the Dutch colonial
authorities, at Den Pasar, Bali, in 1946 (a conference which
was designed, but failed, to split the nationalist movement in
Indonesia) the Lieutenant Governor General of the N.E.1., Dr.
van Mook, declared, “ it is decidely not the intention
of the Government to exclude New Guinea from Indonesia
(the solution) proposed by the Government shows
that it is the intention to keep the territory within the
framework of the United States of Indonesia”.
In a 1949 report to the United Nations on what she called
her “non-self-governing territories”, the Netherlands stated:
“Indonesia consists of a series of island groups in the
region of the equator, extending from the mainland of


Asia to Australia. The principal groups are the Greater
Sunda Islands, the Lesser Sunda Islands, the Moluccas and
New Guinea, west of 141 degrees E.
“ Racially, the indigenous peoples may be
broadly divided into Malays in the West and Papuans
in the East. As these races have intermixed to a
considerable extent, they are not separated by clearly
defined boundaries”.
As one last example of this Dutch recognition of Indonesian
unity, the Netherlands Constitutional Amendment of 1948
may be quoted. As amended, the effective Article stated:
“The Kingdom of the Netherlands consists of the
Territories of the Netherlands, Indonesia, Surinam and
the Netherlands Antilles”.
In all of these examples and there are very many more
available no differentiation was made between West Irian
and the rest of Indonesia. The differentiation came as an
afterthought, as a last flicker of the spiritus imperium.
At the Round Table Conference of 1949, rather than wreck
the whole on the rock of Dutch intransigence, Indonesia
accepted a compromise on West Irian, although in no wise
modifying her claim. The compromise was that:
“With regard to the Residency of New Guinea, it is
decided that the status quo of the Residency
shall be maintained, with the stipulation that within a
year from the date of the transfer of sovereignty to the
Republic of the United States of Indonesia, the question
of the political status of New Guinea shall be determined
through negotiations between the Republic of the
United States of Indonesia and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands”.
The transfer of sovereignty, it will be recalled from Article
One of the Charter quoted above, was “complete, uncon-
ditional and irrevocable”. “Complete” cannot mean other
than covering the whole territory of Indonesia, and uncon-


ditional” cannot mean other than unlimited. Further, the
Preamble to the Charter of the Transfer of Sovereignty refers
to “ the dedication of the parties to the principle
of resolving, by peaceful and reasonable means, any difference
that may hereafter exist or arise between them”. There is
no mention of a unilateral solution of differences, and yet
that is the course adopted by the Dutch in the case of West
Irian. As long ago as February 1952, the Dutch Lower House
accepted an amendment to the Constitution to the effect that
the Kingdom of the Netherlands was said to consist of:“
the Territories of the Netherlands, Dutch New Guinea,
Surinam and the Netherlands Antilles”. Thus, in the postwar
world, we still see attempts at imperial aggrandisement by
virtue of conquest and proclamation.
The Charter of the Transfer of Sovereignty was quite
unequivocal on the future of West Irian. As previously quoted,
it said that: “The status quo of the Residency of New Guinea
shall be maintained, with the stipulation that within a year
from the date of the transfer of sovereignty to the Republic
of the United States of Indonesia, the question of the political
status of New Guinea be determined through negotiations
between the Republic of the United States of Indonesia and
the Kingdom of the Netherlands”.
The only possible interpretation of the phrase “the status
quo of the Residency of New Guinea shall be maintained”
is the continuation of what was before, namely, a Residency,
an administrative unit, a part of the territory of the former
colony the Netherlands East Indies, now called Indonesia.
This status quo should have been maintained until renewed
Indonesian-Dutch negotiations finally settled the question.
Negotiations were attempted, but in spite of far-reaching
compromise proposals by Indonesia, failed to reach agreement.
Instead of continuing negotiations as stipulated in the
Preamble to the Charter of Sovereignty (“ [the
parties are dedicated] to the principle of resolving, by peace


ful and reasonable means, any differences that may hereafter
exist or arise between them”), Holland has acted unilaterally
and illegally by expropriating this huge colonial territory,
seeking to incorporate it constitutionally into the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, and seeking a form of international
recognition of this action by making reports to the United
Nations on her “non-self-governing territory”.
*
**
An Account of Indonesian-Dutch Negotiations on West Irian.
In accordance with the decisions of the Round Table
Conference, a Ministerial Conference was held in Holland
in 1950 to determine the future status of West Irian. Many
and far-reaching concessions were made by Indonesia to
Dutch interests, but even so, no agreement could be reached,
for Holland would not admit the primary Indonesian premise
the ending of the colonial regime and the reunion of West
Irian with the rest of Indonesia.
Amongst the concessions proposed by Indonesia were:
The recognition of Holland’s existing rights and con-
cessions and the paying of full account to Dutch interests
in trade, shipping and industry in bringing West Irian
into development;
The employment of Dutch officials in the adminis-
tration ;
The payment of pensions to Dutch officials in West
Irian, in accordance with the agreement concerning the
position of civil government officials concluded at the
Round Table Conference;
The guarantee of immigration to Dutch citizens;
The inclusion of West Irian in the Indonesian transport
and communications system, whilst recognising rights
already granted to the Netherlands in that connection;


The guarantee of human rights and religious freedom,
including the activities of Christian missions in the hum-
anitarian and cultural fields;
Although such solutions were propounded, Indonesia was
quite unable to accept any proposal such as a condominium
which would have had the effect in practice that Indonesia
would participate in, or even condone, a colonial rule over
West Irian. It was found impossible to reconcile the opposing
viewpoints in 1950, and thus no solution was reached.
In February, 1952 another conference was held. The Dutch
delegation at first proposed that the question of West Irian
should be submitted to the International Court of Justice,
but this was opposed by Indonesia, since the Indonesian
Government considered the problem as a political and not a
judicial one. In an attempt to find a way out of what was
threatening to become a deadlock, the Indonesian delegation
made a major concession, and proposed that there should
be joint Indonesian-Dutch responsibility over West Irian as
a temporary measure, during which period the administration
was to be in Indonesian hands, and the Dutch were to share
reponsibility for the exploration of the territory and the
development of its economy. The negotiations, however, had
to be suspended, because of the resignation of the Indonesian
Government.
Immediately after this came the proposed amendment to
the Dutch Constitution whereby, in the midst of pending
negotiations and conferences, West Irian would be unilaterally
annexed by the Dutch Government.
In spite of this Dutch action, subsequent Indonesian Cabi-
nets have always placed the peaceful solution of the West
Irian problem in the forefront of their programmes. The
Netherlands Government, on the other hand, has unfortunately
shown its reluctance, if not its unwillingness, to arrive at a
negotiated solution. Moreover, the Netherlands Government


has been constantly seeking to strengthen its colonial hold
on Irian and has constantly tried to create the impression
in the international community that there is no dispute about
the sovereignty over West Irian.
The Dutch claim to hold sovereignty over West Irian is
both illegal and misleading. Occupation and temporary admin-
istration do not mean acquiring sovereignty. That is one
aspect of international jungle-law which the modern world
has rightly forbidden.
Because of this, the Indonesian Government has always
strongly challenged the act of the Netherlands Government
of transmitting annual reports about West Irian to the United
Nations under Article 73e of the Charter. That Article deals
with non-self-governing territories, and West Irian does not
fall into that category, for it is part of the territory of the
independent Republic of Indonesia. The submission of these
reports is clearly contradictory to the provision of the Charter
of the Transfer of Sovereignty, which stated: “The status quo
of the Residency of New Guinea shall be maintained ”.
The term “status quo of the Residency of New Guinea shall
be maintained” can only be interpreted as meaning the
continuation of the former status of a Residency of the Nether-
lands East Indies, sovereignty over which has been transferred
completely, unconditionally and irrevocably to the Republic
of Indonesia.
The submission of reports under Article 73e of the Charter
can only be viewed as a Dutch attempt to put a gloss of
legality over an illegal action. These reports are extended with
a conspicuous readiness, whilst reports on Surinam and the
Netherlands Antilles are withheld, on the ground that those
territories are autonomous within the Kingdom of the Nether-
lands.
Perhaps the most regrettable attitude of the Netherlands,
and one which can bar future negotiations, can be seen in the
Note sent by the Netherlands Minister of Foreign Affairs on


24th July, 1953 to the Indonesian High Commissioner at The
Hague. This Note was in connection with the Minister’s visit
to Australia, and contained the statement that: “The Dutch
Government sees no reason for holding discussions with the In-
donesian Government (on Irian) prior to that which it holds
with Australia concerning the possibilities of co-operation in
technical and administrative affairs in relation to West Irian”.
*
* *
Conclusion and summary
The key to the whole question of the future of West Irian
lies in the sphere of colonial politics. If the Dutch adminis-
tration continues, then the territory remains a colony. No
amount of verbose prevarication about “eventually consulting
the wishes of the indigenous people to determine the eventual
disposal of this territory” can disguise the fact that the issue
is one of colonialism. Knowing this, we can still expect to be
treated to the whole repertoire of threadbare arguments on
the advantages to the colonised of being colonised. But the
mission sacree argument is outmoded and discredited.
The fact is that only when West Irian is reunited with the
rest of Indonesia will the first essential condition for the
progress and development of the country and people have
been fulfilled. The end of colonialism is a pre-requisite for
democratic stability and progress in Asia. Colonialism has
been proved unable to fulfil the elementary human require-
ments of the people of colonies and is intrinsically incapable
of providing a reasonable living standard and an increasing
development for the people. It hampers the democratic pro-
gress of the territory and people and renders both liable to
attack from enemies inside and outside the country. It is
therefore necessary in the interests of peace and stability in
the whole world, and particularly in South East Asia, that


colonialism should finally be ended in Indonesia, and until
West Irian is reunited with independent Indonesia this con-
dition cannot be fulfilled.
Under the terms of the Indonesian Constitution, West Irian,
like all other parts of Indonesia, will be granted broad regional
autonomy. There is no intention that the territory should be
closed to the world as it certainly is today. All nationalities
will freely be given the opportunity of reasonable exploitation
of the economic potentialities of the vast area for their own
benefit and for the benefit of the people of West Irian.
Originally, the Dutch claimed that the reincorporation of
West Irian into Indonesia would interfere with the valuable
work of the Missions. It may be recalled that freedom of
religion and worship is guaranteed by the Indonesian Const-
itution, and that this guarantee is not just an empty promise
is shown by the fact that in all other parts of Indonesia no
complaint has ever been made that this important constitu-
tional clause has been broken.
For the people of West Irian the advantage of re-incorpor-
ation into Indonesia is obvious. So long as the territory is
maintained as a colony there will be constant social and
political tension. On the other hand, the people of West Irian,
who rightly regard themselves as being Indonesian, would
be treated by the Indonesian Government as being an integral
part of the Indonesian nation. Further, as part of an inde-
pendent State, Irian will be managed and administered for
the benefit of the Irianese and the Indonesian people
generally. By definition, this is impossible for a colony, which
is necessarily administered and exploited in accordance with
the ethical and economic pattern of the metropolitan country.
The transfer of sovereignty to Indonesia is not complete
whilst West Irian remains under Dutch administration, and
whilst this condition continues, Indonesia will not he able
to play her full part in the fields of defence, co-operation
and economy. Further, whilst this issue remains unsettled,


relations with the Netherlands and with Australia may deter-
iorate. It is obvious that Holland, even if she can provide
the capital for the essential exploitation of West Irian,
certainly cannot provide the necessary labour. Only the rest
of Indonesia can do that.
It would be very wrong to regard West Irian as being a
“reservation” for the Irian people, for the many Eurasians
in Holland, for the surplus Dutch population or the remaining
“denationalised” Indonesians in Holland (from the Colonial
Army). If this system is adopted, then the territory will be
lost to the rest of the world. Those people of the country
who have had contact with the outside world have, through
their own organisations, shown that their people have no
desire to remain at their present low level of culture and
civilisation. It is but reasonable to suppose that the others,
the vast majority of the people, will be better cared for and
will make quicker progress if the administration of the
territory is in the hands of those who have a common cultural
tradition and racial background than if they are in the hands
of those who have only a colonial interest in the country.
It is no new thing for large parts of Asia to be populated
by migration from other areas and there is no ethnological
reason why it should not take place in the case of West Irian.
The only possibility for West Irian to become an asset to
the world is by re-uniting the territory with the rest of Indone-
sia into one independent State. When this happens, Indonesia
can provide the labour required from other, densely populat-
ed, islands.
The necessary administrators who could not be supplied
from West Irian’s own resources (and the local supply would
increase quickly) could be provided from the abundance of
local administrators in other parts of Indonesia.
It is clear that capital for the exploitation of West Irian
will be forthcoming only when the necessary labour is made
available. So long as the territory remains a colony, so long
will the economy be unbalanced.


Historically speaking, there can be no doubt that the terri-
tory has almost throughout the whole of written history been
part of Indonesia. Long before the Dutch regime in Indonesia,
West Irian was part of the Indonesian Sultanate of Tidore
and from the very beginning of the Dutch overtly colonial
regime it has been administratively and politically part of
the Netherlands East Indies.
Even as late as the Indonesian-Dutch negotiations imme-
diately preceding the Round Table Conference, Irian w r as
considered to be part of the territory whose constitutional
future was under negotiation. The Indonesian and Dutch
negotiators had different conceptions on the questions of the
transfer of sovereignty and the structure of the Indonesian
State, but in spite of this there was never at any time a question
of whether or not Irian was part of the disputed territory.
Although perhaps a little removed from the main centres
of the Indonesian nationalist struggle, the nationalist move-
ment in West Irian has been strong and important from the
earliest days.
The leaders of the movement there welcomed the procla-
mation of the independence of Indonesia, and the indepen-
dence movement, which was embarrassing for the Dutch,
quickly developed. As in all other parts of Indonesia, the
independence movement was based on the the fight for the
independence of the whole country. For many years, one of
the most popular slogans has been “From Sabang to Merauke”,
implying that the nationalist struggle was for the independen-
ce of the whole archipelago from the north of Sumatra
(Sabang) to the south-east of West Irian (Meurake). It is
not without significance that both the Republican and
Federalist branches of the independence movement in the
years between 1945 and 1949 never questioned the essential
unity of the whole country.
It is important, too, that at the Round Table Conference
the two Indonesian Delegations acted on behalf of the whole


of Indonesia and that although the Dutch unofficially produ-
ced some so-called representatives of West Irian during this
conference, these “representatives” were in fact officials of
the Dutch administration and had no mandate from the
people of the country. The real representatives of the Irian
people were and are organised in the Partai Kemerdekaan
Irian.
Under the terms of the Round Table Conference, the final
settlement of the future of West Irian should have been made
by the end of 1950. This was not achieved, and the Indonesian
attitude is that the transfer of sovereignty is not yet complete.
Further, it is repeatedly pointed out in Indonesia that the
Dutch arguments for their continued control over the territory
are extremely reminiscent of all the old imperialist arguments.
The Indonesian Government seeks to solve this problem
peacefully. The dispute is regarded as being essentially be-
tween the Dutch and Indonesian points of view, but Indonesia
watches with interest the reactions of the Western democracies.
It may be claimed that the campaign in Indonesia for the
return of West Irian is artificial and that the people of In-
donesia have no great interest in the matter. This misjudges
the nationalist fervour of the country. The more the Dutch
insist on retaining West Irian, the stronger is the reaction
of the whole Indonesian people.
For five years the Indonesian people fought actively for
the independence of their country. The attitude of all In-
donesians is that independence has not yet been finally secured
and that the people of West Irian, no less than the people of
other islands, have the right to enjoy the fruits of political
independence.


THE RESISTANCE, INDEPENDENCE AND NATIONALIST
MOVEMENTS IN WEST IRIAN.
In its modem phase, the independence and nationalist
movements in West Irian can be traced back to the resistance
against the Japanese invaders. Further back in time is the
lively but still embryonic independence movement centred
round the many hundreds of Indonesian exiles concentrated
by the Dutch in the malaria-haunted swamps of Boven Digul.
In the view of writers in the Encylopaedia Brittanica, Irian
was the bulwark which alone repelled the proposed Japanese
invasion of Australia, and this, together with the fact that the
Allied Powers retained some essential bases in Irian, marked
the total eventual defeat of Japanese strategy.
Very many people of Irian took up arms and fought against
the Japanese, either openly in the Armies of the Allied
Powers, or as members of the remarkably wide-spread and
effective resistance movements. Recruiting to these movements
was encouraged by broadcasts and by leaflets spread from
the air, promising a higher standard of living after the defeat
of the invader.
The resistance and guerilla groups were so successful that
the whole coast of Irian between Manokwari and Mandamen
was cleared of Japanese troops by the end of 1944.
One of the leaders of the resistance movement was Silas
Papare, an Irianese, and now a member of the Indonesian
Parliament and a leader of the Partai Kemerdekaan
Indonesia Irian.
Mr. Papare, as well as leading resistance groups, acted as a
guide during Allied landings in Irian and as a centre for the
collection of information. He fought with the American Army
for 8 months, and then joined the Australians for the attack
on Morotai in February 1945. For his activities during the war,
Mr. Papare was decorated by the Allies.


After the total Allied victory, the facile promises made to
the people of Irian were not fulfilled, and a growing and
deepening discontent became prevalent and active. At that
time the discontent had no clear form but aimed simply at an
undefined “progress”.
The openly political orientation came towards the end of
1946 when the Partai Kemerdekaan Indonesia Irian was
formed, largely on the initiative of Mr. Papare. In spite of
Dutch oppression, and the manifold difficulties of communi-
cation, it grew rapidly.
Before this, there had been many revolts against returning
Dutch authority by Papuan soldiers and the population. For
example, in December 1945 a whole Papuan battalion mutinied
at Hollandia and joined the population in revolt. This was
suppressed only after wide-spread arrests by the Army, but
the revolt broke out there again, in July 1946 and January
1947.
The Partai Kemerdekaan Indonesia Irian was soon driven
underground by the colonial authorities, but even so, it had
2,000 members by March 1948, and was the largest political
grouping in West Irian. Considering all the difficulties
inherent in political organisation in such a territory, the
growth of the party is indicative of the deep-rooted desire of
the politically-literate people of West Irian for the ending
of colonialism in their country and for reunion with the rest
of Indonesia.
It is a common Dutch statement that the unrest in West
Irian is due to the activities of “agitators” from other parts
of Indonesia. If so, they must be remarkably successful agi-
tators, and must be working in remarkably fertile ground.
The independence movement of 1945—47, which started in
Hollandia and ran high there, spread like a torrent to Biak,
Semi, Manokwari, Mandamen, Sorong, MacCluer Bay, Fak-
Fak, Arguni Bay, Kaimana and Merauke. In fact, it covered
the whole of West Irian, and that movement, particularly in


its later stages, was an informed political nationalist move-
ment, seeking to strengthen the ties between West Irian and
the rest of Indonesia, and to ensure the complete independen-
ce of the whole of Indonesia.
The movement brought thousands of Irianese people into
close relationship, teachers, policemen, soldiers and civil
servants. The radio station of Biak was burned down, and
the house and office of the Dutch Resident surrounded and
attempts made to arrest him. More than 1,000 Irianese people
were arrested after these happenings, and many of them
are still imprisoned in Hollandia by the Dutch administration.


Within the framework of an independent Indonesia, West
Irian will be:
Granted extensive autonomy, in accordance with consti-
tutional guarantees;
Opened for exploitation by all countries, although not on
a colonial basis;
Drawn into her natural cultural context, with a consequent
raising of the cultural standard of the people;
Able to take her place in the scheme of defence for demo-
cracy and independence in Indonesia.


PERTJETAKAN NEGARA DJAKARTA 714/B 54
