

Cygnis Insignis.
Western Australia
How to Get Land.
Where to Get It.
When to Get It
A Guide to those seeking Homes.




NOTE.
This pamphlet is issued with a view to aiding in-
tending settlers to grasp the conditions attending land
settlement in Western Australia. The questions are
those repeatedly put to the compilers by intending
settlers ; the answers are the result of long experience
and an intimate knowledge of the Land Acts and Regu-
lations, as well as practical experience of departmental
routine. _ .




Cygnis Insignxs.
lEestcrn JVnstrnlia.
Information for Intending Settlers
on the Land.
How much capital is required before going on the
land?
£lOO at least, to ensure any degree of comfort.
What outfit is necessary for a selector going on the
land ?
Suitable outfits may be obtained locally at
who are thoroughly acquainted
with the requirements of people settling in this State.
How much land may be taken up by one selector ?
2,000 acres of Conditional Purchase land, or, if
gazetted as such, any area up to 5,000 acres under Graz-
ing Lease conditions, including a free Homestead Farm.
How much land may a man and his wife take up ?
3,000 acres of Conditional Purchase land, or, if
gazetted as such, any area up to 5,000 acres under Graz-
ing Lease conditions, including a free Homestead Farm.
May land be selected by juniors?
Yes, if of the age of 16 or over, a free Homestead
Farm and 1,840 acres of land may be taken up under
Conditional Purchase conditions.
What tools and implements should be purchased?
Everything necessary and nothing unnecessary may
be bought at , and their
advice as to what is required should be followed.


What are Free Homestead Farms ?
Any male of 16 years of age or over who does not
hold more than 100 acres of Crown Land in the State
may select 160 acres upon payment of an office fee of
£l, and the fee for the survey of same, £7 155,, payable
in four half-yearly instalments.
When does a Homestead Farm become freehold?
A Homestead Farm becomes freehold in 7 years,
provided the conditions of tenure, which are not very
stringent, as laid down in Section 74 of the Land Act,
are complied with.
Is residence on a Homestead Farm compulsory?
Personal residence of the grantee, for six months of
each of the first five years, is compulsory ; but residence
on Conditiont?: Purchase land within 20 miles is con-
sidered the equivalent to residence on the Homestead
Farm. Residence of wife or child over 16 years of age
is accepted, thus allowing the head of the family to
obtain lucrative employment elsewhere.
May females hold a Homestead Farm?
Females who are legal heads of families are eligible
to hold a Homestead Farm.
When a Homestead Farm is selected with Condi-
tional Purchase land, what survey charges are made ?
The survey fee on the total area so selected : thus
if 1,000 acres are taken up as 840 acres under Conditional
Purchase conditions and the balance of 160 acres as a
Homestead Farm, survey fee on 1,000 acres will be
charged.
What kind of dwelling is most suitable for erection
on the land when selected ?
Tents are extensively used for the first six months.
When a more suitable dwelling is needed, houses con-
structed of native hard wood, white ant resisting, may
be purchased all ready for erection at
What are the prices of these houses ?
They vary according to the number of rooms re-
quired. A two-roomed house would cost £ ,
three rooms £ , four rooms £
What deposit is required on an application for 1,000
acres, out of which is selected a Homestead Farm?
From January to end of March, from July to end of
September: £l2 Is. os., i.e., 3d. per acre with lease fee,
Homestead Farm fee and stamp.


From April to end of June, from October to end of
December; £6 16s. Od., i.e., per acre, with lease fee,
Homestead Farm fee and stamp.
How is the Purchase Money paid 1
Half-yearly—on the Ist of March and the Ist of
►September. All payments must be made in advance.
Rents will be accepted with the prescribed fines to the
31st May and 30th November.
Over what period are the payments extended ?
The payment of the Purchase Money is extended
over 20 years.
Are any reductions made on the first payments 1
The first Six half-yearly instalments are at the rate
of 6d. per acre per annum, if the price per acre be 10s.
or over.
TV hat improvements must be effected to comply with
the conditions 1
The selector must expend in prescribed improve
ments an amount equal to one-fifth of the purchas
money in every two years of the first ten years of h
lease. Thus if the area selected is 1,000 acres, and is
valued at 10s. per acre, £lOO must be expended in every
two years for ten years.
What fencing is required 1 ?
The selector must fence in at least one-half of the
land within the first five years of the lease, and the
whole of the land during the above-mentioned period of
ten years.
What is meant by “Prescribed Improvements V’
Any bona-fide improvements made for the purpose of
improving the land or increasing the carrying capacity
of same, such as wells of fresh water, reservoirs, tanks,
or dams of permanent character, and available for the
use of stock; or fences, sheds, and buildings erected for
farm or shearing and station purposes; cultivation, sub-
division fences, clearing, grubbing, draining, ring-bark-
ing, or any improvements for maintaining or improvng
the agricultural or pastoral capabilities of the land.
May land be made freehold upon completion of im-
provements ]
Yes. At any time after the completion of the first
five years, provided all the prescribed improvements
have been carried out, upon payment of the balance of
the purchase money, together with a fee of 305., a Crown
Grant for the land will be issued, thereby making the
land absolutely freehold. A Homestead Farm may not


be made freehold under 7 years unless by direct purchase
at ss, per acre, which must have the sanction of the
Minister.
Where may intending settlers receive information re
settling on the land?
Messrs Stacy and Williams, of No 1 Cathedral Cham-
bers, Perth (opposite Lands Department), will freely
five all information, and, for a small fee, render every
assistance to intending selectors.
What qualifications have they for conducting applica-
tions for land?
Years of experience gained as officers of the Lands
Department, and a thorough knowledge of the Land
Act, and all its intricacies.
Does a selector receive any assistance from the
Government to enable him to carry out his improve-
ments ?
Yes. The Trustees of the Agricultural Bank will,
if they think fit, advance money for helping the settler
to develop his property.
How must the money lent be applied ?
To ring-barking, clearing, fencing, draining, or water-
conservation.
What is the maximum amount lent for these objects ?
£400; but an additional sum of £250 will be ad-
vanced for the purpose of carrying out further improve-
ments. The former sum is paid on the full value of the
work done, the latter only on half thereof.
Is any resistance given Tor the'purpose of buying
stock and machinery?
Yes. £lOO is advanced for the purpose of purchas-
ing breeding stock —mares, cows, stallions, bulls, boars,
or sows, ewes or rams. £lOO is also advanced
for purchasing agricultural implements made in
the State by employees getting the ruling
rate of wages. The total loan to one per-
son, however, will not exceed £750, and this only if it
does not exceed three-quarters of the value of the land.
How much is lent for building a house and sheds ?
Nothing. These are not regarded as improvements
under the Agricultural Bank Act.
Can two or more partners borrow to the full amount
of £750 each?
Yes always provided as just stated that the total
amount lent does not exceed three-quarters of the value
of the land.


How is this value arrived at I
The land is inspected and valued by men skilled in
such work, and on their reports the Board of Trustees
decides.
Does the Bank advance the money in one sum ?
No. Once the loan is approved and the necessary
formalities completed the settler can start work on his
block. As he carries out his improvements he gets some
responsible person to inspect and report to the Bank
as to the amount of work satisfactory done. The
Bank then pays over the amount due.
What is to prevent a man doing the work badly and
still getting the money 1 ?
In that case the Bank may, on learning the facts,
call in the whole of the money advanced, and failing
payment thereof, may foreclose on the mortgage.
Are advances made on second mortgage ?
No. Not by the Agricultural Bank.
How are loans repayable ?
For the first five years interest only at 5 per cent,
per annum is payable half-yearly. Thereafter for 25
years the principal and interest is repayable by con-
stantly increasing sums in the case of the principal and
constantly decreasing sums in the case of the interest.
Can you give an idea of the amounts repayable each
year?
Assume the sum borrowed is £3OO. The first half-
year of the sixth year £5 ss. must be paid to cover
principal and interest, and this must be paid every half-
year till at the end of 30 years from the date of borrow-
ing the final instalment of £9 Is. Od. must be paid.
Advances on stock, however, are repayable according to
the arrangement made with the Bank
May loans be transferred to other persons ?
Certainly; if the consent of the Agricultural Bank
is first obtained and the land is transferable.
Supposing the repayments are not forthcoming?
Then the Bank can take possession. The Bank can
also seize the land if the improvements are not kept in
good repair.
Is there any competent firm in Perth who can con-
duct the business of obtaining a loan from the Bank?
Yes. Messrs. Stacy and Williams, of Cathedral
Chambers, opposite the Lands Office, who have had
years of experience and can be thoroughly relied op.






