

tVre-rvV C)
VI/- $
WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
AND THE
MEANS OFFERED
HY THE
o|oloni2atian OjJm|onition,
ASSIST THE ENTERPRISE AND PROMOTE THE PROSPERITY
FARMERS, ARTISANS,
OTHERS WISHING TO EMIGRATE.
EDWARD STANFORD, 6, CHARING CROSS.
1860.
Price Three Pence.




WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
AND THE
MEANS OFFERED
BY THE
flfjßlflTOStiim Assurance (Jj^rpratkm,
ASSIST THE ENTERPRISE AND PROMOTE THE PROSPERITY
FARMERS, ARTISANS,
OTHERS WISHING TO EMIGRATE.
LONDON:
EDWARD STANFORD, 6, CHARING CROSS.
1860.


INDEX.
Western Australia, a short account of
The Colonization Assurance Corporation, a short
account OF p
Land Department
Life Assurance Department
Emigration Department
Free Grants of Land
Free Passages


THE
COLONIZATION ASSURANCE
CORPORATION,
INCORPORATED BY SPECIAL ACT OF PARLIAMENT,
A.D. 185 a
3, Cannon Street, London, E.C.
Court of 23imtor&
Captain Charles Fitzgerald, R.N., C. 8., late Governor
of West Australia, Chairman.
Frederick Mangles, Esq., Deputy Chairman.
The Honourable F. H. F. Berkeley, M.P.
William Halliday Cosway, Esq., Cowes, Isle of Wight.
Edward Loder, Esq., Great George Street, Westminster.
L. S. Magnus, Esq,, Adelaide Place, London Bridge.
Ambrose Moore, Esq., Princes Street, Bank, London.
George Murray, Esq.; late Murray, Dyett and Co., West
Australia.
B. L. Ogilvie, Esq., Westbourne Park Terrace, London.
J. L. Roberts, Esq., late of Perth, West Australia.
W. W. Ross, Esq., Tain House, Bath.
isTanagn%
C. Stuart Bailey, Esq., late of Her Majesty’s Colonial
Land and Emigration Office.


Assisted Passages.
EMIGEATION
WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
£B.
The present rate of Passage Money is fixed
by the Corporation at <£l6. per statute adult.
The payment of one-half of which entitles
eligible Emigrants to obtain an advance of
the balance from the Corporation, repayable
within two years after arrival in the Colony.
3, CANNON STREET, LONDON. E.C.


A SHORT ACCOUNT
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Western Australia comprises the whole of that por-
tion of the great Australian Continent, situate to the
westward of the 129th degree of east longitude, and is
nearer to England than Sydney, New South Wales, by
3,000 miles ; and its proximity to the Cape of Good Hope,
Ceylon, India, China, and Singapore, has already been
productive of vast benefits to the Colony.
The sea coast, from Cambridge Gulf in the north, to
Cape Pasley in the south, a distance of about 2,500 miles,
abounds in bays, straits and islands ; and is indented with
several harbours and anchorages of varied size and
depth.
The area of Western Australia is about one million of
square miles, or more than eight times the size of the
mother country. It is well watered, possessing several con-
siderable rivers, the principal of which are the Swan, Avon
and Canning, in the district of Perth; the Collie and
Brunswick, in the district of Leschenault; and the Kalgan,
in the district of King George’s Sound, besides several
minor streams. Yallies and luxuriant pastures spread them-
selves through various districts, and especially those of


the South West, where lakes of fresh water, springs, rim-
lets, and brooks arc of frequent occurrence, their presence
being attested by the lively verdure of the vegetation. A
most important consideration for intending settlers also
exists in the fact that the Colony, owing to the prevalence
of westerly winds, is not subject to the calamitous droughts
which so frequently interfere with the operations of the
agriculturist and stockholder in other parts of Australia.
Up to the present time the only portions of this vast
territory which have been opened up for settlement are its
south-west districts, where twenty-six counties, extending
over some two millions of acres, have been mapped and
laid out for colonization by the Government.
. Like all newly-founded colonies, Western Australia has
had to contend with a want of population and labour; but,
notwithstanding this drawback, considerable progress has
been made in the construction of works of public utility,
such as roads, harbours, bridges and piers. JBy these and
other measures, which have been adopted to facilitate the
operations of trade, and to develop the natural resources
of the country, Western Australia has become one of the
most promising colonies of the Empire for the investment
of labour and capital.
Up to the year 1851, a fair share of the stream of
emigration leaving the United Kingdom had been directed
towards Western Australia; and the operations of the
Colonization Assurance Corporation, —which had just
then been established, at the suggestion of the colonists, and
under the auspices of the leading statesmen of the day,—
were in every sense calculated to stimulate the rapid
settlement of the country. But the superior attractions of
the newly discovered gold-fields of New South Wales
and Victoria drew successive ship-loads of valuable workers
to the cast. They went further, and not a few fared


worse, than if they had made Western Australia the end of
their voyage. Still, under the operation of certain measures
which were carried out by the Government, the population
has increased from 5,886, in 1851, to 15,000 in 1859;
and that the colony has been steadily progressing is clearly
shown by the published Returns of its trade and produce :
the value of goods imported having risen from £52,350
to £119,400, and the exports from £22,135 to £72,420,
in the last year.
This gratifying state of things still continues, and the
accounts by the last mail speak most encouragingly
of each branch of industry. “The wool is productive,
and maintains its fair price in the English market.”
“ The horse and cattle holder have had no reason to
complain.” For horses there has been a demand as
ample -as could well be supplied. “As regards cattle,
there has been a steady and increasing demand for
butchers’ meat, and as for dairy produce, it not only
commands a good price, but there is not nearly as much
brought into the market as could be consumed.” “ The
corn grower is in a prosperous condition; not a bushel
does he raise but he can obtain for it a fair remunerative
price. Consequently, fresh land is broken up in quantity
yearly; greater this year than ever before, and with every
prospect of a good season and ample harvest.” “ Mining
operations are proceeding steadily. From the Geraldine
Lead Mine, “ the richness of the ore is undoubted, and the
quantity unlimited.” One hundred tons of copper ore of
great richness have been raised from the Wheal Fortune
Mine, and shipped for the English market. From the
Wanerenooka Mine, ore could have been yielded had
there been vessels to carry it away.” “ The Gwala Mine
yields well,” and there are other mines which we may
shortly expect to hear are in full work. “ The timber trade


is in a healthy state —not only is there a great local con-
sumption, hut the requirements from abroad demand every
effort on the part of the contractors to meet them.”
The climate op Western Australia is generally con-
sidered to be more suitable to Europeans than that of the
other Australian Colonies ; and the soil is acknowledged
to be capable of producing crops equal in quality and
abundance to those of the most fertile regions of the
World.
All sorts of grain, Indian corn, garden vegetables, and all
green crops, wool, tobacco, cotton, silk, wine, oils, raisins,
and fruits, as well as drugs and dye stuffs, &c. of the finest
quality, admit of abundant production. Fruits of all de-
scriptions are of the choicest growth.
Timber is abundant, especially that of the (l Jarrah ’*
tree, which, on account of its resistance to the destructive
powers of the white ant, is peculiarly suited to the Indian
and other markets, where timber is required for railway
purposes, and for other undertakings. It is also admirably
adapted for ship-building, and is approved by the Admi-
ralty, and Lloyds.
Extracts from official documents relating to
THE NATURAL RESOURCES, THE SOIL, AND CLIMATE, OP
Western Australia.
From a speech of Lord Grey, when Colonial Secretary,
in the House of Lords, on the 13th March, 1850: —
“ The development of the resources of Western Aus-
tralia, is a matter of the highest moment. Coal is to be
(( found there, and in steam communication with India,
“ I need scarcely remind you of the vast value of such a
iC product. Further, I may state that Western Australia
f< abounds with forests of the finest timber, while it


“ possesses a climate, and a soil, capable of producing
“ anything which a tropical region of the earth may be
u expected to yield.”
From a Report made by the Colonial Secretary, dated
Perth, 11th November, 1858: —
“ The Colony possesses one of the most healthy climates
“in the world. The mortality since its occupation has
“ not averaged one per cent. I doubt, if any portion of
“ the world is better suited to the English constitution.
“ The mean of the barometer is about 30 inches, and of
“ the thermometer about 63°.
“ I believe that in general salubrity of climate. Western
(< Australia possesses a marked superiority over any of the
Australian Colonies, It is subject to no extremes of
“ heat or cold. Cattle have never been known to die from
“ lack of water, snd in the very driest weather there is a
<e sufficient supply of food. Exposure to weather, by night
f ‘ or day, appears to produce no ill effects on the
“ tions of the Colonists, many of whom for months together
u rarely sleep under any beyond the most temporary
(( dwelling. Snow is never seen, ice only in the depth of
t£ winter, and then only in the very early morning. As
in New Zealand, both maize and potatoes ripen in this
“ country, and the latter crop is grown to a considerable
“ extent. The apple, and the pear, the orange, banana,
“ fig, peach, and apricot, with the melon, and the vine,
“ grow luxuriantly, and may be seen ripening at the same
“ time. The colony is peculiarly adapted to the growth of
“ the vine, on the cultivation of which much attention is
“ bestowed, and which is likely to prove very remunerating,
<l English and tropical vegetables are largely cultivated,
and yield profusely.
Attention is also being directed to dried fruits, and
“ specimens of figs and raisins that have been sent to


“ the periodical Horticultural Exhibitions for competition,
“ are little inferior to those imported from Europe.”
From the “ Colonization Circular/’ issued under the au-
thority of Her Majesty’s Emigration Commissioners in
1856:
“ Western Australia.—ln an official Report to the Secre-
tary of State, dated 11th July, 1848, this colony is said
“ to have a climate of remarkable salubrity, and to be (from
“ the prevalence of westerly winds) but little exposed to
“ drought.”
From the last “ Colonization Circular,” issued under the
authority of Her Majesty’s Emigration Commissioners:—
“ Western Australia possesses one of the most healthy
“ climates in the world. The mortality during the last
“ twenty-five years has not averaged One per cent, of the
“ whole population. Fruits and vegetables from all parts
“ of the world grow to great perfection ; the vine, in
C( particular, the culture of which for wine and dried
“ fruit, is now engaging much attention.”
The following relates to the existence of Gold
Fields in Western Australia, and the fertility of certain
portions of recently explored districts.
Extract of a Report by Assistant-Surveyor Robert
Austin, of an expedition to explore the Interior of Western
Australia, communicated to the Colonial Office, and
published by the Royal Geographical Society:—
“ I beg to direct your attention to the first and second
“ items, as indicative of a fertile country to the eastward;
“ and to the latter as confirmatory evidence in support of
“ an eminent geologist’s opinion that we have, in this
(i hitherto unexplored and improvidently neglected portion
“ of our territory, probably one of the finest Gold Fields
“in the world. I have noted many important facts in
“ support of these opinions, which, if you wish me to lay


“ before you, I shall have much pleasure in submitting for
“ your further cousideration, as well as a plan for future
“ operations from a central depot on the great bend of the
“ Murchison.”
In ecclesiastical matters, the colony possesses a
Bishop, created in 1857, and 15 of the clergy. There is also
a Wesleyan Chapel, a Congregational Church; and a
Roman Catholic Church, numbering fourteen priests. The
educational institutions consist of the Government Colonial
Schools, under the superintendence of a General Board of
Education, who also direct the local schools in the various
townships. Parents who are unable to pay can send their
children free of expense; those who can pay are required
to contribute a trifling sum per week. The Roman Ca-
tholics in Perth have three female schools, one free for
those of all denominations, a middle, and an upper estab-
lishment, as well as various schools in other districts.
There is also a mechanics’ institute under the patronage
of the Governor.
As a further proof of the rapid advance which the Colony"
is now making it may be mentioned that the Union Bank
of Australia have determined to open a branch establish-
ment at Perth, in order to meet the increasing requirements
of the settlers: the capital of the local bank being found
inadequate for the purpose.
11


. COLONIZATION ASSURANCE CORPORATION.
A Short Account of its objects, and the means it offers to
assist the enterprise and promote the prosperity of
those wishing to Emigrate, or acquire Land in West-
ern Australia.
The Colonization Assurance Corporation was esta-
blished in 1850, by virtue of a special Act of Parliament.
The principal objects contemplated by itsformation were the
promotion of Emigration and Settlement in Western Aus-
tralia. In order to enable the Corporation to carry out
these objects effectually, the Act of Parliament conferred
upon it various special rights and privileges, comprising
amongst others the following important ones:—
Firstly —“ To Purchase, to exchange, to surrender, and,
“ either for Cash or for Annual or other periodical Pay-
ments, either determinable or not determinable with
« Life, or for other Considerations, to sell Lands, Tene-
ts ments, and Hereditaments in the Colonies and Depen-
“ dencies of the British Empire, or any of them.”
Secondly —" By Lease or License for such Considera-
“ tion as aforesaid to confer the Rights of mining, quar-
ts rying, brickmaking, limemaking, building, farming,
depasturing, and cutting Timber.”
Thirdly —“ To Carry forward Emigration to the Colo-
" nies and Dependencies aforesaid, or any or either of them,
“ and to convey or procure to be conveyed thither Emi-
“ grants, and to obtain the Premiums, or Bounties, whether
“ in Money, Land, or Land Scrip, and such other Profit or
“ Remuneration, from any source whatever, as can be
“ obtained for or by reason or means of the Introduction
“ or Conveyance of Emigrants.”
The Act further provides that the operations of the Cor-


poration shall be confined, in the first instance , to the co-
lony of Western Australia.
Immediately on the Act of Parliament being obtained,
all necessary arrangements were made for carrying out
the objects of the Corporation, and a number of Emi-
grants were despatched to Western Australia, when the
discovery of gold in the neighbouring Colonies caused the
Corporation to suspend its course of action, until the ex-
citement attending such discovery subsided; and as the
experience of the last few years has fully proved that the
gradual but certain profits which the industrious Emigrant
may realise in his ordinary operations as a farmer or
tradesman, more than counterbalance the uncertain
prizes, the physical and moral disadvantages of gold dig-
ging, the Corporation have determined upon an active
resumption of their interrupted business.
The business is divided into three leading departments,
viz.:—
1. The Land Department.
2. The Life Assurance Department.
3. The Emigration Department..
And the mode in which the business will be practically
carried out is shewn in the following pages.
LAND DEPARTMENT.
The extent of territory open to the operations of the
Corporation is the entire colony of Western Australia ,
comprising an unlimited quantity of fine Agricultural,
Pastoral, and Mineral Land.
The Corporation is already possessed of upwards of
109,000 acres of Freehold Land, nearly the whole of which
is situated about twenty-five miles only from Perth and
Freemantle, the chief towns of the Colony.


The privileges granted to the Corporation by its
special Act of Parliament enable it, in proportion to the pro-
gress of its operations, to acquire land to any extent, the
whole of which will be open for selection and allotment to
Emigrants and others who may, from time to time, be
desirous of settling, or obtaining land, in the Colony.
These Lands will be classified, and divided in the fol-
lowing manner:—
1. Town lots op a quarter of an acre each.
2. Suburban lots of ten acres each.
3. Country or Farm lots of forty acres each
4. Special lots and Mineral Land, as may be re-
quired.
With a view to bring the acquisition of Land within
the reach of all classes, either as an investment of savings,
or for the purpose of present or future settlement, the
Corporation is prepared to enter into any of the following
arrangements for anynuraberoflots that may be required
by the purchaser, viz.:—
1. By sale for cash paid down.
2. By sale on credit, the price payable by instalments.
3. By lease, with or without the combination of Life
Assurance.
PBICE OF LAND.
By Sale for Cash paid down.
The purchasers are entitled to select their land from the
estates of the Corporation, or from any of the available
Crown Lands in the Colony, at the following prices:—
Town lots, £5 each, or at the rate of £2O an acre.
Suburban lots, £2 an acre.
Country or Farm lots, 105. an acre.
Special lots and Mineral Land, as may be agreed upon.


nees, suoject to tne payment 01 tne annual rental
charged by the Corporation for the use of laud under
the tenure by lease.
Term of
Single
Annual
Hf.-yeai’ly
Quarterly
Monthly
Years.
Payment.
Payment.
Payment.
Payment.
Payment.
£ s. d.
£ s.
d.
£ s. d.
£ s.
d.
£ s. d.
1 year
19 1 0
19 1
0
9 13 5
4 17
5
1 12 10
2 „
18 2 10
9 10
4
4 16 6
2 8
7
0 16 4
3 „
17 5 7
6 3
9
3 2 10
1 11
8
0 10 8
4 „
16 9 1
4 10
7
2 6 0
1 3
2
0 7 10
5 „
15 13 5
3 10
8
1 15 11
0 18
1
0 6 1
6 „
14 18 6
2 17
4
19 2
0 14
9
0 5 0
7 „
14 4 3
2 7
11
14 5
0 12
4
0 4 2
10 „
1 11
0
0 15 10
0 8
0
0 2 9
15 „
0 18
1
0 9 4
0 4
9
The Corporation will,
at
any time when
called upon.
advance by way of loan —
-for the emigration of the pur-
chasers, or
their nominees, if eligible, — four
-fifths of the
whole amount which may
have been paid
on account
of the land.
By Sale on credit.
The same prices as “for cash;” the payment of which
may be spread over such a number of years as the pur-
chaser may select from the following Table.
Table I.
[ Without Life Assurance.']
Annual and other Periodical Payments, to which the
Corporation will add interest at the rate of 5 per cent,
per annum, [on the system adopted by Freehold Land
and Building Societies,] necessary to secure the
Freehold Title and possession of £2O, value in land in
Western Australia, at the expiration of a term of
years. The purchasers will be entitled , at any time
during the term of these payments, to demand the
Possession of the Land for themselves or their nomi-
nees, subject to the payment of the annual rental
charged by the Corporation for the use of laud under
the tenure by lease.
N.B. Land Purchasers under this Table will be
entitled to claim prom the Corporation, at the end


OF THE TERM, THE REPURCHASE, Clt par, OF ANY LANDS
IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE WHOLE OF THE SUBSCRIPTIONS
OR INSTALMENTS HAVE BEEN PAID, IN THE EVENT OF ANY
CIRCUMSTANCES ARISING WHICH WOULD RENDER IT UNDE-
SIRABLE FOR THE PURCHASERS, OR THEIR NOMINEES, TO
TAKE POSSESSION OF THE LAND.
By Lease.
[ With, or without, Life Assurance .]
Leases will be granted for such periods as may be
agreed upon, and at the following rental, which is based
upon the current value of money in the colony, viz.:—
Town lots, at 10s. each, per annum *
Suburban lots, at 4s. per acre, per annum.
Country or Farm lots, at Is. per acre, per annum.
Leaseholders may purchase the land in their occu-
pation, at the current prices of the Corporation, at any
time.
LIFE ASSURANCE DEPARTMENT.
The Colonization Assurance Corporation is fhe only
Assurance Society which possesses the privilege of adapt-
ing the well known principles of Life Assurance to the
direct acquisition and present enjoyment of Land.
In an ordinary Life Assurance Office the value of the
policies does not accrue until the death of the assured.
The policies issued by the Corporation not only secure a
Freehold Title to land at the expiration of the terra for
which they are granted, but they also entitle the assured,
or their nominees, to demand and obtain the immediate
possession and enjoyment of the land, at any time after the
policy has been effected.


enjoyment of the Land at any time during the payment
of the premium, subject to the payment of the annual
rental charged by the Corporation for the use of land
under the tenure by lease. .
Age.
For Life
Age.
For Life.
£ s.
d.
£ s.
d.
14
0 7
6
33
0 11
6
15
0 7
9
34
0 11
9
16
0 8
0
35
0 12
0
17
0 8
3
36
0 12
6
18
0 8
6
37
0 12
9
19
0 8
9
38
0 13
0
20
0 8
9
39
0 13
3
21
0 9
0
40
0 13
9
22
0 9
3
41
0 14
0
23
0 9
3
42
0 14
6
24
0 9
6
43
0 14
9
25
0 9
9
44
0 15
3
26
0 10
0
45
0 16
0
27
0 10
3 ,
46
0 16
3
28
0 10
3
47
0 16
9
29
0 10
6
48
0 17
3
30
0 10
9
49
0 17
9
31
0 11
0
50
0 18
3
32 (
0 11
3
c
This privilege enables the Assured, or their nominees,
to obtain good farming land, or a building site, at the
smallest possible outlay; and affords to them a favourable
opportunity of increasing the value of their property , during
life , in proportion to the labour bestowed and the improve-
ments they may be able to accomplish.
Table 11.
Annual Payments necessary to secure £2O, value in
land in Western Australia, at the death of the assured. The
policies issued under this Table entitle the Assured, or their
nominees, to claim and obtain the immediate possession and


Example. — A. 8., aged 30, effects an assurance under
the above table for £2O. This would cost him 10s 9 d
per annum , He then claims, and obtains for himself, or his
nominee, the right to select and take possession of land to the
value of his policy, for which he pays the usual rental
charged by the Corporation for the use of land under the
tenure of lease.
By this plan it will be seen that A. B. becomes pos-
sessed of a lot of good farming land, chosen by himself, on
extremely advantageous terms; and at his death the rent
ceases, no further payments have to be made, and the land
becomes the freehold property of his family, or representa-
tives.
It need scarcely be pointed out that the value of land
advances with the increase of population, and as the efforts
of the Corporation are especially directed to that end, it is
obvious that parties becoming possessed of land, judiciously
selected, may hereafter realize largely on their investments;
as it has frequently happened that land in the neighbouring
Colonies has been sold at prices varying from £lOO. to
£lO,OOO per acre.
EMIGRATION DEPARTMENT.
The cost of a passage to Western Australia under the
authority of the Corporation, is, for the present, fixed
at £l6, each, for statute adults, and £B, each, for children
under twelve years of age.
The current rate of passage money to Western Aus-
tralia in private ships is about £22. The actual saving,
therefore, which emigrants may effect, by sailing in the
ships despatched by the Corporation, is about £6. on each
passage.
In addition to this actual money saving, assisted
passages, and other special advantages and inducements.
18


Hf. -yearly
Payment.
£ s. d.
8 17 5
I 18 8
15 2
0 18 5
0 14 5
0 11 8
0 9 10
arc offered to emigrants proceeding to the Colony in the
ships despatched by the Corporation.
ASSISTED PASSAGES.
The Corporation will grant Assisted Passages to
eligible emigrants on payment of a deposit of £ B, each,
for statute adults, and £4, each, for children, payable before
embarkation. The emigrants so assisted will be required to
pay the remainder of the passage-money within two years
after their arrival in the Colony.
The Corporation will not object to receive the payments
required towards passages, by instalments, spread over
such a number of years as the intending Settlers and
Emigrants may choose to select from the following Table :
Table 111.
[Without Life Assurance .]
Annual and other periodical payments, to which the
Corporation will add interest at the rate of 5 per cent, per
annum, [on the system adopted by Freehold Land and
Building Societies,] necessary to complete the sum of £B,
deposit money, required for an assisted passage at
expiration of a term of years. These payments will, of
course, be doubled in the cases of parties who may be
desirous of subscribing the whole of their passage-money
before leaving the United Kingdom
Term of
Years.
Annual
Payment.
Quarterly
Payment.
Monthly
Payment.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
1 year
7 12 5
1 19 0
0 13 2
2 „
3 16 2
0 19 6
0 6 7
2 9 6
0 12 8
0 4 4
1 16 3
0 9 3
0 3 2
5 „
18 4
0 7 3
0 2 G
6 „
7
13 0
0 5 11
0 19 2
0 5 0
19


Parties to whom assisted passages are granted will be
required, before embarkation, to effect a Whole Life
Policy with the Corporation, payable in land in Western
Australia, on the scale of premiums laid down in Table 11.,
in the proportion of not less than £2O, for each passage.
This Life Policy will confer on the Assured all the privi-
leges, as to the use and possession of land , described under
Table 11.
N.B. —Subscribers or their representatives will be
ENTITLED TO CLAIM FROM THE CORPORATION THE RETURN OF
ANY MONIES PAID UNDER THIS TABLE, TOGETHER WITH IN-
TEREST AT THE RATE OF 5 PER CENT. PER ANNUM, ON THE
COMPLETION OF THE TERM OF YEARS SELECTED, IN THE
EVENT OF ANY CIRCUMSTANCES ARISING WHICH WOULD REN-
DER IT UNDESIRABLE FOR THE SUBSCRIBERS, THEIR REPRE-
SENTATIVES, OR NOMINEES TO EMIGRATE.
SPECIAL ADVANTAGES TO A LIMITED NUMBER
OF EARLY CANDIDATES.
FREE GRANTS OF LAND.
{ln conjunction with the payment of the entire passage
money).
The Corporation offers Absolute Free Grants of Land,
with the right of selection, to Small Capitalists and others,
or their nominees, if eligible, who desire to pay the entire
cost of the passage to the Colony before leaving the United
Kingdom, in the ships despatched under the authority of
the Corporation, in the proportion of 80 acres for every
family in which there shall be more females than males,
and which shall be equal to at least three statute adults in
number; children under twelve years of age counting as
half adults.
The passage money may be subscribed on the scale of
payments laid down in Table 111.


FREE PASSAGES.
[ln conjunction with the purchase of land).
The Corporation offers Absolute Free Passages to Small
Capitalists and others, with families in which there are
more females than males , or their nominees, if eligible,
who desire to complete the purchase money for their land
before leaving the United Kingdom, in the proportion of
one absolute free passage for every land-purchase of the
extent of £2O; Children under twelve count for half
passages.
The purchase money may be subscribed on the scale of
payment laid down in Table I.
It will be observed from the preceding Rules and
Tables, that there are no tines on forfeitures connected
with the payments for Land or Passages; and that the
MONEY PAID, TOGETHER WITH INTEREST AT THE RATE OF
5 per Cent., is returnable, at the expiration of the term
of years selected, whether the subscription is complete
or not.
The Corporation is now prepared to receive Appli-
cations and Subscriptions for Land and Passages.
Applications, and Letters relating to Land and Emigra-
tion, should be addressed to C. Stuart Bailey, Esq., 3,
Cannon Street, London, E.C.


[Abridged Prospectus.]
THE
INCORPORATED BY SPECIAL ACT OF PARLIAMENT,
A.D.1850;
Which confers on the Corporation the following highly
important privileges;—
A Bounty of £2O. receivable for each Emigrant con-
veyed to the Colony of Western Australia.
Liability of each Proprietor limited to the amount of his
Subscription.
Power to Purchase, Exchange and Surrender Lands.
Power to hold Lands to any extent.
Power to Sell Lands either for Cash or under the Life
Assurance principle.
Power to confer by Lease or License the Rights of
Mining, Quarrying, Sf’c.f or any other Right or Privilege
on the Lands, belonging to the Corporation.


CAPITAL £lOO,OOO, in 10,000 SHARES of £lO. each.
With power to increase the same to £600,000 with the
consent of the Lords of the Treasury.
Nearly one-half of the Capital has already been sub-
scribed for, and the proceeds applied in the purchase of
Lands and otherwise for the purposes of the Corporation,
which is possessed of 109,000 Acres of Land in the Colony
of Western Australia. The remainder of the Capital is
note offered for public subscription.
DEPOSIT £2. PER SHARE
Of which 10s is to be paid on application and £l. 10s on
allotment. No calls to exceed £2, nor to be made at in-
tervals of less than Six months between each call. Any
Proprietor desirous of paying up his Shares in full will be
at liberty to do so.
Interest at the rate of 4 per cent per annum, will be paid,
on all calls and deposits, until the Directors shall be enabled
to declare a Dividend.
Application for the unallotted shares may be addressed to
Mr. B. R. Pemberton, Secretary, at No. 3, Cannon Street,
London, E.C.
Each application must be accompanied by a deposit of
10s per share, and a further sum of £l. 10s will be re-
quired on allotment.






Special advantages of emigrating to West-*
ERA AUSTRALIA, UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF
the Colonization Assurance Corpora-
tion.
Free Grants of Land, in conjunction with payment of
passages at £l6. per statute adult.
Free Passages, in conjunction with purchase of Land, at
105. per acre.
Assisted Passages, at £B. per statute adult.
Leases of Land at Is. per acre.
Payment, by instalments.
Five per Cent. Interest, allowed on payments.
Money returned, with interest, if parties are unable to
emigrate.
<BfR res*
3, Cannon Street, London, E.C.
