

S/'s)X Xf-rX/t-Xj




The following pages were originally intended to
appear in the columns of one or other of the daily
papers, but as the writer proceeded he saw that
its style might not be acceptable to the Herald,
while its length would prevent the Empire from
giving it insertion as Original Correspondence,
He therefore determined to publish it in its
present form, for distribution among his fellow
merchants, ship owners, and traders, in the hope
that the importance of the subject treated will
induce them to read it.
Victoria Chambers.
i3l Pitt Street,
Sydney, 27th October, 1873.




WHARFAGE ACCCOMMODATION,
Increased facilities for Loading and unloading Ships
in the Port of Sydney.
The Merchants of Sydney in Chamber of Commerce assembled,
have publicly declared themselves incompetent to advise the
Government in respect to the style of Wharf accommodation
necessary for the business of the Port which they are supposed
to conduct. They have clamoured for many years for more Wharf
accommodation, and now that “ The pool is troubled ” they are
impotent to a degree to help themselves to decide really what
they want.
One would imagine that Wharf accommodation was a very
difficult question, because the more light that is attempted to be
thrown on it, the more difficult and obscure does the object become.
The Merchants required something; they demanded from the
Government something : the Government responded, and placed at
their disposal the talent and ability of the Harbor and Works
department, from its intellectual political head down to the small
boy of the office. The Parliament appointed a Select Committee of
the wisdom of the blouse. That Committee sat for twenty days,
took the evidence of Merchants, Ship-owners, and Stevedores, and
the whole question thus became ripe for action. Then the Merchants
met, and with all the vast stores of information and plans before
them, they deliberately say, We are incompetent. It is the
old story oft repeated, once more produced, “ The mountain
laboring and bringing forth a mouse.”


For one, I am not disposed to think my Mercantile and Ship-
owning brethren were fairly represented at the Meeting of the
“ Chamber ”on Monday last. There are many of that class in
Sydney, both capable and willing to express boldly their views
on the vexed question, but they are not members of that awfully
august body, the “ Chamber of Commerce ” and therefore (although
myself a member) I protest against the decision arrived at, and
expressed at that Meeting, as the opinion of the Mercantile body of
Sydney as a whole.
The Chamber of Commerce has never succeeded in acquitting
itself worthy of its name in any public matter, and they have
brought upon themselves before to-day—and their conduct on the
Wharf question shews they richly deserved it—the sarcasm cast on
them by an honorable and learned gentleman at whose policy they
have often cavilled, but without suggesting anything better.
I wonder if the Campbell’s, the Lamb’s, the Botts’, or the
Moore’s, of early days, when no Chamber of Commerce existed,
felt themselves incompetent to decide on the Wharf accommodation
necessary for the business of their generation. The Wharves built
by them last to this hour, as monuments of what individual pluck
and common sense could do. I wonder again if Captain Smith,
when he extended his Wharf, and made it more commodious for its
size that any Government Wharf has ever been, took counsel from
the Chamber of Commerce or even if he had the assistance of
the Engineer in Chief in preparing plans for the structure which
bears his name. Yet, he as a Mercantile man is among the number,
who, by the resolution of Mr. Joseph at the Chamber of Commerce,
is put down as one of the incompetents. Did the proprietors of the
Cosmopolitan (late MacNamara’s) Wharf> ask the Chamber of
Commerce for an opinion when they so judiciously and so econo-
mically utilised every foot of their Wharf frontage, and provided
at the same time facility to discharge, and safety for the ship ? Did
they keep the country in a state of agitation for months before they
decided on their plans ? Did they ask for the assistance of a
Committee of the “ House.” No ! they, and the gentleman whose
name I have taken the liberty of introducing here saw the necessity,
and they brought their individual experience to bear on it, and took
the advice of a few practical men, but certainly of no politically


scientific Engineer in chief, and they set about their w®rk, and it
was done—-and done well. I cannot help thinking that the Circular
Quay is to be made another opportunity for the display of
engineering skill, and another monument of engineering folly, with
which this colony abounds, and for the cost of which the country
is now suffering under a heavy debt.
My remarks so far are intended for the Mercantile body for
allowing themselves to be led by the nose by two or three com-
mercial men of standing, who generally take the lead, and profess to
speak the sentiments of their class, but who lose no opportunity in
any ventilation they give of public matters to keep an eye to the
main chance. To-day it may suit such would-be leaders to speak
boldly, because of personal interest; to-morrow, they will speak
with bated breath, and display a meekness and modesty as in this
instance, in criticising the plans of certain leading Government
officials, that we almost become suspicious enough to think they
have a motive to serve by such meekness and modest reserve, but
they lead the Mercantile body to put themselves down as “ incom-
petent” to decide their own requirements, and it is against this I
protest.
These pages were written after perusal of a Copy of the
Evidence given before the Select Committee of the Assembly, on
the best means of improving the Wharf accommodation , and pro-
viding greater facilities for the loading and unloading of vessels in
Sydney Harbour, wherein it is apparent that certain gentlemen who
took part at the Chamber of Commerce meeting, did give evidence
on the subject of Wharf Extension; gentlemen who admitted to
the Committee that they had seen “ all the plans ” in the office of
the Engineer in Chief, and then and there did commit themselves
to the plans of the said Engineer.
It is with the view of waking up the public mind to a com-
parison of the several plans, that I am induced to pen these pages,
and I shall endeavour before I conclude to show cause for an
expression of opinion, which will condemn the plans of the Engineer
in Chief, —will prevent the scheme for a middle Jetty in the Cove,
and will prevent the squeezing and consequent confusion that would
follow, if Lieutenant Gowlland’s plans be wholly adopted. And in
so doing I will endeavour to prove that of the plans submitted, that


bearing the name of Mr. Selfe, is, what I maintained for it at the
Chamber of Commerce Meeting,—the most suitable for the interests
and trade of the port, and that, if adopted with slight alterations
and improvements it will suit our wants for the next fifty years.
When the question of wharf accommodation was first mooted in
the Assembly, a good deal was said about absence of suitable wharf
space for the “ Sobraon/’ and it was attempted to be shown that
the owners of that and other similar vessels were deterred thereby
from sending their ships again to this port. I don’t think any argu-
ment has been shewn to sustain the statements made in this parti-
cular, but to meet the assumed want Mr. Moriarty, when giving his
evidence before the Select Committee, produced a sketch of a plan
lately exhibited at the Exchange, and he shows that he has provided
a berth for the “ Sobraon” in the proposed new structure at the
Eastern side of the Cove. It must be borne in mind that the
“ Sobraon ” is 272 feet in length without allowing anything for head
gear, &c,, and to berth this ship Mr, Moriarty has provided a jetty
sixty feet in width ; now I would ask the Engineer in Chief: —
1. How he proposes to discharge, with “ despatch and with
facility” a ship like the “ Sobraon” with a jetty that in effect
is little better than a 60 feet detached stage ?
2. Does he think it possible the ship could discharge from
three hatches at the same time at the proposed jetty ?
3. If Mr. Moriarty thinks it practicable to discharge from
the vessels three hatches, would he propose to put down on
the ship’s deck a tramway, from the fore and quarter hatch to
the middle gangway, and what scheme would he propose to
adopt to convey the cargo stowed in the fore and after holds
to the main hatch, abreast the Jetty ?
4. How he proposes to moor a ship 272 feet in length to a
jetty 60 feet in width ?
It will be seen by reference to the plan of the Engineer-in-chief
that a berth is allotted to the “La Hogue” inside the “ Sobraon”
stern on to the North side of the jetty, and overlapped by the
latter vessel, and a similar berth for another large ship on the south
side of the jetty also overlapped ; now, while the inside vessels might
be comfortably and safely moored with the advantage of a broadside
berth available for all three hatches, the positions assigned to them


suggest another difficulty in regard to the “ Sobraon,” as it would
he necessary to moor that ship safely, to carry her chains across the
La Hogue’s rail, entering about amidships, and across the poop of
the “ Parramatta,” the next ship farther north, and so on for the
after moorings across the ships south of the jetty. The same
would apply to the ship berthed in the position assigned to the
“ Underley,” with the like interweaving and crossing of chains
across the “ Liberator,” and other ships. Therefore, to remove
the inside ships, or to moor other vessels in their places, it would be
necessary to unmoor and remoor the outer vessels at the “Sobraon”
or “ Underley” piers. This objection must be so obvious, that even
the uninitiated in the art of mooring a ship will stare, and I think
will admit that sufficient reason is shewn to condemn, as unsuitable
and unprofitable, the scheme as suggested by the Engineer-in-chief.
Ido not propose at this stage of the discussion,to touch on
the question of the relative cost of the various plans submitted,
but I propose to confine myself to the question of design, ac-
commodation of ship, and practical utility in loading and discharging
of goods.
The next scheme I shall notice, is the proposal to build a long
jetty from the head of the Quay, to the mouth of the Cove, but I
hardly think it will find acceptance with a Sydney public, and I
don’t think we shall see such a thing in our day. The argument in
its favor is, that it will provide a number of berths for vessels
broadside on, and while I admit that would be an advantage, if
unattended with any disadvantage, I cannot see we should gain
much in the way of facility for removing our goods. It appears to me
that the outer ships would be delayed in their discharge by the ships
nearer to the quay, and the cargo from different ships would be
mixed, unless the Pier was constructed of sufficient width to afford
the necessary shed accommodation and road room for the drays; and
in that event, the Pier would have to be so wide as to destroy the
berths on each side of the quay hut it would destroy the traffic of the
Cove altogether and besides it is too much like a spurious imitation of
our neighbours Piers in Victoria, who because Nature has not
given them a natural dock like our Cove, are necessitated to try
the next best thing. But I shall explain before I finish why, and
why only, the Piers at Sandridge have become popular, when


adverting to what we need at this port, even more than an extension
of wharf accommodation. The Pier proposed here would destroy
the Cove, if for no other reason, than because of the silting up
between the piles.
The next plan worthy of notice is that of Lieutenant Gowlland.
It is without exception more suited than any of the others yet spoken
of for berthing the largest number of vessels in the smallest possible
space, and berthing them too with safety and economically, so far as
time and labour is concerned in the mooring of ships; but in my opinion
it fails to meet our wants, in that it provides too much accommo-
dation for ships, and too little for the cargoes which have to be
bandied and removed from them. It shows however that its author
is true to the instincts of his profession in the simplicity and safety
of his design for mooring ships.
The space on the Eastern side of the Quay is not sufficiently
roomy to admit of Gowlland’s plan being carried out, if sheds of a
sufficient size are to be built, and a cart track left wide enough for
the dray traffic which would be necessary if the berths were occupied.
The evidence on this point given by Mr. J. B. Watt, when before
the Committee, speaks of this objection, and I fully endorse his
views, He says—
“ I do not see that it is the object to crowd a great many
“ ships at the Circular Quay There is a great deal of
“ wharfage accommodation in the port, and I take it, the object
“ of the Government is to give the best accommodation they
“can at the Circular Quay, and not to monopolise the
“ wharfage. ... I do not think the object of the Government
“ is to injure owners of wharf property, and to devise plans
“ to concentrate the shipping at that point, ... I believe the
“ whole of the ships that come here could be accommodated at
“ private wharves. ”
Mr. Watt’s evidence as a whole will bear reading and re-reading,
as he deals with the question from the point of view of one of those
most largely interested in the shipping and commerce of the port,
The drift of it all is, that we have in Sydney Harbor, ample wharf
accommodation, even at private wharves, and, while it is very proper
to improve the Circular Quay, it is not desirable to concentrate the
whole trade of the port at one point, and inflict a serious injury on


private wharf owners, to the inconvenience and confusion which
would result from such concentration. Therefore Lieutenant
Rowland’s plan, as a whole, will not suit our trade, but a portion
of it will, as I shall show presently.
The last plan I shall notice briefly is that of Mr, Selfe, and I
would say at once that Mr. Selfe is a complete stranger to me, so
that I speak without any personal prejudice in his favor. Mr, Selfe’s,
in my opinion, is the best plan of any yet submitted because it
provides :
Ist.—Broadside space for the accommodation of the ship, and
permits (the great desideratum to a ship) the working of the three
hatches at one time.
2nd, —It permits the vessel to be moored with little labor, inde-
pendently of each other, and safely.
3rd.—lt makes the most of the frontage of the Quay, without
squeezing the trade into one small focus.
4th.—And I believe it can be constructed more cheaply than any
other plan yet shown.
I said before I did not intend to encumber these remarks with
discussing materials and construction, but I would like to point out
the fearful sacrifice of public money, which would follow if it be
decided to copper the piles of the jetties, one estimate pointing to
£50,000 as the sum it would cost, and I hope the magnitude of
these figures will be sufficient to alarm the greatest advocates of the
plan. It should certainly arouse to action those of the citizens who
have to pay the cost, and the interest on the money thus proposed
to be wasted.
The secret of the popularity of the Sandridge piers arises from
the fact that our Victorian friends exist under Customs’ regulations
framed with some little regard to commercial necessities and to com-
mon sense. In illustration of the relative systems and for the infor-
mation of those not conversant with such details, I would briefly
explain the modus operandi of the two Colonies,
In Victoria, when a ship arrives, and is berthed at the Sand-
ridge pier or at any other wharf berth in Melbourne she can com-
mence to discharge without any interference of Customs petty
officials in the shape of Tide Waiters, &c. A seal is placed on the


ships hatches every night and removed every morning, the ship
making the most of her time during working hours by discharging
indiscriminately. The Cargo when landed is taken posession of and
delivered through the Customs’ authorities to the Importer, and the
liability of the ship ceases from that moment.
In Sydney the moment a ship arrives inside the Heads, an
officer of Her Majesty’s Customs in uniform, yclept a Tide Waiter,
is placed on board, whose supposed duties are to watch the
Ship and Cargo Day and Night. He must therefore if the work
is to be well and efficiently performed 'neither slumber nor sleep !
He is accommodated at the expense of the ship, i.e. board and
lodged ; poor mortal, his position reminds me of a fowl in a hen
coop. He is supposed never to leave the ship, but to act for the
period of his term of duty as a stern sentinel to prevent
smuggling, &c. &c. In addition to the protection afforded by
this official, the precaution is taken, of sealing the hatches each
evening, and better still the Revenue is further protected by the
liability of the ship for the duty on all goods which appear on her
Manifest or in her Cocket, and which are not landed or which
cannot be satisfactorily accounted for. Now, I would ask, —Does
the head of our Customs Department believe that a Tide Waiter
can watch night and day for five weeks without eating, drinking,
or sleeping 1 and therefore of what avail is he for protection from
smuggling during the necessary hours of rest and refreshment, if the
other precautions named are not sufficient. Here is proof—Some time
ago I had a ship in port at a certain wharf, and being in town late one
evening, and desiring to communicate some orders for the morrow
to one of the officers, I called on board at about 11 p.m. —I passed
from one end of the ship to the other on deck, I walked through the
cabins below, but every living soul was out of the vessel, and yet
this ship had on board of her at that time dutiable goods, the value
to the Revenue alone of J 24000 ! of course, supposed to be in charge
of the Vigilant Tide Waiter, whose board and lodging the ship has
to provide ! but there is another little difficulty in regard to this
Tide-waiting arrangement if, by reasons of any delay beyond a
certain time, you keep this man, (even for delays incident to the
Customs’ system itself,) you are called upon to pay, (and cannot
clear your ship until you do,) for the time of this officer at so much


per day,—another tax on shipping, and another drawback to the
prosperity of the Port.
If 1 have not said sufficient of the relative systems of the two
ports—to shew that it is not the want of more Wharf accommodation
which gives Sydney a bad name, I will mention one more circum-
stance of daily occurrence. A London ship usually brings a large
quantity of spirits, wines, and dutiable goods ; if the ship, having a
good wharf berth, a smart stevedore, and a pushing captain, is able to
make a good show of work, and lands fifty or sixty tons of bonded
goods before 12 noon, down comes a peremptory order from the
Landing-waiter to the Tide-waiter on board, Stop all further de-
liveries of Bonded goods for the rest of the day. And stop the ship
must, and delay, expense, and a host of concomitant disagreeables
follow, and that Good Wharf Berth in consequence is occupied,
not THREE DAYS, but THREE WEEKS.
In proof of these statements, and to shew that the picture is not
over coloured I am permitted by a well-known stevedore of this
port, Mr. Chester, to make use of the following:—l put the
question to him, “ Suppose, the Ethiopian, just arrived from London,
(a ship of one thousand tons,) is sent alongside a wharf; and
you were told to discharge her with despatch, working from 6 a.m.
to 6 b.m., How long would you take to put her out ?” Note the
answer, promptly given, “If I had no Customs’ regulations to
contend with, I could do it in Forty working hours ; but under
the present system, it will take perhaps Three Weeks ! ”
Not to jump at conclusions in a matter of this sort, although
quite aware myself of what could be done, I asked Mr. Alfred
Lamb, of Parbury, Lamb & Co., who are large wharf proprietors,
and I put to him the case of a still larger ship, and his answer
given in the presence of one the supporters of Mr. Joseph’s motion
at the Chamber of Commerce was, In Sixty working hours.”
So much for the difficulties, and the real and only difficulties
existing at this moment in the way of facility and despatch to our
shipping and commerce in the Port of Sydney, and the reason why
we hear so much of Victoria and the Piers at Sandridge, as compared
with the Wharf accommodation at this port. I pass on to say,
that our Customs’ system is a disgrace to the age in which we liva.
Its head is opposed to any change or amelioration of its harsh


provisions. He looks at everything from a penal point of view,.
Everything commercial, in his eye, is tinged with fraud, deceit, and
wrong; and the system, which in itself is vicious, is administered in
a way to render its objectionable regulations still more offensive.
It must be clear therefore to the mind of the merest tyro, that before
any large expenditure is incurred for wharves, warehouses, or any
material facilities attempted, we must change the entire system
and its head.
If we had all the wharf accommodation now in use, all that is
proposed by the schemes and plans that have yet been submitted,
If we had ten times the depth of water, ten times the storage room
that we now possess, we would simply be “ as you were,” until the
radical change above indicated is carried into effect. The obstacles
and difficulties attending the trade and commerce of the Port of
Sydney exist under that square pile of Buildings, on the Circular
Quay, denominated —Her Majesty’s Customs.
In concluding my remarks on this question, I would venture
to suggest the following.
Ist. That Mr. Moriarty’s plan will not suit
2nd. The middle jetty scheme is to be shunned
3rd. Lieutenant Gowlland’s scheme may partially be used,
but Mr. Selfe’s is, par excellence, the best yet submitted, and by
blending with it, four of the jetties proposed by Lieutenant
Gowlland for loading berths mainly, it can be made the scheme of
all others, which will satisfy the persons most interested and
best qualified to judge, viz.—The Ship owners, Ship masters and
the Consignees and Shippers of goods. And I go further and say
I believe it will be found by far more economical than any
of the other plans. But all will be useless to accomplish the object
for which our Chamber of Commerce has long clamoured, until we
remove that boom and barrier to our commerce.—The present
Customs’ Kegula lions.
A. W. DOUGLAS, PRINTER, ATLAS OFFICE, 24, HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY*.




