

TRACTS FOR THE PEOPLE, No. 3.
FOR GRATUITOUS DISTRIBUTION.
WHAT ARE WE TO DO WITH
OUR CHILDREN?
Scotch Carpenter. English Bootmaker. Scene, Collingwood.
Cr. Weel, Jem, are the bairns getting on brawly 1
Br. First-rate, two in the factory, three at school, two at
home.
Cr. That’s grand; it’s a blessing to be in a country whar
there’s work and schooling for a’; its rael kind o’ the state to
tak’ such guid care o’ ye.
Br. Oh, I see you’re coming round fast, John—what should
we do without our protective system, which relieves our parental
anxieties for the future of our children 1
Cr. Weel, it’s fine for the young lads —for ye see they’re
trained up in the factory as apprentices under a proper boss,
and then, when they’ve served their time, they can set up for
themselves ; but I’m a wee bit puzzled, for ye see that if they can
start macheenery, a’ richt; but if no, they’ll have eneuch to do
to haud their ain by hand. Then ye see, if they get up factories
there’ll be an awfu’ competition, and if they work by hand
they’ll may be go to the wall.
Br. Now, John, you are terribly deficient in faith, for if they
have once learned a trade it will go hard if they can’t live by
it— I myself have nothing to do with the factory business, but
I am a first-rate finisher.
Cr. It’s a kind o’ question hoo many can get their Icevin’
out o’ the ane trade—and if ye speak o’ faith, from the day


we’re bom till the day we dee, we canna tell what a day may
bring forth. I was ane o’ thirteen—scattered a’ rovin’ the
warld, and we jeest trusted to Providence and did oor best.
The puir world must have been in an awfu’ fix before protection
to native industries was invented.
Br. I’m not first-rate in history, John, but our friends insist
that you’re the innovators in trying to start Free Trade again
after centuries of Protection.
Or. Weel, it’s a lang story, but I canna bring to mind aught
aboot protective duties from the time of Adam down to Queen
Elizabeth, who was an awfu’ woman for monopolies.
Br. Monopolies ! I should think so ; but moderate protec-
tion is a very different thing.
Cr. Aye, aye, just as different as the half o’ a pig micht be
fra the whole hog ; but let’s talk aboot the children, for you’re
a family man, Jem.
Br. Well, I want to see some public provision made for
them before I die, and no one can say when that will happen.
Cr. That’s a pious sentiment, Jem—for life’s awfu’ un-
certain —for young and auld; but dinna ye think, noo, we
micht as well trust Providence a’thegither instead o’ trying to
steer the winds and the waves oor ain gait. Gie the bairns a
good edication, and keep them fra the streets and the publics,
and there’s na fear o’ ’em, but ye canna expec’ thae larrikins to
do much good.
Br. Still, you see how many thousands are employed in
these same factories who would have been starving otherwise.
Cr. Weel, they’re there nae doot, but whar they would have
been on the other plan is anither question. If oor Free Trade
had been let alane ten year ago, there micht hae been mair
employment than ever, for ye see we hae grand natural
resources, and the main wealth o’ the country has come oot o’
a’ the gold—to say naething o’ wool and ither articles—and
there’s been a diversion like o’ capital frae thae big things, to
awheen kickshaws in comparison, and that too at great
expense. Candle making is a sort of legitimate attempt here


in a land o’ tallow, bat £60,000 is a big sum for ane company
to lose in trying an expeeriment.
Br. You dont mean to say that t
Cr. Yes : I see’d it in the director’s report; but what works
me up is the taxing o’ corks that’s wanted for bottles o’ a’ sorts
just to gie two or three bits o’ cork manufacturers a chance o’
leevin’ on charity.
Br. Yes ; but you see these big natural resources don’t
require encouragement, and grow themselves ; whereas native
industries have to be acclimatized.
Cr. It may be sae, and I wud’na objec’ if you Protectionist lads
would only subscribe among yoursels’ instead o’ making the State
your private tax gatherer; but noo look ye here, Jem, I ken
weel that you’re real fond o’ the bairns, and as you’re no’ a
factory man, I just want to tak’ your advice aboot this
machinery that’s making sic a stir.
Br. Well, John, say away, for I am a bit suspicious it
may be a bad job yet for the single working man.
Cr. Vera weel. Ye see, then, that ane machine can do more
work than ten men, and your Mens are keen against aught that
lessens what they ca’ the field o’ employment. For instance,
they just hate the sheepwalks, for the men wanted are few, and
the bit sheep are just nibbling machines for turning grass into
wool and mutton.
Br. You put the case cleverly enough, John—but don’t you
see, it is only by means of machinery that we can hold our own
in competition with importers—hand labour would have no
chance.
Cr. Weel stated—but the upshot is that ye canna support
native industries without pu’ing down native labour, sae that
ye’re fechting again yoursel’s; what I really wanted to impress on
you is that the market for young folk will soon be o’er full
unless you can manage to keep down thae machines that put
human creatures out o’ work; mind, I dinna mean that ye
should gang and brak a’ the fine machinery in the colony, as
they used to do in England when they were a’ mad against the


spinning jinnies and sicli like, but yet ye should be aither the
tae thing or the tither—for there maun be something wrang
when ye put labour awa’ wi’ ane hand and try to fetch it in with
the ither. '
Br. I feel bamboozled, and no mistake, with your political
economy, which I am inclined to think is very different from
common sense.
Cr. We maun try to tak facts and feelosophy thegither,
Jem, and if ye want to be consistent ye should jist go in for
prohibition in toto, and then we could keep all our ain folk
making and mending without machines except their ain fingers.
We would just be as weel off as Adam was when he was put
outside the bonny garden—or I’ll tell ye anither plan if ye’ll
no mention it to the wife.
Br. Fire away, John.
Cr. Now, ye see it’s a secret, but if we con hi ainly leemit
the number o’ children we would just produce the same effeck.
It’s a’ “ supply and demand,” and it stands to reason that if we
want to leemit competition we ought not to allow one man to
bring ten children into the market, when five would be quite
sufficient. It’s jeest a sort o’ home-made immigration system,
without the shipping, and the bairns cost a heap o’ money
before they come to man’s estate. May be no less than £2oo'
apiece.
Br. Well, John, you frighten me, and I’ll not tell the wife
in any case; and as to manufacturing, importing hands
seems to be much the same thing as importing machines, only
they don’t eat and drink, and wear boots and trousers and other
articles. The children are just a puzzle, and it might be best
after all to leave them to Providence and their own exertions—■
for that was all the capital you and I had to begin the world
with, John. Exeunt both.
Published by direction of the Provisional Central Committee, to whom all
communications can be addressed. Box No. 221, Post Office.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
