

pl&ip
fîliiiiili
iiiiii
BSiliii
tes#
KSBiK
BpgggH«
HÉSÉi
ÜMI
ili
•3âï§s*
llfe
ppg
'>■ ''.
' V'i>ÿiN N.
Hffl
i^wpw
-'sSQSsSsvï
tÇæQswa'SSS^^
- '- -
:. . . : : ;■ • .:
■
SææBHKHKæ
L«iiW^ip
vîSï®S!
: /'• ' .. - , .;. V
IHEi
v;V.
;^ÿv : ' 'V












WHAT HAS
MES. CAROLINE CHISHOLM
■ r
DONB FOR
THE COLONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES P
There is yet another mode in whioh the energetic and benevolent may do incalculable good.
They may feel a particular vocation; they may be specially impreseed with somepeculiar form of
social evil, and may devote themselves to war with it ; their line of usefulness may be indicated to
them by their capacity rather than their position ; they may master one particular branch of
philanthropy, and bind ail their powers toits service. They are certainly the most speedily success-
ful of ail the messengers of mercy. Such is Mas. Chisholm, who by years op unwearied individual
EFFORT HAS EEMODELLED THE WHOLE SYSTEM OF AUSTRALIAN EMIGRATION— HAS EE-UNIIED MaNY FAMILIE3
LONG BROKEN AND APART—HAS SAVED MANY ÜNPROVIDED WOMBN CAST DESOLATE UPON THE STREETS OF
Sydney prom destitution and from sin, and uas siarted thousands on a respectable and prospeeous
course.— Westminster Review.
“ for purther particulars enquire within.
«£sî>n«a :
PUBLISHED BY JAMES COLE, BOOKSELLER,
120, KING STREET EAST.




PREFACE.
A few words in explanation of the motives which hâve led to the publication
of this little pamphlet, will probably not be deemed surperfluous. Of the
thousands and tens of thousands who hâve heard of the philanthropical and
successful labours of Mrs. Caroline Chisholm in India, in Europe, and
Australia, but comparatively a small number hâve had the opportunity of
learning precisely what those labours were, and what has been their resuit.
The above remark is probably applicable to a large majority of the inhabitants
of this colony : to sucb, therefore, who may be désirons of some authentic and
reliable information on this subiect, the présent brief sketch is tendered,
which, however, —limited, as it must be to the compass of a few pages, is
unavoidably incomplète and imperfect ; although it is hoped it will be found
sot altogether insufficient or inadéquate to the object in view. Those who
would wish for more ample détails, will bave no difficulty in obtaining them
from mimerons publications which, during the last fifteen years andupwards,
bave been issued from the press in Great Britain, and some of which are
frequently to be met with on the book-stalls in Sydney, such as a well known
work of considérable merit, entitled “ The Three Colonies of Australia,” by
Samuel Sidney ; and “ Caroline Chisholm, her Life and Labours,” by Eneas
Mackensie, &c., &c.
It will be but right to add that this compilation consists almost
entirely of articles, either reprints or original, which from timeto time hâve
appeared in the columns of the Empire, during the last two or three years ;
this acknowledgment having been made, it will scarcely be requisite to offer
any further remarks in commendation of the persistent zeal, as well as the
ability, with which the proprietors of that journal bave laboured to avertfrom
this colony, the discrédit or —it might perhaps more truly be said—the dis-
grâce of leaving, without any adéquate requital, the valuable and unquestion-
ahle services of the above-mentioned excellent lady.
Lest it should be surmised, however, that this pamphlet is a mere
commercial spéculation on the part of the proprietors of the Empire, the fact
should be mentioned that those gentlemen hâve had no share whatever in
originating it, and that they are not iu any way concerned or interested in


this publication, beyond being engaged to priât it in the ordinary course of
tbeir business.
In justice also to Mrs. Chisholm, it should be stated that this little
brochure was proiected and published without the slightest previous
knowledge, on the part of that lady or of any member of her family, that
such a step was in contemplation.
In conclusion, the compiler of this humble publication takes leave to
remark, should a copy of it (as is not improbable) reach the hands of Miss
Florence Nightingale (who désignâtes herself “ the friend and pupil” of Mrs.
Chisholm), or of Lord Shaftesbury, or of the numerous other distinguished
friends and admirers of Mrs. Chisholm in England, they will not doubtless for
a moment hesitate to déclaré that a complété and triumphant answer bas
been given to the question—“ What has Mrs. Caroline Chisholm done
for the Colony of New South Wales ?” And it is equally clear, or at
least highly probable, that after having pronounced this opinion, they will
naturally ask —“ What has the Colony of New South Wales done for
Mrs. Caroline Chisholm ?” The only answer to the last question, which
can at présent be given, is found in the announcement or advertisement which
has from day to day for some time past appeared in the Sydney newspapers,
from which it is to be inferred, that in order to discharge her duty to the
younger and dépendent branches of her family, Mrs, Chisholm is compelled
(with diminished health and strength, but undiminished energy) to wage “ the
battle of life” by undertaking the laborious task of imparting instruction to
the children of others.
Whether such a blot on the escutcheon of the colony as arises from
leaving unliquidated a daim like that of Mrs. Chisholm will remain or will
ere long be removed—remains to be seen ; in the mean time this noble-minded
woman may console herself with a knowledge of the fact, that while several
thousands of pounds hâve been recently expended (itmight notuntruly be said
hâve been completely wasted) in a bootless and fruitless attempt to promote
immigration to this colony, she, by means of sagacious and well-considered
plans, carried on by a long course of indefatigable exertions, (without seeking
and as certainly without receiving fee or reward) succeeded in bringing out
from poverty and its privations, thousands to settle and prosper in this fertile
and beautiful land, —a land flowing with milk and honey—“ Where nature
rejoices in her splendeur, and soûles at her own loveliness.”


WHAT HAS
MRS. CAROLINE CHISHOLM
DONE FOR
THE COLONY OF NEW SOUTH WALBS ?
In these days of testimoniale, présentations, statues, and pensions,—when a
récognition, pecuniary or honorary, of worth—public or private, real or
hnaginary—seems ready to ooze front the finger ends of the whole com-
munity, it will, we are sure, be deemed an act of charity to many who are
eagerlylooking forward for an objecton which to bestow their faveurs if we
bring to their notice the daims of a lady to whom many thousands in this
community are deeply indebted. The following notice is front an old number
of Chamberé Journal, but ithas, we believe, never before been printedin Aus-
tralia, and consequently will be new to most of our readers :
The story of the early life of Caroline Chisholm, her adventures, her
trials, her triumphs over ignorance, préjudice, and tyranny, during the seven
years she passed in Australia, we hâve already related.* Before the close of
this year, she will bave again quitted England, after a career of seven more
years, passed not less usefully to her country and gloriously to her own répu-
tation for wisdom, foresight, energy, and philanthropy, than those she spent in
colonising Australia. She is about to départ, to renew under strange, yet
favourable auspices, her old labours, in colonising and cultivating the earth,
and in civilising and humanising the people. On her first sojourn, she had
to aid and protect the poorest labourers, exposed to ail the oppression that
falls to the lot of the helpless ignorant ; now she will hâve to guide and even
govern the wealthiest labouring-men the world has ever seen. A movement
bas been made, and met with enthusiasm by ail conditions and ranks of society,
for presenting Caroline Chisholm with a testimonial of national gratitude.
The time is appropriate for relating in what manner and by what
means she has acquired in this country a réputation and an influence even
exceeding that she earned in Australia. Plain words will suffice for this
purpose. In 1846, Caroline Chisholm, with her husband, Captain Chisholm,
and family of children, landed in England from Australia. She came the
unpaid agent and représentative ©f many hundred humble colonists, some
who hoped through her means to obtain justice from the home goyernment,
others to discover long lost relatives. One of her last and most important
* gee Journal, No 326.


labours had been to collect from word of mouth “ statements of the condition
of settlers in New South Wales.” These statements were valuable in two
points of view : in the first place, they afforded evidence—not now, but at
that time much needed —of the advantageous prospects afforded by the colony
for hard-working families ; in the next place, as each person gave the par-
ticulars of theparish, county, andcountry from which he or shecame, and the
names of the relations leftbehind, itfollowed naturally that many entreated
Mrs. Chisholm to find out parents, brothers, sisters, children, and either to
convey to them the means of proceeding to Australia, or to induce them to
take advantage of government facilities for proceeding to New South Wales,
In addition to these communications from the authors of the volun-
tary statements, two other important commissions were placed in Mrs.
Chisholm’s hands. During the time that émigration was carried on by
private contractors, who received a certain sum, or bounty per head, for
each of a certain quality delivered alive in Sydney harbour, parents who
could not reduce their families to the number and âge required by the bounty
standard, were induced by the contractors to leave young children behind
them to the care of workhouses. These deserted infants amounted to some
hundreds. Those reclaimed filled two ships. There were also convicts who,
under a public régulation, had been promised that, in case they conducted
themselves with propriety in the colony for a certain period, they should, on
obtaining their liberty—according to colonial phrase, ticket-of-leave —hâve
their wives and families sent to them at the cost of the government. The
promise was performed as regarded a few, but in those days the great sheep-
owners, not having been chastened by the gold-digging dearth of labour,
considered women and children rather a nuisance on their sheep-stations ;
so, in conséquence of their représentations, the promises made to reformed
prisouers were not performed, and there remained due on this account a con-
sidérable number of families.
Charged with these heavy commissions to contest with the Colonial
Office and the Home Office—in addition to the task of corresponding with
s une five thousand soûls of the humblest class of society, spreàd over the
breadth of England, Scotland, and Ireland—Caroline Chisholm comraenced
her work iu 1846, without rank, without influence, with an income barely
equal to English notions of a decent competency. She had ail her way to
make : Australia was so little known and so little esteemed seven years ago,
that the réputation she had gained there availed her little.
She began by arranging in regular order, dated and docketed, the
documents upon which she based her daims for free passages for the wives
and children, who were in this instance her clients, suing in forma pauperis.
It is one of the characteristics of Caroline Chisholm, that she never makes a
daim or a charge—whether it be against a government departmeot or a
commercial System —which she is not prepared to establish with the strongest
judicial proof. Met, in the case of the deserted children, by the Park-street
Emigration Commissioners, first with delay and then with évasion—for a
whole winter, when the snow lay ankle deep in the streets, and walking was
no pleasant task for one who had spent ten years in India and Australia—
backwards and forwards, again and again, day after day, she passed with her
neatly-tied evidence between her lodgings in King-street, Covent Garden, and


Downing-street, Park-street, and Whitehall. Unwearied, undaunted with
written as well as personal application she urged the cause of the poor créa-
tures who, trusting inher,were never likely tobeable tothankher, At length,
worn out by so much pertinacity, the émigration commissioners condescended
to discuss one or two cases. They began, as is the custom with officiais in
such cases, by doubting the facts ; but when as each doubt was hinted, a
bundle of papers was produced, untied, and such particulars as the following
were detailed John Brown, and Mary his wife, sailed from Liverpool
May the —,1836. Ship’s name, , Emigration agent, •, &c. The
third time was enough ; the production of further evidence was waived.
“ That will do,Mrs. Chisholm; we are quite satisfied,” said the bland commis-
sioner, and the order was made that transferred two shiploads of children
from workhouses to their parents.
Like difficulties and like successes attended her exertions in the cause
of convicts’ wives. It was on behalf of this class that she one day refused
an invitation to spend a quiet Sunday in the country, saying : “ Many
prisoners’ wives are in service, and that is the only day they can corne to see
me.”
Of a différent character, yet wonderfully wearying to any one less
steadily determined to fulfil a self-imposed duty, was the task of hunting out
the relatives of the bond and free settlers in New South Wales, whom she had
met in her bush-journeys. From Ireland alone came 5000 letters—and such
letters, such writing, such spelling, as required art almost equal to that of a
Champollion or a Eawlinson to decipher ! —while the postage of unpaid letters
received, not to mention the cost of replies, amounted to no mean sum. From
morning until evening the pen hands of the Chisholms seemed never to cease
moving, except when relieved in order to shake hands with their numerous
unknown friends. Callers came, asked their questions, and departed ; the
door was always on the swing ; no one was asked to give name or address.
By degrees it became known to the working-classes, that honest useful
information might be had from “ one Mrs. Chisholm.” It was the beginniog of
the terrible years of famine and commercial distress. The Chisholm pen, no
longer confined to private correspondence, was translated intoprint. Homely
penny tracts, or pamphlets, told in plain words of “ méat threetimes a day
and true stories of paupers becoming owners of land and live stock, hy the
profits of their own work, in distant Australia, were thus circulated. Up to
this period—between 1817 and 1818—Mrs. Chisholm had contemplated a
scheme of émigration, or rather for colonisation, the relief of home distress on
a large scale, under the auspices of government. Great schemes of colonisa-
tion were in favour in those days. Societies were formed under the most
aristocratie and highest financial auspices, for doing wonderful things at the
Antipodes. Ail these hâve since died out, more or less ignominiously ; some
killed by jobbing ; some by extravagance ; others by their impractical folly.
None asked the assistance or advice of so humble a person as Mrs. Chisholm.
But Caroline Chisholm soon appreciated the character of the people of this
country, and saw that the only useful colonisation must be at once doruestic,
popular, and self-supporting.
She began with a Chartist carpenter, who, with irregular work and
irregular habits, which kept him always in debt, had a raother lie wanted to


“ clutch out of the workhouse.’’ When his hopes of révolution and a political
millennium fortunately failed on the great lOth of April, he flew in despair
for peaceful councils to Caroline Chisholm. She persuaded him to begin by
dropping beer and tobacco, and saviug a shilling a week. The shilling, as
steady habits grew and work improved, soon increased to five shillings.
Within a few months assisted by a loan from Captain Chisholm and some
friends o£ his own, the Chartist carpenter emigrated with his wife ; in less
than twelve months, he sent for his mother. This was the beginning of the
Family Colonisation Loan Society.
In 1850, having prepared the full détails ofthe working of the society,
and obtained the names of a number of decent working-people of both sexes,
who had paid for a considérable period weekly and montbly instalments to-
ward a passage to Australia, she laid her scheme before her fellow-townsmen ;
the member for Northampton, the Eight Hon. Yemon Smith ; the Barl of
Shaftesbury, at that time Lord Ashley ; the Eight Hon. Sydney Herbert ;
the Countess of Pembroke ; and a few r other friends. By their aid, a sufficient
eum was raised to try the experiment of loans instead of gifts to émigrants.
The society started where many societies finish. A committee was formed to
take up the work which had been privately carried on up to working-point by
the Chisholms, and the whole machinery was set in motion before a single
advertisement had appeared, or a single paid officer had been employed.
Captain Chisholm acted as honorary secretary, and his office was no sinécure ;
Mr. Windham Harding, whose time was already fully occupied in the duties
of secretary to a great railway, under which his health has since entirely
failed, undertook the troublesome office of treasurer ; Mr. Samuel Sydney,
author of several popular works on Australia, volunteered to take from Mrs.
Chisholm part of the labour of explaining the objects of the society at public
and weekly meetings.
For a considérable period, the proceedings of the society occupied
verylittle public attention. Newspapers and orators of Parliamentary stand-
ing were monopolized by the Canterbury Colonisation Scheme, for erectingan
empire at the Antipodes. Mrs. Chisholm’s ideas were less magnificent,
although destined to leave more permanent traces. The Family Colonisation
Loan Society was devised to promote, as its name implies, colonisation by
families instead of by units. The government and public companiea had been
previously only anxious that labouring émigrants should be able-bodied and of
equal numbers in sexes—doraestie and social ties were forgotten in the
desire to obtain as much labour-power as possible in return for the passage-
money. Grandfathers, grandmothers, and infants, were couuted as so much
ship space and money lost ; nay, some shipowners called for men only as
they would hâve asked for slaves. Mrs. Chisholm said : “ Always arrange,
if possible, for the émigration of a whole family ; carry complété families, if
you cannot carry complété institutions, to the other side of the world.” The
grandfather and grandmother may be as useful to the colony by the infiuence
they will exercise over their grandchildren and children as if they were model
government émigrants, agricultural labourers under thirty years of âge, able
to dig and plough, and able to Write or read. Then government officers and
colonial employers objected to infants ; but careforthe comforts ofmothersand
young infants formed an especial part of Mrs. Chisbolm’s plans. “ More space,


better food on ship-bnard, cost money,lknow ; but then,” she added, “I save
mothers, and infants born on the sea.” Next she set her face against gratui-
tous émigration - against the pauper-making machine of government free
passages. Candidates for assistance from the Family Colonisation Loan
Society were expected to show that they could help themselves by saving
steadily towards their passage-money, by realising ail they conld from their
property, by borrowing from relations and friends, and only in the last
extremity coming to the society for a loan to be repaid in the colony by
instahnents fixed in reference to the carrent rates of wages.
In order to create the esprit de corps necessary for success, and to
diffuse Sound information in an inexpensive manner, Mrs, Chisholm established
her group-meetings. 4 1 These were a kind of colonising “ at homes, 5 ' without
refreshment, wbich took place &t her own small house in Islington. The
whole expense was confined to the candies, and an old woman who opened the
door.
On these evenings, to which each person was invited who came
privately for advice in the course of the week, the room devoted to the purpose
was crowded with persons of very différent conditions of life. Horny-handed
mechanics, with their wives and one or two children, often an infant in arma,
governesses and frugal servant girls, dock-labourers and unsuccessful surgeons
and lawyers, young lads just from school and not fond of office work, grey-
headed hodsmen anxious to provide for large familles. In one corner of the
room was an exact représentation, in size and fitting, of a berth in one of the
model ships. A desk and table were formed, by a sea -chest, on which were
arranged various articles, or new contrivances, likely to be of use on a voyage.
At the desk Mrs. Chisholm took her seat, often supported by some of the
subscribers to her society. Sometimes a patent-safety cab, dashing up at full
speed, brought Mr. Sidney Herbert, or Lord Shaftesbury. Sometimes the
dowdy neighbourhood was astonished by the blazing lamps and gorgeous
footman of Mr. Yernon Smith’s carriage, on his way to the opéra. At times,
ladies of the highest aristocracy came to assist at these colonising reunions.
But no matter who came, the simple order of the day was the same ;
the practical was never forgotten.
Mrs. Chisholm generally began with a short address on a subject of
practical importance to hearers. She generally tried to answer the more
pressing questions that had been put to her in the course of the week. On
one occasion she began her discourse straight off with : “ The best shoes for
wearing on board ship hâve moderately stout soles, and no heels.” Tbere
were no fine phrases ; it was plain advice, addressed to plain earnest people.
When, as not unfrequently happened, persons who had emigrated as labourers
and returned when successful, to take back poor relations, were présent, they
were invited to give the resuit of their expérience. Letters were read from
immigrants to their friends in England, often containing, in simple language,
matters of great interest. Occasionally, friends to the plan of the society said
a few words of advice, encouragement, or explanation; but ail fine language,
and high-flown promises were considered out of place. Then the intending
émigrants were invited to put any questions ; and these questions brought out
very useful information : the whole tone was conversational. These group-
meetings had not only the effect of saving the répétition of the same information


to many différent parties, but of making those about to sail in tbe same ship
acquainted with each other. Mutual confidence and mutual assistance were
thus cultivated. To these group-meetings, assembled without parade or
expense in advertisements or placards, the spread of sound information, and
the création of a more healthy public opinion on the subject of émigration,
may be traced.
At the same time that these group-meetings were being held, Mrs.
Chisholm did not relax her labours in correspondence and private interviews
with enquirers among intending émigrants. Yery soon the books of the.
society contained more than enough paying subscribers to fill a ship. After
tbe discovery of the gold régions had rendered it unnecessary to stimulate
émigration, the society gave up chartering ships.
In the enterprise of chartering ships, Mrs. Chisholm found berself
embarked in a new sphere of duties. The government, in its supervision of
sbipowners, had acted on the prineiple, that so long as ordinary précautions
were taken for the préservation of the health of third-class passengers in
food and air, enough was done. Modesty and comfort beyond necessaries were
not regarded, and health was sought to be preserved in inadéquate space, only
by limiting the families of young children. Under this System, or want of
System, the sacrifice of infant life was frightful, the détérioration of female
morals, awful.
Mrs. Chisholm determined to set the example of ships, in which men
and women would not hâve to dress and undress before each other ; in which
married couples should not sleep on open shelves or bunks in sight of each
other ; in which ventilation should be secured by fixed apparatus, instead of a
canvas pipe ; in which the closets should be sufficient in number, retired in
situation, and so firmly secured, as not to be liable to destructionfrom a rough
sea. She insisted on having light in ail the berths, even if it were needful to
eut the deck for the purpose ; an ample supply of water by pumps the
émigrants could work ; convenience for washing clothes on the voyage ; a
more ample and regular suppiy of food of a better quality. In fact, she,
for the first time, drew out the charter party in the interest of the émigrant,
These matters, which to the uninitiated would seem of course, ex-
posed Mrs. Chisholm to the vehement and virulent opposition of shipowners,
who had been in the habit of making handsome profits by the packing System
which she made it her business to expose by wordandby deed. One great ship-
owner, of the highest mercantile respectability, declared, with strong adjec-
tives, that he considered himself robbed of a certain ten per cent, of air and
room which the charter party he had signed, without close examination, gave
to the family colonization émigrants. Because, in favour of the health and
comfort and morals of the émigrant classes, she touched the pockets of a most
thriving class—the woman who devoted her time, her health, and ail of com-
fort or luxury that her narrow means would afford, to the relief of her
suffering countrymen, was calumniated as a corrupt jobber, and accused by
those who ought to hâve known better, of making profits by émigration, when
she was living more barely than any mechanic’s wife.
Mrs. Chisholm knew that, without setting an example, it would be
declared by practical men that the reforms in shipping she claimed were im-
practicable. Therefore, she sent off ship after ship, improving on the


arrangement of each —on the occasion of the departure of each, holding great
public meetings, at which the true principlesof self-supporting émigration were
explained, and the public were initiated in the détails needful for making
emigrant-ships safe, decent, and economical. She knew, too, that any System
to be permanent, must be self-supporting. Therefore, when the family-
colonisation plan of fitting out ships had becorae well known, and had been
adopted by private shipowners, she ceased to send out vessels at the risk of
the society. So, too, when the discovery of the gold fields entirely altered
the position of the labourer, then she deemed it unnecessary to stimulate
émigration here by loans, but confined her efforts to removing destitute women
to a land where they were much needed, and to promoting the reunion of
families. To assist in such reunions, she laid such facts before the bank of
Messrs, Coutts andCo., asled that eminent firm, rather in a philanthropie
than commercial spirit, to undertake the receipt, by their colonial agents, of
small remittances. The example of so great a firm soon led other banks to
follow the same course. Before Mrs. Chisholm took the matter in hand the
charge for the remittance of .£lO was the same as for £IOO ; indeed, small
remittances were treated with so much contempt, that the kind feelings of
successful émigrants towards relatives in England were often frustrated or
crushedin the bud by an insolent banker’s clerk,
Thus it will be seen that the seven years which Mrs. Chisholm has
passed in England, during which she has advanced by the power of active wise
pbilanthropy from obscurity to a position of influence which no other woman
in this âge has enjoyed, hâve been years of hard, continuons work —years
during which she has first slowly matured principles of action, and then
laboriously worked out the détails. In her task, —ber patience, her industry,
her self-devotion, her courage, hâve always been found eqnal to the occasion.
At the latest and the earliest hours, her house has been besieged by humble
inquirers, and she has been most kind and encouraging to the feeblest.
Sometimes, indeed, itwas complained, that “ she did not know how to treat
a gentleman.” But no working man ever had reason to accuse her ©f being
proud or impatient.*
When it was necessary for the success of the Family Colonisation
Loan Society, that some one should proceed to Australia to reçoive the in-
stalments of loans advanced to émigrants, the society at that time having no
funds wherewith to pay an agent, Captain Chisholm, one of the most devoted
of husbands and fathers, volunteered, with the consent of Mrs. Chisholm, to
proceed at his own expense to perform the ungrateful task.
When the time had arrived for exposing the abominable cruelties
practised on émigrants in Liverpool ships, Caroline Chisholm, ata sacrifice of
Personal feelings, it is difficult to appreciate, undertook and performed the
task effectively, and yet with nothing offensive or aggressive, in two speeches,
which were reprinted Verbatim by the proprietors of the Liverpool Mercury.
T hough warned that she stood in danger of personal violence from touts and
crimps, she proved that a System of robbery and oppression was practised in
that great port, in défiance of law, and disgraceful to a civilised, not to say a
Christian State.
Mrs. Chisholm has been compared to o‘Connell, to whom she bears a
decided personal resemblance, in the massive character of the upper part of her


head, her forehead, and firm chin ; but her small finely eut nose and sweet
féminine truthful mouth, are the opposite of that éloquent and mendacious
agitator.
The éloquence of Caroline Chisholtn is the éloquence of earnestness,
seriously expressed in flowing Saxon English, without ornament or metaphor.
Her illustrations of argument are ail from real life, whether humorous or
pathetic. Her strength lies in her practical common sense and undeviating
truthfulness. She never allows herself to be carried away by the temptation
of saying sometbing fine or something witty, although she has powers of
pathos, aud of humour and sarcasm in a high degree. It is these qualifies—
enthusiastic yet practical, earnest yet patient and laborious—that hâve united
ail parties and sects in her faveur, and enabled her to live down calumny.
She is about to leave us now. She is to proceed to the midst of the
wild life of the gold diggings of Australia ; and, as the apostle of social
virtues, and the axnbassador of wives and children abandoned, if not for-
gotten, to call together the rude gold gatherers, and in those soft, clear,
féminine, yet thrilling tones to which thousands hâve listened here in rapt
attention—by turns moved to laughter and to tears—recall them to a
sense of their duties as men, as patriots, as fathers, as husbands, as Christians.
The work before her is heavy, but she is equal to the work. Ail who
wish well to their country and our triple dependencies at the Antipodes, will,
in full confidence, wish her God-speed.
EMIGRATION LECTURERS.
TO THE EDITOE OF THB EMPIRE.
Sir, —Tn perusingthe discussion which took place in the House of Asaembly,
on the proposai of wichdrawing from England the two lecturers, Messrs.
Parkes and Dalley, l find that the Hon. Thomas Holt thought proper to
speak of my services, with référencé to this colony, in disparaging tenus, he
having, as reported in your nuraber of the sth July, spoken of me in these
words :—“ Reference has been made to the laborns of Mrs. Chisholm ; but he
thought if she was neglected it was because she had neglected them —she
became weary of well-doing, and directed the émigrant from England to go
to Victoria.”
In my earnest endeavours to ameliorate the condition of my fellow-
creatures for a period, I may now say of twenty-five years, I hâve not
unfrequently found my labours traduced ; but I very rarely indeed, unless I
thought such traducements injurions to my usefulness, took any notice of them.
But when I find a public man, a member of Parliament, speak of me in the
national House of Assembly of New South Wales, in a way disparaging to
my public character, and deviating so widelj from palpable facts, I consider
it due to myself, due to my children, and due to the public, and to publie
men, to meet such traducements with proofs that cannot be controverted. I
say due to the public, and to public men, for I hâve had the gratification, and


the honour of having testimonials and addresses presented to me by public
bodies in this colony, in England and Ireland, Scotlaod and Wales, as well
as in Victoria, and it would be insulting to the judgment and observation of
such men to imply that they subscribed to my testimonial, or signed an
address to me as per enclosed No. 1, if they did not deem I merired such ;
their doing so under such an assumption, would be to impute to them the
grossest inconsistency. And although Mr. Holt said the other night, I “ was
entitled to no thanks from them,” the honorable gentleman himself would,
were such the case, corne under the dishonorable implication ; for on the eve
of my leavingthis colony for England, in March, 1846, heformed one ofour
committee (as per enclosed list) of thirty-four gentlemen in order to présent
to me a testimonial for services rendered to this colony. He also subscribed
a guinea to my testimonial. Can Mr. Holt also hâve forgotten that on the
occasion of my passing by lus place at Liverpool, on my way to the districts
of Tumut, Murrumbidgee, and Yass, with a large party of émigrants, he so
far approved of my exertions, that he feasted the party with a sumptuous
breakfast, offering me at the same time œoney, should I stand in need of it,
for my party, whenl informed him that Mr. Bradley had given meauthority
to draw upon him for any funds I might require for the support of the people ?
With reference to Mr. Soifs assertion that I “directed the émigrant
from England to go to Victoria,” allow me to assure him, that through my
rather varied life, I hâve always endeavoured to put in practice the sound
maxim, “Do unto others as you would be done by.” Of the many thousands
who consulted me while in England, respecting émigration to these colonies,
I never attempted to control their wishes and desires, or to mislead them ;
and in corroboration of the crowds who used to visit me for information, I beg
to refer him to a copy of letter No. 2, as annexed. Ail the facts in my
possession I laid before them honestly and candidly. Some time before I
left this colony for England, I travelled through several of the districts of the
interior. I went from house to house, from farm to farm, in order to see the
people, and to judge of their circumstances, and I must say that they had
such confidence in my disinterested intentions, that I never met with one
refusai. They each and ail stated to me candidly and truthfully, what they
were previous to their arrivai in the colony ; how much they were worth on
their landing ; and what was the value of their stock there. Some even told
me of their hoarded and secret treasure in silver and gold. One man assured
me that he landed in Sydney with only one penny piece in his pocket, and he
thenshowed to me his title deed for 700 acres of land, his own—the fruit of
hisindustry. Several thousands of these “facts” thus collected from the
people of New South Wales, and which I called “ The Voluntary information
of the People,” I took with me to England. At ail my group meetings, and
they were numerous, these telling facts were placed before the people ; they
were continually open upon the table in my office ; numbers I gave away at
the request of inquiring parties, as per subjoined letter, No. 3 ; others again I
brought out in small pamphlets at great personal sacrifice, and a few of which
pamphlets I transmit to you herewith ; one headed, “ Comfort for the Poor
—méat three times a Day ,” was greatly in demand. In the original Etale-
ments the names of the parties were entered, and some of which i took down
in the ploughed field, making use of the plough as my chair. I hâve still in


my possession some of those statements, and if Mr. Hait will honourme with a
call as in days gone by, he will be very welcorae to the persual of them. Chiefly
througb the “ Yoluntary Information of the People of New South Wales,”
I received within a year of my arrivai in England no less than 3381 applica-
tions for passages to thisvery colony and a listof which Ilaid before the Home
Government, besides a roll of 500 young women of good character. As the
question is one of a public character, allow me to transcribe what the Sydney
Morning Herald, of date April 9, 1847—says of the “ Yoluntary Information
of the People.” The object for which Mrs. Chisholm had collected these
statements was at once patriotic and philanthropie. She wished to advance
the interests of the colony, by attracting useful immigrants toits shores, and
she wished to mitigate the sufferings of the poor in the mother country by
causing numbers of them to be removed to this land of plenty. The means
employed for this twofold purpose weretbe bestthat couldhavebeenthought of.
vShe appealed to the actual expérience of those who had madethe experiment ;
she lefc the parties to tell their own story in their own words, each, in propria
persona, subscribinghis name, occupation, and place of abode, the whole being
authenticated, in most instances, by a certificate under the head of a résident
clergyman, magistrate, or other gentleman of known respectability. A body
of facts was thus obtained w r hich could admit of no doubt. They were in
evidence, The witnesses were marshalled before the reader, and the déposi-
tions placed in his hands.” The Herald further adds, in the same article,
>e On tbat occasion we bore the following testimony to the usefulness of this
excellent lady’s kind-hearted exertions. Her zealous devotedness for six
years past, both to the cause of immigration, as a system of high national and
colonial importance, and to the cause of the immigrants, as a class of her
fellow-subjects standing peculiarly in need of counsel and consolation, lias
acquired for Mrs. Chisholm a distinguished name amongst the philanthropists
of Australia. Amid discouragements which less ardent spirits could not hâve
brooked she has persevered in her labour of love with unabated earnestness
and untiring assiduity. In town and country, in prosperous and adverse
tinns, she has followed out her useful and disinterested plans, seeking to
alleviate distress, to soothe the sonows of the stranger in a strange land, to
encourage the despondent, to advise the perplexed, and to assist the newly
arrived in procuring comfortable and permanent settlements. She has done
good to her adopted country —she has been a benefactress to her kind.”
The Morning Herald in continuation says, that, “ The extracts from her re-
cent communications, published in our paper of Monday, shows that she was
not less stirring in London than she had been in Sydney ; she has found
access to the fountain head of the department of tbe colonies ; Earl Grey
had honoured her with an interview, and paid marked attention to her repré-
sentations of the State of this colony with regard to labour. The Emigration
Commissioners, too, had the benefit of conversing with her on two occasions ;
in these, and other influential quarters, she was exerting ail her powers in
the cause of émigration to New South Wales.” Yet, in the face of these
public acknowledgments by a leading journal, Mr. Holt tells the Sydney
public I “ neglected them I “ directed the émigrant from England to go to
Victoria.”
For the further satisfaction and information of the honourable mem-


ber, Mr. Holt, I beg to annex a list of my London committee, thirteen of
■wbom are gentlemen whose interests are closely identihed with New South
Walea. I ask Mr. Holt, I ask every candid reader, if men of this stamp,
like Mr. Brooks, Mr. Flower, Mr. Gore, Mr. Alexander, and sir Stuart
Donaldson would be likely to work with me on a committee for three years, if,
as Mr. Holt says, 1 “ directed the émigrant from England to go to Victoria/’
The honourable gentleman again says, that “ he thought if she, (Mrs.
Chisholm) was neglected, it was because she had neglected them. ’ Let me
ask the honourable member for Newtown if this charge is in conformity to
another fact ofmy exertions to serve some of the people in this colony, when
I undertook, on myreturn to England, to become the bearer of a pétition to
the Impérial Government from those poor men who had gained, by their good
conduct in this country, their social condition amongst their fellow-men, and
beseeching the Home Government to be pleased to grant a free passage ta this
colony, to their wives and children. Many a weary and cold walk, through sleet
and snow, for it was in winter I commenced my opérations, I had to undertake
from Prince’s-street, Mile-end, the eastern part of London, to the Home Office,
before I succeeded in obtaining a passage to Sydney for those poor people.
Although 1 met with every considération and attention from the Home
Secretary of State, Sir George Grey, forms and enquiries had to be gone
through, and I had also to hunt out the wives and families by postal
communication. lam sure I may say, without egotism, that if Mr. Holt
had seen those long-afïlicted people embark, the aged wife separated twenty-
one years that very day, as she told me, from her expatriated husbaud, he
would not say, I “ was entitled to no thanks.” Then, does he, Mr. Holt,
recollect the arrivai in Sydney of a number of the children of Bounty
émigrants, who were left behind by parents owing to their poverty. I was
instrumental, and I thank God for it, in sending those children out ; but I
hadto fight a much harder battle with the Hon. Commissioners of Emigration,
then I had to do with the Home-office, before 1 succeeded. But I went to
those gentlemen well prepared with vouchers from this colony, that could
not be disputed, so the children were sent out. If Mr. Holt wants more proof
I can produce to him abundance of further evidence that 1 hâve not worked
for one colony more than another. My politicalcreed, or rather my principle
has been through life, to work to the best of my ability for alï. 1 hâve
never for a moment considered country, or creed, or colour ; my sole object
has been to do ail the good 1 could. I leave the public to be my judge. I hâve
some thousands of letters now in this house which I received, while in
England, from applicants for passages to the Australian colonies, some from
parties in England, Ireland, Scotland,andWales,nay, severalfrom Germany,
France, and Italy, for I travelled through those countries before I returned to
this colony. Mr. Holt or any other party is most welcome to see them.
Amongst the mass are nurabers of letters from some of the first men and
ladies in the kingdom, al] advocating the cause of colonisation. Those letters
from the poor and rich, I shall leave as heir-looms to my children.
It may not be irrelevant for me here to State that, soon after my
arrivai in England, Earl Grey informed me that he had received from Sir
Charles Fitzroy, then Governor of this colony, a recommendation that my
“ distinguished services in promoting émigration to this colony,” as noted in


the despatcli) should be recognised and rewarded by a pecrmiary grant ; but
I at once, in a letter addressed to Earl Grey, respectfully declined it, on the
ground that it might “ péril my présent usefulness.”
I must say that it is deeply painful to my feelings that I should hâve
to enter thus into such a lengthened détail of my past services ; but unfounded
animadversions, and injurious misrepresentations, are often like a cankering
sore caused by a small thorn, for small as it may be, it may cause much pain
and trouble to eradicate it.
In conclusion, I cannot help remarking that it was hardly kind of Mr.
Holt, at this time of my life, to say that I “ became weary of well-doing,”
Hard work for many years, for both body and mind, with late heavy domestic
afflictions, with severe bodily ailments, brought me some three years ago to
death’s-door, and my médical men at Melbourne sent me over to Sydney as
my only chance of recovery ; and that venerable and venerated médical
gentleman, Dr. Bland, who in the most libéral and kindest manner attended
me, without expectation of fee or reward, never thought I could recover ;
nay, I was so far gone atone period, that a clergyman asked the doctor, in
my presence, how many hours he expected I could survive. He remarked to
the doctor as he stood by, as he supposed, my dying bedside, that as I was a
strong-minded woman, he was sure he would be excused if he asked him how
many hours he thought I could live, —that he had a pressing engagement at
Parramatta, and he would not iike to be absent, as he would hâve to super-
intend the cérémonies at St. Mary’s. I mention this merely to show how
near I was, to ail appearance, to my end, and how incapable I was for some
years back to labour as formerly ; but Providence has been pleased to spare
me for a time, and if with some renewed health, I make an endeavour at this
late hour of my day to do somethiug for myself and my two litle girls, I must
say it was scarcely friendly, or neighbourly, in Mr, Holt, to proclaim t
“ became weary of well-doing,” and thus, perhaps inadvertently, throw a
stumbling block at the threshhold of my door.
Yours faithfully,
CAROLINE CHISHOLM.
Rathbone House, Newtown,
Sydney, June lOth, 1869.
N.B. —I would hâve addressed you earlier, only that having lately
moved to this place, I had to unpack my boxes before 1 could get at the docu-
ments herein referred to. —C. C.
No. I.
Devonport Mechanics’ Institute.
September 21st, 1853.
To Mks. Caroline Chisholm.
MadAM, —The Commit,tee of the Devonport Mechanics’ Institute, acting in the
name and behalf of thirteen hundred members, gladly avail themselves ofthe oppor-
tunity presented by your presence in this town, to convey to you the earnest expression
of their gratitude for the unwearying efforts you hâve put forth for so many years on
behalf of the multitudes of our countrymen and women so constantly crowding the
vessels which bear them to other and distant lands. The Committee regret that the
short duration of your visit prevents them from adcpting some more public mode of
giving expression to the feelings of admiration they entertain for the plans you hâve


devised, and their appréciation of the privations and sufferings you hâve personally
undergone for the purpose of adding to the comfort, convenience, and moral improve-
raentof those whose welfare you hâve so earnestly sought.
We hâve the honour to remain,
Madam,
(Onbehalfof the Committee,)
Your most obedient servants,
(Signed) U. H. King 1 Honorary
J. C. Radford, J Secretaries.
No. 2.
Mrs. Hawkins begs to inform Mrs. Chisholmshe was at her office Bell’s Build-
ings by appointment, and was greatly disappointed and annoyed by finding an impossi-
bility ofgaining admission as the passage was completely blocked by men who would
not allow us to enter, saying, “we miist wait our turn.” I waited patiently some time,
until 1 found it hopeless and useless waiting in a pouring rain, particularly as we were
reminded by the persons waiting we mvst await our hour. I felt very much vexed, not
being able to see you after making an appointment and paying five shillings for a cab,
which I can ill afford, and keeping us in town, which is another great expense, as I
intended to leave here this day for the country. Will it be possible for me to see you
to-morrow, Tuesday, at your house atlslington, at any hour you may appoint, as on
Wednesday we leave London.
St. John’s Villa, Mornington Crescent,
January lOth, 1853.
No. 3.
Society for the Promotion of Colonisation
No. 4, St. Martin’s Court,
13th January, 1853.
Madam, —The Society has at présent no short publications to giveto those persons
who corne for information respecting the colonies, and I therefore take the liberty of
writing to request that you will kindly give us some numbers of your very admirable
pamphlets to distribute to the working classes who corne to our doors. We hope in a
few days to hâve some short works out on the subject, but in the inean time we would
rather distribute yours than any others we are acquainted with.
J remain, madam, your obedient servant,
(Signed) William H. Kingston, Hon. S. C. Secretary.
General Committee —The Right Hon. The Earl of Shaftesbury ; the Right
Hon. Sydney Herbert, M.P. ; the Right Hon. R. Vernon Smith, M.P. ; W. Monsell,
Esq., M.P. ; John Tidd Pratt, Esq. ; F. G, P. Neison, Esq. ; Charles Buxton, Esq.;
Wyndbam Harding, Esq. ; Robert J. Brooks, Esq. ; P. W. Flower, Esq. ; Edmund
Gore, Esq. ; W. Jackson, Esq. ; W. Fanning, Esq. ; James Levick, Esq. ; W. Walker,
Esq,; Thomas Learmonth, Esq. ; Frederick R. Gore, Esq. ; Robert Low, Esq. ; G.
H. Donaldson, Esq. ; T. Aspinwall, Esq.; J.A. Jackson, Esq, ; D. Q. Henriquez,
Esq. ; F. S Atkins, Esq. ; S. Kennard, Esq. ; J. R, Morrison, Esq. ; E. Armitage,
Esq. ; Thomas Lowndes, Esq. ; W'. Millikin, Esq. ; S. Jackson, Esq. ; E. J. Wheeler,
Esq.; G H. Smith, Esq.; James Alexander, Esq. ; Louis Nathan, Esq.; Joseph
Webb, Esq.
Hon. Secretary. —Captain Chisholm, Melbourne, Port Phillip.
Bankers. —For Donations —Messrs. Williams, Deacon, Labouchere and Co.,
Birchin-lane, London. ForDeposits—Messrs. Currie and Co., 29, Cornhill, London,
For Remittances to Australia—Messrs Coutts and Co., Strand, London.


EMIGRATION LECTÜRERS.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sm, —In your paper of the I3th instant, I hâve read with much regret a
letter from Mrs. Chisholm, commenting on certain remarks of mine in the
Législative Assembly, having reference to herse! f.
Ihave read Mrs. Chisholm’s letter with much regret —first, becauseshe
has misunderstood the purport of those remarks ; and secondly, because it
appears I bave (though most unintentionally) wounded the feelings of a lady
for whom I entertain the highest respect.
Mrs. Chisholm’s quotation from the report of whatl saidon the occasion
alluded to is substantially correct ; and 1 believe that that statement is borne
ont by facts, as it is indeed corroborated by her own letter. But Mrs. Chis-
holm has put a totally wrong construction on that portion of the quotation
which appears to hâve given her the greatest offence. I refer to having said,
“ She (Mrs C.) became weary of well doing.” I think if Mrs Chisholm will
do me the favour to read again the report of what I said in reference to her,
she will see that I then spoke, not as a colonist of Australia, but as one of
the représentatives of the colony of New South Wales. From information I
had received, I was under the impression that Mrs. Chisholm had directed ail
her energies towards forwarding émigrants to Victoria (whither she herself
aho followed them), and not to this colony, asheretofore ; hence my saying,
as a colonist of New South Wales, ‘‘she became weary of well-doing. ”
Nothing, however, was further from my thoughts than to insinuate that Mrs.
Chisholm was not perfectly justified in seeking that repose which her long,
indefatigable, and most bénéficiai exertions had so well entitled her to.
Mrs. Chisholm has evidently mistaken my expression, “ became”
(having reference to the past) for “ has become,” winch, if I had used, would,
as I hâve above implied, hâve justly laid me open to Mrs. Chisholm’s censure ;
so, also, with regard to my having said : “ She (Mrs. Chisholm) deserves no
thanks from them” (the colonists of New South Wales), was only intended to
refer to that portion of her life which was devoted exclusively to the in-
terests of Victoria. ,
Mrs. Chisholm’s name is too well and too favourably known to require
the testimony appended to her letter ; it is written in the hearts of thousands
wbo hâve to thank her for the happy possession of comfortable and inde-
pendent homes.
And even though, during the latter part of her active career, Mrs.
Chisholm raay hâve forsaken her first love for the more aspiring pretensions of
our favoured rival, I do think that the invaluable services she formerly rendered
to this colony hâve met with but scant reward. In my opinion no one more
worthily deseryes a pension than Mrs, Chisholm.
Mrs. Chisholm reminds me of some slight assistance I once rendered
her, and of my having been one to présent to her a testimonial. I recollect
the circumstance with much satisfaction, and can assure Mrs. Chisholm that,
were occasion again to offer, I should, with very great pleasure, give my ser-
vices to the one, or my subscription towards the other.


Tt is unnecssary for meto say more on the subject of Mrs. Chisbolra’s
letter, for l atn second to none in acknowledging her iudefatigable zeal in the
cause of immigration ; and I can only repeat, in conclusion, that I am very
sincerely grieved that any remarks of mine should hâve given pain to one
who has earned and secured the gratitude of so many.
Yours faithfully,
THOMAS HOLT.
Camden Villa, Newtown, 17th June.
LEADER FROM THE “ EMPIRE,” Augüst 15, 1859.
Among the inhabitants of this Colony, how many thousands are there who
owe, under Providence, the comfort and affluence they now enjoy to the
philanthropie efforts and untiring exertions of one person, and that person a
woman ? Australia has few names of wide celebrity or historical interest.
Half-a-dozen words would exhaust the catalogue of those known beyond
colonial circles. There is little danger at présent of our falling into the
idolatry of hero-worship. Our sages, warriors, and patriots are yet to corne.
Their advent is in the future. No doubt, there hâve been at times symptoms
that the tendency to set up a golden calf, and to fall down and worship it, is
as strong in human nature now —in the nineteenth century —here in Australia
—as it ever was in any âge of the world’s history elsewhere. Men, who
must theraselves hâve been astonished at the extravagance of colonial folly,
bave had testimonials, addresses, and ovations of ail kinds presented to them
—from ail classes of persons—from a purse of two or three thousand pounds,
to a public breakfast or “ complimentary pigeon match”—for no other reason
appareutly than that they had consented to hononr the colony with their
presence for a few years—until they had accumulated wealth enough, or had
a sufficiency thrust upon them —toenable them to gratify their modest desires
to live a la Milor Anglais on the continent of Europe, or to enjoy the réputa-
tion which attaches even to a Botany Bay millionaire in the parent country.
In addition to the magnificent salaries which many of them received in the
colony, they hâve not only had princely grants of land conferred on them in
the olden time ; but, when they resigned the cares of office, an extravagant
pension for life. For what ? Aye, for what ? Let those answer who were
instrumental in getting up the address, who subscribed to the testimonials, or
who gave the ovations. There hâve been recent and very significant indica-
tions that this species of flunkeyism—this worship of mere wealth—is dj ing
out. Some hints of intentions to leave bave met with no response.
“ Positively my last appearance,” has been proclaimed in vain. The
public was deaf to the appeal, and the intentions of leaving bave apparenlly
been abandoned.
There is now an opportunity offered to those who hâve been foremost
in this folly— who bave made themselves and the colony contemptible by their
adoration of reputed wealthy speculators and fortunate birds of passage—to
retrieve their character—to make ameuds for the past, by shewing that they
are not insensible to the daims of real worth—that they can appreciate true


pbilanthropy —untiring dévotion to the welfare of the more humble of their
fellow-colonists —a life spent in doing good.
If Captain James Cook discovered Australie —if John Macarthur
planted the first seeds of its extraordinary prosperity—if Ludwig Leichhardt
penetrated and explored its before unknown interior—Caroline Chisholm has
donc more; she has peopled,—she alone has colonised it in the true sense of
the term. ïo ber influence, ber untiring efforts, her self-sacrificing dévotion
is owing, in great measure, the spreading over the face of the land of a pros-
pérons —a happy —a teeming population. How many hundreds of homes
hâve been founded, how many families settled throughout the length and
hreadth of Australie by her efforts ? How many family circles re-united,
whose members, but for her influence and exertions, would hâve been still
separated by half the circumference of the globe ?
We are convinced that no inducement—no argument is wanted to
persuade the great mass of the humbler class to corne forward and show by
their acts how fully they appreciate the character and admire the conduct of
Caroline Chisholm. Ail that is wanted to wipe off the disgrâce which so
deeply attaches to the colonists of New South Wales, for not hitherto recog-
nising her daims to public gratitude, is, that some person or persons, in whose
character and position the people hâve confidence, should take the initiative
in the matter. Those who hâve most directly benefitted by her efforts—to
whose welfare her energies hâve been most devoted —although many of them
are now living in comfort, and even in opulence, do not, for the most part,
occupy that elevated social position which it is thought necessary to entitîe
them to take the lead in such a movement as would show the world the
appréciation in which Mrs. Chisholm’s character is held in Australia. Besides
they are mostly scattered over such a wide extent of country, that
co-operation cannot reasonably be expected, unless the movement is
commenced under the auspices of some one whose name is known from one
end of the Colony to the other.
A testimonial to Caroline Chisholm should enlist the sympathies and
ensure the co-operation of ail sections of the community—and unité without
jealousy of creed or class—without national or political animosity—without
sectarian or party différences—every man and woman who has found in
Australia a refuge and a home.
We confess that we are utterly ignorant, and do not care to inquire
whether Mrs. Chisholm is an English, an Irish, or a Scotch woman. Ail
three nationalities hâve been equally benefitted by her. Indeed, for that
matter, the character of her efforts has been truly cosmopolitan. She, more
than any other philanthropist, succeeded in enlisting the help of people of ail
-classes and ail creeds in the cause she had espoused. In her endeavours to
transp'ant an industrious and virtuous, though almost starving population from
the over-crowded countries of the world to the shores of this land of promise,
she secured the co-operation of people who never co-operated for any other
purpose. No tongue has dared to charge her with designs of proselytism,
Personal aggrandisement, or pecuniary cupidity. No tongue but speaks in
terms of unqualified admiration of her character and her conduct. Let the
whole Colony, then, unité in wiping off the foui stain of ingratitude which
clings to us, for our indifférence to the daims of one who has done and


sacrificed so much on our behalf—whose exertions for our welfare hâve
extended over a period approaching a quarter of a century. Let it no longer
be said, that we hâve flattered and fêted the raen, who, by a stroke of fortune,
less straight laced houesty, or sharper practice than their neighbours, hâve
become inordinately rich, while we hâve shown an utter indifférence to the
daims of her who has been one of our greatest benefactors. Let ail true men,
and women too, unité in proving the falsity of the cynical aphorism that
“ Gratitude is a lively sense of favours expected.”
Were we not fully convinced that the feelings of love, esteem, and
gratitude with which Mrs. Chisholm is regarded throughout the Australian
Colonies were of the most lively character, and waited but a fitting oppor-
tunity for their expression, we should hâve hesitated to make, through the
columns of the Empire, an appeal to the justice of our fellow-colonists on the
part of that lady,—whose name, we xnay remark—entirely without her
knowledge—we hâve thus takenthe liberty so prominently to allude to. We
are convinced that an opportunity alone is wanted to induce thousands to corne
forward and give practical expression to their feelings, by contribu'ing each
according to his means, towards such a testimonial as shall he deemed a
worthy token of their gratitude, and a fitting, if not an adéquate, reward for
the labours, the sacrifices, and the toils of more than twenty years.
iStatues in bronze, mural tablets, and storied unis, hâve been erected
in honour of those who, while living, were wholly neglected. The recog-
tiou of their worth and services has corne too late—when that récognition
could no longer avail, Let not tins be the case with regard to the lady who
is the subject ofthese remarks—whose daims we bave thus endeavoured to
advocate. Her comparative retirement for some time past from the
conspicuous position she so long occupied in the public view, bas not in any
way lesseued those daims, or bluuted, we should hope, the feelings which her
services and sacrifices so recently engendered. Let the colonists do honour
to themselves, by doing justice to one who has such undoubted daims ou their
considération —their gratitude—and their love, —as Caroline Chisholm.
POETRY.
TO CAROLINE CHISHOLM.
How Utile hâve the powerful of the earth
Aided in raising up God’s image marred
In falling, and f'rora âge to âge trod down !
Crowns hâve but crushed it ! shepherds and their flocks
Only the more defiled it ! Lawshave bnzzed
Perplexing round about ; before the prance
Of war they cower’d awhile, then seized his band,
And, running at his side. took half the spoil.
Europe and Asia raised Gods over Gods,
Men over men ; but gentle brotherhood
They never knew. Our island sent beyond
The Atlantic wave stern stubborn hearts, unmoved
By pity, and intolérant of tears.
One aller sent she forth of milder mien.


AndPeace and Justice were the counsellors
On right and-left of ihat sage patriarch
Brave was the sire, but braver vvas the son,
Founder of States to live when Europe dies.
Greater than he cornes one whom never gain
Attracted, never sanguinary fie'd
Delighted, never idle peace allured
From earnest duty ; through remoter seas
Her vessel sails . . Her vessel ? Yes, thathelm
A woman guides . . but One alone guides her,
Chisholm ! Of ail the âges that hâve rolled
Around this rolling globe, what âge hath seen
Such arduous, such heaven-guided enterprise
As thine ? Crime Aies before thee, and the shores
Of Austral Asia, lustrated by thee,
Collect no longer the putrescent weeds
Of Europe, cast by senatesto infect
The only unpolluted continent.
Thither hast thou conducted honest toil
Fainting ofhunger on the wealthy Street,
Thither the maiden, in whose palid face
Lust thought he saw his victim, but could raise
Only one blush and one indignant tear.
These, these hast thou watch’d over, nor hast looked
Beyond, where Glory sits awaiting thee ;
Nor wouldst thou hear, with any fresh delight,
What sages in their historiés will record,
That the most potent empire of the earth
Was planted, some five centuries before,
Under God’s guidance by his Chlsholm’s hand.
Semiramis begirt with terraced vvalls
Her mighty city for the prince and slave ;
Thy grander soûl threw open a wide world
With one command —“Be virtaous and free."
W r ALTER Savage Landor.
MRS. CAROLINE CHISHOLM.
The following cloquent tribute to Mrs. Chisholm is from the pen of the Right
Honourable Robert Lowe, M.P., Vice Président of the English Education Board.
During that gentleman’s résidence in Sydney he had ample opportunités of making
liimself personally acquainted with the arduous and successful labours of this most
estimable lady, who, we are happy to learn, is about to open a Ladies’ Educational
Establishment, near Sydney. Most sincerelj do we wish her every success ; and the
best testimonial to her virtues will be an extended and sustained patronage in her new
sphere of action :
The guardian angel of her helpless sex,
Whom no fatigue could daunt, no crosses vex ;
With manly reason and with spirit pure,
Crown’d with the blessings of the grateful poor.
For ihem, with unrepining love she bore
The boarded cottage and the earthen floor ;
The sultry day in tedious labour spent,
The endless taie of whining discontent ;
Bore noonday’s burning sun, and midnight’s chill,
The scanty meal, the journey lengthening still ;
Lavished her scanty store on their distress,
And sought no other guerdon than success.
Say ye who hold the balance and the sword,
Into your lap the wealth of nations poured,


What hâve ye donc, with ail your hireling hrood,
Compare! with ber, thegenerous and the good ?
Much ye receive and little ye dispense,
Your aJms are paltry, a debts immense ;
Vour toils reluetant—f \jter’s is given :
You toil for iiarlh, she .»rs stiil for Heaven.
Empire , May, 13th, 1862,
*. -i
A CAROL ON ftAl I INE CHISHOLM.
(From the L L/on Punch.)
Come, ail you British feranles of r fh and high degree,
Beslowing ail your charity on lan 'beyond the sea,
T’ll point you out a pattern which a better plan vvill teach
Than that of sending Missioners to Tombuctoo to preach.
Converting of the Heathen’s a very proper view,
By preaching true religion to Pagan and to Jew,
And bringing over Cannibals to Christian méat and bread,
Unless they catch your Parson first and eat him up instead.
But what’s more edifying to see, a pretty deal,
1s harty British labourers partaking of a meal,
With wives, and lots of children, about ttieir knees that climb,
And having tuckcd their plateluls in,gethelpedanother time.
Beyond theroaring océan, beneafh the soil we tread,
You ve English men and women, «ipil housed and clothed and fed ;
Who but forhelp and guidance to léave our crowded shores,
Would now be stealing, begging, or lie starving atour doors.
Who taught them self-reliance, and stirred them to combine,
And club their means together to get across the brine,
Instead ofstrikes, and mischief, ajid breaking of the law,
And wasting time in hearing inceridiaries’ jaw ?
Who led their expéditions ? And under whose command
Through dangers and through bardships sought they the promised land ?
A second Mose? surely, it was who did it ail,
It was a second Mosiîs in bonnet and in shawl.
By means of one good lady were ail these wonders wrought,
By Cakomnk Ciiisholm’s energy, benevolence, and thought,
Instead of making here and there a couvert of a ïurk,
She has made idle multitudes turn fruitfully to work.
The ragged pvuper crawling towards a parish grave
She roused directed to a home beyond the western wave;
. She smoothed his weary passage across the troubled deep,
With food, and air, and decencies of ship -room and of sleep.
There s tnany a wife and mother will bless that lady’s name,
Embracing a fat infant —who might else hâve drowned the same.
A mother, yet no wife, compelled by poverty to sin,
And die in gaol or hospital of misery and gin.


Sydney : Printed by Hanson and Bennett, “ Empire ” Office, 104, Pitt Street.
r
aL _ I .




V ■
SR soCj
NATIONAL LIBRARV OF AUSTRALIA
SR , yrjiST ! 2/Lë%/ri >! 6








