

WHAT ENGLAND SHOULD DO
WITH HER CONVICTS.
A SOLUTION SUGGESTED.
BY
W. M. WILKINSON.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY T. J. ALLMAN, 463, OXFORD STREET.
1864.


LONDON:
PRINTED BY THOMAS SCOTT, WARWICK COURT,
HOLBORN.


WHAT ENGLAND SHOULD DO WITH HER
CONVICTS.
I.—THE CRISIS BROUGHT ON BY THE ROYAL
COMMISSION.
There has perhaps never been a time when the whole question
of Convictism was more adrift than it is at this moment.
When, now nearly two years ago, both the official and the public
minds were so bewildered, that a remedy was to be sought out
and suggested through the labours of a Royal Commission,
the public anxiety was to a great extent relieved, by finding
that the enquiry was placed in the hands of some of our
statesmen best acquainted with the subject, and of lawyers in the
highest judicial positions, to whom the question of the disposal
and reformation of convicts must long have been an abiding care.
But a new element has of late years started into prominence in
dealing with any system for the transportation of offenders. The
rapid progress of some of the Australian settlements fi om
Colonies into embryo nations, with all the liberty and sense ot
independence, which the self-government so wisely given to
them has fostered, has now for several years enabled the
Australians to assert their right to be consulted in a question
so intimately affecting their well-being. The Royal Com-
mission therefore embraced also a representative of the colonial
interests, who had paid great attention to the question, and had
already been the chairman of a parliamentary committee which
had condemned transportation to those Colonies altogether.
The Royal Commission thus constituted had with great
labour and many meetings, after the lapse of twelve months,
A 2


at last made their report which was to be the remedy for all the
grievances and alarms of the public, then recently electrified
by the opening of the garotting season. It is not too much to
say that the report was a great disappointment to those who
had hoped for a remedy commensurate with the evils inflicted
both on this country, and on Australia, and on the convicts
themselves, by the old systems, whose complete break down
had brought the Royal Commission into existence as the means
by which a remedy was to be found. It was now seen, in
short, that no great mind had been at work in devising any
new plan in place of that which had proved itself the parent
of the evils complained of, but that the tendency had been to
run in official grooves and forms of thought, and to palliate
instead of uprooting a system which had invariably proved
itself to be capable only of evil. To what the jejune result
was owing can only be surmised from fhe report itself, and
from the published proceedings of the Commission, but
throughout these there is no indication that any really new
idea had ever been entertained—even to be at last rejected
as chimerical.
The Australian Commissioner, seeing what was being pro-
posed, strongly contended that not only should there be no
transportation to any of the old convict settlements there, but
that there should be none to any part of the Australian group
in fact that a Munroe doctrine, similar to that of the Americas,
should keep Australasia for the Australians and free emigration
only—thus denying all exercise of imperial rights even in
parts where no real injury could occur, and even where the
fiee colonists might be not unwilling to receive the convicts.
The other elements of the Royal Commission joined in and
succeeded in carrying a recommendation to resume transporta-
tion in its last and most objectionable form, a form which has
never failed to shipwreck itself by alienating the Colonies and
ruining the convicts j and the main contention and divergence
amongst the Commissioners arose on the question of the


shortening of the term of transportation by the grant ot
tickets-of-leave.
Ought the public to have been satisfied with such a
document? They asked for bread, and they got a serpent.
Evidently the great question to be solved, had received no
solution, and even if the Government were satisfied with the
report and prepared to act upon it, in what way would it be
received by the Australian Colonies ? We have not had long
to wait for an answer to this question. If it was received in
England with disappointment and a faint feeling at the heart,
in Australia it lashed the people at once into mad resistance.
“ Great excitement has been caused throughout Australia by
the Eeport of the Eoyal Commission,” is the first flash by
telegraph, and a pathetic appeal is made from Melbourne
which is intended to work upon the feelings of the Government,
with the aid of a revolver peeping out of the pocket, in the
shape of a threat to throw off allegiance to the Imperial
Crown, if the objectionable Eeport be persevered in. To this
pass has the old system not very unreasonably brought us with
the Colonies which are now the brightest gems in the Queen’s
diadem. Our wealthy and independent brethren of Australasia
have been sorely tried with the reckless system pursued by
the mother country, of pouring out its filthiest scum upon
their devoted heads, and after a cessation for ten years of the
oblation, they decline to have it recommenced in all its old
enormity, with no redeeming feature. No concession or ame-
lioration was proposed by this Eoyal Commission sitting at
Westminster, towards the feelings and susceptibilities of those
who practically have grown into a free nation, and who should
have been the first, or at all events the second, to be consulted.
It is obvious then, that if they were to be conciliated, it
should have been by some new plan which should not offer all
the objections of the old, —by some plan which would put
transportation on a new footing, with new elements of success,
and at least a probability that the convict should not be con


verted into a bushranger to strike terror into the civilization
of our richest Colonies.
It has occurred to me to have many conversations with
colonists, and with those who have had official opportunities of
observing the old system, and especially with one friend whose
views of what would be the true mode of meeting the present
ciisis commended themselves so entirely to my judgment, that
it appears to me that it would be culpable not to put them
before the public.
What has happened within the last few days, is that the
Government recoiling at the first news from the Colonies,
called a meeting at the Colonial Office of several of those who
represent the Colonies in this country, and gave up the whole
question of transportation to Australasia, and all the recom-
mendations of the Eoyal Commission. This was the work of
one afternoon, and now it may be said that we are just where
we were two years ago, with the exception of having made it
much more difficult to obtain the consent of the Colonies to
any new scheme, however really harmless, or even beneficial
to them. This is the net result of the long and anxious
labours of some of our foremost men who were supposed to be
the best acquainted with the subject. The romantic views of
the one Australian representative in the Eoyal Commission
have thus very properly ultimately triumphed, notwithstanding
that he was the sole dissentient from the conclusions of his
colleagues.


II.—HOW THE OLD SYSTEM FAILED.
Before commencing the discussion of the remedy, I admit
that philanthropic systems and theories are not to be exercised
alone on behalf of the crime-committing classes, but also for
society at large. This ought, certainly, to be acknowledged, now
that these systems and theories, as applied to the punishment
and reformation of offenders, have so utterly failed.
Let me not in this however be misunderstood, nor let it be
thought that the remedies I am about to offer for the cure
of the disease now so acute, and requiring firm and decisive
treatment, are in anyway opposed to the truest interests of
humanity. Far from it. It is my conviction that they will
on the contrary best serve them, and on the one hand secure
society from contagion, whilst on the other they will guard
the criminal from relapse.
I take for granted that the first object of punishing an
individual for a crime is to deter him and others from following
in his coarse 5 and that when once society has, in doing this,
deprived him of the liberty of free action, it is desirable if free
action is restored to him, that he should have given practical
guarantees that he is to be trusted with its exercise. The
existing system of punishment has not done this.
The system similar to it in all its leading features and in
many of its minutest details, and indeed that from which it
was copied, as established in Van Dieman’s Land, failed, and
signally failed there.
Failed there too, in that new, labour-wanting country,
even when guarded by the very checks, which, not in force m
England, give to the Irish system its apparent prominence for
good over it.


I am prepared to admit the partial success of the Irish
system, due in a very great extent to the character of the
crime and criminals of Ireland, as well as to the different way
in which crime and criminals are regarded by the mass of the
Irish people, to that in which they are regarded in England;
but due also to the influence and individual character of the
organizer of the system.
A system, the successful working of which is dependent
on personal attributes, or on the comparative indifference of a
people to the vindication of the law, is not one to be accepted
as infallible nor to be immediately adopted in another country.
Confined within the limits of its stockades, or other well-
defined boundaries, the system as judged by the strict observ-
ance of its laws and regulations, was in Van Dieman’s a
success, but beyond these limits and boundaries practically
crime increased, and the reformation, nr in other words the
permanent and material improvement, of the individual con-
victs, from year to year grew worse.
In England or in Tasmania, with a population dense or
spare, with labour abundant or the reverse, this system is
alike uninfluenced, its evils are its ruin, and will in all cases
bring about sooner or later the same results—garotting in the
streets of London, or brigandage in the Australian bush.
So far then it might appear that transportation had failed
also. This was so, and it was not so. Transportation by itself
as a power to diminish crime in this country, and to offer to the
criminal a certain return to honest industry, with the reward
which that industry' will ever win, never as a whole failed.
It was not till a second system was engrafted upon it, in every
way antagonistic to it, rendering its true object and views
useless, that it failed and broke down utterly.
Ihe waste lands in the South Atlantic were no longer
used a,s the means by which the outlaw, removed alike from
privation and temptation, could redeem the vice of the past;
but they were only occupied as sites for manufactories in


which crime was polished, and guilt was lacquered to pass
for virtue.
If here with every means to secure effectual control and fit
agents, Portland and Dartmoor, as the great official prototypes,
have fallen to pieces in their designers’ hands, what else could
be expected from the penitentiaries of Port Arthur and the
Eocky Hills hut the same collapse ? Such were the experiences
to have been derived from these last as guides, but the warnings
they gave were disregarded.
But the engrafting on transportation of the plan technically
known as the Probation System, was one main cause which
led to the exclusion of convicts from the Australian Colonies.
The other cause 1 will allude to hereafter. The following out
of the same plan in this country, under the new name of
“ Ticket-of-Leave,” is now the cause which has led to the
existing terror and agitation.


III.—A NEW SYSTEM PROPOSED.
I AM prepared to show that in a return to a system of trans-
portation on a new basis, and of a new material, and freed from
this plan of probation, and somewhat resembling that originally
in force, will he found a permanent remedy for these evils. It is
true that the original system was condemned by a Committee
of the House of Commons, but on evidence which was then
and could now be easily shewn to be true only in one feature
in its working, and which was wholly at variance with the
general results. That system was abandoned in the face of and
in opposition to the almost unanimous voice of the colonists,
who protested, by petition and remonstrance, against the
conclusion which had been arrived at, and which they showed
was based on data collected for specific objects, by those who
saw in the change to be substituted for it either a plan of
punishment and reformation, in accordance with their philan-
thropic theories, or a quite new organization, to be attended
with its staff of comptrollers, generals, superintendents, medical
men, wardens, and extended officialism.
That transportation, in the earlier stages of its history in
Australia, was not unattended by grave abuses, no one can
deny; but these abuses in their intensity fell far short in their
piactical effects of those which followed on the establishment
of the new system. In the first, they were only incidental to
it, and an exception—admitting then of easy remedy without
radical change; in the last, they are inseparable from and
inherent in it, and they will always produce the same dead-
lock at which we have now arrived.
It is not enough, however, to suggest a bare return to
the system of transportation, having for its principle the com


pulsory service of the convict in private employment, from
whence he can work to freedom by industry and continuous
good conduct, unrestricted by the tender and gentle coercion
of great governmental establishments. These penal stockades
deal only with the surface, and measure this industry and
conduct by submission to rules and discipline, carefully formed
to diminish humanity to a minimum, and to remove all
temptation to a breach of official routine. I would now call
attention to the obstacles with which such a return would
probably be attended, and the plans for their removal.
It is not my purpose here to enter into any further con-
sideration of the question of how far a nation is justified in
pouring forth into other lands the objects of her crime, and of
founding new peoples from the sources of her misery ; but to
this I will draw attention, that it can be maintained, whether it
be due to this system of transportation or in spite of it, that the
fields it occupied present now, and did, even before gold came
with its influences of great good and great evil, scenes of
wondrous prosperity and marvellous progress; whilst England
was relieved by it from the terror which now disturbs her, and
from the reproach from which she now seeks to escape.
Were I a citizen of a free colony, even admitting all that
the warmest advocates of transportation urge, and urge, I
confess, with clearer evidence to support their views than has
been brought to bear against them by their opponents, I would
shrink from having my country turned into a lazar house upon
the old plan, and would resist to the end its occupation by the
convicted felons of another land, hovever patent might be the
advantages that accompanied them. Yet on the other hand,
regarding a colony as an atom of the empire, and with the
right of empire to occupy and settle under proper checks the
public domain in the way most conducive to the well-being ot
the largest interests in the welfare of humanity, I would not
hesitate to exercise the power that right had given me.
It is between these two conflicting feelings, or rather


principles, that England is now really called upon to decide.
Her sympathy has been for the few last years with the
Colonist, but practically, as we all now, her reason has never
yielded to that sympathy. To allow reason now to be heard,
when sympathy has had so much sacrificed to it with no
corresponding benefit, would in no way stultify her. But
sympathy however need not be much alarmed, nor reason be
called upon to be inexorable.
For, in suggesting a return to transportation, I would at
once be understood to have it regarded not so much in the
light of a severe and hardening punishment, but as a means of
drying up the very springs and sources from whence have
hitherto been drawn the confirmed criminals.


IV.—FONS ET ORIGO.
There should be no transportation of hardened criminals,
nor any for even second offences. Transportation should
begin, not as with the exception of death, the last punishment
left for the law to vindicate its outraged majesty, but with the
first lapse into crime, and before the rank fungus has had time
and opportunity to overspread the mind.
It should be applied as a correction for the early stage of
crime, for its fountain and origin, and for comparatively
slight offences, and not left as a last resource for the hardened
and irreclaimable | nor for those who at one leap have com-
mitted a great crime ; and it should be a punishment which
though still severe in one aspect, should be merciful, as
embracing hope, and new springs of action in all others.
It should be severe in insisting that only by compulsory
labour and continuous toil the offender should be allowed to
win his way back to limited freedom, yet merciful in removing
him from the early associations or temptations that led him to
his first offence, giving him direct inducements to continue a
life of industry when actual freedom is won, and which an old
thickly-peopled country cannot afford him.
It is then, to those young in crime, to first offenders in
fact, and to those only, that the punishment of transportation
should be applied.
The punishment of the more hardened offenders I will
presently suggest.
Two contradictory objections will be urged, one that the
punishment is greater than the offence; the other, that
offences will be committed with the object of obtaining this
punishment.


Though each of these may be sometimes the case, yet even
if they be, remedies to check either one or both of them
need not be sought for long. No one will deny that those
who will commit crime with the object of transportation will
sooner or later commit crime for its own object; and it must be
remembered that it is from the first offenders that the second
offenders come—that they are the true fount and spring of the
criminal classes, and that by drying it up, you may in a few
years have greatly reduced the bulk of crime, by converting
it into industry, and drying up the stream before it has had
time to become overpowering. In how happy a state should
we not be in five short years after such a system had been in full
effect, if we only calculate on having removed all the second
and subsequent convictions, by having taken away the first con-
victions into a new career of industry. But it will also be
justly argued that if you do not rid the country of the older
and more hardened offenders you are proposing nothing.
I have said I will presently offer suggestions as to them;
but what I contend for is, that it is now of more moment to
look at once over a wider field and to deal directly with the
causes from whence the great majority of the more confirmed
offenders come, namely, from the first convictions.
That education, and the establishment of homes and
reformatories have done much, and are working great good,
especially among the destitute and neglected young, must be
admitted; but these are not enough, as is proved by long
experience. It is now for society acting through its Govern-
ment, to deal firmly, though yet in true mercy with those who
for the first time break the law. A continuous sojourn in a gaol
to them has no mercy or promise of hope in it. It is in the
gaol that hope is lost, and he who enters it with often real
regret and penitence, if not for the crime, yet at its detection
and its consequences, leaves it with his conscience seared, his
initiation into the brotherhood of crime complete, and his
mind made up for the future which he proposes for himself to


follow. Even should the punishment he has suffered lead him
to regret the crime, and seek in honesty for life’s support, no
few nor small difficulties meet him at the very first attempt
to give effect to his resolution, not the least of which is in his
effort to re-enter the field of labour, with the stamp of the
prison on him. A return to crime is almost in spite of himself
enforced upon him.
For the offender whilst he is young in his vocation, a
removal from temptation, and to a country where the stigma
even for the first offence, which would he otherwise and else-
where against him, is lost in the value ot the labour he offers
as an atonement, and where also that labour will win him
freedom, and secure him from relapse, is the strong feature of
the system which I advocate.
So far, then, as to giving the offender an opening for his
return to honesty.
The example his punishment sets to deter others, is that
of his removal from his country and his friends, and that for a
period of his sentence his labour is compulsory; not however
horded in gangs, where the evils I have already alluded to,
with others still more terrible, follow as of course, and for
which those who coerce him, rather than he himself are re-
sponsible, but assigned to private service for the sentenced
term, and receiving by right only from his master shelter, food,
and clothing.
Objections will be urged against this plan, and evidence
will be quoted to support them.
I have already admitted that in former times, when a
similar system of treatment of the convicts who had taken the
high degree in crime then necessary for transportation, was in
operation, it had its abuses; but these abuses were rare ex-
ceptions and not the rule.
One interesting and prominent feature in connection with
the system of assignment is worthy of attention as compared
with the system that followed it, and it Is this, that whilst


there are few, if any, of the old estates in New South Wales
and Tasmania, on which there are not employed as overseers
and trusted servants, men who had worked their way to
freedom on that estate from assignment, an instance of the
a probation ” case, running beyond the period of his first
hiring, was quite rare in comparison.
Hundreds of small landsmen and tenant farmers are the
results of assignments—the loafers and criminals of the great
towns are the chief result of the probation system.
The assignment system induced industry, and above all
the creation of a certain amount of sympathy and interest
between master and servant, leading often to an attachment
to the soil and locality,—a passion, if I may term it so, full of
good to influence the natural restlessness of the class.
Under the other, or probation system, the convicts drilled
into a simulation of good conduct by rule and line with an
amount of work demanded from them sufficient to amuse and
not toil to weary, became and continued the worthless helpless
creatures they were; unable to earn their bread by labour, and
without a tie other than the stockade, and their loathsome
haunts, to connect them with a better form of life.
The chief evil urged against the old assignment system
was that masters were often tyrannical, and treated their
assigned servants with harshness if not with cruelty. That
there were such masters it is no doubt true, but they were not
many; and whilst manners have changed and public opinion can
reach them now easier than then, simple and efficient means need
not be wanting, by local magistrates and travelling inspectors,
to secure fair treatment for the prisoners by their employers.
It is a return to this old wise plan, with a new class of
convicts for its subjects, and under new guarantees, which I
now suggest. Misdirected and ill-informed philanthropy, sup-
ported by an ill-conceived and short-sighted economy, swept
it away, to erect in its stead that probation system which has
turned human beings into worse than brutes, and has increased


four-fold the tribute which the nation pays to crime. The
cost suffered by the nation at the hands of its criminal classes
who are preying upon it, added to the cost of the present
systems of gaols and penal establishments, come altogether
to so enormous a sum, that true economy, Irrespective of other
consequences, may be shewn to consist only in permanent
amelioration of the evil. My proposals, then, in a few words
are these: —
1. The transportation of criminals for first and those
not great offences, making such a punishment direct,
without a previous probation in this country, to Western
Australia, or to some other equally favourable countiy
for carrying it out.
2. Their immediate assignment on landing into
private service, for a stipulated and certain period of
their sentence, receiving food, clothing and shelter, but
no right to demand remuneration for their labour
in money.
3. The whole remaining time of their sentence to be
allowed to hire themselves for wages, but to remain in
the Colony under surveillance.
4. To induce rapid colonization by persons of posi-
tion and capital, free grants of land to be issued to
settlers in proportion to their capital, and with the
right to have convicts assigned to them, In numbers
proportioned to their land and capital.
If, then, a return to a system of transportation is allowed
to be desirable, and the class of first criminals such as I have
suggested be its subjects, the next step is to decide on the
country best fitted for their reception.
The Hudson Bay Territory, or the Island of Anticosti, at
the mouth of the St. Lawrence, offer many advantages, but it
is doubtful how far it would be prudent to commence such a
settlement in any part of North America, if another place
can be found.
B


The Munroe doctrine lies deep in the American heart, and
will yet form the bond, not indeed to re-unite the shattered
Kepublic, but to cement for a common object a strong alliance
between the separate and Independent nations of that great
Continent.
With the exception of their isolation, the Falkland Islands
have little to recommend them. Nature there is too rugged
even to give certain promise that life can be supported by her
products.
The selection of the West Indies or the coast of Africa
would be viewed as a return to the punishment of death for
all offences.
And in all these countries one element, without which no
system of transportation will succeed, or become for any ex-
tended time permanent, is wanting, and that is, a direct
inducement for free settlers, with more or less capital, to
establish themselves there, and who would be the willing, nay,
anxious employers of the exiles.
And more than this, time, and very considerable time,
must elapse before you could give effect to any system of
transportation to the countries I have named; for establish-
ments will have to be organized, and considerable buildings
will have to be erected, and all this involving large outlay
as well as time.
What is wanted is isolation to a safe extent, vast area,
tolerable climate, good soil, sound and permanent resources to
which human industry can be applied. Such wants are all
supplied by Western Australia, and with these additional and
essential advantages, that it is now almost the only Colony
where the Crown retains the power of disposal over the public
lands—where already exist complete organization, and for-
tunately the necessary establishments to apply fully and at
once the scheme proposed, and where also the Free Colonists,
so far as they arc unawed by the romantic notions of the
older and more populous Colonics, are in favour of the


reception of offenders, even of a much worse class than those
who should have ever been transported.
The material to transport is unhappily too abundant; a
vast region suitable for its reception is available; but these
two elements alone are by no means enough to secure the
probable chance of success for any system of transportation.
A direct means of turning this material and this region to the
useful purposes of life must still be supplied. The element to
direct the use of this material, and to possess itself of this
region, must also be found.
To depend alone on what under its present state will be
furnished by the settlements and employing classes of Western
Australia, would only too certainly bring into activity the
same causes that influenced in part the agitation against
transportation, in later years, by the Colonists of New South
Wales and Van Dieman’s Land. Both from this country and
from the Colonies of Australia, substantial means must be
taken to attract the capital and energy that can alone employ
the convicts, and that will also permanently attach itself to
the soil. And this can only be done by returning to the
system of free and liberal grants of land, regulated by the
amount of capital and means held by those who are ready to
employ the class of convicts I have mentioned in this great
work of settlement and colonization.
Again, I am ready to admit that in former years when
land was so granted there were partial abuses in its practice,
but these abuses were in truth very few. Political hostility
and personal disappointment exaggerated them immensely.
It was unfortunately thought to be the easiest remedy for
these abuses to remove bodily the cause by discontinuing free
grants altogether, and by its removal, the ground was prepared
to receive the seed of subsequent agitation, now resulting in
the very difficulties which England has at this moment to meet.
But these abuses need not be repeated, they can be readily
guarded against; nay, even if isolated instances do occur, what


system is perfect? For my own part, I believe that no system
for dealing with the waste lands of the Crown has as yet been
devised, which equals in justice to the individual, and to the
whole community, the measure of the Imperial Parliament,
known as the Australian Land Sales Act. Yet within the
last five years the whole of the free Governments of Australia
have annulled it, and each Colony does now with its own land
as to its Legislature seems fit.
In again having recourse to a properly organized system
of transportation, the terrible neglect of the past, of landing
thousands of men in a new and uninhabited country unac-
companied by women, must never be repeated. This cause
alone was of itself sufficient to lead to the abandonment of
transportation. The evils it worked were great —the good it
prevented from being worked was greater stilL
For every shipment of men sent to a convict settlement—
I am, of course, not speaking of Bermuda or Gibraltar—
the equivalent number of women should be sent also, and
invariably the wives, and the children too under a certain age,
of convicts, if willing to go, should be sent after them. In
the case too of married convicts, who have undergone the
whole of their sentence in this country, and who have, after
helping to maintain their families, saved enough to enable
them to emigrate—and which should always be insisted upon
—facilities should be offered for their families to follow them.
This may seem as if I am suggesting benefits for crime
which honest industry cannot always command—l acknow-
ledge it; but to this extent, that whilst I am providing for
the imperative good of the sound portion of society, I am by
these methods releasing honest industry here of the pressure
and competition of crime. I seek, in doing this, to establish a
system not like the present one, wholly consisting of irredeem-
able evil, but having in it those elements of good, which on
the one hand will diminish in this country the nurseries and
breeding places of human misery and vice, and will in the


Colony where it is established conduce to its permanency and
success, so as to avoid the probability of otherwise having
again in a few years to seek a fresh solution of how to treat
the crime of England.
I have already alluded to the fact that Western Australia
is now the only Colony of that group over which the Crown
retains its right to the disposal of its waste lands, and is
regulated by the Act already alluded to; though, if my
memory serves me right, there is a clause in It to except from
its provisions under certain circumstances, its being used for
the reception of offenders of any degree of crime.
If this be so, the framers of the Act perhaps wisely provided
what the future might require under a return to the old crude
and revolting system. Cheap labour, abundant too, but with
eonvietism will not alone induce either capital, or the class of
employers desirable to settle a colony of this character, to
betake themselves to it. Greater advantages must be offered
to tempt this class to emigrate, and free grants of land made
with no stinting hand will be the most powerful magnet to
attract.
Millions on millions of acres are on this wide Western
Coast ready for occupation, yet the ordinary progress of
colonization has as yet done little in effecting anything in
this direction, though neighbouring Colonies settled years
afterwards were assisted too, and that to no small extent, at
their foundation, and in their subsequent erection and progress,
by labour which had but just emerged from chains.
If, then, it may be asked, these Colonies now so flourishing
have benefitted by this means, why has not Western Australia ?
The reply is a simple one—the good lands of Western
Australia were not so available to a port as the other Colonies
where the rich soil often borders the ocean, the waves of the
Atlantic breaking in boiling surf on the richest soil of the
south; but the journey from Van Dieman’s Land or New
South Wales to Melbourne or Adelaide is as 10 to 2 ; a voyage


from Hobart Town to Launceston or Fremantle, for more
than ten months in a year involves a dead beat to windward
for often six weeks together.
It has been by this isolation, the stream of settlement
turned from and not towards it, that has for so many years
retarded the progress of Western Australia, and which will
for generations continue to do so unless adventitious aid,
whether it be gold or the convict and free land, comes to her
rescue.
These statements I am not making on behalf of Western
Australia. Were I individually interested in or attached to
her soil, I might prefer to share in the struggles and privations
of her early days when free, than reap in the future the harvests
which vice will have sown and crime have reaped.
I am making these statements and suggestion as the result
of observation, uninfluenced by feeling or prejudice.
I desire only to restrict myself to the consideration of
what, in my opinion, are the means best calculated to relieve
effectually England from the pressure and terrorism of its
crime, and to turn it into channels which will dilute or
purify it, and at the same time be not seriously injurious to
this or the neighbouring Colonies.
To pile convictism on convictism, or depend on the few
employers now in Western Australia, or on those who may be
hereafter attracted by its comparative prosperity, will be far
from being sufficient to secure the probability of effecting
this. The emigration of women, free passage for the convict’s
family, the rule that, on every homestead, and in all branches
of industry, where assigned labour is employed, a certain pro-
portion of free men must be employed as workmen or over-
seers will promise some good; but, together with the return to
a modified plan of assignment or apprenticeship, no system of
transportation will be permanent, or meet the wants of England,
that does not combine with it the means of attracting a con-
tinuous stream of the educated and middle classes of this


country, with more or less ot capital and no attraction can
be stronger than free land.
It was free land with convictism that laid the foundation,
not only of the settlement of Australia, but of America.
It was the grant of free land that led to the marvellous
prosperity of New South AAales and \ an Dieman s Land even
in the early stages of its settlement.
It was the grant of free lands that attracted, too, in those
early days, men whose names are found on the roll of your
first settlers in your old Army and Navy Lists.
Are there not now hundreds of men similar to these, now
in this country, with younger brothers’ portions or restricted
incomes, but with energy and the will, who, though now
cribbed and confined in the pushing struggle around them,
would find themselves stimulated by the inducements I propose
in this open and unoccupied field of colonization, and with a
certain prospect of independence if not of great wealth ?
It was the wide free grants of land which cherished in
Australia that spirit of loyalty and conservatism of public
freedom, which otherwise the democratic institution England
has given it would have endangered.
But unless England’s misery had been converted into
Australian industry, these broad acres would have been of
little value.
Hitherto we have been trying to sketch out a plan for
dealing with the fountain and origin of crime, so as to dry up
the springs from which the bulk of the criminal class is
subsequently manufactured. As a part of this plan we have
tried to make it not only such as to consort with our interests
at home, but also to make it the means of creating a new
Colony not formed of irredeemable ruffians, but only of those
who have made little progress in crime 5 not even all first
offenders, but only those whose first offences have not marked
them as adepts or experts in their new vocation. I hey might
be represented roughly by those who are now sentenced to


such a punishment as six months’ imprisonment. There are
others, however, such as our burglars, garotters, highwaymen,
and other dangerous criminals, whom in fear and trembling
we would prevent from being at liberty amongst us at home,
and who should equally not be thrust upon any country or
colony for whose well-being we are anxious.
These last, then, who havener saltum arrived at the summits
of crime, are not the proper persons in their present state,
either for colonizing convicts, or for any sort of liberty. They
have shewn themselves to be so dangerous and so far lost to
all immediate hope of amendment, that another system must
be applied to them. This class has hitherto formed the only
transported element, and it is no wonder that the Colonies in
their present advanced state should be profoundly moved at
finding a Eoyal Commission coolly proposing to're-open so foul a
traffic upon their shores. The proposal is selfish in the last
degree, and with all past experience against it, no wonder that
it has been received with a roar of indignation.
Let no such convict ever again be exported from these
shores. If we must, in the incomplete nature of our present
social organization, have an annual increment of such poor
creatures, let us as a part of the punishment to ourselves, keep
them in the country which engendered them, and do our
utmost towards reclaiming them, before they are permitted
after long years so much freedom as to choose either to remain
with us once more on trial, or to seek another land.


V.—THE CAPUT MORTUUM.
With convicts now undergoing their various terms of punish-
ment, or with those who have been once or more frequently
tried and punished, it is more difficult satisfactorily to deal.
Here, however, on the very threshold of considering this
subject, I would urge distinctly the recognition of these
principles:—
First. —That no pardon other than free, the original
prerogative of the Crown, be ever issued.
Secondly. —That the system known as the Ticket-of-
Leave or License System should, so far at least as
England is concerned, henceforth cease.
Thirdly. —That the whole of the sentence of trans-
portation or imprisonment should be suffered to the last
hour, and that no diminishing of time for alleged good
conduct be sanctioned under any circumstances.
Fourthly. —That every re-conviction should of itself
double the former period of servitude.
Diminish the period of the original sentence if you will,
but, whatever it may be, carry it out to the hour. Do not
continue the monstrous injustice of releasing at an early stage
the convict sentenced for some frightful atrocity, on the ground
of his good conduct whilst under punishment, or, in other
words, for his obedience to the prison discipline, whilst you
immure for a longer time another prisoner who, sentenced to
the same period of punishment for a theft, prompted perhaps
by destitution, has broken some petty regulations, or has in-
curred the hostility of some small official.
Hides and regulations must be respected and enforced;
but obedience or disobedience of them should in no way be
permitted to alter the sentence of the Judge.


The conditional pardon, and the ticket-of-leave, both
originated entirely out of the necessities of the Government,
and were the manufacture of official expediency. The prin-
ciples that should guide public policy would repudiate them,
and true mercy to the individual convict, can only recognize
in them a pitfall and a badge of shame.
Shorten the sentence then, if you will, but let every day
of it be worked out.
Let penal establishments be formed in suitable localities
for applying the new principles which I would suggest, where
work can be organized on a large scale; perhaps stone quarries
might find such employment, as furnishing a material for which
there is a constant demand and steady sale, whilst the want of
continuous supplies of it on a commensurate scale, is one
cause of the expense and difficulty in finding contractors to
carry out harbours of refuge and other great public works,
under such circumstances as would enable the Government to
inaugurate them. Convicts might also be employed on such
works themselves, as well as on the quarries. These are merely
offered as suggestions, however; but what I insist upon is, the
new mode of dealing with the convict under such employment,
as one to give him now the most powerful inducements to
commence a life of industry and care.
Let the prison food and clothing provided by the Govern-
ment for each convict be only sufficient to support life the
prison diet, bread and water —the prison dress, a leathern cap,
a serge shirt, jacket and trousers of wool, and a pair of shoes.
But a full day’s pay for a full day’s work, out of which
let the convict be at liberty to appropriate, after deducting what
he owes the public for his day’s food and clothing,what he wishes
in the purchase of better food and clothing and bedding —this, of
course, subject to certain restrictions; but let care be taken
that he should be obliged to lay by not less than a certain
proportion of his earnings. This saving would insure that, on
issuing from his prison at the expiration of his sentence, he


would have a fund in hand to support him for a time, whilst
looking out for employment, so as not to be immediately
tempted back to crime, or better than all, facilities should be
afforded to the convict to make him devote his savings to removing
himself from this country to some other land. I will not here
enter into any details as to what might be a prisoner’s saving
after only four years of work, but I have satisfied myself that,
even with a low average of wages, after deducting cost of clothing
and food, it would be sufficient to afford him ample time to
obtain work, or to secure a passage free to Canada, or even to
Australia; to which, if you add his knowledge that a re-
conviction, or a “relapse” into crime in this country, would
carry with it a double sentence, it might have some influence
in urging him to adopt.
In the case of a married convict, a portion of his earnings
should be set aside for his wife and family.
A day’s wages for piece-work, such as he would earn by
ten or eleven hours’ hard work in a state of freedom, will not
fail to make him in his confinement toil also. But it also will
make his life bearable and his punishment supportable; and
these feelings once established, by his owing his daily comforts
to his own industry, a continuance of his labour, when outside
the prison walls, will have become habitual to him, and that first
labour thus induced will have had its true object and reward.
This system, though it will in the first outset appear to in-
volve a large outlay, will have this desired effect. It will apply
convict labour to really useful and reproductive purposes, and
not fritter and squander it away, as is done now. It will,
besides, not disturb the cost of the labour generally, by intro-
ducing a cheaper though worthless competition, and it will
be devoted to Government works, and objects, which, without
it, they have hitherto found to entail too costly a burden on
the public purse.
A close imprisonment, and stern but not vexatious discipline
and enforced heavy toil, contain in themselves enough of


punishment to deter others. The shortened sentence, the
certain reward of continuous industry, the creation of new wants
dependant on it, and the accumulated savings by which another
life, or another home, is to be sought, when freedom is at last
earned, will give us more promise for hope and for the future,
than the license to work under the eye of the police, or the
pardon with freedom restricted.
Reformation of the character and a change of heart are in
higher hands. A great error hitherto has been in believing
that the gaol influences were an inducement in working out
this deepest reformation and change.
Doubtless in working out the details of such a system,
difficulties will be met. How to apportion the application of
this labour—the differences between the skilled and the un-
skilled, the strong and the weak, the old and the young. But
these difficulties can be overcome, and they are common to
any system. Inequalities there must be in this as in all things.
There are many trades and employments which would be
necessary among the convict society thus constituted, which
would be called into necessary activity. Of this, however,
there can be no doubt, that except to the very unsound in
body or mind, the desire to eat and live, and the power to
earn the means for doing so is given to all, and this is the sole
base on which the whole system of prison management should
rest. Firmly establish this, all else is secondary to it, and its
management will be easy and successful.
The difficulty of the application of this system to the
convicts now undergoing punishment will doubtless also be
made an objection; but it need not be more than a temporary
one, and it will be urged too that the prisons and penal establish-
ments not relieved by the issue of tickets-of-leave, will become
full to overflowing, and that certain promises or arrangements
with the convicts under the old system will be broken.
This last objection is surely more applicable to the orders
said to have recently been issued from the Home Office,


directing that no shortening of the periods of sentence are to
he permitted. For if this is so, faith will he broken, and faith
should be kept with the bond as well as with the free. Judges
aware of how the penal administration has construed the
discretion of punishment and materially lessened its period,
have been guided accordingly in their sentences. The new
orders said to have been issued practically and without further
crime on the part of the convict, extend his punishment.
My proposal carries out the detention of the convict to
the full time, but offers a more beneficial alternative in lieu of
the mitigations hitherto in force.
The immediate deportation of first offenders will reduce
the pressure for space in the penal establishments and it may
be further desirable to transport at once all first offenders now
in custody.
Whilst retaining the power to flog, I think that all
experience in connection with penal discipline shows that its
consistent use as a punishment becomes soon ineffective and
hardening. It ought only to be resorted to in cases of open
mutiny and violent insubordination, and should not be ad-
ministered but in isolated cases: rarely resorted to, hut when
resorted to it should be in all severity.
The true difficulty in carrying out what I have proposed is
however not one of details, for these I am satisfied could be
easily worked out. It is rather one caused by the Govern-
ments, who, in dealing with the question in former years,
have reaped only such a succession of failures as have caused
the Colonists, who are writhing under the evils inflicted upon
them, to endeavour to cut the knot by refusing to receive any
further importations. lam sorry, also, to add that the breach
of faith attributed to Lord Grey, when ten years ago, after
much difficulty, he prevailed upon them to allow transporta-
tion to be renewed under modified conditions, has caused the


Colonies to lose confidence in the good faith ot the Home
Government. Although he promised that a limited number of
not the worst convicts should be sent out, and only in a certain
proportion to free emigration, yet shiploads of convicts were
sent without the performance of the stipulated conditions.
The Colonists, justly enraged at this, refused to receive
them or allow them to land. The remedy for this for the
future would be to define, by Act of Parliament, the conditions
of transportation, and not to leave them to the arbitary control
of a department. If, after all, it should be found impossible
to make use of Western Australia, there are other parts of that
vast continent, such as the Gulf of Carpentaria, which are
entirely unsettled, and might be made available for the
purpose, or the Hudson’s Bay Territory might be resorted to.
The evil to be remedied is a pressing one, and I believe
that some such solution as I have suggested would adequately
meet it, by converting into useful elements the early class of
criminals, and by dealing with the worst at home, according
to a plan which would give strong and new inducements to a
reformation of character.
We have sufficient public works in this country which
might be aided by convict labour in quarries, to make it more
desirable and economical to keep them here, rather than send
them to an island, where not only would their labour be thrown
away, but the hopeless horrors of Norfolk Island would be
repeated.
Whilst thus providing for both classes of criminals, second
convictions would become comparatively rare, and thus the
country would in a very short time have mastered the criminal
element, by dealing with it at the fountain, instead of attempt-
ing to control it when it has become a rushing river.
44, Lincoln’s Inn Fields,
1 January, 18G4.
