

WHAT IS TO BE DONE WITH
OUR CONVICTS:
SKETCH OF A SYSTEM
OF
PENAL STATE SERVITUDE,
AN EFFICIENT, REFORMATORY, AND ECONOMIC
SUBSTITUTE
FOR
TRANSPORTATION AND IMPRISONMENT.
'To the Press to make known, to the Public to approve, and to the Legisla-
‘ture to enact, I would earnestly commend this Penal System; as one tending
‘to diminish the number of Convicts; and to reform established criminals through
‘motives of common policy; and especially as tending to check the increase
‘ of juvenile criminality , and provide for the education and training of neglect-
'ed youth in habits of honest industry:—and all at a cost to the country
‘trifling in comparison with the vast expense of our present penal arrangements.’
EDINBURGH:
W. P. KENNEDY, ST ANDREW STREET;
GLASGOW: D. BRYCE; ABERDEEN: G. DAVIDSON;
LONDON: HAMILTON, ADAMS, AND CO.;
DUBLIN: J. M‘GLASHAN.
1861.




SKETCH OF A SYSTEM
OF
PENAL STATE SERVITUDE.
“ What is to be done with our Convicts ?” is at the present
time a question of much interest. I propose to answer it, by
developing an economic and reformatory substitute for trans-
portation and imprisonment. The old methods of disposing
of Convicts have worked no good to society or to the unhappy
outcasts themselves.—Young Colonies have been polluted by
the stream of immorality which has been directed against
them, and young Convicts have been schooled in crime and
hardened against repentance, by the corrupt companionship
into which they have been driven. Expatriated Convicts have
been planted in a country where the road to fortune was a
short one, and where a few years raised them from poverty or a
precarious living, to competence, and even affluence. Im-
prisoned Felons have been housed, and fed, and clothed in
idleness, better than thousands who toiled in honest, anxious
effort for their rags and scanty fare. Petty crimes have been
committed for the sake of the shelter and nourishment of the
penal period; and graver offences have been hazarded, in the
hope of securing transportation to a land of easy plenty.
Crime has thus been fostered instead of checked, and irrepar-
able injury has been inflicted on society in our colonies, and
on poverty and juvenile depravity at home.
The colonies are now in active hostility against our effluence
of vice—our gaols and our enlarged penitentiaries are crowded
—and our criminals—especially juvenile ones—are swarming-
ly on the increase. What, then, is to be done with our
Convicts ? What do we do with our Poor ? To our national
disgrace, we tempt the honest Pauper into crime, by the su-
periority of our provision for the Felon. We must make the
Convict’s bed harder, and his fare scantier and coarser, and


his task heavier and more ignoble than the pauper’s, or crime
must continue on the increase—crime of our own creation.
What must we do with our Convicts? In the first place,
we must check their increase , by preventing idleness, ignorance,
and criminality among neglected children , —which, as I shall
show, we can easily and effectively accomplish ; and we must
lessen their number, too, by exercising over them such a mea-
sure of wholesome severity as may deter from crime by the
fear of punishment, and such as may shield the Poor from the
strong temptation of comparative comfort as criminals, to that
which rewards their honesty and willing industry as paupers.
Our first duty to the State, and to the Convicts too, is, to see
that punishment is so proportioned to crime as to deter from
its commission ; our next is to see that we put no impediments
in the way of criminal reformation, but give to the helpless
and the virtuously inclined every possible facility in turning
from the paths of vice ; and our next care should be to carry
out these duties with such economy as to impose the least
possible burden on society at large.
Under existing arrangements, the dread of punishment does
not deter from crime. Prisoners skip out of the dock with
pleased alacrity to the oft experienced “ punishment” of im-
prisonment :—we have our “ gaol-birds” who flit from one to
another of their Penal Castles, and who can speak of the com-
parative comforts and kindness of every gaol and gaoler in the
kingdom;—and we have thousands of thieves, burglars, and
swindlers, known to be such hy profession, many of whom pass
the greater part of their existence at public charges, in the
prison, the penitentiary, and the hulks, without ever experienc-
ing a wish to change their mode of living. They make merry
and surfeit on the proceeds of undetected crime, while fortune
favours them; and resign themselves contentedly to healthful
repose, and a salutary fast after a feast, when “ trade” grows
dull, or “ luck” is bad. They are escorted by cab or railway
to the scene of their “ public appearance,” where they feel
themselves the “ lions” of the hour, the “ observed of all ob-
servex-s”—and the more so in proportion to the daring and
atrocity of their crime'; —and they are carried from the court-
house to the prison in their covered van, to save them from the
fatigue of walking, and from the degradation of exposure to


the public gaze. The gaol has no terror for them, nor are
they awed by the judge;—but they receive his grave rebukes
with levity, and often, by open impertinence, defy his penalties.
We need some mode of punishment which shall be dreaded
by the hardened wretches who now make crime a profession—
which shall discriminate more between the vicious and the well-
disposed among criminals, and which shall stretch a great gulf
between the Convict and the Pauper. The excess of comfort
should be strongly on the Pauper’s side. It might be impolitic
to effect this by any very great amelioration of the pauper’s
condition—lest indolence should be tempted to pauperism ; but
there can be no public or private reason to prevent us from
adding to the severity of the Felon’s doom. There is no mercy
in mildness of punishment. Let it be severe, certain, and
speedy—proportioned to the crime—and it will combine true
mercy with genuine reformatory efficiency.
The greatest and most dreaded of punishments are, Isolation
from Society , and Public Exposure. The former of these we
attempt in our solitary and silent systems of imprisonment;
the latter enters but little into our penal arrangements.
Prison space and surveillance are required to an enormously
expensive amount for the silent solitary method of punish-
ment ; and its results have not been such as to warrant the
extension of the system to all our criminals. We can more
cheaply and effectively separate our convicts from kindred
companionship and general society without intra-mural se-
clusion ; and make them more bitterly feel their penal isola-
tion, by keeping them in the throng, while they are not of the
throng. We can combine the solitude that human nature
shrinks from, with the public exposure which all men equally
dread, and so render the lot of our unhappy criminals far too
unenviable to seduce men into crime, or to attach them to it.
“ Amidst the crowd, the hum, the shock of men,
To hear, to see, to feel, * * *
With none who bless us, none whom we can bless, * *
This is to be alone ; this, this is solitude !”—Lord Byron.
GENERAL PLAN.
Instead, then, of transporting our Convicts to another and,
for them, often a better world, which many of them so greatly
desire, —and instead of consigning them to the profitless and
costly “ durance vile” of prisons, which few of them suffi-


ciently fear, —I propose to condemn them to various periods
and grades of State Servitude, and to keep them among us
to drudge before our eyes as warning examples to evil doers.
And I propose to do this in such a way as to reduce the cost
of punishment to a mere fraction of what it now is—and so
as to make the penal discipline hold out every possible induce-
ment and temptation to the criminals to reform. I would
visit their faults with what they would feel to be severe chas-
tisement, and bestow an equally ready and liberal reward on
their good conduct.
I shall show first how this system of State Servitude may
be made to cost the country almost nothing; and how it may
be graduated to the various degrees of criminal demerit. I
shall next explain how the system would operate in deterring
from crime, and in reforming the criminal; and I shall indi-
cate a plan—which, I believe, will commend itself to common
sense and common feeling—to the head and to the heart of
every well-disposed person in society—for the prevention of
“juvenile depravity, 1 ’ by the punishment of the real offender,
when he can be reached, and the merciful guardianship and in-
dustrial education of his demoralized victims. And, lastly, I
shall detail some of the practical workings of the plan, with
reference to the safe custody of the criminals, and the regula-
tions for their general management.
MISDEMEANOURS PUNISHABLE BY FINE.
Certain classes of offences are punished by pecuniary fine.
These might continue to be so dealt with; but the amount of
the fine should increase in all cases with the status and abi-
lity of the offender. A fine of Five Pounds will be a quarter's
earnings to one man, while it will not amount to a day's in-
come to another; and it would be manifestly unjust to mulct
the labourer of three months’ income, and the capitalist of one
day’s, for the same offence. A graduated scale of so many days’
income should therefore be used in fixing the amount of
fines for such offences as have pecuniary penalties attached.
DEFAULTERS.
When fines are not paid—from want of means or other cause,
—the defaulter shall be subjected to State Servitude in Con-
finement, until he has worked out the amount. His daily board
shall be charged to his account, and he must labour until he


has earned for the State the amount of his fine , as well as the
'price of his hoard. He will receive credit for the amount he
earns every day, at fixed rates of remuneration, according to
the class of work which he has performed.
REFRACTORY DEFAULTERS.
Should he prove refractory in refusing to work, he will be
punished by removal into the next grade of servitude, which
shall be called the
FIRST CLASS OF CONVICTS.
The lowest term of servitude in this grade shall be one month.
The criminals shall be drafted as Street Servants to the
various towns which may apply for them, or to which they
may be allocated in the proportion of population. They shall
wear a convict dress, upon which the wearer's number in
the police list, and also the nature of his offence , shall be con-
spicuously displayed. Thus every passer-by might read the
cause of the criminal’s degradation, and point to his fate and
criminal badge as a warning to youth to be honest, upright,
and industrious.
The business of these Convicts will be to perform scavenger-
work, sewer-cleaning, street-watering and lighting, stone-break-
ing, oakum-picking, and such other duties as may be required
of them by the local magistracy.
REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS.
The duty to be performed by each Convict shall be assigned
to him by an Overseer: if it is satisfactorily executed, he will
receive a good mark as his day’s character; if he has been
indolent, disobedient, or negligent, and has failed to give
satisfaction to the Overseer, he will receive a had mark as his
day’s character.
The period of servitude of each Convict will be divided
into Ten Equal Parts. If upwards of two-thirds of the days’
characters in any of these tithes have been good, the
Convict shall be rewarded by the remission of one tithe of his
period of servitude; and if two-thirds have been bad, he
willjbe punished by the addition of one tithe. Thus: a Con-
vict sentenced to three months’ service will have ten periods
of 9 days each to serve. If 7 days in any of these tithes have
good characters, 9 days of servitude, (one tenth of the whole
period,) will be remitted as a reward ; and if 7 days in any tithe
have bad characters, 9 days will be added as a punishment.


The practical working of this system as an encouragement
to good behaviour, will be best perceived from an example.
Take four Convicts, each sentenced to the same period of
servitude,-A B, C D, E F, and G H. Their tithe-
registers stand thus:
[The squares are tithes of the period of servitude. Good marks,
(/,) Bad marks, (\), tithes remitted, , (+,) tithes fulfilled , (*)]
A
B
C D
E F
G H
/
1
1 / 1
I * 1
| \
/
1
1 \ 1
| * |
| \
/
1
1 / 1
1 * 1
| \
/
1
1 / 1
1 * 1
| \
/
1
| \ |
1 * 1
| \
+
1
1 / i
1 * 1
1 #
+
!
1 X I
1 * 1
| *
+
1
1 / 1
1 * !
j *
+
!
1 + 1
1 * 1
| *
+
1
1 + |
1 * 1
| *
i + 1
| *
i + 1
| *
1 + 1
*
| *
| c
A 13 has five consecutive good tithe marks, for each of which
his period of servitude is shortened one tithe, so that he is a
free man at the end of half the period of his sentence. C D
has three had marks, for each of which he adds a tithe to his
period of servitude, and he has five good marks, for each of
which a tithe is remitted, so that he will have to serve eight
tenths of the whole period of his sentence before he can claim
freedom. E F has never attained the marking point either
for bad or good conduct, and consequently serves his full time.
G H has five consecutive had marks , each of which having
added a tithe to his period, he has still the whole time of his
sentence to serve when A B is set at liberty. As a further
punishment for continued misconduct, G H is transferred to
the next grade, called the
SECOND CLASS OF CONVICTS.
The lowest term of servitude in this grade shall be one year.
The Convicts of this class will be employed in gangs at public
works, such as the making and repairing of roads and harbours,
the drainage of lands, reclamation of bogs, working the tread-
wheel, and other hard labour. They also shall have daily


characters, with the same system of rewards and punish-
ments, by tithes of remission or addition, as has been already
detailed. Convicts of this class may be employed as those of
the preceding grade, or in any other way that may from time
to time be necessary.
A THIRD CLASS OF CONVICTS
may be added, to be employed in the working of Mines and
Quarries, and in such other severe and dangerous labour as
may be imposed on them. The same system of daily tasking
and tithe marking to prevail in this, as in the other grades.
The lowest period of servitude to be five years.
The fixing of a “ lowest period” does not limit the duration
of servitude in either of the grades. A criminal may be sen-
tenced to five years, or longer, in the first class. Not only
the amount , but the kind of servitude, could thus be adapted
to the criminality, age, constitution, and other circumstances
of the offender.
The characteristic of this Penal System is Labour, —unre-
mitting, strictly-exacted labour; such as would, in all cases,
repay the cost of food, clothing, and housing of the Convicts,
if not that also of Overseers, and other incidents of the system.
The arrangements for Reward and Punishment are of such
a nature as to give the Convict a more than usual interest in
his behaviour, and to make it the extreme of folly for him to
give way to a refractory spirit.
The larger number of Convicts would be those sentenced to
servitude of the First Class ; and to this grade I would look,
especially, for reformation of character, and for a wholesome
example to the evil-disposed and the yet unconvicted prowlers
of our streets. The exemplary influence of this public punish-
ment would drive many idlers to industry, and preserve many
waverers in honesty.
SOLITARY PUNISHMENT.
To add the punishment of Solitude to that of Exposure , the
following regulations should be rigidly enforced.
Any Convict detected in speaking to any person, bond or free ,
other than an Overseer, to be punished by a bad marie in ordin-
ary cases, and corporal punishment, besides, in aggravated cases.
To strengthen this injunction, it should be made a Mis-
demeanour, punishable by fine , for any free person, not an
Overseer, to hold any conversation with a Convict.


SAFE CUSTODY.
The Safe Custody of the criminals might be very simply
secured by the following regulations:—
I. Any Convict attempting to escape from servitude, to be
punished by the addition of five tithes of his whole period of
sentence; and, on a repetition of the offence, by corporal
punishment, and removal to the next grade of criminals.
11. Any person harbouring , or otherwise assisting a Convict in
an attempt to escape , to be punished by the imposition of a Fine
equal to the state value of the Convict's labour for the whole unex-
pired portion of his period of servitude, —or, in default, by servi-
tude in confinement for the amount, as previously explained.
Conveniently located Police-Offices could be appointed as
Convict Day Stations, where food and temporary shelter
could be obtained; and the Gaols and Police-Stations would
furnish appropriate Night Quarters.
FEMALE CONVICTS.
No mention has yet been made of Female Convicts. These
might be allocated to towns, for menial duties, in connexion
with the prisons and police-offices, and to wash and sew for
the Convicts of the town. In case of a greater number of
Female Convicts than could be employed in this way, they
might be subjected to out-of-door labour, such as carrying
water, cleansing the dwellings of the poor, or even performing
scavenger work. For women are as capable as men of the
street drudgery of towns; and they would probably feel as
acutely the degradation of public exposure. To this feeling I
would trust for greatly lessening the number of criminals
under the new discipline.
With reference to the higher grades of offenders, such
arrangements as are now in force in the Penal Settlements
with reference to Female Convicts, might be suitable for home
adoption ; or a system of appropriate hard labour could easily
be arranged, if existing plans were not approved. But, looking
at the laborious services regularly performed by women among
the lower classes, I can see no reason for any great difference
being made, except periodically, in the kind of labour imposed
on Female Convicts. Leniency in punishment will but en-
courage crime; and severity (always, of course, short of
cruelty) will be more merciful, if not to individual sufferers,


at least to the criminal class, and greatly more beneficial to
society at large.
ALLOCATION.
In order that the public exposure to which Convicts would
be subjected by this system might not prove an impediment
in the way of their carrying out resolutions of amendment,
the following principles should regulate their allocation.
I. Convicts of the first class should never be subjected to
street servitude in the same town in which their offence was
committed, or in any town or parish in which they have, by
residence, acquired a “ settlement.”
11. Convicts whose ordinary (honest) employments have
been of a public nature , should never be allocated to towns
within 50 miles of the place of their criminality, or of any
parish in which they have acquired a settlement.
PERSONAL DISFIGUREMENT.
For the same reason, also, of throwing no impediment in
the way of their amendment of character, Convicts sentenced
to periods of servitude of less than one year , should not be sub-
jected to close cropping of the hair , or any other disfigurement
of the person, save in dress. Male Convicts sentenced to
one year , and upwards , might have their hair close cropped
and re-cut at the ordinary intervals, except during their last
tithe of servitude. Female Convicts sentenced to periods of
less than two years , should be exempt from close cropping , but
those sentenced to two years servitude , and upwards , might
have the hair cropped in the usual manner, and re-cut at the
ordinary intervals, except during the last six months of servitude.
DISCHARGE OF CONVICTS.
Convicts having fulfilled their term of sentence, are to be
returned to the place whence they were originally removed, or
to the parish in which they had last acquired a settlement.
If they have no means of gaining an honest living, they should
have the option of being placed for a time in an Industrial
School, to be qualified for following some lawful calling.
Those, who have, by good behaviour, obtained a remission
of part of their period of sentence, would generally find em-
ployment from charitable persons desirous of affording to
the well-disposed, an opportunity of forsaking their evil
courses. The Overseers would always be furnished with a list


of such parties; and they might often be the means of ob-
taining immediate employment for enlarged criminals deserving
of the opportunity.
JUVENILE CRIMINALS.
To put a check upon the continual increase of juvenile
criminals, the following regulations should be enacted.
Any criminal under the age of 16 years, convicted either
before a magistrate, or at assizes, to be dealt with in the fol-
lowing manner.
His, or her parents, or natural or foster guardians, to be
summoned and questioned as to what they have done for the
child’s moral, intellectual, and industrial education. If they
cannot show that they have fulfilled their duty to the child,
in teaching him the moral obligations of honesty and truth-
fulness, of social right and wrong,—and—if in circumstances
to afford school education—in giving him a knowledge of the
use of letters and figures, in reading, writing, and counting,
and especially in making provision for his acquiring an honest
livelihood by the exercise of some lawful calling , they shall be
bound IN penalties to undertake these duties whenever the
child shall have been delivered to their custody.
If the result of the examination prove that the child has
been criminally neglected, the execution of his sentence shall be
modified or foregone; and the negligent parents or guardians
shall be punished by the imposition of a FINE, equal to the state
value of the Convict’s services during the whole remitted
period of his sentence; or, in default, be subjected to state
servitude for the amount, as before explained.
Should the examination exonerate the parents or guardians,
as having, to the best of their ability, fulfilled their duty, the
sentence shall be carried into execution.
Surveillance.
Parents or guardians receiving the custody of a criminal
child, shall be bound to make a quarterly declaration before a
Justice of Peace, of the fulfilment of their duties to the child
until he shall have attained the age of 16 years, or until the
expiry of his term of sentence, if it should extend beyond that
period.
Paupers.
In case of parents or guardians being unable to undertake


or continue the care of the child under the imposed conditions,
or in case of negligent parents or guardians being unable to
pay the fine, and subjected to the consequence of default, the
child shall be put upon his parish, or sent to an industrial
school, for maintenance, education, and apprenticeship ; the
parents or guardians being compelled to contribute to his sup-
port according to their ability ; but without penalty in default ,
if unable by reason of poverty.
Should the convict child have no parents or guardians liv-
ing, or accessible, he shall, if he have been neglected, be put
upon his parish for maintenance, education, and industrial
training : if otherwise, he shall undergo his punishment.
Expenses.
[The expenses attending the care of Juvenile Convicts might
be refunded to the burdened parishes, at a fixed rate for each
Convict, payable out of the fine fund, augmented, if necessary,
by the State.]
CORPORAL PUNISHMENT.
The object of Penal Discipline being to strike preventive
terror into the viciously inclined ; and leniency in punishment
being a direct encouragement to offence, severity of treatment
should be resorted to as the most effective means of checking
criminality. Ordinary offences of Convicts will be sufficiently
punished by our system of daily marks; but aggravated
offences should be visited with corporal chastisement besides.
“ Spare the rod, and spoil the child,” is a domestic axiom of
universally acknowledged truth: the principle might be ad-
vantageously carried out in dealing with unruly social offenders.
Overseers should therefore have the power of maintaining
discipline, by the public infliction of Corporal Punishment on
the Convicts under their charge. The fear of this would do
more than any other motive to keep offence in check, both with-
in and without the Convict ranks.
DISTRIBUTION AND DISCIPLINE.
The principle by which Convicts should be allocated to
towns, might be such as the following.
Towns having a gaol or other appropriate place for the safe
custody of Convicts, should receive a certain number of cri-
minals in proportion to their population.
Every such town should be provided with an Overseer or
Overseers, whose duties would be to receive the Convicts assign


ed to their town; to make provision for their daily mainte-
nance, safe custody, and full occupation ; to keep the registers
of daily character, and of tithe awards ; to award corporal
punishments; and to send the prisoners to their respective
destinations at the end of their periods of service.
Expenses.
[The cost of transporting criminals from any town to a
place of allocation, or of liberation, to be disbursed by the town
whence they are transported; but the former class of expenses
to be refunded by the town receiving criminals for servitude.
Or—if the convict labour, —especially for short periods—
should not be considered worth the cost of transport, as well as
of maintenance, &c. all the former expenses might be made
chargeable on the State.]
Second and Third Grades.
The maintenance and management of criminals of the other
grades to be conducted by officials salaried by the State. The
value of the convict labour would probably, under proper man-
agement, nearly, if not quite, defray the whole of the expenses.
From the nature of the penalties attached to attempted es-
cape, as well as from the great incitements offered to good
behaviour by this system, it is believed that few precautions
would be necessary with reference to the safe custody of the
Convicts. They would, of course, be deprived of the means
of effecting an escape without assistance, the penalties of which
offence are such that there would be little fear of their being
often incurred.
PUNISHMENT FOR LIFE
No offence short of murder should be visited with Life
Punishment. Let not Hope be ever extinguished to the blood-
less Criminal. A definite period should invariably be fixed
for the duration of servitude, with the opportunity of remission
offered as an encouragement to good conduct, and a temptation
to complete reform even to the most desperate offender.
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.
The Punishment of Death might be very advantageously
superseded by Hopeless Condemnation to Life Servitude.
Cut off the murderer from society—forfeit his life ; but let it
wear out in laborious and hopeless captivity, and not be vio-
lently cut short by judicial slaughter. Death—the fate of
all men sooner or later—is no dreaded punishment to the


reckless man-slayer. He meets it boldly, and often without
reluctance. And the example of Capital Punishment is quite
inoperative to deter from Capital Offence. Among the thou-
sands who throng to witness its infliction, the Criminal Class
furnishes an eager concourse ; and the demeanour of the crowd
around the scaffold is invariably one more of holiday enjoy-
ment than of horror. The execution is a spectacle rather
than a Fearful Warning. In proportion as Capital Punish-
ment has been repealed, the crimes of which it was the penalty
have regularly decreased : so that even Transportation and
Imprisonment, mildly as these punishments are administered,
are more dreaded than the Deprivation of Life, which at once
cuts short “ the thousand natural ills that flesh is heir to.”
The murderer should be doomed to unending toil—cut off
from every intercourse with the world, as completely as if his
strangled body had been laid in the dust. When this is pro-
claimed his fate, we may confidently anticipate a vast reduc-
tion in the number of those fearfully frequent scenes of blood-
shed, which stain the pages of the Criminal Calendar.
Half of the murderer’s forfeit possessions should be the
property of the family bereaved by his crime ; to whom, also,
the surplus earnings of his labour, after deducting the cost of
maintenance, should belong.
LUNATIC CRIMINALS.
Lunatic Criminals should not be committed to the General
Asylums for the Insane, but consigned to a National Estab-
lishment designed expressly for their class. In this way only
can their safe custody and proper management be secured.
CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.
I have now sketched my plan of Penal State Servitude
sufficiently to enable the public to judge of its feasibility, and
of its merits, comparatively with the prevailing systems of
imprisonment or transportation beyond sea. Something must
be done to lessen the number of our Convicts, and that speedily;
for the statistics of crime show an increase considerably above
the ratio in which the population rises.
I have indicated a means of dealing with crime which
would infallibly tend to greatly lessen it in every stage, and
which would especially operate for good in clearing society of
the young apprentices to guilt, who have at present no helping


hand of mercy and considerateness to loose them from the
stern indentures which bind them to dishonesty and the
“ wages of sin.”
I have purposely confined my observations within the nar-
rowest limits, that the busiest of our citizens may find time
to peruse them; and I have avoided temptations to amplify,
and illustrate, or quote statistics, lest I should, in so doing,
render less distinct the broad outlines of my scheme. The
subject is one of no ordinary importance. Reader! take it
to your thoughts and to your heart. If you agree with me
in thinking this Penal Scheme calculated to do good—since our
present convict system, confessedly, effects none—let us do
something for society, by striving to establish it.
The law-makers are so trammelled and bewildered by inter-
ests, patronage, office, and the buzz of the active machineries
around them, that they can rarely think of a subject apart
from the existing routine of things. Let us call their atten-
tion from gaols and penitentiaries, hulks and transport-ships,
as matters of course and necessity in dealing with crime; and
show them a more effective, reformatory, and economic dis-
cipline in State Servitude, and profitable Labour, with warning
ignominy, at Home ; and in State Guardianship, and kindly
training in Industry, for the neglected Children of Poverty
and Crime.
Finally: to the Press to make known, to the Public to
approve, and to the Legislature to enact, I would earnestly
commend this Penal System ; as one tending to diminish the
number of Convicts; and to reform established criminals through
motives of common policy ; and especially as tending to check
the increase of juvenile criminality , and provide for the educa-
tion, and training of neglected youth in habits of honest in-
dustry :—and all at a cost to the country trifling in comparison
with the vast expense of our present penal arrangements.
Let a practical use be made of this easily practicable sys-
tem of Convict Discipline; and the Schools of Crime which
abound in our large cities will soon be broken up in terror;
while our police cells will be emptied of that constant throng
of youthful delinquents which is kept up by the impunity with
which adult vice can now speculate in “ juvenile depravity.”
