

TRACTS TOR THE PEOPLE, No. E
FOR GRATUITOUS DISTRIBUTION.
WHAT 18 THE GOST OF
PROTECTION?
We address this question to the people of Victoria, because
they have a right to know at what cost Protection is main-
tained, and whether it is worth paying for.
The cost of Protection is not easily seen. It is generally
understood that the imposition of revenue duties is the agency
employed to encourage local manufactures; but while we are
asked to look at factories established and people employed, the
other side of the picture is out of sight.
Direct taxation is quickly felt and easily followed, but indiret
taxation has an insidious effect, and is wrapped up in alj
the articles imported, which are charged with duty as they pass
into the general consumption of the country. When a tariff
is simple, as it was previous to 1865, there is no difficulty in
tracing its effects; but when it includes a great variety of
goods, as is the case under the tariff of 1871, it is not so easy
to ascertain its results.
The cost of indirect taxation is therefore complicated, and
consists, Ist—Of charges originating at the Custom House, and
2nd—Of charges imposed upon the people by the effect produced


on the prices, not only of imported, but also of locally manu-
factured goods.
Let us look first to the Custom House. There duties are
paid of 10 or 20 per cent., as the case may be—which of course
are added by the importer, with interest, to the cost price. In
addition to this, much extra trouble, loss, and hindrance are
incurred, all of which must be paid for, to say nothing of the
obstructions to foreign and intercolonial trade, which, like the
barnacles on a ship’s bottom, impede external and internal
progress.
The importer sells to the retailer, who again adds his profit,
and the result of all these charges is that for every 20s. paid as
duty to the Custom House, you as consumers have to pay at
least 30s. in the increased prices of goods.
On the other hand, under Free Trade the number of articles
taxed would be few in number, and easily dealt with, imposing
little labour on the department and the importer, and therefore
involving only a moderate addition to the cost price.
To see the full bearing of the argument, we must analyse the
Customs’ revenue, which in 1874 yielded £1,779,287. Of
this amount, no less than £1,081,157 was derived from spirits,
wines, beer, tobacco, tea, sugar, coffee, opium, and rice, 'the
duties on which have no reference to a Free Trade or Protective
Policy, leaving £690,130. Nearly all the duties covered
by this sum are intended to be Protective, or were at all
events imposed for that purpose; but to be on the safe side,
let us reduce the amount to say £500,000 paid on protected
articles, and then recall to mind the additional charges which
end in higher prices to the consumer, equivalent to probably
half as much more. Thus, we have £750,000 paid by the
people in Custom House duties and consequent charges on
goods, representing a probable value of seven or eight millions
sterling at the port; so that about 10 per cent, is added to
prices, so far as this part of the process is concerned.
Let us see now what additional cost is attributable to
Protection.


The articles taxed in order to he protected are varied in kind,
and enter more or less into competition with local products;
but, taking them as a whole, it may be fairly assumed —for the
purpose of our argument —that on an average half of the entire
consumption is imported, and half manufactured here.
In this case, the price being equally raised over all, if
£500,000 is paid in protective duties, at the Custom House, on
the one, another £500,000 is paid by the people on the other
and this without putting one sixpence more into the Treasury.
Thus our protective tariff doubles that taxation of the people
which is legitimately imposed as revenue. In addition to this,
we have seen that the charges involved in these protective
duties, after making a large allowance, amount probably to
£250,000 more, which gives £725,000 paid on the imported,
and another £750,000 paid on the colonial-made articles, or
£1,500,000. Of this total sum £500,000 alone is revenue ; but
this sum could be raised under a Free Trade tariff, on ten or a
dozen articles, without interfering with trade or prices to any
extentworth speaking of, and therefore the remaining £1,000,000
is nearly all due to Protection, and is the amount paid as a
bonus by the consumers, who of course form the immense
majority of the people ; for the persons engaged in protective
manufactures do not in any case exceed 2J per cent, of the
whole population.
If this calculation is in the main correct, and the principle
on which revenue duties are employed as a lever to raise prices
all round for the benefit of local producers is shown to be
so very costly and extravagant, it is time for the people of
Victoria to awake from a delusion which has cheated them
with the false appearance of a mirage. The factories in
Melbourne, Collingwood, and Footscray, are concentrated
under our eye, but the wide-spread industries which have made
Victoria prosperous are to be found in gold-mining, agriculture,
grazing, wine growing, and other pursuits, to which the soil and
climate of Victoria are naturally adapted, along with the
attendant industries which gather round these main resources.


The sun, the earth, and the air, are our co-helpers in creating
wealth, which furnishes employment, directly or indirectly,
to the main part of our population, and would furnish much
more if these natural resources which are our proper “native
indutries,” were more fully developed. As a new colony,
our interest is to encourage these great staples in the first
place—not to starve them, as we are now doing, by diverting
capital from more profitable into less profitable pursuits. No man
in his senses will say that we are bound to manufacture every-
thing ; and it is the great law of exchange which gives to every
separate country, and to every individual in the country, the
advantages of all the world combined, thus creating cheap-
ness and abundance, instead of artificial dearness and scarcity.
Protectionists will tell you that in return for this exaction
of some million of pounds per annum you are creating new
industries and providing the rising generation with employ-
ment. We expect to hear the cry, “What shall we do with
our children 1 ” assuming the question at issue, as if what is
best for the whole people were not also best for their children.
These and many other points will be fairly met in future papers.
Meanwhile, you cannot get rid of the question, “ What is the
cost of Protection V’ and it is for you to say whether “ the game
is worth the candle.”
Published by direction of the Provisional Central Committee, to whom all
communications can be addressed. Box No. 221, Post Office.
STILLWELL AND KNIOHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
