

WHAT OF THE AFTERMATH?
BY REV. C. E. TAPP
3d
DAN RITSSELL


CHRISTIAN DISTRIBUTORS,
BOX 688 FF, G.P.O., Sydney.


WHAT OF THE AFTERMATH?
BY REV. C. E. TAPP.
SHOULD my choice of such a subject—“ What of the
Aftermath?”—seem presumptuous and my treat-
ment of the subject even more so, I would assure
you that I am conscious both of my limited knowledge
of the subject and the vastness of the subject itself. I
simply offer you some of the fruits of a very genuine
concern—and of a close following of the trend of inter-
national relationships over the tortuous course taken
by them during the past 20 or 25 years,
I would assure you that I am absolutely convinced
of the ultimate overthrow of the Axis Powers and
Japan. What sacrifices—especially of precious lives
—will be demanded in order to accomplish this I dare
not, and cannot, suggest. But I entertain no doubts
whatsoever of the ultimate defeat of Germany, Italy
and Japan.
But that is*simply the first, even if essential, stage
in a world-wide campaign to free humanity from the
fears of economic insecurity and war. It is the second
and prolonged and also perilous stage in this campaign
that is occasioning thinking people and lovers of
humanity such anxious concern. What is to happen
when active hostilities cease? In view of what occur-
red at the close of the last war, are the hopes and
yearnings of vast millions of war weary and sad and
battered people to be at the mercy of scheming minori-
ties to whom wars and depressions are instruments by
the use of which these scheming groups become more
firmly entrenched and increasingly powerful ?
We have heard it said that this war is a people’s
war. I doubt it. That was also said of the last war.


I doubt if any war is ever a people’s war in the sense
intended by the users of such a term. Any war
becomes a people’s war by the sheer force of inevitable
circumstances. But let us take the phrase in its literal
sense. Let the peace also be the people’s peace. And
unless the people’s sacrifices occasioned by two world
wars are to be in vain—the coming peace must be a
people’s peace in a truly realistic degree. And for it
to be a people’s peace the people themselves must
prepare for it, plan it, police it, and see that it is
carried out, and not undermined and finally destroyed
by the forces of reaction and greed.
SOME OF THE PERILS OF PEACE.
1. —There is always a tendency for a season of
great effort to be followed by a time of great reaction.
Labour is exchanged for lassitude, seriousness for
frivolity, self-sacrifice for self- indulgence, and unity
for dissension. This is exactly what happened to the
Allies after the first world war, and so we lost the
peace, and hence this second world war. “Having
done all”, we failed to “stand”. The same reaction
will challenge us again,
2. —Absence of understanding by the people of
the issues involved in peace and rehabilitation. It is
true that this time there is a more general approach
to the problems of peace than was manifest at any
time during the last world war, or even after it, when
in any case it was too late. But there are still multi-
tudes of people who are playing this war game for all
it is worth, and because of big earnings are uncon-
cerned regarding what is to come after.
3. —'My third fear has to do with the Vatican.
Apart altogether from its pro-Fascist attitude and
anti-Russian attitude, the traditional attitude of the
Vatican does not encourage us to expect much of a
contribution to world unity, world fellowship, world
understanding. (vide the Vatican’s attitude to the


League of Nations, Abyssinia, Franco’s dastardly war
upon Spanish liberties.)
4. —Despite our 20 year treaty with Soviet
Russia, whereby the two nations agree to work
together, not only for the overthrow of the Axis, but
afterwards for world reconstruction, we know enough
of the unpopularity of Russia and the fear of Russian
ideology in certain responsible and influential quarters
in this country, England and America, to cause us-to
wonder whether the treaty of unity with the Soviet
will be able to withstand in spirit, as well as in letter,
the subtle pressure and the camouflaged hostility that
even now are in evidence, and certainly will become
more potent during the stressful days which will
follow the Armistice.
5. —Lurking always in the background are the
unscrupulous and soulless armament interests, which
have defeated many attempts at international under-
standing and co-operation, and have precipitated many
international crises. These soulless corporations will
be ready to provoke misunderstandings and to exploit
and develop any suggestions of post-war disunity—
even should such disunity involve strife between what
are now the Allied nations—for wars are the very life
and marrow of armament interests.
6. —Any attempt to side-track or postpone the
implementing of social security policies within any of
the nations involved will be to deal a death-blow to
any hopes of international security, for questions of
social security and international security are insepar-
ably interlocked. That is why men like Sir Patrick
Hannon, and interests such as he represents, will need
to be closely watched.
7. —That leads me to another phase of the same
question. The cry is certain to be raised that we
cannot afford the cost of social security, and there will
be a disinclination to find and vote the necessary


credits. We will not be prepared to devote to the
prosecution of peace and security a fraction of what
we spend upon war and destruction and death.
8. —The evils of racial and economic nationalism,
with its hatreds, animosities, greed, competition, trade
rivalries and tariffs. In a special broadcast from
Washington by the Hon. Cordell Hull, Secretary of
State, U.S.A., July 23, 1942, Mr. Cordell Hull said:
“One of the greatest of all obstacles which in the past
have impeded human progress and afforded breeding
grounds for dictators, has been extreme nationalism.
All will agree that nationalism and its spirit are
essential to the healthy and normal political and
economic life of a people, but when policies of nation-
alism—political, economic, social and moral—are
carried to such extremes as to exclude and prevent
necessary policies of international co-operation, they
become dangerous and deadly. Nationalism, run riot
between the last war and this war, defeated all
attempts to carry out indisputable measures of inter-
national economic and political action; encouraged and
facilitated the rise of dictatorships; and drove the
world straight towards the present war. During this
period narrow and short-sighted nationalism found its
most virulent expression in the economic field. It
prevented goods and services from flowing in volume
at all adequate from nation to nation, and thus severely
hampered the work of production, distribution and
consumption, and greatly retarded efforts for social
betterment.”
Will the perils of fanatical nationalism be lessened
or accentuated this time —owing to the fact that this
time Japan is not our ally but our enemy?
9. -The fear that the “Four Freedoms” and “The
Atlantic Charter”, which have been published and
announced as the basis for future peace and rehabili-
tation, will be accepted by the nations (ourselves
included) with reservations, or even sabotaged alto


gether (as was done last time with President Wilson’s
“Fourteen Points”). At any rate, partial acceptance
by ourselves or any other nation will accomplish
the same process of destruction. And when the
implications of these “Four Freedoms” and “The
Atlantic Charter” concerning Australia’s policy of
Protection and Downing Street’s attitude to India come
home to us, one wonders whether straightway the
enthusiastic and universal acceptance of these basic
principles for peace and rehabilitation is not immedi-
ately threatened.
10.—The final threat to future peace and well-
being lies in the possible absence of any enlightened
and vocal Christian public opinion. Last time there
was no enlightened Christian public opinion and the
voice of the Church was not heard. Hence, once
again, we lost the peace, and because the Church was
too late in mobilizing Christian thought, opinion and
action, a measure of responsibility for what has hap-
pened since must be accepted by Christian leaders and
people.
WHY MUST WE WIN THE PEACE?
1. —Surely the tragic aftermath of 1914-18 is
ample and sufficient answer, but there are additional
reasons.
2. —The death, the sacrifice, the suffering of the
last war were followed by what amounted to a base
betrayal of such death and sacrifice and suffering.
By a cruel mocking of the hopes which such death and
sacrifice and suffering had awakened within the
human soul.
And what of the death, and sacrifice, and suffering
of this war?
Let me answer that question by quoting from a
speech delivered on 30th May, 1942, by Hon. Sumner
Under Secretary of State, U.S.A. Pray God
he speaks for us all. “Now, more than ever before,


must we keep faith with those who now, at this very
hour, are dying for the cause of world security and
peace. After the victory is won, what then? Will
we make certain that those who have died shall not
have died in vain?”
3. —The men who are fighting and suffering and
who may be spared to return to us are not fighting
and suffering for the perpetuation of the status quo.
“These men will demand that justice be done inexor-
ably and swiftly to those individuals or groups, as the
case may be, that can truly be held accountable for the
stupendous catastrophe into which they have plunged
the human race. But I believe they will also demand
that the United Nations become the nucleus of a world
organization not merely to determine the final terms
of a just, and honest, and durable peace, but to provide
the mechanism by means of which what the world
produces may be fairly distributed among the peoples
of the world—so that the peoples of the world may
obtain goods and services requisite to human welfare”
(vide Mr. Sumner Welles).
4. —We dare not, by losing the peace, condemn
still another generation—the third in succession—to
a world situation bristling with the possibilities of a
still more terrible repetition of the succession of wars
and depressions which have characterized the past 80
years. To lose the peace would be to launch successive
generations upon a world—and into a situation—
lacking all guarantees having to do with social security,
social progress and human well-being.
HOW MAY WE WIN THE PEACE?
1. —By the defeat of the Axis and Japan.
2. —By the retention of unity and co-operation
between the Allied nations. “During the period of
transition the United Nations must continue to act in
the spirit of co-operation which now underlies their
war effort —to supplement and make more effective


the action of countries individually in re-establishing
public order, in providing swift relief, in meeting the
manifold problems of readjustment. Beyond these
there will lie before all countries the great constructive
task of building human freedom and Christian
morality on firmer and broader foundations than ever
before. This task, too, will of necessity call for
united action.”
3. —By the inter-Allied policing of the Axis and
Japan. It is perfectly clear that the United Nations
must exercise surveillance over aggressor nations until
such time as they demonstrate their willingness and
ability to live at peace with other nations. How long
such surveillance will be necessary must depend upon
the speed with which the peoples of Germany Italy
and Japan and their satellites give convincing proof
that they have repudiated and abandoned the mon-
strous philosophy of superior race and conquest by
force, and have accepted the basic principles of
peaceful development. Further disruption by these
aggressors must be rendered impossible.
4. —Armament interests and production must, by
some means of international agreement, be placed
under international control and the profit-motive be
entirely eliminated from the production of instruments
of death and destruction.
5. —lf the Vatican is to be represented at any
conference or conferences having to do with the
establishment and maintenance of peace, I would
suggest that the Archbishop of Canterbury and a
representative of the World Council of Churches
should also be members of such conference or
conferences.
6. —No scheme or schemes of international peace
and security can possibly be complete or permanent
unless the nations provide within their countries, and
between their countries, economic freedom and


economic security—thus providing against the hazards
of human existence.
7. —That leads me to this: That we should acquaint
ourselves with—(a) The contents of “The Atlantic
Charter”. (b) “The Four Freedoms”. (c) The
Malvern Conference findings, (d) With the Beveridge
Social Security Scheme, (e) With the Commonwealth
Plan, (f) With similar programmes as they from
time to time appear.
8. —Because the “Four Freedoms” and “The
Atlantic Charter” do embody and express basic
Christian principles. Because their acceptance and
application will provide an assurance of stable and
enduring peace, their acceptance and embodiment in
policies of national and international significance is an
obligation calling for the intelligent and loyal support
of the people, especially Christian people.
BY WHOM MUST THE PEACE BE WON?
1. —By the people. Whatever form or system of
international organization should be established, let
it be an organization bearing the approval and carry-
ing the intelligent backing of the people. The League
of Nations was in reality a “League of Cabinets”, or,
to be still more realistic, “A League of Some
Cabinets”.
2. —When our Commonwealth representatives
leave us to represent us at future Peace Conferences,
let them be the people’s representatives in reality. That
is, let them know the mind of the Australian people:
let them hear the voice of Australia speaking to them.
Our future ambassadors for world peace should be left
in no doubt concerning what Australia expects of
them. This should not be an impossibility. In these
days of “Gallup polls”, of wireless, of propaganda, it
should be well within the bounds of possibility either
for our Commonwealth authorities to refer to us, for
our consideration, an Australian policy for submission


to a future Peace Conference, or else for the people
themselves to take the initiative, and, by means of
organization, to submit to our Commonwealth leaders
a summarized expression of the desires of the people
of the Commonwealth concerning peace and security.
4.—Herein is the call for Christian leadership,
and, incidentally, the justification (if any were
needed) for the preparation and deliverance of this
lecture. I would suggest that the time is here for
groups of Christian people to take up and consider
“the things which belong unto peace” (Lk. 19:42).
“This means intensive study, hard thinking, broad
vision and leadership, not for governments alone, but
for parents, and teachers, and clergy, and all those,
within each nation, who provide spiritual, moral and
intellectual guidance. Never did so great and so
compelling a duty in this respect devolve upon those
who are in positions of responsibility, public and
private” (vide Mr. Cordell Hull).
I would very humbly suggest that in our response
to such an appeal, in of such a task on
the part of responsible Church leaders in Australia,
we in Australian Churches and Australian public life
would be going far in the direction of securing an
answer to our own prayers of establishing and build-
ing the Kingdom for which we pray, of making actual
the fulfilment of the angels’ “Song of Peace upon Earth
among people of goodwill”, of making “Thy Kingdom
come and Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven”.


OTHER PUBLICATIONS HANDLED BY
CHRISTIAN DISTRIBUTORS
Box 688 FF, G.P.O., Sydney.
1. “Capitalism, Socialism and the Church” —Rev. Ralph Sutton.
2. “Does It Make Sense?”—Rev. Eben V, Newman, 8.A., 8.D.,
B.Litt.
3. “What Is and What Should Be”—Raymond Barkitt, B.Com.
4. “Freedom’s Peril”—Rev. Alan Walker, B.A.
5. What’s Wrong With a Gamble?”—Rev. Ralph Sutton.
6. The Church and the Working Class”—Rev. Ralph Sutton.
7. “Blueprint for Security”—Rev. Dr. C. M. Churchward.
