

■f[oZGi
WHAT DO UNITARIANS BELIEVE?
By Rev. A. C. HENDERSON, M.A., 8.D.,
Minister of Melbourne Unitarian Church.
Unitarians believe that the religion proclaimed by Jesus on
the hills of Galilee is the purest and most exalted that the
world has ever seen. The great key-note of his teaching
was : “ God is your Father, all mankind are your brethren ;
live as those who are mindful of such glorious truths, by
cultivating a spirit of fraternity towards all your fellowmen.”
“ Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
so to to them, for this is the law and the prophets.” “ The
first commandment is, “Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our Gcd—
Jehovah is one; and thou shalt love Jehovah thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind,
and with all thy strength.” The second is this, “ Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself.”
Referring to the last-mentioned quotation, the late Presi-
dent Lincoln, of America, declared, “ When any Church will
inscribe over its altar, as its sole qualification for member-
ship, the Master’s condensed statement of both Law and
Gospel in those two great commandments—that Church will
I join, with all my heart and with all my soul.” And the
late Dean Stanley expressed himself in similar terms, to the
following effect, “ If any Church existed, which in reality
and in spirit put forth these two commandments as the sum
and substance of its belief, as that to which all else tended,
and for the sake of which all else was done, it would take
the first place amongst the Churches of the world, because it
would be the Church that most fully had expressed the mind
and intention of the founder of Christendom.”
And this is what is done by every Unitarian and Free
Christian Church. The great principle of Love is recognised
as the one thing needful, and the creeds of Christendom are
entirely set aside, as containing a far larger proportion of
error than of truth. We reject,, e.g., without the slightest
hesitation, such doctrines as the Trinity, the Deity of Jesus,
and Substitution, believing them to be no part of the religion
which Jesus taught, but the additions of a later time.


On turning, e.g., to the “Gospel according to Mark,” which
we regard as the earliest and most reliable of the gospels, we
find Jesus represented as actually rebuking a young man
who applied to him the title “ good.” “ Good master,”
exclaimed the young man, “ what shall I do that I may in-
herit eternal life ?” To which Jesus at once replied, “ Why
callest thou me good ? None is good but one, that is, God.”
Now, if Jesus had been literally God himself, walking upon
Earth (as some Christians believe he was), we think he would
have said, “You do well to call me good, for that I am; I
am not only good, I am God himself.” Or, if he had been
one of a Trinity of Divine Beings, (as the majority of Chris-
tians believe he was) he would then have said, “ You do well
to call me good, for that I am ; I am one of the three persons
of the Godhead, each of whom is absolutely perfect.” In-
stead of which, he said, “ Why callest thou me good, none is
good but one, that is, God.”
So, too, we find that according to the teaching of Jesus,
God, our Heavenly Father, is the only being to whom prayer
ought to be addressed : —“ Pray to thy Father who seeth in
secret, and thy Father who seeth in secret, shall reward thee
openly.” “ When ye pray, say, ‘ Our Father who art in
Heaven, hallowed be Thy name.’ ” Jesus never instructed
his disciples to address their prayers to a Trinity.
So, too, in the beautiful story related in the 4th gospel
regarding the conversation of Jesus with the woman of Sa-
maria, at the well. He is not represented as declaring that
the hour would come when men should worship three persons
in one Godhead; but, on the contrary, the following is the
language he is recorded to have used : “ The hour cometh,
and now is, when men shall worship the Father in spirit
and in truth.”
We now come to the question, “ In what sense was Jesus
of Nazareth the Son of God?” To which we reply that
according to the teaching of Jesus, all men are the sons of
God, when they strive to live in obedience to their Heavenly
Father’s will. Therefore it was that Jesus said to his dis-
ciples, “ Call no man your father upon earth, for one is your
Father, who is in heaven.” So that Jesus not only claimed
to be a Son of God himself, but instructed all his disciples to
regard themselves in precisely the same light. The idea that
there was something supernatural about the birth of Christ
sprang up amongst the earty Christians as the result of two
causes;—the first being the frequency with which Jesus


J- *7' *2-
spoke about God as his Father—which language seems to
have been interpreted by some of the early Christians as
indicating that God became the Father of Jesus by working
a miracle ; while the second cause appears to have been the
natural instinct of which led the early Chris-
tians to exalt the personality of Jesus more and more, as time
rolled on. And this is why, when we turn to the latest
gospel (which is called “ the gospel according to John,” and
which was probably composed in the second century, a.d.,
by one of the early Christians"who resided in the land of
Egypt), we find that Jesus is there represented as a much more
decidedly supernatural being than in the “ Gospel according
to Mark.” The tendency to throw a halo of the miraculous
around the memory of the great Teacher had been gradually
developing during the interval which elapsed between the
composition of the first Gospel and that of the fourth.
Before passing from this branch of our subject, it may be
desirable to mention that the well known text, I. John, v. 8
—(“ There are three that bear record in Heaven,” etc.), after
having been regarded, for many centuries, the great bulwark
of the doctrine of the Trinity, is now universally admitted
to be an interpolation made by some scribe about the year
750 a.d. All the early manuscripts of the New Testament,
up till the beginning of the eighth century, unanimously
omit those words. The passage has, accordingly, been
dropped in the Revised Version ot the New Testament.
Substitution (sometimes called “Salvation b> blood”) is
another of the doctrines of popular Christianity which Uni-
tarians reject. They do so for three reasons : —First, because
they consider it an irrational doctrine; second, because it
has an immoral tendency ; and third, because it is opposed to
the best teaching of the Bible (both of the Old Testament and of
New) and especially to that of Jesus himself.
Christianity, as taught by Christ himself, and Modern
Christianity, are thus, in our opinion, two entirely distinct
and separate things. The one is like a crystal stream, as it
issues from the mountain-side ; the other, like the turbid,
muddy river, into which it becomes transformed in the lower
stages of its course. Jesus taught that religion consisted,
simply and solely, in love to God and Man ; modern Chris-
tianity teaches us that, in addition to this, we require to
accept, as true, a formidable array of doctrines—many of
which it is extremely difficult to understand, and still more
so,Ao believe ! How great, then, is the privilege of belonging


n . *ft ’ , %
// ' £ J 4- % {
NOTE TO THE READER.
Yours faithfully,
JAG
tt&uo
ALEX. C. HENDEESON,
J. Haase, Pi
ftozei
4
to a Church like ours, religion we profess is abso-
lutely identical with that which fell, in its pristine simplicity,,
from the lips of Jesus on the hills of Galilee.
“ Love towards God and Man ” : —Where can we find any
Religion whose basis is grander and more glorious than this ?
It is a Religion which is suitable not only for the inhabitants
of this little world whereupon we dwell, but for every other
world, throughout the remotest regions of unfathomable space.
We cannot imagine that any world exists, in which it is not.
the duty of the rational creatures it contains to love the great
Creator for all the blessings which he has bestowed, and to-
love, likewise, all the other children of his power.
Such, then, we believe to be the True Religion—a Reli-
gion which is appropriate, not for one solitary sphere of
existence only, but for the Universe at large. As the poet
Longfellow has beautifully said,
“ Love is the root of creation ; God’s essence ; worlds without number
Lie in his bosom like children ; he made them for this purpose only ;
Only to love, and be loved again.”
“ Lovertherefore, is the mfClling of God’s law. ’ “Love-
is of God, and every one that loveth is a child of God.”
If the foregoing article has, in any degree, given voice to your beliefs and
sentiments, you are cordially invited to attend the Services which are held
every Sunday, in Melbourne Unitarian Church, within whose walls strangers
are always sure of a hearty welcome.
Perhaps you may say, “ But I do not know in what locality that church is
situated.” Then, let me describe its position to you, as clearly as I can. I
have no doubt you are familiar with the large building known as St. Pat-
rick’s Cathedral ? Well, the Unitarian Church is almost exactly opposite.
St. Patrick’s Cathedral stands on the North side of West Grey Street,.
(Eastern Hill), while the Unitarian Church is situated on the South
side of the same street. There are two churches on the South side of West
Grey Street; the one is the German Lutheran Church, while the other (the
more easterly of the two), is ours. With the aid of those directions, you
should find it an easy task to steer your way to our beautiful Church on
Eastern Hill. So, do not fail to come, next Sunday, either to Morning-
Service, at 11, or to the Evening Service at 7 o’clock—or, better still, to
both. And if you should, feel desirous of asking me any questions, or of
having a little conversation with me about theology or kindred topics, it
will give me great pleasure to receive a call from you in the Yestry, at the
close of either of the Services.
Minister of Melbourne Unitarian Church.
