

WHAT THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND
HAS DONE FOR
NEW SOUTH WALES.
By Ven. F. B. BOYCE,
Archdeacon of West Sydney.
ANNIVERSARY SUNDAY
The First Sunday in February.
New Edition.
SYDNEY:
F. H. Tieljen, Printer, 5 Regent Street, Redfarn.
1926.




“The Seed Time op the Past is the Harvest of To-day.”
ANNIVERSARY SUNDAY
Resolutions Passed Unanimously by Both Houses of the
Provincial Synod of New South Wales, on 2nd August,
1904.
Proposed by Canon Boyce and seconded by Rev. W. H. H.
Yarrington, M.A., LU.B.
“(a) That, with the view to remembering the first Divine
service in Australia, which was held in 1788, ‘on the Sunday after
the landing .... under a great tree,’ at Sydney Cove, and for
the purpose of emphasizing the priority and the history of our
Church here, it is very desirable that in every parish yearly, on
the Sunday after Anniversary Day, which would be the anniver-
sary of the planting of our Church on this continent, there should
be some suitable notice or commemoration of so important and
interesting an event, (b) That the Bishops be respectfully asked
to communicate the foregoing resolution to the clergyman in
charge of each parish in their respective dioceses, and to take
any other steps they may deem advisable to promote the object
stated.”
A year after a brief statement was found in the Mitchell
papers, that said that the first service was held on Sunday, 3rd
February, 1788. The landing had taken several days.




What the Church of England has Done
for New South Wales'
BY ARCHDEACON F. B. BOYCE.
The foundation in the land of a great institution like the
Church of England should be of deep interest. Its parishes now
form a vast net work covering the whole country, while those who
enrol themselves under its flag are so numerous that her position
approaches that which is national. According to the Government
'census of 1871 the Anglican population was 45.5 per cent., and in
1901 it was 46.6. In 1921 it had risen to 48.91. We turn our
attention therefore to its beginning and its history.
The Rev. Richard Johnson, 8.A., Magdalen College, Cam-
bridge, was the clergyman with the first fleet. William Wilberforce
proposed his name to Mr. Pitt, the Prime Minister, who made the
appointment. His commission was dated 24th October, 1786, but
the fleet did not sail until the following May. He must have had
a clear and simple faith in God, intense loyalty to duty, a true
spirit of self-sacrifice, and a brave heart to have left his native
land as he did. Some convicts later on said that they did not
believe that there was so good a man beside in all the world. To
understand his difficult position, one must try to realise what his
surroundings were, and in the light of the times in which he lived.
Before he left, help was rendered him from several quarters.
He appeared before the committee of the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge, to place before them the spiritual needs of
those in his charge, and as a consequence an important grant was
made of Bibles, Prayer Books, and tracts. He sailed in the
“Golden Grove.” On arrival, his “parish” was the whole land,
with 1030 precious souls who had come in the fleet, who indudbcl
750 convicts and a few free settlers. h irfim
Prisoners were sent from England to America for a long time, .but’Hie''War'of
Independence of 1776, stopped that course. Barton, the able writerbof. : itfreiifirst
volumti of the official records of Australia’s earliest days, deals this, matter
and proves by figures, that a far larger number of convicts had fre'eh 'setlt' ro ine
States than to this country. IjV - j(l >


There must have been many sad hearts when the fleet left Old
England. The voyage of eight months was not only dreary in the
extreme in the small ships of the period, but dangerous because
through seas almost wholly unknown. Mr. Johnson held regular
services, and was most attentive to his duties. At Rio he visited
each ship. There must have been great joy when the new land of
hope and promise was reached, and what thankful hearts there
must have been when the long voyage ended!
The fleet arrived in Sydney Cove towards sundown on Satur-
day, 26th January, 1788. What a memorable summer’s evening it
must have been for those on board! The tender, the “Supply,”
with Governor Phillip had gone on before, and he, with others,
having landed, had a small space cleared in the bush and had
hoisted the British Flag. Around it he and officers drank the health
of the King, George 111., in four glasses of porter, and marines
present fired a salute. The official and formal inauguration of the
Government did not take place until the 7th February. That was
after the Church Service.
The landing from the eleven ships needed forethought and
organization. The historic Cove, which is now the Circular Quay,
then, - of course, had no wharves. There was only the wild bush
in which were big gum trees and possibly rough scrub to the
water’s edge. There was no roof for any one to sleep under. It
was to be a very difficult and harsh beginning. There were the
women to be considered as well as the men. Blacks had doubtless
been seen, and it would not be known whether they were hostile
or otherwise. Consequently the landing from the ships covered
several days.
Divine Service.
Captain Tench writes : —“On the first Sunday after our land-
ing Divine service was performed under a great tree by the Rev.
Mr, Johnson, Chaplain of the Settlement, in the presence of the
troops and convicts, whose behaviour on the occasion was equally
regular and attentive.”
It evidently had official sanction, as the military and pris-
oners were there, and no doubt the little handful of free
settlers.
When the first edition was published in 1905 it was thought
that the next Sunday after the 26th January would always be the
right day for the Anniversary of the Church. But in 1906 an
old memorandum was found among the Mitchell papers
that gave the exact date: it was Sunday, 3rd February, clearly
“the first Sunday after our landing.” The brief memorandum
also gave the preacher’s text: “What shall I render unto the Ford
for all his benefits toward me.” (Psalm 116; 12).


The; First Public Gathering in Australia,
It was to worship God. What other country had then so
honourable and so right a beginning? It enshrines for ever the
first Sunday in February as the real Anniversary Day of our
Church in this land.
What a remarkable service ! The new and romantic surround-
ings, the isolation from the far distant England, home and beauty,
and the consequent loneliness of the little company, many of them
outcasts, the possible dangers that might confront them in a land
that they knew scarcely anything about, and their hope for the
new life before them, all must have helped to make that service
singularly impressive. It was the first time in Australia that God
had been publicly worshipped, and in which our sublime liturgy
had been used on its shores. We wish that we had more particu-
lars. What were the leading thoughts in this the first sermon on
this continent 7 There is no doubt, from what we know of Mr.
Johnson, that he exalted Christ and placed Him before his hearers
as the loving Saviour. We can think, too, that throughout there
would be a strain of thanksgiving for God’s mercies to them in
the long voyage on the mighty deep. Few, or no more, memor-
able services have ever been held in Christendom during the
centuries of its history.
Dean Cowper has well said: —“That may be regarded as the
day on which the planting of Christianity was begun in Australia;
the day on which the Christian faith was proclaimed, and Chris-
tian worship first celebrated. It was the setting as it were of a
small stock, which was to grow and expand into a great tree,
throwing out its branches, and yielding its fruit on every side.”
A Commemoration Proposed.
I urged at a meeting that there should be a Commemorative
Service annually, on the very site, if possible, on which the first
was held. A charge of sentiment might be made, but is not senti-
ment a powerful factor in nations, and often the basis of patriot-
ism? Why then exclude it from the Church? The Rev. W. I.
Carr-Smith, of St. James’, who later became a Canon of an
English Cathedral, was at the meeting, and believing that the
place was in his parish, with a genius for. the historical, happily
arranged for such a service. It was held in front of the Custom
House at Circular Quay, at 3 p.m., on Sunday, Ist February, 1903.
He kindly asked me as the proposer to take part. After a shortened
form of Church service he delivered an appropriate address, as
did also the Rev. E. H. Lea who was present. I spoke from the
words, “This day shall be unto you for a memorial.” The attend-
ance was about 300.


Thu First Survicu.
There was much controversy as to the site where this
famous first service was held, and the question is undecided. More
than one have asserted that “the great tree’’ was on the east side
of the Cove. But that point is quite secondary to that of holding
the service itself, and there is no doubt on that matter, and that
it was on the first Sunday in February. Rev. W. I. Carr Smith
in the next year changed the site, by advice from the front of the
Custom Flouse to one close to the old obelisk, opposite the Royal
Exchange, from which all the mileage of roads in this country
start. Year by year, ever since this service in the open air has
been held on or close to that position.
Eater the C.E.M.S. took charge by request. A large proces-
sion, with the Cathedral and some other choirs in their surplices
have gone through the streets from St. Andrew’s to the site.
For several years Rev. Canon Bellingham, M.A., of St. Philip’s,
has brought to this service the original Bible and Prayer Book that
Mr. Johnson had used.
The attendances grew largely. On one occasion the estimate
in the press was no less than 5,000.
Action in Synod.
With the view of enlarging the scope of the commemoration,
I moved in September, 1903, a resolution in the Synod of the
Diocese of Sydney in favour of a general Anniversary Sunday.
It was seconded by Dr. Ftouison, and carried without dissent.
Since then the Synod has adopted the first Sunday in February
as the right day. I brought the same resolution before the Pro-
vincial Synod the next year, and with the substitution of the word
“planting” for “beginning,” it was unanimously passed by both
Houses, Such a day rightly signalizes a humble but most honor-
able commencement. It is a time annually in which we can review
the past, in fact, it is a Church history Sundays An institution
would be poor indeed if it had, after living over a century, no
work or deeds worth remembering. That thought was in my mind.
We can recount that the one Minister of the Cross has become
about 600, with seven Bishops. If we think of the whole Common-
wealth, the number would be about 1,500, and 24 Bishops. There
was no roof in 1788, except the “great tree,” but now there are
stately cathedrals and hundreds of churches, many being very
beautiful. The first service was at the birth of a nation, and all
through since, our ancient and historic Church planted then in this
land, has nobly witnessed for the faith and the high ideals con-
nected therewith, and so helped the public life in matters of vital
consequence.


To celebrate the anniversary of the foundation of such a
great institution, seems not only most fitting, but a plain duty. As
the State celebrates its anniversary, and has its day, why should
not the Church? In Australia, Church and State began together,
and it is appropriate that both should keep their anniversaries at
about the same time. It is well to emphasize that the Church here
is as old as the State.
A General Observance.
The general observance began in 1904. Archbishop Saumarez
Smith had helped the resolution of the Synod by forwarding it
on to all his clergy. In St. Andrew’s Cathedral Archdeacon
Gunther, a lover of the history of our Church in this land, dis-
coursed on the subject. Rudyard Kipling’s recessional was sung.
God of our fathers, known of old,
Lord of our far-flung battle line,
Beneath Whose awful hand we hold
Dominion over palm and pine—
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget —lest we forget.
I had the privilege of preaching in the evening.
In many churches the day was celebrated. One, at least
(Holy Trinity, Dulwich Hill) was specially decorated. Arch-
deacon Langley, at St. Philip’s, marked the day by suitable ser-
mons and hymns, and notably by using the historic Bible and
Prayer Book that Johnson had brought from England with him
in the first fleet.
A Visible Link.
This Bible and Prayer Book deserve more than a passing
notice, as they are a visible link that has been preserved. They
were saved in the burning of the first St. Philip’s Church in 1798,
were used in various rooms afterwards, and for many years in
the second St. Philip’s, when built. In 1842 Archdeacon Cowper
took them to England and had them re-bound. They are now
carefully kept in the iron safe in the vestry of another, a third
and grander St. Philip’s, and only used on occasions of excep-
tional interest. Archdeacon Broughton, before his consecration
Inscription upon the chest containing the Bible and Book of Common Prayer,
which were conveyed to New South Wales by the original settlers for the use of
public worship; “Quo ne intercideret memoria christianae fidei in his oris primura
praediratse, sacrarum scripturarum volumen, item que exemplar libri liturgiae
ecclesiae. Anglicanse, que. una cum colonia idcirco hue advecta, a primo station
appulsu in sacris concionibus adhibebantier, in hac acra reponenda atque in ecclesia
sancti Philippi apostoli conservanda. CURABAT REV. GUL. BROUGHTON,
A M Archidiaconus. Sydneiae, Australium.
Salut: Human: MDCCCXXXIV.
Colon: Fundat: XLVI*
Anno


as Bishop, preaching in St. Philip’s on Anniversary Day, 1834,
which happened to be a Sunday, said: “As an appropriate monu-
ment also of the event which this day witnessed, and in perpetual
acknowledgment that the frame of human Society should stand
upon the Word of God, and be compacted together by His pure
worship, provision has been made for the preservation within the
walls of this Church, the oldest place of Christian worship existing
in this colony, of the Bible and Book of Common Prayer which
accompanied the original settlers, and were here first used in the
service of Almighty God. May they remind us, and our posterity
to the latest generations, of our duty to reverence and study that
sacred word, and thus at least to show our thankfulness to God,
who has brought us into a land where we may eat bread without
scarceness, and not lack anything in it. A heinous and a hateful
sin is national ingratitude. May it never be imputed to us.”
The Priority of Our Church.
One point that is brought out at the Anniversary is the
priority of our Church to that of other Churches in this State.
I have a sincere regard for the work of other denominations, and
recognize its importance, but it is only fair to remember that
during the most difficult, the crudest and the darkest days the
Church of England by itself witnessed in this land. For about a
fourth of the history of New South Wales, which for long was
the history of Australia, there was only one church here, and that
was our Church of England. There were some adherents of
other Churches and visits of passing missionaries, who sometimes
stayed for a little, but it cannot be said that either was officially
and regularly represented by one of its ordained and recognised
ministers until years had passed. The first such minister of the
Methodist Church came in 1815, of the Roman Catholic in 1820,
of the Presbyterian in 1823, and later, one of the Congregational
and of the Baptist Churches.
On the other hand, our Church was here from the very first.
Johnson was soon assisted for a short time by the Rev. James
Bain. In 1794 the Rev. Samuel Marsden arrived, and for nearly
a half a century the colony had the advantage of his vigorous
ministry. The Rev. H. Fulton aided for a space. We read of
his conducting Divine Service on the Hawkesbury on 7th Decem-
ber, 1800, and a church was opened there on 16th August, 1805.
In 1809 there came the Rev. William Cowper, ever faithful, active
and able, and the next year the Rev. Robert Cartwright, another
earnest-minded man. Soon the number of clergy was enlarged,
and there were ten in 1825. The sainted Archdeacon Broughton
came in 1829, to be consecrated the first bishop of Australia seven
rears later.
6


In the West, Rev. Samuel Marsden visited Bathurst in No-
vember, 1825, and held services, and arranged that a clergyman
be appointed at Kelso. In the South, in 1827, Rev. Thomas
Hassall was stationed at Cobbity, and from there worked over
Goulburn and other parts.
It is interesting to note that while the earliest parish registers
are in the Registrar General’s office, those in the possession of the
C'hurch at Windsor date from 1810, and Liverpool 1811. In the
then distant west they date, at Kelso 1826, and at Wellington
1837; in the south, at Goulburn 1838, and in the north, at New-
castle, 1826. As far north as Port Macquarie the foundation
stone of a church was laid in 1924. A mission to the aborigines
was begun by the C.M.S., under the Rev. William Watson, at
Wellington in 1832. Rev. James Gunther went there in 1837,
and moved to Mudgee in 1842. By the action of the Campbell
family of Duntroon, a substantial Church was built at Canberra
in the ’forties, later site of the Federal Capital. In the ’eighties,
Rev. G. A. Oakes, afterwards Archdeacon of Bathurst, did most
valuable work for several years in the far west. These were the
slow days of travel. There were no railways, trams, motors or
bikes. The saddle was the chief means of transit. Hard graft
was common. I may add that in the West the railway had its
terminus no further than Mount Victoria in 1869. These facts
all show how in the very early days of Australian life our Church
was possessing the land and witnessing and doing work for her
Lord and Master.
Our Church and Education.
There are at least two important matters concerning which
there might well be national thankfulness for the work of our
Church. One is that of education and the other is that of moral
reform. What is the testimony of history?
The work of the Church in the education of the people is a
most notable matter for national gratitude. The training of the
children is of momentous consequence, as the country’s well-being
rests on the character of the men and women it produces. “As
the twig is bent, so is the tree inclined.”, A well-known writer has
said that “The regeneration of Society is the regeneration of the
individual by education.” Our, Church all through the history of
New South Wales has vigorously fostered education.
But especially while caring for the secular, she has stood for
religious instruction. Education can never be good if it be one-
sided. . It is a sad mistake to suppose that a boy is prepared for
life if some of the most important faculties are left uncultivated.
The aim should be to properly balance a boy’s mind. The
teaching of the three R’s will not make a boy obedient to his
parents. The teaching of geography will not make a. boy honest.


A knowledge of grammar will not make a boy honourable. An
acquaintance with algebra will not teach a boy to be upright and
loving, much less will it put into his heart the fear of God. For
instance, who will argue that a mere knowledge of a trade, such
as that of a bricklayer or carpenter, will make a man truthful or
temperate? These things are good in themselves, but is it right
to leave the more important faculties —the moral and spiritual—
out in the cold and untrained ? Secular education alone is utterly
incomplete, and would tend to destroy that righteousness which
is the sure foundation of national greatness. The Duke of Wel-
lington went so far as to say: “Educate children without religion,
and you will make a race of clever devils.”
The Church, then, working on the truest lines, has ever
warmly urged the necessity of education for the people—religious
as well as secular. It must be remembered that it is recently,
comparatively, that the State has been willing to bear the burden
of education. People now enjoying the lavish expenditure on the
public schools, some doubtless built with borrowed money, can
scarcely realise the immense difference a generation or two ago.
It is very easy to talk of having a good education, now that the
public purse is wide open. It was not always so. The Church
had to collect subscriptions and put up buildings. Any Govern-
ment help was partial, and it is really wonderful how much she
was able to do with the very limited means at her disposal. The
superintendence by the clergy and the general management usually
took up valuable time, yet very freely given. The anxieties
connected with the schools were sometimes great.
Thu Early Days.
The father of education in Australia was the Rev. Richard
Johnson, B.A. He established the first day school, and it was
held in the wattle and dab church that he had built in 1793. and
was opened at Michaelmas of that year. That noble organisation
of our Church, the S.P.G., gave £lO a year each towards the
salaries of two teachers, and later of a third. But those grants
were merely earnests of splendid help in other years.
The Rev. Samuel Marsden opened the first school in Parra-
matta. At the end of 1797 there were three schools in the colony.
Two of them were Church schools, and the other a private one.
We find that in 1826 the Church had 16 schools.
The Church and School Corporation, beginning in 1826, ren-
dered large help, but that body expired in 1836. Dr. Lang says,
in his History of New South Wales that in 1833, “There were 35
Primary or Public Schools in the Colony, all of which were under
the superintendence of the Clergy of the Church of England.”
8


Church Schools.
From that time State aid was given, and rightly too, to other
denominations for education purposes, and, indeed, also to minis-
ters' stipends. It will be seen that during about two-fifths of the
history of New South Wales the Church of England Schools were
the only ones, except a few that were private. Among the latter
must-be named a Roman Catholic School, opened in 1822. In
1850, our Church had 92 Schools, with half of the children. Of
the other half the Roman Catholics numerically were first, with
the Presbyterians second, and Methodists third.
The Government aid given was various—sometimes a pound
for every pound subscribed, and for a time a half-penny a day for
each child in towns and a farthing to a half-penny for each in the
country. A Board of National Education was formed about
1850. and the Public School system began and gradually expanded,
but the Denominational Schools were continued until 1883, when
all aid was withdrawn. In 1878, it may be remarked that the
cost to the State for each child, on the aggregate yearly enrolment
in Public Schools, was £3 is. yd., and in the Denominational
19s. Bd. The Churches in some way by buildings and subscrip-
tions made up the necessary difference. I called the Denomina-
tional system not State aid to the Church, but Church aid to
the State.
Among those from which all aid was withdrawn were our
splendid and almost historic Schools in Sydney of St. James,
which was carried on in Elizabeth Street; of St. Philip, of Christ
Church, and of St. Paul. The secular education was fairly equal
to that in the then Public Schools, but there was the additional
important advantage of daily religious instruction. In all Church
Schools the Bible held a high position.
Since the withdrawal of Government aid a few Primary
Schools have been kept on, but in a comparatively small way.
The Church, however, has largely availed herself of the right to
give religious instruction in the Public Schools, and in that matter
is an easy first.
Middlk Class Education.
Passing from primary education to the higher, we find that
the Church again did good work by Archdeacon Broughton
founding, in 1831, the King’s School at Parramatta. It has had a
most honourable history. Sydney College followed; but again the
Church did important work by the establishment by Bishop
Broughton of St. James’ Grammar School, Phillip Street, in 1839,
which took the place in Sydney that The King’s School held in
Parramatta. It lasted until late in the ’fifties, many of our leading
citizens were educated there, but it eventually gave place to the
Sydnev Grammar School. I must name, however, among others,


ihe Holy Trinity Grammar School at Dulwich Hill and Barker
College near Hornsby .; and for girls, Abbotsleigh at Wahroonga.
In the country towns the Armidale Grammar School, All Saints’
College, Bathurst; and also at Bathurst, the Marsden
College for Girls. All help to show how strong the Church is
as to secondary education. I might say very much more on the
whole matter. In fact, there are other Church Grammar Schools
that I might touch on, such as the North Shore Grammar School,
and the Girls’ Grammar School, but lack of space forbids. A
point is that, as the University was not opened until 1853, the
Cranbrook King’s School and St. James’ Grammar School in
some measure made up then for the higher education it later on
provided. In middle class education for boys our Church has
done'far more than the State. We do not forget the State High
Schools of the later days.
The Battee against Secueiarism.
I loyally accept the present Education Act, and do not now
advocate its repeal. It is a compromise. There is religious
instruction of a non-sectarian kind by the teachers in our excellent
Public Schools, and the ministers of all denominations have the
legal right of entry to teach children of their own Churches at
certain hours. Christian men in other States, where they have a
hard and deadly secularism, envy the New South Wales com-
promise. In Victoria, I am informed, the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ was struck out of the reading books.
But who gained this compromise? Unquestionably, the
Church of England. The long struggle on behalf of the religious
teaching of our children is one of the most heroic in our annals.
Bishop Broughton courageously, entered into the conflict. In fact,
on the very day that he landed in Sydney as Bishop he inter-
viewed the Governor to urge that a proposal, adverse to the Bible
in the schools, should be abandoned. He said that he wanted the
whole Bible in the day schools, and not a Bible on which there
could be neither note nor comment. When he died, it was with
his face to the foe. Bishop Barker ably kept the flag flying, and all
through his episcopate of 27 years his time was embittered by the
conflict, but he never flinched. In at least two general elections,
the question was the leading issue. Some of his ablest addresses
were on behalf of the children, and when he spoke the whole
country seemed to listen. It was by his statesmanship and excep-
tional influence that the loss of our schools was so long post-
poned, and the compromise reached. The cause of schools con-
nected with any Church had become unpopular, chiefly because
of an indiscreet Pastoral on education issued in 1879 by the
Roman Catholic Bishops, which deeply offended thousands, but
10


he and many who fought with him were fearless in the battle. A
writer has said that “to back an unpopular opinion is the finest
hardihood in the world.”
I readily admit that the main fight was round the denomina-
tional schools. The Church of Rome strove for hers with all
her might, and preferred, if she could not have grants in aid, that
the Public Schools should be absolutely secular. Our Church,
however, in pleading for her Day Schools, was waging the war
against secularism all along the line. The need of teaching the
children in school the Christian faith was ever strongly empha-
sized, and in the very forefront. The Bible, or, in other words,
its principles, was proved to be a great necessity for the land.
One of our country clergymen especially wrote many letters to
the press, published later in a 47-page pamphlet. He was quoted
in both Houses of Parliament, and by “The Sydney Morning
Herald” in a leader. Bishop Barker, in a great public meeting,
urged people to read what he had said. Others of our clergy
helped in various ways. Organizations such as the “Bible Com-
bination,” led by Canon Robert flaylor, that held at least one
memorable public meeting out of many, were all helping to kill
secularism. The result was the existing compromise which meets
with so much favour, and is spoken of with so much thankfulness.
A combination of forces, however, were arrayed against the
Church, including that of infidelity and unbelief, and the rancour
of the sectarian strife raised was of the worst description. We
may well thank God for more peaceful and loving days. The
present Act was born of strife.
The State now spends large sums in educating the people,
and the days of utter neglect have passed. In the main it is due
to the action of our own and other Churches, in ever strongly
emphasising from the pulpit, the platform, and in the press, the
duty of educating the children of the country. They so educated
public opinion that in time it was reflected in the Parliament. I
claim that the great work the State now does must historically
be traced home chiefly to that source.
Surely the Church of England should be gratefully remem-
bered for the great part she played in the struggle. Was it not
a national work, and of the highest kind? But after all it was
simple duty, and to that she was heroically loyal. Does not the
Word of God say, “And these words which I command thee this
day .... thou shalt teach them diligently to thy children” 7 Was
not the work helping to realise the desire of the psalmist, when
he said: “That our sons may be as plants grown up in their
youth; that our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after
the similitude of a palace” ?


Moral Reform.
Ctne work in which the Church has taken the leading part in
New South Wales has been in raising the people, morally, to a
higher level so that they compare not unfavourably with those in
other lands. It is righteousness that exalteth a nation. The
truest interests of any country are the happy homes built on love,
integrity, and reverence, or, in other words, on Christian prin-
ciples. The present Bishop of London has said that Christianity
is the basis of our civilisation.” Its negation means anarchy,
revolution, and death; its acceptance, order, peace, and life.
No reader of Colonial history can shut his eyes to the troubles
of our early days. Up to 1840, when transportation ceased, while
a host of free settlers came here, no less than 59,000 convicts
arrived. Previous to 1788 the prisoners had been sent to what is
now the United States. The offences were sometimes political,
often trivial, but often again quite the reverse. I will not, how-
ever, dwell upon this unpleasant point.
One writer says of the beginning of the century: —“The state
of morals was utterly depraved —oaths and ribaldry, and auda-
cious lying were universal. Marriage, and the sacred ties of
domestic life, were almost unknown, and those, who from their
station should have set an example to the convicts and settlers,
encouraged sin in others by the effrontery of their own trans-
gressions,”
By proclamation parties were warned in 1817 to travel be-
tween Sydney and Parramatta only by daylight, because of the
number of robbers. A writer said of 1821 that for one to pass
near the Rocks in Sydney after dark there was “The hazard, or
rather certainty, cf being stripped and plundered....” There is more
than one incident of a sale of a wife by auction.”
When the first Cowper arrived in 1809, his son, the late
Dean, says that “he discovered the moral state of the population
was to a large extent painfully low. . . . There were numbers
living without any sense of shame in a state of concubinage, with-
out having gone through any kind of marriage ceremony.” The
father’s own words were, however, much stronger as to what he
called the “unblushing concubinage.” Governor Macquarie, a
little later, wrote of “the total disregard to the common decencies
of civilized life.”
Intemperance.
The young Colony was suckled with rum. That potent spirit
was long a common measure of value, and generally used as such
instead of money —that is, things were bought and paid for in
rum. For instance, Sergeant-Major Whittle sold a house to
Governor Macquarie for 200 gallons of rum. A hospital was
12


built in Sydney, long known as the Rum Hospital, the builders
having received a certain monopoly of the spirit in payment for
the work. One of the chief causes of the rebellion that brought
about the downfall of Governor Bligh was his interference with
the distillers.
Intemperance was, therefore, frightfully common. No tongue
could describe the drunken orgies and consequent brutalities. Even
in the thirties and forties the convictions for drunkenness in the
Sydney Police Court were extraordinarily high, and the ruin of
home life was terribly frequent.
Matters gradually improved, but a dislocation of society arose
in the fifties through the discovery of gold. Hundreds of thous-
ands came from the homeland, some of the best, but often the
prodigal and the ne’er-do-weel. Through those on the diggings
the drink bill assumed quite romantic proportions. There was a
new Australia.
Bushranging.
The interior, as it was opened up, soon presented a great
difficulty, and bushranging was common. In 1854, The Empire,
the daily paper edited by the late Sir Henry Parkes, said; “Sly
grog-sellers and horse-stealers abound in the mountainous country
in the Carcoar district. The place lies between Goulburn and
Bathurst, and is the ‘centre depot’ where the horse-thieves meet
and exchange stolen animals, those taken from Bathurst being sent
to Goulburn, and vice versa. Mobs of ten and twenty are driven
off runs. In such cases their destination is the Ovens or Mel-
bourne, and sometimes Sydney. The small bodies of constables,
foot and mounted, are quite inadequate to break up the gang, and
the mounted patrols are wholly applied to the service of preventing
crimes on the high roads. No small wonder that so many sly-
grog shops abound in the mountainous country; the sly grog-
sellers and the horse-stealers ‘work into one another’s hands.’ ”
In the ’sixties the bushranging assumed its most historic
form, and reached its final stage. Gardiner, Ben Hall and others
roved about the country, chiefly between Bathurst and Goulburn
and westward to the Weddin Mountains, and were a terror to
thousands. But what enabled them to escape capture for so long
a time, was, unquestionably, the sympathy with them that existed.
It was said that the country swarmed with “bush telegraphs” to
tell when the police were near. Thus, while Sydney and the
towns had improved, the remote parts were an especial trouble.
It was, therefore, in uncongenial soil the Church had to work, but
the greater the difficulties the more glorious the victories.
13


How the Change Came.
We have still very much to grieve over, but we are not now
worse than other English speaking peoples. How has the great
change been made? The answer is “Mainly by the work of the
Church.” She was alone here in the early days to witness for
truth and righteousness, and all through her numerical position
has given her an especial influence. Her ministers constantly
raised their voices against the vices of the day, and the highest
in the land were not spared. The ten commandments read in her
services were continual reminders of the law of God, and of plain
duty. Johnson, by example and precept, rebuked wrong and
preached the principles of Jesus Christ as the panacea for the ills
of suffering humanity. Marsden’s fame as a reformer and worker
on behalf of purer lives reached the Mother Country, and William
Wilberforce described him as a “moral hero.” ’ The first Cowper
with no unsparing rhetoric denounced sin and nobly stood amidst
the immorality, drunkenness and general profligacy of the Sydney
of that day for a straight and honourable life, with the marriage
bed undefiled. He married no less than 187 couples at St. Philips
in the year after his arrival, which was altogether out of propor-
tion to the population. That the men named and others later on
so fought that in time the better self was seen among the people
is beyond question. They were the leaders in this and in awaken-
ing the public conscience. Mr. James Bonwick, one of the most
copious writers on our early history, has said that the happy
transformation was to be attributed to Christian teaching.
As to intemperance, all must agree that matters have vastly
changed for the better, and that our Church has had a very
important share in the work.
As to the bushranging, all denominations did something, but
the work of our Church in the sixties was of especial moment.
Clergymen of the diocese of Goulburn, such as the late Dean
Pownall and some others did active pastoral work over hundreds
of miles of country that the outlaw's terrorised. On the Bathurst
side, then in the Sydney Diocese, such men as the Rev. Joseph
Barnier (wdro had charge of the Lachlan River), Rev. Canon
John Vaughan, of O’Connell, Rockley and the Fish River; the
Rev. W. F. B. Uzzell, of Carcoar; the Rev. Henry Langley (later
Bishop of Bendigo), of country near Bathurst, and some others
all worked with remarkable energy and genuine success. The
point in this connection is that their labours among the settlers in
the then back block destroyed the sympathy with the bushrangers.
The residents recognised that it was riot commonly respectable to
connive with them, and that the right thing was to respect the
14


law. The trouble ended. I well remember an old resident of the
outer part of the Bathurst district, a man who did not belong to
our Church, telling me that Mr. Langley had done more good than
fifty policemen.
There were other forces for good at work, no doubt. Other
denominations must be remembered. The Government did some-
thing, but in the nature of the case its efforts were nuga-
tory. It is hard to make men moral by Act of Parliament. A
great writer has said: “The trouble is not with your leaders, but
with yourselves. The true reform of any nation must begin and
end in the hearts of the people, and until it does begin there, and
proceed from there, and return there, no change of officers or
parties will greatly affect conditions for the better.” The raising
the standard of the Lord Jesus Christ and the appeal to the heart
as well as to the head were evidently the main roads to reform.
It has been something to have had in communities from the
very beginning of our history a scholarly Christian gentleman,
such as the average Church of England clergyman has been, mix-
ing freely with the people, and pointing them to a high ideal.
Ministers are but human, and while they have had their weak-
nesses, it is morally certain that their influence has been immense
on behalf of law, order, truth, righteousness, and mercy. Nor
must the invaluable work of clergymen’s wives be forgotten. The
fruit is of many kinds, but it is especially in the thousands of
happy homes to-day of God-fearing parents, and in the purer
lives and sweeter manners that now prevail.
The; Church and Labour.
Passing on, the Church, further, has set forth the principle
of justice between the employer and employed. St. Paul’s words,
“Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal’
knowing that ye also have a Master in Heaven,” have been often
kept to the front. James McGowen, long a most trusted Labour
leader and some time Premier, was for 35 years the Superintendent
of one of the Church’s greatest Sunday Schools in Sydney. It is
by the proclamation of true principles that reforms come, and
better aims prevail. The education of public opinion is of vital
consequence in any movement for the welfare of the people, and
without it statesmen are powerless to act. Clergy have advocated
earlier hours of closing shops and shorter hours of labour. They
have fought against sweating. Men almost unconsciously very
often drink in the principle and hold it, only to shine forth with
brilliancy at a later stage and become the great force that opposes
all unjust conditions of labour on either side. While, therefore,
15


the Church has been enunciating the principles of the Lord Jesus
Christ, she has been educating men on the true and only lines on
which labour troubles can ever be rightly solved.
The Sense of Compassion.
The Church, again, has ever taught the duty of compassion,
and materially aided to implant in the hearts of the people the
spirit of charity for the suffering and downtrodden. In a broad-
minded way her clergy and people have led and joined in forming
Societies with benevolent aims, especially hospitals, and usually
free from all sectarian bias. Remembering their numerical posi-
tion, they might easily, like the Roman Catholic Church which
has its own St. Vincent’s Hospital, have done otherwise and
worked among themselves. But with a liberal policy they have
fostered brotherhood under one banner in carrying out the prin-
ciples inculcated in the parable of the Good Samaritan, and have
rejoiced in uniting with all to aid those of any or no creed in the
hour of darkness and distress. The present readiness to help the
poor and especially the sick is largely due to her teaching. Was
not the feeling very different in the old times here a
hundred years ago when the lash was in constant use t
The spread of the feeling of compassion, as seen in that
and other movements, is one of the signs of the increased
influence of Christianity, and of the growth of a leading principle
taught by our Lord Jesus Christ. The pulpits of our Church
have commonly been clear on that duty, and not a few have said
with Drummond that love was the greatest thing in the world.
A writer aptly says, “The seed time of the past is the harvest of
to-day.”
Briefly, the work of our Church has told. Her efforts were
not merely by preaching in her parishes that covered the occupied
land, or by education in the Day Schools, but by Sunday Schools,
by other Church organizations of an uplifting tendency, and by
house to house visitation. “For precept must be upon precept,
precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little
and there a little.” To rightly judge we must try to survey her
work as a whole.
The Old Ace Pensions.
One of our clergymen started a movement early in 1895 to
obtain pensions from the Government for the aged poor. He
had been deeply touched by seeing the serious want and suffering
among them. To him it was pitiable that many old men and
women were constantly begging about and were penniless. Before
the time named his voice had been raised on their behalf. A
16


long letter of his, in which he went into the whole question,
appeared from his pen in “The Daily Telegraph” of 9th Septem-
ber, 1895. He followed by appeals for the aged in other
journals.
Mr. J. C. Neild, M.L.A., soon after brought the question
before Parliament, but without success.
Early in the next year the same clergyman called a public
meeting in the city to form an Old Age Pension League, and paid
the expenses out of his own pocket, soon to be refunded him.
Sir Arthur Renwick was elected President. Most useful work
was done. The agitation went on for five years, and the clergy-
man referred to worked zealously all through. Almost at the
end of 1900 the Lyne Government pushed a bill through Parlia-
ment that provided the pensions—the victory was won ! It was
in the last weeks of the century, and it was said that it fittingly
crowned the work of a period famous for humanitarian advance.
Victoria immediately followed the Mother State.
In 1919 the Commonwealth gave about £4,000,000 to the
cause.
The Law later became Federal, and old poor and needy
people now receive £1 pension per week each, and some comfort
and sunshine are thrown into their lives.
The same clergyman ardently worked for Invalid Pensions
until the law was passed.
Some Incidents.
But it is no part of my present object to write a history of our
Church. I hope that an abler pen will some day do her the
justice which has been so far lacking. There are, however, some
points which help to ennoble her, and which on her Anniversary
Day may well be remembered.
It was a memorable day when Samuel Marsden sailed from
Sydney on the first of his seven missionary voyages to New
Zealand. Among the notable services in history, was that on
Christmas Day, 1814, when he held the first service in that
country, and preached to Maoris, who were cannibals, from the
text “Behold, I bring you glad tidings.” The marvellous triumphs
of the Gospel in those early days in New Zealand are those of
New South Wales. By 1828 cannibalism had ceased there, which
was a practical indication of an uplifting of humanity. But,
far better, many souls had been won for Christ. Now a stained
glass window in the Cathedral in Auckland calls him “The Apostle
of New Zealand.”
17


I think of the long and lonely journeys of the saintly Bishop
Broughton, and at a time when there were no railways and when
roads were only tracks and there were no bridges. I picture him
at Sofala on the Turon in the early and rough days of the gold-
fields, working for the building of a Church. He held a meeting
at six in the morning and urged the diggers to do the work, and,
seizing a pick, he dug the hole at the north-west corner for the
first post. Many picks were at once lowered from shoulders, and
before breakfast half the holes were made. Within four days, he
often helping in the labour, the building was erected, and he, get-
ting up to the top of the gable, nailed on it a cross, the glorious
symbol of our faith.
I can think again of Bishop Tyrrel and his weary journeys,
and his readiness to walk. His 20 mile walk home to Morpeth
after landing at Newcastle from his four months’ island voyage
with the great Bishop Selwyn was only significant of the man.
Is there physical degeneracy in the men of to-day 7 Thinking
of walking, the mind reverts to Samuel Marsden, who would
preach in Sydney in the morning, and would sometimes walk along
the old Parramatta Road the 14 miles to preach at St. John’s,
Parramatta, in the evening.
I think of Bishop Barker in his last visit to the west as
Bishop, being out over twelve weeks with much of the journeying
on horseback and much hardship. The railway was only to Mount
Victoria. Is not travelling as to the main roads absolutely differ-
ent now? I can picture him, for instance, in the course of that
visit preaching at the Trunkey goldfield, then new, at the edge of
the Abercrombie Mountains, to rough diggers that crowded a
Church built and opened before any public house at the place,
although nine had been begun at the same time. His eloquent
voice with which he glorified Christ and urged faith in Him and
consequent duty to men was heard there, and in those twelve
weeks in dozens of other centres.
I can think of the clergyman who in 1874 was sent out as
Organising Missioner to the distant River Darling. He was to
conduct services where possible, and arrange for the stipends of
ministers it was proposed to station there. He held numerous ser-
vices, and successfully accomplished the purpose as to finance. He
rode on horseback through to Bourkewhen all vehicular traffic was
stopped because of the flooded country, and in the course of
the two months occupied he covered in the saddle nearly 2,000
miles. Finding that by pushing he could give a brief time at the
new town of Cobar, he rode 160 miles to it in two days —using
18


three horses and camping in the night at Byrock, forty miles from
am’ house, with a blackfellow who was guiding him through, the
bush. The track, where there was a track, had been from Bre-
warrina, via Gongolgon and Tindarry. The foundation stone of
a Church was laid at Bourke, then 300 miles from any Protestant
place of worship. This was many years before the railway
was built.
The days are probably passed, through the building of bridges,
in which clergymen had sometimes to swim flooded creeks, and
even rivers. Five of our men were drowned in the ardent endeav-
ours to do the duty of their office. On the other hand, the perils
of drought cannot be forgotten. The average minister in New
South Wales, I do not speak of exceptions, has been a hard
working and self-denying earnest man, having no high stipend,
and his manifold labours the last day will declare to the glory
of God.
St. Andrew’s Day, 1868, is one to be remembered as that in
which the Cathedral in Sydney was opened. The structure re-
presented a generation of patient effort, and, included in the
£60,000 that it cost, self-denial on the part of a host of Church
people in offerings acceptable and pleasing to God.
It is a pleasant and beautiful memory in Sydney—the min-
istry of the two Cowpers—devout, with plenty of brain power,
and scholarly, covering in the lives of father and his second son
92 years. The father began work in 1809, when the City had
only 5,000 souls; when the son died it had risen to 500,000. 1
venture to think that no other two lives are more closely identified
with the history of the great City in its best and highest aspects.
I may add that the eldest son, Sir Charles Cowper, was five times
Premier of New South Wales.
Advanced Church Government.
Ascending from detail and incidents to matters of Church
statemanship, I notice wise and far seeing action in the self-
government provided the Church. The Synods, instituted in
1866, are Church Parliaments with comprehensive legal powers.
They were from the first elected on a franchise of “one man one
vote,” and it was not for years after that citizens were accorded
a similar franchise in choosing their State Parliaments. In 1895,
the Provincial Synod widened the suffrage by giving a vote to
every woman, again before the State had made legal the right of
women to vote. If the same powers of self-government had
existed in England it has been said that the separations from her
would never have been. The Church again long preceded the
19


States in the matter of Federation. Through the genius of Bishop
Barker, the General Synod was established in 1872, embracing
representatives from all Australia and Tasmania, and thus feder-
ating all the Dioceses; but it was not until 1901 the federation
of the States was consummated and the Commonwealth formed.
On these important matters was not the Church more than
abreast of the times? Instead of following, did she not lead?
Spiritual Work.
I have assumed all through that the chief work of the Church
—the Spiritual—has been done. She would be wholly unworthy
of her name and ancestry, and a traitor to our Lord Jesus Christ,
had she troubled about better conditions of life and neglected the
salvation of the souls of men for whom He died. I have thought
in this paper rather of the national work, than that for the
individual. Indeed, time would fail me to tell of the victories
achieved by the preaching of the Cross from that to crowds in the
metropolis to the isolated settlers in the distant back blocks. There
is possibly no clergyman of experience who could not speak of
men and women whom he had known who had by early training
led holy and consistent lives in the fear of God, and in love for
Christ, and were faithful unto the end. He could tell of those,
again, whose hearts the Lord had touched when living in a careless
and worldly way, and who, saved by faith, became zealous and
most useful Christians. He could recount how young men, poor
prodigals, snared by drink and immoral women, had been changed
and raised from the slough of despond to become followers of
Christ and faithful witnesses to the truth. He could speak of
deathbeds of many who were simply trusting the Saviour, that
were so calm and peaceful, and, again, so joyous and triumphant
that the loosing of the silver cord plainly meant a glorious entrance
into the inheritance of the saints in light. What one minister of
Christ could tell, when multiplied by the experience of hundreds
of earnest men, most of whose names are nearly forgotten on
earth, would show a great host of people of New South Wales,
who, having washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb, were
now for ever resting in the home beyond. One notable thing the
Church has done in this land certainly has been to faithfully
preach the Gospel to the people, and with a most blessed result.
While her work has been of a many-sided kind, that of the
spiritual life of the people has ever been in the very forefront.
Conclusion —138TH Anniversary.
I have narrated matters connected with the ever memorable
first service in this land, and referred to many affairs in the work
20


of our Church in the 138 years of her history. Ido not for a
moment pretend to have said all, or nearly all, that deserves to be
better known by Church people. Her educational work and the
moral change she so largely participated in causing to stand out
conspicuously and honourably, as well as other matters, each of
no small importance. These, when taken together, show that she
has played a great part in the making of Australia. I have
spoken of the arduous nature of the work, and of the zeal mani-
fested, and I now desire to say a few words in conclusion.
Thankfupnuss.
I think that at the coming 138th anniversary of the planting
of our Church here, there may well be a deep feeling of thankful-
ness to God for His goodness. Was not the first public gathering
on this Continent one to worship Him, and why the Bible and
our Prayer Book were used ? The Church, no doubt, has not done
all that ought to have been done, but that her work has been great,
and a blessing has been very evident. To begin in a new land
with the first use of our beautiful and inimitable Prayer Book
under “a great tree” in the bush, and to think of the wonderful
change by the extension of her work in the cities and the scores
of towns and country places, all testifying to the devotion, faith,
and self-sacrifice of her sons and daughters, may well cause us to
exclaim in thankfulness, “What hath God wrought ?” When, too,
we review the history of the periods and observe the hard and
difficult times through which she had to work and witness, we may
well again lift up our hearts in gratitude to the Everlasting
Father for His tender care and never-failing aid.
We may thank God also that the land we live in and love
has had so noble an institution within its borders working all
through its history in its vast net work of parishes for home and
humanity; one, too, that ever cared for the children and stood
for high ideals of purity, integrity, honour and charity.
Anniversary Sunday, therefore, should be joyfully celebrated.
It should be an Australian Church History Sunday; a day of
thanksgiving. The memory of Richard Johnson and the little
band of worshippers under that great tree on that summer day
in 1788, with all the blessing since, may well cause us to thank
God “with hearts, and hands, and voices.”
A handsome -memorial in stone was erected in 1925 at the site of the first
church built in Sydney, in 1793. It also commemorates the holding elsewhere of
the first service, in 1788. The place is at the corner of Hunter and Bligh Streets.
21


The; Present.
Present duties naturally arise to the mind. The faithfulness
and courage of the past must be maintained for the forces against
Christianity are subtle and powerful. We must be watchful and
stand fast in the faith, qutting ourselves like true men, and daring,
no matter what the opposition, to keep all our flags flying. As
members of the ancient and historic Church of the English we
should bravely endeavour to forward the principles in the two
books that are still preserved, that Richard Johnson brought
with him, believing that in them we learn of the great salvation
from sin through our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the means
whereby humanity can be enriched in the noblest ways. While
heartily welcoming new lines of thought and action, not out of
harmony with truth, we might well remember, in the noise and
distraction of controversy, the words of the prophet: “Stand ye
in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the
good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls.”
Let us be aggressive. We should do what is possible to
conquer the weaknesses and vices of to-day. There is a miserable
and ignorant God-dishonouring and soul-destroying indifferentism
very common, and which ought to be battled with until killed.
There are thousands who will not admit themselves to be un-
believers, but yet live as such and do not care, ever ignoring God.
We should show these men their terrible danger, and awaken them
to their plain duty to their Heavenly Father and themselves.
There is again the “trinity of evil” to be fought, in the
impurity, the intemperance, and the gambling of the day. Do
not the improvements, and, indeed, triumphs of the past in this
State as to the two first encourage us to march hopefully forward.
While much has been accomplished, there remains an extensive
field yet to be possessed, and men and women should strive
against these and other ills for complete victory.
The Future.
As to the future, we know that it is with God. We should
attempt great things, however, for Him, and the heroism, and
much more is wanted in Church life, will be acceptable to Him and
inspiring to others. A friend writes: “Set your heart on the
high thing, and all the lesser will be served. The effort will be
full of pleasure, and the pursuit will make you strong.” Let us
go forward without fear, with brave hearts, and with enthusiasm,
22


for our God will be with us as in the past in this land, and will
ever bless our faithful labours. With love for men of other
Creeds may we endeavour then to cause our English Church more
than ever to shine forth in the strenuous years to come as a
witness for “the truth as it is in Jesus,” to the glory of His Great
Name, and for the saving of precious souls for whom He died.
Milton’s words should appeal to us:
“Argue not
Against Heaven’s hand or will, nor bate a jot
Of heart-or hope, but still bear up, and steer
Right onward.”
St. Paul’s Rectory,
Sydney,
First Edition, January, 1905.
Second Edition, January, 1926.
23




