

DO FOR AUSTRALIA?
nO V “ Then towns he quicken’d by mechanic arts,
A. ' Vv • And bade the fervent city glow with toil;
Bade social commerce raise renowned marts,
; \ Join land to land, and marry soil to soil,
Unite the poles, and without bloody spoil
,4 Bring home of either Ind the gorgeous stores
Or, should despotic rage the world embroil,
SS: . Bade tyrants tremble on remotest shores,
Oi J j While o’er th’ encircling deep Britannia’s thui
SAT ’ THOMSON
And bade the fervent city glow with toil;
Bade social commerce raise renowned marts.
Join land to land, and marry soil to soil,
Bring home of either Ind the gorgeous stores:
Bade tyrants tremble on remotest shores.
While o’er th’ encircling deep Britannia’s thunder roars.”
THOMSON’S CASTLE OF INDOLENCE
¥ rl
I
I
J By JOSEPH ROBERT MORRISON, Esq
\
Third Edition.
LONDON:
EFFINGHAM WILSON, PUBLISHER,
11, ROYAL EXCHANGE.
1851.
Price One Shilling.
.WHAT SHOULD THE GOVERNMENT




DEDICATED BY PERMISSION
SIR EDWARD NORTH BUXTON, BART., M.P
WHOSE NAME AS WELL AS THAT OF HIS ILLUSTRIOUS FATHER,
IS SO HONOURABLY ASSOCIATED WITH THE CAUSE OF
HUMAN PROGRESS AND SOCIAL AMELIORATION,
HIS HUMBLE AND OBLIGED SERVANT
Philpnt Lane.. London,
Dec. 3,1851
\
J. 1?. MORRISON.




WHAT SHOULD THE GOVERNMENT DO
FOR AUSTRALIA?
INTRODUCTION.
We are induced to give publicity to the following thoughts,
in consequence of the failure, or at all events doubtlul
issue, of certain means which were taken, with the view of
promoting Emigration to Australia. At a late meeting of
the Committee of the New South Wales and Van Diemens
Land Mercantile Association, we called attention to the
short supply of labour in the Colonies hitherto, and which,
from the Gold Discoveries, is likely to be more felt than
ever; to the inadequacy and unsuitablcness of the regulations
under which free passages are at present granted; and to
the propriety of encouraging the emigration of married
couples with young families. Our views were unanimously
concurred in, and, in conjunction with Stephen Kennard,
Esq., of Austin Friars, we were deputed to confer with the
Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners on the subject.
We, accordingly, had two interviews with their honourable
Secretary, to whom we suggested the expediency of greatly
relaxing the conditions under which free passages have


heretofore been offered to the labouring classes, in considera-
tion of the altered circumstances of our Australian Colonies.
Suffice it to say, without going into detail, that we were
courteously received and respectfully listened to, and that
Mr. Walcott seemed quite to appreciate the danger to which
the pastoral and other interests are, at the present moment,
exposed. But, on the other hand, he reminded us that the
existing schedule of regulations had been sanctioned by the
Colonists themselves; that neither he nor the Board had
any power to alter them; and that they were at all times
ready to carry out official instructions from the other side.
We replied, that if the Commissioners were incompetent of
themselves to adopt all or any of our suggestions, Lord Grey
could enable them to do so; that, although we should never
think of trespassing on the valuable time of an Imperial
Secretary for the Colonies on a mere question of detail, it
would be quite in order for him (Mr. Walcott) to recom-
mend the alterations referred to, and we had no doubt, that
thus brought under his Lordship’s notice, they would get
his immediate sanction; that, although in ordinary cases it
was well to wait instructions from the Colonies, emergencies
required prompt measures; and that, in present circum-
stances, the representations of such a body as the New South
Wales and Van Diemen’s Land Mercantile Association, all
of whose members were largely connected with Australia,
and whose every pulsation was in unison with Colonial
interests and feelings, might be regarded as amply justifying
some deviation from the beaten track. Mr. Walcott’s faith
in his rubric, however, seemed but little shaken; and from
the way in which a case has since been dealt with, to which
we shall afterwards more fully allude, we fear the same
policy as hitherto will be pursued. The truth is, the great
virtues of Government Boards are clock-work regularity and


mathematical exactness, and however well these are in their
place, they are the least likely to give way to any innovation,
except such as comes from the fountain-head; and the
instinctive abhorrence which official men have for any-
thing like personal responsibility is quite proverbial. But
if the officially-expressed wishes of the Colonies must be
waited for before anything new is done to further Emigration
to Australia, the greatest tyro in Colonial matters may esti-
mate the probable mischief which will thence ensue.
The uncertain result of our efforts in the cause of
Emigration having led our minds to the more general
question of “ What should the Government do for Aus-
tralia ? ” we shall consider Australia as it was before the
recent Gold Discoveries, the injurious effects which these
are likely to have on the other interests of the Australian
Colonies, and the closer ties which should now subsist
between the mother country and those distant possessions.
Our first section will embrace the three topics referred to,
and, by persons not hitherto versed in Australian affairs, it
will be read with interest. Parties already connected with
the Colonies may pass at once to the second section, which
alone contains anything peculiar or original, and relates
exclusively to Emigration.


■


WHAT SHOULD THE'GOVERNMENT DO
FOR AUSTRALIA?
SECTION I.
Much as we have hitherto been indebted to our Australian
Colonies, their importance is only beginning to develop
itself. As an outlet to our surplus population, as an extend-
ing market for British manufactures, and as supplying the
staple to one of our leading branches of industry, they are
already well appreciated. But their capability in all these
respects is in reality only dawning upon us. The population
of Australia, exclusive of New Zealand, is just now about
400,000 souls, and its increase during the last ten years has
been about 100 percent. But, notwithstanding this ratio of
augmentation, the Australian continent is not yet fringed
with even a pastoral population, and its interior has been
only partially surveyed. Our imports thence were, last
year, three-and-a-quarter millions sterling, and our exports
thither between two and three millions sterling. Australia
takes as much from us as the whole of our North American
Colonies, more than all our West Indian possessions, or four
times as much as the Cape. Another remarkable feature of
the Australian Colonies is the success, more or less, of all
who have settled in them, and the preference generally
evinced by those who have resided at the antipodes for the
land of their adoption over the mother country. All the
supplies of labour hitherto sent out have been insufficient
for the demand; pauperism is a thing unknown ; and the
constant cry is, “ Come over and help us !” We have been


much struck, however, with the circumstance, that although
labour has been in such request, Sydney, Van Diemen’s
Land, Port Philip, and South Australia have been so warm
and unanimous in their protest against the importation of
convicts. Indeed, from having been the last resort of our
refuse population, they are now colonised by the flower of
the country; and what was the punishment of crime, is now
the reward and appropriate field for industrious merit. But
we are now entering on a new experience of these valued
possessions, and our prognostications regarding their loyalty,
advancing morals, and regular prosperity, are likely to be
at fault, unless decisive measures are promptly adopted by
the English Government to avert the threatened crisis. We
allude to their auriferous history which, although of recent
origin, is deeply significant.
On the 3rd of September, it was ushered in by the
Times ’ City Article telling us of gold having been found
in the Sydney district, not only in grains, but in lumps,
and that there was no doubt the quantity would keep
pace with the judicious employment of capital in suitable
machinery, and on the day following, the powerful
writer of the leader department rushed in “ res medias'.'
Many wondered at his temerity, and contrasted it with his
zeal previously, in counter-working impostures and dispelling
illusions. Others thought that his vaticinations, although
sonorous, were cautiously framed, and that, much as they
were calculated to excite the imagination, he might after-
wards mock the disappointment which he had wrought.
But how far his prophetic sagacity was to be depended on,
the sequel will show. As if assuming all that has since
transpired, he chastised the Government for not granting
us steam communication, and took care to remind them
that the Colonial Legislature had no jurisdiction over the
Crown lands, or any revenue therefrom. Cloud- compelling
Jove, moreover, as if he had had in retrospect, or knew by
virtue of electric wires stretching from Bathurst to Printing-
house Square, what has since burst upon our view, legisla-
tively remarked, that Australia, as an auriferous country, had


the advantage of California, in having teen previously settled
by civilised Anglo-Saxons ; that the scene of our penal colo-
nisation must be transferred to another quarter ; and that the
diggings were likely to beat Sir William Molesworth s elo-
quence, and all the efforts of the Anti-Convict League.
On the 11th, we heard that considerable quantities of gold
and gold-dust were waiting at Bathurst for transmission
with military escort, to Sydney, and that the discoverer,
when in California, had been so much struck with its
geological resemblance to the Australian wilderness he had
left, that he was induced to return to it. And by the same
opportunity we received an elaborate report by the Rev.
Mr. Clark, asserting that gold was abundant, not only
in one locality, but all over the mountains which belt
the Australian continent. And with regard to actual
findings, the following incidents from a series of jottings,
from the Times newspaper, will speak for themselves:—One
individual had got, as his share of an adventure, with five
others, £2,000, and £20,000 was said to have been gathered
in all. One lump is next found, ounces, almost entirely
virgin gold, which was called, the Goliath of the Australian
Diggings, being forsooth the largest piece ever found on
British ground. But events thicken as we proceed ; truth
becomes more wonderful than fiction; and Arabian Nights’
Entertainments are thrown into the shade. The abundance
of gold is no longer a scientific inference, but a great fact,
and the casual windfall is now recognised by the Colonial
Government, as not only a rising interest, but one which
threatens to swallow up all others, and to absorb the thews
and sinews, not only of the Sydney district, but of the
neighbouring colonies. A royalty of thirty shillings per
month is cheerfully paid by each digger to the Government.
Mr. Hargreaves, the original discoverer of the gold mines,
is rewarded with a present of £SOO, an appointment of
£350 per annum, and two horses to continue his explora-
tions. Several lumps of gold are found in one hole, weigh-
ing 106 lbs., which were sold for £4,160 ; and the amount
actually exported is said to amount to about £70,000.


With such a series of’tidings as these, not only confirm-
ing, but surpassing each other, and which it were fatiguing
to the imagination to follow out farther, it seems as if we
should he contradicting the obvious inferences of every-day
experience, were we to doubt that the yield of Australian
gold will be equal to that of California, whose exports last
year amounted to twelve millions sterling, and are estimated
this year to exceed that amount by three millions sterling.
Whatever difference of opinion exists as to the probable
effects of these discoveries on the character and habits of
Australian colonists, no one ventures to affirm that in
the precious metal our antipodal possessions will fall short
of California. It seriously behoves us, therefore, to con-
sider the moral bearing of this new feature on our
brethren in the Colonies, and how it will affect those
pursuits which have hitherto engendered their wealth,
Lawyers deserted by their clerks, shopkeepers by their
apprentices, gentlemen by their servants, ships by their
crews, and flocks by their shepherds, indicate a state of
things which may well alarm the statesman, the merchant,
and the philanthropist. With the nomadic habits of gold
hunters we naturally associate in our minds every species
of vice and crime. True, indeed, the auriferous history
of Australia has been inaugurated by an Anglo-Saxon race,
not only civilised, but enjoying religious privileges and
glorying in their subjection to the same laws as ourselves.
For this we thank God, and take courage. Another ray
of hope which gilds the future, is the united and deter-
mined opposition of all the Australian Colonies to the
introduction of convicts; and this, since these gold dis-
coveries, and while they were stinted in the supply of
labour. Nor can we forget that our Australian brethren
are largely imbued with the same business maxims and
feelings as obtain in London and throughout Lancashire
and Yorkshire. But while we have no reason to despair
of the character of England’s sons, in the remotest quarter
of the world, and subject to such influences as have already
ruined states, we feel we have a duty to perform; and we


know that by them our humble efforts to avert the threat-
ened crisis will be favourably appreciated. We are gratified
to see that the Colonial government are alive to the im-
portance of maintaining the supremacy of law, and of not al-
lowing the various interests of their territory to fall a common
sacrifice to what has hitherto proved a revolution-breeding
society-sundering and individual-isolating monster, wher-
ever it has raised its head. In heaven’s name, we wish
them success; and when Sir Charles Fitzroy returns to
England at the expiration of his period of office, may it
be not with the blood-stained honours of a warrior, but with
the God-like reputation of having saved a Colony from sui-
cide ; of having upheld the frame-work of society, and of
having preserved the integrity of the British character amidst
all the contaminating influences of immediate contact with
the mammon of unrighteousness ; and, in the meantime, we
devoutly hope, that the noble Secretary for the Colonies,
in Downing Street, will lose no time in affording the Co-
lonial Government the necessary assistance.
Last year, the supply of wool from our Australian Co-
lonies was about 130,000 bales, which may be valued at
.€2,600,000. Each bale may be taken to represent the
produce of about 100 sheep, and in the management of a
station, three men are generally allotted to each 1,200
sheep. This statement, loose though it be, serves to illus-
trate the jeopardy in which the pastoral interests of Aus-
tralia are placed by the attractions of the gold mines.
For every three men that go to the diggings, 1,200 sheep
are exposed to the tender mercies of the native dogs, and
thus may not only an annual value of £240 be lost, but
also the means of producing it. We say nothing of tallow,
which, although a leading article of export, is of secon-
dary importance, and must, to a certain extent, share the
same fate as the staple referred to. We have already
heard that the monster copper mines in South Australia
are threatened with a defection of hands; but on this head
wo are less fearful, as they can at all times offer high
inducements to workers, and the destruction of property


is not necessarily consequent on a lack of labour. But as
the thriving city of Adelaide owes its prosperity * chiefly
to their active operation, even a temporary suspension of
work would disastrously unsettle the habits of its popu-
lation. The trade of Australia with the South Sea Fisheries,
being at all times casual and uncertain, is of course regarded
with less anxiety, although it is desirable that her maritime
advantages should be cultivated. But while we plead for
means being taken to keep up the productiveness of the
various resources of Australia, instead of all her interests
being sacrificed to one, and that because the most syren-
like, the least elevating of all, we may be permitted to
observe that the pastoral wealth of Australia is capable of
indefinite expansion, and that much as flock-farmers have
hitherto prospered, the anticipated high range of prices
consequent on a large influx of gold, as well as a short
supply of wool, is likely to be as remunerative as ever,
if they are able to retain their hands. This is also an
encouragement to intending squatters and emigrant labourers.
We come now to the question of Steam Communication,
and we hold it to be a mockery of the exigencies of the
case, on the part of our Government, to advertise for tenders
for a two-monthly line of Screw Steamers to ply at the
rate of 8| knots an hour, and that it would be much
better, as the able writer of the Times' City Article says,
were they to abandon the Mail Contract system altogether,
as alike incommensurate, and tending to discourage com-
petition. If Government does interfere in the matter, they
should at any rate give us the benefit of the latest improve-
ments in steam and nautical science, instead of suggesting
merely the rate of speed accomplished by good sailing
vessels. And last year, when the Peninsular and Oriental
Company offered to carry the mails from Singapore to
Sydney for £105,000, with the benefit of the route from
Suez to Bombay, of which the East India Company have
at present the monopoly; we do not think they were justified
in breaking off the negociation because the latter was im-
practicable. The Peninsular and Oriental Company already


carry the mails to Singapore. Why not have offered them
some countervailing advantage? The present mail con-
tract with them expires in 1853, and that with the East
India Company for the service from Suez to Bombay in 1854.
Some temporary arrangement might surely have been come
to, and any sacrifice in the mean time might have been
redeemed at the period of our new agreements. Our
having steam from Panama and the Cape, were only
questions of time, probably not more than three or four
years; and these are weapons by which fair and reasonable
terms might be exacted from the two Companies referred
to. And if we had had to pay just now an extravagant
sum to the Peninsular and Oriental Company for carrying
the mails between Singapore and Sydney, that would have
been a trifling consideration compared with the great social
and commercial benefits which should thence have accrued.
It has been said that railways have done more for civili-
sation than monasteries; and we are certain that a less
niggardly economy in this matter would have been more
advantageous to England and her Colonies than a great
deal of what has been spent in the construction of ships of
war. The truth is, we are little in great things and great
in little. The question of steam communication with
Australia has been too exclusively viewed in a colonial and
mercantile light. And in these aspects it has assumed a
magnitude within the last few weeks of which we had no
previous conception. For now that we are threatened with
the extermination of half our Australian flocks, yielding to
the various parties concerned £1,300,000 ; this destruction
of property, if not entirely prevented, might at all events
have been arrested, if we had heard earlier of the gold
discoveries.
But what shall we say, when we view the binding of our
colonies to the mother country by closer and more endearing
ties as an imperial, a moral, and a religious question ? Is it not
one of world-wide interest? To say that its successful settle-
ment would facilitate commerce, would revive an abeyant
affection among the far-scattered members of families, and


speak a word in season to many a weary soul, is much
below “ the height of our great argument.” If not a realisa-
tion, it would at all events be a shadowy fulfilment of the
hopes of saints, martyrs, and confessors of bygone times,
and, in some degree, an answer to the prayers of millions
of Christians in our own day, for the levelling of moun-
tains, and the elevation of valleys, that the Lord’s glory
may be exalted, and that all flesh may see it together.
And yet twice has the cup of this great consummation been
dashed from our lips. The very last session, our Parliament
opposed the report of its own Committee on the subject.
What night-mare is this which thus deprives us of voluntary
motion ?
We all know that Lord Grey is an able and upright
statesman, with pure motives and noble alms. That he is
not a passive man, his conduct in reference to the Slave
Apprenticeship Bill, and his having not long ago prevented
the formation of a Whig Cabinet, abundantly prove.
What uncontrollable necessity now obstructs his path?
Which colleague absorbs his personality, or to what measure
is the one we advocate postponed ? Undoubtedly there are
outward circumstances, which we do not see at variance with
his own will; and we exhort the country, with one loud and
simultaneous cry on the subject, to strip it of all extraneous
difficulties, and thus enable Lord Grey to bring in the
time—
“ When man to man, the warld o’er,
Shall brothel’s be for a’ that.”
But, before leaving this subject, we cannot omit calling-
attention to the following suppressed memorial to the
Hon. Abbot Lawrence, the American Ambassador to our
Court. We extract it from the Sydney Morning Herald , of
the 12th of August:—
(Copy.)
“ London, March 1851.
“ Sir, —We are induced to address your Excellency under the
following circumstances, and at the request of a numerous body
of Australian colonists at present in England.


“ It is doubtless well-known to you, that for many years Aus-
tralia has earnestly entreated the Home Government to diminish,
by means of steam, the vast distance which separates her shores
from the mother country. For the attainment of this object, her
citizens have evinced no ordinary degree of interest and anxiety.
The colonial press teems with the subject, and the whole com-
munity has united in calling with one voice for the establishment
of a steam route. Impelled by the ardently expressed wishes of
of their constituents, the representative bodies of the different
colonies have addressed repeated memorials to the Crown, soli-
citing a boon long ago conceded to nearly every other British
colony. In support of these memorials, petitions from all the
large constituencies of Great Britain have been presented to Par-
liament, urging the accomplishment of this project, and intimat-
ing that political considerations now joined with the commercial
interests of the country, in forbidding any further procrastination.
“ Yielding at length to these remonstrances, her Majesty’s
Ministers, three years ago, officially admitted the necessity of
immediately extending accelerated means of intercourse to Aus-
tralia. Since then they have monthly, if not daily, held out
hopes to the public that they were on the point of establishing a
Mail Steam Communication between England and her colonies.
We grieve, however, to inform you, that hopes so held out have
been entirely falsified. Promises made to a distant, and, there-
fore, helpless community, have been utterly disregarded. The
keels of the Mail Steamers that were to sail are yet unlaid.
“ Three years ago, under the pretext of immediately forming
a steam route, the usual Australian Mail Packet Service was
entirely suppressed ; and within the same period, public tenders
for a steam service have, on three separate occasions, been ad-
vertised. It would appear, from Parliamentary papers, that such
tenders have been freely responded to by various public com-
panies and individuals, but no result has followed these steps. A
supine and procrastinating executive is permitted to paralyse the
growth—the colonization —and the empire of our race in the
Southern Hemisphere.
“ To crown this dereliction of public duty, we are informed that
the Admiralty has recently received a tender from responsible parties,
who offer to organize a steam route from Singapore to Sydney,
for the amount of the postages alone, and it is with mingled aston-


ishment and concern, we have it from authority, that the Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer, to whom the adjustment of this question
now stands referred, rejects this moderate and unexceptionable
proposal. In lieu of at once permitting Australian postal revenue
to be applied to its legitimate purposes, the due acceleration of
Australian Postal Communication, he yesterday stated in the
House of Commons, after having promised Avstralia steam for
three years, that he now proposed to refer the whole question to the
consideration of a Parliamentary Committee.
“ The course adopted on this occasion by Sir Charles Wood leads
us to the painful but unavoidable conclusion, that Her Majesty's
Ministers have no real intention of opening out a steam route, but that
they are wilfully trifling with a measure in the immediate realisation
of which the progress of Australian commerce and civilization is
admitted to be vitally involved.
“Disgusted with this long-continued neglect, wearied with
pledges made year after year only to be broken, Australia turns
in despair from those who now direct the councils of England ;
her citizens appeal through you to the United States of America,
for that support so injuriously denied them by the mother
country.
“ The enlightened policy which has of late years influenced your
Government munificently to encourage the formation of numerous
ocean steam lines, leads us to hope that you will think it con-
sistent with the interests of America to assist Australia in this
her hour of need, that in this instance you will not hesitate to
adopt her cause, and thus make it your own. While closely
connecting her shores by steam with your Western States you
will not only develop and promote a commerce now rapidly
rising into importance, but you will also merit the deep gratitude
of a sister state, if you are the first to aid in bringing her within
that cycle of civilization from which geographical distance still
bids her stand isolate and apart.
“We are in consequence desired to request that your Ex-
cellency will lay the case of Australia before your Government—
commiserating the long neglect she suffers from, and conscious that
in promoting her commercial prosperity you will also greatly add
to your own; and we believe that sufficient mutuality of interest
exists to warrant your listening to the suggestion which it is our
duty to make, viz.:—That you now undertake that office which


England declines, and immediately organise a mail steam com-
munication between Sydney and Panama. From that point,
American steamers will convey the Australian mails to New
York. From thence also the steam-ships of a British Association
will keep up a regular postal communication free from all further
expense with England.
“ Should your executive decide,on carrying this measure into
effect, we believe it may be accomplished at a very moderate
expenditure, an estimate of which is herewith enclosed for your
perusal. Upon referring to this estimate, you will perceive that
the Legislatures of the Australian Colonies have themselves come
forward and voted to any individual who will realize this project
a sum aggregating £lO,BOO per annum; besides which, the
postages form another source of revenue applicable to defray the
expenses of this communication. It is well known, that the
correspondence of the colonies must proceed exclusively by what-
ever route the mail steamers may adopt; and it is so extensive,
that we are informed a packet postage of Is. per letter would
produce upwards of £33,700 per annum. These sums, if not
altogether sufficient to induce a contractor to undertake the line
from Panama to Sydney, would at all events place £34,500 at
the disposal of your Government in part liquidation of any ex-
penses it may incur. That expense, you will perceive, has been
estimated at between £50,000 and £OO,OOO. If taken at the
latter sum, £60,000, it would leave no greater amount than
£14,500, or a sum equivalent to the annual cost of maintaining
a sloop of war to be provided by the United States.
“We deem it right to state here frankly to you, that the Aus-
tralian colonists, especially the Legislature of New South Wales,
have evinced a decided preference for the Eastern Route, which
leads to Australia, via Singapore, in lieu of that via the Isthmus
of Panama. We are aware that the latter is the only route which,
for obvious grounds of policy, could meet with your support; but
although this route be not considered by Australians the most
eligible, we believe the colonists will willingly waive any objec-
tions they may entertain to it, in order thus to secure through
you an immediate admission into the pale of nations, without per-
mitting that much wished for event to depend for an indefinite
period upon the futile excuses of a temporising Statesman.
Having thus discharged our duty in addressing you, we desire


in conclusion to inform you, that the gentlemen named in the
margin—
“ Robert Lows, Esq., . } New South Wales.
“ William Fane De Salis, Esq., )
“ Sir Montague Chapman, Bart., South Australia.
“ J. A. Jackson, Esq., Van Diemen’s Land.
“ John Leslie Foster, Esq., Victoria.
“ Or any two of them, have been specially deputed to wait on
on you personally, in order, should you desire it, to afford your
Excellency any statistical or other information connected with
this subject, you may think requisite to obtain for the guidance
of the cabinet at Washington.
“ We have the honour to be. Sir,
“ Your most obedient Servants.
‘ To His Excellency the
“ Honourable Abbot Lawrence, &c.,
“ United States Embassy, London.”
Loyal as are our Australian colonists, let us remember
that British enterprise is justly impatient of restrictive
procrastinations, and that the mail bags may travel with as
much facility from Panama to New York, as to London.
But surely England—the mother of empires, the international
arbitress, strong in battle and wise in counsel, the friend of the
oppressed, the good Samaritan, the sanctuary, the bank, and
the workshop of the world—is not thus to be supplanted by
America, her own offspring, whom, however, by tyrannical
resistance of just demands and a sanguinary war, she has nursed
into a republic, a rival power, and the factious opponent of
Slave-Emancipation and Free-Trade. Let her rather profit
by the blood, treasure, and territory lost in unnatural con-
flicts, and seek to retain her Colonies by the bonds of mutual
affection and a common interest, and thus make more sure
her present position as Mistress of the World!
SECTION 11.
In a commercial view, by far the most important subject
suggested by a consideration of the reciprocal advantages to
be derived from our connection with Australia, is the


question of Emigration. In whichever aspect we look at
it, its importance cannot be overrated, whether as a mode
of lessening our poor-rates, as raising the lower classes, or
as extending our commerce. During the late famine in
Ireland, our Parliament voted a loan to that country of two
millions sterling, a sum which has been long ago disposed
of in the mere sustenance of life, and the repayment of
which is likely to be attended with considerable difficulty
and discontent. Much as our benevolent policy was at the
time to be commended, we cannot but regret that a method
of relief was not adopted which in its operation would
eventually replace the amount lent, without exciting those
national feelings which we see brought into play. In an
age of which its great characteristic is, that “ men run to
and fro, multiplying knowledge,” and on which it may
literally be said, the “ ends of the world have come,” every
phase of emigration should be attentively watched, and its
peculiar character and tendencies seriously considered.
Of course the idea of compulsorily either arresting or
directing the tide is not for one moment to be entertained.
But still, if we wish to remain the great focus of civilisation,
if we care for the world’s outermost circle reflecting our
own hues, if, in short, any value is to be attached to our
national development in our own colonies, we have great
reason for alarm, when we see four-fifths of our emigration
flowing into other countries than our own dominions; and
there seems no objection to securing for our own colonies a
decided preference in our own labour market. How far the
reverse has been the case, the following extract from the
Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners' Report for
last year will show:—
To the United States - - 223,078
To British North America - 32,961
To Australia and New Zealand 16,037
To other places - - - 8,773
Total - 280,849 souls.


The supposed amount of Irish Emigration was 207,852,
and what its character has been for the last three years, let
the moneys remitted home, in order to pay the passages to
the States for relatives left behind, tell. Their amount in
1848 was £460,000; in 1849, £540,000; and in 1850,
£957,000. Contrast this with the character and extent of
emigration to the Australian Colonies. The number of
ships despatched to Australia and the Cape during 1850
was 31; and of emigrants, 7,903; and since the beginning
of this year to the present time, the number of ships sent to
Australia is 39, and of statute adults 8,580. And, with
respect to our Government emigration, we find that the
actual outlay, from the beginning of 1847 to the spring of
1850, was £572,000, and from that time to the 2nd of May
this year, £35,000, nearly £9,000 having been paid by the
emigrants, £13,000 from the Land Fund of New South
Wales, £9,000 from that of South Australia, and £4,000
by the Cape of Good Hope. The total expenditure from
the commencement of 1847 to the end of 1850 was about
£607,000, the number of ships 204, and that of emigrants
50,957.
Now here is something for British patriots to look at.
From 1848 to 1850 inclusive, our emigration to America
amounted to upwards of 600,000, and the total amount
remitted home by the emigrants was, in round numbers,
£2,000,000. The number of emigrants to the Cape and
Australian Colonies was 50,957, and the amount expended
by the Commissioners £607,000, and this not from the
beginning of 1848, but from that of 1847 to the end of
1850. What an accession of strength to the Anti-English
party on the other side of the Atlantic, as compared
with the reinforcement of loyal industry to our colonies!
Aye, and compare the almost eleemosynary and reluctant
character of our Colonial emigration with the voluntary and
reproductive features of that from Ireland to the States.
If we allow such a state of things to go on, are' we not at
once alienating the best of our blood, and bringing our
Colonies into disrepute? But not only are we thus passively


strengthening the hands of a rival power; but now that we
are fully and irrevocably committed to the principles of
Free Trade, we are retarding their development in our
commerce with the Colonies, at the very time that we are
hampered by hostile tariffs, both on the European Continent
and in the Western Hemisphere.
We shall now consider the 'regulations under which the
Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners grant free
passages, and, before entering on this branch of our subject,
we feel bound to express our high sense of their honourable
Secretary’s (Mr. Walcott’s) affability and official talent, and
the courtesy which has always characterised any communi-
cation we have had from the Emigration Office. Our
remarks, therefore, apply merely to the system, not to the
Board of Commissioners, who-, we believe, are as efficient as
can be desired. And for the information of such as are
interested in Australia, we may just now take occasion to
say, that we are informed by Mr. Walcott, that the Land
Fund already at their disposal will allow of their despatching
two ships a month to each of the Colonies. He could not,
at the present moment, say the precise amount; but we take
his statement as indicating something like j£90,000.
Now for their Schedule of Eegulations, from which, not
to lengthen unnecessarily the present treatise, we make the
following extract: —
“5. Persons who intend to buy land, or to invest capital, in
trade ; —or who are in the habitual receipt of parish relief; —
or who have not been vaccinated, or had the small-pox;—or
whose families comprise more than three children under ten years
of age, cannot be accepted.
Application and Approval.
6. Applications must be made to the Commissioners in the Form
annexed. The filling up of the Form, however, confers no claim
to a passage; and implies no pledge that the Candidates,
though apparently within the Regulations, will be accepted.
7. If approved of, the Applicants will receive a printed u Ap-
proval Circular,” calling for the Contribution required by Article
8, and pointing out how it is to be paid. After it is paid, they
will, as soon as practicable, receive an Embarkation Order
Cwhich is not transferable) , naming the Ship in which they are


to embark, and the time and place of joining her. They must
not leave their homes before the receipt of this Order,
Payments
TOWARDS
Passages.
8. The Contributions above-mentioned, out of which the
Commissioners will provide Bedding and Mess Utensils, etc., for
the Voyage, will be as follows :
of embarkation must also be
I. Married Agricultural La-
bourers, Shepherds, Herds-
* men, Miners, and their
11. Single Men between 18 and
36 years and upwards, of
any of the above callings
and whether part of a fa-j
mily or not, each
111. Country Mechanics, such as
Blacksmiths, Bricklayers,
Carpenters, Masons, Saw-
yers, Wheelwrights, and
Gardeners,andtheirWives,
also Females of the Work-
ing Class, not being Do-
mestic or Farm Servants
(when they can be
taken) per Head
IV. Children under 18—per
Head j
The expense of reaching the Port
paid by the Emigrants.


Cautions to Applicants.
5. No preparations must on any account be made by the Applicants,
either by withdrawing from employment or otherwise, until they re-
ceive the “ Approval Circular Applicants who fail to attend to
this warning will do so at their own risk, and will have no claim
whatever on the Commissioners.
6. The Selecting Agents of thje Board have no authority to
promise passages in any case, nor to receive money. If, therefore.
Applicants wish to make their payments through the Agents, instead
of in the manner pointed out in the “ Approval Circular ,” they must
understand that they do so at their own risk, and that the Commis-
sioners will be in no way responsible .
7. Should any Signatures attached to an Applicant’s paper
prove to be not genuine, or should any false representations be
made in the papers, not only will the application be rejected,
but the offenders will be liable, under the Passengers’ Act, 12 &
13 Vic. cap. 38, to a Penalty not exceeding £5O.
8. Should any Applicants be found on personal examination
at the Depot, or on Board, to have made any mis-statement in
their papers, or to have any infectious disorder, or otherwise not
to be in a fit state*of health to enbark, or to have any mental or
bodily defect likely to impair their usefulness as labourers, or to
have left any of their young Children behind, or to have brought
with them more Children than are mentioned in their Application
Form, or expressly sanctioned by the Commissioners, or to have
attempted any deception whatever, or evasion of these Rules,
they will be refused admission on board the Ship, or if embarked,
will be landed, without having any claim on the Commissioners,
9. If Applicants fail to attend at the appointed time and
place for embarkation, without having previously given to the
Commissioners timely notice, and a satisfactory reason, or if
they fail to proceed in the Ship,—or are rejected for any of the
reasons specified in the preceding article, they will forfeit their
contributions, and will have no claim to a passage at any future
time.
Outfit, etc.
14. The Commissioners supply Provision, Medical Attendance,
and Cooking Utensils at their Depot and on board the Ship
Also, new Mattresses, Bolsters, Blankets, and Counterpanes,
Canvas Bags to contain Linen, etc., Knives and Forks, Spoons,


Metal Plates, and Drinking Mugs, which articles will be given
after arrival in the Colony to the Emigrants who have behaved
well on the voyage.
15. The Emigrants must bring their own Clothing, which will
be inspected at the Port by an Officer of the Commissioners;
and they will not be allowed to embark unless they have a suffi-
cient stock for the voyage, not less, for each Person, than—
FOR MALES.
Six Shirts
Six pairs Stockings
Two ditto Shoes ...
Two complete suits, of
FOR FEMALES.
Six Shifts ....
Two flannel Petticoats
Six pairs Stockings
Two ditto Shoes ..
Two Gowns
exterior clothing
With Sheets, Towels, and Soap. But the larger the stock of
Clothing, the better for health and comfort during the voyage,
which usually lasts about four months, and as the Emigrants
have always to pass through very hot and very cold weather,
they should be prepared for both; two or three Serge Shirts
for Men, and Flannel for Women and Children, are strongly
recommended.”
From these it appears, that the most eligible male adult is
subjected to the following outlay before going on board:—
For outfit.
Six shirts - - - - 0 18 0
Six pairs of stockings - - 0 4 6
Two pairs of shoes
0 10 0
Two suits of exterior clothing 3 0 0
Sheets, towels and soap
0 10 0
5 2 6
1 0 0
Payment to Commissioners
16 2 6


The most eligible female adult
Six shifts - - - - 0 18 0
Two flannel petticoats - - 0 8 0
Six pairs of stockings - - 0 4 6
Two pairs of shoes - - - 0 8 0
Two gowns - - - 0 12 0
Sheets, towels and soap r - 0 10 0
3 0 6
1 0 0
Payment to Commissioners
£4 0 6
The least eligible male has, therefore, to disburse, under
similar circumstances, 21/. 2s. 6d., and females 19/. os. 6d.
The passage money paid by emigrants to America ranges
from 21. 10s. to 4/. 10s., and scarcely any thing extra in
the way of outfit is necessary. It moreover appears from
this schedule, that those who are least tied to one spot
and most likely to go to the diggings, are granted free
passages on the most favourable terms, and that those best
adapted in the present circumstances of Australia to pro-
mote the general development of her resources, are subjected
to penalties, amounting in most cases to a prohibition.
According to a report of the Commissioners, the number
of emigrants from Sydney to California, who had free
passages out to Australia, was in 1849, 814. Brother
Jonathan again ! And in illustration of the latter state-
ment, we give a case which recently came under our notice.
It is that of a respectable able-bodied saddler and his
wife, both fifty years of age last birth-day. He had been
a master in London, but, owing to the havoc of railways
in his particular calling, had become unfortunate. He
applied to the Emigration Commissioners on behalf of
himself, his wife and family, which consisted of three
daughters, whose respective ages were twenty-three, nineteen,
and nine, and a son aged fourteen, and an approval circular
was sent to him requiring him to pay 34/. The parents


were in youth accustomed to rural affairs, and, in reference
to this case, the writer addressed the following letter to the
Secretary of the Colonial Land and Emigration Oifice :
Philpot Lane, City, Nov. 17 th, 1851.
S. Walcott, Esq., Colonial Land and Emigration
Office, Park-street, Westminster.
Sir, —Referring to the interview with which Mr. Kennard and
I were favoured by you on Saturday, when we waited upon you
as a deputation from the New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land Mercantile Association, I take the liberty of making a special
application with respect to a case then incidentally brought under
your notice. The case is that of C—«— R , who has received
an approval circular from your office, on behalf of himself,
wife and family, and who is called upon to make a payment
of thirty-four pounds sterling. You are already aware of their
suitableness as applicants for free passages; and lam personally
cognizant of their inability to pay the sum referred to. If,
therefore, you will in the exercise of a benevolent discretion,
either altogether dispense with such payment, or greatly mitigate
it, I feel assured that the interests of the colony will not be
prejudiced by such a relaxation.
Hoping for your favourable reply, I have the honour to be,
Sir, your most obedient servant,
J. R. Morrison.
We also give Mr. Walcott’s reply:—
Colonial Land and Emigration Office, Park-street,
Westminster, Nov. 1 9th, 1851.
J. R. Morrison, Esq.
Sir, — I am directed by the Colonial Land and Emigration Com-
missioners to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 17th
inst., and in reply to state, that as saddlers and reduced tradesmen
do not come within the class of persons whom the Commission-
ers have been authorised to send out to Australia, at the expense
of the Colonial funds, C R , in whose behalf you
apply, is wholly ineligible, under the established regulations, for
a passage in one of the Commissioners’ ships.
As, however, he has two grown-up daughters, and as the
Commissioners are very desirous of meeting the wishes of the
colonists by sending out young women of good character, they


consented to relax, as far as they properly could, the regulations
in R ’s favour; and informed him, that if he could pay for
himself and his wife, who were both over 50, the rates fixed for
people of that age, and coming within the third class in the regu-
lations, the Commissioners would allow him to accompany his
four children, and would take them on payment of one pound
each, which is virtually giving them a free passage.
I am to add, that the Commissioners regret they are unable
to grant this family a passage on more favourable terms.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant.
S. Walcott, Secretary.
Let us hear the testimony of one of the highest practical
authorities on such a question before this case occurred. We
extract the following from a letter of George Russell, Esq.,
of Golfhill, Port Philip:—
“ I am decidedly of opinion that men in middle life, or from
40 to 50 years of age, are quite as useful as young men. Indeed,
the former are generally preferred, as being more steady and
attentive, and the employment of looking after sheep is of such a
light and healthy nature, that it is admirably suited to that class
of persons. Some of my best shepherds have been upwards of
60 years of age, and middle-aged men with families pretty well
advanced, so that the boys can be employed, as they frequently
are, at the age of ten years or upwards, in looking after sheep
are the most useful, and are more generally employed in the
grazing districts than any other class of persons. I have re-
peatedly had families of this description in my service, whose
joint earnings amounted to from £BO to £lOO per annum, with
sufficient provisions ; and not more than £3O of this sum was
required to provide clothing and other necessaries.
To preclude further remarks of our own on the regula-
tions generally, we give the remainder of this very sensible
letter, and hope our esteemed friend will pardon our giving
it this publicity.
London, sth Nov. 1851.
J, R. Morrison, Esq.
Mr Dear Sir, Understanding that you are taking an
active part in endeavouring to obtain a relaxation in some of


the most restrictive conditions of emigration to the Australian
colonies, and thus facilitate and promote the removal of many of
the labouring classes in this country to those colonies, where
their labour is so much wanted, and where it meets with such
ample compensation, as compared with this country—having
had twenty years’ experience as a settler in the colonies, and
having been recently endeavouring to engage labourers to send
out to my establishment at Port Philip, I take the liberty of
offering a few observations on the present regulations for
granting passages to emigrants.
First.—l would remark that I believe never, in the history
of the colonies, has a more copious supply of emigrants been so
urgently required as at the present time, when, owing to the
extensive field for the profitable employment of labour by the
recent discoveries, the labouring population are likely, to a very
considerable extent, to be diverted from the usual and more legi-
timate occupations of the country, and thus, not only will serious
loss accrue to individuals, but in my opinion the general prospe-
rity of the colonies be materially retarded. I would, therefore,
suggest as a temporary measure, and as a remedy for the evils
consequent on a dearth of labour, that all emigrants who can
obtain testimonials of character and ability in their respective
callings, whether country labourers, miners, domestic servants,
or mechanics, whether married or single, with or without families
if under fifty years of age should be sent out free of any charge
whatever.
Secondly.—From my experience as a large employer of labour
in the colonies in the country districts . . . ( Vide previous Extract,
p. 29) . . , I am, therefore, decidedly of opinion, that this class of
persons, particularly country labourers if healthy and not above
fifty years of age, should obtain passages at the lowest rate.
Thirdly.—l am of opinion that no distinction relative to pay-
ments for passage ought to be made between mechanics and
and other classes of labourers. The wages of mechanics in the
colony for some years past have been, and still are, very high :
and the fact of the demand for this description of labour not
being adequately supplied by the emigrant vessels which have
gone to the colonies for two or three years past, would tend to
shew that this restriction operates as a preventive to the emigra-
tion of this class of persons.


Fourthly.—l think that the condition by which emigrants,
having more than two children under twelve years of age, have to
pay £4 instead of £l, for all above that number, if under twelve
years of age, has a tendency to prevent the emigration of a useful
class of persons, as well as the condition by which families, hav-
ing more than three children under ten years of age, are excluded
from any assistance whatever. As a rule, I am of opinion that
middle-aged couples, with the elder members of their families
pretty well advanced, are more suitable for the colonies than
younger couples with young helpless children, or than newly
married young couples, who are likely to have families after
arrival in the colonies; and certainly married couples without
families are, or ought to be, more able to pay part of their pas-
sage money than married couples having families to support; but
under the present regulations those who are least able have to
contribute most.
Fifthly. —Since my arrival in this country I have met with
several settlers from Australia who, like myself, are anxious to
send out labourers to their establishmeuts in the colonies; and all
agree that objectionable as the present regulations are in many
points, no part of them so effectually prevents the emigation of the
most useful classes to the colonies, namely agricultural labourers,
as the irksome process which the intending emigrant has to go
through, although he may be in every respect unobjectionable,
before he can obtain the sanction of the Commissioners to a free
passage, and an order for embarkation. After having made up
his mind to emigrate he has to communicate with one of the local
emigration agents, who probably sends him a schedule, with a
copy of the regulations. The filling up of the schedule and ob-
taining the necessary certificates of birth, etc., is attended with
not a little trouble and anxiety to an illiterate man ; and many
of them have to travel many miles to obtain extracts from the
Parish Register, or certificates of baptism of themselves and
children.
After all this trouble has been taken, and the schedule pro-
perly filled up and forwarded to the local Emigration Agent, the
emigrant naturally expects that he has overcome nearly all the
difficulties in reference to the free passage; but, after a delay, it may
be of some weeks, during which the emigrant is kept in suspense
and anxiety, and if a farm labourer (they being generally engaged


for six or twelve months), he has frequently to give up a good
situation, remove his family to another residence, and take some
precarious and uncertain employment till the period of his em-
barkation ; and all this trouble and inconvenience have often to be
undergone before the emigrant knows whether his application
has been approved of. Probably the first information he receives
is to the effect that some informality exists, and that his applica-
tion cannot be entertained till that is rectified, when he either
gives up his intention in disgust, or is put to additional trouble,
loss of time, and other hardships connected with his case. If his
application has been approved, he receives the intimation to pay
the necessary emigration fees to the Commissioners in London,
or if paid through the local Agent it must be at his own risk.
Here another difficulty arises ; the caution relative to paying the
fees to the local Agent naturally excites his suspicion ; and how
is a labouring and frequently illiterate and uneducated man in the
country expected to know how to arrange about the payment
of the requisite advance in London! Still it is not until after this
money has actually been received in London, that the emigrant
is furnished with an order to embark ; indeed, the whole system
is beset with difficulties and vexatious delays and annoyances to
the intending emigrant. While residing, for a short time lately
in Northamptonshire, I had a number of applications from country
labourers, to engage to go out to Australia; and when recently in
Fifeshire, I had about twenty applications in the course of a week,
from respectable farm labourers, just the class of men that are
most wanted in Australia. But the answer was generally the
the same ; viz., How was it to be expected that men like them could
accomplish all that was required to obtain a passage without the
assistance of some one who knew more about it than they did ?
As a remedy for all these difficulties, I would suggest, that the
local agents should be more numerous throughout the’ agri-
cultural districts, and ought to be invested with more power. I
cannot see any reason why a local agent (after an applicant has
filled up his schedule according to the prescribed form, and ob-
tained the necessary certificates) should not have the power of at
once approving of the applicant, receiving the money, to be paid
by the emigrant in advance, and informing him of the time and
place of embarkation. This might necessitate the maintaining
of some of the emigrants longer at the depots, previous to


embarkation, but that would be more than compensated for, by
the facility afforded to a desirable class of emigrants, who, under
the present system, are discouraged by the preliminary difficulties
inseparable from securing the approval required, before receiving
a free passage to Australia.
Sixthly. —With reference to the number of emigrants that
may be required in Australia, I can only speak with reference
to Port Philip; and up to the time of my leaving the colony,
about a year ago, the supply of emigrants was not nearly
sufficient to meet the increasing demand for labour. An
emigrant vessel with about 300 souls on board, only supplies
about 80 able labouring men, the remainder consisting of women
and children ; and this number is scarcely perceptible in abating
the demand for labour, particularly at busy seasons of the year.
If I were to form an opinion as to the number now required
(taking into consideration the absorption of labour at the gold
diggings), I should decidedly consider that an emigrant vessel
arriving every week, would not glut the labour market, and would
probably not supply the demand.
Seventhly.—With regard to the means of carrying out this
increase of emigration. So far as Port Philip is concerned, the
resources of the Land Fund are amply sufficient to meet all ex-
igencies, particularly when the increase of this fund for the past
few years is considered, the probability of this increase going on
steadily for some time to come, arising from the great extent of
rich and valuable lands still held by the Government; the desire
manifested by the colonists to invest their profits in acquiring
this description of property; and the probable increase or con-
tinuance in the amount of such profits derived from the demand
for, and increasing production in the amount of our staple articles
of export; and in the event of the Land fund not being sufficient
to meet the present emergency, I think, for the reasons stated
above, it would afford the most undoubted security for raising a
loan for emigration-purposes. This question has been, I think,
frequently brought before the Government, by the Legislative
Council of New South Wales ; and I believe generally supported
by the colonists. It appears to me a most legitimate and safe
mode of proceeding to meet the present great demand for labour,
in a young colony which is every year increasing and developing
fresh resources.


In conclusion, allow me to remark, that when I consider that
the present and future prosperity of Australia depends so much
on the labour market being adequately supplied, the disastrous
results which must ensue by the profits arising from the produc-
tion of our staple articles being absorbed in paying an exorbitant
rate for labour (as was the case in the years 1839, 1840, 1841,
and part of 1842), and the ample resources possessed by the
colonies to supply the labour market, I am surprised at the diffi-
culties in the form of unnecessary formalities and restrictions
which intending emigrants have to contend against, before ob-
taining a passage to Australia, being allowed to continue, as well
as at the general apathy which seems to prevail on the subject
among the government authorities in this country.
Trusting you will succeed in your laudable endeavours to re-
move some of those difficulties, and thus confer a permanent
benefit on the Colonies of Australia.
I remain, my dear sir, yours sincerely,
George Russell.
In short, the preference now shewn to single adults
over married couples with young families should, con-
sidering the attractions of the diggings, be annihilated, if
not reversed ; and a code of regulations less fitted to the
temper and condition of the working classes cannot be
conceived. Instead of having anything inviting about it,
it presupposes that all the world is anxious to go to
Australia, and that all it has to do is to filter the applicants,
so that those only may have free passages who are most
likely to become gold-hunters or highwaymen. And still
the Commissioners have more money than they are able
to spend under their present regime.
We pass on to the Prospectus of the Family Colonization
Loan Society, originated by Mrs. Chisholm, whose name
will be famous not only in the annals of Australia, but in
those of her sex. It is as follows:
“ This Society has for its object the foundation of a National and
Self-supporting System of Colonization to the Australian
Colonies.
Payments. —The industrious classes are, in the first instance.


to pay the greatest part of their passage money, according to
eligibility and circumstances of parties, and the then state of the
Society’s funds ; the other half or portion to he lent to them by
a benevolent public, as a loan, without interest. For this loan
they will have to sign an agreement , previous to receiving their
embarkation orders, that they will refund such loans, through the
instrumentality of Agents in the Colonies, within two years after
their arrival in the said Colonies, or sooner, if possible, in order
that the money so repaid may be re-lent to others in like manner;
or the borrowers can nominate their own relatives and friends for
a passage and a loan equal to the sum refunded by them ; such
nominees or persons named subject always to the approval of the
Central Committee.
Family Groups. —Each group to contain not more than eight
families, nor less than three families, and a limited number of
single individuals. The object is for friends and relatives to unite
and aid each other in their common emigration, and to form a
social intimacy amongst strangers in the same cause, by making
parties acquainted with one another previous to embarkation ;
thus families and individuals who cannot meet with persons
wishing to emigrate from their own locality, may join another
group, provided that such arrangement may meet the sanction of
both parties. The group of approved families and individuals
being formed, the members of each group must pledge themselves
severally to assist in the recovery of loans to persons constituting
their group, and further hind themselves to pay a proportionate
share of the fee of ten shillings for each member of their group
who may become a defaulter.
Fees. —Persons on being enrolled as Members of the Society,
will have to pay an entrance fee of one shilling each (the same
for children), to meet in part the current expenses of the office.
And to cover losses and other incidental expenses, all adults
benefiting by the Loan Society, must also pay a fee of ten
shillings each in addition to their passage money, and children
under 14 years of age five shillings each. This sum to be paid
in the Colony, with the last payment of their loan, and to be
added to the Reserve fund to meet losses, etc.
Ike Reunion of Families, —Relatives and friends now separated,
(some being in England, others in Australia,) when they are
unable to pay the sum required for their passages, may jointly, in


both countries, make weekly and monthly deposits, until they have
by their united efforts raised the necessary amount, which, with
the aid of a loan from the Society, may enable such parties to
emigrate. In like manner, parties in England anxious to emigrate,
and who cannot at once pay the required sum, can make iveekly
and monthly payments towards their passage either through the
Central or Local Committee, or if there happen to be a family
with some grown-up children, without possessing the necessary
means, one or two of the most eligible may precede the rest to
the Colonies, and through the mode of the reunion of families,
contribute to the emigration of the remainder of the family. It
will be the duty of the Society’s Agent in the Colony to remit
such payments to the Central Committee in England, for the
specific purpose of the emigration of the parties. The rules of
the Society do not admit of the separation of man and wife.
Colonial Agents. —Agents will be appointed in the Colonies to
receive from Emigrants all loans made by the Society, to remit
the same to the Central Committee in England, to keep a register
of all agreements entered into, the districts to which the Emigrants
shall proceed, to afford advice and assistance to Emigrants in
obtaining employment, and to facilitate, by all the means in their
power, the due settlement of the people, as well as to forward
all correspondence between them and their friends in Europe.
The Agents will give receipts in duplicate to each Emigrant for
all sums received on account of loans, and payments for the re-
union of families, such Emigrant handing or remitting the dupli-
cate to the District Committee, and retaining the original.
Protection to Orphan Girls and Friendless Females. The
friendless young women will be grouped with, and introduced to,
families at the Group Meetings previous to embarking, and placed
under their special guardianship ; and arrangements will be made
on the passage to insure mutual responsibility for good conduct.
In like manner youths and young men will be associated with the
family groups, and, if seen necessary, placed under the care of
the heads of families.
Committees. —District Committees will be formed by parties in
Australia, who will aid Agents in the settlement of Emigrants
and the recovery of loans. The heads of Emigrant Families, or
intelligent individuals, may be expected to be called upon to co-
operate \yith and aid the District Committees.


Testimonials, —Certificates of good character must be produced
from two respectable householders before applicants can be
enrolled, and members of Groups must pledge themselves not to
admit into their body persons of doubtful character. If married,
a certificate of marriage must be shown before passages are
granted.
Associated Groups. —A List of the Associated Groups embarked,
with their names and ages, the place from which they emigrated,
their destination and subsequent settlement, the amount advanced,
repayments made, the sum still due and by whom, will be pub-
lished as often as the Committee think fit.
Cabins. —Enclosed Cabins will be furnished to each family, size
according to number of individuals. Children above 14 years of
age will sleep in separate compartments from their parents. One
cabin will be allotted to six single females, and due attention will
be paid to the arrangements of the single men’s births.”
We understand from public authority, that the Society is
not in debt, and from Mrs. Chisholm herself that she has
this year dispatched 700 emigrants, and that she has at
this moment a great many more applicants than the Society’s
funds admit of her accommodating—a fact which shews that
the labouring classes of this country have a higher standard
of character than they generally get credit for. And we
are happy to understand from the other side that this appeal
to their better feelings is so far justified by the readiness
with which Mrs. Chisholm’s emigrants repay the sums lent
by the Society, and the avidity with which they are pre-
ferred to the government emigrants for situations of trust.
The inadequacy of Mrs. Chisholm’s scheme to the require-
ments of the Colonies is its only objection, and the cause of
emigration is too important to be left to the casual impulse
of public benevolence. But between the Colonial Land
and Emigration Commissioners on the one hand, and Mrs.
Chisholm’s Society on the other, as well as by a reference
to our Poor Law statistics, we have the vanity to think that
we have stumbled on a principle neither eleemosynary nor
friendly, which entirely meets the exigencies of the case.
We glean from public documents, that in England and


Wales on the Ist January, 1851, the number of able-bodied
paupers in receipt of relief, was 154,525, and that the poor
rates for England, Wales and Ireland, amounted last year
to about £7,000,000.
We advocate family emigration on a large scale to the
Australian colonies, and we humbly think that 100,000
souls, consisting of men, women and children, should be
sent out within the next two years, and that the sooner the
work is begun the better. Such a number would at once
be absorbed by a vast continent, whose pastoral, agricultural,
and mineral resources are beyond our present powers of
computation, which for aught we now know is capable of
sustaining a population equal to that of Great Britain and
Ireland, and whose population, at this moment, is not sup-
posed to be more than double the number of emigrants from
Ireland last year to the United States. Nor considering
the number of able-bodied paupers in the receipt of relief
in England and Wales the beginning of this year, would
such a drain derange our labour market. It would in fact
lighten the burdens on native industry by widening the
outlet for our manufactures. And seeing that we are beset
with hostile tariffs on all hands, let us promote trade in our
own dominions, and obey the call of Providence by beginning
to take possession of the entire land both in Australia and
New Zealand. We have already seen that our own Colonics
are outbid in the labour market by the United States. But
how are we to turn the tide of emigration in favour of our
own Colonies, seeing that the labouring classes do not fully
avail themselves of the free passages already offered them?
We say, Away with the eleemosynary principle altogether,
and let us address ourselves to the self-respect and social
ambition of the labouring classes. Let us offer passages
with superior comforts to those at present enjoyed in emi-
grant vessels, and the amplest means of secular and religious
instruction on the voyage. We say let us offer these to
suitable families on credit, and thus raise many that are
depressed to a higher position, and obviate the difficulties and
obstacles felt by many in even the middle classes. And let


us commit the promotion of the emigration movement, not
to Government Commissioners, who can only observe general
rules, but to firms of prudence and respectability, whose
business it would be to consider every case on its own merits,
and who would pledge themselves for re-payment of passage
moneys to the Government after the lapse of a reasonable
time, such as to admit of remittances being received from the
other side. The circumstance of such Firms passing appli-
cants is the best guarantee of their fitness, as they would have
a direct interest in both their character and subsequent
success as colonists. Public men can only deal with
cases in the class, and if they' act otherwise, they are
justly obnoxious. But it is the exclusive prerogative of a
private concern, whose prospect of remuneration is identified
with the issue of a transaction, to view things separately
and in detail. But although private concerns were entrusted
with the direction of the Emigration movement, we should
still approve of the sanatory surveillance remaining in the
hands of the present Emigration Commissioners. As to the
means of carrying out this measure, we suggest that Govern-
ment should raise the loan of a million sterling, on the
security of the Land Fund, which last year amounted to
over £140,000, and which, with the royalties from the
Gold Diggings, will be still more productive, and that of
the poor-rates, which in England, Wales, and Ireland last
year amounted to about £7,000,000. The Colonists have
again and again urged on the Home Government the pro-
position of a loan, on the security of the Land Fund; but it
has never been responded to, because, we presume, it was
considered unfair to the parties who might by this means
obtain free passages, and who in a year or two might by the
purchase of land become themselves the employers of labour.
The present owners and occupiers of land might thus be
benefited in the labour-market at the expense of future
purchasers of land, the condition of all such transactions
being, that 50 per cent, to 80 per cent, should be laid out in
supplying the Colonies with labour. But our proposition is
altogether free from this objection, as instead of forestalling


the Land Fund, the amount of money laid out in this scheme
would come back to the Commissioners, less the remuneration
to their Agents, for the trouble of carrying out the measure.
We propose, however, that all such charges should be made
to fall first on the Land Fund, which, we hope, would
more than bear them, and that any surplus advanced by
this country should remain always available for emigration
purposes, the relief of the poor, and the direction of indus-
trial enterprise.
In conclusion, we sum up all by deprecating convict
transportation, by pleading for the emigration of the lower
classes before they have been either driven into the work-
house or the Penitentiary, by demanding family emigration
on a large scale, as the best means of maintaining the social
equilibrium and general development of our Colonies, by
calling on the Imperial Government not to allow our
Colonies to be outbid in the labour-market by a rival
power, by claiming for this country the only reciprocal
Free Trade which we can at present have; viz., with our
Colonies, and by solemnly warning this country against
estranging her expatriated sons, by turning a deaf ear to
their wishes.


POSTSCRIPT TO THE SECOND EDITION.
We have had every reason to be gratified with the almost
immediate sale of our first Edition, the demand exceeding
the number of copies then thrown off*. In tendering our sin-
cere thanks to the public for the favour with which our hints
have been received, we have also the agreeable duty of
offering our acknowledgments to the Newspaper Press, not
only for the flattering notice taken of our production, but
for the zeal and ability with which the topics therein referred
to have since been handled —viz., Convict Transportation,
Steam Communication, and Family Emigration to the Pastoral
Districts of Australia. The effect of the first in directing
the tide of emigrant labour toward a foreign shore, instead
of to our Australian Colonies—the feature with which the
public are least familiar—is at once obvious to every reflect-
ing mind; and, we are happy to say, has had ample promi-
nence in an influential journal. The mission of Captain
Stanley Carr and J. C. King, Esq.—the one for the purpose
of influencing a larger supply of labour, and the other to
oppose Convict Transportation, is most opportune, and with
these gentlemen our interviews have been highly satisfac-
tory; and we feel assured, that, supported by the Australian
interest in this country, they will ere long return to the
land of their adoption, crowned with the benedictions of
emigrant labourers on this side, and be regarded by our
growing empire in the Southern hemisphere as its greatest
benefactors.
Since our former edition, the question of Steam Commu-
nication has assumed a new phase. Nothing definite is yet
known; but it is rumoured, and generally believed, that the
Government have accepted Mr. Walton's tender for the con-
veyance of the Mail—via the Cape every alternate month,


touching at Swan Elver, Adelaide, Port Philip, and ulti-
mately Sydney. Between the two terminal points, it is
calculated the voyage will occupy three months, or about
the same time as is now taken by a good sailing-vessel. The
sum, for which Mr. Walton is understood to have agreed to
perform this service, is £26,000 per annum. Government
have also advertised for tenders for steam communication
once in two months between Singapore and Sydney —the
required speed being knots an hour. The result of
this will not be known till the 26th of February. Great
impatience is justly manifested by all interested in the
Colonies, at the time which must elapse before even the
Cape route is made available. No one expects this line
to be in operation for six months; and it will occasion
no surprise if another year is lost. A strong feeling also
prevails, that, in regard to speed, this proposition is alike
unworthy of England and Jier invaluable possessions in the
Southern Hemisphere. To shape our plans in such a
matter, by anything like an immediate equality between
expenditure and income, is neither coping with the exigen-
cies of the case, nor the probable increase of traffic a few
years hence. A more long-sighted view of the subject,
would give us the benefit of every recent improvement, and
possibly be more in favour of our Postal revenue. But, on
behalf of those connected with Australia on this side, as
well as in the name of Emigrant labourers generally, and
that of the middle classes, who look forward to the Antipodes
as the field of action in which a great proportion of their
families are to be engaged,—we protest, as we have already
done in the body of the pamphlet, against a more intimate
connection with the Australian Colonies being treated either
as a Postal or Colonial question.
Despite the vexatious delays and nibblings of our
Government with the subject, Steam Communication, not
only via the Cape and Singapore, but also Panama—rapid,
regular, and frequent—is a consummation which will have
been realised before six years more elapse. But why wait
so long ? Why should not steam communication, on the-


most approved principles, by all the three routes, be made
the cry of every constituency in Great Britain and Ireland ?
Why should not a measure of such extensive enfranchise-
ment and emancipation be made a Ministerial question?
And if these three lines of ocean steamers should for the
first three years entail an annual loss of even £lOO,OOO on
the National Exchequer, should it prevent our fulfdling a
noble destiny ? With an elastic revenue, new sources of
Colonial wealth opening up before us, and curtailed as we
now are in our commercial Intercourse with foreign coun-
tries by adverse tariffs and political convulsions, does not
the finger of Providence beckon us to this goal ? Where
would have been our present national greatness, had English
merchants not trusted somewhat to the future, and taken
tides at their flood? Why, twelve months did not pass
after the discovery of Californian gold, before there was an
efficient fortnightly communication by steam between New
York and San Francisco.
With regard to the Emigration Commissioners, we are
happy to state, that after the publication of our first Edition,
we had a communication from them, announcing the follow-
ing alterations:—Families are now accepted, having four
children under twelve years of age, instead of formerly, only
three under ten; the limit as to age of the most eligible is
extended from forty to forty-five years; single men of the
second class between fourteen and thirty-six years, instead
of as formerly eighteen and thirty-six, are accepted on pay-
ment of £2 each; and children under fourteen are required
to pay 10s., instead of as formerly, in some cases, £4, and
others £1 per head. We hail this as a move in the right
direction, and as an instalment of the proposition submitted
to them by Mr. Kennard and the writer.
We have only further to add, that the Colonial Office
seems inclined to deal with the preference, of which we
complained, hitherto evinced by the Emigrant classes for
America over our possessions in the Southern Pacific. The
idea of a Joint Stock Company being formed to supply
Emigrants with outfits, etc., on credit has also been thrown


out. Our opinion as to the greater efficiency and more
correct working of individual enterprise is still unchanged.
Our proposition is already before the public; and, we doubt
not, a prospectus of the rival scheme will soon be forth-
coming. The Government and the country can then judge
between the two. But our labours will not have been in
vain, if the result is increased Family Emigration, and if
the downfall of Pastoral Australia is arrested.
Lonuun, 20 th Dec. 1851.
