

WHAT IS ELECTRICITY?
|l jL'frtuvc.
CHARLES ETLER,
2 BATT : 14th REGIMENT.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BA R. BELL, STEAM PRINTER, 97 LITTLE COLLINS STREET EAST.
18G9.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


f*[ i


®ljat is €lectricitg £
lx taking up the question “ what is Electricity,” it is very
necessary to distinguish between the progress of Electricity, con-
sidered as a Science, and considered as a system of Experimental
Discovery and Adaptation; between the wonderful skill and success
with which it has been harnessed, and set to do our work; and
our knowledge of that mysterious something, which seems to be
able and willing to do almost everything for us, provided we fur-
nish it with the suitable harness. Because, unless we make this
distinction, we are very liable to fall into the error of mistaking
our ingenuity in mechanical adaptations for a knowledge of those
far-reaching principles underlying the phenomena of Electricity.
From the first Electric Machine, which was probably a bit of
amber, to the Atlantic Telegraph Cable, there is no doubt a vast
progress in experimental discovery, and practical adaptation; but
the history of the Science although full of changes, still winds up
with the oft-repeated question “ What is Electricity ?” This
history, in its bearing on the subject of this Lecture can be
summed up in a few words Previous to the eighteenth century,
Electricity was spoken of as an effluvium or subtile spirit. During
the eighteenth, and the earlier part of the present century, our
notions of its nature have been expressed by the word “ fluid
and this word has been, at various times, and by various writers,
characterised by such terms as “resinous,” and “vitreous,” “ail-
prevading,” “semi-material ” “attenua'ed.’’“exceedingly elastic,”
“ imponderable,” and so on. At present the word “ fluid”
to be fast giving way to the word “force;” but as few, of whom
lam not one, understand what “ force” is, the original question
still remains on hand, viz ; ‘ What is Electricity ?’ Besides, to
speak of Electricity as a “ force' 1 is simply to place it in a larger
category containing other things besides; whereas to define a term
is not to put it in a class, but to individualize it; not to show
wherein it agrees with other terms, but to point out t e diffe s
which separate it from all other things.
Now, although it is not in ray power to give a definite answer
to this question, I hope to be able to disencumber it of some things


with which is is commonly, but perhaps not rightly associated ;
and thus to give a fairer statement to the unsolved problem. In
this attempt I shall avoid the use of hard scientific words ; never-
theless, if you would follow me, it will not by any means be
sufficient to listen merely to the sound of my voice, nor even to
yield an easy acquiescence in my statements ; for, although I shall
touch upon but very few points, it will be necessary for me to
condense paragraphs into sentences, and sentences into words, and
thus to leave to others the task of filling in a sketch from an in-
complete outline.
Lest, however, your attention should be diverted from the
matter in hand, in order to dwell on my presumption in proffering
an opinion of my own on a subject so very difficult, I beg to state
that instead of suffering from an inflation of knowledge, for many
years past I have been engaged in extending, not my knowledge,
but my ignorance of things ; that, instead of climbing high up
into the tree of knowledge for the fruits whioh are said to grow
there, I stand on the level ground of our common experience, and
content mvself with such windfalls as come within the reach of
all who will but stoop to pick them up —stooping being an essential
part of the process.
The name Electricity may be, and in fact, has been applied to
different things, and the first point to be determined is :—What is
that particular thing of which the word is rightly the name. Had
the ancients more fully possessed this wonder-working instru-
ment, they would in all probability have had the God JElectricus,
who would have held high rank on Olympus; or, perhaps Jupiter
himself might have been styled Jupiter the Electrician, instead of
Jupiter the Thunderer. Nor can we fairly laugh at such fancies,
since even now, some assert, and more believe that Electricity is
the instrument by means of which Deity manipulates Matter.
Whether or not such an opinion is well founded, is a point which
can be best taken up and discussed when those who hold it
are fully agreed as to the nature of the two things thus brought
into Electrical connection. In later, and less enlightened ages,
Electricity would either have been placed under some saintly pa-
tronage, or it would have been denounced as Satanic in its origin.
The earlier observers spoke of it as an “ emanation,” or (i efflu-
vium” peculiar to certain bodies. But subsequently when its
twofold character had been established, Electricity was a name
given to two fluids distinguished by the terms of Vitreous, and
Resinous. Afterwards Franklin dispensed with one of the fluids,
and discarded both their names, substituting for these latter the
terms Positive and Negative. Ever since, Electricity has been
commonly regarded as a fluid or imponderable agent; and has thus


been placed in a class including 1 other hypothetical fluids, such,
for instance, as the “ luminiferous ether,” “ caloric,” the “ mag-
netic fluid,” the “ interplanetary ether,” and some others. At
present there seems to he a disposition among men of Science to
abolish this “ Electric Fluid,” and consider Electrical phenomena
simply as a manifestation of Force or Energy.
Of these different applications of the term in question, I shall
only consider the last. But helore doing so, it will he well to
point out another sense of which it is susceptible. Whether it has
been already so applied I cannot say.
The word “ Geometry” is not employed as the name of a spirit,
nor of an effluvium, nor of a fluid, nor of a force, but of a class,
which class consists of many individual propositions; and if these
individuals be removed, Geometry disappears with them. So also
the word “ Yertebrata” is employed to denote, not a cause or
agency of any kind, but simply a class comprehending a vast
variety of individual animals. So also “Truth” is not some divine,
or self-existent principle, hut rightly considered, is a convenient
name by means of which we associate in one class a great number
and variety of individual propositions. And generally, the ten-
dency of modern thought is to extract from such comprehensive
terms as Life, Mind, Feeling, Gravitation, Ac., all notions of
causative essences, and self-existent principles, and to view them
simply as convenient names under which we can group together-
individual facts. So, likewise, we can dissociate from the term
Electricity all hypotheses concerning ethers and fluids of all kinds
and view it simply as a generic term, by means of which we can
combine in one class the various facts brought under our notice by
the Electrician, Now “Force” is not the name of any class of
facts, but is defined as a cause, of which motion is the effect.
Hence, to speak of Electricity as a Force, is practically to refer it
to some individual cause—some mysterious agency, which, however
far we carry physical research, like the horizon, bounds our view
on every side; and beyond which we can never hope to see.
Furthermore, the ancient deities, the mediaeval spirits, and the
modern fluids, are only so many different impersonations of “ Force;”
wherefore, to discard those various impersonations and to substitute
the indefinite term “ Force ” is practically to demolish one set of
idols, and to exalt another, and that other merely verbal.
But the proposition, Electricity is Force —is objectionable on other
grounds, inasmuch as it merely establishes an equivalent between
two different words, but does not establish any intelligible equality
or relation between two different things . Of such verbal proposi-
tions there are many; the celebrated aphorism “ Knowledge is


be fairly Bymboll9ed
If it be objected, that in defining Force to be that which pro-
duces motion, we do not assume, but in reality possess a knowledge
i its nature, since the definition brings it into an intelligible
embod?e S d lp Tj th : Jf° tion/ . ' Xt might be r «P lied A* the knowledge
embodied in the definition is only equal to that obtained by inver-
ting the proposition, thus Motion is that which is produced by
Force; or more concisely And if it be affirmed that we
have learned from other, and independent sources all that is
possible, or at least necessary for us to know concerning the na-
ture of motion I simply ask :-What is it ?-a question which
has never yet been answered. Further, by adhering to the pro-
position, Electricity is Force, we involve ourselves in a logical
tangle. For if Electricity is a Force, and Force produces Motion
therefore Electricity is a certain cause of which motion is a certain
predicable effect. But numberless facts prove that motion is
present as a cause in the excitation, i, e. production of Electricity,
and m so far as motion is concerned in the production of Electricity
;l a S0 M Pr . OdUCeS f orce ; for Electricity is Force. Now to assert
that Motion produces Force, or is concerned in producing it is
not to invert the definition of Force, but to contradict it, or at
least wholly to extract all significance out of it.
Again, if we proceed further, and disencumber the subject of the
intermediate term Force, and retain the term Motion only, the
original objection, and the original difficulty still remain. For
unless we truly know what motion is, we do but re-state the fact
that x~y. With reference to this term, most persons are probably
of opinion that they know well enough what motion is, although
perhaps they may be unable to express that knowledge in unexcep-
tionable language, 1
Speaking for myself, however, I am sincere in confessing that
although this question has more or less occupied my attention for
several years past, I can neither answer it, nor even form any
definite and reliable opinion about it. And generally, in taking up
subjects of this nature, it is so necessary to be able to discriminate
between what we know, and what we think we know, but do not
that 1 will give a quasi illustration, which, although professedly
dealing with Motion only, is just as applicable to Force, Energy
Matter, Action, Gravity, and a great many other, and constantly
employed terms. J
uww ? e3ated tba ,J a Greek sage, on being asked the question
« j S motlon • re P lie d by walking across the room saying;
Behold you see motion, but what it is I cannot tell you.” Now
it appears to me that the matter cannot be so easily settled and


dismissed; and further, I believe that the answer of the sage was
unphilosophical in the extreme. Had he more thoroughly con-
sidered the subject, his reply might perhaps have been more in the
following strain: —
“My friend, you see me as I move across this room; but if you
therefore imagine that you see motion itself, you will fall into a
very palpable error; for we can see material bodies alone, and of
them, those only which emit or reflect light. Eject from your
mind, therefore, the error that motion is visible. What you see is
my person successively in different positions in respect to the
various other persons and objects in this room. You see my per-
son, and you see the objects, but you infer the motion ; and in this
instance the inference is right, although there is no mistake more
common than that of inferring a motion which does not exist.
Distinguish carefully, therefore, between the two questions, what
is motion? and where is motion ? Had your question been, what is
Life? I might have replied, pointing to a man, a bird, and a tree.
In these you may see some of its concomitants, and seeing them,
you may infer the presence of life; but concerning the real nature
of the thing thus named, I am wholly unable to inform you.
Nay more, not only am I unable to answer the question you have
put me; lam not even able to determine whether it is, or is not
answerable, Eor, on the one hand, to assert that no solution can
be given, is either to define motion as an inscrutable mystery—thus
beo’gino- the whole question ; or prospectively to limit the powers
of thought, and the range of knowledge; while, on the other
hand, if I say the problem may be solved, I pass judgment on a
matter which, whether cognoscible, or incognoscible, lies at present
entirely beyond my reach. Nor, my friend, can you be too cau-
tious in accepting’ the definitions usually provided for this term,
inasmuch as they are either synonyms, or synonymous expressions,
and therefore do not touch the matter at all; or they contain some
error which, when carefully scrutinized, piove that the leal natme
and significance of the thing we call motion, is greatly misunder-
stood. 0 Moreover there is another error against which I would
caution you; do not mistake a part for the whole. 1 01 even
granting it to be true that motion is ever accompanied by a change
of place, it is by no means to be assumed that “ change of place”
forms the sum total of the thing, for are not dime and direction just
as truly constituents of motion ? Hence, in addition to the pai-
ticular condition specified, there may be other and unperceived
conditions of equal or even greater significance, none of which
must be overlooked in any true definition of the word. You are
pleased to regard me as a philosopher; and may be perhaps sur-
prised to hear me thus confess my ignorance touching such an


exceedingly common thing as motion ; hut I may possibly lessen
your sur rise by putting to you your own question in my own words,
thus—The first and most obvious fact which arrested my attention
when I commenced the study of nature was this —Many, and im-
portant portions of the universe were ever changing their positions,
forms, magnitudes, and aspects ; which changes were generally
referable to a condition of things called motion. When I sought for
an explanation by looking more closely into nature’s machinery, to
my surprise, I detected this thing called motion everywhere. I
found that it was a prime element in all phenomena; that while
some of its modes are the only criteria of life, it is none the less
active in death, I say, that this thing which lat first thought to
be the characteristic of some things only, is safely predicable of all
things ; and I became impressed with the feeling that in the pro-
found bosom of Nature there lay concealed The Demon of inimit-
able Unrest, whose presence is felt in tremor or in change, even to
her remotest extremities. It is true that I see where motion is
almost every moment of my waking life ; I can even measure it,
and number it, and call it by many learned names, I do not there-
fore, my good friend, ask you for its other names; nor for its
number, nor measure, nor localities, but simply, What is it?
For my own part, I candidly confess myself unable to satisfy your
curiosity; and you must content yourself by gathering from my
reply to you the truth of the paradox that to be ignorant of a
thing sometimes demands a good deal of knowledge.
In view of these and other difficulties not noticed, it seems to
me to be wiser to refrain from the use of such expressions as
“ Electricity is Force,” or “ Electricity is Motion,” and to employ
the term simply in its generic sense, viz., as the name of certain
associated phenomena; by doing so we obtain this advantage:—
We neither affirm nor deny the existence of Electric Fluids and
Forces; and we more completely qualify our minds for the study
of the phenomena by confining our views solely to the facts of
the case ; and by making it our object not to invent, but to discover
Nature. To adopt a contrary practice is much the same error as
if a landscape painter, instead of affixing the name of the locality
somewhere on the frame, should paste it in large letters across
the centre of the picture itself. 110w r much philosophy has ob-
structed our views of things, and thus retarded the progress of
knowledge by this inveterate name-pasting propensity, is a question
strictly pertinent to the subject in hand, but which cannot further
be dwelt upon.
If now instead of harping on the old question, What is Electri-
city ? I particularise my enquiries, and ask —Why does glass, on
being rubbed by a piece of cloth, acquire the power of attraction


and repulsion ? What is the explanation of tbe two opposite
Electricities ? Why do a spark, and an explosion take place be-
tween two electrified bodies at one time, but not at another ? I
have but one uniform answer to give,—l do not know. But this
reply does not in reality reach the depth of my ignorance on these
matters ; for, not only am I unable to give the rationale of any
one single electrical fact, but I am very far from sure that in
describing the fact itself, I do not altogether misapprehend and
therefore mistake it. To consider two instances only :
1, Speaking of the approach and contact of these two pith
balls, A and B, we affirm that they attract each other ; which
expression, if it means anything at all, affirms that in each of these
bodies resides temporarily some agent, power, or cause, which pulls
or draws the other towards itself. And again, speaking of the
recession of these two 1 odies, we say that they repel each other ;
that is to say, there is a certain something in them which drives
or forces the other to a greater distance. These two words,
Attraction and Repulsion, thus implying some mysterious agency
into the nature of which we cannot penetrate, constitute a sort of
philosophical ne phis ultra. But whether they truly embody some
knowledge of the matter, or whether they involve some radical
error, is a point I shall not presume to determine. The simple fact,
separated from all hypothetical causes, is this: —Two bodies in a
certain Electrical condition approach each other ; while in another
Electrical condition they recede from each other j but with
reference to the cause of these motions we know nothing, and the
two terms “ attraction” and “ repulsion” may be but two largely
written names which, so to speak, we paste across the centre of the
picture, and which perhaps might be removed with great advantage,
since the two motions in question may be referred to causes which
are far more easily apprehended, viz : —lnequalities of pressure.
For instance, let these two pith balls, A and B, be suspended near
each other. Now, as a matter of fact, we know that the atmosphere
presses equally on every part of these balls, and that this pressure
denotes an equal and opposite re-pressure on the part of the balls
themselves. Viewed in connexion with each other, these two balls
collectively possess four distinct hemispheres, viz;—the two which
are near and opposite to each other, and the two which are remote,
Let the pressure on each of these hemispheres be denoted by 100.
Then, since the pressure and re-pressure is everywhere equal and
opposite, the balls remain motionless. But if by any means
whatever this equality of pressure be destroyed—for instance, if
the pressure on the remote hemispheres become 120 instead of 100,
or that on the near hemispheres, 80 instead of 100, we have an in-
telligible cause to which we can refer, and by which we can explain


the approach of the two balls ; as, by reversing- the conditions we
can assign an intelligible reason for their remotion to a greater
distance. But even admitting that Electrical attractions and
repulsions are more readily explicable by referring them to
inequalities of pressure, it is still to be determined by experiment
whether this pressure is atmospheric, or whether it be a pressure
sui generis ; and until this preliminary point has been disposed of,
it is idle to attempt to explain the origin of the inequality in
question.
2. The other instance in which we possibly mistake the facts
of the case is this If a person holds his knuckle near the
prime conductor of an electric machine, the knuckle is said to
receive, and the prime conductor is said to give off electric sparks.
That is to say, electric sparks leave the brass knob, pass through
the intervening air, and impinge against the knuckle. This
electric machine has two prime conductors, one of which is con-
nected with the glass plates, and the other with the cushions which
press against the plates. If I hold my knuckle near either of these
prime conductors we see exactly the same fact, i.e ., the knob gives
off and the knuckle receives an electric spark. But, if for my
knuckle, I substitute one of the prime conductors themselves, we
see that exactly the same thing- takes place. Hence the following
questions :—ln this last case which of these brass knobs gives off,
and which receives the electric spark ? Does a spark leave each
simultaneously ? or, do the spark we see, and the minute explosion
we hear, take place in the air, and at a point intermediate between
the two conductors, and thus instead of leaving one, and impinging
against the other, leave neither, and infringe against both? or
lastly, do sparks leave both knobs, but strike against neither?
Possibly the language in which these questions are expressed involve
some absurdities; but if it were established, as a matter of
fact, that all Electric explosions take place at a point midway be-
tween the two differently electrified bodies, such a fact would be of
g-reat significance. But to know the truth of the matter, and to
declare that knowledge in appropriate language, is evidently a
point which i equires, and deserves some consideration; for if the
language now employed be erroneous, it is difficult to see what
prevents such fundamental errors from vitiating the whole science.
From what has been said, it will be seen that I am perfectly
sincere in declaring ray inability to explain any one fact in Elec-
trical Science ; that is to say, 1 cannot take any particular phe-
nomenon, (say the divergence of these two slips of paper) and
place that act of divergence in an intelligible and necessary
connexion with the pressure of the cushions against the revolving
plates.


But, it may be asked, granting the word Electricity to be
employed in the way proposed, viz.j'as the name of a certain class
of phenomena, is the old question, What is Electricity ? fairly
answered ? Certainly not: tor arbitrarily to determine the appli-
cation of a scientific term is one thing, and to investigate and
expound the problems comprehended under that term, is another,
and very different thing. The question is not answered, but it
must be put in other words, the full significance of which will be
best gathered by looking at some analogous cases:—For instance,
What is that element of union which combines into one system the
exceedingly dissimilar animals included in the term Vertehrata ?
The reply is—not a fluid, nor a force, not a self-existent principle of
any kind, but simply a fact—the possession of a backbone. Or,
again ; What binds into one system both the individual proposi-
tions, and the various branches of Mathematics ? The leply is,
that the object, either direct or indirect, of every Mathematical
Proposition is to establish an equality between two contrasted
quantities.
So with Electricity. By applying this term as a common name to
a great variety of physical phenomena we tacitly assume that these phe-
nomena are bound together by some common underlying condition;
and if, instead of at once cutting the knot, by inventing Electrical
fluids and forces, we refer the connexion to some fundamental fact,
or condition, we propose to ourselves a problem, which, however
difficult it may be, is certainly not an impracticability, for the question
is no Ipnger what is Electricity, but—What is that fact or condition
which is common to all phenomena comprehended under that term ?
There are two ways in which we might set about answering this
question ; one of these is right and the other wrong. But before
indicating these two methods I must, for a moment pause to distin-
guish between two things, which, although very closely allied, are
yet quite distinct, viz :
Experiment and Observation on the one hand, and Science on
the other ; the distinction between the two being that which exists
between cumulation and construction , or between the juxtaposition
of parts, and the organization of parts. For instance; suppose
a person (ingenious, but wholly unacquainted with Geometrical
reasoning ), to possess a good set of Mathematical Instruments, and
to devote his time to the construction, and instrumental examination
and comparison of Geometrical figures ; there can be no doubt but
that he would discover, and experimentally establish a great many
Geometrical facts; and that if others similarly qualified engaged in the
work, the process of discovery and experimental verification would
be carried very far into Geometrical Science. In this case we should
have a great accumulation of facts, many of them of the greatest


practical Importance; but rightly considered, such facts constitute,
not the component parts of a science, but simply a mass of experi-
ments, having no other connexion than that denoted by a common
generic term, or that established by the rule and compass. If,
however, (without laying aside his material instruments), he takes
up those also provided by Euclid in his Definitions and Axioms,
then it is possible for him to reach by this second route all the facts
which he attained in the first. But the connexion which he now
establishes between his facts is not nominal, and instrumental, but
mental; not artificial but natural; not accidental but necessary. Ex-
perimental Geometry denotes the laborious gathering together, and
placing in juxtaposition, the leaves, the fruit, the bark, the branches,
and the stem of the Geometrical Tree ; but Euclid’s Geometry
{which is a science) denotes a mental germ, which, vitalized by truth,
grows, and becomes a tree by assimilating and organizing the
materials it feeds on. In fine, Experiment and Observation is not
Science, but therefrom the mind gathers the materials out of which
it constructs Science, by placing each fact upon one solid axiomatic
to resume; if a man wishes to discover the great centralizing
fact of Electricity, I think he would do wrong to go on adding fact
to fact, and experiment to experiment, iu order to have at hand as
many “instances” as possible, inasmuch as the accumulated dissimi-
larities thus brought under his views, must so disturb and perplex his
judgment, as effectually to prevent him frem looking through the
diiferences which the phenomena exhibit, into the thing wherein they
all agree In short, as he multiplies his facts, so he multiplies his
perplexities, which he can escape only by imagining some special
and effective agency, or by inventing some hypothesis, which, when
critically examined by other eyes, is sure to leak at various points,
and which at best, will be but departmental in character ; whereas,
e>ery Scientific hypothesis should have two sides, viz., the depart-
mental and the universal ; the former of which should connect the
facts embraced in that particular Science, while the latter should
connect the whole department with the general system of things
lying outside of it. , , „ . .
The other, and in my opinion, the right method of enquiry is that
for which we find a precedent in Euclid, and a recommendation
everywhere, except in books. It consists :-lst In the selection of
definite axiomatic ground upon which to build ; and w niclq with
some verbal alteration, should serve as the basis of any other science
2nd. In furnishing the mind with its necessary instruments; that
is to say, with sharply defined, and inelastic terms ; so that (meta-
phorically speaking) the word which means a square in the first
chapter, may not signify a rhombus in the second, and a scalene
triangle in the last. 3rd. In taking up one of the simplest Electrical


facts first, and resting it on the general axiom, and so on, fact by
fact, thus making each fact axiomatic, and the axiom itself Electrical.
If success should not attend this method, it is difficult to see how
it can be achieved by adhering to the other, since (still clinging to
the Geometrical proposition as an exemplar) every scientific truth
must be compounded of the particular instance, and the general
axiom, the latter of which we do not discover in the science, but
carry with us into it.
It would be idle to discuss here what these axioms may or may
not be; but if it should be asked, “ What are the first terms in this
branch of science to be defined?” it might be fairly replied, that such
terms are to be found in the statement of an elementary electrical
fact. But here again, it is necessary to pause, in order to arrive at
some definite notion as to what constitutes an u electrical fact,”
else very possibly we may mistake a part for the whole. For
instance, simply to rub this glass tube with a piece of silk, is not an
Electrical fact; neither does it consist in the motions of these pith
balls. But the anterior condition of glass rubbing, and the posterior
condition of motion in the balls, taken together, constitute the two
sides, halves, or constituent parts of one and the same electrical
fact. Call this anterior condition A, and the posterior condition B.
Then A and B are not two things, but simply the opposite parts of
the same thing. Hence the statement of the fact must embrace
both A and B.
If now we come to put this simple experiment into language we
are presented with an alternative ; that is, (1) we may employ several
terms which defy definition ; or (2) we may employ but two terms
which solicit, rather than defy definition. For instance, we may
affirm that the motion and consequent inequality of pressure in A,
are succeeded by an inequality of pressure , and a consequent motion
in B ; in which case the only terms requiring formal definition would
be “motion” and “pressure.” On the other hand, and adopting
the ordinary language, we may affirm that Friction (i. e. motion
and pressure) excites into activity a certain Electric “fluid” or
“force” which repels and attracts in B. Here in addition to the
two terms mentioned, we have several others, such as Attraction,
Repulsion, Electric Fluid or Force, Electrical Excitation, and by
inference Quiescent or Latent, and Active Electricity. In choosing
one of these alternatives, and rejecting the other, there are various
considerations to be held in view, of which I shall briefly touch upon
two only, viz :—those concerning Analogy and Assumption.
Now Analogy is in physical research, what Circumstantial Evidence
is in Law—something which points towards a conclusion, but does
not strictly demonstrate it—the materials out of which we may, if
careful, construct a reliable opinion , but cannot establish a truth .


If. (returning to our experiment) we say that motion and pressure
are the fundamental conditions in the anterior half of the fact,
denoted by A; and if we, therefore, infer that motion and pressure
are the fundamental conditions in the other half of the fact denoted
by B, our inference is borne out by a vast number and variety of
analogies, some of which come as near as possible to the point
without deciding it. Whereas, if we chose the other alternative and
assert that the motion and pressure we observe in A, generates
Electricity, and this Electricity becomes Attraction and Repulsion in
B, wo do in fact, assert that there are physical phenomena in which
the cause and effect may possess no element of homogeneity, but
may be entirely and utterly dissimilar ; an assertion which should
not be made in the absence of proof, since it is not only unsupported
by the phenomena themselves, but also runs counter to all analogy.
With reference to the assumptions involved in the alternative.
If in the experiment we refer the opposite motions of the pith balls
to the action of two opposite and peculiar attractive and repulsive
causes; and if again, we refer these causes to the action of some
peculiar force, or fluid, we not only describe the fact, but explain it
likewise; and we explain it by inventing some mysterious agency,
and inserting it between A and B. The presence of such inter-
mediate agency can be neither seen nor demonstrated, but simply
assumed, and assumed in order to account for the motions of the
pith balls; but which motions the assumption leaves wholly unac-
counted for, since it establishes no intelligible connexion between A
and B. In adopting the other alternative the homogeneity of con-
dition in A and B is an inevitable inference. But even if it be an
assumption to state that the pressure on the opposite sides of the
balls become unequal, the assumption extends no further; for, admit
that, and the observed motions become an intelligible necessity.
Hence, to come back to the point, the balance greatly preponder-
ates in favour of the simpler statement of the Electrical Fact; and
if we therefore adopt it, the terms which first come uppermost for
definition are motion and pressure ; while such words and expres-
sions as Attraction, Repulsion, Electrical Fluids or Forces, and
Electrical Excitation, may be with great advantageremoved from the
lecture table, and placed away on the top shelf.
It is obviously impossible for me to exhibit here, even if I had
them at hand, all the difficulties of this subject; I will therefore
conclude by pointing out one or two connected with the single term
pressure. Here a variety of questions at once suggest themselves ;
all of, them requiring very careful handling.— e.g. What is
Pressure ? What is the true relation between it and motion ? Do
bodies receive, diffuse, and transfer pressure with equal facility ?
And if not, what bearing have such facts on Electrical Conduction


and Insulation ? and so on indefinitely. But it is evident that the
first of these questions, “what is pressure?” must receive some definite
answer before we can take up the others with any well grounded
expectation of fairly solving them. But to attack such a problem
at once, with a view to its immediate solution is very much the same
thing as if a person attacked a difficult geometrical proposition
before his mind had become habituated to geometrical methods, or
furnished with the necessary preliminary Geometrical principles.
I make no pretensions whatever of being able to answer the
question. I have merely an undefined and half-formed opinion on
the subject; but to make this opinion intelligible would require, not
a concluding paragraph, but one or two very carefully prepared lec-
tures, since it is based on some elementary laws concerning two
other things called Form and Quantity, which lie underneath the
question —“ What is Electricity ?”
E. Bell, Steam Printer, 97 Little Collins-street East, Melbourne,


