

I /(VI
• EQW>sRE>f©to
0R v
Wliat Bimetallism -
MEANS FOR
Australians and Australia
IPublisbeb bv> tbe
Bimetallic League of New South Wales,
6 SPRING STREET,
SYDNEY.


Send your Faulty Wools—a^.
TO THE
LAKESIDE WOOL SCOURING CO
WRIGHT & ABBOTT,
WATER RESERVE, BOTANY.
ju** Office: 5 SPRING ST., SYDNEY.
WRIGHT & ABBOTT —.
Beg to announce that they are now adding
an EASTWOOD and AMBLER Wool-Washing
Machine to their existing extensive plant.
This is the Latest English Invention of its
kind, and the only machine of its kind in
the Colony.
Referring to .this grand invention, one of
the largest firms of Wool Combers in Brad-
ford writes: “The Eastwood and Ambler
Wool-Washing Machines are the best because
the staple of the wool is undisturbed, and
consequently combs and cards better. We
use no other machines now.”
WRIGHT & ABBOTT, Commission Wool Scourers,
%
5 SPRING STREET, SYDNEY.
BANKERS: UNION BANK OF AUSTRALIA, Ltd.


Wliat Bimetallism .
MEANS FOR
Australians ana Australia.
* *
published bs tbe
Bimetallic League of New South Wales,
6 SPRING STREET,
SYDNEY.


w. ALISON,
President of the Bimetallic League of New South Wales.
What is Bimetallism ? It is Monetary Reform. It is a financial question. It concerns
our every day welfare, our bread and butter. It shows the close relation between standard
metal money, prices and wages. It shows how the yellow man with the white money has such
an advantage in manufacturing competition over the white man with the yellow money. It
explains how falling prices produce misery, foreclosure of mortgages, reduction of wages, and
that this fall, foreclosure and reduction has been caused by a reduction of the legal tender
monejrof the gold-using races. It claims that a return to the monetary system which was the
law prior to 1873 would bring back rising prices, rising wages and prosperity. The present
pamphlet, in a simple and condensed form, affords the reader an opportunity of judging how
far the claims for Bimetallism are grounded on facts, experience and reason. Let no one credit
the representations commonly made that the subject is a difficult one. On the contrary, it is
full of life, vitality and every day interest. No one will regret giving a few hours to its study
when he finds out how closely the subject is connected with his every day pecuniary interest.
W. ALISON,
President.


M 3 2 rs/ F I° lS
BIMETALLIC LEAGUE.
fi/itß of bonbon ©fS«S- —29 Cornhill, E.C.
Utaiujjcstn: ©fßceS- —Haworth’s Buildings, 5 Cross Street.
IJmmngljam ©Sees.—23 Temple Row.
“ The object of the League is to urge upon the British Government
the necessity of co-operating with other leading Nations for the
establishment, by International Agreement, of the free coinage of
Gold and Silver, at a fixed ratio.”
ircsibcnt—lord aldenham.
Cfoattman of dkitexal Council. —h. r. grenfell.
iue-fusi&ents.
The Duke of Abercorn, K.G., C.B.
Lord Ashburton.
Thomas Ashton (Oldham).
The Marquis of Abergavenny, K.G.
John Addison, Q.C., M.P.
The Marquis of Ailesbury.
George W. Allen, C.I.E.
Right Hon. A. J. Balfour, M.P.
Right Hon. Gerald W. Balfour, M.P.
Sir David Barbour, K.C.S.I.
Thomas Baring (London).
Joshua Barrows (Padiham)..
William W. B. Beach, M.P.
The Duke of Beaufort. K.G.
H. R. Beeton (London).
Gilbert Beith, M.P.
Lord Henry Bentinck, M.P.
Lord Charles Beresford, C.B.
Commander Hastings Berkeley, R.N.
Thomas Bertwistle (Accrington).
Colonel the Hon. F. C. Bridgeman, M. P.
Right Hon. Jacob Bright, M.P.
Rev. H. F. Burnaby, M.A.
Right Hon. Henry Chaplin, M.P.
Alfred L. Cohen (London).
The Marquis of Carmarthen, M. P.
The Earl of Carlisle.
Lord Castletown
C. W, Cayzer, M.P.
R. B. Chapman, C.S.I.
Lieut. -General Sir Andrew Clarke, G. C. M. 6.,
C. 8., C.I.E.
Admiral Sir J. E. Commerell, K.C.B.
G. A. V. Conybeare, M.P.
The Marquis of Conyngham.
J. Corbett (Droitwich).
A. H. Cottam (Blackburn).
Sir VV. J. R. Cotton (London)
Rev. Canon Cromwell, M.A.
Joseph Oowen (Newcastle-on-Tyne).
The Earl of Crawford and Balcarres, LL.D.,
F.R.S.
Alexander Cross, M.P.
Sir Henry S. Cunningham, K.C.I E.
Coningsby R. Disraeli, M.P.
Earl of Donoughmore, K.C.M.G.
Sir H. F. de Trafford, Bart.
Sir E. Robert P. Edgcumbe.
The Earl of Ellesmere.
Lord Elcho.
Sir J. Whittaker Ellis, Bart.
Baron Emile Erlanger.
R. Lacey Everett.
The Marquis of Exeter.
Captain H. T. Fenwick, M.P.
The Earl of Feversham.
The Duke of Fife, K.T.
The Earl Fortescue.
Thomas Fielden (Todmorden).
G. H. Finch, M.P.
Professor H. S. Foxwell, M.A.
Moreton Frewen (London).
Lord Gerard.
Alban G. H. Gibbs, M.P.
Vicary Gibbs, M.P.
Professor E. C. K. Conner, M.A.
The Marquis of Granby, M.P.
C. W. Gray.
Sir Edward Green, Bart.
H. R. Grenfell.


W. H. Grenfell.
Earl Grey.
Sir Lepel H. Griffin, K. C.S.I
James Guthrie (London).
W. Murray Guthrie.
Lord Claude J. Hamilton.
Lord F. Hamilton, M.P.
Thomas Hanbury.
Frank Hardcastle,
Sir Hector M. Hay, Bart.
A. Raymond Heath.
Augustus Holder, M.P.
Right Hon. E. Heneage.
J. P. Heseltine (London).
Sir Alfred Hickman, M.P.
Right Hon. A. Staveley Hill, M.P.
Charles Hoare (London),
Alfred Hoare (London).
J. Sancroft Holmes.
David Holmes (Burnley).
Sir T. C. Hope, K.C.5.1., C.I.E.
Sir W. H. Houldsworth, Bart., M.P.
James Houldsworth, Wishaw, N B.
Isaac Hoyle.
Sir Henry H Howorth, K.C.1.E., F.R.S.,
M.P.
George Howell.
Sir F. Seager Hunt, Bart., M.P.
Sir Guyer Hunter, K.C. M.G.
J. Henniker Heaton, M.P.
Rev. J. F. A. Hervey, M.A.
Henry Higgs, B.A , LL.B.
W. Jacks.
Right Hon. Sir Henry James, M.P.
A. Weston Jarvis.
A. Johnstone-Douglas (Ruthwell, N. 8.).
J. Jordan, M.P.
Gen. R H. Keatinge, V.C., C.S.I.
George D. Kelley (Manchester).
H. Knatchbull-Hugesson, M.P.
J. Boyd Kinnear (Lady Bank, N. 8.).
Lord Knightley.
Edm. F. Vesey Knox, M.P.
The Marquis of Londonderry, K.G.
Sir J. C. Lawrance.
Edward Langley (London).
Joseph Larmor, D.Sc., F.R.S.
Elliott Lees, M.P.
Sir Roper Lethbridge. C.I.E.
Robert Livingstone.
Hon. and Rev. Edward Lyttelton, M.A.
Sampson S. Lloyd (London).
Wilson Lloyd, M. P.
Sir Alfred Lyall, K.C.8., K.C.I.E.
Sir Leonard Lyell, Bart, M.P.
Hugh M. Matheson.
Cuming Macdona, M.P.
Sir Donald H. Macfarlane,
John Wm. Maclure, M.P,
Sir Joseph N. McKenna.
Elphinstone V. A. Maitland.
J. H. Manners-Sutton (Newark).
Earl Manvers.
Professor James Mavor.
James Mawdsley (Manchester).
Edward Mellor (Oldham).
Sir H. M. Meysey-Thompson, Bart., M.P.
T. Milvain.
A. B. Freeman Mitford, C. 8., M.P.
Sir Guilford L. Molesworth, K.C.I.E.
Sir Samuel Montagu, Bart., M.P.
R. Jasper More, M.P.
Wm. Mullin (Manchester).
John Musgrave (Whitehaven).
Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart.
Ernest Noel (London).
T. O’Hanlon.
Edward Howley Palmer (London).
Herbert B. Praed (London).
Sir Richard H. Paget, Bart., M.P.
J. Pinkerton, M.P.
W. Pomfret Pomfret.
The Duke of Portland.
L. L. Price, M A.
A. D. Provaod, M.P.
Sir John H, Puleston.
The Earl of Radnor.
Lord Rowton, C. B.
Lord Rook wood.
Lord Kendlesham.
E. M. Hatton Riddell.
Rt. Hon. Sir M. White Ridley, Bart., M.P.
Sir George Russell, Bart., M.P.
James Rankin, M.P.
Thomas Salt.
Col. T. M. Sandys, M.P.
Sir Albert A. David Sassoon, C.S.I.
Sir George R. Sitwell, Bart., M.P.
Lord Sherborne.
H. Seton-Karr, M.P.
J. W, Sidebotham, M.P.
T. H. Sidebottom, M.P.
William Smart, M.A., LL.D
Samuel Smith, M.P.
Lord Suffield, K C.B.
J. E. Spencer,
Lord Stanley, M.P.
The Duke of Sutherland.
Sir T. Sutherland, K.C.M.G., M.P.
Professor J. E. Symes, M.A.
Sir Charles Tennant, Bart.
W. E. M. Tomlinson, M.P.
C. E. Howard Vincent, C. 8., M.P.
Viscount Valentia, M.P.
Professor Robert Wallace,
Edmund Waller (Glouc ster).
Colonel Cornwallis West.
George Whiteley, M.P.
Philip H. Wicksteed, M.A.
Stephen Williamson.
W. H. Wilkinson (Accrington).
The Marquis of Winchester.
Colonel Mild may Wilson, M.P,
R Grant Webster, M.P.
Sir George 0. Wombwell, Bart.
Caleb Wright.
Sir Thomas Wright (Leicester).
George Wyndham, M.P.
The Earl of Yarborough.
4


Australian ‘granr&cs.
NEW SOUTH WALES : SOUTH AUSTRALIA :
Head Office, Sydney.
Hon. Sec., A. W. Pearse, 6 Spring Street. Head Offices, Adelaide.
VICTORIA : Hon. gee., G. Fowler Stewart, 14 King
Head Office, Melbourne. William Street.
Hon. Sec., John L. Menzies,*s9 Temple
Court.
£ealanfr sranc&.
Head Offices, Dunedin. Hon. Sec., David Reid, Jun.
THE BRITISH LEAGUE
PROMINENT MEMBERS
Bankers
Henry Coke
Baron Emile D’Erlanger.
Sir E. Robert P. Edgcumbe.
Thomas Glaister.
Sir Lepel H. Griffin, K.C.S.I.
Alban G. H. Gibbs, M.P., Director of the
Bank of Australasia.
Vicary Gibbs, M. P., Director of the Queens-
land National Bank.
Charles Hoare.
Alfred Hoare.
Thomas Salt.
Sampson S. Lloyd.
John Nutt Bullen, Director of the London
and Westminster Bank, Limited.
E. F. Duncanson, Director of the London
and County Banking Co., Limited.
James Parlane,Manchester and Salford Bank,
Limited, London.
James Eckersley.
Sir Horace B. T. Farquahar, Bart.
Sir Thos. Sutherland, K.C.M.G., M.P.,
Director of the Bank of Australasia.
Augustus Holder.
J. F. Horley.
The Imperial Bank of Persia (Loudon).
Wm. Jackson.
Andrew Kingsmill.
Wm. Keswick.
The London Bank of Mexico.
J. Howard Gwyther.
Isaac Hoyle.
Marquis of Ailesbury.
Henry Wethered.
J. R. Heaven.
David McLean.
E. C. Morgan.
Sir James Mackay, K.C.I.E.
John Musgrave.
J. A. Maitland.
Herbert B. Praed.
Alfred Crewdson.
Robert Neill, Jun.
Sir Samuel Montagu, Bart., M.P.
The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Cor-
poration.
The Chartered Bank of India, Australia and
Wm. Patterson.
W. Pomfret-Pomfret.
Henry M. Read.
E. M, Hutton-Riddell.
China (London).
Sir Charles Tennant, Bart.
Duke of Abercorn, K. 6.
E. P. Squarey.
I. Seligman.
C. I. Sassoon
Edward Sassoon.
M. G, Schilizki.
A. Von Andre.
The Bank of China, Japan, and the Straits
(London)
F. B. Blake.
Sir Henry Cunningham, K.C.I.E.
The Delhi and London Bank, Limited,
John Thomson.
Col. Mildmay Wilson.
Sir Alexander Wilson.
Y. Nakai.
London.
Merchants
A Zim nern.
Rt. Hon. Wm. Lidderdale (London).
Hon Evelyn Hubbard,
Thos, Baring.
Herbert C. Gibbs.
Sir John Muir.
Jasper Young.
W. M. Strachan.
Henry G. Hayter.
Francis G. Hayter.
H. D. Stewart.
Sir Robert Jardine, Bart,
Hugh M. Matheson.
Edward Howley Palmer.
Reginald E. Johnstone.
Sir Albert A. David Sassoon, C.S.I.
Reuben Sassoon.
David Murray.
E. Iveson.
G. A. Batchelor.
H. Bill.
Alexander Adam.
J. F. Ogilvy.
W. Murray Guthrie.


John A. Beith.
Robert Barclay.
Arthur D. F. Culbard.
W. E. Dorrington.
Geo. Handasyde Dick.
John S. Dods,
W. and C. Dunlop.
H. T. Gaddum.
Robert Gladstone.
Thomas Henthorne.
J. Arthur Hutton.
Henry Lathbury.
Manufacturers, &c
Alfred Arnold.
Ely Andrew.
Edward Cox.
Alfred Emmott.
Sir Edward Green, Bart.
Edward H. Greg.
George C. Haworth.
Frank Hardcastle.
Lewis Haslam.
Thomas Heginbottom.
Walter J. Houldsworth.
J. H. Howell
Howard Asten Allport
James Houldsworth
Joseph Jackman.
Oldham Operative Cotton Spinners’ Associa-
tion, Oldham.
The Amalgamated Associations of Operative
Cotton Spinners.
Northern Counties Weavers’Association.
Weavers’ Association, Blackburn.
Bristol Trades’ Council.
United Textile Factory Workers.
Huddersfield Trades’ Council,
(not
Labour Organisations and Labour Leaders.
J. M. McLaren.
John W. Miller.
Charles Macdonald.
Duncan Matheson.
Samuel Ogden.
T. O’Hanlon.
A. E. Rodewald.
Edward J. Reiss.
J. W. Southern.
Walter A. Sandeman.
J. Schack Sommer.
William Sargant.
otherwise Classified).
W. C. Jones.
John King.
Joseph Lees.
Charles H. Neville.
P H. Normand,
David Spence.
W. A. Secretan.
J. L. Thackeray and Son.
Wm. Taylor.
George Walthew.
Sir Thomas Wright.
I. Crewdson Waterhouse.
E. W. Wrigley.
S. Bourne.
Manchester and Salford Trades’ Council, and
Lithographic Printers’ Association.
Oldham Cotton Spinners’ Association.
United Textile Factory Workers,Manchester.
Card and Blowing Room Hands’ Operative
Association, Manchester,
Northern Counties Weavers’ Association,
Accrington.
The United Textile Factory Workers.
Northern Counties Weavers’ Association.
Landowners and Agriculturists (not otherwise Classified).
Lord Ashburton.
Marquis of Abergavenny, K.G.
The Duke of Beaufort, K.G.
Thos. Bell.
The Marquis of Conyngham.
Earl of Carlisle.
Lord Castletown.
The Earl of Crawford and Balcarres, K.T.,
LL.D., F.R.S.
The Earl of Donoughmore, K.O.M.G.
Marquis of Exeter.
The Earl of Ellesmere.
Duke of Fife, K.T.
The Earl Fortescue.
The Earl of Feversham.
The Earl Grey.
Lord Gerard.
W. H. Gibson.
Antony Gibbs.
C. W. Gray.
Sampson Hanbury.
A. Raymond Heath.
J. Bancroft Holmes.
Lord Knightley.
Capt. F. C. Loder Symonds.
The Mkrquis of Londonderry, K.G.
H. Liversidge, Jun.
Earl Manvers.
H. L. B. McCalmont.
Touman Mosley.
The Duke of Portland.
Lord Penrhyn.
Lord Rendlesham.
The Duke of Richmond and Gordon, K.G.
The Earl of Radnor.
Lord Rowton, C.B.
Clare Sewell Read.
Lord Brookwood.
Lord Sherborne.
Lord Suffield, K.C.B.
The Duke of Sutherland.
The Marquis of Winchester.
Sir Geo. U. Wombwell, Bart.
The Earl of Yarborough.
6


Members of the House of Commons (not otherwise Classified).
John Addison, Q.C., M.P.
Gilbert Beith, M. P.
Wm. W. B. Beach, M.P.
Colonel the Hon. F. C. Bridgman, M. P.
Rt. Hon. Jacob Bright, M.P.
Gerald W. Balfour, M.P.
C. A. V. Conybeare, M.P.
The Marquis of Carmarthen, M.P.
Alexander Cross, M.P,
C. W. Cayzer, M.P.
R. Lacey Everett, M.P.
Lord Elcho, M.P.
Coningsby R. Disraeli, M.P.
Capt. H. T. Fenwick, M.P.
G. H. Finch, M.P.
Marquis of Granby, M.P,
Rt. Hon. E. Heneage, M.P.
George Howell, M.P.
Sir W. H. Houldsworth, Bart., M.P.
J. Henniker Heaton, M.P.
Sir Henry H. Howarth, K.C.1.E., F.R.S.,
M.P.
Rt. Hon. A. Staveley Hill, M.P.
Sir Alfred Hickman, M.P.
Rt Hon. Sir Henry James, M.P.
Sir F. Seager Hunt, Bart., M.P.
Lord F. Hamilton, M.P.
J. Jordan, M.P.
Wm. Jacks, M. P,
H. Knatchbull-Hugessen, M.P.
H. Seton-Karr, M.P.
Edmund F. Vesey Knox, M.P.
Wilson Lloyd, M.P.
Sir Leonard Lyell, Bart., M.P.
Elliott Lees, M. P.
Sir H. M. Meysey-Thompson, Bart., M.P.
A. B. Freeman Mitford, C. 8., M.P.
John Wm. Maclure, M.P.
Cumming, Macdona, M.P.
R. Jasper More, M.P.
Hon. J. Scott Montagu, M.P.
Sir Donald H. Macfarlane, M.P.
J. Pinkerton, M.P.
Sir Richard H. Paget, Bart, M.P.
A. D. Provand, M.P,
James Rankin, M.P.
Sir. Geo. Russell, Bart., M.P.
Rt. Hon. Sir M. White Ridley, Bart., M.P
Lord Stanley, M.P.
J. E. Spencer, M.P.
T. H. Sidebottom, M.P.
J. W. Sidebotham, M.P.
Sir George R. Sitwell, Rart., M. P.
Col. T. M. Sandys, M.P.
Sir Mark J. Stewart, Bart., M.P.
Samuel Smith, M.P.
W. E. M. Tomlinson, M.P.
Viscount Valentia, M. P.
C. E. Howard Vincent, C. 8., M.P.
R. Grant Webster, M.P.
George Whiteley, M.P.
Stephen Williamson, M.P.
George Wyndham, M.P.
Economic
Authorities.
Professor H. S. Foxwell, M.A.
F. J. Faraday.
Professor E. C. K. Gonner, M.A.
Henry Higgs, B. A., LL.D.
J. S. Mackenzie, M.A.
Professor Mavor, M.A.
Professor J. S Nicholson, D.Sc., M.A.
L. L. Price, M.A.
Professor J. H. Poynting, F. R.S., D.Sc.,&c,
Professor J. Ryan, D.Sc., M.A., LL.M.
J. Barr Robertson.
Professor Henry Sidgwick, D.Litt.
William Smart, M.A., LL.D.
Professor J. E. Symes. M.A,
Philip H. Wicksteed, M.A.
General.
The Most Rev. Archbishop Walsh, Dublin.
The Peninsular and Oriental Steam Naviga-
tion Co.
Abraham Haworth.
Geo. W. Allen, C.I.E.
W. Lockett Agnew.
John Andrews.
Rev. Martin Anstey, M.A.
H. R. Beeton.
Walter M. Blackey, Glasgow.
The Right Hon. Lord Charles Beresford.
Rev. H. F. Burnaby, M.A.
Lord Henry Beutinck.
Commander Hastings Berkeley, R.N.
Sir David Barbour, K.C.S.I.
Col. Thomas Brooks.
Fred. S. Bishop.
Rev. C. A. Barlow.
Sir W. J. R. Cotton.
Lieut.-Gen. Sir Andrew Clark, G.C.M G.,
C. 8., C.I.E.
Alfred H, Cohen, Trustee and Manager of
the London Stock Exchange.
Admiral Sir J. E. Commerell, K.C.B.
Rev. Canon Cromwell, M.A.
John Corbett.
A. J. W. Douglas.
Ernest Cassel.
Frank C. Capel.
A. Cassella.


J. T. Calvert.
R. B. Chapman, C.S.I.
A. Cotterell-Tupp.
W. H. Duignan.
Sir John Whittaker Ellis, Bart.
Thomas Fielden.
H. C. Field.
James Guthrie.
W. H. Grenfell.
H. R. Grenfell.
R. S. Gundry.
J. E. Hall.
Cornelius Hanbury.
Capel Hanbury.
Sir Hector M. Hay.
J. P. Heseltine.
SirW. Guyer Hunter, K.C.M.G.
Sir. T. C. Hope, K.C.S.L, C.I.E.
Thomas Hanbury.
Lord Claud J. Hamilton.
Alex. T. Hunter.
Andrew K. Hichins, Trustee and Manager of
the London Stock Exchange.
C. J. Harcourt.
A. Johnstone-Douglas,
J. Boyd-Kinnear.
Peter Kevan.
Gen. R. H. Keatinge, V.C. C.S.I.
Hon. and Rev. Edward Lyttelton, M.A.
Edward Langley.
Arthur Lee.
Joseph Larmor, D.Sc.; F.R.S.
John Mark.
W. S. Miller.
J. H. Manners-Sutton.
Sir Guilford L. Molesworth, K.C.I. E.
Reginald E. Middelton.
Sir Joseph N. McKenna.
H. J. Manton.
Elphinstone V. A. Maitland.
Ernest Noel.
Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart.
William Noton.
T. E. Powell.
J. F. L. Rolleston.
A. G. Renshaw.
W, T. Rothwell.
J. D. Sandars.
D. E. Stephens.
A. G. Schiff & Co.
J. B. Stanhope.
Hermann Schmidt.
Ernest Seyd.
Lieut.-Gen. Richard Strachey, C.S.I.
J. C. Taylor.
H. S. Trower.
Colonel Cornwallis West.
Edmund Waller.
Thomas A. Welton.
H. E. Wollmer.
James Dundas White, M.A., LL M.
Professor Robert Wallace.
Rev. J. F. A. Hervey, M.A.
M. Eenest Seyd, in 1871, wrote the following remarkable prophecy :
It is a great mistake to suppose that the adoption of the gold (standard of value) by other
States besides England will be beneficial. It will only lead to destruction the monetary
equilibrium hitherto existing, and cause a fall in the value of silver from which England s trade
and the Indian silver valuations v ill suffer more than all other interests, grievous as the general
decline of prosperity all over the world will be.
The strong doctrinarianism existing in England as regards the gold valuation is so blind
that, when the time of depression sets in, there will be this special feature :
The economical authorities of the country will refuse to listen to the cause here fore-
shadowed ; every possible attempt will be made to prove that the decline of commerce is due to
all sorts of causes and irreconcilable matters; the workman and his strikes will be the first con-
venient target; then “ speculating ” and “ overtrading ” will have their torn; many other
allegations will be made, totally irrelevant to the real issue, but satisfactory to the moralising
tendency of financial writers.
8


SUBSCRIPTIONS TOWARDS THE GUARANTEE FUND
For Extra Work in developing the Organisation of the League.
Antony Gibbs & Sons ... £2,500 0 0
Sir Wm. H. Houldsworth,
Bart., M.P 2,500 0 0
H. McCalmont 2,500 0 0
Heseltine, Powell & Co. ... 2,500 0 0
James Dilworth & Son ... 2,500 0 0
Robert Barclay ... ... 1,000 0 0
P. Spence & Sons ... 1,000 0 0
I. C. Waterhouse ... ... 1,000 0 0
Crosses & Winkworth ... 1,000 0 0
Duke of Sutherland ... ... 1,000 0 0
Thomas Hanbury ... ... 1,000 0 0
Duke of Portland ... 1,000 0 0
Alfred Crewdson ... ... 1,000 0 0
Ernest Cassel .. ... ... 1,000 0 0
Antony Gibbs... ... ... 1,000 0 0
W. H. Grenfell 750 0 0
S. Smith, M.P 500 0 0
Smith, Edwards & Co. ... 500 0 0
W. T. Rothwell 500 0 0
Duke of Fife ... ... ... 500 0 0
Charles Hoare ... ... 500 0 0
Davies & Eckersley ... ... 500 0 0
Geo. Fraser, Sons & Co. ... 500 0 0
Lewis Haslam ... ... 500 0 0
R. E. Haslam... ... ... 500 0 0
Reddish Spinning Co. ... 500 0 0
Joshua Hoyle & Co. ... ... 500 0 0
C. H. Neville 500 0 0
Earl of Yarborough ... ... 500 0 0
Lord Ashburton ... ... 500 0 0
Matheson & Co. ... .. 500 0 0
Jardine, Matheson & Co. ... 500 0 0
United Textile Factory Workers 500 0 0
G. Handasyde Dick 500 0 0
John A. Beith 500 0 0
Thomas Baring ... ... 500 0 0
J. R. Heaven... ... ... 500 0 0
Balfour, Williamson & Co. ... 500 0 0
Sir Chas. Tennant, Bart. ... 500 0 0
“A Friend,’’per theßt. Hon.
Henry Chaplin, M.P. ... 500 0 0
D. Sassoon & Co, ... ... 500 0 0
R. Haworth &Co ... ... 500 0 0
Sir Horace Farquhar .. 500 0 0
Sir H. H. Edwards, Bart. ... 300 0 0
J. F. Hutton & Co. ... ... 250 0 0
F. Hardcastle... ... ... 250 0 0
James Houldsworth ... ... 250 0 0
Aid. Thomas Glaister ... 250 0 0
Hayter & Hayter ... ... 250 0 0
Woolston & Beeton ... ... 250 0 0
Marquis of Londonderry ... 250 0 0
Earl of Lonsdale ... ... 250 0 0
Earl of Radnor ... ... 250 0 0
Alfred Emmott ... ... 250 0 0
Stewart, Thompson & Co. ... 250 0 0
Lord Penrhyn ... . 250 0 0
A. G. Renshaw ... ... 250 0 0
Iveson & Co. ... ... 250 0 0
Ricardo Moller ... ... 250 0 0
W. M. Strachan ... 200 0 0
E. J. Reiss ... ... ... 200 0 0
David Murray ... ... 200 0 0
Lord Stanley .. ... ... 200 0 0
E. Tuck 200 0 0
Rodewald & Co. ... ... £l5O 0 0
J. Schack Sommer 125 0 0
J. Nutt Bullen ... ... 125 0 0
J. H. Gwyther 125 0 0
W. Patterson... ... ... 125 0 0
Earl Grey ... 125 0 0
E. W. Wrigley 125 0 0
R. R. Symon ... 100 0 0
J. Beckett 100 0 O
W. B Secretan ... ... 100 0 0
M. Corgialegno & Co. ... 100 0 0
Geo. Harrison ... ... 100 0 0
David McLean ... ... 100 0 0
E. Crewdson ... ... ... 100 0 0
Llewellin & James ... 100 0 0
W. R. Grace &Co 100 0 0
Theobald Crewdson ... ... 100 0 0
R. T. Mallett 100 0 0
Lathbury & Co. ... ... 100 0 0
Dods, Ker & Co. ... ... 100 0 0
Sir Alex. Wilson ... ... 100 0 0
MacDonald, Miller & Co. 100 0 0
W. A. Sandeman ... ... 100 0 0
M. G. Schilizzi ... ... 100 0 0
R. B. Chapman ... ... 100 0 0
A. Zimmern ... ... ... 100 0 0
A. Cotterell Tupp ... ... 100 0 0
Sidebottom & Hardie ... 100 0 0
F. B. Blake 100 0 0
J. D. Sandars... ... ... 100 0 0
Marriage & Pinnock... ... 100 0 0
R. Wilkinson... ... ... 100 0 0
Rt. Hon. Henry Chaplin, M.P. 100 0 0
A. D. Provand, M.P. ... 100 0 0
Sir David Barbour ... ... 100 0 0
H. R. Grenfell 100 0 0
J. D. Sandars... ... ... 100 0 0
J. Dickinson & Co. ... ... 100 0 0
T. W. Shaw 100 0 0
C, H. Shaw ... ... 100 0 0
J. A. Maitland ... ... 100 0 0
W. S. Young 100 0 0
C. J. Whittington ... ... 100 0 0
E. F. Duncanson ... ... 100 0 0
John Nelson ... ... ... 100 0 0
Joseph Lees ..7 ... ... 100 0 0
J. &T. Garnett ... ... 100 0 0
W, L. Agnew... ... ... 100 0 0
Hon. Evelyn Hubbard ... 100 0 0
Reginald E. Johnston ... 100 0 0
Robert Greg & Co. ... ... 100 0 0
Rt. Hon. Wm. Lidderdale ... 100 0 0
C. H. Clegg 100 0 0
G. M. Boissevain 100 0 0
And sums under £lOO, bringing the total to
over £50,000.
Special Donations for 1895.
Peninsular & Oriental S.S. Co. £5OO 0 0
The Chartered Bank of India,
Australia and China ... 100 0 0
George D. Rowe ... ... 25 0 0
C. H. Clegg 20 0 0
A. G. Schiff 10 0 0
M. G. Schillizzi 10 0 0
J. C. Kelley 5 0 0
And other sums.
9


A. W. MEEKS,
Vice-President of the Bimetallic League of New South Wales.


OFFICIAL STATEMENT OF THE BIMETALLIC LEAGUE.
Until the year 1873 the ratio at which gold and silver were interchangeable was steady,
because the mints of France and other European countries were open to all the world for the
unlimited coinage of both metals on the fixed basis of 15£ oz. of silver to 1 oz. of gold.
*lt may be stated generally that during the last century the national unit of coinage which
constituted the standard of value in the principal countries practically rested on both metals,
silver being usually the nominal standard, with gold rated to it, at the discretion of each
Government.
In the United Kingdom, from 1717 to 1816, this system prevailed, the ratio of gold to
silver having been fixed at 1 to 15 - 21.
In the United States of America the joint gold and silver standard was originally adopted
in 1786 with a ratio of 15 25 to 1 ; changed in 1792 to 15 to 1, and in 1834 to 16 to 1.
In 1803 the joint standard, with a ratio of 15J to 1, was definitely adopted by France, and
in 1865 the formation of the Latin Union, ultimately consisting of France, Italy, Belgium
Switzerland and Greece, extended and confirmed it.
Owing to this, the par of exchange between gold and silver standard countries kept
practically uniform, and silver, as fully as gold, performed the functions of money throughout
the world.
The action of England in 1816, in adopting the single gold standard did not disturb the
steadiness of the ratio between the two metals, so long as the continental mints remained open
to the unrestricted coinage of silver; but when Germany, which had previously had a silver
standard, in 1873 introduced a single gold standard, the old equilibrium was destroyed, because
France and the other bimetallic countries, in view of the heavy sales of silver by Germany,
suspended their free coinage.
This action caused the price of silver, as quoted in gold, to fall, and it (the gold price of
silver) has since fluctuated violently, affecting all international exchanges between silver
standard and gold standard countries. In the case of India, the rupee, formerly worth about
25., has gradually dropped to Is Id in English money, with increasing uncertainty as to its
prospective exchangeable value as against gold.
The substitution of gold for silver, and the greater amount of exchange work that is in
consequence thrown upon gold, has led to the “ appreciation ” of that metal, and to a fall in
prices of Commodities, as measured in gold,which is everywhere visible, and everywhere
baneful in its effects upon commerce, upon manufacturing and agricultural industry, and upon
the growth of employment necessary to provide work for our rapidly-increasing population.
Whenever the London Money Market is distressed and perplexed by the withdrawal of
even small quantities of gold, and by apprehensions as to further demands, coupled with
serious doubts as to the sufficiency of future supplies of that metal, the necessity of fixing an
international ratio between gold and silver so as to make both metals available for bank
reserves becomes strikingly apparent. This would provide an adequate supply of money
available purposes and for the internal transactions of the Kingdom. Grave
danger would thus be averted. ”
The aim of the Bimetallic League, as already mentioned, is to secure, by international
agreement, the opening of the mints of the leading commercial nations to the unrestricted
coinage of silver and gold at such fixed ratio as may be mutually agreed upon amongst those
nations. means a par of exchange would be secured ; the two metals would again
acquire an inteFSatiOnaTcharacter as money/and WOtffdtnove TfeelyTrom nation to nation
according to the monetary requirements of the various markets, whilst prices and wages in all
countries would be adjusted by a uniform standard.
Convinced of the evils resulting from existing conditions of our monetary system, and of
the hindrance to trade and agriculture, which are largely due to the disturbed relation between
gold and silver, we appeal to everyone for co-operation in carrying out the objects of the League.
*Chis and the three following paragraphs are from the note appended to the Final Report of the Royal
Commission on Gold and Silver, by the Right Hon. Sir Louis Mallett, C. 8., one of the Royal Commissioners.
11


There is every encouragement t' press the matter, seeing that the United States of America,
France (with the other States of the Latin Union), Germany and Holland are willing to
co-operate.
These Powers, it is known, will not move without England, and, under an erroneous
conception of the advantages of a single gold standard, this country has hitherto stood aloof.
The final report of the Royal Commission on Gold and Silver was, however, of a character
so favourable to tha cause advocated by the League that the question is now thoroughly ripe for
settlement, and the recent public declaration by Mr. Leonard Courtney (one of the Commissioners
who had signed Part 2) that he is now of opinion that International Bimetallism is both
desirable and practicable, strengthens the case for monetary reform.
It is advisable, therefore, that the facts of the case may be made widely known throughout
the country, in order to bring the force of public opinion to bear upon Parliament and upon the
Government, so that England, instead of being a barrier in the way of an international
convention may take her due share in the settlement of a question so vital to the well-being of
the Empire, so essential to the interests of British and Irish agricultural and manufacturing
industries, and of commerce everywhere, and to the financial stability of India.
Any further information concerning the League may be obtained from the genei al secretary,
Henry McNiel, F.S.S., 29 Cornhill, London, E.C., who will also acknowledge subscriptions
and donations.
Information may also be obtained from the Manchester offices of the League, Haworth s
Buildings, 5 Cross Street, Manchester; from the Birmingham office, 23 Temple Row,
Birmingham, or from any of the local hon. secs.
Members of the League can be enrolled at any time, the annual subscription being one
guinea. Remittances to be made payable to the Bimetallic League.
All publications of the League are delivered free to Members.
Leon Faucett, in 1843, wrote :
If all the nations of Europe adopted the system of Great Britain, the price of gold would be
raised beyond measure, and we should see produced in Europe a result lamentable enough.
Before a French monetary convention in 1869, testimony was given by the late M. Wolowski,
by Baron Rothschild, and by M. Rouland, governor of the Bank of France. M. Wolowski said ;
The sum total of the precious metals is reckoned at 50 milliards, one half gold and one half
silver. If, by a stroke of the pen, they suppress one of these metals in the monetary service,
they double the demand for the other metal, to the ruin of all debtors.
* *
Baron Rothschild said :
The simultaneous employment of the two metals is satisfactory, and gives rise to no com-
plaint. Whether gold or silver dominates for the time being, it is always true that the two
metals concur together in forming the monetary cii’culation of the world, and it is the general
mass of the two metals combined which serves as the measure of the value of things. The sup-
pression of silver would amount to a veritable destruction of values without any compensation.


The Cat*Feney Question.
SPEECHES MADE IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
On March 17th, 1896,
Referring particularly to the Interests of the Colonies.
Mr. H. WHITELEY moved—“ That this House is of opinion that the instability of the
relative value of gold and silver since the action of the Latin Union in 1873 has proved
injurious to the best interests of this country, and urges upon the Government the advisability
of doing all in their power to secure by international agreement a startle monetary par of
exchange between gold and silver.” '
Several speeches having been made,
Mr. WYNDHAM (Dover) said mention had been made of Argentina. There was a
gentleman there farming 20,000 acres, by name Mr. Brett, and he could sell corn at a pound
in London and carry back in paper worth £3 10s in Argentina, with which he pays rent, taxes
and wages already low. It might be asked what this had got to do with the motion before the
House, but he thought that its connection was apparent. It was obvious where the benefit
was. It was an inducement to grow wheat in Argentina, and while that was directly injurious
to the British farmer it was indirectly injurious to the manufacturer. The temptation was to
take back paper and not other articles of profit. In these debates some hon. members spoke as
if the principle of barter existed—as if Argentina took back goods for goods. Tne right hon.
gentleman the Chancellor of the Exchequer had said that he was prepared to accept this
resolution, but he was not prepared to see any such ratio as fixed as between silver and
gold. The right hon. gentleman had said that it would be dishonest for any Government to fix
a ratio between silver and gold. But was it honest for the late Chancellor of the Exchequer
to close the mints in India and so suddenly cause a violent fall in .the value of silver ? (Hear,
hear.) He believed that the British artisan would trouble his head very little about the
comparative value of silver and gold when he understood that the present currency system of
the world was putting a bounty on the labour of the yellow against that of the white races.
(Hear, hear.) In Bombay the premium upon gold was 100 per cent., and what was true of
India was true all over the East. They were told that the receipts from the income-tax were
increasing; but to pay income-tax was the privilege of the creditor class, and it was the man
who did not pay income tax that was being ruined. (Hear, hear.) All this prosperity of
which they heard so much was accompanied by a steady decrease in our exports running
alongside with an increase of our population. It had been said that it was only in the articles
that were produced simply that this Eastern competition affected us. But the umbrella was
rather an elaborate article of manufacture. Formerly the Chinaman, not in order to keep off
the rain, but to support his own dignity, bought a 15s. umbrella, whereas now the Japanese sold
360,000 umbrellas a year in Shanghai to the destruction of the English manufacturer. But
things were going further than that. Very shortly they would come over here and supply us
with our own articles. Owing to the advantage they had in the possession of a peculiar kind
of wood, the manufacturers of Shanghai would shortly be able to put on the English market a
cottage piano for the exiguous sum of £25. He would not go into the arguments as to the
practicability of fixing this ratio, but unless a ratio was fixed we must make up our minds to
live in the future in a monometallic paradise. (Laughter.) We must reconcile ourselves to
seeing our mines and factories shut and our lands out of cultivation, and then we should look


at the British artisan—lucky fellow —with no work to do, gazing at his household utensils
made of Straits Settlements tin, on Japanese coal burning in his grate, and on a cottage piano
from Shanghai (loud laughter), enjoying the privilege of the rich of twirling his thumbs, and
wondering how much the pawnbroker would give him for the whole lot. (Laughter.) When
it was said we were a creditor nation, we forgot who were our debtors. Our own children.
(Cheers.) For every bale of wool the colonies used to export they must now export two, if
they were to pay the debt we had piled up. This financial policy, which said that a man who
had contracted to pay interest in gold must continue to pay it in gold, although he had to shear
twice as many sheep and work twice as many hours as he did, was the financial policy of a
Shylock. (Cheers and laughter.)
Sir William Harcourt then spoke.
Mr. BALFOUR.—I do not know that the right honorable gentleman has kept up the
debate on the level of amusement to which it was raised by the hon. member for Dover, but I
admit he has made a long, interesting, and important speech. In the time left to me I cannot
traverse the whole of it, but I can touch on the main heads of argument the right hon.
gentleman has used. Before Ido so let me gently remark that the right hon. gentleman has,
on certain subsidiary points, made himself a sponsor for various extraordinary views. Among
other things he allowed us to understand that the commercial position of a manufacturing
country depends upon the lowness of wages and the number of the hours that the operatives
work in that manufacture. He has told us, if we have anything to fear from Japan it is
because the English artisan asks for short hours, works but six days a week, and has good
wages, whilst the Japanese artisan works long hours, has small wages, and works seven days a
week ; and on these grounds he forecasts the future commercial and manufacturing supremacy
of Japan. (“No, no,” and “Hear, hear.”) He distinctly told us that if we were being
undersold in the neutral markets of the world and in our own these were the reasons ; and I
hope the Labour representatives on his side of the House will take note of his views. (Hear,
hear,) Then he gave us an account of the abandonment by France of the bimetallic system ;
he said France did not wait for the results of the war of 1870 before determining to give it up,
but already by a Commission she had made up her mind that the system was one she could no
longer hope to maintain. Ido not know where the right hon. gentleman got his information,
but I am informed that the report of the French Commission to which he alluded was considered
by one branch of the French Legislature before the war of 1870, and they declared in January
of that year that the bimetallic system should be reaffirmed ; so that before the war of 1870,
and in the face of that Commission —so I am informed —with full knowledge of what it had to
say, France deliberately reaffirmed the bimetallic position. The right hon. gentleman told us
that, holding as we do that the present condition of exchange between England and India
afforded an artificial stimulus—a stimulus, as he did not say artificial, though I think it is—to
Indian manufactures, we should ask what would be thought of our policy by the Indian
population if we deliberately adopted a new system under which that stimulus to Indian
manufactures would be put an end to. That might be a good argument from some points of
view, but it is not from that of the right hon. gentleman, for he was a member of the Govern-
ment which forced upon India an artificial currency, which tampered with Indian currency,
which tampered with the currency of 200 millions of her Majesty’s subjects for the deliberate,
avowed, and openly-expressed purpose of raising the value of the rupee above the market
price, with the inevitable result, in so far as it was raised thus artificially, that the stimulus
to Indian exports would be diminished. I think I am absolved from dealing with that
argument when it proceeded from a gentleman who has done more than any one to prove its
futility. The right hon. gentleman then went on to use an argument which lam glad to think
has scarcely been alluded to in the course of the debate —the argument of the creditor country.
There is no argument that has brought us into greater discredit or into juster discredit with
countries on the Continent, with Air erica, and with our own colonies than the creditor country
argument. (Hear, bear.)
Sir W. HARCOURT.—Why ?
Mr. BALFOUR.—I will tell the right hon. gentleman why. The right hon. gentleman
tells us, and tells us truly, that the debts of this country are paid in commodities which are
estimated upon a gold basis, and that the result of the appreciation of gold which has gone on
during the last twenty years, is that the creditor country paid in commodities gets a very much
larger proportion of commodities than on the original gold value of the commodities, it had the
slightest right to. Does the right hon. gentleman think that this creditor argument is one
which commends itself to those who have got to pay debts in this country ? What they ask
and what we ask is that some standard of debts which could be valid oyer a long
period of years should be adopted, not only between individuals, but between countries.
We hold—and this is held by the best scientific economic opinion of every party all over
the world—that this would be more effectively secured by the bimetallic system


than by the monometallic system. (Cries of “No.”) I do not say that that
opinion is right, but Ido say that it is the opinion of all economic authorities. If
foreign countries hold as they do hold, that the single standard has the result of artificially
increasing the burden of their debts to this country, they will think, and think truly, that the
right hon. gentleman is not so much occupied in maintaining what is called an honest currency,
as, with the object of obtaining a currency which will geo more than their just debts from our
debtors. I pass from these outworks of the right hon. gentleman’s speech to the main conten-
tion with which I understand it to be occupied. The of the Government has already
been expressed by my right hon. friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer. He has told the
House that the Cabinet is of opinion, as, if I may say so, I have always been of opinion, that
it is absolutely impossible to force upon the commercial and banking classes of this country a
form of currency against which they protest, and which they are not prepared to accept.
(Hear, hear.) I admit that, while my right hon. friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer has
perfectly accurately represented the policy of the Government, if it had fallen to my lot as
Chancellor of the Exchequer to carry out the same duty, there might perhaps be a slightly
different colouring put upon his expression of opinion, (Laughter.) The drawing of the pic-
ture was absolutely correct, but the toning and shading perhaps leave, from my point of view,
something to be desired. (Laughter.) My right hon. friend had a perfect right to speak as he
has spoken. He is a believer in a single standard, as I am a believer in a double standard.
We are absolutely agreed as to the policy to be pursued. The difference between us is this—
that while my right hon. friend rather triumphs in the opinion which is so largely held in the
city of London amongst the banking classes in regard to our present system of currency, I
regret that that opinion should exist. I think that in this case, as in other cases, they have
rather lagged behind sound opinion on the subject, and that the time will probably come when
they will take the view already taken by the great mass of scientific economists that the
bimetallic system of currency is one that ought to be adopted, not merely by other nations, but
by us also. I am encouraged in that view of the future opinion of this country by the
revolution in that opinion which has already taken place. (Hear, hear.) I distinctly
remember the time when if a debate on this subject took place in this House we should have
heard one member after another declaring that the bimetallists denied the laws of supply and
demand, the effect of production on value, and all the rest of it. That view is, lam glad to
think, abandoned, and if not absolutely abandoned, those who hold it are a small and belated
minority who have not taken the trouble to make themselves acquainted with the literature of
the case. (Laughter.) I think it will be admitted that it is not now open to any man, who
professes to be an educated man, to pretend that what is held by the great majority of the
French nation, the great majority of the Italian nation, the great majority of the Belgian
nation, the great majority of the German nation, and by practically the whole of the American
nation, is one that is open to that kind of criticism ? And as a matter of fact there is not a
single instructed economist in the country who would now venture to repeat anywhere and in
any company, however ignorant, the arguments that once would have been received with
universal applause. (Cheers.) The whole trend of civilised opinion is in the direction of a
double standard (Cheers), and I confess that I look forward to a period when it will be
accepted not merely by the great commercial nations of which I have been speaking, not
merely by the great manufacturing classes of Lancashire, and by the vast majority of the repre-
sentatives of agriculture, but also by the great body of opinion within this great commercial
centre of the Empire. (Cheers.) I do not think it would be profitable or convenient that I
should deal in detail witti the advantages which may be anticipated from some settlement of
this question. But one point I must deal with. It has been constantly assumed by the
monometallist speakers that we have some power by our own action to settle the debt-paying
value of our own standard of exchange, and that it is competent for us to say, “We stick to
the gold standard, no nation can disturb us ; we remain in splendid isolation as regards our
currency.” That is not in the power of this or of any Government. (Cheers.) It is not in
the power of this or any nation. Whether we like it or not, the laws of nature are too
strong for us. (Hear, hear.) Whether we like it or not, the currency of one nation does
depend and must depend upon the action taken by other nations in regard to their currency.
The action of Germany and France may alter the whole value of the debt-paying capacity of
your standard ; and if to-morrow the great commercial nations of the world did what in my
opinion they have the power to do, if they chose to exercise it, and were to say, “ England
refuses to join us. We will leave her on one side. We will adopt a bimetallic system and let
her get on as she chooses with a monometallic system,” the result of that would be, I admit,
entirely beneficial to us, but it would also entirely upset the present debt-paying capacity of
the standard which you think, by your own powers, authority, and Legislature, you have
chosen to establish. (Cheers.) The truth of the matter is that there is no subject in the world
which is more proper for international arrangement than currency. There was a time when
commerce was, broadly speaking, confined within the limits of the country which issued the
currency in which the debts contracted under that system had to be paid. That has been


WILLIAM ALLAN, M.L.C., Queensland,
Vice-President of the Bimetallic .League of New South Wales.


The first spinning mill in Japan was erected in 1863 with 5456 spindles.
At end of 1883 there were 16 mills with 43,700 spindles.
» 1888 ,, 24 „ ,, 88,140
„ 1892 „ 39 „ „ 403,314
„ 1893 „ 46 about 600,000 „
„ 1896 ,, 57 „ 1,300,000
“ It means increased employment and higher wages."
If wool were to rise in price the sheep grower would start improvements to carry more
sheep ; land now abandoned would pay to occupy ; if wheat remained up more wheat land
would be broken up ; if maize went up more land would be laid down in maize ; if silver went
up mines now too poor to pay would be worked. All this would provide an enormous outlet for
the employment of labour. With the increased demand for labor would come higher wages.
Wages follow prices. High prices and high wages mean prosperity. The Chinaman or
Japanese who can now convert their ■ savings of say £2O in gold into £4O of their own money
would be deprived of that unfair advantage over our workers.
“It means that if ive contract debts we shall not have an increased rate of interest to pay by
the annual appreciation of gold as we have had for the last S 3 years. ”
The reason so many of our pastoral properties have fallen into the hands of the financial
institutions, and so many of our farmers and squatters have been ruined, is because when they
contracted their loans a certain amount of their produce bought a certain amount of gold to pay
their interest with. Every year gold has been getting dearer, therefore they have to give more
and more of their produce to buy the same amount of gold to pay their interest with. The
over-supply theory was exploded by the Royal Commission on Gold and Silver in 1888. There
can be no over-supply in the world whilst there are millions starving and unemployed.
“ It means increasing the general prosperity of the many as against the prosperity of that
few known as the Lombard Street gold ring.”
In 1873 the bondholders of the world formed a corner in gold, and managed to get silver,
half the legal tender money of the world, disfranchised ; this means that for every pound of
flesh in the way of interest due then, they now exact or get two pounds. It is generally
stated by our newspapers that England is against bimetallism ; this is wrong, it is Lombard
Street that is against it, the people of England are greatly in favour of it. See appended
report of resolution in British House of Commons passed in March last. Bimetallism means
that on any debts contracted in future the interest shall be stable, because prices will be stable,
and that a loan at 4 per cent, will mean in 20 years 4 per cent, and not, practically, 8 per cent,
through the fall in prices. The latter is what has happened to our loans, national and private,
since 1873.
It means removing the bonus of 100 per cent, which the yellow races, the Hindoos, the
Mexicans, and the Argentines have on everything they export.
The yellow man with the white money is gradually ousting the white man with the yellow
money for reasons already shown.
In the report of the Yokohama Chamber of Commerce, dated May 5, 1894, the following
statistics are given :
The same report adds, a still more rapid increase is expected in the near future, large
orders, it is known, have been placed for more machinery, some for yarn of the finest qualities.
In the Consular report on trade at Kobe, for 1892, a return is given of the dividends paid
during the preceding twelve months by 21 mills in Osaka, the average dividend being 18 per
cent., the highest being 28 per cent, and the lowest 8 per cent.
Compare this with the account of the Cotton Trade in England, as given in the Economist
in 1894. The balance sheets of 93 spinning companies in Oldham show a net total loss of
£72,768 in 1893, against a net loss of £104,664 in 1892.
After these figures can anyone wonder at reductions in wages, strikes and starvation.
The coal trade of Newcastle, as compared with Japan, is in exactly the same condition.
Sir Thomas Sutherland, chairman of the P. & O. Co., stated lately at a meeting, that at
present they were doing most of their repairs in Japan, and that a farther fall in silver might
see them before long building their ships there.


w. B. ABBOTT,
Vice-President of the Bimetallic League of New South Wales.


Having given my reasons for being a bimetallist, I will now proceed to the best of my
ability to state the questions usually put to me and the answers I give ;
Q. You are one of those bimetallist faddists, are you not ?
A, If to be a faddist is that I believe in what is believed in by nearly all the political
economists of the day, many of our leading bankers and merchants, and by a majority of the
British House of Commons, I certainly am.
Q. The whole thing is being run in the interests of the silver mines, isn’t it ?
A. If you will read the list of names of those who are vice-presidents of the Bimetallic
League, and of those who subscribe to its funds, you will find this is only a cry raised by those
who wish to prejudice the public against the question.
Q. Why not make copper, iron, a bale of wool, etc., legal tenders, —why stop at silver ?
A. At the present time two-thirds of the human race carry on their business with a silver
currency, and what we are aiming at is to bring the remaining one-third into line, and to thus
remove the bonus at present given to the yellow and other silver using races. There is no
necessity for making other legal tender money. Silver answered the purpose for generations,
and always remained steady as related to gold until it was demonetised by the crime of 1873.
Q. All the bankers are opposed to it. How is that ?
A. The present manager of the Bank of England is a bimetallist, and the two late managers
are bimetallists ; and amongst many other bankers the following are vice-presidents of our
League :—C. Hoare and A. Hoare, of Charles Hoare and Co. ; Thomas Salt, Chairman of
Lloyd’s Bank; Sampson Lloyd, of Lloyd’s Bank; J. N. Bullen, London and W estminster ;
E. F. Duncanson, London and County Bank; James Parlane, Manchester and Salford Bank;
Sir Horace Farquahar, Alliance Bank; Sir Thomas Sutherland, Bank of Australasia ; Sir
Charles Tennant, Union Bank of Scotland ; Sir Lepel Griffin, Bank of Persia ; Alban G.
Gibbs, Bank of Australasia; Yicary Gibbs, Queensland National Bank; E. 0. Morgan,
National Bank of New Zealand ; M, Van de Berg, Governor of Bank of Netherlands, and M.
Magnin, Governor Bank of Prance, and many others.
Q. There is any amount of gold in the world. Look at the banks. They have more gold
than they know what to do with. How does this blend with your theory of scarcity ?
A. The accumulation is one of the effects of the scarcity. When you take the trouble to learn the
subject you will find that two-thirds of the gold discovered goes into the arts and sciences. Of the
little remaining a large proportion is being hoarded by European nations, and that gold you
speak of as being in the Australian Banks, what use is it if it is out of circulation ? It is all
very well to say interest is reduced, but what use is that to those producers who have no
margin with which to convert their loans. Any amount of gold in the world ! The whole
amount of gold in the world would go into a cube of 22 feet. The Banks have part of this
gold in their coffers because it does not pay to employ it. It merely shows the state of trade
is such that the circulation of gold is contracting and is lying idle in the reserves. It is too
risky to go into any industrial enterprise because of the fall of prices, and the impossibility of tel-
ling when prices will stop falling. The dire effect is that men prefer Government Bonds, and decline
the risks of productive enterprise. Thus gold accumulates, and capital can only earn 2or 3
per cent, interest.
Q. You simply want to pay off all debtsjat 50 per cent, reduction, which is repudiation.
A. The English Parliament, representing as it does the interest of the creditor country,
England, desires to restore a “stable par of exchange between gold and silver,” which is
bimetallism. One can hardly be called a repudiator when the creditor country itself supports
the cause.
Q. Do you think it honest to advocate a change which might be calculated to enable you
to legislate in such a way as to avoid paying your full debts ?
A. How about the change in 1873, made by financiers, which enforced a payment which
now amounts to double what you contracted to pay, and which they shrewdly foresaw must
take place.
Q. Anyway you have been knocked out by the American election. You see the gold man has
been returned by an enormous majority.
A. Out of a total vote of over 14 millions, a change of 25,000 votes would have put Bryan
in in place of M'Kinley, You have been taking what the financial editors of the Australian
dailies have been telling you for gospel. They have woefully misled the people on this question,
and almost invariably refuse to insert letters giving the truth. M'Kinley is a strong bimetal-
list and always was. He is, however, a bimetallist with other nations, whereas Bryan, having


got tired of waiting for other nations, determined that America should start on her own
account. If M‘Kinlay hadn’t been a bimetallist he would have been defeated by millions of
votes. See the American “ Sound Money ” papers.
Q. All our daily papers are against it, and their correspondence always ends in favour of
monometallism.
A. It is quite true that nearly all the dailies are monometallic papers, because their financial
editors have been reared in a certain school and have not time or inclination to bring themselves
in touch with the latest developments of the question. The reason they always end in favour
of monometallism is because they generally refuse to put in letters opposed to their own pet
fancies. The Australasian Pastoralists’ Review has, however, always given a fair field and no
favour. The Meat Trades' Journal has now followed suit.
Q. If bimetallism is such a good thing why was it discarded ?
A. It was mainly accidental and was done ■without due consideration by the nations.
Prince Bismarck says that in Germany, in 1870, they took the advice of an eminent economist
and changed to the gold standard, but found that instead of putting soup in their kettles they
only put water. France had to pay them an enormous indemnity and they determined to get
it in gold and go on a gold basis. France, in order not to assist them in their operations closed
her mints to the free coinage of silver. In America, if silver was not demonetised by fraud, as
is maintained in many high quarters, the demonetisation was never discussed by the American
people, and the fraud was not discovered for some years. In no case was this terrifically im-
portant question discussed by the people.
Q. Would we not have to pay much more for all we have to eat and wear, and would it
not be bad for the poor man ?
A. Certainly we should have to pay more for a good many things, but then the increased
prosperity all round would more than compensate for that. As for the poor they would be in
receipt of more regular and higher wages, and in cases where they are now earning nothing
they would be earning the wherewithal to purchase. Surely it is better to be earning
money and to give for bread than to be earning nothing and give 2d. In Great Britain
nearly all the labour bodies subscribe to our funds and the leaders are nearly all bimetallists.
Q. Is not the whole agitation got up by the Yankees, who have an enormous amount of
silver they want to double the value of ?
A. The answer to this is, that it is not only America, but nearly all the nations of Europe
that desire a reform of the currency.
Q. Why is England opposed to bimetallism ? she has become enormously rich under a gold
standard, why should she change ?
A. England is not opposed to it, it is only the bondholders who receive £2 for ever £1 they
contracted for that are opposed to it. The producers of England are nearly all ruined, land
has gone out of cultivation, manufactories are shutting down in many industries and are being
erected in Japan and China. Thousands of white men are thus being thrown out of employ-
ment.
Q. Prices of wheat and wool have risen without bimetallism, how do you account for that ?
A. The price of wool and general products at the present moment, 1897, is as near as
possible half what it was twenty-three years ago. In many parts of the world the price of
wheat is ruled by London, i.e., the world’s price. Wheat can not rise much “ locally ” because
foreign cheap wheat would at once be imported. Of course a drought in India and Australia
lessens the output of wheat and wool and momentarily up goes the price. Bimetallists contend
for the law of supply and demand. The ordinary observer can easily see that if the supply of
wheat lessens while the demand remains the same or increases, the price of wheat will rise.
What seems more difficult and yet is exactly the same is, that if the supply of legal tender,
“ gold and silver,” is halved by the substraction of “ silver” as a legal tender, the demand for
the other legal tender, “gold,” will be doubled, and more goods and labour have to be given
to buy it. This is what was done in 1873 to the advantage of only the one class who held the
debts and mortgages and Government Bonds.
A. W. PEARSE,
Hon. Sec. Bimetallic League of N.S.W.


THE SILVER QUESTION.
By W, J. Spencer (Phil-Argent).
The subjoined papers were originally written for the Australian Mining Standard , and
appeared in that journal in the months of July, August and September, prior to the American
Presidential election. They were not intended for subsequent repubhcation, but, it they win
at all assist to direct attention to one of the most potent causes of the present depression, the
author will deem his labour amply repaid :
What is the “ silver question ? ” The silver question, as it presents itself to us to-day,
arises from the fact that silver, which previous to 1873 remained fairly steady at about ss. per
ounce, has receded in price to little over a half-a-crown, and the currency of silver countries, stated
in terms of gold, has fallen in like proportion. The rupee, which was formerly worth 25., has
fallen to Is. 2d.; the yen and dollar, which were formerly worth 45., have fallen to is. 3d.
Consider what this means. The face value of the silver coin in the world was estimated a lew
years ago at £400,000,000, and a paper circulation of immense extent was also based upon it.
The gold value of this enormous sum has now declined to £400,000,000. Its possessors have been
mulcted in the difference—say £400,000,000-and their purchasing power m the worlds
markets correspondingly impaired. Can it be wondered at that there has been a steady decline
in prices since silver was demonetised in 1873, when silver com was deprived of its legal tender
status by the nations which had previously recognised it ? Prices have fallen, whilst i nte , re ®t
and other charges payable in gold remained unaltered, the producer s profit has vanished. Ine
inducement to embark in productive enterprise has been weakened, or altogether removed ;
capital has stagnated, and general depression has taken the place of activity and enterprise.
The mining industry has been as great a sufferer as any other producing interest, except
that it has enjoyed a certain set-off in the increased value of gold. First, there is the decline
in value in silver itself. In the half-year ended November 1890 the silver won by the Broken
Hill Proprietary Company, according to their last report, averaged 4s. s£d. per ounce, tne
price having been raised in that year by the purchases of the United States ( f°^ ernm ® l^ nd< T
the Sherman Act. During the half-year just ended the average price was only 2s. 9 7-lfid. per
ounce. The difference, Is. 7 13-16 d. per ounce, on the half-year s output of 4,107,0780 z ,
would have amounted to £239,039, which would have enabled the company to pay £527,030 in
dividends and bonuses during the six mouths, instead of £288,000, which actually was paid.
The experience of the Proprietary applies to every other silver-producing mine in the world.
The loss which has been suffered, and is being suffered by shareholders in silver mines, and by
all connected with the industry, through the fall in price, is immense and I shall show later on
that it has been caused entirely by unwarrantable legislation directed against the status of the
metal in its monetary relations. The annual production of silver at market prices is worth i
believe, roughly speaking, about £23,000,000. At the mint price which prevailed before 118/3
it would be worth £46,000,000. Those interested in its production would have £23,000,000
more to spend, and its expenditure would react most favourably upon trade Thebukof
silver in the world, including bullion and plate as well as com, is estimated at 7,400,000,( OOoz.
At present prices it is worth £925,000,000. At the price current before the anti-silver legis-
lation of 1873 it would have been worth £1,850,000,000. Its owners may, therefore be
considered to have been impoverished to the enormous extent of £925,000 000. Even if this
were the whole of the evil, who could wonder that depression has attended the process ot
depreciation ?
But this is not the whole of the evil by any means, even as regards the mining industry.
The prices of many metals and minerals, such as coal and tin, are indissolubly linked with the
price of silver. The price of silver rules silver exchange, and coal and tin are largely produced
by silver standard countries. In a recent issue you have shown that Japanese coal is sold in
Singapore at seven dollars per ton. In order to compete with it, with the dollar exchanging at
2s. 3d , Newcastle coal has to be sold at 18s., freight and charges paid. W ith silver at ss. per
oz and the dollar exchange at 45., Newcastle would have 28s. per ton to cut at, instead ot
18s., which would make all the difference in the world both to coal companies and coal miners.
Under the stimulus of this low exchange the production of Japanese, Indian, and Chinese coal
is advancing by leaps and bounds, and it is rapidly ousting Australian coal out of all Eastern
markets. The Australian trade is being handicapped and restricted in like proportion, and
outside Australian boundaries it threatens to become un quantite negligible. Coal-owners may
well regard with absorbing interest the course of the currency struggle in the United btates.


The price of tin is affected by low silver exchange, in much the same way as that of coal,
with the exception that the terminal market is London. Tin at £6O per ton means —at Is. 2d.
per rupee—over 1000 rupees per ton from which to defray charges. At this price the Malay
producer is doing remarkably well. But at 2s. per rupee, the normal rate of exchange when
the mints of the United States and of the Latin Union were open to the free coinage of silver,
the price would have to be £IOO per ton in London to give the Straits producer 1000 rupees per
ton. No wonder that Australian production of tin is declining, whilst that of the Straits
Settlements is booming. The list might be indefinitely extended, but I have instanced enough
to show how the operation of an abnormally low silver exchange stimulates production in silver
standard countries, and retards that of gold standard countries. Take only one instance outside
of mining. The woolpacks, which are used so largely in Australia as packages for the clip, can
be landed here from Calcutta at Is. sd. each, with rupee exchange at Is. 2d. Consequently
Dundee, which cannot supply at this price, is practically excluded from our market. But, with
the exchange at 2s. per rupee, the Calcutta manufacturer would want 2s. sd. per pack to do as
well as he is doing now. There would be an ample margin here for the operations of British
manufacturers, and the money sent to them would improve the market for woollens, and thus
increase the demand for the great Australian staple. The countries which use the white, or
depreciated, money are active and prosperous, whilst those which use the yellow, or appreciated,
money are afflicted with stagnation.
As long as the American Presidential elections are on the tapis there will be no lack of
interest in the silver controversy. M'Kinley got his nomination because he was believed to be
squeezable on behalf of silver, but his lukewarmness and timidity on the currency question are
alienating both the gold Republicans and the silver Republicans, and his election is by no
means as certain as it was once deemed. The tariff issue, in which he won his fame as the
most thorough-going Protectionist America had yet produced, is relegated to a back seat. In
two-thirds of the States of the Union, Democrats, Populists, and pro-silver Republicans, are
saying :—“Sink all minor issues till we get back ‘the dollar of the fathers’—free coinage at
16 to 1 ! ” This is not a mere flash in the pan ; it is the conviction of the thinking men of a
great people, who understand what ails them, and are beginning to find it intolerable. They
may be cheated of their desire, of course. If the chicanery of politicians, the immense influence
of the administration, and the tremendous money power of the gold faction of the Eastern
States, can frustrate their object, it will be frustrated, It has been said that “ the average
American plough-boy is better informed on the silver question than the average Australian
editor.” But even if that is true, it is not saying a great deal, and there is many a slip ’twixt
the cup and the lip.
Let us assume that silver wins, and that free coinage at 16 to lis declared. What will be
the result ? A terrible panic, say the gold men. No doubt to some extent they are right.
But it will be a panic among the gold men, lest they should be compelled to accept silver.
Whenever the United States does not behave itself, the gold men make their power felt. We
all remember the sensational demand for gold that followed the Venezuelan difficulty.
Creditors of the States tightened the screw, and panic and distress at once ensued. They
declare that if free coinage is established they will tighten it worse. But free coinage would
take away their power, because free coinage would make silver dollars of full weight a legal
tender for the payment of all debts except such as were specially contracted to be paid in gold.
As long as the United States adheres to the gold standard she is at the mercy of her gold
creditors. They can and they do bring her “to heel” whenever it suits them. But if she
once restores to her silver dollars the purchasing power of which she so unaccountably deprived
them a few years ago, she at once resumes her financial independence. Instead of
causing panic in the United States, free coinage will deprive gold creditors of the power
to create a panic at will—a power which in the past they have ruthlessly exercised, and
which they may be trusted to exercise at the present juncture to the full extent that the law
will permit. They are even now at work. Hence the cables! “So many million dollars of
gold have been withdrawn from the United States, and another loan to replenish the Treasury
is imminent.” The Treasury is only compelled to borrow gold because it will not use its own
silver. Free coinage would compel it to use its own silver, and the necessity of borrowing gold
would vanish. In place of being for the most part an impoverished and debt-ridden people the
Americans would have money to spend. They would spend it, too, in a fashion that would
speedily send depression to the rightabout, and cause a good demand —by the way —for woollen
goods and their corollary, Australian wool.
“ But it would not be honest to pay in silver,” That is just what it would be, except, of
course, where there is a definite contract. Tnose who furnished the money for the last loan


received bonds which are specifically payable in “ coin,” not in gold. !Not only did they accep
these bonds, but they g>t a much higher rate of interest because of this very contingency. It they
object to being paid in silver dollars they will show their willingness to “ repudiate an obliga-
tion into which, with their eyes open, they deliberately entered. A very happy text tor the
daily papers for their next sermon against repudiation.
What would be the effect on the price of silver ? The closing of the Indian mints
depressed silver 9d. an ounce in a few days. Is it extravagant to conjecture that the opening o
the American mints—the free coinage of silver for the purposes of the immense commerce o*.™®
United States—would raise the price at least twice as much, or, say, Is. 6d. per ounce ? And is i
not almost certain that the English Government would re-open the Indian mints in such au event .
which would give a further impetus to the upward movement of the white metal. What would
an advance of Is. 6d. or 2s. per ounce mean to Australian silver mines ? What would it mean
to silver exchange, to the competition of Japanese coal, Straits tin, Argentine wool and mutton .
Australia is trembling on the brink of a greater “ boom” than she has ever experienced. She
never would experience it if the issue depended on her leading journalists. Fortunately, their
opinions don’t count. The issue will be decided without their suffrages. Ihe effect on prices
will be world-wide —upward, giving increased prosperity and activity to enterprise of a
kinds, if the silver party win the day; downward, with increased stagnation and intensitie
depression, if the gold party again prevail.
In this connection it is worth remembering that Russia is in the field for a gold loan
about seventeen millions sterling. The gold that Russia takes she keeps. She has now in er
“ war chest ” a bigger hoard than any other nation. The abstraction of so large an amoun o
gold from a stock which is already woefully inadequate for the purposes of the won s com-
merce, must tend still further to increase the strain on the already over-valued metal; which is
the same thing as saying that it will cause a further fall in the prices of staple commodities,
unless silver is admitted to bear a part of the burden. This will be accomplished if the ree
coinage ” party prevail. They may not think of it in the heat of the struggle, but the fortunes
of producers in gold-standard countries all over the world are bound up with theirs, ihey are
fighting the battles of Australia as well as of the Western and Southern States. Ihose w o
condemn them now will share in the prosperity achieved by their efforts should they prove
successful.
The views of M. Henri Cernuschi, who predicted the evils that would follow from “ the
crime of 1873,” and who has been styled the father of bimetallism, are of melancholy interest
at this juncture. Shortly before his death he confided to his friend, M. Edmond Thery, editor
of the Economiste Europden, that his views as to the wisdom of free coinage in the United
States had been modified. He regarded Sir W. V. Harcourt’s speech in the House of Commons
in the bimetallic debate of March last as an expression of the hopeless antagonism of the great
gold creditor country to any change which would diminish the unearned gains which her money
lenders at present receive through the appreciation of gold. From one of his last utterances
on the subject I quote the following abridged extracts ; no doubt many of my readers will find
in them the reflection of their own best thought on the subject. Says M. Cernuschi:
“ I have always combated the uncompromising silver men of America, who at bottom are
really silver monometallists, because it (free coinage) would not immediately bring about a true
solution of the problem that international bimetallism has in view, namely, the instantaneous
fusion of the two standards in a single international money by the establishment of a fixed
parity of value between gold and silver. . . . But if I were a citizen of the United States,
and were convinced that Europe, by reason of England’s attitude, is fixedly hostile to the
establishment of a stable monetary parity between gold and silver, obstinately rejecting all
ideas of international bimetallic agreement, then I should erase to be an international bimetal-
list, and should go over unhesitatingly to the camp of the silver men,”
“ The appreciation of gold in regard to silver that has taken place since 18/3 has had a
twofold result for the United States, namely (1) It has diminished by half, on American terri-
tory, the value in gold of all the national products which are subject to the competition of
silver standard or of paper currency countries ; and (2) It has doubled the real burden of the debts
contracted abroad in gold, since double the quantity of American products is now required to
discharge the annual liabilities arising from these debts.”
For “American” in the above passage we might with equal truth read “ Australian. M.
Cernuschi continues :
“From a theoretical point of view, the free coinage of silver at 16 to 1 re-established by
the United States, without the concurrency of Europe, would be a vicious solution, but it
would, nevertheless, be a step in the direction of international bimetallism, for, under the
regime of the new standard, the p r oductive power of the United States would receive so
enormous an impulse, and this development would have so disastrous an effect upon the


A- W • PEARSB,
Hon. Secretary of the Bimetallic League of New South Wales.


economic and financial interests of England and the other European nations now governed by
the gold standard, that it may be confidently predicted in advance that the course of events
would force the adoption of international bimetallism as the only true solution, even upon
those who to-day deny the possibility and efficacy of it. ”
The mantle of M. Cernuschi has fallen upon a number of enthusiastic advocates of bimetal-
lism, who are now assisting to the best of their capacity the American movement in favour of
the free coinage of silver.
One great obstacle to the understanding of the currency question is an unwillingness to go
deep enough. People are satisfied with superficial views, and satisfied the more readily because
superficial views are fashionable, and bring the propounder of them a certain amount of credit
amongst the superficial. Australians, moreover, being mostly of British descent, bring their
British prejudice in favour of the single gold standard with them. The gold standard is the
standard of the creditor nation, because under it its gains increase year by year. But it follows
of necessity that the losses of its debtors increase in precisely the same ratio, the gain of the
one ( arising out of the loss of the other. Australia is a debtor community, and is already
beginning to ask how it is that it takes nearly 1000 bales of wool or 1000 tons of wheat to pay
off in gold the same amount of debt that was formerly paid by 500 bales or 500 tons. But let
us try to set to the root of the matter, and to see what is right, irrespective of the interests
either of the debtor or the creditor.
If we were to see men forcibly taking property from one person and giving it to another we
should be prompt to protest against such violence and injustice. But if it were explained to us
that those who thus acted were officers of justice, and were taking goods from one who had
stolen them and were restoring them to their rightful owner, our view of the case would be
quite changed, and our sympathies would flow out towards the administration of justice and the
enforcement of restitution. The illustration applies to the silver question. The methods
propounded for raising the price of silver appear to the superficial observer to be mere devices
for benefiting the owners of silver at the expense of owners of gold, for there is no doubt that
the purchasing power of gold would be pro tanto diminished by any course of action which
would raise the price of silver. Diminishing the purchasing power of gold is the same thing as
raising the price of commodities, for it means that it would take more gold than it does now to
buy a bale of wool, a truck load of wheat, or a ton of tin or copper. If this were done arbitrarily,
and without just cause, it would be an iniquitous proceeding. But the facts of the case are
that by a policy which has given an immense unearned increment to the possessors of gold, the
possessors of silver, property, products, etc., have been arbitrarily and causelessly mulcted to the
extent, as I have shown, of well on for a thousand million pounds sterling. The producers of other
commodities have been farther mulcted by being deprived of the competition of the purchasing
power thus destroyed, not only as to the shrinkage of the mere coin value, but as to the paper cur-
rency which would have been reared upon it. The rehabilitation of silver, therefore, instead of
being an arbitrary exercise of power for the benefit of a single section, is an act of justice to the
whole community, not only to the possessors of silver who have been wronged, but to the world’s
producers of other commodities who have suffered with them. "By disrating silver from its
position as a monetary metal, by taking away its status as legal tender, and closing the mints
to its free coinage, the purchasing power of the dollar has been reduced from 4s. 2d. to little
over 2s. Id., and that of the rupee from 2s. to little over Is. That means that the possessors of
the world’s silver, which, before this gigantic wrong was consummated, was worth 1800 million
pounds sterling, have been wrongfully deprived of nearly 900 million pounds. The disappearance
of so much actual or potential purchasing power or legal tender has reduced prices of staple
commodities, till production, except under most favourable circumstances, no longer shows a
profit, and industry and enterprise necessarily flag, and depression and stagnation take their
place. It is to undo this gigantic wrong, not merely to confer a temporary advantage on
possessors of silver, that currency reformers are exerting their most strenuous efforts.
Let us look at the subject from another standpoint. Never in the world’s history has the
human intellect been so fruitful in invention as in the last century, especially in the last two or
three decades. Never have there been such an increase and multiplication of commodities.
Take, for example, the department of electricity—electric lighting, electric power, the tele-
phone, &c. In another department see the extension of the manufacture of cycles. The
luxuries of twenty years ago have become the necessaries of to-day, and curiosities have become
articles of every-day use. Does anyone believe that the tendency towards further advances in
the same direction has come to an end ? Will it not rather go on increasing, one invention
preparing the way for others which will follow it or arise out of it ? All these new inventions


are commodities. Every service which is paid for is a commodity, and equally with every
article of use or luxury requires money to pay for it. Does it not follow that with this
tremendous increase in commodities and purchaseable services, an increase in the volume of
money is also necessary? Providentially, as I believe, by a coincidence as others will say,
simultaneously with this great expansion in productiveness and invention, there came a vast
increase in the production of the two precious metals which had hitherto been used by civilized
nations as legal tender money—that is to say, in the production of silver and gold. The
increase in commodities was attended by an increase in the volume of money to buy them.
Historians tell us of the frightful miseries that have followed contraction of the currency, a
calamity that was generally caused by the exhaustion of the then existing mines of
gold and silver. Industries have flagged,, the unemployed have increased beyond all
bounds, until sedition overwhelmed civilization and whole provinces relapsed into their
original barrenness. There has been no falling off in the production of the gold and
silver mines in the 19th century. But the calamitous contraction of the currency which
was formerly brought about by such a visitation has been gratuitously courted and brought
down upon our devoted heads by our own statesmen and financiers, who, by their
suicidal enactments, have destroyed the purchasing power of one of the two monetary metals,
and reduced it to a mere commodity, which must be exchanged for gold, or for paper equivalent
to gold, like copper, iron, or wool. By this course they have virtually destroyed the purchasing
power of one-half of the world’s money, and the countries which they have misled by their
counsels are to-day suffering the evils which were foretold by the clear-sighted minority who
opposed them. In the nooks and corners of the earth where silver is still full legal tender—
such as Mexico and Japan—there is activity and prosperity. In Great Britain capital and
labour are alike idle for want of profitable outlet, and the same state of affairs prevails in
Australia. The unemployed are the despair of our statesmen, whilst never before was there
such an aggregation of idle money in the coffers of the banks. “No profitable outlet,” is the
explanation. Prices are too low to admit of profit, and prices are low because the world’s
purchasing power has been curtailed by one-half. On the other hand interest, rent, &c.,
payable in gold, continue in full force.
Before answering the more common objections, I wish to show the relation of the “ free
coinage ” movement in America to the cause of currency reform. So far as economic evils are
traceable to the gigantic “blunder” of the gold currency theorists, they are due to the
destruction of the monetary, or debt-paying, power of one-half the world’s money—silver—and
the consequent doubling of the purchasing power of the other half—gold. If a weight is
depending on two ropes, and one of them is severed, a double strain is thrown on the other.
The world’s commerce depended in its last resort for its medium of exchange upon silver and
gold. Paper only did duty, and only does duty, by reason of its convertibility into sterling coin.
Silver has been removed by the craze for the single gold standard, and the weight of the commerce
of the civilized world has been thrown upon gold alone. Gold has to do double duty, and to
go twice as far as it did before, because, in addition to its own proper monetary work, it has to
do that which was formerly done by silver. That means that prices have declined, roughly
speaking, by one-half, with disastrous results to industry and commerce It means also that
gold, without other effort of its owners than that of manipulating the currency in their own
interest, has doubled its purchasing power, which doubling, by the way, is alleged by the
owners aforesaid to be “ honest ” and “ sound.”
This much being conceded, it is obvious that the remedy is the rehabilitation of that half
of the world’s money which has been disrated—namely, silver. The scientific bimetallists have
been wont to declare that this could only be satisfactorily accomplished by an all-embracing
international agreement, that is to say, by every nation —or nearly every nation—agreeing to
admit both silver and gold to free coinage at its mints at a ratio to be universally agreed upon.
Such an agreement has many recommendations. It would double the amount of the world’s
sterling legal tender money. It would for ever do away with ruinous fluctuations in exchange.
It would be rational and sensible, but for that very reason, seeing that prejudice and ignorance
are so strongly entrenched in influential and dominant circles, it is not likely to be adopted.
But there is another resource, less exact, less scientific, less capable of meeting all the require-
ments of the case, but which would nevertheless afford an immense measure of relief.
Consider the problem. What is needed is that the increasing supplies of both gold and
silver shall be fully available as legal tender money to carry the ever increasing bulk of the
world’s commerce. This result could be obtained, not only by every nation agreeing to use
both metals, but by a sufficient number of nations agreeing to reinstate silver, leaving the rest to


enjoy their present gold standard. The immense power and influence of the United States, if
she were to re-open her mints to the free coinage of silver, would be of inestimable service’in
this regard. If the United States were to open her mints to the free coinage of silver an
enormous addition of legal tender silver money would at once be made to the world’s currency.
The immense needs of the population of the United States would be mainly met by the white
metal, or notes representing it. Her gold, of which she is a large producer, would be set free
to pay the foreign creditor. Gold would accumulate in the gold standard countries, and by its
accumulation would tend to raise prices. By the rise in prices American staple products would
become more valuable, and the balance of trade would be more readily maintained in her favour.
Moreover, the European nations whose interests are largely bound up with silver France
Germany and Russia—would have a rallying point if the great Western Republic were to
declare in favour of silver. At present they have none, but deem themselves bound to follow
servilely in the wake of England. Hot one of them is strong enough to take the initiative, and
their international animosities forbid combination. But the United States is strong enough,
and none of them would be ashamed to follow her lead. Together, with silver reinstated if
they choose to disrate gold, as Great Britain disrated silver, they could completely turn the
tables on the great creditor nation, and virtually dictate their own terms, instead of, as at
present, slavishly copying her bad example. They could, in fact, to vary Bismarck’s phrase,
“ leay e her to stew in her own gold.” The adoption of the free coinage of silver by the United
States would be a most important step in its rehabilitation, and would bring the international
agreement desired by the philosophic bimetallists very much nearer.
“But ’—it is alleged by one objector, “bimetallism is a policy which favours existing
debtors at the expense of existing creditors ; therefore it is unjust.” To this it is sufficient to
rejoin that the present system of gold monometallism favours existing creditors at the expense
of existing debtors. Year by year, since 1873, gold prices have gone against debtors, till in
many cases it now takes twice as much labour, or the products of labour, to defray an annual
debt of say £lOO as it did when the debt was contracted. Assistance to the creditor *to
perpetuate and intensify this extortion would be unjust. To reduce the debt to its original
pressure would be just. 5
Says another : “If prices advance the purchasing power of labourers’ wages will be
reduced.” This is true to a certain extent, but it does not justify the inference which is drawn
from it—namely, that the restoration of silver is, on this account, inadmissible. If wheat rises
as in \ ictoria, to 4s. 6d. per bushel, instead of going begging at 2s. 6d., we don’t find this
question of the purchasing power of wages alleged as any practical grievance. We rather con-
gratulate ourselves that those farmers who have wheat to sell are prosperous, can pay their
way, and have some money to spend, which gives an impetus to trade. The truth is that the
purchasing power of his wages concerns the worker much less than the contingency of having no
wages to spend. The haunting, carking fear of being out of employment is what embitters the
life of the working classes. This it is which is driving numbers of the more thoughtful to
socialism. When prices of productions are so low as to leave no profit, no fresh capital is
embarked in producing them. Retrenchment is relentlessly resorted to in order to make ends
meet, and hands are discharged right and left, till there is an army of unemployed suoh as faces
us in nearly every Australian colony at the present moment. But when prices rise so as to
show any reasonable prospect of durable profit, the reverse takes place. Fresh enterprises are
entered upon, new factories are built, and old ones enlarged, and there is at once an increased
demand for labour. If this takes place in many industries at the same time—and it would take
place in nearly all if silver were rehabilitated—no willing and capable worker need be out of
work a day. Commodities are now too cheap to give a living profit. Granted that they would
be somewhat dearer. Did that consideration prevent any of the colonies (except, perhaps, New
South Wales) from inaugurating a protective tariff ? But even a protective tariff is powerless to
give permanent activity to enterprise so long as the currency wrong remains unredressed
because at present all prices have to be “measured ” in gold, and the “ measure ” is an unjust
one, which is continually “ stretching ” against the seller. The disadvantage to the working
classes of commodities being a little dearer is a mere trifle compared with the ever present
fear of being “retrenched ” or being compelled to join the unemployed.
“ But ” —if production were thus stimulated would there not be over-production ? This is
a more plausible objection than any of the others, but a very little consideration will show that
it is baseless. When the community is fairly prosperous, which is the same as saying when
producers can obtain fair prices for their products, and when the consequent competition for
labour ensures fair wages to their employees, everyone has money to spend, and nearly everyone
has more money to spend than is required to buy the bare necessaries of life. Outside those
necessaries there is boundless scope for productive energy. What a demand, for instance, there
would at once be for clothing if everyone had the wherewithal to purchase a new outfit.
What requirements for upholstery and furniture, for books, musical instruments, and works of


art ! Stagnation and depression, with their resultant poverty, woefully curtail demand for
these things, and thus double their own intensity by consigning to poverty and lack of employ-
ment those who are engaged in producing them. Poverty begets poverty, and wealth begets
wealth. Seeing one patent cause of poverty in the degradation of silver, and the consequent
appreciation of gold, fall of prices, and resulting depression, wisdom dictates that those who
control the world’s financial destinies should retrace their steps.
Of similar nature to the last is the “ poser ” put to me by another objector. “ You would
enable employers to pay their workmen, and enable debtors to pay their creditors, with a fifty -
cent. dollar. They would run around to buy silver at 50 cents per dollar, and they would pay
it away at 100 cents per dollar.” Indeed! From whom would they buy? If I have 100
ounces of silver, and the law specifies that the mint will coin it for me into full weight legal
tender dollars, at the rate of 100 cents to the dollar, to whom will I sell at 50 cents to the
dollar ? Objections of this character show very plainly the superficiality of which I have
before complained. If it be still demurred that the enactment would double the wealth of
owners of silver at one bound lam not concerned to deny it. Whatever might be the result in
this direction, it would add to the general prosperity instead of diminishing it But, what is
more to the purpose, it would not confer any new and previously unheard-of privilege on the
owners of silver. It would simply restore to them a privilege of which they have been wrong-
fully deprived, and which was highly conducive to the general welfare. Not a voice has been
raised in protest by the gold standard advocates whilst the possessors of the world’s silver were
being wrongfully impoverished to the extent of one-half their wealth. Yet the whole world
necessarily suffered by that impoverishment. Bitterly, however, they complain if there is a
prospect of those who have been thus wronged being restored to prosperity, though it is obvious
that this would necessarily increase the general prosperity just as surely as the former course
caused general depression. The objection that the possessors of silver would be enriched by
the proposed course loses all force when it is seen that it is simply a matter of restitution, not
of capricious favour. Add to prosperity by all means if it can be righteously done, but don’t
prolong unrighteous impoverishment.
Writes a correspondent : “ It is the market ratio of the metals which controls the relative
value of the metals in coin, and the legal ratio of the metals must always conform to the
market ratio.” This is a very dogmatic generalisation, and, like most other dogmatic general-
isations, it must be received with much caution and many qualifications. But, assuming that
it contains a germ of truth, what does it mean ? The market ratio of silver to gold at present
is about 30 to 1. Therefore, the dogma declares, it is impossible to establish a mint ratio at
any other figure. If the Indian mints and the American mints were thrown open to the free
coinage of silver to-morrow the dollars and rupees, according to this “ law, ” would command
no higher value than 30 to 1. That is to say. the rupee would still be worth only 13d. and the
dollar 2s. 3d. Does anyone believe such an incredible proposition? Mr. H. Dunning Macleod
may believe it, but he is a barrister, more at home with abstract dogma (especially dogma of
his own framing) than with actual exchange transactions. The closing of the Indian mints
reduced the price of silver atone swoop from 3s. 3d. per ounce to 2s. That is to say, the
alteration of the legal status of silver changed the market ratio between silver and gold from about
24 to Ito about 32 to 1. What limping logic it is which admits that the closing of a mint may
lower the price of the metal usually coined, but denies that its reopening can raise or sustain
the price ! The truth is, that the legal ratio and the market ratio are intimately connected.
The principal influence affecting the market price of silver is the demand for coinage purposes.
The closing of a mint cuts off that demand and therefore- causes the price to fall. On the
other hand, the reopening of the mint would at once revive the demand, and cause the price to
rise. Thus, it is abundantly evident that to a great extent, at any rate, the market ratio
depends upon the ratio established by law. I do not see how there is any escape from the
conclusion that if the mints of India, of the United States, and of the Latin Union, were
again opened to the free coinage of silver at the legal ratio current in 1873 the market price of
the metal would, in a very short time, conform to that ratio. That is to say, no one would sell
silver for less than he could get for it at the mint. Close the mints, and you take the best
customer, almost the only customer, out of the market. Open them, and the demand is at once
restored, and the price, which depends upon demand, is affected also.
“ Then if the price of silver can be maintained by law at 16 to 1, or ss. per ounce, why
not maintain it at Btol, or 10s. per ounce ? One should be as easy as the other. And, if the
price of silver can be maintained by a law enacting its free coinage at a certain ratio, why not
the price of iron, copper, hay, or straw ? ” The answer is simple. Bimetallists are striving for


trie restoration of the status quo, which was ruptured by the demonetisation of silver. Previ-
ously the world had enjoyed, in rough and ready fashion, the full use of both gold and silver as
monetary metals. Then, at the instigation of visionary innovators, silver was thrown over-
board, leaving the rapidly increasing commerce and production of civilised nations to be borne
by gold alone This has caused immense loss to owners of silver—that is to say, to the owners
of one-half of the world’s coined money and bullion, apd the lots they have experienced has
been shared by all the world, in the stagnation and depression which has ensued. Bimetallists
desire no such startling innovations as silver at 8 to 1 ; still less do they desire that iron,
copper, hay, or straw shall be used for monetary purposes. They desire, simply, the righting
Of wrong the restoration of silver to the status of which it was wrongfully deprived, and the
restoration to commerce and industry of the valuable assistance which silver is able to render
them. The ratio at which silver was received as money prior to 1873 varied between 15‘2 to i
and 16 to 1 This is the ratio we wish to see restored. It has been destroyed by the successive
closing of their mints to the free coinage of silver by nation after nation. It can be restored
by those nations one by one retracing their steps ; or it can also be restored by international
agreement, in which all should take action together. Hut restored it must be, unless heart-
breaking depression and stagnation are to be indefinitely prolonged and further intensified.
The questions about iron, copper, and the like, however, are not seriously put. i hey are
merely thrown out as entanglements, and lead nowhere. What they amount to is this : xou
say it is in the power of Governments to do a wise action ? Why, then, should they not also
do a foolish action ? ” We only say that it is in the power of the civilised nations of the world
to do again what they did before, and in the light of advanced knowledge to do it better, and
in a manner less open to objection. “ But when both metals were used as money the nations
were always in trouble. Either gold or silver was always leaving them and causing inconveni-
ence.” There is some truth in this objection. But if it can be shown that the inconvenience
arose from removable causes, then it is wiser to remove the causes than perform the happy
despatch ”by throwing one of the metals overboard. All the trouble about silver leaving a
country or gold leaving a country arose from the difference in the ratios enacted by the ditterent
nations. Thus the ratio in France in the latter half of the 18th century, previous to 1785. was
14-70 to 15, while in England it was 15 2 to 1. Silver, therefore, was worth more in gold in
France than in England, and English merchants found it more profitable to make their pay-
ments to France in silver than in gold ; French merchants, on the other hand, found it more
profitable to make payments to England in gold than in silver ; thus a dram on silver was set
up in England. But if both countries had enacted the same ratio, there would have been no
inducement for exporting silver from England, and consequently no drain of the metal, it is
difficult, if not impossible, to maintain a number of different ratios side by side ; but by the
same reasoning it would be easy to maintain the same ratio, because no profit could then be
made by exporting one metal in preference to the other. This is the recommendation of the
international agreement, which is being contended for by the bimetallists of Great Britain,
France, Germany, and the United States. It is the most rational and intelligent way of settling
the question—too rational, lam afraid, for the present age, which prefers prejudice to
enlightenment, which prefers extortion to equity, and which also prefers hostility and cross
purposes to mutual agreement.
Failing international agreement, the only other hope for the rehabilitation of silver is the
frank adoption of silver by the nations which have abandoned it, and the determination, more-
over, to adhere to silver, should conflict arise, in preference to gold. As long as every nation is
on its own ” it must necessarily be difficult to maintain the parity of the two metals in any
one of them. When difficulties arise, the weight rests upon one monetary metal or the other.
The question then arises, “Which one shall it be ? ” Hitherto the answer has always been
“Gold.” Thus a nominal bimetallism, such as prevails in the United States, in times of stress
becomes gold monometallism, and her financial difficulties are accentuated by the contrast between
the ease of the bimetallic period, when nobody cares whether he gets gold or silver, and the
stringency of the period of pressure, when everyone is scrambling for gold, and silver is'Only
valued so far as it is exchangeable for the yellow metal. If, in place of answering “ Gold to
this question, “ Which one ? ” the United States were frankly to answer “ Silver,” and let the
gold go, she would relieve herself at once of the most pressing of her troubles. Her silver,
wnich is now uselessly stored up, not even valid as a backing for paper (because the Treasury
deems itself bound to redeem all silver certificates with gold), would then become of real
tangible assistance to her commerce. Silver would advance in price, and the rise would stimulate
trade all the world over. Instead of stagnation there would be industrial and commercial
activity, and, instead of depression, buoyancy.
It is maintained by many American silver men that the United States is able, single-
handed, to maintain the par between gold and silver at 16 to 1. Her population and commerce
are much larger than those of the Latin Union, which kept its mints open from 1849 to 1873
for the coinage of both silver and gold, at the ratio of Is£oz. silver to loz. gold. The idea is a


pleasing one, and 1 heartily hope that it may be put to the test, and may prove to be well
grounded.
There are, however, two important differences between the position of the Latin Union
and that of the United States, either of which is sufficient to cause misgivings. In the first
place, the United States owes an immense amount of money to Great Britain. Much of it is
liable to be called in at will, and much of it would be called in, partly from unreasoning panic,
which would desire to get hold of its money and sit on it till the course of events became clear,
and partly from a partisan desire to hamper as much as possible the new departure. The
Latin Union owed money, but it owed it mostly to its own people, and was not in danger of
any such drain from outside its borders as that to which the United States is subject whenever
she displeases Lombard-street. Of course, she can cut this knot, just as Great Britain cut the
currency knot by throwing silver overboard in 1816, rather than negotiate with other nations
for a stable par of exchange. But, in the meantime, she would find it much more difficult to
maintain a par of exchange in the teeth of heavy external indebtedness than if that indebted-
ness did not exist. Until silver was raised to ss. an ounce in the world’s markets, the drain
would be on gold only, and this, 1 should imagine, would constantly tend to destroy the
equilibrium.
The other difficulty is that, even if it were possible for the United States, acting unitedly,
to maintain the ratio between the two metals by free coinage of both at 16 to 1, and to prevent
gold from going to a premium, it does not follow that it would be possible in her present divided
condition. The financiers are mainly to be found in the Eastern States. They are, almost to a
man, fanatically attached to the gold standard, so much so that few of them find it possible to
refer to the advocates of silver in any other terms than those of hatred and contempt. They
would almost certainly make it their business to demonstrate that the free coinage of silver
would not work,” and, having so many of the strings in their own hands, it is quite conceiv-
able that they might succeed in sending gold to a premium.
On the other hand, the free use of silver as ultimate money of redemption would in a
short time so stimulate internal commerce that even these difficulties might be triumphantly
conquered, and the great Republic might be able to buy with her own productions as much
gold as she needed to pay her foreign creditor, instead of borrowing it at a ruinous rate of
interest, as she has lately been doing. But, failing the maintenance of the bimetallic par, she
would have to stick to silver as her standard, or else sink back into monetary dependence far
more galling than any she has yet experienced.
Many readers will sympathise with Professor Foxwell, who commented recently on the
utterjdiscrepancy between the telegraphic reports and the actual facts and occurrences of the
currency struggle in the United States. “No greater contrast can be conceived,” he said,
“ than that which exists between the general impression given me by my correspondents—men
from all parts of the United States, without any axes to grind—and the impression which is
left on my mind by the telegrams in the leading papers.” To a large majority of newspaper
readers, the Republican party, with their chosen candidate, Major M‘Kinley, represents the
advocacy of a single gold standard, that will carry with it an increasing demonetisation of
silver, and a further fall in prices, whereas the fact is that the Republican platform, so far as
regards the currency, is precisely on the lines of the London Bimetallic League, viz., the main-
tenance of the gold standard, without further coinage of silver, except by international agree-
ment. The Republicans stand for Protection, the Democrats for Freetra le. It follows that
those papers which espouse the cause of Major M‘Kinley against Mr. Bryan throw up their
hats for Bimetallism-cum-Protection, as against Bimetallism-cum-Freetrade. It is as well
that their readers should know this fact, even if their own knowledge of it is somewhat
defective.
At the annual meeting of the Bimetallic League, a weighty remark on “ sound money ”
came from Lord Aldenham, the president of the League. “ The London press,” he said, ‘‘join
in the chorus for ‘sound money’ or ‘honest money,’ fondly believing that these words are
applied in the United States to gold monometallism, and not, as they really are, to international
bimetallism, the system which we advocate.” These articles will not have been written in vain
if my readers remember that in the largest English-speaking population in the world, numbering
nearly 70,000,000, “ sound money ” and “honest money” are terms which signify bimetallic
money. They will then know what value to set upon the utterances of journals which laud
“ sound money” and decry bimetallism in the same articles.
The principal speaker at the meeting was Professor Francis A. Walker, admittedly one
of the leading economists of the world, who had been expressly invited from the United States


to take part. He began his address by pointing out the obstructiveness of the city of London.
“Of all the vast expanse of the globe,” he said, “ one square mile alone blocks the way to the
adoption of a world’s money as wide as the world’s trade. The veto of this city blocks a
monetary policy which has approved itself by longhand beneficent operation, a monetary policy
the economic validity and practical efficiency of which has been admitted with absolute
unanimity by the most distinguished Commission which jias been assembled in this country
since the great inquests on the Bank Charter 50 or 60 years ago—a monetary policy which the
nations of the earth never needed so greatly as to-day.” He went on to show that Germany,
France, and all the great European Powers, would cheerfully and promptly second the action
of the United States, and do all that England would do in restoring the ancient parity of the
metals. In a passage of great power he asked whether, with so many nations waiting upon
England, and none willing to move without her, England does not owe something more to the
world of which she is so important a part; whether even the particular interests of the British
Empire are being served by an isolated, unsympathetic, and uncompromising attitude, in a
matter of universal concern. He maintained that the larger aspects of international bimetallism
had not received adequate consideration at the hands of the press. But then, I may remark, it
is seldom, indeed, that the press, taken individually, can ever take a broad view, or set itself
free from the “ Little Pedlington” bounds of “the policy of the paper.” Once wrong, always
wrong, is usually the motto, none the less faithfully observed although it may be unuttered.
“ There is no occasion,” said Professor Walker, “ to disparage the arguments which have been
used to maintain the monometallic system so far as one of the great functions of money is con-
cerned ; its advantages are plain, manifest, unmistakable. But these advantages may be
purchased too dearly, if they are obtained by the sacrifice of the larger interests of the regular
confident, progressive production of wealth. What the monometallists say is true ; but it is
only one-half of the truth, and it is the lesser and the meaner half. Unquestionably, mono-
metallism enables you to do the business you have to do with greater ease and with less of
friction; but does not the experience of the world, aye, of England herself, during the past
twenty years, show that the adoption of a system which seta the two halves of the commercial
world at variance and discord, monetarily speaking, gives you less business to do? Have not
the navigation interest, the manufacturing interest, the agricultural interest, even the trading
interest, felt, and grievously felt, the loss of that par of exchange between the gold-using and
the silver-using nations, which the bimetallic system so long maintained ? A large economy is
more than a minute finance. No one questions the accuracy with which monometallism takes
tithe of mint, and anise, and cummin, but we may rightfully charge it with neglecting
weightier matters of the law which concern the public in the highest degree. Whatever may
be true of the banker, should not the great merchant care first, and care most, for those things
which promote the large, continuous, and ever expanding volume of production?”
While regretting the rashness of the Democrats, whose platform he opposed, Professor
Walker speaks of them far more generously than do their Australian critics, who have not the
excuse of partisan strife, seeing that they have all the field to themselves. “Eagerness and
anxiety,” he said, “have been too strong for prudence and diplomatic reserve. Diplomacy
and reserve are not characteristic of the American people. Whatever they desire and believe
in they are ever impatient to work for, and ready to make sacrifices for, to the very limits of
their strength and means. The Bland-Allison Bill of 1878 was the will of the American people
by a very large majority. It was non-diplomatic, it was injudicious, it was practically
mischievous, for by it we simply put our fingers into the door and took the squeezing that
belonged by rights to those who had brought about the trouble, and by just so much diminished
the interest they might feel in remonetisation, yet I believe that Act to have been one of genuine
enthusiasm, in the main disinterested, in the main loyal. The entire action of the United States,
from 1878 to 1893, in the large coinage of silver dollars, and the large purchases of silver
bullion, was prejudicial to the cause of bimetallism, but it was in the main due to a loyal
intention to undo the great wrong of demonetisation which followed the gold monometallic
propaganda set on foot by the Paris Conference of 1867. The opposition to the measure referred
to was almost solely on the grounds of policy.”
As to gold monometallism in the United States, Professor Walker was very outspoken.
“There is no proper gold monometalliet party,” he said, “in the United States. There are a few
city editors of a type not unknown to you, a few bankers, especially among those having direct
London connection, a few economists, mainly of the harsh arbitrary a priori school, and some
other highly respectable citizens, whose intellectual conformation specifically adapts them to that
sort of reasoning, who favour gold monometallism for its own sake. There are greater numbers
whom the successive disappointments regarding the remonetisation of silver have disposed, in a
kind of despair of any other issue, to accept the situation without further struggle. But I
assert in the most positive manner that if a proposal for a bimetallic agreement were to come to
the United States from the principal countries of Europe, the opposition upon a popular vote
would be so trivial as not to be worth a formal count.”


The cry about “repudiation” and “silver miners” comes in for equally specific refutation.
“It has been chiefly charged in Europe,” said the Professor, “that the United States were
chiefly moved to their successive efforts for the monetary rehabilitation of silver by a selfish
and particular interest. That opinion is, however, in my humble judgment, mis'aken. Silver-
mining is one of the smaller of the vast and diversified industries of the United States, and
while those who pursue it have pressed their cause in Congress with intense zeal, their utmost
activity could never have seriously affected the public policy of the country had not the con-
victions of the people at large favoured every effort for the restoration of silver to its full rank
as a money metal. It is also unfortunately true that there is in the United States a party con-
sisting of those who, irrespective of any personal interest in silver production, have always
advocated inflation and cheap money. Nothing has made this party formidable since the sound
beating it got twenty years ago, except the existence of a real grievance in the forcible, unneces-
sary, and wanton demonetisation of silver, and the unceasing fall of prices. Widely separated from
both of these classes, as to their economic views and motives, remain the true international
bimetallists of the country. These men are not inflationists, although, in accordance with their
general economic views, they earnestly deprecate a diminishing money supply.”
It is not because they wish to scale down debts, and pay off mortgages in a depreciated
currency that Americans are bimetallists. They know the contraction of the currency to be a
curse, and they have recently experienced its effects in enhancing the burden of all debts, in
cutting into the profits of business, in paralysing enterprise, and heaping up capital into great,
useless masses. They are bimetallists because they believe that bimetallism would restore
healthy and permanent activity to commerce. At the same time, Professor Walker expressed
the opinion that the maintenance of the gold standard in the United States is not one whit less
secure by reason of what was done at the Chicago Convention. “In spite,” he says, “of many
friendly suggestions from this side of the water, we are not going to pull any burning chestnuts
out of the fire. The United States yields to no nation in her readiness to make reasonable
exertions, and to sustain reasonable sacrifices for the common good. But the Great Republic
of the West will make no doubtful experiments in finance, at any rate none more questionable
than it did in 1878 and 1890. The bonds of the United States will continue to be paid in gold
or its full equivalent, and its credit will stand where it has ever stood since the vindication of
its nationality in the war of secession.”
The flood of misconception and misrepresentation of the silver question, which has deluged
the civilised world, has its spring and source in the untenable postulate which affirms that the
gold monometallists were warranted in insidiously destroying (as far as they were able) the
monetary power of one half the world’s money, namely, the silver half, which previously was
about equal in value and purchasing power to the gold half. The amount of each is nearly a
thousand million pounds sterling. All the reasoning of the advocates of the single gold stan-
dard is based upon the equally monstrous assumption that it was possible to effect this world-
wide destruction of legal tender money and of credits based upon it without causing terrible
and unjustifiable loss and disaster—the loss and disaster, namely, attendant on a long and not
yet terminated period of falling prices, marked by the ruin of myriads of producers, and by
almost universal depression and stagnation. England began the downward course by demone-
tising silver in 1816. That was a mistake, committed doubtless with the best intentions, but
still a mistake. Inconvenience was experienced on account of other nations withdrawing silver
from Great Britain. This was because of the divergence of their ratios. If they valued silver
in relation to gold more highly than she did, her silver left her and went to them. The
enlightened course would have been either to alter her own ratio so as to command the situation,
or else to negotiate with other nations for the adoption of a common ratio, which would have
removed the inconvenience. At that time, however, the advantages of international agreement
were even less appreciated than they are now, and a ratio was regarded rather as a means of
retaliation than as a possible bond of union. Great Britain cut the knot by so over-valuing
her silver that it was no longer possible for any nation to take it from her. This, however,
necessitated the closing of her mint to its free coinage, and the curtailment of its legal tender
power to sums not exceeding 40s. It was degraded, in short, to a mere token coinage.
Had the commerce of Great Britain in 1816 been as important relatively to that of other
nations as it is now, the evil effects of her demonetisation of silver would probably have been
more keenly felt. But her commerce was only small, and the full significance of her action was
further concealed by the fact that when the demonetisation of silver was enacted she was
enjoying (?) a suspension of coin payments, her finances having been depleted by the Napoleonic
wars. As, moreover, the mints of nearly all the other civilised nations of the world were


open to the free coinage of silver, the monetary power of that metal in the world's markets
suffered very little. The market price also remained fairly steady. From 1849 to 1873, during
which time the French mints were open to the free coinage of either r or geld at the ratio
of ounces of silver to 1 ounce of gold, the market price of silver in London kept within a
ratio of from 4s llfd. per ounce to ss. 2d. per ounce. In 1873, however, France, fearing that
she would be flooded by the silver which Germany was pouring in upon her, after the payment
of the war indemnity, first limited her free coinage of silver, and in 1876 suspended it. The
United States and other nations took the same course. From that time the price of silver has
tended steadily downwards. It is futile to affirm that the fall has been caused by over produc-
tion of the metal, for the price of silver, measured by other commodities than gold, has
remained, according to the index numbers, fairly steady. Even to-day 10 ounces of silver will
buy almost as much of wheat or of most other staple products in the London markets as it
would have bought when its gold price was ss. an ounce. To anyone capable of reasoning on
such subjects this is proof positive that there has been no formidable over production of silver
relative to commodities. The evils of low prices must have arisen, then, from the appreciation
of gold, that is to say, from requiring it to do single-handed the work which had previously
been done by gold and silver together. It follows that the depreciation, not only of silver, but
of other commodities, is due to the stupendous fatuity which has demonetised silver. No
other cause is adequate. This cause is adequate. Moreover, the effects which would neces-
sarily follow from this disastrous tampering with the world’s currency were foretold by the
clearer-sighted among the world’s financiers whilst the wickedness and folly were still in course
of perpetration. Their warnings, however, fell on deaf ears, and even now the only hope of
effecting reform lies in the revolt of the masses who are suffering from the resultant stringency
and depression rather than in the professedly enlightened financiers who have doggedly ranged
themselves on the wrong side.
Follow the course of the price of silver from 1873. In 1878 it had dropped to 4s. per
ounce, that is to say in five years after the closing of the mints of Germany, the United States,
and the Latin Union, to its free coinage, it had fallen 7d. per ounce, an amount three times
greater than any fall which had affected it in the 50 years preceding that rash and momentous
step. In 1883 it was down to 4s. 2£d. ;in 1888 it was 3s. 6£d. ; and in 1893 its average price
was 2s. 9§d. This, however, has been still further reduced by the closing of the Indian mints,
so that to-day its price is only about 2s. The fall in the gold prices of commodities has
kept pace with the fall in the gold price of silver. The result is that it now takes, on the
average, about twice as much of the products of labor to pay a given debt in gold as was
required prior to 1873. Should no great rehabilitation of silver—such, for instance, as the
United States democrats are striving for—be effected, this appreciation of gold and depreciation
of commodities will go on intensifying. Those who uphold the maintenance of the single gold
standard are, therefore, consciously or unconsciously, advocating a policy of conscienceless
confiscation, which unjustly confers an enormous unearned increment on money-lenders but
ruins producers. Even the money-lenders profit but little, for their cash lies idle on their
hands. Prices are so low that profits are almost non-existent, and there is little inducement to
embark capital in any active enterprise, except, perhaps, mining; hence it hangs on their
hands, and for years they were glad to lend it at call, or short notice, for about J to
f per cent, per annum.
Other considerations than those which pertain to pure finance have embarrassed the situa-
tion. Other nations have deemed that the rapid growth of British trade was due to her
adoption of the gold standard, a fallacy which is on a par with attributing the heat of the
weather to the thermometer, or the stagnation of a pond to the tadpoles within it. Conse-
quently the gold standard has been looked upon by them as a passport to solvency, and as a
kind of hall-mark of national respectability. So far as national prosperity is concerned, it
may, however, be fearlessly affirmed that many nations would experience far greater prosperity
under the silver standard than under the gold standard. Where there are but two monetary
metals within the range of practical consideration, and one is over-valued, only a creditor
nation can safely adopt the over-valued metal as its standard. The path of safety for the
others is to cling to the under-valued, and therefore cheaper, metal. If all nations except
England were to adopt the silver standard, silver, in its turn, would, of course, become over-
valued, and this would render it as necessary for some of them then to adopt gold, as it is
to-day advisable that they should adopt silver. Let me try to illustrate my meaning by a
little apologue A wealthy man had a service of gold plate. His friends and neighbours,
who were not so affluent, thought his prosperity was due to his service of gold, and resolved
that they also would furnish their plate chests in the same manner. The strain on their
resources soon made itself felt, and in their inmost souls they confessed that it would be far
wiser if they were to return to their former modest display of silver. But they would have
cut out their tongues rather than confess openly that they were not as well able to sport gold
as he. They suffered great mental torture in the effort to maintain appearances and had to


retrench unsparingly in other directions. But they were bolstered up in their determination
by the dealers in gold plate, who imagined that a return to silver would be very detrimental to
eir trade. At last, some inkling of the state of affairs reached the wealthy man, whose
example was causing so much tribulation to his neighbours, and for their sakes he determined
to send his gold plate to the bullion dealers and furnish his table with silver. But then the
neighbours followed suit likewise, till silver threatened to become as much too dear as it had
formerly been too cheap. Finally an understanding was arrived at, that the relative resort to
each of the two metals should be in accordance with the exigencies of the case, and that osten-
tation and all other unworthy motives should be ruled out of court. The wealthy did not
taboo silver, and the poor did not impoverish themselves by endeavouring to make a display of
gol . bo they used gold or silver according to their means and needs, and lived happily and
contentedly ever after.” J
VIII.
Money in itself is not wealth, though its possession under ordinary circumstancer commands
wealth, its economic use is that of a medium of exchange. It is necessary that it should have an
intrinsic value equal to its face value, otherwise there would be no adequate safeguard against over-
issue on the one hand, or skilful counterfeiting on the other. Now silver and gold together filled
this condition for centuries. As long as a sufficient number of the world’s mints were open to the
free comage of each of them, the market value only differed from the mint value by the amount
of the charges which would convey the metal to the mint where it could be coined. These
charges consisted mainly of the expenses of carriage. Were the mints re-opened to the coinage
of silver the conditions would again be fulfilled. There is only one reason why the present
price o silver is only half its coinage value, and that reason is that the mints have been closed
to its coinage. If an adequate number of them were re-opened—perhaps if only the mints of
the United states were re-opened to the free coinage at the old ratio—the metal would almost
immediately resume its old price and maintain it, greatly to the advantage of production and
commerce. 6 r
It is customary to assert that the price of silver fell because of over-production. This,
however, is abundantly disproved by statistics. It is humiliating to see presumedly well-
informed writers in financial papers complacently repeating so baseless an assertion For the
5U years from 1781 to 1830 the production of silver was 4620 z. to loz. of gold. The mint ratios
o the various nations were about 15 to 1, yet so long as the mints were open, in spite of the
disparity between the mint ratio and the ratio of production, the variations in the market price
■ m ! tal j were 80 sli g ht as to be insignificant. From 1831 to 1880, the period which
includes the date of the closing of the mints, the production of silver was only 8'730z. to loz. of
gold. Yet this is the period in which it is alleged that the over-production of silver necessitated
the closing of the mints ! Was there ever a more outrageous misstatement ? The mints were
closed, I repeat, at the instance of visionary innovators, who thought they saw in the adoption
of the single gold standard an open sesame to national wealth. Instead of this it has led to a
period of unparalleled extortion on the part of money lenders, of stagnation and depression in
commerce, and of wholesale ruin among producers. “ Things will find their own level in time,”
say the optimists. Granted that they will, what will that level be ? The level of wages and
prices on the basis of the single gold standard will be less than one half what it would be
basis of gold and silver together. What strikes, what social convulsions, what misery
and distress, what loss and ruin, there will be before the level of the single gold standard is
reached ! &
■ Before the blunder of 18/3 was consummated—l do not call it a “crime,” because I believe
it to have been the offspring of officious ignorance rather than of evil intent—its consequences
were foretold by competent authorities. M. Wolowski said before the French Monetary Con-
vention of 1869 : The sum total of the precious metals is reckoned at fifty milliards—one
half gold, one half silver. If by a stroke of the pen they suppress one of these metals in the
monetary service they double the demand for the other, to the ruin of all debtors. ” Is not this
rum of debtors one phenomenon with which we are confronted to-day ? Its significance is not
destroyed by the fact that some of the biggest debtors, instead of themselves succumbing,
though bankrupt, have been powerful enough to ruin their creditors. In a memoir read before
the rrench Institute about the same date, M. Wolowski said : “The suppression of silver would
be a veritable revolution. Gold would augment in value with a rapid and constant progress,
which would break the faith of contracts, and aggravate the situation of all debtors, including
the nation ; it would add, at one stroke of the pen, at least three milliards to the twelve
milliards of the public debt.


That there has been such an increase in the pressure of debt even advocates of the single
gold standard have been compelled to admit. Sir R. Giffen, in 1888, wrote : “A fall in prices
in such a general way as to amount to what is known as a rise in the purchasing power of gold
is generally—l may say universally—admitted. It is obvious beyond all question that these
effects may be important. The weight of all permanent burdens is increased compared with
what would have been the case had there been no appreciation. The debtors pay more than
they would otherwise pay, and the creditors receive more. Appreciation, or in other words an
increase in the value or purchasing power of the standard coin, is a most serious matter for
those who have debts to pay,”
Professor Jevons, also an advocate of the single gold standard for Great Britain, had for©
bodings of the evils that would follow if other nations followed Great Britain’s example. He
said : “It stands to reason, of course, that if several great nations decide that they will, at all
cost, have gold currencies to be coined within the next few years, the annual production cannot
meet the demand, which must mainly be supplied, if at all, out of stock. The result would
doubtless be a tendency to a fall in prices. But is it likely,” he asks, “that such proceedings
will be taken by rational statesmen and rational Parliaments? It is really too absurd to
suppose that any country will insist upon immediately having a gold currency at any cost,
regardless of the fact that it will thereby injure its own trade and commerce in the getting.”
However, what he deemed to be too absurd to contemplate is what has actually happened.
He did not live long enough to see the full extent of the evil as it faces us to-day. But he saw
enough to cause him to say : “If Governments will in this way derange the conditions of supply
and demand, it is impossible that prices can remain steady.” Since his time, Austria, Russia,
and Venezuela have joined in the mad rush after the gold standard, and India has taken a
disastrous step in the same direction.
Allow me to quote a few more authorities before passing to another phase of the subject. John
Locke says : “ The value of money in general is the quantity of all money in the world in propor-
tion to all the trade. ” Apply this to the demonetisation of silver, which, roughly speaking, reduced
the quantity of the world’s money by nearly one half, and at the same time added the silver to
the number of commodities to be measured against gold. Ricardo says : “ The value of money
in any country is determined by the amount existing. That commodities would rise or fall in
price in proportion to the increase or diminution of money I assume as a fact that is incontro-
vertible.” Elsewhere he says: “The demand for money is regulated entirely by its value,
and its value by its quantity.” James Mill says : “In whatever degree, therefore, the quantity
of money is increased or diminished—other things remaining the same—in that same propor-
tion the value of the whole and of every part is reciprocally diminished or increased.” This is
just what has happened before our eyes. The quantity of money has been wantonly diminished
by the demonetisation of silver, and prices of products have diminished in the same ratio.
John Stuart Mill says : “ The value of money—other things being the same—varies inversely
as its quantity, every increase in quantity lowering the value, and every diminution raising it
in a ratio exactly equivalent.” In another place he says : “ That an increase of money raises
prices and a diminution lowers them is the most elementary proposition in the theory of
currency, and without it we should have no key to any of the others. ”
Coming back to the question, “What is honest money ? ” I cannot more fitly close this
chapter than by quoting from an article in the Journal of Finance (London), by H. B. Beeton :
“Whether a dollar is honest or dishonest is entirely a question of purchasing power, and has
nothing whatever to do with its gold price. If it be dishonest-to repay a debt in a dollar of
less purchasing power than that in which it was incurred, it is, of course, equally dishonest to
require payment of a debt in a dollar of greater purchasing power than that in which it was
incurred. There is such a thing as injustice to the debtor, as well as to the creditor, and what
is more, injustice to the debtor abates industry and enterprise, and so causes loss to society,
which injustice to the creditor does not in the same degree. The belated gold monometallist
desires a dollar maintained at a parity with gold, whatever its purchasing power, and he there-
fore, knowingly or unknowingly, advocates a policy in itself intensely dishonest. Some
allowance must be made in this case for the heat of party strife, but the sooner our journalists
who are profoundly ignorant of the nature of the issue, leave off abusing the silverites and
misrepresenting the sound money men, the better for their reputation and their readers’
enlightenment. As Abraham Lincoln once said:—‘You may fool some people all the time,
and you may fool all the people some time, but you cannot fool all the people all the time.’ ”
The great stumbling block with many people is, that silver at present is only worth in the
open market 50 cents to the dollar. The closing of the Indian mints depressed it 10 cents.
If any more mints are closed it will probably not be worth 40 cents. But the fall will be


caused by mischievous legislation. The mints were not closed because of the over-production
of silver. Statistics show this plainly. The mints were closed in 1873. During the five years
1860 the production of silver was only 4£oz. to loz. of gold. In the five years ending
18/0 it was 7oz. of silver to loz. of gold, and during the five years ending 1875 it was lloz. of
sdver to loz. of gold. Surely it ought to be superfluous to say that a production of even the
maximum of 11 to 1 could not break down the ratio of to 1. The maximum production of
silver, in relation to gold, was not reached till 1893, twenty years after the mints were closed,
when it was 22 sto 1. In 1895 it had fallen to to 1. In any case the production of a single
year, or even of ten or twenty years, could have but little effect on the mass of the metal in
use, and it is only the latter (so long as the monetary power of the metal is not tampered with)
which is operative in affecting the ratio. As a matter of fact, the existing mint ratio (1478 to
15 - 82 to 1) was maintained between 1781 and 1830, although the production of silver to that of
gold in that period was as 46'2 >z. to loz. As long as the mints were open a production of silver
46 times as great as that of gold did not break down the ratio. After the mints were closed an
excess relatively only a fraction as great broke dowm the market altogether. How can any
candid person say that the present price of silver is the result of the fair and unfettered
operation of the law of demand and supply, when, at the instance of the fanatical champions
of the single gold standard the strength of the demand, which was for purposes of coinage,
was mischievously cut off? To point the finger at the present low price of silver is as if some
bloodthirsty scoundrels had hamstrung a horse, and then jeered because it could not gallop.
Some say that the wanton and uncalled-for interference with the monetary power of silver
caused no impoverishment. Let me try to make this point plain by an illustration. A man has
five pounds worth of silver money in one pocket and five sovereigns in the other. He is worth
ten pounds. He can, and probably will, go out and buy ten pounds’ worth of goods. Multiply
him by millions, and you get some idea of the purchasing power of the masses, the mighty
force which makes the wheels of trade go round. But an edict is passed that silver is no
longer to pass current, but must be sold for gold. What is the position then ? Instead of a
man with ten pounds to spend, you have a man with only five pounds to spend, and a pocketful
of silver tokens for which he must find a buyer before they will help him to buy anything.
Instead of being a cash customer for ten pounds’ worth of goods, he can only be a customer
for five pounds worth. Multiply this case by millions, and you have something akin to what
ha,s actually happened. The world (which means the people in it) bad in one pocket about 800
million pounds’ worth of gold coin. It had in the other pocket about 800 million pounds’ worth
of silver coin. Without any valid reason, at the instance of monometallist theorists, who were
warned of the evils that would follow their course, the silver was deprived of its monetary
power by the civilised nations of the world. Some of them refused to regard it as legal tender
except for trifling amounts. All closed their mints to its free coinage. The result is that at
this moment the silver is only worth 400 million pounds instead of 800 millions, and instead of
being legal tender money it is a commodity which must be sold for gold. For international
purposes gold, and gold alone, is the only money which counts. Instead of buyers possessing
1600 million pounds sterling of hard legal tender coin, they only possess a fraction of it. The
remainder of the purchasing power they once enjoyed is for the nonce destroyed. It will be
restored just in proportion as silver is remonetised.
Some monometullist writers, in desperation at the hopelessness of their case, attempt to
impugn what they call the “quantitative theory” of money. They talk about “ credit ” and
paper currency, ’ and try to confuse the issue in other ways. But paper money, which is the
outward and visible sign of credit, is only valid in solvent countries as long as it has legal
tender coin behind it. If the legal tender is not there when wanted, credit vanishes. If you
doubt it draw a cheque for an amount larger than your banker will pay ! A true theory is
merely a description of a fact, and the “quantitative theory” is a description of a fact, the
fact that if silver is deprived of its monetary power there is less money in the world than there
was when it possessed monetary power. There are more sellers with larger quantities of com-
modities to sell, because the silver itself has now become a commodity which has to be sold for
gold. There are fewer buyers, and they have less money, because the purchasing power of their
silver money is destroyed or impaired. Consequently there is less and less “ spring ”in the
market, and, as even Mr. A. J. Wilson acknowledges, obligations which nominally represent
only 10 per cent, press with a weight of 20 per cent., because twice the amount of the
products of labour has to be sold to bring the same nominal amount of money. The “ quanti-
tative theory ” is merely an expression of the stubborn fact that if a man with five pounds in
gold money and five pounds in silver money is deprived of the silver, he will only have five
pounds instead of ten. All the ingenuity in the world cannot get over that, nor show that the
man is not impoverished.
“ Ob, but,” say our financial writers, “ the production of gold is increasing so rapidly that
it will soon answer all purposes.” Just tell the man who had the ten pounds (but it will be


well to get out of his reach first): “ See [here, my man, we have robbed you of five pounds’
worth of silver, but you can earn another sovereign in gold, and then you will be better off
than ever you were. ” If he earned ten pounds more in gold he would not be so well off as if
he had the silver in addition to the gold. The world needs the full use of its two monetary
metals to carry the constantly increasing volume of trade. The Herald estimates the annual
increase of commerce at only per cent., and considers that the increase in the production of
gold is sufficient to carry the increase of trade without further contraction in prices. But the
lelegraph unkindly “gives away ” the argument of his brother sophist by pointing out that in
the last 60 years the trade of the United Kingdom has increased 600 per cent. ! Does not such
an increase demand a proportionate increase in the quantity of the legal tender medium of
exchange ? What is a paltry and pottering per cent, per annum to the expansion of com-
merce which would take place if the energy, enterprise and invention of the people were not
hampered by a wanton and unjustifiable contraction of the currency?
Finally, as to the honesty of the question. In my opinion dishonesty began when the
world’s producers and traders were unwarrantably deprived, in the interests of owners and
producers of gold, of the legal tender power which had previously been accorded to silver.
Dishonesty is prolonged by those who wish to enable creditors in gold to continue to exact twice—
or very likely more than twice—as much of the products of labour as is equitably their due.
The championship of the single gold standard is the championship of conscienceless confiscation.
The championship of the double standard is the advocacy of an honest return to the status quo
ante helium, with which there ought never to have been any interference.
TO BIMETALLISTS.
W. J. SPENCER, one of the Vice-Presidents of the Bimetallic League of
New South Wales, and a journalist of acknowledged ability and experience, invites
subscriptions with a view to issuing a WEEKLY RECORD of the PROGRESS
of the CURRENCY CONTROVERSY. The paper will devote special attention
to the PALL IN PRICES and consequent COMMERCIAL and INDUSTRIAL
DEPRESSION which have been brought about by the DEMONETISATION OF
SILVER.
The subscription will be 12s 6d per annum, or 3s 3d .per quarter, posted
to any part of Australasia, and IQs per annum, or 2s 6d per quarter, posted to
any address in New South Wales.
The issue will be commenced as soon as sufficient funds are in hand to pay the
ACTUAL CASH EXPENSES OF PRINTING, the editor being willing to give
his services without return. Should the amount received be insufficient to warrant
a commencement, any subscriptions that may be forwarded will be RETURNED
IN FULL.
Subscriptions may be sent to
A. W. PEARSE,
Hon. Secretary
Bimetallic League of New South Wales.


Opinions of Eminent Authorities
John Locke, in his “ Consideration,” etc., published in 1690, said :
Money, while the same quantity of it is passing up and down the Kingdom in trade, is
really a standing measure of the falling and rising value of other things in reference to one
another, and the alteration in price is truly in them only. But, if you increase or lessen the
quantity of money current to traffic in any place, then the alteration of value is in the money.
The following is from an essay on money by David HuME,lthe great Scotch historian :
It is certain that since the discovery of the mines in America industry has increased in all
the nations of Europe * * * We find that in every kingdom into which money begins to flow
in greater abundance than formerly everything takes a new face ; labor and industry gain life ;
the merchant becomes more enterprising, the manufacturer more diligent and skilful, and even
the farmer follows his plow with greater alacrity and attention. * * * The good policy of the
magistrate consists only in keeping it, if possible, still increasing, because by that means he
keeps alive a spirit of industry in the nation and increases the stock of labor, in which consists
all real power and riches. A nation whose money decreases is actually at that time weaker
and more miserable than another nation which possesses no more money, but is on the
increasing hand.
* * *
John Stuart Mill, in Principles of Political Economy, says (page 301) :
If the whole money in circulation was doubled, prices would double. If it was only
increased one-fourth, prices would rise one-fourth. The very same effect would be produced
on prices if we suppose the goods (the uses for money) diminished instead of the money
increased, and the contrary effect if the goods were increased or the money diminished. So
that the value of money—all other things remaining the same —varies inversely as its quantity ;
every increase in quantity lowering its value and every diminution raising it in a ratio exactly
equivalent. That an increase of the quantity of money raises prices and a diminution lowers
them is the most elementary proposition in the theory of currency, and without it we should
have no key to any other.
* * *
Ricardo plainly says in regard to this question :
That commodities would rise and fall in price in proportion to the increase or diminution
of money I assume as a fact that is incontrovertible. That such would be the case the most
celebrated writers on political economy are agreed. * * * The value of money does not depend
upon its absolute quantity, but on its quantity relative to the payments it has to accomplish ;
and the same effect would follow either of the two causes—from increasing the uses for money
one-tenth, or from diminishing its quantity one-tenth.
William Stanley Jevons, professor of political economy and logic in Owen University,
England, says :
I cannot but agree with Mr. McCulloch, that, putting out of sight individual cases of
hardship, if such exist, increasing the quantity of money must have, and as I should say, has
already a most powerful beneficial effect. It loosens the country from the old bond of debt and
habit as nothing else could.
* * *


Judge John Barnard Byles, one of England’s greatest jurists, in his work, Popular Political
Economy (page 154), says :
Men talk glibly of variations in the currency. Few reflect on the awful extent to which
such changes affect the prosperity of all ranks. The laborer, the pauper, and the beggar are as
much interested in the currency question as the manufacturer, the shopkeeper, or the great
proprietor of lands or funds, and even more.
Alexander Hamilton, in his report on the Mint in 1792, said :
To annul the use of either of the two metals as money is to abridge the quantity of the
circulating medium, and is liable to all the objections which arise from a comparison of the
bent fits of a full with the evils of a scant circulation.
William H. Crawford, Secretary of the Treasury, in a report (February 12, 1820) to
Congress, says :
All intelligent writers on currency agree that when'it is decreasing in amount, poverty
and misery must prevail.
Mr. R. M. T. Hunter, in a report (1852), to the United States Senate, says :
Of all the great effects produced upon human society by the discovery of America there
was probably none so marked as those brought about by the great influx of precious metals
from the New World to the Old, European industry had been declining under the decreasing
stock of the precious metals, and an appreciating standard of values ; human ingenuity grew
dull under the paralyzing influences of declining profits, and capital absorbed nearly all that
should have been divided between it and labor. But an increase in the precious metals, in
such quantity as to check this tendency, operated as a new motive power to the machinery of
commerce.
* * *
Prof. A. L. Perry, says :
The fact that such a medium is in universal circulation, and that the holders are ready and
willing to exchange it against any sort of service adapted to gratify their desires, exercises a
kind of creative power, and brings a thousand productions to market which would otherwise
never have come into existence. Money is a form of capital which stimulates and facilitates
all the processes of production without exception.
Prof. Chevalier, of France, in speaking of the increase of money, says :
Such a change will benefit those who live by current labor and enterprise ; it will injure
those who live upon the fruits of past labor. In this respect it will work in the same direction
with most of the developments which are brought about by that great law of civilization to
which we give the noble name of progress. ** # It has been wisely said that there is no machine
which economises labor like money, and its adoption has been likened to the discovery of letters.
* * *
Mr. J. R. McCulloch, the English economist, speaking of an increasing volume of money, says :
It promotes industry and diminishes the weight of obligations which press upon producing
classes, whether employed or unemployed.
Fawcett, in Handbook of Finance (pages 146 to 148), says :
The decline of prices since 1872-73 is explained by the increased value of gold. The first
effect was to cause a collapse in “speculative securities,” viz., bonds of railroads, etc., which
were based on the expectations of a continuance of high prices for commodities or, in other
words, a low value for gold.
* # *
The following extract from Allison’s History of Europe shows that this ruinous policy of
contraction has obtained in other countries beside our own, and that the effect was then, as
now, to fill the coffers of the rich money lenders at the expense of all other classes.
* * * But if an increase in the numbers and industries of men coexists with a diminution
in the circulating medium by which their transactions are carried on, the most serious evils


await society and the whole relations of its different classes to each other will be speedily
changed, and it is in that state of things that the saying proves true, “that the rich are
every day growing richer, and the poor poorer.”
The cause of our depression is money famine, and nothing else.— John A. Logan.
Whoever controls the volume of money of any country is absolute master of all industry
and commerce — James A. Garfield.
Liberty cannot long endure in any country where the tendency is to concentrate wealth in
the hands of a few.— Daniel Webster.
That prices will rise or fall as the volume of money be increased or diminished is a law as
unalterable as any law of nature.— Professor Walker.
Labor is prior to and independent of capital. Capital is only the fruit of labor, and could
never have existed had not labor first existed.
If a government contracted a debt with a certain amount of money of circulation, and
then contracted the money volume before the debt was paid, it is the most heinous crime
that a government could commit against the people.— Abraham Lincoln.
I know that the bondholders and monopolists of this country are seeking to destroy all the
industries of this people in their greed to enhance the value of their gold. I know that the act
of 1873 did more tlian all else to acco nplish that result, and the demonetization act of the Revised
Statutes was an illegal and unconstitutional consummation of the fraud. I want to restore that
monev to where it was before, and thus aid in preventing the consummation of their designs.—
Speech by Senator Beck oj Kentucky, page 258, Congressional Record, January 11, 1878.
* * *
Horace Greeley saw what comparatively few saw as clearly as he did, viz., that the establish-
ment of the British system meant slavery not only to the blacks, but to the whites ; and these
were the words for which the bankers of New York drove him from the office of the Tribune
with a broken heart to the grave. He said :
“We boast of having liberated 4,000,000 of slaves. True, we have stricken the shackles
from the former bondsmen and brought ail laborers to a common level, but not so much by
elevating the former slaves as by practically reducing the whole working population to a state
of serfdom. While boasting of our noble deeds we are careful to conceal the ugly fact that
by our iniquitous monetary system wa have nationalized a system of oppression more refined,
but none the less cruel, than the old system of chattel slavery.”
* *
Mr. A. J. Balfour, a Member of the British Government, in January, 1893, said
“We want two things in our currency. We require of it that it shall be a convenient
medium of exchange between different countries, and we require of it that it shall be a fair
and permanent record of obligations over long periods of time. And in both of those great
and fundamental requirements of a currency our existing currency totally and lamentably
fails. ... Of all conceivable systems of currency that system is assuredly the worst which
gives you a standard steadily, continuously and indefinitely appreciating, and which by that
very fact throws a burden upon every man of enterprise, upon every man who desires to
promote the agricultural or the industrial welfare of his country, and benefits no human being
whatever but the owner of fixed debts in gold. And let me tell you that this question is pressing
because it is impossible that we should remain as we are. If we do not move to a better
system we shall assuredly be driven to a worse system. ... I firmly believe that a currency
which bears no stable or permanent relation to the currency of other countries is a chronic
hindrance and difficulty in the way of export trade. I firmly believe that the difficulties that
you are throwing by your present system upon Indian finance are almost overwhelming. . ,
I do not regret an opportunity of publicly expressing my personal convictions that we have
now reached a crisis in this monetary difficulty in which it behoves every citizen in this country
to do his best to arrive at a wise, an honest and a patriotic conclusion.”
Mr. G. J. Goschen, M.P., Nov. 17, 1887.
“ I fully appreciate the importance of the question. I feel it is almost' impossible to
exaggerate its importance.”


Leonard Courtney, M.P., May 2, 1894.
‘ I may still put upon record upon high authority which I believe is true—that all the
professors of the United Kingdom have recently had it under their consideration whether they
should not sign a declaration of opinion in favor, not only of the possibility of establishing an
international ratio, but of a desirability of doing it. (Applause.) .... The fact remains
and the fact is significant and important—that they were all agreed, not only on the possibility of
an international ratio being stable, but on the desirability of arriving at an international ratio ”
Sir S Montagu, M.P. (Liberal).
“ I need not argue with regard to the practicability of bimetallism, because that has been
proved over and over again before the Royal Commission on Gold and Silver, of which I had
the honor to be a member.”
* * *
Mr. C. Hoare (banker), May 2, 1894.
“Now with regard to the action of bankers on this question: it has generally been
considered that bankers are opposed to any Bimetallic alteration of the currency because they
are supposed to gain by the appreciation of gold. As far as I can understand the question
bankers are mixed up most intimately with the prosperity of the country, and we do not gain
by any large proportion of our customers carrying on their business at a loss. We gain by the
general state of our customers’ businesses being prosperous—(hear, hear); so it is quite a mistake
to suppose that bankers gain by the appreciation of gold, which means the constant fall in prices
whicn means a constant carrying on, by our most important customers, of their business at a los*. ”
* , * •*
Sir W. Houldsworth, May 2, 1894.
“ Mr. Courtney has remarked that a fall in the general level of prices of only 10 per cent
‘would just counteract all that we have done in the last fifteen years in the reduction of the
National Debt. We have reduced the nominal amount, but the burden is unaltered The
pressure of all debts, public and private has increased.’ They do not fall pari passu with the
falling in the prices of commodities in the wholesale market. The consequence is that producers
whether agriculturalists or manufacturers of any kind, are caught between the upper and nether
millstones of falling prices and of fixed charges, and are inevitably crushed. Under such
circumstances, when prices are continually and persistently falling, capitalists very natura’lv
do not encourage industry.” J
* *
Disraeli, in 1873, said :
“It is the greatest delusion in the world to attribute the commercial preponderance and
prosperity of England to her having a gold standard.”
45


THE CASE IN A NUTSHELL.
1. Money is not simply a commodity or a material thing per se, but a material thing upon
which the function of legal tender has been conferred. It means therefore—whatever is
appointed by law to liquidate debt.
2. The function of money may be conferred upon one or more material things, such as gold
only (England), silver only (India), or both silver and gold (England down to 1816, France
down to 1873).
3. The value of money in terms of commodities depends upon the quantity of it in
existence and the extent of the commercial transactions that have to be liquidated by it (the
rapidity of its circulation being taken into account).
4. If the value of money in terms of commodities is to remain constant, the growth of the
population and the annual extension of the world’s commerce must be attended by a parallel
increase in the volume of the world’s money (economies in the use of money effected by the
growth of credit and the development of banking facilities generally, being taken into account).
5. But since 1873, the trade and commerce of the world have been increasing more rapidly
than the volume of the world’s money (credit and banking facilities having again been taken into
account) and consequently the value of money in terms of commodities has been continually rising.
6. This is exactly equivalent to saying that since 1873 prices of commodities have been
falling.
7. Now in all the leading countries of the Western world (Europe and America), the
function of money since 1873 has been conferred on gold only. It is true that the silver coined
in France previously to 1873 is still legal tender to any amount, but the free mintage of silver
has been stopped. If bimetallism were readopted, i.e. , if by an international agreement the
function of money were again conferred on silver as well as gold (as it was from time immemorial,
down to the year 1873), the volume of the world’s money would be capable of increasing in
closer proportion to the increase of the population, trade and commerce of the world, than
there is any prospect of our attaining to, so long as gold is the only material on which the
function of money is conferred. (Roughly speaking, there are about 800 millions worth of gold
and 800 millions worth of silver in the world available for use as money, two-thirds of the
population of the world using silver. The annual increase in the quantity of the precious
metals is roughly about 25 millions worth of gold and 25 millions worth of silver, but most of
this is required for use in the arts, and for the East).
8. An increase in the volume of the world’s money, by again including silver, would put
an end to the perennial rise in the value of money in terms of commodities, which has been
taking place ever since 1873, or what is the same thing in other words, it would prevent any
fall in general prices, arising merely from causes affecting the currency, while it would not
interfere with any natural cheapening of goods, brought about by inventions reducing the
cost of production, &c.
9. This arrest of the fall of prices would give stability to merchants’, manufacturers’,
farmers’ and traders’ profits, and induce them to enlarge their business. It would thereby
stimulate industry, revive trade, increase the demand for labor, and improve profits and wages,
in accordance with the natural laws of supply and demand.
10. If, as the result of the currency being put upon a natural basis, prices of commodities
should tend upwards, what the entire class of merchants, manufacturers, farmers, traders and
workmen gained as producers, would more than compensate them for the extra price which
they might or might not have to pay for commodities as consumers, for whilst, in the case of a
rise, they would gain on the whole amount produced, they would in any case only lose on that
portion of the amount which was consumed by themselves, the rest of the (assumed) increase in
the price of commodities being borne by the class of non-producing consumers.
11. The non-producing consumer, although losing temporarily by the (assumed) rise in prices,
would also benefit in the long run by the increased number of openings for investment, and
the intensified demand for the use of his capital.
12. Hence bimetallism would benefit every class of the community, acd subserve the
material welfare of humanity as a whole.


3 heS? 12 P ro Positions are the !2 rungs of the bimetallic ladder, by which we ascend from
o" hTS B a °n f A Ur ? t r £ Bent com mercial depression, agricultural ruin, and armies of unemployed
to the high, and healthy, and safe ground of commercial prosperity. y
* * * * * * * * #
It must be borne in mind that these twelve theses have attached to
reservations and qualifications, such as those inserted after Nos 3 and 4 Thev do ho ”
accurately repress the maiu current of the stream of true economic thought * ’
*** *****
Although necessarily stated in an academic, theoretical, or doctrinaire form thev have all
been verified by an appeal to the facts of history. ’ y nave aJI
* *
b6 /7^ Xpla '? ed t J the term “ Value of Money” has two distinct
roffrf; Dg ’iJ u’A Th ® sellin 9 val ne of money, i.e.— Its value in terms of commodities or the
ratio m which it is exchanged for them ; and (2) Its loanable value, i.e.-Its value in terms of
mid forVhe Vpm tereBt (m ° ney P aid . for the extended loan of capital), and Discount (money
l f i t . he . tem P° r . ar y accommodation of cash). There are also irrelevant meanings such as
term Is nlcd he™. “ moMrertibl « P»P» errancy. It is in the first of these sensei’ that the’
* *
.. Th fi ? mg °} r^. 10 , ls a matter of detail, not a matter of principle. It is a question for
the expert and the diplomatist, who will have to take into account all the Conflicting
interests involved. Their object should be to determine a fair and proper relative valuator
freely minted silver corns m terms of freely minted gold coins, which, howevermustnotbe
arDfirdnU ? nCO ° f Sllver in fche market, for at present its value has been
fnfi vf lydepr f e . clafccd b y its demonetisation in 1873. This is done by all the Railway Companies
m fixing the ratio or proportion of Ist, 2nd and 3rd class fares. y om P anles ’
wnnlC f S J 6r T neC ? BSa u y t 0 that under the bimetallic system, no change whatevei
mate\Vof k and e b m l ° f P a y ment dually employed, which would consist as now.
I che fl ae ® a ? d bank notes, with gold and silver used for small change. No private
dividual would be inconvenienced by it in any way whatever. The change itself would be no
oT£5 tth r jj he rotatlo “ of th( l earth upon its own axis, though its effect upon the growth
of trade and industry would be of vital importance. p growtn
MARTIN ANSTEY, M.A., 1893.
47


COMMERCIAL RATIO OF SILVER TO GOLD EACH YEAR FROM
1687 TO 1894, BASED UPON THE PRICE OF SILVER IN
THE LONDON MARKET.
(From 1687 to 1832 the ratios are taken from Dr. A, Soetbeer ; from 1833 to 1878 from Phley
and Abell’s Tables , and from 1878 to 1894from daily cablegrams from London to the
Bureau of the United States Mint.)
Year.
Ratio
Year.
( Ratio.
Year.
Ratio.
Year.
Ratio.
Y ear.
Ratio.
Year.
Ratio.
1687
14-94
1722
15-17
1757
14-87
1792
15-17
1827
15-74
1861
15 50
1688
14-94
1723
15-20
1758
14-85
1793
15 00
1828
15-78
1862
15-35
1689
15 02
1724
1511
1759
1415
1794
15-37
1829
15-78
1863
15-37
1690
15 02
1725
15 11
1760
1414
1795
15-55
1830
15-82
1864
15-37
1691
14-98
1726
15-15
1761
14-54
1796
15"65
1831
15-72
1865
15 44
1692
14-92
1727
15-24
1762
15-27
1797
15-41
1832
15-73
1866
15 43
1693
14-83
1728
1511
1763
14-99
1798
15-59
1833
15-93
1867
15-57
1694
14-87
1729
14-92
1764
14-70
1799
15-74
1834
15-73
1868
1559
1695
15-02
1730
14-81
1765
14-83
1800
15 68
1835
15-80
1869
15-60
1696
15 00
1731
14-94
1766
14-80
1801
15.46
1836
15-72
1870
15-57
1697
15-20
1732
15-09
1767
14-85
1802
15-26
1837
15-83
1871
15 57
1698
15 07
1733
15-18
1768
14-80
1803
15-41
1838
15-85
1872
15-63
1699
14-94
1734
15-39
1769
14-72
1804
15-41
1839
15-62
1873
15-9
1700
14-81
1735
15-41
1770
14-62
1805
15 79
1840
15 62
1874
1617
■32
1701
15-07
1736
15-18
1771
14 66
1806
15-52
1841
15.70
1875
16 59
1702
15-52
1737
15 02
1772
14-52
1807
15-43
1842
15-87
1876
17 88
.2^
1703
15-17
1738
14-91
1773
14.62
1808
1608
1843
15-93
1877
17 22
1704
15-22
1739
14-91
1774
14.62
1809
'15 96
1844
15-85
1878
17 94
. a o
1705
15-11
1740
14 94
1775
14 72
1810
15-77
1845
15-92
1879
1840
1706
15-27
1741
14-92
1776
14-55
1811
15-53
1846
15-90
1880
18 05 ©
1707
15-44
1742
14-85
1777
14.54
1812
1611
1847
15-80
1881
1816 H
1708
15-41
1743
14-85
1778
14-68
1813
16-25
1848
15-85
1882
1819 <
1709
15-31
1744
14-87
1779
14-80
1814
15 04
1849
15‘78
1883
18-64 g It
1710
15 22
1745
14-98
1780
14-72
1815
15-26
1850
15-70
1884
18 57 a It
1711
15-29
1746
15-13
1781
14-78
1816
15-28
1851
15-46
1885
19 41 [z
H JE
1712
15-31
1747
15-26
1782
14-42
1817
1511
1852
15-59
1886
20 78 g
1713
15 24
1748
1511
1783
14-48
1818
15-35
1853
15-33
1887
2113 | sS
1714
15-13
1749
14-80
1784
14-70
1819
15-33
1854
15-33
1888
21-99 p
1715
15-11
1750
14-55
1785
14-92
1820
15 62
1855
15-38
1889
2210
st
1716
15-09
1751
14-39
1786
14-96
1821
1595
1856
15-38
1890
1976
« o
1717
15-13
1752
14-54
1787
14-92
1822
15-80
1857
15-27
1891
20 92
1718
15-11
1753
14-54
1788
14-65
1823
15-84
1858
15-38
1892
2372
Si
1719
15 09
1754
14-48
1789
14-75
1824
15-82
1859
15-19
1893
26-49
s'?
■- —
1720
15-04
1755
14-68
1790
1504
1825
15-70
1860
15-29
1894
32 56 J
1721
15-05
1756
14-94
1791
15-05
1826
15-76
'!>
As bearing upon the above the following table is
instructive and significant :
RELATIVE PRODUCTION OF GOLD AND SILVER.
For 100 years,
1681 to 1780, 26’3 ounces of silver to 1 ounce of gold.
1781 to 1830, 46-2
99
99
99
50 „
1831 to 1880, 8*73
9 9
99
9 »
„ 5
,,
1881 to 1885, 17 2
, ,
» 9
9 9
5
..
1886 to 1890, 20-9
9 9
9 >
99
„ 4
1891 to 1894, 20-1
99
9 9
99
„ 1
year,
1894
16-9
99
99
99
These tables show the operation of the Legal Ratio in governing the relative
value of gold and silver, notwithstanding the greatest divergencies in the annual
production of the two metals-
John Andrew & Co., Printers, 13 Bridge Street, Sydney.
48
F lor£


Gibbs, Bright&Co.
37 PITT STREET,
MERCHANTS,
SHIPPING AND INSURANCE AGENTS.
Advances made on all classes of Station Produce and
Minerals for sale in Sydney or Shipment
to London.
Regular Line of Steamers and Sailers to London
Agents for
The Anglo-Australian S.N. Co., Ltd., to London.
The Eastern & Australian S.S. Co., to China and
Japan.
The Union Insurance Society of Canton (Marine).
The Guardian Assurance Co. (Fire).


Bimetallic League or New south Wales
President.
W . ALISON (Oanonhar).
Vice-Presidents.
A. W. MEEKS.
H. W. WRIGHT.
H. E. RUSSELL.
W. S. FORBES
A. MUGGRIDGE.
W. J SPENCER.
W. PEARSE (Oollymongle).
W. HENDERSON.
G. FOX, Queensland.
WM. ALLEN, M.L.C., Queensland.
W. GAMBON, Queensiand
T DE M. MURRAY PRIOR, Queensland
C. LUMLY HILL, Queensland.
Office:' 6 SPRING STREET, SYDNEY
Hon Secretary - A. W. PEARSE
Silver and Gold
Will both be saved by ordering
all your
Printing and Stationery
From JOHN ANDREW & CO.,
13 Bridge St., Sydney.
50
