

What is Eugenics?
A Plea
for
Racial Improvement.
BY
Mrs. R. J. J. HAWKES,
B.Sc. (London), M.Sc. (Birmingham).
PRICE ONE PENNY.


Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


WHAT IS EUGENICS?
NATIONAL DEGENERACY AND ITS
CAUSE.
ARTICLE I.
[Re; rinted from “The Birmingham Daily Post,”
October 7th,
By Mrs. R. J. J. Hawkes, B.Sc. (London),
M.Sc. (Birmingham).
During the last sixty years much energy and thought
have been given in every quarter of the globe towards
improving the condition of the human race by changes in
environment; but, unfortunately, much of this energy
has been misdirected, for in our efforts to alleviate the-
sorrow of the day we have forgotten or ignored the effect
of our action upon the centuries. We are now beginning
to learn that we must not consider environment only, bur
also what is far more important, the stock for whom we
better the environment. The problem of the improve-
ment of the human race has, therefore, a twofold aspect,
and by far the more important one is that of stock.
We must, therefore, study to improve our stock. The
apostle of this study is Sir F. Galton, and to the science
of producing a well-bred race, i.e., a race good in
physique, intellect, and morals, he gave the term
Eugenics. This name he derived from the Greek word
“ eugenes,” which means good in stock. Eugenics is the
science of the production of a good race, primarily by
changes in the stock, and secondarily by certain changes
in the environment, which will have a future as well as
a present value.
But, it may be asked, why was Galton so troubled
by the condition of the race that he invented a new
science? Are we not better than our fathers? Unfor-
tunately the answer is, “We are worse, because the
average quality of the nation has depreciated.” The
causes for this sad but by no means hopeless condition
are not far to seek; they are (1) the decrease in the birth-
rate of the fit; (2) the increase in the birth rate of the
unfit; and (3) the injudicious methods of modern
philanthropy.


There is a decreased birth-rate among the superior
classes of the nation; thus Sydney Webb has stated that
the average number of children to the married English
intellectual is 1.5. The most superficial of thinkers must
at once see that such a rate of reproduction is very
disastrous, for from the intellectual classes are recruited
our rulers, our thinkers, our scientific men, our great
organisers, &c. A class that has so few children does
not even maintain its numbers, much less increase itself,
for to increase we must produce enough children to
overcome three contingencies—(a) death before maturity;
(6) chances of not marrying; (c) chances of infertility
when married.
The chief causes of this decreased birth-rate are—(l)
the increase of luxury (which not only produces small
families but also prevents many marrying at all); (2) the
increase of competition; (3) the later age of marriage
(with consequent reduced fertility as well as shortening
the period of fertility; (4) the increased expense of
educating children; (5) the tendency of intellectual
women not to marry at all; (6) increased factory legis-
lation for women without compensation during periods of
necessary absence from work.
The Fit and Unfit.
There is much talk of the decreasing birth-rate; by
all means let us consider it, but still more carefully let
us consider the comparative birth-rates of the fit and
the unfit. What percentage of those born are eugenic?
That there is a steady decrease in the average quality
of the children is obvious when we consider that the
average number of children produced by the intellectual
has sunk to 1.5, whilst the number produced by the
unfit is to-day about 6 per family. This being the case,
what are we to say to the nation’s future? Listen to
Karl Pearson: “ Without high average soundness of body
and soundness of mind, a nation can neither be built
up nor an empire preserved. Permanence and dominance
in the world passes to and from nations even with their
rise and fall in mental and bodily fitness. Lost provinces
and a generation of hectoring may follow to the conquered
nation whose leaders have forgotten the primary essential
of national soundness in body and in mind.” Or, again:
“ The test of the efficiency or prosperity of any country
was not the amount of exports or imports, not the power
of its army or navy, not the diffusion or amount of its
wealth, not the efficiency of its education, but the kind
of men and women it turned out.”


The birth-rate among the obviously unfit is large;
thus the researches of the Eugenic laboratory give it as
7 per marriage among the London mentally defective, and
Goring found it 6.6 among criminals. This is bad, but
the practical results are even worse, for not only do these
feeble-minded, insane, &c., have large families, but on
account of their irresponsibility and lack of self-control
they may easily produce three generations while superior
classes are producing two.
Then come our charitable institutions and our
“ modern human sympathy/’ aiding and abetting the
feeble-minded and criminals by finding them homes (the
workhouse, “ homes,” colonies, asylums, gaols, &c.),
instead of, as at one time, passively ridding the country
of degenerates by allowing them to die because they
could not fight the competitive battle of life, and actively
ridding it of criminals by extensive capital punishments.
The illegitimate babies of the feeble-minded and criminal
women are no longer born under the hedge, only to die,
but they are fostered by the State in our workhouses, with
the result that they grow up and probably return to the
same place in a few years, with babies of their own. “Do
I therefore call for less human sympathy, for more
limited charity, and for sterner treatment of the weak?
Not for a moment; we cannot go back a single step
in the evolution of human feeling. But I demand that
all sympathy and charity shall be organised and guided
into paths where they will promote racial efficiency, and
not lead us straight towards national shipwreck. The
higher patriotism and the pride of race must come to our
aid in stemming deterioration. . . . We see pain
and suffering only to relieve it without enquiry as to the
morals of the sufferer or as to his national or racial value.
And this is right. . . . But here science steps in
crying, “ Let the reprieve be accepted, but next remind
the social conscience of its duty to the race. No nation
can preserve its efficiency unless dominant fertility be
associated with the mentally and physically fitter stocks.
The reprieve is granted, but let there be no heritage if
you would build up and preserve a virile and efficient
people.” (K. Pearson).
Misapplied Charity.
Let us now turn to the third cause of national
degeneracy—the question of misapplied charity. Not
only does our short-sighted charity encourage the unfit,
but these unfit exist to be a millstone round the neck
of the fit by compelling the latter to pay (a) the poor
rate (chiefly used by the unfit); (6) the education rate (a


considerable amount now Avasted on special schools); (cf
for the upkeep of “charity organisation” (the funds of
which are chiefly used by such unfit as the unemployable);
( d ) for asylums (from which so-called “ cured ” patients
are let free to reproduce themselves); (e) for the adminis-
tration of justice. Voluntarily, the fit pay towards the
upkeep of homes for feeble-minded, epileptics, and
alcoholics, where the dominant idea of the management
is to return these unfortunates to the world as improved
and cured, with the result that they at once do their best
to supply a new generation upon which the fit may lavish
their care and money.
We now keep alive and tend carefully—quite rightly
—the physically unfit, such as [a) epileptics, ( h) con-
sumptives, (c) the malformed, ( d ) weaklings, (e) deaf and
dumb, (f) alcoholics; but, and this is the point to be
realised, we also, quite wrongly, allow them to reproduce.
Pearson has found the size of families for tubercular
stock to be 5.7, for degenerates 6.1, and albinotics 5.9.
Schuster found the families of deaf and dumb as great
as 6.2. We know that the misfortunes as well as the
sins of the fathers are visited upon the descendants; but
why, knowing this, do we encourage this reproduction of
the unfit, Avhen they can only become a burden to the
parents of the fit?
We have hitherto considered reproduction as the
inalienable right of every citizen, but is it? Which is
the greater sin to the community, to steal £I,OOO, or for
a manifestly unfit person to produce a child or children
for whom there is little or no chance of escape from an
evil inheritance? Why do we imprison the man who
does the former and give free maternity help and free
food to the woman who does the latter; and, moreover,
relieve the parents of the burden of bringing up the child
by placing it in a “home” or “workhouse” ? Surely
we see through a glass darkly. If our imaginations are not
stirred by this picture of the increase of the unfit, perhaps
the economical side of the picture may appeal to us.
There has been a careful investigation of the history of
the descendants of two degenerate girls by the name of
Jukes. These girls and their descendants have during
150 years cost the United States £260,000. Is not the
price of freedom to such individuals rather too dear for
the nation?
The Relative Importance of Environment ant
Heredity.
The man in the street has been educated to believe
that reforms which alter the environment will effect the


salvation of the race; that by gradually giving everyone
good physical conditions, fresh air, cleanliness, clothes,
warmth, good housing, open spaces, &c., a good education,
and a good moral upbringing Utopia will arrive. But,
a.s opposed to this education, the experience of the race
teaches that you cannot make a silk purse out of a sow’s
ear; figs will not grow on thistles; like father, like son;
that a child is a chip of the old block; geniuses are
born and not made; or, in other words, in spite of
environmental factors, children remain what they are
born. Whilst we believe in the transmission of our
inborn physical and intellectual characters we still
foolishly expect miracles as regards the inheritance of our
moral nature, and yet, what does Karl Pearson, that
cautious and careful worker, say,. “ There appears no
doubt that good and bad physique, the liability to, and
the immunity from disease, the moral character and the
mental temperament are inherited in man with much the
same intensity,” which means that we have just as many
chances of passing on to our children our interest in
literature, our powers of accurate observation, our bad
temper, or our self-denying nature, as our strong muscles
or our exceptional height. “ Education for the criminal,
fresh air for the tuberculous, rest and food for the
neurotic—these are excellent, they may bring control,
sound lungs, and sanity to the individual; but they
cannot save the offspring from the need of like treatment
nor from the danger of collapse when the time of strain
comes. They cannot make a nation sound in mind and
body, they merely screen degeneracy behind a throng of
averted degenerates.”
Environment must take the second place because it so
slightly, if at all, affects our reproductive cells, of which
our bodies may be considered merely the bearers. If we
come from a good sound stock, we are the bearers of a
great charge, of the germs in which lie dormant the
possibilities of happy, useful lives; but, if we bear
within us only germs of an undesirable stock, surely we
do better to give these germs no chance of development.
No one denies that environment is of great im-
portance, indeed, without a certain share of good environ-
mental conditions we can never attain to maturity and
that state of reproduction which makes of us a racial
as opposed to a transitory and egoistical unit. Environ-
ment cannot change our inborn nature, but it can modify
:t, and that in two directions —(1) inhibitively, as for
example when by putting a thief into- a gaol we prevent
him from stealing: we know that the thief generally
remains a thief (the average number of convictions in our


prisons is ten per person), but the environment does keep
him, for the time being, an honest man; and (2) environ-
ment can act positively, as an encouragement; thus, a
feeble-minded boy is set to dig alone, he gazes at the
sky and does nothing, but put him with ten others to
dig, under supervision, and he digs well and earns his
daily bread. In neither case is there change in the
nature, the thief is still a thief, the feeble-minded is still
feeble, but because of a wise environment both have
ceased to be burdens to the community; nevertheless,
unless they are' prevented from producing they do not
cease to be a burden to the race.
Carlyle’s View.
What does Carlyle say: "It is maintained
that an infant of genius is quite the same as any other
infant only that certain surprisingly favourable influences
accompany him through life, especially through child-
hood, and expand him, while others lie close folded abb.
continue dunces. . . With which opinion I should as
soon agree as with this other, that an acorn might, by
favourable or unfavourable influences of soil and climate,
be nursed into a cabbage, or the cabbage seed into an
oak. Nevertheless, I, too, acknowledge the all-but
omnipotence of early culture and nurture; hereby we
have either a doddered dwarf bush, or a high-towering,
wide-shadowing tree, either a sick yellow cabbage or an
edible luxuriant green one ” and, again, what writes
Buskin, " The greatness or the smallness of a man is
determined for him at his birth, as strictly as it is
determined for a fruit, whether it be a currant or an
apricot. Education, favourable circumstances, resolution,
industry, may do much; in a certain sense they do
everything. That is to say, they determine whether the
poor apricot shall fall in the form of a green bead
blighted by the east wind, and be trodden underfoot; or
whether it shall expand into tender pride and sweet
brightness of golden velvet.” It is to be noted that from
the point of view of the race, the “ doddered bush ” and
"the sick cabbage” are as much negligible factors as the
dead apricot, because neither has developed into a repro-
ductive organism. They did not get the minimum
environment necessary to reach maturity. At the worst,
environment can kill us, but at the best it can never turn
bad into good. "Thus it is that in the same circum-
stances one man rears a stately edifice, whilst another,
vacillating and incompetent, lives for ever amid ruins:
the block of granite which was an obstacle on the pathway


of the weak becomes a stepping-stone on the pathway of
the strong."
We hear a great deal of talk of the struggle for
existence leading to the survival of the fittest, but we
must distinguish clearly between a natural or uncivilised
environment in which the race is to the swift, the battle
to the strong, and where the weakly perish, and a
civilisation like our own, where the weak are fostered
and cared for at the expense of the strong, rendering the
struggle no longer man against man, but where the weak
man is helped and the strong man is hindered in the
battle of life. Again, to quote Pearson, “ Loaves and the
circus—wages for the unemployable and the football
match to kill time—are as much signs now as of old
that selection is being suspended, and that suspension
undoubtedly means the rapid multiplication of the unfit
at the expense of the fit.”
[Reprinted from “The Birmingham Daily Post,”
October Bth, 1910.]
ARTICLE II.
A PRESSING PROBLEM.
SOME SUGGESTED REMEDIES.
We generally forget, when considering the family,
that there are two parents, a mother as well as a father,
and that to get the best of results we must have the best
of inheritance on both sides. We must look upon the
family descent, not as a straight line, but as a veritable
tree, which spreads equally upon the maternal "and
parental sides and to each branch of which we probably
owe some of our hereditary qualities. It is not enough
for health and virtue and intelligence to be on one side,
they must be on both. How many a capable man has
paid for his folly in marrying a woman for prettiness
only, by producing a family of mediocre children; how
many a woman has paid for her foolish philanthropy in


marrying a weakly or immoral man by having a brood of
weaklings or no family at all.
We live under a civilisation which, whilst it is by no
means to be despised, is not perfect, and which must
certainly come to an end, even as did those of Assyria,
Egypt, Greece, and Eome, unless, before it is too late, we
can raise the average quality of the nation by decreasing
the unfit and increasing the fit. We have still plenty
of good stock in this country, and it behoves us to tend
it carefully and make good use of it before it degenerates.
How Are the Fit to be Increased?
This naturally gives rise to the question, How are
the fit to be increased? Before answering this, it is as
well to define as clearly as possible who are the fit. In
.speaking of the qualities that make for eugenic fitness,
Galton says: “ I have no doubt that the reader will agree
with me that the members of prospering communities are,
as a rule, conspicuously strenuous and that those of
decaying or decadent ones are conspicuously slack.”
“ I have studied the causes of civic prosperity in various
directions, and from many points of view, and the
conclusion at which I have arrived is emphatic, namely,
that chief among the causes is a large capacity for labour
—mental, bodily, or both—combined with eagerness for
work.” To this quality of laboriousness we must add a
freedom from any hereditary disease of body or of mind
and rather more than average intelligence and morality.
In any particular case it is usually quite easy to decide
whether the person is or is not suitable as a parent. Fit
parents may be found in every part of the country and
in every class.
What measures must we now take to encourage the
increase of the fit?
(1) We must map out a great campaign to educate
people in a knowledge of the laws of heredity, and to
inspire them with the ideal of the race and their duty
towards the State. We have grand qualities in us; are
we to let them disappear ? The past has served us, are we
to desert the future? How many have two children who
might well have four, how many are unmarried because
ease is dearer to them than the duties, the privileges, the
responsibilities, and not least the pleasures of parent-
hood ?
It is not impossible that it may again be our pride
to have our "quiver full,” when the greatest glory of a
man or a woman is children rather than motor-cars and
jewels. We are ready enough to talk of patriotism, and
think we have done all when we “ sacrifice ” our sons


by sending them into the army or navy; cannot the-
nation be made to realise that the greatest patriotism is to
produce a sufficiency of healthy boys and girls? There
is plenty of room for the fit; it is only the unfit who
are too numerous.
It is especially to be noted that Karl Pearson has
shown, by his extensive statistical studies, that the first
and second children tend to be less well equipped,
physically and mentally, than the third and fourth, so
that the family of two is not only numerically, but also
qualitatively inferior.
(2) Maternal endowment, is wisely administered, can
do much to encourage both the production and the keeping
alive of fit children. To reduce infant mortality it is
necessary to enact laws to prevent women working for
a definite time before and after the birth of a child, and
to forbid married women to work in trades where lead
and phosphorous poisoning is common. But, side by side
with this legislation, there must be arrangements for
compensating the mother for money unearned. This com-
pensation, which should be at least three-fourths of the
woman’s wage, should be provided by the combined action
of the State, the factory and the woman, and help should
be given only if the parents are averagely healthy and
well behaved. Maternal endowment can do no good,
indeed it must do active harm, if it is given indis-
criminately.
(3) In matters of taxation, the eugenic step has been
taken in relieving certain incomes of 7s. 6d. per child.
This is very little, but it is a beginning. The relief
should rapidly become greater, but only in families where
the parents are in possession of averagely good morals,
intelligence and physique; for example, no relief should
be given where one of the parents is periodically insane,
where both are consumptive, or where both are deaf and
dumb. Co-incidentally, it will be necessary to increase-
the taxation on the unmarried men and women, and on
the childless married.
(4) A large number of scholarships should be provided,
to be given on all-round conditions like the Rhodes
Scholarships, and to be open only to the children of people
who really require this financial aid. No student should
be eligible for any scholarship who is not “ worthy by
character as well as learning,” and who has a physique
likely to prevent him making use of his opportunities.
By this method the careful parent would be relieved of
much educational anxiety. Fit children are the greatest
asset of the race, but, also, the greatest responsibility of
the parent.


(5) Municipalities or charitable individuals might well
start eugenic garden cities, where the houses could be let
at low rentals to young people of good character, mind,
and physique, thus relieving them of one of their financial
difficulties. It would soon, doubtless, be a matter of
pride to dwell in such a city. Surely it is time that
family pride should not be confined to those descended
from broad acres, but should be found in all families, no
matter of what class, who have behind them an ancestry
of hardworking, moral, healthy men and women.
(6) Boys and girls should be carefully and truly
instructed in the nature and meaning of sex, its place
in the life of the individual and the nation. Without
careful sex instruction it is impossible for us to produce
a healthy and normal race. What nature has arranged,
we should have the courage to face naturally. We must
attempt to get rid of the innocence which led to prurience,
and the prurience which could see salvation only in
innocence.
How ARB WB TO DECREASE THE UNFIT ?
A not less vital point than the increase of the fit is
the lessening of the numbers of the unfit. It is theoreti-
cally difficult to draw the line between the inferior and
the somewhat unfit, but for the present we may confine
our attention to the very unfit, and for them the methods
of practical politics are as follow: —
First, we may utilise the method of compulsory
segregation for the following classes:—(l) All children at
present in our feeble-minded schools; (2), all lunatics,
temporary or permanent; (3), all who refuse to work; (4),
all criminals over 20 who have had more than two terms;
(5), all confirmed drunkards; (6), all girls who go twice-
to a rescue home (most of these belong to Class 1). By
segregation is meant the permanent detention of
individuals in industrial schools or colonies, where they
would live decently, industriously, and die old and
peacably, without any chance of passing on their inherited
misfortunes to another generation. If we could do this,
consider the state of this country after, say, eighty years
(for the unfit when well treated live long). We should
probably at the end of that period be able to abolish the
majority of our asylums, gaols, and workhouses, to reduce
considerably the number of our judges and the para-
phernalia of justice, and to reduce and simplify our
charities. The money which during these eighty years
was spent on preventive eugenics could after that period
be expended upon constructive eugenics.


The above six classes would not cease to exist, butr
they would cease to he a large national factor, for we-
know that a large percentage of our cases are hereditary,
although a certain proportion arise in a way which is
as yet unexplained, but which, doubtless, will be
ultimately understood. The expense during these eighty
years would be great certainly, but not so great at the
present expense of asylums, workhouses, gaols, process of
justice, police, inspectors, special schools, out-of-door
relief, money to unemployables, &c. It must be borne
in mind that many colonies could be partly, if not entirely,
self-supporting.
The above six classes are bad for the community in-
two ways, first, as thriftless or mischievous social factors,
who already spend much of their time in institutions, and
on whom much money *lB spent in recapturing them after
each depredation on the community, and in proving in an
expensive manner that they should again be put under
control; and, secondly, as parents likely to produce
harmful offspring. Anyone who cares to enquire into-
the history of asylum and feeble-minded cases will dis-
cover the folly of our present system of returning
“improved” or ‘ cured” cases to the community. It
is not at all rare for such women to produce a child
during each period of release. An extreme case is on
record of a feeble-minded girl who had seven babies during
her successive periods of absence from restraint. The-
woman was excellent in the laundry of her institution,
and might there have lived a largely self-supporting life;
as it was, the community becomes responsible for eight
individuals, and had also the expense of bringing this-
woman back -to the colony seven times.
There is another class of unfit individuals, who, unlike
the above six classes, may be useful social units, but,
like them, bad parents. As the former, there is no need
for them to be shut up, as the latter, they should be pre-
vented from reproducing, and in Switzerland and America
experiments have already been made to deal with these
cases. Under this method of treatment might come (1)
persons with a mild form of epilepsy; (2) members of
families with a strong consumptive history; (3) persons
suffering from some types of mild or temporary insanity.
England does not appear prepared yet for this method;
but it is a possible solution of one side of the difficulty.
The Methods oe Eugenic Study.
The above conclusions have been reached as a result
of years of labour —eugenics being a science, for it is
founded upon facts, and not upon suppositions. It is-


obvious that in order to know how to deal with the
difficult subject of race we require to know much of man,
both normal and abnormal. It is necessary to know how,*
and how much, one human being differs from another;
what are the chances of difference and similarity between
parents and children, brothers and sisters, cousin and
cousin. First, therefore, we must make a great series
of accurate observations, all of which must be carefully
recorded and tabulated by trained experts. The results
obtained from these tables will serve as a guide in our
eugenic reforms. Here enters the work of Karl Pearson
and his assistant at the Galton Laboratory of National
Eugenics in London, founded by the far-sighted genius of
Sir F. Galton. But, in addition to the biometrician, we
require the method of experiment in order to deduce
the laws of heredity. These experiments have been done
on plants and animals by careful breeding, and from the
works of Darwin, Mendel, de Vries, Bateson, Davenport,
and Punnett we have already learned much. We cannot
breed man experimentally, but it is possible to learn all
that can ever be needed, if people will allow their family
histories to be worked out carefuly.
Instead of one eugenics laboratory, in which the work
is statistical only, we want in every large town a eugenics
laboratory in which the experimenter and statistician
work side by side, aiding and correcting each other.
These articles are a simple statement of the nature
and claims of eugenics, not as expounded by any one
society or school of thinkers, but presented in as broad
a light as possible. Eugenics is a science in so far as it
acquires accurate data by experiments on the lower
animals and plants, and observes the results of the experi-
ments which time and fate have made upon the human
race; an art, in so far as it is an ideal for its betterment.
Eugenics is a far-reaching subject, of which we should all
have a knowledge, for which we can all have a practical
enthusiasm. Its motto might well be “ Let no generation
live unto itself.”
BOOKS RECOMMENDED.
1. Essays in Eugenics, fay F. Galton. Is. 6d.
2. The Nature and Scope of National Eugenics, fay
Karl Pearson. Is.
3. The Eugenics Review. Is. per quarter.
4. Heredity, fay Leonard Doncaster. Is.
5. The Family and the Nation, by W. C. Whetham
and his Wife. 7s. 6d.




The
Journal Printing Offic-
-31, Cannon Street,
Birmingham.
