

WHAT THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND
HAS DONE FOR
NEW SOUTH WALES.
hnnivershrv sundry,
V
SYDNEY;
William Blanchard, Printer,
80 Bathurst Street.


The First Service in Australia.
“On the first Sunday after our landing Divine Service was
performed under a great tree by the Rev. Mr. Johnson, Chaplain of
file settlement, in the presence of the troops and convicts, whose
behaviour on the occasion was equally regular and attentive.”—
Captain Tench.
Resolutions passed by both Houses of the Provincial Synod.
2nd August. 1904 j
“ (a) That, with the view to remembering the first Divine service
in Australia, which was held in 1788, ‘on the Sunday after the landing
undei a great tree, at Sydney Cove, and for the purpose
of emphasizing the priority and the history of our Church here, it is
very desirable that in every parish yearly, on the Sunday after
Anniversary Day, which would be the anniversary of the planting of
our Church on this continent, there should be some suitable notice or
commemoration of so important and interesting an event, (b) That
the Bishops be respectfully asked to communicate the foregoing
resolution to the clergyman in charge of each parish in their
t espective dioceses, and to take any other steps they may deem
advisable to promote the object stated.”


St Paul’s Rectory,
Cleveland Street,
Sydney.
-«-oy
r
Lr /


S
>V * M <5 £T,
<v^(^
' -
A/






What the Church of England has done
New South Wales.
HNNI¥ERSHRY SUNDRY,
THE Rev. Canon F. B. BOYCE.
7he foundation in the land of a great institution like the Chu\
England should he of deep interest. Its parishes now form a vast vex
covering the whole country , while those who enroll themselves under iti
are so numerous that her position approaches that which is nat
According to the census of 18/1 the Anglican population was 45'5 per
and in 1901 it was 46'6, or almost half. We turn our attention theref
its beginning.
ilie Rev. Richard Johnson, 8.A., Magdalen College, Cambridcn
was the clergyman with the first fleet. William Wilberforc
proposed his name to Mr. Pitt, the Prime Minister, who made th
appointment. His commission was dated 24th October, 1786 but th
fleet did not sail until the following May. He must have had a clea
and simple faith in Cod, intense loyalty to duty, a true spirit of sell
sacrifice, and a brave heart to have left his native land as he did Som
convicts later on said that they did not believe there was so good a mai
beside in all the world. To understand his difficult position, one mus
try to realise what his surroundings were, and in the light of the timei
in which he lived.
Before he left, help was rendered him from several quarters H<
appeared before the committee of the Society for Promoting Christiai
Knowledge, to place before them the spiritual needs of those in his
charge, and as a consequence an important grant was made of Bibles
Prayer Books, and tracts. He sailed in the “ Golden Grove ” Or
arriva!, his “parish” was the whole land, with 1030 precious souls whc
had come m the fleet, who included 750 convicts and a few free settlers.
There must have been many sad hearts when the fleet left Old
England. The voyage of eight months was not only dreary in the
extreme in the small ships of the period, but dangerous because through
seas almost wholly unknown. Mr. Johnson held regular services, and
was most attentive to his duties. At Rio he visited each ship There
must have been great joy when the new land of hope and promise was
reached, and what thankful hearts there must have been when the W
voyage ended ! s
The fleet arrived in Sydney Cove towards sundown on Saturday,
wbth January, 1788. What a memorable summer’s evening it must have
been for those on board ! The tender, the “ Supply,” with Governor
Pin 1 lip had gone on bemre, and he, with others, having landed that day,


had a space cleared in the bush and had hoisted the Union Jack. Around
it he and some officers drank the health of the King, George 111., in
four glasses of porter, and marines present fired a salute. No doubt
many from the other ships landed the same evening. The official and
formal inauguration of the Government did not take place until the
7th February.
Divine Service
Captain Tench writes : —“ On the first Sunday after our landing’
Divine service was performed under a great tree by the Rev. Mr.
Johnson, Chaplain of the Settlement, in the presence of the troops and
convicts, whose behaviour on the occasion was equally regular and
attentive.” The words the “ First Sunday after our Landing ” are
important in themselves, as indicating when the service was held.
What a remarkable service ! The new and romantic surroundings,
the isolation from the far distant England, home and beauty, and the
consequent loneliness of the little company, many of them outcasts,
the possible dangers that might confront them in a land that they
knew scarcely anything about, and their hope for the new life
before them, all must have helped to make that service singularly
impressive. It was the first time in Australia that Gfod had
been publicly worshipped, and in which our sublime liturgy had
been used on its shores. We wish that we had more particulars.
What was Mr. Johnson’s text? What were the leading thoughts
in this the first sermon on this continent ? There is no doubt,
from what we know of the man, that he exalted Christ and placed Him
before his hearers as the loving Saviour. We can think, too, that
throughout there would be a strain of thanksgiving for Cod’s mercies to
them in the long voyage on the mighty deep. Few, or no more, memor-
able services have ever been held in Christendom during the centuries of
its history.
Dean Cowper has well said : —“ That may be regarded as the day
on which the planting of Christianity was begun in Australia; the day
on which the Christian faith was proclaimed, and Christian worship first
celebrated. It was the setting as it were of a small stock, which was to
grow and expand into a great tree, throwing out its branches, and
yielding its fruit on every side.”
A Commemoration Proposed.
I ventured to suggest at a meeting that there should be a Com-
memorative Service annually, on the Sunday after Anniversary Day, on
the very site, if possible, on which the first was I eld. A charge of
sentiment might be made, but is not sentiment a powerful factor in
nations, and often the basis of patriotism ? Why then exclude it from
the Church P The Rev. W. I. Carr-Smitb, who was at the meeting,
finding that the place was in his parish, with a genius for the historical,
happily arranged for such a service. It was held in front of the Custom
House at Circular Quay, at 3 p.m., on Sunday, Ist February, 1903. He
kindly asked me to take part. After a shortened form of Church
service he delivered an appropriate address, as did also the Rev. E. H.
Lea who was present. I spoke from the words, “ This day shall be unto
you for a memorial.” The attendance was large.


When the First Service was Held.
The remarkable first service under a great tree was, I wish to repeat,
on “the Sunday after the landing.” According to Dr. Andrew Houison,
who read a valuable paper on the subject before the Australian Historical
Society, this was on Sunday, 27th January, 1788, the official landing
having taken place the day before. It has been asserted, on the other
hand, that the landing of the main body was not until that and the
following days, and that the next Sunday, the 3rd February, was the
one meant. We are sure that Mr. Johnson, who is described as
“assiduous in his duties,” would not let the sacred day pass without, if
possible, holding a service. The point, however, is that it was the first
“ Sunday after the landing,” and that even if held on 3rd February it
would have been earlier had the Sunday been nearer. Any commemora-
tion of the event must naturally be on the Sunday and not according to
the day of the month. Do we not keep Easter Day and Whitsunday,
not as to the day of the month, but as to that of the week ? If, there-
fore, Dr. Houison happens to be mistaken, the Church, by having the
commemoration on the Sunday following the 26th January (Auniversary
Day) will, except about once in six years, always be holding it on a day
after the 27th, and consequently on the one that is absolutely right.
When the 27th happens to be the Sunday, we may certainly give Dr.
Houison the benefit of the doubt. Mr. F. M. Bladen, the editor of the
Historical Official Becords, favours Dr. Houison’s opinion.
Action in Synod.
With the view of enlarging the scope of the commemoration, I
moved in September, 1903, a resolution in the Synod of the Diocese of
Sydney in favour of a general Anniversary Sundav. It was seconded by
Dr. Houison. and carried without dissent. I brought the same resolution
before the Provincial Synod last year, and with the substitution of the
word “ planting ” for “ beginning,” it was unanimously passed by both
Houses. Such a day rightly signalizes a humble but most honorable
commencement. It is a time annually in which we can review the past;
in fact, it is a history Sunday. We can recount that the one Minister of
the Cross has become about 400, with six Bishops. If we think of the
whole Commonwealth, the number would be about 1000, and 20 Bishops.
There was no roof in 1788, except the “great tree,” but now there are
stately cathedrals and hundreds of churches, many being very beautiful.
The first service was at the birth of a nation, and all through since, our
ancient and historic Church planted then in this land, has nobly
witnessed for the faith and the high ideals connected therewith, and so
helped the public life in matters of vital consequence.
To celebrate tne auniversary of the foundation of such a great
institution, seems not only most fitting, but a plain duty. As the State
■celebrates its anniversary, and has its day, why should not the Church ?
In Australia, Church and State began together, and it is appropriate
that both should keep their anniversaries at about the same time. It is
well to emphasize that the Church here is as old as the State.
A General Observance.
The general observance began on Sunday, 31st January, 1904.
The Archbishop had helped the resolution of the Synod by forwarding it


on to all his clergy. In St. Andrew’s Cathedral Archdeacon Gunther, a
lover of the history of our Church in this land, discoursed on the subject.
Rudyard Kipling’s recessional was sung.
God of our fathers, known of old,
Lord of our far-flung battle line.
Beneath Whose awful hand we hold
Dominion over palm and pine—
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet.
Lest we forget—lest we forget.
I had the privilege of preaching in the evening.
The Rev. W. I. Carr Smith again held an open-air service, which
proved of notable interest. As the result of enquiries he changed the-
site to that of the little triangular reserve in Macquarie Place, feeling
fairly sure that it was there or very close to that spot that Johnson, 116
years before, had unfurled the royal banner of the King of Kings.
In many churches the day was celebrated. One, at least (Holy
Trinity, Dulwich Hill) was specially decorated. Archdeacon Langley,,
at St. Philip’s, marked the day by suitable sermons and hymns, and.
notably by using the historic Bible and Prayer Book that Johnson had
brought from England with him in the first fleet.
A Visible Link.
This Bible and Prayer Book deserve more than a passing notice, as;
they are a visible link that has been preserved. They were saved in the
burning of the first St. Philip’s Church in 1798, were used in various,
rooms afterwards, and for many years in the second St. Philip’s, when
built. In 1842 Archdeacon Cow per took them to England and had them
re-bound. They are now carefully kept in the iron safe in the vestry
of another, a third and grander St. Philip’s, and only used on occasions,
of exceptional interest. Archdeacon Broughton, before his consecration
as Bishop, preaching in St. Philip’s on Anniversary Day, 1834, which
happened to be a Sunday, said : “As an appropriate monument also of
the event which this day witnessed, and in perpetual acknowledgment
that the frame of human Society should stand upon the Word of God,
and be compacted together by His pure worship, provision has been
made for the preservation within the walls of this Church, the oldest
place of Christian worship existing in this colony, of the Bible and Book
of Common Prayer which accompanied the original settlers, and were
here first used in the service of Almighty God. May they re’mind us,
and our posterity to the latest generations, of our duty to reverence and
study that sacred word, and thus at least to show our thankfulness to
God, who has brought us into a laud where we may eat bread without
scarceness, and not lack anything in it. A heinous and a hateful sin is
national ingratitude. May it never be imputed to us.”
Inscription upon the chest containing the Bible and Book of Common Prayer, which
were conveyed to New South Wales by the original settlers for the use of public worship:
“Quo ne intercideret memoria christianae tidei in his oris primum prsediratse, sacrarum
scripturarum volumen, item que exemplar lihri liturgise ecclesiffi Anglican®, que. Una cum
coloma idcirco hue advecta, a primo station appulsu in sacris concionihus adhibebantier, in
hac acra reponenda atque in ecclesia sancti Philippi axiostoli conservanda. CURA BAT REV.
GUL. BROUGHTON A M Archidiaconus. Sydneise, Australium.
* ( Salut: Human: MDCCCXXXIV.
AUUO I Colon: Fundat: XL VI.


The Priority of Our Church.
no point that is brought out at the Anniversary is the priority of
'our Church to that of other Churches in this State. I have a sincere
regard for the work of other denominations, and recognize its importance
but it is only fair to remember that during the most difficult, the cruelest
anti the darkest days the Church of England by itself witnessed in this
and. Por about a fourth of the history of New South Wales, which for
tong was the history of Australia, there was only one church here, and
tmt was our Church of England. There were some adherents of other
Ahurches and visits of passing missionaries, who sometimes stayed for a
little, but it cannot be said that either was officially and regularly
represented by one of its ordained and recognised ministers until years
had passed. The first such minister of the Methodist Church came in
bi->, of the Roman Catholic in 182 1 ), of the Presbyterian in 1823, and
later one of the Congregational and of the Baptist Churches.
On the ofher hand, our Church was here from the very first.
i vqjTi! 1 S °c? n assisted for a sbort time by the Rev. James Bain. In
;/ y4 tde Samuel Marsden arrived, and for nearly a half a century
the colony had the advantage of his vigorous ministry. The Rev. PL
I niton aided for a space. We read of his conducting Divine Service on
the Hawkesbury on 7th December, 1800, and a church was opened
there on I bth August, 1805. In 1809 there came the Rev. William
Cow per, ever faithful, active and able, and the next year the Rev. Robert
Cartwright, another earnest-minded man. Soon the number of clerow
was enlarged, and there were ten in 1825. Archdeacon Broughton came
in B_b, to be consecrated the first bishop of Australia seven years later
- Bus interesting to note that while the earliest parish registers are
in the Registrar General’s office, those in the possession of the Church
at Windsor date from 1810, and Liverpool 1811. In the then distant
west they date, at Kelso 1826, and at Wellington 1837; in the
south, at Goulburn 1838, and in the north, at Newcastle, 1826.
As far north as Port Macquarie the foundation stone of a church was
w- I-” 1 AT* A mission to the aborigines was begun under the Rev
William Watson at Wellington in 1832. These facts all show how in
the very early days of Australian life our Church was possessing the
land and witnessing and doing work for her Lord and Master
Our Church and Education.
There are at least two important matters concerning which there
might well be national thankfulness for the work of our Church One
and the other is moral reform. What is the testimony of
the work of the Church in the education of the people is a most
notable matter for national gratitude. The training of the children is of
momentous consequence, as the country’s well-being rests on the
c aracter of the men and women it produces. “As the twig is bent, so is
.ie tree inclined. A well-known writer has said that “ The regeneration
ot Society 1S the regeneration of the individual by education.” Our
fostered
But especially while caring for the secular, she has stood for
I. ? gIOUS instruction. Education can never be good if it be one-sided.
It is a sad mistake to suppose that a boy is prepared for life if some of


the most important faculties are left uncultivated. The aim should be-
to properly balance a boy’s mind. The teaching of the three R’s will not
make a boy obedient to his parents. The teaching of geography will not
make a boy honest. A knowledge of grammar will not make a boy
honourable. An acquaintance with algebra will not teach a boy to be
upright and loving, much less will it put into his heart the fear of God.
For instance, who will argue that the mere knowledge of a trade, such
as that of a bricklayer or carpenter, will make a man truthful or
temperate ? These things are good in themselves, but is it right to leave
the more important faculties —the moral and spiritual —out in the cold
and untrained? Secular education alone is utterly incomplete, and
would tend to destroy that righteousness which is the sure foundation of
national greatness. The Duke of Wellington went so far as to say:
“ Educate children without religion, and you will make a race of clever
devils.”
The Church, then, working on the truest lines, has ever warmly
urged the necessity of education for the people—religious as well as
secular. It must be remembered that it is recently, comparatively, that-
the State has been willing to bear the burden of education. People now
enjoying the lavish expenditure on the public schools, some doubtless
built with borrowed money, can scarcely realise the immense difference-
a generation or two ago. It is very easy to talic of having a good
education, now that the public purse is wide open. It was not always so.
The Church had to collect subscriptions and put up buildings. Any
Government help was partial, and it is really wonderful how much she
was able to do with the very limited means at her disposal. The
superintendence by the clergy and the general management usually took
up valuable time, yet very freely given. The anxieties connected with,
the schools were sometimes great.
The Early Days.
The father of education in Australia was the Rev. Richard Johnson,,
B.A. He established the first day school, and it was held in the wattle
and dab church that he had built in 1793, and was opened at
Michaelmas of that year. That noble organisation of our Church,
the S.P.G., gave £lO a year each towards the salaries of two teachers,
and later of a third. But those grants were merely earnests of splendid
help in other years.
The Rev. Samuel Marsden opened the first school in Parramatta.
At the end of 1797 there were three schools in the colony. Two of
them were Church schools, and the other a private one.
We find that in 1826 the Church had 16 schools.
The Church and School Corporation, beginning in 1826, rendered
large help, but that body expired in 1836. Dr. Lang says, in his History
of New South Wales that in 1833, “ There were 35 Primary or Public
Schools in the Colony, all of which were under the superintendence of
the Clergy of the Church of England.”
Denominational Schools.
From that time State aid was given, and rightly too, to other denom-
inations for education purposes, and, indeed, also to ministers’ stipends.
It will be seen that during about two-tilths of the history of New South


Wales the Church of England Schools were the only ones, except a few
that were private. Among the latter must be named a Roman Catholic
School, opened in 1822. In 1850, our Church had 92 Schools, with half
of the children. Of the other half the Roman Catholics numerically
were first, with the Presbyterians second, and Methodists third.
The Government aid given was various—sometimes a pound for
every pound subscribed, and for a time a half-penny a day for each child
in towns and a farthing to a half-penny for each in the country. A
Board of National Education was formed about 1850, and the Public
School system began and gradually expanded, but the Denominational
Schools were continued until 1888, when all aid was withdrawn. In
1878, it may be remarked that the cost to the State for each child, on
the aggregate yearly enrolment in Public Schools, was £8 Is. 7d., and in
the Denominational 19s. Bd. The Churches in some way by buildings
and subscriptions made up the necessary difference. I called the
Denominational system not State aid to the Church, but Church aid to
the State.
Among those from which all aid was withdrawn were our splendid
and almost historic Schools in Sydney of St. James, which was
carried on where the Public Boys’ High School is now; of
St. Philip, of Christ Church, and of St. Paul. The secular education
was fairly equal to that in the then Public Schools, but there was the
additional important advantage of daily religious instruction. In all
Church Schools the Bible held a high position.
Since the withdrawal of Government aid a few Primary Schools
have been kept on, but in a comparatively small manner. The Church,
however, has largely availed herself of the right to give religious instruc-*
tlon in the Public Schools, and in that matter is an easy first.
Middle Class Education.
Passing from primary education to the higher, we find that the
Church again did good work by founding, in 1832, the King’s School at
Parramatta. It has had a most honourable history. Sydney College
followed; but again the Church did important work by the establishment
by Bishop Broughton of St. James’ Grammar School, Phillip Street, in
1839, which took the place in Sydney that the King’s School held in
Parramatta. It lasted until late in the fifties, many of our leading
citizens were educated there, but it eventually gave place to the Sydney
Grammar School under Mr. Weigall. I might say very much more on
the whole matter. In fact, there are other Church Grammar Schools
that I might touch on, such as those of country towns, and the
North Shore Grammar School, and the Girls’ Grammar School, but lack
of space forbids. A point is that, as the University was not opened
until 1853, the King’s School and St. James’ Grammar School in some
measure made up for the higher education it later on provided. In
middle class education for boys our Church has done far more than the
State.
The Battle against Secularism.
I loyally accept the present Education Act, and do not now advocate
its repeal. It is a compromise. There is religious instruction of a
non-sectarian kind by the teachers in our excellent Public Schools, and
the ministers of all denominations have the legal right of entry to teach


children of their own Churches at certain hours. Christian men in other
States, where they have a hard and deadly secularism, envy the New
South Wales compromise. In Victoria, lam informed, the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ was struck out of the reading books.
But who gained this compromise ? Unquestionably, the Church of
England. The long struggle on behalf of the religious teaching of our
children is one of the most heroic in our annals. Bishop Broughton
courageously entered into the conflict. In fact, on the very day that he
landed in Sydney as Bishop he interviewed the Governor to urge that a
proposal, adverse to the Bible in the schools, should be abandoned. He
said that he wanted the whole Bible in the day schools, and not a Bible
on which there could be neither note nor comment. When he died, it
was with his face to the foe. Bishop Barker kept the flag flying, and all
through his episcopate of 27 years his time was embittered by the
conflict, but he never flinched. In at least two general elections, the
question was the leading issue. Some of his ablest addresses were on
behalf of the children, and when he spoke the whole country seemed to
listen. It was by his statesmanship and exceptional influence that the
loss of our schools was so long postponed, and the compromise reached.
The cause of schools connected with any Church had become unpopular,
chiefly because of an indiscreet Pastoral on education issued by the
Roman Catholic Bisnops, which deeply offended thousands, but he and
many who fought with him were fearless in the battle. A writer has said
that “to back an unpopular opinion is the finest hardihood in the world.”
I readily admit that the main tight was round the denominational
schools. The Church of Rome strove for hers with all her might, and
preferred, if she could not have grants in aid, that the Public Schools
should be absolutely secular. Our Church, however, in pleading for her
Day Schools, was waging the war against secularism all along the line.
The need of teaching the children in school the Christian faith was ever
strongly emphasized, and in the very forefront. The Bible, or, in other
words, its principles, was proved to be a great necessity for the land.
Organizations such as the “ Bible Combination,” led by Canon Robert
Taylor, that held at least one memorable public meeting out of many,
were all helping to kill secularism. The result was the existing com-
promise which meets with so much favour, and is spoken of with so
much thankfulness. A combination of forces, however, were arrayed
against the Church, including that of infidelity and unbelief, and the
rancour of the sectarian strife raised was of the worst description. We
may well thank God for more peaceful and loving days. The present
Act was born of strife.
Surely the Church of England should be gratefully remembered for
the great part she played in the struggle. Was it not a national work,
and of the highest kind ? But after all it was simple duty, and to that
she was heroically loyal. Does not the Word of God say, “And these
words which I command thee this day . . . thou shalt teach them
diligently to thy children ” ? Was not the work helping to realise the
desire of the psalmist, when he said: “ That our sons may be as plants
grown up in their youth; that our daughters may be as corner stones,
polished after the similitude of a palace ” F
Moral Reform.
One work in which the Church has taken the leading part in New
South Wales has been in raising the people, morally, to a higher level so


that they compare not unfavourably with those in other lands. It is
righteousness that exalteth a nation. The truest interests of any country
are the happy homes built on love, integrity, and reverence, or, in other
words, on Christian principles. Indeed, Christianity is the very basis of
our civilisation. Its negation means anarchy, revolution, and death;
its acceptance, order, peace, and life.
No reader of Colonial history can shut his eyes to the troubles of
our early days. Up to 1840, while a host of free settlers came here, no
less than 59,000 convicts arrived. Previous to 1788 the prisoners had
been sent to what is now the United States. The offences were some-
times political, often trivial, but often again quite the reverse. I will
not, however, dwell upon this unpleasant point.
One writer says of the beginning of the century: —“The state of
morals was utterly depraved—oaths and ribaldry, and audacious lying
were universal. Marriage, and the sacred ties of domestic life, were
almost unknown, and those, who from their station should have set an
example to the convicts and settlers, encouraged sin in others by the
■effrontery of their own trangressious.”
By proclamation parties were warned in 1817 to travel between
Sydney and Parramatta only by daylight, because of the number of
robbers. A writer said of 1821 that for one to pass near the Bocks in
Sydney after dark there was “ The hazard, or rather certainty, of being
■stripped and plundered.” There is more than one incident of a sale of a
wife by auction.”
When the first Cowper arrived, his son, the late Dean, says that
“he discovered the moral state of the population was to a large extent
painfully low. . . . There were numbers living without any sense,
of shame in a state of concubinage, without having gone through any
kind of marriage ceremony.” The father’s own words were, however,
much stronger as to what he called the “ unblushing concubinage.”
■Governor Macquarie, a little later, wrote of “ the total disregard to the
■common decencies of civilized life.”
Intemperance.
The young Colony was suckled with rum. That potent spirit was
long a common measure of value, and generally used as such instead of
money —that is, things were bought and paid for in rum. For instance,
Sergeant-Major Whittle sold a house to Governor Macquarie for 200
gallons of rum. A hospital was built in Sydney, long known as the
Rum Hospital, the builders having received a certain monopoly of the
spirit in payment for the work. One of the chief causes of the
rebellion that brought about the downfall of Governor Bligh was his
interference with the distillers.
Intemperance was, therefore, frightfully common. No tongue could
describe the drunken orgies and consequent brutalities. Even in the
thirties and forties the convictions for drunkenness in the Sydney Police
•Court were extraordinarily high, and the ruin of home life was
terribly frequent.
Matters gradually improved, but a dislocation of society arose in the
fifties through the discovery of gold. Thousands came from the home-
land, some of the best, but often the prodigal and the ne’er-do-weel.
Through those on the diggings the drink bill assumed quite romantic
proportions.


Bushranging.
The interior, as it was opened np, soon presented a great
difficulty, and bushranging was common. In 185 d, The Empire, the
daily paper edited by the late Sir Henry Parkes, said: “ Sly grog-sellers
and horse-stealers abound in the mountainous country in the Carcoar
district. The place lies between Groulburn and Bathurst, and is the
‘centre depot’ where the horse-thieves meet and exchange stolen
animals, those taken from Bathurst being sent to Groulburn, and vice
versa. Mobs of ten and twenty are driven off runs. In such cases their
destination is the Ovens or Melbourne, and sometimes Sydney. The
small bodies of constables, foot and mounted, are quite inadequate to
break up the gang, and the mounted patrols are wholly applied to the
service of preventing crimes on the high roads. Ho small wonder that
so many sly-grog shops abound in the mountainous country; the sly
grog-sellers and the horse-stealers ‘work into one another’s hands.’ ”
In the sixties the bushranging assumed its most historic form, and
reached its final stage. Gardiner, Ben Hall and others roved about the-
country, chiefly between Bathurst and Goulburn and westward to the
Weddin Mountains, and were a terror to thousands. But what enabled
them to escape capture for so long a time, was, unquestionably, the
sympathy with them that existed. It was said that the country swarmed
with “bush telegraphs ” to tell when the police were near. Thus, while
Sydney and the towns had improved, the remote parts were an especial
trouble. It was, therefore, in uncongenial soil the Church had to work,,
but the greater the difficulties the more glorious the victories.
How the Change Came
We have still very much to grieve over, but we are not now worse
than other English speaking peoples. How has the great change been
made ? The answer is “ Mainly by the work of the Church.” She
was alone here in the early days to witness for truth and righteousness,
and all through her numerical position has given her an especial influence.
Her ministers constantly raised their voices against the vices of the
day, and the highest in the land were not spared. The ten command-
ments read in her services were continual reminders of the law of God,
and of plain duty. Johnson, by example and precept, rebuked wrong
and preached the principles of Jesus Christ as the panacea for the ills of
suffering humanity. Marsden’s fame as a reformer and worker on
behalf of purer lives reached the Mother Country, and William
Wilberforce described him as a “ moral hero.” The first Cowper with
no unsparing rhetoric denounced sin and nobly stood amidst the
immorality, drunkenness and general profligacy of the Sydney of that
day for a straight and honourable life, with the marriage bed undefiled.
He married no less than 187 couples at St. Philip’s in the year after his
arrival, which was altogether out of proportion to the population. That
the men named and others later on so fought that in time the better
self was seen among the people is beyond question. They were the
leaders in this and in awakening the public conscience. Mr. James
Bonwick, one of the most copious writers on our early history, has said
that the happy transformation was to be attributed to Christian teaching.
As to intemperance, all must agree that matters have vastly changed
for the better, and that our Church has had a share in the work. Tim


drink bill had been wonderfully high, but in 1881 it had fallen to
£5 4s. sd. per head, and in 1903 to £3 2s. lOd.
As to the bushranging, all denominations did something, but the
work of our Church in the sixties was of especial moment. Clergymen
of tbe diocese of Goulburn, such as the late Dean Pownall and some
others did active pastoral work over hundreds of miles of country that
tbe outlaws terrorised. On the Bathurst side, then in the Sydney
Diocese, such men as the Rev- Joseph Barnier (wbo had charge of the
Lachlan River), Rev. Canon John Vaughan, of O’Connell, Rockley and
the Fish Rivei; the Rev. W. F. B. Uzzell, of Carcoar; the Rev. Henry
Langley (now Bishop of Bendigo), of country near Bathurst, and some
others, all worked with remarkable energy and genuine
point in this connection is that their labours among the settlers in the
then back blocks destroyed the sympathy with the bushrangers. The
residents recognised that it was not commonly respectable to connive
wdth them, and that the right thing was to respect the law. The trouble
ended. I well remember an old resident of the outer part of the
Bathurst district, a man who did not belong to our Church, telling me
that Mr. Langley had done more good than fifty policemen.
There were other forces for good at work, no doubt. Other
denominations must be remembered. The Government did something,
but in the nature of the case its efforts were largely nugatory. It is
hard to make men moral by Act of Parliament. A grea.t writer
has said : “ The trouble is not with your leaders, but with yourselves..
The true reform of any nation must begin and end in the hearts of the
people, and until it does begin there, and proceed from there, and return
there, no change of officers or pai'ties will greatly affect conditions for
the better.’ The raising the standard of the Lord Jesus Christ and the
appeal to the heart as well as to the head were evidently the main
roads to reform.
It has been something to have had in communities from the very
beginning of our history a scholarly Christian gentleman, such as the
average Church of England clergyman has been, mixing freely with the
people, and pointing them to a high ideal. Ministers are but human,
and while they have had their weaknesses, it is morally certain that their
influence has been immense on behalf of law, order, truth, righteousness,,
and mercy. Nor must the invaluable work of clergymen s wives be
forgotten. The fruit is of many kinds, but it is especially in the
thousands of happy homes to-day of God-fearing parents, and in the
purer lives and sweeter manners that now prevail.
The Church and Labour.
Passing on, the Church, further, has set forth the principle of justice
between the employer and employed. St. Paul’s words, “ Masters, give
unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also
have a Master in Heaven ” have been often kept to the front, while on
the other hand, it has emphasized his words, “Servants, obey in all
things your masters, according to the flesh ; not with eye service, as
men pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God; and whatsoever
ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men.” It is by the
proclamation of true principles that reforms come, and better aims
prevail. The education of public opinion is of vital consequence in any
movement for the welfare of the people, and without it statesmen are
powerless to act. Men almost unconsciously very often drink in the=


piinciple and hold it, only to shine forth with brilliancy at a later
and become the great force that opposes sweating, and all other un-just
conditions of labour on either side. While, therefore, the Church has
been enunciating the principles of the Lord Jesus Christ, she has been
educating men on the true and only lines on which labour troubles can
•ever be rightly solved.
The Sense of Compassion.
The Church, again, has ever taught the duty of compassion, and
materially aided to implant in the hearts of the people the spirit of
charity for the suffering and downtrodden. In a broad-minded way her
clergy and people have led and joined in forming Societies with
benevolent aims, especially hospitals, and usually free from all sectarian
Kemerabermg their numerical position, they might easily, like
the Homan Catholic Church which has its own St. Vincent’s Hospital
have done otherwise and worked among themselves. But with a libera!
policy they have fostered brotherhood under one banner in carryino- out
the principles inculcated in the parable of the Good Samaritan, amfhave
rejoiced in uniting with all to aid those of any or no creed in the hour of
darkness and distress. The present readiness to help the poor and
especially the sick is largely due to her teaching. Was not the feelino-
very different in the old times here a hundred years ago whsh the lash
was m constant use ? Would it have been possible, even fifty years
without such education, to have made law in this country
Bens ion Act, and the most liberal in the world P Ho doubt the Act
needs to be seriously amended, but the principle has come to stay, and
it is doubtful whether the half-a-million a year now spent on our old
people will ever be very largely reduced. It was a crowning act of
philanthropy and generosity at the close of the nineteenth century, and
happily clergymen of our Church had a very important part in initiating
and promoting so great and benevolent a movement. The spread of the
feeling of compassion, as seen in that and other movements, is one of the
■signs of the increased influence of Christianity, and of the growth of a
leading principle taught by our Lord Jesus Christ. The pulpits of our
Lhurch have commonly been clear on that duty, and not a few have said
with Drummond that love was the greatest thing in the world
Briefly, the work of our Church has told. Her efforts were not
merely by preaching in her parishes that covered the occupied land, or
)y education m the Day Schools, but by Sunday Schools, by other
'Church organizations of an uplifting tendency, and by house to house
‘ lor precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept,
line upon line, line upon line, here a little and there a little.” To
lightly judge we must try to survey her work as a whole.
Some Incidents.
But it is no part of my present object to write a history of our
i i 1 tlOpo - tha f aB abler P en wpl some day do her the justice
which has been so far lacking. There are, however, some points which
help to ennoble her, and which at her Anniversary may well be
remembered. J
B was a memorable day when Samuel Marsden sailed from
Sydney on the first of his seven missionary voyages to New Zealand
Among the notable services m history, was that on Christmas Day,
14, when he held the first service in that country, and preached to


Maoris, who were cannibals, from the text “ Behold I bring you glad
tidings.” The marvellous triumphs of the Gospel in those early days in
New Zealand are those of New South Wales. By 1828 cannibalism had
ceased there, which was a practical indication of an uplifting of humanity.
But, far better, many souls had been won for Christ.
I think of the long and lonely journeys of the saintly Bishop
Broughton, and at a time when there were no railways and when roads
were only tracks and there were no bridges. I picture him at Sofala on
the Turon in the early and rough days of the goldfields, working for the
building of a Church. He held a meeting at six in the morning and
urged the diggers to do the work, and, seizing a pick, he dug the hole at
the north-west corner for the first post. Many picks were at once
lowered from shoulders, and before breakfast half the holes were made.
Within four days, he often helping in the labour, the building was
erected, and he, getting up to the top of the gable, nailed on it a cross,
the glorious symbol of our faith.
I can think again of Bishop Tyrrel and his weary jouimeys, and his
readiness to walk. His 20 mile walk home to Morpeth after landing at
Newcastle from his four months island voyage with the great Bishop
Selwyn was only significant of the man. Is there physical degeneracy in
the men of to-day ? Thinking of walking, the mind reverts to Samuel
Marsden, who would preach in Sydney in the morning, and would
sometimes walk along the old Parramatta Road the 15 miles to preach
at St. John’s, Parramatta, in the evening.
I think of Bishop Barker in his last visit to the west as Bishop,
being out over twelve weeks with much of the journeying on horseback
and much hardship. The railway was only to Mount Victoria. Is not
travelling as to the main roads absolutely different now ? I can picture
him, for instance, in the course of that visit preaching at the Trunkey
gold field, then new, at the edge of the Abercrombie Mountains, to rough
diggers that crowded a Church built and opened before any public house
at the place, although nine had been begun at the same time. His eloquent
voice with which he glorified Christ and urged faith in Him and conse-
quent duty to men was heard there, and in those twelve weeks in dozens
of other centres.
I can think of the clergyman who in 1874 was sent out as
Organising Missioner to the distant Darling. He was to conduct
services where possible, and arrange for the stipends of ministers
it was proposed to station there. He held numerous services,
and successfully accomplished the purpose as to finance. He
rode on horseback through to Bourke when all vehicular traffic
was stopped because of the flooded country, and in the course of
the two months occupied he covered in the saddle 2,000 miles. Finding
that by pushing he could give a brief time at the new town of Cobar, he
rode 160 miles to it in two days —using three horses and camping in the
night at Byrock, forty miles from any house, with a blackfellow who was
guiding him through the bush. The track, where there was a track, had
been from Brewarrina, via Congolgon and Tindarry. This was years
before the railway was built.
The days are probably passed, through the building of bridges, in
which clergymen had sometimes to swim flooded creeks, and even rivers
and life has been lost in the ardent endeavour to do the duty of his office.
On the other hand, the perils of drought cannot be forgotten. The


average minister in New South Wales, I do not speak of exceptions, has
been a hard working and self-denying earnest men, having no high
stipend, and his manifold labours the last day will declare to the
glory of God.
St. Andrew’s Day, 1868, is one to be remembered as that in which
the Cathedral in Sydney was opened. The structure represented a
generation of patient effort, and, included in the £60,000 that it cost,
self-denial on the part of a host of Church people in offerings acceptable
and pleasing to God.
It is a pleasant and beautiful memory in Sydney —the ministry of
the two Cowpers—devout, with plenty of brain power, and scholarly,
covering in the lives of father and son 92 years. The father began
work in 1809, when the City had only 5,000 souls ; when the son cfied
it had risen to 500,000. 1 venture to think that no other two lives
are more closely identified with the history of the great City in its best
and highest aspects.
Advanced Church Government.
Ascending from detail and incidents to matters of Church statemau-
ship, I notice wise and far seeing action in the self-government provided
the Church. The Synods, instituted in 1866, are Church Parliaments
with comprehensive legal powers. They were from the first elected on a
franchise of “ one man one vote,” and it was not for years after that
citizens were accorded a similar franchise in choosing their State Parlia-
ments. In 1895, the Provincial Synod widened the suffrage by givino- a
vote to every woman, again before the State had made legal the right”of
women to vote. If the same powers of self-government had existed in
England it has been said that the separations from her would never have
been. The Church again long preceded the States in the matter of
Federation. Through the genius of Bishop Barker, the Genera! Synod
was established in 1872, embracing representatives from all Australia
and Tasmania, and thus federating all the Dioceses : but it was not until
1901 the federation of the States was consummated and the Common-
wealth formed. On these important matters was not the Church more
than abreast of the times ? Instead of following, did she not lead P
Spiritual Work.
I have assumed all through that the chief work of the Church—the
Spiritual —has been done. She would be "wholly unworthy of her name
and ancestry, and a traitor to our Lord Jesus Christ, had she troubled
about better conditions of life and neglected the salvation of the souls of
men for whom He died. I have thought in this paper rather of the
national work, than that for the individual. Indeed, time would fail me
to tell of the victories achieved by the preaching of the Cross from that
to crowds in the metropolis to the isolated settlers in the distant back
blocks. There is possibly no clergyman of experience who could not
speak of men and women whom he had known who had by early
training led holy and consistent lives in the fear of God, and in love for
Christ, and were faithful unto the end. He could tell of those, again,
whose hearts the Lord had touched when living in a careless and worldly
way, and who, saved by faith, became zealous and most useful Christians.
He could recount how young men, poor prodigals, snared by drink and
immoral women, had been changed and raised from the slough of despond


to become followers of Christ and faithful witnesses to the truth. He
could speak of deathbeds of many who were simply trusting the Saviour,
that were so calm and peaceful, and, again, so joyous and triumphant
that the loosing of the silver cord plainly meant a glorious entrance
into the inheritance of the saints in light. What one minister of Christ
could tell, when multiplied by the experience of hundreds of earnest
men, most of whose names are nearly forgotten on earth, would show a
•great host of people of New South Wales, who, having washed their
robes in the blood of the Lamb, were now for ever resting in the home
beyond. One notable thing the Church has done in this land certainly
has been to faithfully preach the Gospel to the people, and with a most
blessed result. While her work has been of a many-sided kind, that of
the spiritual life of the people has ever been in the very forefront.
Conclusion.
I have narrated matters connected with the ever memorable first
service in this land, and referred to many affairs in the work of our
Church in the 117 years of her history. Ido not for a moment pretend
to have said all, or nearly all, that deserves to be better known by Church
people. Her educational work and the moral change she so largely
participated in causing stand out conspicuously and honourably, as well
as other matters, each of no small importance. These, when taken
together, show that she has played a great part in the making of Australia.
1 have spoken of the arduous nature of the work, and of the zeal mani-
fested, and I now desire to say a few words in conclusion.
Thankfulness.
I think that at the coming 117 th anniversary of the planting of our
'Church here, there may well be a deep feeling of thankfulness to God
for His goodness. The Church, no doubt, has not done all that ought to
have been done, but her work has been great, and a blessing has" been
very evident. To begin in a new land with the first use of our beautiful
and inimitable Prayer Book under “ a great tree ” in the bush, and to
think of the wonderful change by the extension of her work in the cities
and the scores of towns and country places, all testifying to the devotion,
faith, and self-sacrifice of her sons and daughters, may well cause us to
•exclaim in thankfulness, “ What hath God wrought ? ” When, too, we
review the history of the period and observe the hard and difficult times
Through which she had to work and witness, we may well again lift up
•our hearts in gratitude to the Everlasting Father for His tender care and
never-failing aid.
We may thank God also that the land we live in and love has had
«o noble an institution within its borders working all through its history
in its vast network of parishes for home and humanity ; one, too, that
•ever cared for the children and stood for high ideals of purity, integrity,
honour, charity, and chivalry.
Anniversary Sunday, therefore, should be joyfully celebrated. The
memory of Richard Johnson and the little band "of worshippers under
that great tree on that summer day in 1788, with all the blessing since,
may well cause us to thank God “ with hearts, and hands, and voices.” ’
The Present.
Present duties naturally arise to the mind. The faithfulness and
courage of the past must be maintained, for the forces against Christianity


tire subtle and powerful. We must be watchful and stand fast in the
faith, quitting ourselves like true men, and daring, no matter what the
opposition, to keep all our flags flying. As members of the ancient and
histone Church of the English we should bravely endeavour to forward
the principles in the two books that are still preserved, that Richard
Johnson brought with him, the Bible and the Book of Common Prayer,
believing that in them we learn of tbe great salvation from sin through
our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the means whereby humanity can be
enriched in the noblest ways. While heartily welcoming new lines of
thought and action, not out of harmony with truth, we might well
remember, in the noise and distraction of controversy, the words of the
prophet: “ Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your
souls.”
Let us be aggressive. We should do what is possible to conquer the
weaknesses and vices of to-day. There is a miserable and ignorant
God-dishonouring and soul-destroying indifferentisnx very common, and
which ought to be battled with until killed. There are thousands who
will not admit themselves to be unbelievers, but yet live as such and do
not care, ever ignoring God. We should show these men their terrible
danger, and awaken them to their plain duty to their Hpavenly Father
and themselves.
There is again the “ trinity of evil” to be fought, in the impurity,
the intemperance, and the gambling of the day. Do not the improve-
ments, and, indeed, triumphs of the past in this State as to the two
first encourage us to march hopefully forward. While much has been
accomplished, there remains an extensive field yet to be possessed, and
men and women should strive against these and other ills for complete
victory.
The Future.
As to the future, we know that it is with God. We should attempt
great things, however, for Him, and the heroism, and much more is
wanted in Church life, will be acceptable to Him and inspiring to others.
A friend writes: “ Set your heart on the high thing, and all the lesser
will be served. The effort will be full of pleasure, and the pursuit will
make you strong - ” Let us go forward without fear, with brave hearts,
and with enthusiasm, for our God will be with us as in the past in this
land, and will ever bless our faithful labours. With love for men of
other Creeds may we endeavour then to cause our English Church more
than ever to shine forth in the strenuous years to come as a witness for
“the truth as it is in Jesus,” to the glory of His Great Name, and for
the saving of precious souls for whom He died. Milton’s words, recently
quoted by the Archbishop, appeal to us;
“ Argue not
Against Heaven’s hand or will, nor bate a jot
Of heart or hope, but still bear up, and steer
Right onward.”
St. Paul's Rectory,
Sydney,
2nd January, 1905..


