

J WHAT IS CLASSICAL STUDY? I
i
| !
> |
INAUGURAL LECTURE
> - ' , (
> . ’ (
> (
! - .
> ‘ c
) * ;
> . * l
> r . c
; DELIVERED IN THE c-t!EAT HALL OF THE
> >
| l
1 UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
! |
) ' S
| • I
j BY
( " \
WALTER SCOTT, M.A.
{ ' f:
■ Professor of Classics in the University of Sydney
<, . >
Fellow of Merton College, Oxford J
> >
\. ■ V
(*' < '
( )
i'' . - i
l
<
> • ;
l s
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE




WHAT IS CLASSICAL STUDY?
INAUGURAL LECTURE
DELIVERED IN THE GREAT HALL OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
MARCH 23, 1885
WALTER SCOTT, M.A.
Professor of Classics in the University of Sydney
Fellow of Merton College, Oxford
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE
JBB5




WHAT IS CLASSICAL STUDY?
Mr. Chancellor, Ladies, and Gentlemen,
In coming forward to address you from
the chair to which I have had the honour to be
appointed, I cannot but refer to an event still fresh
in all our thoughts, and give expression to the
general sense of the loss which classical study has
sustained in the death of my predecessor. It is
not for me to describe the rare qualities of intellect
and heart, the force and fire of genius, by which
Dr. Badham so deeply impressed all who were
brought into contact with him ; and you, in the
midst of whom he lived and worked, can need no
words of mine to remind you how large a place he
filled in the thoughts and affections of his friends
and pupils. But all of us who have the interests
of classical scholarship at heart have reason to
express our grateful recognition of the service
rendered to the cause by one who, himself among
the most brilliant scholars of his time, knew so
well how to communicate to others his own en-
thusiasm for the studies in which he took delight,


and who laboured so earnestly to throw open to
all aspirants the access to that higher culture, of
which no one more fully realized the inestimable
value. We shall best show honour to his memory
by earnestly endeavouring to carry on the work to
which the energies of his life were devoted, that
of classical stud}^.
I propose this evening to consider briefly what
that study is, and at what it aims. It would be
impossible, within the limits of a single lecture, to
do more than glance at so wide a subject; but it
may be worth while to direct our thoughts to a
few of the many questions suggested by it. In
classical scholarship, more perhaps than in any
other department of knowledge, we are apt to lose
sight of the whole in confining our attention to the
parts. The bearing of this branch of study on
practical life, though quite as real as that of any
other, is not always equally obvious ; and many
a scholar must, at some stage in his career, have
known what it is to be embarrassed by a doubt
how far any definite gain of insight into the living
world around him and within him is to be looked for
in return for hours spent over the forms of a dead
language.
The full value of such studies can be learnt from
experience alone. Those only who have themselves
enjoyed the advantage of a classical education are
in a position to appreciate adequately the benefits
conferred by it; and their anxiety to extend those


benefits to others is the best proof that they feel
themselves to have been gainers. But it is.well
to ascertain, if we can, in what the gain consists.
The times are happily past when all criticism of
the traditional course of instruction could be
silenced by a mere appeal to prescription and
authority ; and the use of the classics as an instru-
ment of education has been disputed by men whose
names may claim at least the respect of a serious
reply. “ What shall we say,” asked Mr. Herbert
Spencer, in a recently published essay/ 5, “of the
wisdom of those who persist in thinking that pre-
paration for successful and complete living (which
is the purpose of rational education) is best effected
by learning to speak and write after the manner
of two extinct peoples, and by gaining knowledge
of their chief men, their deeds of war, &c.; who in
their leading school devote two hours per week to
getting some ideas about the constitution of the
world they are born into, and thirty-six hours per
week to construing Latin and Greek, and making
verses of small sense or none; and who in the
competitive examinations they devise give to
knowledge of words double the number of marks
which they give to knowledge of things \ ”
Now the question here involved is one of far
too much importance to be trifled with. If Mr.
Spencer and those who think with him are right,
then by all means let us leave the dead past to
* Nineteenth Century, July, 1884.


bury its dead, and divert our University endow-
ments to more productive uses. If, on the other
hand, we find reason to conclude that almost every
phrase of the passage I have just read implies a
distinct fallacy, and that the view which it illus-
trates rests wholly on a mistaken notion of what
a classical education is, then we may thank Mr.
Spencer for putting the issue clearly before us,
and go on our way with fresh confidence. But,
in either case, we shall do wisely to face the
question without prejudice, and try honestly to
arrive at the true answer. And in order to do
this, our first step must be to ascertain what clas-
sical study means.
Classical study, as commonly understood and
practised, falls into two divisions, closely connected,
but distinct. It includes, first, the study of the
Latin and Greek languages ; and secondly, the
study of the Latin and Greek literatures. The
distinction is of practical importance, because it is
a fact, which must be recognized, that of those
who begin to learn the ancient languages, a part
only ever make progress enough to utilize their
knowledge of the language to any great extent in
the study of the literature. The chief Greek and
Latin authors have long been translated, more or
less successfully, into English. Now a good trans-
lation, as it has well been said, represents the
original, much as an engraving represents the
picture it is copied from ; though the loss of the


colouring is inevitable, the outlines may be faith-
fully reproduced. And so, while a student who
has learnt to enter into the spirit of the Greek
language gains an insight into the meaning of
Sophocles or Plato, and an appreciation of their
incommunicable force and charm, which no trans-
lation could possibly have given him, those who
are still struggling with the first difficulties of the
grammar might, perhaps, find in English versions
as much of the substance of the literature as is
for the time accessible to them. Hence it has
sometimes been argued, by those who regard
the language solely as a key to unlock the litera-
ture, that all who stop short of that degree of
knowledge which would enable them to read a
book fluently in the original, have missed the only
aim of a classical education, and that where all
alike are taught the elements, the many who fail
are unfairly sacrificed for the sake of the few who
succeed.
But, in reality, it is not so; and even those
whose study of one of the ancient languages stops
at a point very far short of perfect knowledge
have gained, if their work has been sound and
honest as far as it goes, advantages which it would
be difficult to over-estimate. In saying this, I
have no wish to lay undue stress on what may be
called the mental gymnastics argument; that is,
the argument that the faculties of the mind, like
the muscles of the body, need to be braced and


strengthened by hard labour, and that the diffi-
culty of learning Latin and Greek affords the best
opportunity for the necessary exertion. Not that
those who so argue are altogether mistaken. In-
deed, few of us, perhaps, realize as we should
how easily the thinking power is weakened by
mental laziness, or neglect to make the effort
necessary to recall what is half forgotten, or to
clear up a difficulty ; and as a corrective to this
tendency, any study is of value in proportion as it
demands accuracy of thought and close attention.
For this purpose, it would certainly be difficult to
find an exercise better suited than the study of
Latin. But the grammar of ancient languages
is not, after all, the only science that may serve
as a training-ground for the student’s power of
memory and application; and this argument was
so much dwelt on in past times, when certain
venerable formulae, of the type of “As inpraesenti
perfectum format in avi” were sometimes almost
thought to operate with a kind of magic virtue in
brightening the mental faculties, that we can
afford to pass on at once to a further question.
In what, then, consists the value of the know-
ledge acquired by the student who has learnt
the elements of Latin % I answer, that he has
learnt to know something of the nature and
meaning of language itself—of his own language,
quite as much as of that which he is professedly
studying; and if we are told that a student so


occupied is wasting his time on words when he
might be learning about things, we can only reply
that no method has yet been discovered of com-
municating our thoughts about things, or, indeed,
of thinking at all, except in the most rudimentary
way, without the use of words. Language, the
instrument of thought, is far too delicate a tool
to be handled with effect by those who are ignorant
of nature and construction. Neglect of the
study of words, therefore, is necessarily accom-
panied by confusion of thought —that is, by mis-
taken notions about things and persons.
There is truth in the old saying, that “ he who
knows but one tongue knows none.” He may have
plenty of vigorous words at his command of the
sort that are needed for the business of everyday
life; but to the more delicate shades and refine-
ments of expression, the subtler touches and pro-
founder meanings of language as used by the
masters of the art of speech, he is to a great
extent deaf and blind. Even educated men are
hardly aware how often they not only hear or
read, but use themselves, phrases that sound
familiar, but convey no definite meaning to their
minds; and if they are not conscious of any
failure to understand the words, it is only be-
cause they have not paused to ask themselves
what idea or image is represented by them.
Language thus emptied of meaning, which is its
soul, is in the only true sense dead language; and


one of the chief advantages which an Englishman
gains in learning Latin or Greek is that his own
language becomes to him more really living, more
alive with meaning. No one that has taught or
practised translation into an ancient language can
fail to be aware of the close attention to the exact
sense of the English that is cultivated in the
process; and without digressing into the much-
disputed question whether or not learning to write
Latin verses is a waste of time, I may safely say
that one of the chief uses of writing them is to
be found in the insight into the meaning of
English poetry acquired in the attempt, wofully
unsuccessful as it often is, to reproduce that
meaning under a different dress. In translating
from one language into another, we are forced to
detach the thought from the particular form of
words in which it has been embodied; and
by that very fact we gain an understanding
of the relation of words to thought, which no
direct study of our own tongue could give us, and
which those who have once acquired it will carry
with them into any field of thought on which
they may afterwards enter.
And if some language other than our own is
needed as a means to a true knowledge of
English, Latin is on many grounds the most
suitable. Modern languages, such as French and
German, useful as the knowledge of them may be
from other points of view, will not so well serve


this particular purpose, because they are too like
English, and do not put the translator to the
same extent under the necessity of going down
below the words to the thought underlying them.
That which gives the study of Latin its special
value is precisely that which constitutes its
special difficulty—the fundamental difference in
the structure of the sentence, which makes it
impossible to turn a passage of English into
Latin without breaking it up and reconstructing
it in a way that compels attention to the meaning
of the different parts and their relations to each
other. Latin expresses by means of variations of
form in the significant words themselves relations
of thought which are indicated in English partly
by a fixed order in which the words stand, and
partly by the employment of auxiliaries. Each
of these different types of language has advan-
tages of its own, as a means of expressing
thought. English, with its long and cumbrous
periphrases, has a greater range and completeness
of expression. We can say most things in our
language, but it takes us a long time to say them;
and the thought loses half its strength by being
diluted in a flow of unemphatic words. Latin
gains proportionately in definiteness by its sharply-
marked distinctions of case and mood, and in
force and point by the power of varying the order
of the words which its inflections give. But the
special capabilities of either language can be fully


appreciated by those only who know both and
are in a position to contrast them.
Most of the advantages of Latin as a means to
the study of language are shared by other inflec-
tional languages, and in particular by Greek.
But for a student who has no prospect of making
his way far into the ancient literatures, the study
of a second language of the same class may be
thought superfluous; and, at any rate, there can
be no doubt that the time which he can spare
from other occupations is better spent in acquir-
ing a sound knowledge of one language than a
smattering of two. And if a choice is to be
made, there are good reasons for preferring Latin.
Not only is its peculiar regularity and solidity of
structure valuable as the strongest possible con-
trast to the amorphus flexibility of English, but
its vocabulary is the source of a large part of our
own; so that the learner is enabled to trace the
natural history and development of words, in
form and sense, and to observe still living and full
of meaning the metaphors out of the fossilized
remains of which our own speech is to a great
extent built up. Accordingly, this University
has recognized a distinction between Latin and
Greek, by making the one compulsory for all
students, and the other optional. I would only
advise those who decide to give up Greek to make
sure that they get an equivalent in exchange.


So far I have spoken only of the study of the
ancient languages. But this study, highly as we
may rate its educational value, is only a sub-
ordinate branch of classical scholarship; and its
highest use is to give access to the ancient litera-
tures —that is, to enable the student to think
attain the thoughts, and to feel again the emotions,
which once lived in the great minds of the old
world.
The study of ancient literature, involving, as it
does, the whole work of reconstruction of the
thought and action of a past age, includes so
many departments that no one scholar can hope
to cover completely more than a small part of the
held. First among its various branches, as being
the necessary foundation of the rest, may be
placed the examination of the evidence by which
the past is known. In order to reconstruct the
past in thought, we must make our own the con-
tents of the books in which its records are
preserved; and thus a principal part of classical
study must be the work of interpretation —that is,
the translation and explanation, in detail, of the
Greek and Latin writings, involving as a neces-
sary means that study of the language of which
I have already spoken. But with the art of
interpretation is inseparably connected that of
criticism. In attempting to explain the writings
of the ancient authors, we are constantly met
by the question, “ What did they write ? ” The


manuscripts in which their works have come
down to us are full of the blunders of successive
copyists—men either wholly ignorant of the
meaning of what they copied, or, still worse, with
just enough knowledge to have a misplaced con-
fidence in their own powers of judicious correction.
The interpreter of a classical book has need, there-
fore, to ask himself at every step, “ What are the
actual words of the author ? ” The evidence
available for answering the question is partly
external—that of the existing manuscripts—and
partly internal. The mere work of interrogating
the manuscripts, and judging their comparative
authority where their evidence conflicts, is in
some cases, notably in that of the Greek Testa-
ment, one of such complexity that it has attained
to the dignity of a separate art, the art of palaeo-
graphy, as it is called. But when the results of
the manuscript evidence are completely before us,
the work of textual criticism is still only begun.
In many passages the reading thus arrived at
either makes sheer nonsense, or at least involves
some inaccuracy of thought, or awkwardness of
expression, of which the author cannot have been
guilty. Here, then, is the field of conjectural
emendation.
There is no branch of classical study that has
incurred more ridicule than this department of
textual criticism ; and perhaps I may add, none
that has better deserved it. Scholars have some-


times fancied that they possessed a special power
of divination denied to other men, which justified
them in correcting the traditional text of an ancient
writer like a schoolboy’s exercise, and asserting on
no other ground than an incommunicable instinct
of their own, that where the author, as represented
by the manuscripts, says one thing, he not only
should have said, but did say, quite another. And
strange to say, it has often been the most brilliant,
and in other departments the soundest, of scholars
that have been most infected by this cacoethes
emendandi. It would hardly be possible to outdo
in this direction the extravagances of the great
Bentley, who, not content with introducing over
seven hundred alterations in the manuscript text
of Horace, ended by perpetrating what almost looks
like a deliberate reductio ad dbsurdum of his own
method, in a re-written “Paradise Lost.” No
wonder that the Goddess of Dulness in Pope’s
satire smiled approval on a class of commentators
who, by w r ay of putting new life into old writers,
‘ Murder first, and mince them all to bits ;
As erst Medea (cruel, so to save !)
A new edition of old AUson gave.
Let standard authors, thus like trophies borne,
Appear more glorious, as more hacked and torn •
And you, my critics ! in the chequered shade,
Admire new light through holes yourselves have made.”
Work of this kind, no matter how eminent the
names attached to it, is doomed to perish by its


inherent unsoundness. For it rests on two cardinal
errors : first that of assuming that every irregu-
larity or obscurity in the text is a proof of cor-
ruption, a principle which would produce strange
results if applied to the text of Shakespeare or
Browning ; and secondly, that of supposing that
even where a corruption has been detected, it is
always or usually possible to restore the true text
in its place. “ Sophocles ought to have written A
for B,” says the emendator; “ therefore, he did
write it.” Now, even supposing that a modern
scholar is so imbued with the modes of thought
and feelinof of the ancient Greeks as to be able to
substitute for a suspected line one that the greatest
of Athenian poets would have accepted as worthy
of himself, how can he prove that the poet did
write just this and nothing else ? Why may there
not be a second or a third combination of letters
which would equally suit the requirements of the
passage ? And even if the critic is prepared to
maintain that his conjecture is of all possible read-
ings the most perfect in poetic form and matter,
how can he be certain even then that the poet him-
self did not once in a thousand lines fall below a
grammarian’s standard of perfection ?
To the question, “ What did the author write V’
therefore, an imperfect answer is often all that is
obtainable. When the critic can show—first, that
a passage as given by manuscript authority is cer-
tainly corrupt; secondly, that the context requires


a certain meaning; and thirdly, that a particular
phrase by which the author would naturally have
expressed that meaning is one out of which the
growth of the manuscript text in its corrupted form
can be explained letter by letter by showing the
causes of the copyist’s mistakes—then, and then
only, can he lay claim to the achievement of that
rare feat of scholarship, a certain conjectural
emendation. Such emendations there are ; and
if their existence is not more generally recognized,
it is because they have so often been buried in
masses of ill-grounded guesses. But in such
matters examples are worth more than general
rules; and those who wish to know what is meant
by the true art of textual emendation cannot do
better than study the work of Dr. Badham in this
field. At the same time, it must always be borne
in mind that it is only in exceptional instances that
successful conjecture is possible even to genius.
In other cases, where there is real reason to suspect
the traditional text, what is needed in the com-
mentator is simply the courage to confess his
ignorance. It may be well to print, for the use of
beginners, editions in which doubts as to the true
reading are kept out of sight; but for those who
wish to know what is and what is not the work of
the author himself, the best edition is that which
most obtrudes the inevitable uncertainties of the
text on the attention of the reader.
There is a tendency in some quarters to despise,


as solemn trifling, that minute study of the
language and meaning of the Classics of which
textual criticism is the most conspicuous example.
But those who take this tone forget that with these
branches of scholarship classical study as a whole
must stand or fall. Except so far as it has been
ascertained word by word what the ancient authors
wrote, and what they meant by what they wrote,
the profoundest literary criticisms of their works,
and the widest historical generalizations based on
them, are built upon the sand ; and instead of des-
pising the microscopic labours of the scholars by
whom such work has been done, we have every
reason to be grateful to, and proud of, men who had
such faith in the greatness of their vocation as in-
terpreters of the past, and took such a far-sighted
view of its scope and permanent value to humanity,
as to find an adequate outlet for their best energies
in the honest discharge of the obscurest tasks of a
citizen in the community of letters, and to consider
their individual lives well spent in laying truly and
well a stone here and there in the great edifice of
learning. It is but a narrow conception of know-
ledge that looks to comprehend its whole compass
within the limits of a single life ; and it is only by
minute subdivision of labour that its parts can be
brought to that perfection which is the necessary
means to the advancement of the whole. In the
scholars, by whose patient and half-forgotten
labours the ancient world has step by step been


made accessible to modern thought, we may see
realized much of the spirit of Browning’s “ Gram-
marian ”
“ Oh, if we draw a circle premature,
Heedless of far gain,
Greedy for quick returns of profit, sure
Bad is our bargain !
“ That low man seeks a little thing to do,
Sees it, and does it;
This high man, with a great thing to pursue,
Dies ere he knows it.
“ Lofty designs must close in like effects ;
Loftily lying,
Leave him—still loftier than the world suspects,
Living and dying.”
But this at least is clear, that the method of the
scholar is in the strictest and most technical sense
scientific; that is to say, that in the restoration
and interpretation of the ancient texts, just as in
any branch of physical science, certain established
facts are made the ground of inferences arrived at
by a systematic application of common sense ; and
in both spheres alike, results once gained are of
permanent value, and admit of verification at will.
Such work, if well done once, is done for all time ;
and while nothing can in either branch of know-
ledge be more instructive or more interesting than
to follow in the footsteps of a discoverer, and
repeat for ourselves the process by which some


truth was first established, it is no more essential
for every classical student to work out from the
beginning the text of his author or the rules of his
grammar, than for every surveyor to calculate for
himself his table of logarithms. Just as a modern
schoolboy may learn in half an hour physical
truths of which Newton was ignorant, so he may
buy for a few pence a more correct text of an
ancient author than was accessible to Scaliger or
Casaubon, and, in many cases, form a truer notion
of its meaning. And, though no one can claim to
be a finished scholar who does not, at least, know
something of the methods by which such results
have been arrived at, less advanced students will
do well to accept the classical texts as established
facts, and proceed at once to utilize their know-
ledge of the language in learning the lessons to be
drawn from their contents.
The ancient literatures may be regarded from
two different points of view ; and at successive
periods in the history of modern scholarship each
has prevailed in turn. One class of scholars are
chiefly interested in the permanent element of
ancient literature —that is to say, they find in it
the most perfect expression of thoughts and
feelings that are as true and real for us to-day as
for the men who uttered them two thousand years
ago, because based on the unchanging principles


of our common human nature. Such a student
prizes his Homer or Horace just as he prizes
Shakespeare or Wordsworth —as a treasury of
beautiful imaginations clothed in harmonious
words, or as a revelation of the secret heart of
man. To the ancients, much that has entered
into the mind of the modern world was necessarily
hidden; but what they did see they saw with a
vividness, and told with a transparent directness,
that no later age can rival; and without ignoring
the different literary excellences of the moderns,
the classical scholar goes back to his old authors
with an ever fresh sense of their living truth and
unapproachable perfection. If I do not dwell
longer on this aspect of the subject, it is because
no mere description can convey any notion of the
world of high thoughts and beautiful forms that
lies open to those who have learnt to know and
love the Classics.
But it is possible to adopt another attitude
towards the ancient literature the attitude of the
historian, in the widest sense of the word; that
is, we may treat the works of the ancient authors
as conscious, or more often unconscious, records
of their time, and learn from them how men of
former ages lived, and worked, and thought, and
joyed and sorrowed; how states rose and fell, and
how our complex society grew up out of its first
rudiments.
It can hardly be necessary, I think, to prove


the value of historical knowledge. If, as has been
said, “to know things truly is to know them
through their causes,” then the present can be
known in its true meaning only to those who
know it through its causes in the past, and who
can trace back to their sources our modes of speech,
and thought, and action, and the institutions which
regulate our lives. Those who have not learnt
something of this lesson are lost in a world which
they cannot understand as it is, because they
cannot explain how it has come to be, or even see,
perhaps, that there is anything to be explained.
And of all people in the world, we English in
Australia can least afford to disregard the past.
A country dating her very existence as a separate
community within the century, and even now only
beginning to realize the splendid possibilities before
her, a country in which all faces are turned towards
the future, and all brains and hands are engaged
in the momentous task of laying down the lines for
a career of indefinite development, Australia has
reason, if ever a country had, to look for guidance
to the accumulated experience of past generations,
and to maintain every link that helps to preserve
the continuity of human progress.
But admitting the importance of some know-
ledge of the past, why, it may be asked, should
we choose ancient history rather than that of the
modern world, with which the present is more
immediately connected ?


It must be remembered, to begin with, that the
distinction between ancient and modern history,
as Professor Freeman has been so careful to teach
us, is a purely artificial one; what we call ancient
history is merely modern history of an earlier date.
No impassable gulf separates us from the ancient
Greeks and Pomans; almost every detail of our
daily life, and almost every thought that passes
through our minds is connected by chains of cause
and effect with deeds that were done and thoughts
that were conceived by the people of some ancient
Mediterranean town. It is true that that would
indeed be a one-sided conception of history, which
ignored the modern world; and a University
which makes no provision for study in this de-
partment is confessedly imperfect in its organiza-
tion. But there are sufficient reasons for holding
that for a first introduction to the study of the
past, and as a means of learning the historical
method, the earlier civilization affords the most
suitable field.
In the first place, the task is easier than that of
reconstructing a more recent period, because the
materials are less unmanageable. It is impossible
for us to form any clear notion of the history of our
own generation, because we are too much in the
midst of it. We must look at events from a distance
to see them in their true perspective. A soldier in
action has usually little notion how the battle
goes. He sees nothing but the enemy who faces


him, and all the rest is to him unmeaning noise
and smoke. It is only when the battle is over
that it is possible to write its history —that is, from
many imperfect and partial descriptions, to drop
accidental details, and group in their true relations
the main events which have contributed to the
ultimate result. Now, in the case of Greek and
Roman antiquity, the process of sifting the
materials, which is the first step towards acquiring
a true knowledge of a period of history, has been
done for us by time—and, indeed, done only too
completely. But though much that would have
been most precious has been lost, what has sur-
vived is for the most part of the best; so that in
the study of antiquity our material is not, as in a
recent period, a vast mass of average thought and
action, but only the wisest thoughts and the most
prominent actions, as reflected in the great minds
of the time. To use our former illustration, we
form our idea of the battle in this case from the
descriptions of a few of the most able officers and
trained observers, instead of having to gather it
from the confused babble of a mob of common
soldiers.
And not only are the materials to be used in
the historical reconstruction of classical antiquity
more limited in extent, but the phenomena to be
observed are in themselves more simple and intel-
ligible. In ancient Greece and Rome we find
communities of men at a relatively early and,


therefore, easily comprehensible stage of develop-
ment—political, intellectual, and moral—and at
the same time with the power and habit of leaving
in their literature a lasting record of their condi-
tion ; and the combination is unique. Those
whose interest lies in the study of man in his
social relations can nowhere find political issues so
sharply defined as in the little self-centered city-
states of the Greeks ; while nowhere but in the
history of the Homans can be observed under
equally favourable conditions the evolution of the
social organism from town to nation, and from nation
to world-empire. And so, too, if we turn our atten-
tion to the inner life of the human spirit, as
revealed in poetry and philosophy, it is to Greek
literature that we must look for the clearest pre-
sentation of the progress of thought in its successive
stages, from the first ingenuous reflections on the
world around, to the profoundest of speculations
on the ultimate problems of existence.
There is a further reason for preferring classical
antiquity as the first field for historical study, in
the possibility of treating it impartially. The
more nearly we approach the present in our study
of the past, the more our view is liable to be
coloured and distorted by the accidents of our own
position, and the harder it becomes to detach
ourselves from the special interest of our own
particular class or sect or party, and look at things
from the centre. It is difficult, for instance, for


Liberals and Conservatives to meet on common
ground in discussing the course of European
events during the last hundred years ; still more
for a Roman Catholic and a Protestant to agree
as to the significance of mediaeval history. By
going back to an age before our modern party
divisions were formed, we gain the same sort of
advantage as is gained for the criticism of life by
studying it in the fictitious characters and situa-
tions of poetry, instead of in the persons of our-
selves and our friends; we are free to forget our
prejudices, and examine objects as they are. It
is true that at every stage of history alike we find
the same human nature confronted with the task
of solving, in theory or in practice, what are at
bottom the same problems; and, indeed, it is only
because this is the case that the study of the past
is either possible or profitable. But in the ancient
world these problems presented themselves in
different forms and under different names from
those with which we are familiar in our own lives,
and it is therefore easier in dealing with them to
make the truth our sole concern.
And in the possibility which it affords of escap-
ing from our immediate surroundings, and looking
at the world through other eyes than our own, is
to be found, perhaps, one of the greatest of all
uses of the study of the past. It is not that the
opinion of a Greek or Roman, even on matters
which came within their ken, is more likely to be


true than that which the student holds as his own;
but the knowledge that men have thought and
acted on principles widely different from those we
fancy natural and necessary, and the habitual
effort to put ourselves in their mental attitude,
and to see things for the moment as they saw
them, is of inestimable value in opening our minds
and widening our sympathies. It is here, if any-
where, that the superiority of the educated over
the uneducated man should show itself. The one,
confined to his own little narrow world of habit
and unreasoning tradition, regards all who differ
from him with hatred and contempt. For others
to think or act unlike himself is to him a proof of
mere ignorance or perversity, because he cannot
conceive any other mental position than his own.
The other has learnt that though truth is ulti-
mately one, one truth has many sides and many
aspects; that no opinion firmly and honestly
held can fail to include, however intermixed with
error, some saving particle of the truth; and
that no man has a right to criticise the actions
or beliefs of others till he can put himself men-
tally in their place and appreciate the grounds
of their position. And as these convictions grow
in him, the false confidence of presumptuous
ignorance gives place to a humbling sense of the
littleness of his present knowledge, and an ever-
increasing readiness to welcome fresh light, from
whatever quarter it may come. Differences of


opinion there must always be; but those who
have learnt these lessons (and they cannot be
better learnt than through the medium of classical
literature) may hope at leafet to raise controversy
to a higher level, and change it from mere angry
wrangling, productive of nothing but mutual bit-
terness, to a fruitful search after some more
comprehensive truth. Nor need we fear that the
disturbance of traditional beliefs, involved in the
attempt to understand other views than our own,
will only result in endless doubt, or in the final
victory of error. When truth and falsehood are
once fairly Confronted, truth, by its very nature,
must prevail; and those who believe themselves
to be already in possession of the truth should be
the last to shrink from the test. That faith must
indeed be ill grounded which can only be main-
tained by shutting our eyes and ears to all that
lies outside it. If we are right in our beliefs,
then we may be sure that full and free inquiry
will result in their further confirmation. It is
only those who fear to be driven from a position
which they already feel in their hearts to be
untenable that have any cause to love darkness
rather than light. And for dispelling that dark-
ness which is the favourite haunt of narrow pre-
judice, no means can be more effective than the
study of civilizations and modes of thought so
widely different from our own as those of classical
antiquity.


The hostility to classical education shown in
some quarters may be accounted for as the natural
reaction against the mistaken notion, once pre-
valent, but now happily almost extinct, that the
classics are the only thing worth teaching or
learning. Of the two great departments of
knowledge —realism and humanism, as they have
been called, or knowledge of the world of natural
law, and knowledge of man—classical study con-
tributes to the latter alone, and that merely in
common with the study of other literatures and
other periods of history ; and the error of mistaking
the part for the whole seems at first sight so strange
that it is worth while to recall its historical origin.
If we trace hack the word “ classics ” to its first
meaning, we find ourselves among the political
institutions of early Rome. Under the organi-
zation ascribed to King Servius, the Roman
citizens were for voting purposes distributed into
a series of classes, according to the yield of their
landed property. The first class thus consisted
of substantial men with a considerable stake in the
country, while the lowest division formed the pro-
letariate, or floating landless population. The
adjective classicus, or belonging to a class, was
restricted in usage to members of the first class
only ; and the Romans of a later age, whose
interests were literary rather than political, trans-
ferred the word by a metaphor to authors of assured
position and established reputation, and spoke of


Homer or Sophocles, Virgil or Horace, as a clas-
sicus scriptor , in opposition to the vulgar herd of
insignificant and ephemeral writers. The word
was thus used in nearly the same sense in which
we use it when we speak'of Shakespeare and
Milton as English classics, or distinguish classical
from popular music. So understood, the study of
the classics would mean the study of the master-
pieces of literature ; and if the term applied to
Greek and Latin literature only, this was due to
the accident that to the student of the Roman
Empire no other literatures were accessible.
During the dark ages which ensued on the fall
of Imperial Rome intellectual interests, except so
far as they were diverted to the study of theology,
remained dormant. In Western Europe Greek
was totally forgotten, and Latin was employed
mainly as the language of the Church, and not as
a means of access to Pagan literature. When
therefore the European world, by slow degrees,
awoke to the priceless value of the literary treasures
that had survived the wreck of the Roman civili-
zation and lay buried in half-forgotten manuscripts,
centuries elapsed before men could overtake their
intellectual arrears and enter fully into the heritage
of earlier thought. To the student of those times,
then, the secret of knowledge lay, not in the future,
but in the past. He held in bis hands the records
of a more enlightened age ; and his work was to
search those records and appropriate their contents.


In the study of the great writers of Greece and
Borne, the only then existing classics , lay for
him the access to an apparently inexhaustible
storehouse of accumulated wisdom. But a time
came when the main results of ancient thought
had been assimilated; and when once the impulse
to intellectual life and growth was given by the
revival of ancient learning, that very impulse
tended of itself to carry the searcher after truth
beyond the position reached by the ancients. And
so the moderns, who had been content so long to
sit at the feet of the great men of a past age, took
courage at last to use their own eyes, and look, as
the ancients themselves had looked, directly at
the living world around them ; and they turned
away from searching Aristotle and Yirgil to inter-
rogate nature and man.
The great and many-sided movement from
passive acquiescence in ancient authority to the
freedom of modern thought was, however, no
sudden revolution. For a long time the newer
thought could hardly find expression except under
the old forms. Latin remained the language of
the learned world, so that access even to the
modern additions to the stock of knowledge lay
through an ancient tongue. But this state of
things was in its nature transitory; it came to be
realized more and more that the proper vehicle for
modern thought was modern language. And thus
by degrees, as fresh regions of knowledge opened


out which had not come within the ancient view,
and as one great original writer after another at
once proved and increased the independent re-
sources of the modern tongues, Latin and Greek
lost their old supremacy as the only paths to
knowledge; so that though we still reserve to the
Greek and Homan authors the name of classics ,
which has come down from a time when no other
literatures existed, the study of the classics in this
sense has finally taken its place in the modern world
as one among other forms of intellectual activity.
No one has better reason than the classical
scholar himself to view the change with satis-
faction. The different provinces of knowledge
are not to be regarded as so many jealous or
hostile countries, among which any gain on the
part of one must be another’s loss. They should
rather be compared to friendly states, enjoying
all the benefits of an unrestricted commerce.
When one district adds to its resources, all are
the richer. It is not merely that as men we are
all gainers by every accession to the world’s stock
of knowledge ; but more than this, each special
study has something to learn from the rest. It
would take more time than I can spare to enume-
rate the gains which classical scholarship 'has
derived from the modern development of natural
science. It is from this source mainly that
modern scholars have acquired a truer conception
of the scientific method. They have thus learnt,


for instance, to realize with new force that know-
ledge of the past, like other knowledge, can only
rest on properly authenticated evidence, and that
no names, however venerable, are sufficient war-
rant for accepting statements which their authors
had no means of verifying. Hence, much of the
early history of the Greeks and Homans, which a
more uncritical age received without question on
the faith of such writers as Livy and Plutarch, is
now seen in its true light, as a collection of myths
and traditions, not without an interest of its own,
but valueless as direct historical evidence ; while,
on the other hand, such historians as Niebuhr and
Mommsen have taught us to reconstruct the
earlier condition of an ancient state out of the
materials given in its known later stages, by
processes as strictly scientific as those by which
the geologist traces back to their origins in the
past the formations of the earth’s present surface;
and, if those who first applied these methods to
ancient history were sometimes tempted to forget
the distinction between ascertained truths and un-
verified hypotheses, the error is one that is unfor-
tunately not unknown in the records of other
sciences.
Again, philology, or the science of word-forma-
tion, which once only too well deserved to be
described as a system of derivations in which
consonants counted for little, and vowels for
nothing, has by the strict application of the com-


parative method been placed on as firm a basis as
the science of physiology; and while many im-
provements and corrections in detail doubtless still
remain to be made, the main principles of the
growth of language are now as firmly established
as those of the evolution of plant and animal life.
And thus, within living memory, a fresh science
has sprung up, the results of which have not only
explained much that was hitherto obscure in
language, but have served to throw a wholly new
and unexpected light on the early history of the
human race.
But if the scholar has reason to welcome the
advance of physical science, surely the man of
science in his turn will do wisely to give his sup-
port to scholarship. For if the purpose of educa-
tion, as we are rightly told, is to give the learner
“ some ideas about the constitution of the world he
is born into,” it must not be forgotten that that
world is not merely a world of physical forces and
chemical reactions, but also a world of living men ;
and asa“ preparation for successful and complete
living,” it can hardly be superfluous to learn some-
thing of the one art we all must practise—the art
of speech ; and something of that part of nature
which lies nearest to us —human nature, as it
exists in ourselves and in our fellow-men ; and
that, not merely human nature in its vague and
general outlines, where man is treated in the
species, and the science of body may hope to keep


pace with the science of mind; but human nature
in all the complex phases of character and intellect,
of aspiration and achievement, which infinitely
transcend all possible analysis of brain and nerve,
and in which man differs from man as far as heaven
from hell; human nature, that is, as known not
through science, but through literature.
It is time that the old dispute between the two
great provinces of knowledge should cease. Scholar
and man of science, both alike, are right in insist-
ing on the importance of their own studies ; and
each alike is wrong in claiming the wdiole field.
In a University, if it is to be worthy of the name
as a seat of the higher education, the study of
literature and natural science, of the spirit of man
revealed in thought and action, and the laws of
the material world, should both find a place, and
work on harmoniously side by side. Each is the
necessary complement of the other, and each can
only lose when its advocates stop their ears to
what the other has to teach. It is by giving full
and free development to both, and enabling the
student, when he has once acquired a general
knowledge of the methods and results of other
studies than his own, to devote himself with his
whole heart to that special branch towards which
his natural aptitudes and inclinations direct him,
that we shall best discharge our function as a
University. So doing, we shall send out from
among us year by year a succession of men pre-


pared to realize in active life truths learnt in
theory in our lecture-rooms ; while now and again
we may look to see rising among us here, as in
other educational centres, a thinker by vocation
—one whose life’s work is to discover and reveal
some fresh aspect of truth, who can advance the
frontiers of knowledge, or comprehend as a whole,
and therefore in the end direct, that common
progress of the race to which the individual
activities of each and all unconsciously contribute.
Fully to realize these hopes, and to make our
University education all that it might be as a
centre of light to the students and the colony at
large, must be a work of time as well as difficulty.
But the end is one worth striving for ; and surely
it is a thought that may well stimulate us all to
our most earnest efforts, when we reflect that each
one of us, teacher and learner alike, so far as he
gives himself heartily and conscientiously to the
work before him, is helping, in his place and
degree, to shape the destinies of this newer and
wider England, and to determine whether the
great outburst of energy, with which our age is
entering into long-deferred possession of the riches
of the earth, shall issue only in some gross and
unnatural union of material wealth with intel-
lectual barbarism, or in a harmonious development
of physical wellbeing and mental culture, through
which human society may be raised to levels yet
unknown.




