

THE CHRISTIAN WORLD PULPIT.
January 16, 1895,
dear mother herself understood not the
signs Ho spoke, understood not why He
left her, only learnt that it could not
but be; only learntthatHe had reasons
for all He did, that He thought it more
important for Him to stir up these
Temple schools than for her to be saved
anxiety, that He had business to do for
His Father in that inner shrine which
over-ruled all her plaims for peace and
quietness ; not out of forgetfulness for
her, but solely out of necessity for His
mission had He moved on that
Epiphany.
So let devout souls trust Him
now as she trusted Him then, who,
though she could not understand
what He spoke, yet went down
to Nazareth and kept all the
sayings in her heart. Beloved, Christ,
our eternal King, is the same for ever; yet
always He must go forward to further
victories and to further work. We
cannot tell when, or how, or whither,
but we can wait upon His movements
and can look out for the signs of His
coming, and we can be loyal when He
comes, and cry after Him: “ Good luck
have Thou with Thine honour. Gird
Thou with Thy sword upon Thy thigh,
O Thou most mighty, because of Thy
worship and renown. Eide on! Eide
on, because of the word of righteous-
ness and meekness and truth.”
WHAT THE GOSPEL HAS DONE
FOR POLYNESIA AND NEW GUINEA.
A LECTURE
BY REY. S. McFARLANE, LL.D., F.R.G.S.
PIONEER MISSIONARY TO NEW GUINEA.
Fortunately, or unfortunately, I am
one of those men who have enjoyed the
supposed happiness of gazing upon new
lands, ascending mountains, crossing
deserted plains, sailing along silent
rivers into the unknown, where no
white man had been before me, meeting
with new races, new languages, new
and sometimes nasty customs; often in
scenes of excitement, sometimes trying
to prevent the attacks of natives, at
others prudently running away; watch-
ing savages, warriors, and cannibals
come under the civilising and elevating
influences of Christianity; reducing
languages to writing and translating
Scriptures; establishing schools and
churches and training a native ministry.
You will therefore understand my diffi-
culty when asked to give an address of
thirty or forty minutes upon “ What
the Gospel has Done for Polynesia and
New Guinea." I feel that the subject
requires powers of selection and con-
densation far beyond any I possess.
However, I will endeavour to deal with
the subject as fully and briefly as I can.
In order to understand what the
Gospel has done for these natives we
must consider how it found them. A
hundred years ago the Prince of Dark-
ness reigned supreme throughout all
those widely extended regions of our
globe. Idols were as numerous as
inhabitants, and temples as the vil-
lages which lined the shores, or were
scattered over the hills and mountains.
Idolatry abounded everywhere. Oppres-
sion, cruelty, and cannibalism were
common. Voyagers who knew little of
the people, but were charmed with the
scenery, were wont to describe the
islands as gems that sparkled in the
peaceful waters of the vase Pacific—
quite a Paradise ! But the nearer the
view, the darker the moral aspect
became. We, who have lived nearly
thirty years amongst them, know some-
thing of their real and terrible condition
without the Gospel, and we are also
witnesses to the marvellous transforma-
tion produced by the Gospel. Intellec-
tually, morally, socially, and spiritually
these tribes were lost. They had been
on the down-grade for ages. We are all
either on the up or down grade, getting
nearer to God or farther from Him.
The natural run of society under sin
must be downward, from bad to worse,
unless interrupted by some remedial
agency from without. The native races
of whom I am speaking had wandered
a long way from God, and were lost, for
they had no idea of the way back to
Him. Their language, legends, and
cult prove that they have wandered, and
indicate the road along which they have
travelled. There is no time to go into
these questions now, but I may just
observe that if—as our best philologists
tell us—all languages in their develop-
ment proceed from the simple to the
complex, from monosyllables to poly-
syllables, from the agglutinative to the
inflectional; then the languages of Poly-
nesia, through their various dialects, are
amongst the oldest living on the face of
the earth.
Whence Came the Papuans ?
It does not follow that because a
tribe or nation has no written language
their speech is merely a kind of
gibberish, having neither correct sense,
sound, nor grammar. I have lived
amongst Papuans for nearly thirty years,
and reduced several of their languages
to writing, and can testify that in some
respects they are even superior to our
own. Some of them have inclusive
and exclusive pronouns, dual and triad
numbers, as many as seven words for
the pronoun you , all of different grades,
also a court and common language;
and the words are all as precise
in their meanings as if they had been
defined by Johnson ; the grammar is as
regular and uniform as if it had been
formed by Bindley Murray, whilst the
pronunciation is as exact as if it had
been settled and phonographed by
Walker, thus clearly pointing back to a
higher state of civilisation from which
they had fallen.
How come the natives in Polynesia
and New Guinea—savages, idolaters,
and cannibals—to have such a language
if they have not brought it down with
them ? If all our civilisation is to be
traced to a slow but gradual develop-
ment from a state of primitive barbar-
ism and savage existence, how are we
to account for the condition of these
people ? Here we have two large sec-
tions of prehistoric men, who are still
in the age of stone and lake-dwellings.
Where is the evidence that they are
advancing in civilisation, intelligence,
morality, or happiness? The fact is
that there is abundant evidence that
both races are retrograding, and none
whatever that they are advancing,
except under influences from without.
I have found some of the bush tribes in
the vicinity of the Fly Eiver practising
cremation. If it is true that “ the
custom of burning the dead was well
nigh universal in remote ages in the
countries of the old world,” then it is
probable that the Papuans have brought
the custom (as well as others) with
them—that of circumcision, for instance.
The stone gods and charms amongst the
natives of Polynesia and New Guinea —
some standing erect from one to eight
feet in height, others portable and
carried about by the natives —also
point to very ancient forms of worship.
Now consider that the f/rst empires
that arose in the world were formed by
descendants of Ham, and that Nimrod,
the grandson of Ham, went into Assyria
and founded Nineveh, and the city
which hebuilt, and the empire, continued
for ages to overshadow all Western
Asia. Mizraim, the son of Ham,
founded the Egyptian monarchy and
the Philistine Commonwealth. Canaan,
the fourth son, settled in Palestine, and
his descendants founded, first the Ca-
naanitish kingdoms, then Tyre, and
subsequently Carthage.
These were for a long time the leading
nations of the world; they possessed
its highest civilisation, and held all but
a monopoly of its commerce. These
young monarchies, no doubt, sent forth
strong and vigorous colonies, which took
possession of the Asiatic Archipelago,
Australia, New Guinea, and Western
Polynesia. Thus we may reasonably
connect the decaying Polynesian and
New Guinea tribes with the oldest
civilisation of the world.
No Progress without Regeneration.
It is no use talking, as some people
do, about leaving the heathen to the
“ natural progress of the race/’ and sup-
posing that all the advanced races of man-
kind began at the level of the savage state,
and have reached their present state of
culture, civilisation, wealth, and liberty
by laws of development in mere nature.
That there is such a thing as develop.
43


ment, we all admit. All the human
faculties are capable of development by
exercise or training, and every human
being will of necessity be developed to
a certain degree, both in mind and body,
by the growth of years and the neces-
sary struggles of life. But that human
society was ever carried forward a sin-
gle step in the matter of morality
under mere laws of natural develop-
ment we utterly deny. The Greek
civilisation displayed a high state of
culture, but their literature from
Hesiod downwards is sprinkled with
traces of sentiment derived from the
Jewish and Egyptian religions. The
Roman civilisation was but a propa-
gation of the Greek ; and the Teutonic
race, often named as an example of
natural development, is known to
have been set forward by the
civilisations it conquered and its
early conversion to Christianity.
What does it mean that so many
races, empires, and languages of the
world have become extinct ? Whatever
may be said of a law of natural progress,
there can be no doubt that a law of
natural deterioration is at work, and
has been going on for ages amongst the
people under consideration. It signifies
nothing to ask for such races more
time ; time has nothing for them better
than extermination. It requires a
Gospel and a faith above nature to lay
hold of them and raise them. It is
possible for the living and advanced
races to go downward, but never for
these dead ones to rise, unassisted. We
have proofs enough that peoples ad-
vanced in culture may become savages,
but no example of a race of savages that
have risen to a civilised state by mere
development. How many great and
powerful races have become extinct!
We look for the Ninevites with as little
hope as for Ninus himself. The Assy-
rians, Babylonians, and Medes are all
vanished. The Egyptians, Phoenicians,
Etruscans, Romans, once the great
powers of history and civilisation, are
extinct. We may rest assured that
there can be no hope of a restoration of
society, or of a religious uprising of men,
except by a supernatural and Divine
operation. Progress, under sin, by laws
of development is a fiction. There is
no hope of progress apart from the
regenerative and quickening power of a
grace that transcends mere natural con-
ditions, and we must thoroughly realise
this before we can be hearty workers in
the greatest of all reforms—that imposed
upon us by our Divine Master —the
evangelisation of the world.
Although these Polynesian races had
sunk so low, and were still sinking when
Christianity reached them, we mission-
aries found a good basis on which to
build. They had lost the true ideas
of God as revealed to men; but they
had not lost the idea of a god, a supreme
being. The Bible informs us that God
made man after His own image. It is
equally true that man makes his god
after his own image. These people had
become cruel, so their god was cruel.
That “ God is Love ” was a perfect
revelation to them. They had lost the
Scriptural idea of a future state, but
had an idea of a future state. Nor
had they lost the idea of rewards
and punishments after death. So
that we found a doctrine of Theism,
a doctrine of a future state, and a
doctrine of rewards and punishments ;
and instead of beginning by denouncing
their heathen practices, we began by
correcting their ideas on these subjects
of common belief. As Christianity
became known, appreciated, and felt,
their heathen practices were abandoned.
Our first duty in landing amongst
these strange and savage tribes, who
have no written language, is to acquire
their language and gain their confi-
dence, neither of which is so difficult to
accomplish as many people suppose.
For instance, when they come off to
our boat, or we land on the beach, we
are on the look-out for the key sentence
to their language. Everything about us
is new to them—our clothes, umbrella,
watch, handbag, boat, sails, oars, &c.
They are naturally very much surprised,
and very inquisitive, and we watch for a
sentence which we expect to hear over
and over again as they handle or point
to different things, and we write it
down phonetically, assuming that it
means, “ What is this? ”
Learning an Unwritten Language.
In reducing these languages to writing,
we never use the English sounds to the
vowels. A vowel with us is a pure simple
sound, and if we want the two sounds
of the English vowel i, we use a and
i, or of the English vowel u, we use i
and u, giving the continental sounds to
the vowels. Thus, when I first came
in contact with the people of New
Guinea, and heard “ Nalu peik ” re-
peatedly, accompanied by an inquir-
ing look, I wrote it down, and then
tried to find out if it was the sentence
I wanted by taking a cocoanut and say-
ing to one of the natives, “ Nalu peik ? ”
The man looked astounded, then
delighted at the discovery that I knew
his language. He then poured out a
torrent of words, supposing that I knew
all he said ! However, my only reply
was, Nalu peik ? He soon caught the
idea that I wanted the names of things,
and seemed most anxious to give me a
long list. I had got the key sentence,
and the rest was easy. To find out the
grammar, however, is more difficult,
and often takes many years.
A Blessed Bevolution.
Some people consider that these
tribes cannot be civilised and saved.
Others say that they are not worth the
trouble and expense. My own experi-
ence emphatically contradicts both
these statements. I am convinced that
there is no race so low that Christian-
ity cannot raise, civilise, and save them;
and no language into which the Scriptures
cannot be translated. My own experi-
ence and testimony resemble that of
other missionaries in Polynesia and
New Guinea, which all go to show that
one of the most striking proofs of the
truth of Christianity, and of its trans-
forming power, is the wonderful adapta-
tion of the Gospel to the great spiritual
wants of humanity.
Thirty-six years ago I went to the
Island of Lifu, near New Caledonia,
and with my wife settled amongst the
savages. The work was not so difficult
or dangerous as in New Guinea, native
evangelists having gone before and
somewhat prepared the way. Some of
the people, however, were still practising
cannibalism. Tribal wars, heathen
feasts, and the night dance were con-
tinued long after my arrival. And yet
when we left Lifu, in 1871, to commence
the New Guinea mission, the natives
had all embraced Christianity. Churches
were built throughout the island, to
which day-schools were attached. The
language was reduced to writing, and
the entire New Testament and Psalms,
with hymn-book, school-book, and
catechism, translated into it. A seminary
for the training of teachers for schools,
pastors for the churches, and pioneer
evangelists for the heathen beyond, was
in full working order. European stores
had been established in different parts
of the island. Education and trade
were growing side by side. The native
churches were liberally supplying men
and money for the extension of the
Gospel to the heathen, and it was eight
of these converts that we selected from
numerous volunteers, to be pioneers of
Christianity and civilisation in New
Guinea.
The same revolution which has thus
changed 300 islands in Polynesia is now
going on in New Guinea with the most
encouraging results. The civilising and
elevating power of Christianity amongst
these tribes is most remarkable. The
contrast between a village of savage
cannibal warriors in heathen times, and
the same village fifteen or twenty years
after they have embraced the Gospel, is
almost incredible. Before I left New
Guinea, the Governor accompanied me
on a visit to some of our mission
stations. We first of all visited some
of the wild tribes up the Fly River, then
places where we had had a mission for a
few years, and finally spent the Sunday
at the village where we commenced the
New Guinea Mission.
When I first landed amongst these
people they were at constant war with
the surrounding tribes. The village was
guarded night and day. The houses
were decorated with human skulls—the
trophies of war. Before a young man
could get a wife he had to show, by
44
January 16, 1895.
THE CHRISTIAN WORLD PULPIT.


the skulls of his enemies hanging before
the door, that he had proved himself a
warrior. They had murdered the crews
of several vessels which had been
wrecked in Torres Straits, and were a
terror to captains who had to take their
vessels through those dangerous waters.
Their work was war, and their recrea-
tion the war-dance. The Governor
now found them neatly clothed, attend-
ing church and school, and developing
the resources of their country. He
expressed himself as amazed at the
change in so short a time ; and yet for
eight years the people of that village
declared that they would not embrace
our religion of peace. Three times they
drove the Lifu evangelist from the place,
and twice tried to poison him. Over
and over again I re-established the
mission ; and now they are themselves
contributing both men and money to
send the Gospel to their heathen
brethren.
Their condition is the best answer to
those who doubt their ability to rise;
and their devotion and self-sacrifice the
best answer to those who doubt the
sincerity of their professions. They
not only give their best young men as
pioneer evangelists, but work hard to
get money to contribute annually for the
spread of the Gospel. I feel sure that
if the churches could be made to realise
the present salvation which Christianity
brings to these people, saving them from
the hell of heathenism with its cruelty
and cannibalism, and lifting them into a
very heaven of peace, happiness, and
progress, they would cease to speculate
so much about the future, feeling that
there is enough in their present salva-
tion to fire our enthusiasm.
The Polity of Nonconformist Missions.
Now, briefly, how has all this been
done ? or what is the character and
ecclesiastical polity of Nonconformist
missions? I say Nonconformist mis-
sions, because to them has fallen the
high honour of beginning, and almost
exclusively carrying on, the work in
Polynesia and New Guinea. Bigotry,
prejudice, and sectarianism may com-
bine to overturn what Nonconformists
have accomplished; or Christian zeal may
prompt missionaries of other denom-
inations to perform what Nonconfor-
mists have left undone, but the future
and impartial historian will ever award
to them the honour of having been the
apostles of Christianity in Polynesia and
British New Guinea. In both these
great and successful mission-fields, the
London Missionary Society began the
work. Wesleyans, Presbyterians, Epis-
copalians, and Americans have since
entered the Polynesian mission.field
and done splendid service amongst those
islands that are fast becoming to
Australia what the West Indies are to
England,
The prominent features of these mis-
sions have been, and are still: Preach-
ing, Bible translation, establishment of
schools and printing presses, organi-
sation of churches, and the general wel-
fare of the people, including their civil,
social, and physical condition.
The plain preaching of the Gospel
and Scriptural exposition of Bible truths
claim the first place in the programme
of a Nonconformist missionary. In
order that this work may be successfully
accomplished, the great Nonconformist
Missionary Societies send out well
qualified men who are able to acquire
languages and, if necessary, reduce
them to writing, prepare school books,
and translate the Scriptures from the
languages in which they were written,
and, above all, train a native agency to
carry on and extend the work.
Side by side with the preaching of the
Gospel goes the social improvement of
the natives. Better roads are made,
better houses built, which are soon
furnished with the useful appliances of
civilised life. There are men in both
the missions where I have laboured
who were once cannibals and degraded
heathens, but who, when I left, were
living in neatly and strongly built stone
houses, furnished with tables, chairs,
sofas, beds, cooking utensils, crockery
ware, and even electro-plated spoons
and forks. The missionary’s wife plays
a very important part in the formation
of Christian homes. Let no man
presume to assert that unmarried
missionaries, male or female, could
possibly have accomplished for good
what may now be witnessed in Poly-
nesia. Christian principles have been
exemplified in family life before the
heathen with the happiest results.
There are now multitudes of homes in
Polynesia which are centres of refine-
ment, culture, happiness, and intelli-
gence, presided over by women, officia-
ting in those offices recognised as her
sphere of duty. In these abodes it is
no mockery to sing “ Home, Sweet
Home.” I do not hesitate to affirm that
Nonconformist missionaries in Polynesia
and New Guinea have displayed wisdom
and foresight, common-sense and sound
piety, in the organisation and manage-
ment of churches and the general work
of the mission.
If we take the Acts of the Apostles,
and the Epistles of Paul, Peter, James,
and John, or the New Testament as a
whole, for our guide, we shall find that
the churches organised by Nonconform-
ist missionaries in Polynesia will com-
pare favourably with the Primitive
churches gathered by the Apostles in
various parts of the Roman Empire
during the first century of the Christian
era. In many respects there is a most
striking resemblance between the
churches organised by the Apostles, and
those which now exist in various parts
of Polynesia. The more closely exami-
nation is made and comparison drawn,
the more manifest the parallel will
appear. The very language employed
by some ecclesiastical historians respect-
ing the churches of the first century
would aptly describe the organisation
of Nonconformist mission churches in
Polynesia. All those great ecclesiastical
establishments, and Church and State
arrangements, centering at Antioch,
Constantinople, Eome, and elsewhere,
were an after-growth—may we not call
them a fungus growth ? —when Chris-
tianity became corrupt.
New Testament Churches.
I maintain that the mission churches
of Polynesia and New Guinea have been
modelled after the New Testament and
Apostolic pattern, and that the mis-
sionaries have faithfully carried out the
spirit of the last command of our
ascending Saviour, “ Go ye, therefore,’and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.” Would the worldly, the
indifferent, the sceptical, or even the
enemies of missions to the heathen, vote
for the churches in Polynesia being
pulled down, the church-bells silenced,
the Christians turned over once more to
idolatry, the schools—week-day and
Sunday—being closed, the school books
and Bibles being burnt, and the tens of
thousands of simple-hearted worshippers
being forbidden to sing the songs of
Zion in concert with their fellow-Chris-
tians in other lands? Would they re-
build the old temples, rekindle the fires
upon their altars, call forth the victims for
sacrifice, and make the hills and valleys
ring with the shouts of midnight revellers
around the burning pile? Or would
they summon from heaven those who
have died in the faith of Jesus, and are
now raising their voices to the song of
“ Him that loved us and washed us
from our sins in His own blood’’ ? Who
that is interested in the welfare and
progress of his fellow-men—of whatever
creed or nation—would, if he could,
stamp out Christianity, and restore
idolatry ? And if all are thus bound to
admit that Christianity has been a great
blessing to these tribes, then none can
escape the obligation to propagate it.
As the followers of Christ we have to
face these facts—firstly, that millions of
our fellow-men are sunk in the abomi-
nations of heathenism, from which
Christ came to save them; secondly, that
He has commanded us to take to them
the message of pardon, peace, and hope ;
and, thirdly, that He has clearly shown
us what blessed results follow the pro-
clamation of His Gospel. He has also
made it perfectly plain that there is a
human, as well as a Divine, side
in the work of saving men. “We are
His fellow-workers.” In the .spiritual
as in the natural kingdom He has pro-
vided the seed and adapted it to the
soil. Our part of the work is to bring
the two together. We cannot under-
45
THE CHRISTIAN WORLD PULPIT,
January 16, 1595,


stand the mysterious power of the
Gospel any more than we can under-
stand the mystery of life in the seed,
but we can see the effect of bringing
seed and soil together in both king-
doms. There can be no crops in either
kingdom without God. We cannot do
without Him, and He will not do with-
out us.
Christianity not Played Out.
The great work of the Church is, un-
questionably, to plant the seed of the
Word in the soil of the human heart,
leaving results to God. If we do our
part, He will never fail to do His.
Having provided the seed, and adapted
it to the soil, He waits for His servants
to bring the two together that He may
send His Holy Spirit to create the new
life. To talk of Christianity being
played out is, to missionaries like my-
self, utter nonsense. We feel that the
sooner some forms of it are played out
the better. That such a subject could
be discussed in newspapers should
quicken our zeal as Nonconformists in
planting Christianity in its simplicity
and purity abroad, and in tearing off the
accretions that have gathered round it
at home. The men who argue thus live in
a world different from ours. They can-
not see with our eyes, nor feel with our
hearts. They see God ruling over them,
as He does in nature; we feel Him
within us. We believe in Christ’s
promise that He will be with His people
till the end of the world.
My own experience is but the experi-
ence of other pioneers and workers in
the mission-field. In times of darkness
and danger, and sickness and suffering,
and perplexity and death; in perils
from the sea, in perils from savages;
in perils from the climate, and, I may
add, sorrowfully, in perils from our own
countrymen, our blessed Lord has been
true to His promise. It is in selfish-
ness and worldliness, in self-sufficiency
and intellectual pride, and such things,
that He cannot be with us. But He
will always be with us if we are seeking
to do His will, and I am sure many of
us feel our increasing need of Him. We
need Him to save us from sin ; to help
us iu the battle of life ; to be our light
in darkness; our strength in weakness ;
and our hope for the future. We need
Him in our social life, in our business
life, in our political life, and in our
church life and work. If Christ was
really in all of us who profess Chris-
tianity, ruling and regulating our life,
we should be more in earnest about
the salvation of the perishing heathen!
Faith is the hand that lays hold on
Christ; the eye that looks to Christ;
the ear that hears the voice of Christ;
the mouth that feeds on Christ; the
finger that touches Christ; and the
key that unlocks the treasures of Christ.
— Bev . F. Harper.
THE INSOLUBLE ENIGMA.
BY DR. LYMAN ABBOTT.
The Bible is an audacious book, because
the writers of the Bible cared only for
truth ; accordingly, in their writings
they put the most contradictory truths
side by side, without any attempt to
modify either truth or to show their re-
conciliation. A striking illustration of
this is afforded in the story of Joseph.
One moral of that story Joseph himself
interprets, in a single sentence addresssd
to his brethren, contained in the lesson
allotted for our study to-day : “ But as
for you, ye thought evil against me ; but
God meant it unto good, to bring to pass,
as it is this day, to save much people
alive.” The same contrast is brought
out yet more clearly in Peter’s sermon
on the day of Pentecost: “ Him, being
delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken,
and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain.” Our lesson thus suggests to us
these two truths:—l. Men’s free will
and responsibility ; 11. God’s overruling
providence.
I. The sovereignty of law may be held
in such a spirit as to take all moral re-
sponsibility off from the individual. Tho
man is represented as a machine, and his
course as absolutely determined by ex-
ternal forces as is that of the billiard-ball
by the blow from the cue. Says J. Cot-
ter Morison; “ The man with the
criminal nature and education, among
given circumstances of temptation, can
no more help committing crime than he
can help having a headache under cer-
tain conditions of brain and stomach ; ”
and, again : “No merit or demerit at-
taches to the saint or the sinner in the
metaphysical or mystic sense of the
word; their good or their evil qualities
were none of their own making.” It is
difficult, at least, for me to see how one
who holds Edwards’s doctrine of the will
can escape J. Cotter Morison’s practical
deduction: if the will is always deter-
mined by the strongest force external to
it, the responsibility rests with the force,
not with the will.
Now the Bible lays great stress on
the sovereignty of the divine law; and
not only that, but on the actual deter-
mining power and providential adminis-
tration of earthly affairs by God. But
it never takes the responsibility off from
the individual. Though Christ was, by
the determinate counsel and foreknow-
ledge of God, taken and crucified and
slain, the hands that crucified and slew
Him were wicked hands. So the des-
tiny of Joseph was foredetermined.
The nature of that destiny was even
hinted to him in his remarkable dreams;
and yet these brethren, in fulfilling that
destiny, were guilty of their brother’s
blood. They knew themselves to be so ;
they confessed their guilt one to another.
“We are verily guilty,” they said, “ con-
cerning our brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul when he besought
us, and we would not hear.” They were
under no compulsion to sacrifice their
brother to their own envy and hatred.
Man is a free moral agent. His crime
is not the physical product of a physical
cause. There is an inherent originating
power in the will; or, if one objects to
this philosophy, still it remains true that
man is guilty when he does what he
knows to be wrong, and that no phil-
osophy can be true which repudiates
this universal testimony of conscience,
condemning the wrong-doer and bearing
witness to his moral responsibility.
And yet God rules. Life is not
made up of the currents and counter-
currents of independent human actions.
There is a Master Mind in the universe,
and He foreknows, arranges, determines.
Though wicked are the hands that
crucify and slay, still they fulfil unwit-
tingly the Divine purpose ; though the
ambition which seeks to sunder the
Union for the sake of maintaining slav-
ery is allowed to accomplish the Divine
purpose in the emancipation of the
slaves, it is a criminal ambition; though
the brethren are verily guilty concern-
ing their brother, yet they carry out the
Divine purpose and achieve, though by
their envy and malice, a beneficent
result. If we look at life from the point
of view of our own personal conscience,
we know that we are free moral agents,
and we cannot escape condemnation for
our wrong-doing ; if we look at life from
the point of view of Divine law, we may
take comfort in the assurance that God
orders all things for the best. Experi-
ence is more trustworthy than philoso-
phy. The philosophy which denies the
sovereign rule of God, and that which
denies the freedom and responsibility of
man, both deny the truth of human ex-
perience. The enigma remains unsolved;
law and liberty remain in apparently
irreconcilable conflict, but yet the soul
sings sometimes, in its penitence, this
song:
Because I was impatient, would not wait,
But thrust my impious hands across Thy
threads.
And marred the pattern drawn out for my
life—
O Lord, I do repent.
—sometimes, in its trust and confidence,
this song:
What though thou rulest not.
Yet heaven and earth and hell
Proclaim, God sitteth on the throne.
And ruleth all things well.
—From “ The Outlook .”
In tho cross is found health, in the
cross life, in the cross a protection from
our enemies, in the cross an infusion of
the sweets of heaven, in the cross
strength of soul, in the cross the joy
of the Spirit, in the cross the sum of
virtues, in the cross the perfection of
holiness.— Thomas a Kempis.
46
January 16,1895*
THE CHRISTIAN WORLD PULPIT.
