

WHAT I KNOW
OF THE
LABOUR TRAFFIC
A. J. DITFFIELD.
“ The fate of the whole race might
compared to that of some beautiful
and graceful maidens, who, on some fatal festal day ,had playfully ranged them-
selves in exquisite order, to support on their heads, as living caryatides, a slight
weight of fruit, and flowers, which had all of a sudden hardened into marble,
and crushed them under it.”—Sir Arthur Helps, Conquest of the New World.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
BRI SBA N E :
WATSON, FERGUSON & CO.,
Queen Street.




WHAT I KNOW
THE LABOUR TRAFFIC.
A. LEOTUEB
DELIVERED TO
THE SCHOOL OF ARTS, MACKAY,
THE CAPITAL OF THE SUGAR INDUSTRY IN NORTH
QUEENSLAND, JUNE, 1884.
■WITH 3P R, E IP .A. O E.
-A.. J. DUFPIELD,
Attorney for the Queensland Government on Board the “ Heath,” Labour Vessel,
Licensed by the Premier to convey 156 Islanders from the South Sea Islands,
to the Homebush Plantation, the Property of the Colonial Sugar Company in
Mackay.
BRISBANE :
WATSON, FEEGU-SON, AND CO.,
Queen Street.


,
.


TO ALL PATRIOTS, GOOD AND TRUE.
Fellow Sinners, —
The best of us have sinned in the matter on which I presume to
address you—namely, that labour traffic cf which you seem to have heard
so much, and yet know next to nothing. We are all guilty—from the
dear bishop down to the humblest of his sheep; from the Premier up to
the meanest sugar planter ; and from the ablest editor down to his devil.
We are all concerned in the stern injustice now rampant in North Queens-
land, which, if it be not uprooted, will spread to the South. It will spread
like thistle seed, and breed like rabbits. That is to say, if the injustice
which I propose to lay stark before you be not abolished now, it will
become so strong that you will never be able to abolish it.
0 ! you who love Queensland for its summer sky and sweet air, and
hate it for the evil conduct of its affairs and the ways of its public men
who are rich and think themselves strong, let us strengthen our hearts by
the resolve, that so far as it rests with us, neither bad men nor fools shall
rule over us, and where we live injustice shall not reign.
I offer for your thoughtful consideration the revised text of a lecture
which I delivered the other day in Mackay. But before turning to the
lecture, let me fill your minds with a little colouring matter, so that you
may see more vividly what I am driving at in that discourse.
The waters where certain fishers go to fish—not for cod, but for
men—are called, in their precise language, “ fishing grounds”— a pictur-
esque term, and significant of a traffic which has taken twenty years to
grow in Queensland, but has grown during the past five years to surpris-
ing dimensions. It has, in fact, grown with your growth, and been made
an essential part of your national life. That is to say, if there had been no
land handy and appropriate for growing sugar; if there were along the
northern coast no organised provision trade; no traders in dry goods—
rum, calicoes, tobacco, and many other useful, useless, as well as necessary
things, there would not have been any trading in human kind. But it so
happened, that some of the men who owned small vessels were able to
make contracts with sugar planters to go and fetch and deliver a cargo o;
human beings on well understood terms ; and there were also men, as it


happened, who were oppressed at the time with much bad rice, and had on
hand many things which they could not sell, and did not like to throw
away: so it became convenient to send a ship to the South Sea Islands
with a mixed cargo of rubbish, called “ trade ” and putrid provisions, in
order to bring back by the license of the Premier as many Islanders as
could be safely caught. By which means someone—it is not necessary to
specify who —would be sure to make profit out of the sale of goods, even
though he realised a loss in Kanakas. But if a ship went, say from
Townsville to the Solomons or the New Hebrides, or Tombarra, Mela-
pheelee and Miau, to fish for men, and returned, it may be, to Mackay
within less than three months, bringing a hundred copies of the article in
prime condition, then the fishers of men would clear at least £1,500;
and if, having five ships of the same carrying capacity, making three
voyages in the year with like success, then the fishers of men would make
an absolutely clear gain of twenty-two thousand five-hundred pounds ster-
ling. The temptation held out may be considered great, but the risks are
great also. Kanakas as well as men die, or are wrecked, and the gilt on
the gingerbread is easily rubbed off ; and it has happened, that although
these fishers did catch a thousand Islanders within twelve months, they
for certain dark reasons, were only able to rejoice in that they had disposed
of a lot of bad stuff —cleared out a heap of rubbish—suffered no loss in
cash, and greatly extended their trade connections. So that, if a man did
not keep a shop and deal in glass beads, gunpowder, flour, calico, two-
penny-half-penny looking-glasses, rum, biscuits, tinned-jams, Jews’ harps,
fish hooks, and general Brummagen trumpery, and dealt only in
he might lose in going to fish for them ; but, by combining Kanakas
with dry goods, a very good thing may be made of it according to th e
current ethics of trade. It is absolutely true, that if there were no bargains
to be made in glass beads, bad tobacco, prints that will not wash, pipes
that do not draw, knives that will not cut, and tomahawks which can carry
no abiding edge, the trade in Kanakas would have no personal attractions
for those who have “ developed the trade.” There are honourable excep-
tions to these rapacious traders ; there are merchants in the strict meaning
of that term who enter into the business in a little different spirit, who
pay their seamen the best wage, and give their captains every inducement
to do well. But the same holds good of these as of the others—that but
for the extent of their ordinary trade relationships and the syndicates they
can form, they would have nothing whatever to do with the traffic in
human beings ; and there can be little doubt, that in the course of
when Government is purged of political corruption, and its officers are


appointed for their fitness, and not for the votes of their friends, the
rapacious traffickers will be unequal to compete with the responsible mer-
chant, and commerce in Islanders will be as well conducted as the immi-
gration of Europeans in steamships by respectable companies who ar e
interested in the price of Queensland stock, and the material progress of
the colony. In the mean time, man does not live by commerce alone
nor can commerce be said to be the narrow way which leads to everlasting
bliss. I have lately talked with Kanaka dealers on the subject of their
traffic, who, in a Christian, apologetic way, conveyed to me their convic-
tions, that the trade was good for the Kanakas themselves; that these
privileged summer children were carried away from a low animal existence?
and brought in contact with a superior race; that they get improved in
industrial art; are taught to wear clothing; eat superior food; learn
the value of money ; and moreover, they had a very good chance of getting
their minds expanded.
I was not displeased with this argument. I only suggested that the
catalogue of goods ” might have been enlarged; and that the immediate
question for us to occupy ourselves with, lay in smaller compass, viz.:
Is this thing just ?
Whether it is pleasant and charitable for the Islander to give him a
free passage to Queensland to enlarge his mind ; clothe his nakedness ;
teach him to do systematic work ; smoke pipes ; earn wages ; and become
a superior being by learning the filthiness of the local tongues, and become
the possessor of the infernal spirit of rum, to be ultimately “ conveyed ”
back to the abject animal life from which he was beguiled, is not the ques-
tion at issue—ls the thing just ? Is it done in a just and righteous way ?
Because, if it is not just, you had much better leave the Islander where he
is, and wait until he asks you to do for him that great and manifold ser-
vice, instead of taking so much pains to press your benevolent designs
upon his contracted mind.
“ Granted,” I continued to say to these Christian merchants, “ that
you have proved to your own satisfaction, that you have raised the
Kanaka in the scale of humanity, will you submit to be examined on the
question of how much you have, at the same time, improved your own
account at the National Bank ? When you have given us a faithful
return of that improvement, we will then consider what your desire for the
improvement of the Kanaka really amounts to.”
“ Another manifest form of injustice in this traffic is,” I went on,
“ that the ‘ contract ’ entered into, is a one-sided contract. No Islander


from New Ireland on his advent to Queensland, and very few of the other
Islanders ever understood the nature of the 1 contract into which they
were beguiled. I know that the Statute of 1880 expressly provides for
this ; but it is a farce that is played, not the Act which is carried out*
No Islander is ever made aware of the value of his labour : he has no
capacity for measuring time, whether you picture it in years, yams, or
moons, and his motives for coming to Queensland, you will find, are inti-
mately connected with a latent conviction, that he will have increased
facilities for exercising his thieving propensities ; and may, if he has any
luck, return with his pockets full of gunpowder, and a musket on each
shoulder ; but be you quite sure of this, that the Kanaka does not come
here to see you ride on horses ; to hear your music in church ; and much
less to dig and dung regularly in your sugar garden for the sura of £6 a
year and his keep.”
All this, and much more did I pour into the patient ears ol my
Christian Kanaka dealers; and all that came of it, when I came to an end>
was a joyous exclamation, accompanied with the jovial request, “ Let’s
liquor,”
Such lightness of heart speaks volumes ; and it is not, perhaps,
untrue to say that many, even of our Christian merchants, are more
moved by the force of habit than the strength of argument.
Now having spent the best part of my life in the service of the
people, and being filled with the spirit that cannot rest, the spirit that
is ever on the watch to sing out “ All’s well,” or “ Take care,” 1 lately
went with a merry heart on a cruise in a “ labour vessel ” to the South
Sea Islands, bent on seeing all that belongs to this traffic and in the
interests of humanity and for the defence of the character of a British
Colony, to report minutely on all through which I might pass. As the
Government attorney appointed to that vessel I looked forward to an in-
structive and novel voyage.
About the middle of last January we entered the Coral Sea on our
way to New Ireland. What winds we had were contrary. They would
have carried us direct to the Solomon Islands, but the master of the
vessel, a man of much seafaring experience, complained to me in tones of
great bitterness that he was not supplied with “ trade ’ appropriate for
the Solomons.
“ The Solomons,” he said, u are too wise now to be caught with glass
beads and fish hooks : you can only hook Solomons with muskets ; had
I been allowed to carry muskets and powder I could have run down to the


Solomons, loaded up at once, and returned in five weeks. But the
blasted Queensland Government have stopped all that.” I defended the
course taken by the Government—not because I consider it a course that
would, or could, have any permanent practical good result, but for other
reasons into which I did not enter with the skipper. His reply to me is
worth giving. He said :
“ To deprive the English merchant of the right to trade muskets for
Kanakas is to handicap him too much. The Queensland proclamation
which stopped trade in muskets to Queensland ships will give a monopoly
to the French in the musket trade, as well as to all others who trade in
copra. The Queensland Government has no control except over its own
vessels; and all the vessels, and they are many, which trade with the
Islanders of the South Pacific who carry muskets and powder, will cut
the Queensland vessels out of the trade.”
This I thought was a new and worthy argument to urge on that other
argument of annexaton which all men of pariotism and reflection see must
soon prevail. Only the Imperial Government can stop this traffic in fire-
arms with the Islanders, by showing a sympathy with all who seek to
bring the South Sea Islanders into the British Kingdom; for until these
beautiful Islands of the Coral Sea are annexed by Great Britain the more
difficult will become the solution of some of the problems which belong
to the connection of Queensland with Greater Britain.
Already may you scent a new gtme. No Master licensed to
convey Islanders may now leave any Queensland port with muskets, or
gunpowder on board, or be found by an English man-of-war with these
things, without running the risk of having his ship seized —but, such is
the quick intelligence which directs and presides over the Kanaka trade,
that no difficulty need prevent the licensed dealer in Islanders from coming
to some understanding with the dealers in copra. The copra dealer may
carry muskets and gunpowder, the copra dealer, if he be a German,
French, or North American, can get Islanders for muskets, and lodge the
Islanders in some safe rendezvous to -be agreed upon, and the master of
the labour vessel will arrive on the scene at the appointed time, and the
thing is done. The risk would be very great, but risk is one of the
attractions to many persons engaged in fishing for men. The copra traffic
is co-existent, and co-extensive with the labour traffic, it has been con-
taminated by it from the beginning—nearly all the early atrocities of the
labour trade sprang from its relations with the mysterious copra, and may
be said to have been the procuring cause of the Islanders’ revenge which
has overtaken not a few innocent and many misguided men.


And now contemplate the modern fishers of men,” and consider
how an ancient and sacred title having lost all its divine meaning, should
be revived in a Christian land to depict the practice of some modern
Christians when committing acts which cannot be otherwise characterised
than insulting to the name of Christ, because they outrage his humanity.
It is of course generally believed that the Government Agent attached
to each of these labour vessels is an absolute security against the possibility
of such an irregularity as that hinted at above being carried out. Alack !
Government Agents are but men, and some are notorious for being as frail
as—say woman—there are ways of manipulating a Government Agent,
even as there are ways of lubricating the Government appointing him, and
the Government Agent has been as big a sham as any other sham ever
designed to quiet the mind of a sensitive public having votes. Indeed
the traffic in Islanders is so full of mystery, and surrounded by so much
weakness, and inexperience, to say nothing of imbecility and prejudice
on the one hand, and brutal selfishness on the other, that much care is
needed in handling it, lest for one thing we be found, in an excess of zeal
to be uprooting wheat while we go spudding up the tares.
Let me help you to penetrate this mystery. Not only are owners of
vessels and big grocers deeply interested in the Kanaka fishery, but
hundreds of smaller fry are even much more eager for its continuance ;
the planter of course is anxious, but the little shop keepers of the North-
ern towns who sell things to Kanakas at a rate of profit ranging up to
265 per cent, are going mad, and mob the Premier and his private
secretary with deputations and newsmongers, yelling at the top of their
voices “ Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth, keep it up
or you will go down,” using much more forcible language than I can
command. The Premier promises and is glad to get away. Then when
the Premier is out of sight the small shop keepers begin like the priests
of Baal, to cry aloud and to spare not saying that Noith Queensland is
going to the devil—or it is going to separate—or that it is going to drop
sugar, and then there will be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth^
The explanation is this: Close to every large plantation, or cluster
of plantations, the dealers in men have numerous smaller people who keep
little stores for the sale of kickshaws, such as the Kanaka loves.
Every one thousand Kanakas will spend in three years at these little
shops the sum of eighteen thousand pounds sterling, in glass beads,
Brummagem trumpery and Sydney goods. This stuff which realises for
the traders in human beings the sum of eighteen thousand pounds does
not cost the fishers of Kanakas one thousand pounds !


Nor is this quite the whole of the beautiful story. The dealers in
men and women are also agents for numerous trading concerns who carry
on a varied commerce in the hateful trash which finds no market that is
mentioned in any known Chamber of Commerce but is sold to low bred
scoundrels who do peculiar business with the coloured children of men.
That is a dark saying. If you come to understand its full meaning
you will be able to appreciate the trouble which I have taken in procuring
-other facts and details which you have yet to learn.
This is one feature of that injustice which I am laying stark before
yju ; and now, if you please we will read over together the lecture which I
delivered at Mackay :
Mr. President, Ladies, and Gentlemen, —
What is known as the labour traffic is not to be considered merely as
a local institution, but an integral part of that great industrial war, whose
field is the world, whose soldiers are the people of all nations and
languages, and whose generals and captains are the chief men of the best
races of mankind. We have recently been told by a Regius Professor of
History, that the object of all the principal bloody wars which immediately
preceded the Napoleonic Wars, and ended at Waterloo, was the possession
of the New World. Whatever may be thought of this theory, it certainly
throws a new light on history, for it draws our attention from the petty
ambitions of mere kings to the struggles and throes of humanity. We
cease to care for the secrets of courts, and take no interest in the tricks of
diplomacy, or the intrigues of politicians, but are brought face to face with
man, as the agent who is responsible for the earth not being made a
slaughter house, but a garden; not a chess board, on which two or three
may plot and play a sanguinary game for their own amusement, but a free
highway leading to a more perfect life in which man shall stand not only
as the paragon of animals, but the Beauty of the World.
Whether we are satisfied or not with Professor Seeley’s solution of
his own problem, the New World is ours at this moment —not by bloody
war and the conquest of the sword, but by means of gentle peace and the
triumphs of industry and commerce. The English race is master of all
that Columbus and his companions discovered. The Americas and the
Australias have come under the sway of the Anglo-Saxon. The influence
of the Latin race, like the influence of the Latin religion, has ceased to
rule, much less to over-awe the mind of man. The religion of practical
life has taken the place of technical religion; in other words, reality has
come into collision with shams and unrealities to the everlasting damage
of the shams. “ The Bull Dog,” “ The Lion,” “ The Defence,” The
Dragon,” and “ The Swan,” have met the “ Immaculate Conception,”
the Holy Ghost,” the “ Holy Cross,” the “ Virgin without Sin,” the
“ Queen of Heaven,” the “ Mother of God,” and the “ Sacred Heart,”*
* The names of some of the Spanish ships which formed part of the Armada,
and were destroyed or taken by Drake, Howard, and Hawkins.


and these sham things have been blown to the winds. Precisely what
Drake, Howard, and Hawkins did for the Invincible Armada, Watt,
Brindley, Srneaton, Rennie, Telford, Stephenson, Faraday, Brunei, and
Brown, Jones, and Robinson have done for the monopolies which kept the
world pinned to its mother’s knee—which kept its commerce first in
manacles and then in leading strings, and made its traffic to pass through
gorgeous toll-bars kept by painted beadles in the pay, and for the profit
of secular potentates and sacred popes.
During the past fifty years railways have levelled the mountain, up-
raised the plain, spanned the river, changed the conditions of human life,
and made the land increase the variety of its products, and to become a
constant source of increasing and wholesome change. Railways have done
much more ; there are now more horses, drivers, saddle and harness
makers, wheelwrights and coachbuilders than there were before railways,
which it was thought would annihilate these. What before was stagnant
and deadly, became qtfick with healthful motion.
What railways have done for the land, steamships have done for the
great and wide ocean ; and steamships have been the cause of more sailing
vessels being employed than would have been employed but for them. By-
means of railways and steamships the face of the world, so to speak, has
got a new expression ; it has the graduated face of a clock—not to tell
the time to this or that parish, this or that nation, but to universal
man. The sun is not more fixed in the centre of the universe to keep the
sidereal worlds in tune than man is the master of the world to keep all
things in time. Let me illustrate this by my own experience. Twenty-
three years ago I went on board an English commercial steamer in the
port of Cobija, in the Republic of Bolivia, as a passenger bound for Aus-
tralia on January 6th, lat. S. 24 degrees. I steamed along the coast of
Peru, Ecuador, and Hew Granada, calling at many ports. Arrived at
Panama, I took a train to Colon and went on board another English com-
mercial steamer, which carried me to Hayti, to Jamaica, St. Thomas,
Barbados, and the Azores to England. Another English commercial
steamer carried me to France ; a railway built by English skill carried
me from Havre to Paris and on to Marseilles, where another English
commercial steamer carried me to Malta and Alexandria, where another
English built railway carried me across the desert and the Hilo to Suez ;
another English commercial steamer carried me down the Red Sea, hoary
with the tales and woes, the triumphs and decay of fifty centuries, to
Australia, just then beginning to open its eyes ; to Melbourne, lat. S. 88
degrees, where I arrived by contract time on the 13th April, doing a dis-
tance of twenty-thousand miles in ninety-six days, with the regularity and
punctuality of the best clock in the world.
M hat was then done in ninety-six days is now done in sixty days ;
what then cost £2OO costs now £BO. Every railway over which I
travelled, and every steamship in which I was a passenger was built by
British skill and the majority with British capital—excepting the Panama
railway—the greatest feat in railway construction which, up to then, had


been achieved, was built by the people of the United States, aided by
coolies and free negroes.
There was not a port, town, city, island, river, or sea over and through
which I passed, where you did not see the British flag and the Stars and
Stripes giving colour to earth and sky ; and varied as were the people
and languages which came in my way, the variety of industries which
had been called into existence by those agencies was far greater. It would
take me all night to recite to you the new and varied industries which the
power of steam had called into existence. The amount of labour required
to be done far exceeded the number of available labourers. Peru was
dependent upon the Chinese coolie for loading her guano and attending
to her sugar garden. She had millions of negroes and aborginals in her
territory, but an insane philanthropy, aided by a Government who was
dependent on popular clamour for its power, changed those negroes and
aboriginals from soldiers of labour into free assassins and emancipated
burglars. You could, five years later, when these beings got their liberty
to go idle and cut men’s throats, no more get them into industrial harness
than you could harness the mosquitoes. The amount of money which
Peru paid for alien labour during the period of her Guano Age is simply
incredible, Chili was dependent upon the Cornish miner for developing her
exhaustless wealth of copper. Bolivia is still entirely dependent upon
British industry and commerce for the maintainance of her civilisation.
Ecuador the same; the rivers and mountains of New Granada are depen-
dent upon British and American enterprise for opening up her treasures.
If any of these countries are showing signs of decadence—as they are—
you will find that the process of this decay is co-existent with the breaking
off of commercial relations with Great Britain. Peru would long ago
have gone to the dogs but for British ships and British capital. So with
the islands of the Spanish Main, and everywhere oir both sides of that
track of twenty thousand miles which I traversed in ninety-six days, do
you see British hands on the face of that mighty clock whose works are
regulated by British men, whose pendulum is British capital, and whose
mainspring is the British way of life.
The changes which have come over the face of England during the
past fifty years of her industrial war are precisely the changes which have
come or are coming over the face of the world. Those changes include a
re-distribution of wealth. Capital has been made aware of its responsi-
bilities, Labour has so far advanced in intellect as to perceive that
without capital labor is denuded of its ample fruition, and cannot achieve
its greatest good. The dominant religions which fostered monopolies,,
enmities and strife have been undermined by that modern spirit of co-
operation, which shows the interdependence of human beings on each
other, and that the result of this co-operation must be the good of man-
kind.
By co-operation I do not mean that clubbing together which saves us
30 per cent, in wine, 25 per cent, in boots, 150 per cent, in drugs, and
something respectable in butcher’s meat and baker’s crumb, but that
divine co-operation in which the feet cannot say to the head 1 have no-


need of you, but all are members one of another. Knowledge is no
longer confined to a privileged sect. There is no royal way to anything,
much less to learning. Science, the glory and solace of the greatest
minds, is everywhere on the side of humanity.
If you would test for yourselves if there be such an element in our
modern life as the enthusiasm of humanity, you must not look for it in
parliaments or in the church, or in the army, or among lawyers, or in the
wider fields of trade, where the vain make their riches and fools lay up
their store ; but you must look for it in that grand unsectarian commerce
of the wide world with which science is intimately connected, and to which
it owes its triumphs in the past and its larger hope of greater triumph in
the future. In the laboratory of science you find the great men of our
time plotting how to destroy space to kill pain, abolish disease, take con-
tagion captive, and make the evil spirits of corruption and decay the
servants and slaves of man.
What the grand army of commerce has done for the higher science,
the smaller armies of trade have done for the skilled workman ; these in
their turn have conquered difficulties, which benumbed the larger number of
unskilled labourers ; and planting, sowing, hedging and ditching, and
the more drudgery of toil have become connected with a superior organisa-
tion and the labourers have thereby improved. In other words, what the
head designed and the hands and feet carried out, has produced a result
in favour of the body to which both belong. These are but a few of the
changes which mark our own immediate time, which we must keep steadily
in mind while we contemplate the labour traffic and seek to find for it a
sure and rational footing.
Make an imaginary voyage in likeness to my real voyage, and sail
from any port you like in the east to the west, from north to south, and
box the entire compass, you will find a precisely similar state of things—
islands linked to each other ; and these to continents by a service which
has grown into a necessity of Nature, demanding the exercise of the
highest skill lo maintain and direct, by means of which, things are brought
into daily common use which, but a short while ago, were only known in
the laboratories of scientific men, or were monopolies in the grip of the
rich. So that you may safely say the high result which humanity has
achieved in freedom, knowledge, prescience, skill, and courage, is the force
which directs and rules the industrial war whose field is the world ; for
the benefit of the world, and not for the mere pleasure and advantage of a
privileged few.
That which at present has not come under the supervision of the
head of this army will, sooner or later, have to come under that supervi-
sion until the humblest member of the whole of the industrial force shares
in the advancement of its veterans, and the beneficent result of the con-
quests which can never be reversed. It is one of the greatest encourage-
ments we can carry in our hearts to know that at the head and front of
this world’s industrial war, the brightest and best intellect the world
possesses, sits enthroned in absolute command. The genius of Watt,
Stephenson, Brunei, Faraday and the rest, has become the inheritance of


every British home, directing its rule, regulating its mental and moral
force, dictating what shall be done with onr boys; and this, which I have
called an encouragement, is also a guarantee that the progress which has
been made can never be arrested ; the good which has been achieved shall
grow, and the improvement in all that makes life worth living, has become
as palpable as the means by which it was acquired. Cobb’s coaches will
never supersede railways. Water-wheels, even if driven by Niagara, will
never displace steam ; the wooden telegraph on a hill can never do the
work of the sub-marine wire. There is no going back on Watt, Stephen-
son, Brunei, Faraday, and the rest, while the advance which has been
sounded even within the past year, bids fair to carry us over a vaster sur-
face than we have as yet surveyed ; and I think you should bear in mind
here, that this vast war—this industrial struggle, which has now been
going on for fifty years, without any material interruption, owes nothing
whatever to Government; on the contrary, it has gone on, conquering and
to conquer, in spite of the obstruction of Government, insane legislative
restrictions, and the mischievous regulations of Parliaments. That war
for the acquisition of material wealth was begun and continued by private
enterprise, and is being conducted solely by the free citizens of the best
races of mankind for the good of mankind, and not for the aggrandise-
ment of dynasties, the prestige of Governments, or the exclusive good of
one race or people.
Now, co-existent with the casting of that net of railways over
the world, and the beginning of our modern industrial war, whose
field is the world, was the discovery of Austialian gold—a discovery
which liberated two-hundred and fifty millions of sovereigns from central
gloom in thirty years, and allowed them to go where they would. Had
that discovery been made three thousand years ago, a golden calf would
been set up, and all nations compelled to come and bow down and worship.
Had that discovery been made by Alexander the Great, Mount Olympus
had been changed into a shrine, and all the world gone mad on art. Had
the discovery been made by Charles V., or his melancholy, bloody-minded
son, Philip 11., the church would have become a military power vaster and
more detestable than that of Islam, and all the world been alternately
paralysed with the fear of an illimitable and everlasting stink pot, and
buoyed up with the hope of a heaven made of lawn clouds in which the
matins should go on till vespers, and a never changing eternity be passed
in saying prayers in the Spanish or Latin tongues.
Had the discovery of Australian gold been made by George lIL>
North America would still be the unhappy hunting- ground of the savage,
and German States and German kings and German queens and high
serenities would now be as abundant as German silver, and the great
world had gone idly-strutting about with nothing but bands of music for
its leaders. Had the discovery been made by Napoleon the First, the
world would have been made into a barracks, and we should all have been
colonels or corporals, except the women, who would never have been any-
thing save mere mothers and cooks.
But the discovery was not made in the interest of hoary superstition


or classical art, and beautiful mythology, or Christian fanaticism, or vul-
gar family pride, or military genius, but by a happy necessity, in the
interests of humanity. That long hidden gold gave commerce wings,
under whose shadow the world might not only find rest from tyranny and
Governmental interference, but an ever growing freedom in which every
individual unit of the world, while rejoicing in a sweet perennial liberty,
might yet find a freedom greater still by being hound to the world’s in-
creasing work.
You do not need any other illustration of that being true than the
result of George lll.’s madness, by which England lost her great North
American colony, in order that the British race might find a wider
expanse of freedom, and the river of English liberty should seek and find
the ocean of manful independence, and humanity assume a dignity which
it had never known till then. Suffer one word more of exodiura. Not
only are we compelled to acknowledge the sway of intellect and the influ-
ence of science over a World awakened to a new sense of what the world is,
but we see, as plainly as we see the Southern Cross, amid a galaxy of
stars in the sky, that the growth of individual character and the develop-
ment of purely local institutions, all in sympathy with the general advance-
ment, have gone on so steadily increasing, that if we did not find that
individual character and those local institutions when we sought for them,
we should be as disappointed as if we found at the time of figs that our
fig tree had no figs on it. Every town in every English colony is the
fruit and outcome of that new individuality. Every new institution which
new conditions of life call into being is a similar fruit and outcome—a
fruit and outcome in which human nature has become, or has given signs
of becoming, so moulded into fitness for the social state, that it will tolerate
no interference save that interference which maintains the equal freedom
of all.
And now, to leave the contemplation of these elevating generalities,
let us come to something which is as simple and unrelenting as the multi-
plication table, something which deeply concerns ourselves as colonists,
which involves our fame, the purity of our morals, and the quality of our
humanity.
Why is it, that a very large number of highly respectable religious
and educated people at home give such a ready ear and willing credence
to murders and outrages which have been done on labour vessels and in
sugar fields belonging to Queensland ? How is it, that men in high com-
mand and office have wontonly misrepresented this colony in the matter of
the labour traffic? How came it to pass, that when the annexation of
New Guinea by Great Britain came to be regarded by Queensland as a
political and social necessity, the Imperial Government resented the action
of Queensland as an impertinence, and went the length of saying, that if
New Guinea were annexed, Queensland should have no control in admin-
istering its affairs ?
If we can satisfy ourselves in the answer to these questions, we shall
have made a discovery before which the discovery of gold will pale before
it as so much ineffectual fire. Prove to yourselves that you have made


this spiritual and moral discovery, and that the discovery gives you a pas-
sionate delight and satisfaction; you will have brought in a new industrial
era, you will have solved the mystery of social life and give an absolutely
intelligible reason for the continuity of human endeavour.
Now, the reason, I think, why the Imperial Government has been so
ready to flout and lecture Queensland on its labour traffic, is simply
because it obeys in this matter the behests of the highly respectable
religious educated people in London, Birmingham, Leeds, Manchester,
Sheffield, Glasgow, and the agricultural districts, whose personal interest
it is to keep up an intermittent racket on slavery and the labour traffic.
The reason why high officials have written so wantonly against Queensland
(Sugar planters is, that those officials found a vast number of highly
respectable religious educated people ready to believe all that may be said
of murders, outrages, and slavery, as they have been said to obtain in
Queensland. The reason why highly respectable religious educated
people in England keep up a constant, or intermittent row, as it suits
them, on these matters of slavery and outrages on humanity, is a twofold
reason.
1. They are slave-drivers of a deep indellible dye, and commit out-
rages on humanity that arc systematic, which yield the highest pecuniary
profit and procure the greatest national disgrace.
2. They go to the enormous expense of indulging in the luxury of
maintaining two religions, each of which contradicts the other. For six
days in the week they do nothing but take thought for the morrow, buy
in the cheapest market and sell in the dearest, fare sumptuously every day,
pick quarrels and jealousies, and foster competition with neighbours ;
make the longest, heaviest, and most precise weapons of war ; gender,
mistrust, spread calumnies, and indulge in revenge ; and keep up an army
and navy on the blood and sweat of peaceable people —a people whose life
is robbed of all joy and passionate delight in that which most distinguishes
man—a people whose unremitting toil is unrelieved by any hope—to
whom freedom, therefore, has no meaning, and “ carefulness has been dis-
couraged by continually showing to the careful that those who are careless
did as well as themselves—sometimes better.” Nay, a people who have
paid penalties for carefulness. Labourers working hard and paying their
way, have constantly found themselves called on to help in supporting the
idle, the dissolute, and depraved ; have had their tables, chairs, beds, fire-
irons, clocks, and family Bibles seized under distress warrants, that able-
bodied paupers might be fed, and eventually have found themselves and
their children reduced to the deep damnation of pauperism. “ Well-
conducted poor women, supporting themselves without aid or encourage-
ment, have seen the ill-conductcd receiving parish pay for their illegitimate
offspring. Nay, to such extremes has the process gone, that women with
many illegitimate children, getting from the rates a weekly sum for each,
have been chosen as wives by men who wanted the sums thus derived.”
In shoi’t, you shall put one leg of a pair of compasses in the heart of
England, and with the other describe a circle of thirty miles in which you
shall find eighty thousand English men, women, and children idle, and


regularly, every day, are washed, dressed, combed, fed, and lodged at the
expense to the industrial community of one million seven-hundred and
sixty-thousand pounds sterling a year ; and what is true of particular
Midland county is typical of all the other counties, and this pauperism—
this degradation of humanity—this debased national life—this national
disgrace—is the outcome of the two contradictory religions which our be-
loved mother goes to the expense of keeping up. This six days’ secular
slavery, revenge, money-making, and all the rest of it, is the outcome of
the inhuman religion and disnatured selfishness which preside over and
dictate the six days’ secular work. The religion of the seventh day incul-
cates that you shall take no thought for the morrow; that you shall do
unto others as you would that they should do unto you ; that God may
forgive you your trespasses as you forgive them that trespass against you ;
that if your enemy smite you on the left cheek you shall turn to him the
other that he may also smite that ; that if your enemy hunger you shall
feed him ; if he thirst you shall give him drink ; that you are to be happy
if men speak evil of you and revile you ; that you shall sell all you have,
and give to the poor ; and the whole of this sublime seventh-day religion
is summed-up in the one word—self-sacrifice. This is but a mild repre-
sentation of the second of the two religions which our mother professes,
for one day in seven. She never carries out this religion—never ; nay,
she does not believe it. On the contrary, for six days out of the seven
she is occupied in disobeying it, and proving that it cannot be true. She
judges herself by the standard of the six days’ religion, and everybody
else by the religion of the seventh day. When any special tidings reach
her from Queensland she puts on her Sunday religion and judges by that;
when any tidings reach her from the United States, she forgets all about
the charity which beareth all things ; hopeth all things ; thinketh no
evil, and is not easily provoked, which is part of the Sunday music she
has piped to her ; and instantly assumes an attitude of questioning or
doubting, or of freezing unsympathy. Why ?
How U it that England, the head quarters of the great industrial
war, whose field is the world, treats with marked coldness, indifference,
and disdain, not only the United States, but every one of her great
colonies as well ? How does it come, that in the Cabinet of the Imperial
Government nearly always the stupid man of his party is selected to be
Secretary of State for the Colonies ? How is it that men were, for many
years, sent to be Gi vernors of colonies who never achieved the height
of average intelligence, and never showed the least strain of greatness;
but were at the best, men trained to the mere routine of office, and were
not even excellent clerks, nor possessed of any distinguishing gifts or
accomplishments ?
There are happy exceptions to this bad rule, and the different and
differing Governors selected now is proof sufficient of the truth of the
change which is involved in ray question.
The answer is, that the religion of common sense, and common
humanity which is the adopted religion of these new communities, is a
reproach to the transparent hypocrises, the gorgeous impostures, and


splendid shams which prevail in the old country; and the old country
hates the new religion, and would, if possible, suppress it. The religion
which is fast laying hold of the minds of men, is one in which Nature is
reasserting her position as high priest. There is more Nature in the
colonies than there is at home ; and, therefore, more independence and a
sweeter freedom.
Nature teaches us, and so, for that matter, does St. Paul, that if a
man does not work, he shall not eat; if he does not obey the laws of his
being he must perish; if he does not dress and keep the garden in which he
is placed, if he does not compel the earth to yield her increase, he shall be
turned out of the garden, and a flaming sword which turns every way,
shall be kept going to keep him out of it. If any community, or any unit
of which the community is composed, persistently and of set purpose, sets
itself to oppose, thwart, obstruct, or in any way embarass the march of im-
provement. or does not keep in sympathy with the head of all things, even
though he or it may only belong to the lowly feet, the consequences, how-
ever disastrous, must be borne.
In our great industrial war, there is absolutely no titles to sell or
give away ; no pensions are possible to imbecility ; and profit or reward
must be the natural fruition of effort in subordination to rational rule.
The determination to apply this law in all its rigour has, for the moment,
given an appearance of ferocity to colonial public life, which, however
much it is to be regretted, could not well be helped. In this war self-
sacrifice shall be prohibited as irrational, but so also shall brutal selfish-
ness. Although, if any rich planter, smitten with remorse for the way
he has increased his substance, thinks fit to endow a college for teaching
the English tongue to Islanders, and the Polynesian tongues to doctors,
overseers, Government agents and others, we will not hinder him in car-
rying out his merciful intent, while he and his class shall be allowed the
full benefit which may result from such an institution being founded. We
will not allow the morrow to take thought for itself, but take care that
what we do to-day shall lead to something better next morning. If a
man smites us on the right cheek we will take care that he does not do it
again. If our enemy hungers we will find him a job ; if he thirsts he
shall have the chance of earning an honest penny.
If our neighbour becomes unfriendly ; takes to making guns or
dynamite, and shows an unmistakeable hankering to come and spoil our
garden, or take it from us, avc will not spend our money in setting up
rival manufactories of destructive diabolical explosives, but we will make
that garden so sweet to live in, so sacred to possess, so holy and beauti-
ful to behold, and so glorious to defend, that none shall dare to make us
afraid, and those who do not love us, shall be made to tremble and fear—
not for the vengeance we shall inflict, but for the impregnable defence
which it would be death to try to destroy.
This, if it be not the actual national life of Australia, is the spirit of
it ; this is the tendency which unconsciously it is assuming. The hope
we are cheered by is the hope Avhich avc of to-day look to see realised ;
that in this new land Englishmen, Scotchmen, Welshmen, and Irishmen


may be born again ; born into the liberty which is not a dream, or a mere
Sabbathday hypocrisy, or a Sunday sham, but a continual and ever-increas-
ing passionate joy. This it is which is at the bottom of Imperial
unsympathy, induced by the unsympathy of the influential rich, religious
highly educated people, who live on the blood and sweat of English people,
to whom liberty has ceased to have a meaning, and life has lost its Eng-
lish charm.
A sailor does not hate lawyers; the carnal man does not hate the
spiritual man ; the imposter does not hate the man of truth and honesty
so much as the highly respectable, rich religious people at home hate
Australians who secure their independence by working for their living.
What has all this to do with the labour traffic as it is being conducted
in Queensland ?
Everything.
Ihe Mackay district is adapted to the growth of sugar; if you culti-
vate sugar you make the'garden yield its natural increase. This natural
increase is shared by the community to which Mackay belongs. Every
ton of sugar which you get out of your garden represents an increase in
other gardens. The industries which are called into existence by sugar
are as varied as human life. Science and scientific men have thriven
more on sugar than on guns and gunpowder. Sugar cannot possibly dis-
pense with science. The machinist and practical engineer, the carpenter,
blacksmith, saddler, horsemonger, timber-getter, builder, agriculturist, and
other captains and leaders of labour find their highest work when sugar
is made most of ; the shipper and skipper, the careful hanker and the
anxious grocer buzz about sugar as bees buzz about flowers ; and, like
them, make much honey from the cane. If you do not continue to make
the most of sugar, you will, in the language of Touchstone, be damned.
One of the principal items in making sugar, is labour. The chief labour
needed is the labor of the hands and feet. In plain English, the most unles-
sioned, skillless of labour, is the labour most suitable for tending the sugar
garden. The heat and burden of the day are the hardest to bear of the
work required to be done ; and those accustomed to bear the sun’s heat
must do it; the wages must correspond to the value of the labourers’
time; and because we do not chop blocks with razors, or sharpen slate
pencils with lancets, so we do not employ Scotchmen to dig and dung the
sugar garden. As sensible men engaged in the industrial war of the
world, you recruit the soldier which is most adapted to your ranks; as
loyal officers of the army, you seek to prepare the soldier for the fight in
the best way to insure success. In plain English, you believe that the
labourer especially adapted for your garden, has been proved to be the
Islander of the Islands of the Coral Sea ; or better still, the Indian
Coolie. In short, any of those races of mankind who can suffer the burden
of the solar ray. The reasons why these “ aliens ” are needed for such
work, are so obvious, that I will not insult your understandings by repeat-
ing them ; while the objections which have been raised against the employ-
ment of Indian Coolie labour, are the objections of timid men, ignorant
operatives, and politicians for the most part, who could not climb into


political power and remain there except by the brute force of/selfish and
ignorant operative class. The employment of the Indian Coolie in Noith
Queensland is the only solution of the detestlble difficulties which beset
you ; and until that solution is applied, this colony will steadily continue
to decrease in everything which could insure its permanent progress.
At first sight sight you would say, and I think, say well, that the
fittest labourer, and the one most adapted to the soil, is the aboriginal of
the soil. The Australian Caliban ought to be kept at Australian work.
But the fact is, the Australian Prospero has not proved himself equal to
the task of taming the Australian Caliban. The Australian Caliban has
been allowed to ally himself with the Australian Stephano and Trinculo;
that is, to political conspiracy and drunkenness. His hateful nature has
been allowed to gratify its lust on the Australasian Miranda, Neither the
Australian Prospero nor the Australian Ariel have any power over the Aus-
tralian Caliban. He will do anything but work, he will not even carry
logs. If Prospero pinches Caliban or makes him feel his power, the
highly respectable rich religious people at home cry out, “you shall not do
that;” and in fact, the Australian Prospero has never shown any gifts,
supernatural or scientific, for keeping Caliban in his place.
That I think is deeply to be regretted. The Society for the Propa-
gation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts has, I am told, been very successful
in its century of operations. The Church Missionary Society has probably
converted India to Christ. It may be so. Ido not know. What I do
know is, that the Australian aboriginal is, at this hour, a more debased
creature than he was before he was taught to hide his shame in a regula-
tion blanket. The last time I was at the neighbouring port of Bowen
three or four cockle shell canoes paddled in the early morning up to the
starboard side of the English commercial steamer on which I was a pas-
senger. Each canoe contained what appeared to be several bundles of
rags. Presently the rags fell from half-a-dozen full grown naked women,
who proceeded to cover themselves with the waters of the transparent sea.
Some ardent youths, my companions in travel, began to waste their sub-
stance in riotously throwing half-crowns, shillings, florins, and silver six-
pences into the great laughing water. Down went the bronze mermaids
head first into the deep, out of sight, bringing up the shining coin which
they had caught, and showing it in gleeful triumph. This submarine
exhibition of Australian art was open for more than an hour, and those
Australian mermaids paddled to their camp each with sixteen shillings in
her mouth, which would be spent in rum and tobacco.
I had seen men and boys diving for silver sixpences on heathen
coasts, but it was reserved for me to see full grown women do the like
within sound of the English Church bell. Each of those women had a
little baby, and I think it is right to ask if those babies are to be allowed
to grow up as irresponsible as kangaroos, and to have free warren over the
Australian vineyard without being compelled to take their share in dress-
ing and keeping it ?
However, the Australian Caliban is not available for the Australian
sugar garden. He will steal as much sugar as he can; but I think he
should have a fair shaie of the educating cane.


The Islanders of the Islands of the Coral Sea are superior beings to
the Australian Caliban. Many have a strong strain of European blood, with
an occasional Oriental and Anglo-Indian outline of face. They speak a
language which is at once musical and familiar, in which you find a fair
sprinkling of Spanish and Arabic names and words. Palacios Papa,
Gomes, Baul, Rodrigues, Pasian, and Fandango were among some of the
names I took down from Islanders’ lips. They resemble the people with
whom I have lived in the Gulf of Paria, in the Valley of the Cauca, on the
mountain plateaus of Cundinamarca, and on the borders of the Gran
Chaco. They go stark naked, and are all the shades you can make out of
black and white. They are a highly moral people. [I am not surprised at
the laugh which greets this remark, because I know that when we are brought
in close contact with a stranger and more brutal nature than our own, we
succumb at once, and probably with pleasure.] They are possessed in a large
degree of the industrial and fine arts. They are hard-working, ingenious,
imitative, docile, cleanly*—if you don’t make them wear clothing ; fond of
music and dancing, laughter, making love, intriguing and theiving. The
women are singularly affectionate, grateful, humourous and vain. The
married women appear to be absolutely loyal, and certainly I never saw or
heard a married woman sneer at her husband or speak ill of him except
behind his back. Some are very beautiful, others are merely pretty, a few
are as plump as partridges, and because they are natural, I did not see a
single ugly woman amongst them.
I have now on two different occasions in twenty years, made two
different journeys from England to Australia in ships carrying on each
several hundred immigrants, such as serving maids from Ireland, Scot-
land, Wales, and England ; tradesmen, deluded clerks, agricultural
labourers, drapers’ assistants, grocers, lawyers, and other useless and mis-
chievous people with their wives and daughters; and I have now just
returned from a voyage of 133 days in a vessel of 176 tons carrying
eighty nine naked men and women ; and I beg to say, that in sobriety
and cleanliness, the ability to amuse themselves in industry and cheerful
content and gratitude, in sweetness and human dignity, the unchristian
heathen of the Coral Sea, to use a phrase, licked the baptised Britishers
hollow.
They cultivated in their own beautiful islands sugar cane, tobacco,
yams, cocoanuts, bananas, nutmegs, arrowroot, hairicot beans, bread fruit,
the sweet potato or caucdn, and many ether fruits, and flowers and precious
things. We came on illimitable beds of delicious oysters, and large
virgin reefs within which you find the beche-de-mer in strange and mar-
vellous abundance.
The Islands themselves on which these people dwell are of singular
and fantastic beauty. They are all volcanic, and spring from platforms
of coral rock a thousand fathoms deep, and rise to the sky in outlines like
unto stratified music. When the sea which surrounds them is like liquid
opal and the sun tips their peaks with gold, or bathes their valleys in
purple, or paints their slopes in emerald green, you need the best words
of the best poet to describe them.


The first island at which we called was New Ireland. It extends
from Cape Santa Maria to Byron’s Straits, 180 miles, and from Cape
Santa Maria to Cape St. George, 60 miles. It rises to heights varying
from 600 feet to 3000 feet in a series of bold ranges, whose summits and
valleys are densely clothed with luxuriant vegetation. As many as 200
natives visited the ship in their frail canoes, bringing all kinds of delicious
fruits and vegetables for barter. We bought a cart load of yams, cocoa-
nuts, vegetable marrows, sugar cane, arrowroot, bananas, almonds, Chili
peppers, and sweet lemons for what in money value would amount to about
fifteen-pence. The canoes had no sails, but were well ornamented. The
men belonged to a mixed race of feeble but graceful physique; they were
below the average middle height, but a few measured sft. lOin, The
chest of the biggest which I measured was only 32 inches round. At
the invitation of the captain of the ship some thirty of the natives came
on board, went over the ship, sat on the deck and had a smoke. Some of
these we dressed up in red calico, painted their faces with oil colors
showed them various things, and otherwise interested them and gained
their good will. One of the more demonstrative wished to kiss the
Government Agent, but that gentleman had presence of mind to evade
the attention by giving the native his cigar.
Now, had the Government Agent been drunk in his bunk, botanising
on shore, or otherwise willingly keeping his eyes shut, or had the captain
been an unscrupulous scoundrel, those thirty natives could have been
placed under hatches, conveyed to Mackay, and the ship have made an
absolute pi’ofit of £765 by the transaction, and nobody been any the wiser.
Such things hai'e happened.
The temptation is sufficiently great to men who have no character to
lose—over whom it is next to impossible to exert control—and therefore
the Government interfered, as it was bound to interfere. But it was one
of the worst things that could have happened. When a Government does
not make the administration of justice its one and only business, but is
compelled to mix itself up with the people’s business and issue regulations
about how the people shall do their business, and when they shall do it,
and dictate what the people shall work at, the number of hands and feet
they shall employ in their garden, and whether they shall be white or black
and the wage that shall be given, chaos will have come into the industrial
army, and the industrial army and the industrial war cannot go on.
The reason why the Government was bound to interfere, even at the
awful cost of forsaking its legitimate functions, was that murder was being
done under the guise of trade, and man-stealing was being carried on in
the name of commerce.
Oh, the pity of it!
There was not the slightest necessity for these disgusting and dis-
graceful irregularities. But there is for sinful man some diabolical fas-
cination in man-hunting that exceeds fox hunting, fishing or shooting
birds as much as real war exceeds a sham fight. It has always been so,
under all the dynasties of recorded time. Man hunting, in all probability,
achieved the acme of its infamy under Charles V., and was carried on by


all the Christian monarchies until a very recent date. How, with what
veng’enance and blood it was abolished in the United States we all know
full'well. How the Southern States are at the present moment yielding
a fuller and nobler increase under their changed conditions than they yield-
ed under the reign of the slavemonger has been made obvious to the mean-
est capacity. But that we, at this hour and period of the great industrial
war, should, on our seeking to found an English colony within the tropics,
have got hampered and embarrased on the question of labor, is one of
those accidents in your history that cannot possibly assume a permanent
influence in any shape or form.
Here have forced upon us two questions which cannot, and ought not
to be shirked.
1. What measure of blame is due to you ?
2. Was the interference of Government effective?
1 That you have_been blameworthy to a large extent is too amply
proved by the amount of blame which is due to you still. Ihe death
rate among South Sea Islanders on some of your estates has reached
the appaling height of sixty per cent. These deaths all arose from
preventihle causes. You have shown no ability in acclimatising 1 the
Islanders whom you bought, and when through purely climatic effects
men and women dropt down dead, and continued to die like rotten
sheep, you were supine in the application of remedial measures. It
is notoriously true that the Islanders on your plantations have not
properly or appropriately fed. Many have been allowed to die of
ulcers, dysentry, fever, wounds, paralysis, delirium, dropsy, opthalmia,
pnumonia, and from fear. The number of the “missing” and the
if found dead ” has not yet been reckoned up ; that number you know
to be very great. How many have gone mad , you do not know, or
care to know. How many have died while watching on your own
solitary shores for the ship to come which had been promised to carry
them home, you cannot accurately declare ; nor are you yet quite
sure that you have found out the right way of sustaining, lodging, and
clothing these labourers. This is a very serious indictment. But
more remains. When on a recent occasion 224: of these people died
in a brief space out of some 580, then down with suffering and sorrow,
who was present when these Islanders passed away? When anyone
was present in those last moments he was generally some brutal person,
who could not speak a word of the dying man’s tongue, some wretch
who was probably not quite sober, or some prentice butcher placed
there to do the mere mechanical part of shovelling the remains into
a hole.
Let me ask you, not how many hours did you keep these people
at work, but, did' you ever give them any play f These Islanders are
passionately fond of music and dancing ; in their own homes or on
their own yellow sands, they are nearly always getting up a song, and
having a dance. How have you knocked the song out of them, and
crippled them for the dance ? Had you known how to keep their
hearts merry, their limbs had not lost their motion, they had not died.


Some of you, to your honour, would never have taken these Islanders
under your care or into your service, if you had not known how to
handle them ; and those very plantations where the right methods of
treatment have prevailed, are proofs sufficient that the dire mortality
which has occurred, was needless. Lastly, have you always been just
in your dealings with these children of the Coral Sea ? It is astonish-
ing, and to some, a thing unknown, that injustice kills. To many
human beings injustice is more deadly than rats’ bane or arsenic. The
cause of much of the injustice which'planters have meted out to their
Islanders, is that in an insolent sense of their own religious as well as
racial superiority, they have regarded the Islanders as heathen, and
therefore, out of the pale of justice ! r J his thrice-accursed conviction
is strong in the minds of all professing Christians, especially those who
place a higuer value on pious beliefs than on human feelings ; and it
will become the bounden duty of all citizens of Queensland to ascertain
whether this thrice-accursed conviction is wide-spread and abidino- ■
because, if it be, then the trade in Kanakas must cease ; not
the interests of the Islanders, but in your own interests and the interest
of humanity.
Heathen ! I would infinitely rather live the rest of my days on
one of the Islands of the Coral Sea among* these “ Gentiles of the
Isles” than among a people whose god is 'a trinity of lust, avarice
and greed !
This brings me to our second question. Was the interference of
Government in regulating, rectifying, or conducting the labour traffic
effective ? }
If I have in much sorrow, accused you of blame, it is with much
more indignation that I accuse the Government of Queensland of
interfering in the labour traffic in such a manner os to foster abuses
breed scandals, and induce the grossest outrages ever committed on
human beings.
We have agreed, that Government was compelled to interfere
because murder was being done in the name of trade, and man-stealing
in the name of commerce. But the interference ought to have been
effective. It was the most defective interference ever made by Gov-
ernment. It was a disgraceful mockery—a shameful delusion, and an
effectual snare.
Under the organised interference of Government, Islanders have
been brought from their homes who never understood the nature of
the “ contract” into which they were beguiled.
Under the organised interference of Government, labour vessels
have been made into dens of infamy where the grossest sensuality, and
obscene living have been rampant, in which some representatives of
Government took part, and were as conspicuous for their treachery to
the Executive, as for their loathsome, immoralities.
Under the organised interference of Government, labour vessels
have been fraudulently measured, whereby the responsible Minister has
licensed a ship to carry more Islanders than the Statute allowed.


Under the same organised interference, many thousands of
Islanders have, by a legal figment, been enthralled in Queensffind after
having been illegally beguiled from their homes by the very men whom
Government had selected to represent it ; and whose duty it was to
hinder the doing of these things.
Under the organised interference of Government, the Government
submitted complacently to insult and outrage in the persons of some
of its representatives, which only a Government conscious of its own
corruption, could have so submitted itself
Under the organised interference of Government, other things
have been done, which I will, for the present, refrain from revealing;
hut if need he, I will make known with sufficient clearness of speech
in my own time. Lest, however, it should he supposed by some, that
this is mere rhetorical flourish, 1 will ask you to try to imagine how
much infanticide has been committed in these Islands since Govern-
ment began its ineffectual interference ?
You will never guess.
I think that another thing for which Government is specifically
responsible ought not to be passed over. I allude to the pernicious
evil of deluding- the public by means of the non-effective interference
of Government. The people have been deluded by the way the Gov-
ernment have carried out its none effective interference. This is what
I have called an effectual snare. Had the interference of Government
been real, earnest, or what it pretended to he, instead of being an or-
ganised hypocricy, the people would not have been deceived, the traffic
might have been loyally conducted, and unreported outrages, and
outrages, that have been too much reported, would not have been be-
gun and systematically continued.
But now let us get into the fresh air and resume our experience
at the Islands.
We brought no natives from New Ireland because we had no
attractions to offer them. They wanted rifles, if you please, and gun-
powder, and we had nothing but prints that would not wash, pipes
that would not draw, knives and tomahawks too soft to sharpen, look-
ing glasses, mouth organs, fish hooks, jews harps arid small glass
beads.
An incident occurred at New Ireland which is worth telling: The
captain who had given up all hope of seducing New Irelanders to sell
themselves made all sail for Cape St. Mary. We had not been two
hours before the wind when we came on a large fleet of canoes, con-
taining not less than three hundred islanders. They carried no arms,
they brought no provisions to market ; thereupon the master reversed
sails and came to a stand, for surely here were people anxious for a
free passage to Queensland, to enlist in the industrial army. The
canoes came close to the ship, but there was no sign that a single soul
meant to sell himself. The captain then opened up his cheap jackery,
he filled both hands with gauds—the mate and recruiter held up knives
and tomahawks. “All this” shouted the skipper, “for one hoy!”


Then on the instant came from the canoes one unanimous cry of
“ gammon ! ” I was never more surprised in my life, and diligently
enquired of the captain afterwards as to what he thought of this use
of the English slang word, and whether the natives could know its
real meaning. On which he petulently said that he supposed “ some
adjective missionary fellow had been among them! ” If that be so it
is the most valuable missionary intelligence I have ever received.
Then did the captain, because he would not be baulked, begin to play
on a jews harp. No doubt he had been accustomed thus to play the
syren, but to my infinite amazement, some of the natives began to
make much more accordant music in response on their own Pan-
pipes ! If “ gammon ” was scathing, scornful, satire, the pandean
pipe playing was sweetest humour. The captain seeing that nothing
could be done, observed a squall coming on, so he gave the word
“ bout ship,” and we continued our course, and the natives paddled
home, no doubt to thread small heads, tell tales, and go to sleep before
a fire under the cocoa palms.
This matter of the small colored glass bead remained a mystery
to me for a long time. Here were full grown men willing to sell
themselves for a thimble full of glass beads ! What could it mean ?
Here were women parting with all control over their own souls and
bodies for as many glass beads as you could hold between thumb and
finger • you could buy a splendid ammon or canoe capable of holding
20 men for six penn’orth of glass beads ; you could get 10,000 cocoa
nuts f.o.b. for eighteen pence in the form of glass beads.
What could be the meaning of folly so obvious to the commercial
mind ? I will answer that question.
One day when the weather was unpropitious, the heat excessive,
and life very dull and heavy on hoard ship, and hardly worth living,
the captain gave our women a present of those beautiful glass beads,
10,0U0 of which you can buy for 2s. od. Instantly the face of all
creation was changed ; joy took the place of deadly dullness, every
woman was happy ; and when women are glad, men cannot he sorrow-
ful. On another occasion we took on board a youthful naked woman,
without the least speck of ornament or cicatrisation or tattooing, and
she was so melancholy for the first day or two that I began to suspect
that she had been carried away against her will. I made strictest en-
quiry, and found that she had come for love; she had climbed out of
the sea into the boat of her own free accord and would not be turned
out of it. What, therefore, was the matter ? She found herself mis-
erable, poor and naked amongst some of her own sisters whose necks
and arms and loins were covered with the precious glass bead, and she
was shy, demure, lonely, and full of woe. She was very pretty, and
the captain, who was not insensible to the charms of female beauty,
gave her a small match box full of beads. As if by magic she was a
changed being; it was soon found that she had a peculiarly sweet
voice, and five minutes later she was leaning against this one, then
against that, giving opinions, and in the most familar way taking an


interest in jour welfare and criticising everything and everybody all
round. Moreover, she was married a few days after she had come
into her kingdom of glass beads.
The explanation of this mystery is as follows : —The natives of
those Islands are great artists in shells. They make lovely bracelets
out of shells, which they call “ altiltol ambulot .” Earrings, nose, and
finger rings, all out of shells, which they call kabbn. Kabdn is a
generic word for wealth. The man or woman with the longest string
of kabdn, is the most important person in the village ; it is equivalent
to the family diamonds of our own aristocracy. An ample necklace
of real kabon takes a life-time to make, and these children of the Coral
Sea regard our Brummagem moulded glass beads (coloured), as of equal
value. This is the solution of the small head mystery, which, in all pro-
bability, will be a mystery for some time yet, but may not last quite so
long as some mysteries of less importance to the families of men,
which hold them in as deep a spell and give as deep a tone, and tint
to their lives.
From New Ireland we made a rapid run to Melapheelee, Melaleff,
and Maleur, known on the charts as the Khaan Group. From these
Islands we obtained, on two visits, forty-five men and women. We
could easily have doubled the number but that women were refused.
There was no difficulty whatever in obtaining the men brought away.
Some sold themselves, and gave the proceeds to their kingsfolk and
acquaintance. In other cases the “ king ” got a portion of the barter
gauds for himself. The “king” on more than one island was not at
all a bad looking scoundrel. He seemed to have absolute command
over the lives of the natives ; he orders this man to go, and he goes :
this other to stay, and he remains ; otherwise they pay their king no
respect; he paddles his own canoe, catches his own fish, and takes his
place like the rest in a canoe of twenty, and works as a common man
when any common work is done
Limited as the authority of the king or chief is, it has a marked
effect on the life and conduct of the natives, for they learn obedience,
and readily fall into any rule or regulation under which they may
come on board ship, or on a plantation.
i am morally persuaded that the great attraction which brings
the Islanders to Queensland is, that they may carry back muskets and
gunpowder. They come, as I have said, with readiness, and are con-
tented to come, but they have no idea of the duration of time ; they
cannot realise the meaning of three years or three yams, as applied
to a space of time •, they have no memory, not even so much as the
domestic dog, and you can only impress their minds by the same or
similar means. As for understanding, a “contract” printed on paper,
the thing is simply a solemn farce.
On our way from New Ireland to Melapheelee, we spoke an
American whaler, and made a very near acquaintance with a sperm
whale, whose leviathian-bevelled sides were sixty feet in length ; and
I could not help feeling jealous for Queensland, that a traffic so


essentially English as that of whaling, should not be pursued in waters
so convenient to Queensland ports. From the Khaan Group we went
to Gerrit Denys, another much larger group of much larger Islands.
The natives speak the same language, hut with a pronunciation so dif-
ferent, as to make it seem, on first hearing, to he a different idiom ,
they are of the same mixed breeds ; carry on the same commerce and
cultivation ; have among them no lawyers or tailors, or shoemakers, or
doctors or priests ; and the only ambition they have, is to possess a
long string of glass beads and a gun.
Here I went through the terrible experience of knowing how more
vessels are lost in calms than in storms. Our ship was lying close to
San Antonio, with nothing but light airs playing with the sails. All
day a heavy sea swell had rolled in from the north-east About half-
past ten at night there came a dead calm, the swell heaving us stealth-
ily on 10 the reef which ran out from San Antonio. The night up to
eleven o’clock was clear, when there came down not showers, but waves
of rain hiding stars and sky from sight. The thunder was simply
maddening, but there was a candour about the lightning which robbed
it of any malignant partiality; by its occasional flashes we were kept
advised of the silver waves which shivered on the coral reef immedi-
ately under our port bow. The captain behaved with promptness and
skill, helped by a crew who manned the boats and pulled the nose of
the ship into a safe position ; a breeze sprang up which favoured us, and
after a night of grave anxiety we got under sail for the Solomons, glad
to get out of the way of skulking reefs into the free and open sea.
Man has made nothing so beautiful as a ship, but it is also the
most helpless of things ; a ship without wind is a body without a soul,
and the time will come when, if these visits to the islands of the Coral
Sea are to be continued, they will be made not in three-masted bar-
quentines, but in vessels, to whom a breeze is no favour and a dead
calm a great boon.
The time occupied in the voyage was, as I have said, one hundred
and thirty-three days ; had the ship been provided with an auxiliary
screw, the voyage, including the days occupied in recruiting, could have
been done in less than twenty-five days.
The method of recruiting is exactly like the old method of the
recruiting sergeant in country towns at home. All the lies that can
be conveyed to an Islander’s fancy are palmed off on him, and no
mortal mixture of earth’s mould, is so easily deceived as he; he is an
adapt in deceiving himself, and he indulges in it as some lower natures
indulge in ardent spirits; but when he is helpt in his self deception
by one who is an artist in lying, then the Islander falls easily into the
snare which is laid before his open eyes. Nothing has astonished me
so much as the little that is known of the natural history of these
people, and apparently no one cares to know anything about them.
Let me remind you, that these Islanders have never been con-
quered by a superior race. They have never come under the discip-
line of military rule ; have never known what it is to obey orders,


even when these are given by a man in a language they do not
know, and thinks he will be understood if he speaks sufficiently
loud. They have not been trained to continuous effort, they have
never felt the insolence or the graciousness of correction —save the
little moral influence which may be said to be induced in them
by being ruled in a limited degree by their kings or head men, they
know little or nothing of restraint. The physic of the doctor, the
rod of the schoolmaster, or the rousing voice of the gangman are all
odious to them. They die as willingly under the influence of a little
authority as they do on a meat diet or a reduction of the temperature.
They would give the world to know English, or that the English
knew New Irish. Having the frailty of all human beings they are
fond of sympathy and an exchange of ideas; nothing is so sweet to
them as beads and a clear understanding of what is wanted from
them ; what they want themselves and what they are going to receive
for wliat they are willing to part with. But from this they are at
present debarred, and in a manner that is absolutely appalling to be-
hold ; men get angry if these summer children do not apprehend the
meaning of an inarticulate thundering noise or some unhuman panto-
mime. Up to the present your South Sea Islander has been an ex-
pensive failure, and I cannot help saying it, you who have suftered
most are most to blame.
What remedy you will provide for this state of things, circum-
stances, an increase of accurate knowledge, combined with the best
experience and your common sense, will dictate. You may, perhaps,
until an able and enlightened Government shall open up India to your
choice, come to the conclusion, that to have training depots at the
Islands to prepare and discipline recruits for your garden will be better,
more worthy of you in every way, and would certainly be cheaper than
to keep expensive and sometimes excellent and adequate hospitals on
your own estates. Take, for instance, Bouka, the northernmost point
of the Solomons, and always within a day of the ever constant south-
east monsoon. There you could acquire suitable land, set up copra
works, collect the grotesque but profitable beche-de-mer, plant sugar,
and have a model plantation from whence you could obtain well-drilled
recruits for your own service. By this means, or something after this
way, you would get better men ; you woubJ secure a fair proportion of
the hill tribes who are more adapted for acclimatisation ; you would
obviate the risk, danger, and cost of long voyages. Governmental
regulations, if these must continue, could then be rationally carried
out without the slightest need of running counter to regulations
which have a precedence over all colonial regulations or Govern-
ment resolutions, or Government Agents. I allude, of course, to
the regulations of the Mercantile Shipping A.ct and the exactions
of Insurance Companies, At any rate we all know that the labour
traffic is a traffic which need never have brought us trouble. We know
that for it to be continued it must be found to be fit and appropriate,


and continued in sympathy with the great Head of the Department.*
The best men, the best appliances, the most experienced intelli-
gences combined with a passion for justice, and an unswerving allegi-
ance to that which is excellent and right must mark your conduct.
Then instead of your Islander costing you large sums of money and a
world of care to recruit and make fit for your service he shall not cost
you the fourth even in money value of what he costs you now.
And for our dear mother who lectures us, we will never cease to
say—
'• 0 England ! model to thy inward greatness,
Like little body with a mighty heart,
What mightst thou do that honour would thee do
Were all thy children kind and natural.”
* By this figure of speech I did not mean as I have been maliciously represent-
ed to mean the Premier of Queensland, but One, who although He goes by many
names is quite unknown to the vast majority of men, both in this colony and out
of it.
POLE, OUTRIDGE & CO., PRINTERS, WICKHAM STREET, BRISBANE,






