

What An Executive
Should Know


Training men for'
business leader-
ship must shift
from the less
practical, the
purely historical,
and the theoreti-
cal, to the practical
and concrete
situations of busi-
ness as it is now.


Copyright.
HEMINGWAY & ROBERTSON PTY. LTD.
Printed in Australia.


What An Executive
Should Know
This training is strictly lor serious business men
young or old, who see in if an opportunity to
profit by the experience of other business men.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE
Division in Australasia of
HEMINGWAY AND ROBERTSON
Proprietary Limited
Bank Place, Melbourne, C. I.
AUSTRALIA.
1931.


It is only through
an adherence to
calculable conclu-
sions that we can
be certain of ac-
complishing sound
and permanent
prosperity the
greatest thing for
a certain advance-
ment towards an
improved national
welfare.
Industry and our
economic condi-
tions require facts
for safety to
business and the
nation.


Headquarters
in Australasia
BANK HOUSE, MELBOURNE.
Australasian Headquarters of Hemingway &
Robertson, since 1897 Educational Leaders
in the Southern Hemisphere.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Some Facts
About Us
THE first stones of this national institution were
laid in New Zealand in 1897.
Inspired with the idea of placing at the disposal
of ambitious men a personal tuitional service, calcu-
lated to enhance the possibilities of a more success-
ful career. Tuition activities straightway met with
remarkable success; the continuance of which led to
enquiries from all parts of New Zealand, requesting
similar instruction, and thus the idea of compiling com-
plete and satisfactory courses of instruction for busi-
ness by a correspondence method was germinated. At
that time the idea of such a system of tuition was
quite unknown in Australasia, and only vaguely
talked about overseas.
Developments continued, and in 1912 the Aus-
tralian Office was opened in Melbourne. The history
of the following years is a story of steady expansion
and improvement.
In September, 1929, Hemingway & Robertson
made a further forward step in taking over the local
organisation of the Alexander Hamilton Institute,
whose work, through its Modern Business Course and
Service, is of international importance and acceptance.
In 1930, the Alexander Hamilton Institute com-
menced the complete reorganisation of its Modern
Business Course and Service to meet the tempo of
new business conditions. Opportunity was taken of
this forward movement by Hemingway & Robertson
to completely adapt and rewrite much of the text
matter and all of the service for Australasian con-
ditions. Now for the first time business men through-
out Australia and New Zealand may subscribe to a
course which is international in its acceptance, and
essentially local in its application.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Headquarters
Overseas
HAMILTON HALL, ASTOR PLACE, NEW YORK.
Remodelled and enlarged building, the home
of the Alexander Hamilton Institute for
the United Kingdom, Canada, and U.S.A.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON I N S T I T U T B


About the
Institute
THE Alexander Hamilton Institute was founded in
1909 by Joseph French Johnson, then Dean of the
New York University. School of Commerce, Accounts
and Finance.
Since that time the Institute has offered an
executive training to business men through its now
famous Modern Business Course and Service.
It has enrolled for this training more than
415,000 men (over 6,000 in Australia and New Zea-
land), among whom are many of the leading business
executives of the world.
It is not an exaggeration to say that there are but
few manufacturing or financial organisations which do
not have at least some of the executives enrolled with
the Institute.
There is one all-important question for every
business man to ask himself: “Where am I going to
be in business five years from now?”
The Alexander Hamilton Institute knows that
business progress and greater business success are
more sure to the man who faces the question frankly,
and takes active steps to win the goal he seeks.
This book brings to you the plan and scope of
the Modern Business Course and Service, designed
for executives and potential executives who feel the
need of acquiring the basic principles of modern
business.
The Course brings you a definite knowledge of
the principles and practice of every phase of modern
business. This definite knowledge is necessary for
the correct organisation, able direction, and efficient
management of every business enterprise. It creates
broader business vision, greater executive ability and
wiser mature judgment.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Business to-day
requires broadly
trained men who
understand all de-
partments of a
business.
While business
demands and pays
well for such
broadly trained
men, it does not
produce them.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Chapter One
YOUR NEXT FIVE YEARS
WN any business organisation to-day there will be
found owners and workers, just as might have been
found a generation ago. In an organisation of any
size, however, there will be men filling positions which
are peculiarly the outgrowth of modern business. The
expansion in the scale on which business is conducted,
the growth of the business unit, with hundreds
employed where tens formerly worked, and with
thousands a not unusual payroll, has led to a demand
for a comparatively new type in business—the
executive.
The internal development of the business unit has
paralleled its external growth. Both have been toward
impersonality. Handi-craft industry produced goods
for a personal trade; machine industry produces
standard goods for world markets. So, in office or
factory, where owner once could know all his
employees and carry on his business alone, now a staff
of executives exercise control. To capital and labor,
as productive factors, a third element, management,
must now be added.
There is a steady demand for men of executive
ability. This means a demand for men who know
business' and know how to obtain results with their
knowledge.
Some executives will be found directing sales
forces: some the production of goods. The accountant,
the advertising manager, the credit man and a dozen
other department heads find their places in the ranks
of modern business executives. But just as oculist,
surgeon, and nose and throat specialist start first-year
medicine with dissection, and follow the same funda-
mental course throughout, to-day’s business executives
are finding a broad grounding in business as a unit,
the sure foundation for executive training. For
executives, general principles come first; specialisation
later.
The purpose of this book is to give a digest of
what organised business training includes.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


The Tempo
of Business
TT HE next five years in Australian business will
offer more opportunity and more danger, than
is likely in any similar period for a long time to come.
More men will achieve independence.
More men who might achieve it will fail because
of their inability properly to analyse the facts.
A right program will be more profitable than it
ever has been. A wrong decision will be far more
costly.
To put it in other words, the organisation of
business, the tempo of business, the speed of business
are all in process of rapid change.
As a result of these new developments, thousands
of men who supposed they were secure for life find
themselves in a strange situation. They are dazed
and wondering. The need of business is for trained
men, not only in high official position, but in every key
position throughout entire organisations—men who will
merit constant promotion to greater responsibilities,
because they have been trained to think and reason,
in terms of fundamental principles.
There is a law that holds inexorably in modern
business; men progress in proportion to the breadth
and soundness of their business training and
knowledge.
Business is in crying need of executives, and yet
business is unable itself to develop enough executives
to meet the demand.
For it is the universal tendency of modern
business to develop the specialist—the man who knows
well the particular department in which his experience
has been gained, but who has been so close to his job
that he has had little or no opportunity to study the
broad, fundamental principles upon which all business
is built. Thus business is overrun with specialists
who stop acquiring knowledge at this stage —but yet
of executives, business cannot secure sufficient numbers.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Business
To-day
"■BUSINESS has long since ceased to be largely a
series of price-hagglings—a continual measure-
ment of greed and sharp wits against sharp wits and
greed. The real business men of this age are creators.
They are seeking to build that which will endure.
To-day, more than ever, it is the man who can
organise and conduct the affairs of an entire business
or of an important department of a business, whom we
are asked to produce. Such a man practically deter-
mines his own business status.
This natural development has been further aggra-
vated by underlying changes in business. Chief
among the motivating conditions are : the motor car,
the radio, the aeroplane. Chief among the resulting
manifestations are : mergers and re-organisations.
A permanent business, whether it is big or little,
must be productive, and it must be beneficial to every-
one concerned buyer, seller, employer, employee.
The executive who runs such a business, or any part
of it, must give his energies to organising the forces
that are at his command: to judging, directing, and
influencing men: to long distance planning: to meeting
unexpected difficulties and unlooked-for opportunities
with correct, decisive thought and word.
These functions call for brains —not the crude
product, but finished material; they call for thought—
not helter skelter, but concentrated and effective; they
call for knowledge not aimlessly picked up, but
organised.
In place of a confused chaos of notions as to the
best methods of starting, managing, and financing
business, of keeping accounts, of buying and selling,
of personnel control, there are now definite, well-
established principles.
Some of these principles are concerned with mat-
ters over which the individual has no control. They
belong in the field of economics. However well a
man may know his own business, he should have at
least a working knowledge of economics.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


A Definite
Plan
AS you envisage the next five years, there is every
reason for optimism, for you have hope, deter-
mination, and the prospect of numberless opportunities.
But for sober analysis, first look back on the last five
years, and plot your rate of progress.
Five years ago you had hopes and plans—every
man has—you need only ask his wife—if they have not
materialised, is it not for lack of definiteness ? In
starting anew, what plan can you conceive that has
the all-important element of definiteness and inevita-
bility? There is only one plan for business which
recent history can endorse, and to which successful
men can testify. It is: Executive training in the
principles of all the important departments of business.
This is what the Alexander Hamilton Institute pro-
vides: a definite plan for your business progress.
We offer you definite results, results which you
will feel in a definite space of time. There is nothing
vague or conjectural about it.
As an extra locomotive attached to a train makes
its power felt at once, so you arc conscious immediately
of a fresh force at work for your business progress. In
2i years you will have acquired the equipment of an
executive. Your new sense of power will be as clear
to those about you as it is to you. That your income
and responsibilities will multiply is assured. You will
have more confidence, more poise, more decision, more
time, more ability to handle men, more assurance in
handling problems, more power. And your progress,
in position and income, will have only begun.
There are only two ways to attain an all-round
knowledge of business —
One is by actual experience in each of the main
divisions of business—Production, Marketing, Finance,
Accounting and Personnel. Approached by this road,
success is many years away.
The other, the shorter and more direct road to
success, is the way of the Alexander Hamilton
Institute.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


A Knowledge of
Principles is Vital
IF a man is to be considered as head of a business,
something more is demanded than that he be a
specialist in his own field.
A sales manager who knows only selling; a pro-
duction manager whose business knowledge does not
reach beyond the factory; an auditor who knows only
accounts —none of these men would be qualified to
control at the head of an enterprise, for there would be
many matters coming before them for decision on
which they would be unable to pass sound judgment.
Going further, the clerk who knows only his own
job is an unlikely prospect for head of his department.
A business man does not need to be, nor can he be, a
jack of all trades. But he does need, in addition to a
thorough knowledge of his own work, a good working
knowledge of the other departments of business and of
other businesses that may be operating in altogether
different lines. Broad knowledge cannot be gained
by experience alone. The man is fortunate who can
discharge his own work between usual business hours.
He has no chance to learn of the other departments of
business at first hand. He can, however, learn what
others have found to be successful principles and
methods, and what they have discovered to be
unsuccessful.
Organised business knowledge is a systematic
summary of the lessons that experience has taught
thousands of able men.
Likewise the department head should have a
knowledge of the principles of the departments outside
his own so as to work in harmony with every phase
of the activities of the concern.
The institute does not train men to become just
credit men, just advertising men, just salesmen, just
accountants, or just plant managers. It does not train
narrow specialists for narrow jobs.
The Modern Business Course gives a man a
sound and thorough training of the fundamentals in
every phase of business and trains him to understand
business in its entirety.
modern business course and service


Efficient
Management
ONE of the most striking symptoms of the business
difficulties of the present time is the urge put
forward by publicists and others for a reduction in the
costs of production.
It is to be presumed what the protagonists of lower
production costs have in mind, is really a plea for
lower costs in conducting business in all departments.
It is a pity that the corrective views should be confined
to what is, after all, merely one phase of the problem,
and not necessarily the dominant one. To the think-
ing business man there can be no doubt that one of
the contentions advanced in this respect, is that faulty
organisation and management in industry, are one of
the prime costs of economic disequilibrium.
It may be said that lack of efficiency in manage-
ment is always present in greater or less degree in a
large number of businesses. The extent to which
businesses are committed to the care of inexperienced
managers and executives, on the poor recommendation
of their possession of the minimum of capital, or
because of nepotism, or even more casualness in
selection, is notorious.
In many old-established concerns, conservatism
in outlook acts as a drag on progress, and yet it is
to the care of many of these that the fortunes of
business are committed.
There are many men in business who, while freely
admitting that a working knowledge of law or
engineering is not inherited, nevertheless feel them-
selves entirely competent, without either counsel or
experience, to undertake one of the most delicate, tech-
nical and difficult of all business operations, that of
organising a business enterprise. Yet this is some-
thing in which few men ultimately succeed, and which
requires and receives the continuous study of our very
best executives.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Chapter Two
MEETING THE CHALLENGE
THIS is the way in which the Institute presents
business principles to its subscribers. It has
taken the experience of the world’s business men. It
has boiled down that experience into convenient form.
It brings this concentrated experience to you and says,
"Take it and use it as your own.”
Could any mind come in contact with the minds
of these business men without becoming more self-
confident, more active, more able? Could any man’s
mind under this wonderful stimulus, fail to produce
valuable ideas for his business?
For the human mind is like the receiving set of a
radio. It picks up thoughts and ideas at all times, and
to whatever degree you train yourself to think in
fundamental principles, to that degree do you pick up
fundamental ideas and thoughts. If your training has
been confined entirely to detail —to methods—to the
how instead of the why—of business procedure, your
mind can be tuned to receive thoughts and ideas only
in terms of detail and technique. But when you train
yourself to think fundamentally, you can no more keep
fundamental thoughts and ideas out of your mind, than
you can keep messages out of a radio receiving set by
building a stone wall around it.
The men modern business must have to continue
its present pace, to carry out plans for further expan-
sion, are the men who have ideas. Ideas that speed
sales. Ideas that cut costs. Ideas that increase the
net profits of their companies.
The ability to generate ideas, and the knowledge
of fundamental business principles that is behind that
ability, distinguishes the executive from the clerk, the
£BOO or £1,500 a year man, from the man who is
making £3OO a year.
We train you to avoid costly errors, to avoid
unnecessary work, to concentrate your efforts on work
that is constructive and profitable,
We teach you the time-tested methods of success-
ful men whose authority is proved.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Guesses No
Longer Pay
■ N the good old days all business was largely guess-
work. The difficulties of expanding business
were met by men giving their time with the zeal of
scientists. They worked night and day, and they
learned by frightfully hard experience.
The good guessers could acquire a fortune and a
reputation for wisdom. They guessed that they would
take such and such a line of goods: they guessed what
their customers would buy: they guessed how much
stock they had on hand; they often guessed at what
they had taken in or paid out during the month.
They gained knowledge through hard experience.
Graduating from the "University of Hard Knocks,"
was their slogan and pass-word.
A younger generation rightly asked whether the
time and labour of learning could not be saved. Edu-
cators against inertia and conservatism were trying to
demonstrate that it could. Young men began to
acquire at business colleges and universities the special-
ised training that formerly required a lifetime of experi-
ence. Through the medium of specialised training
they quickly rose to important posts. Whenever they
succeeded against the so styled "self made” business
man it was only because they were naturally better
administrators—their special training had made them
so.
Here then was an army of professional technicians
under amateur generals. A few of these generals were
also gifted students. They were self-trained as well
as self-made men. Some of them were so impressed
by their discovery of what could be learned from
others, even through the wretched scraps of business
literature then available, that they founded the
Alexander Hamilton Institute.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


A Vital
Development
THE realisation that general business development
depended not on the extent to which a compara-
tively few business men voluntarily acquired an under-
standing of fundamental business and economic prin-
ciples, but upon the readiness with which thousands of
others might appreciate the advantages of and the
necessity for such training, was responsible for the
founding of the Alexander Hamilton Institute.
But a year ago the Institute from its contact with
business leaders, sensed revolutionary changes were
in prospect —changes echoing in Australasia.
Little business units were being merged into big
units. Industries were reaching out into broader
markets. Prices were about to become subject to an
entirely new set of conditions. Production methods
were being revolutionised. Sales organisation and
strategy of the past were entirely unfitted for the new
competition.
The responsibilities of guiding business under the
new conditions could not be discharged by men trained
under older and easier circumstances.
The Institute set out to prepare a wholly new
course to meet the new conditions. The co-operation
of authorities whose business success belongs to the
present and not to the past was engaged. They are
the biggest and most successful men of the present.
As a result, the Course and Service now offered
is new from start to finish. Every unit will come to
you fresh and alive—straight from the inner sanctums
of the new business world.
Here in Australia and New Zealand, Hemingway
& Robertson faced with a like task of evolving new
ways to meet the changing conditions have brought
this new Course right into line with conditions as they
apply to these countries, so that business men here
may have at their disposal the most famous business
Course and Service in the world oriented to Australian
and New Zealand business conditions.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Fundamentals Govern
All Business
MBECAUSE all businesses are fundamentally alike
we have charted the range of knowledge neces-
sary to the business man who would progress steadily
and substantially in his business career.
To the executive, this range of knowledge is essen-
tial to the proper conduct and progress of business.
To the younger man, to the man on one of the
lower rungs of the business ladder, this complete, all-
round knowledge becomes increasingly important as
his responsibilities increase; while still acquiring a
working knowledge of his own department of business,
he must, even at this stage of his business career, begin
to look beyond the narrow confines of his own job.
This broadened knowledge of business as a whole will
prepare him for the executive position of to-morrow;
also it will help him in coping more successfully with
the pressing problems of to-day.
A business executive cannot afford to make
mistakes. To guard against mistakes, he must be
fortified with an all-round knowledge of business
practice—not merely a partial or one-sided knowledge
of a particular department.
These principles are fundamental and apply to all
lines of business. The man who says they do not
apply because his business is “different” is simply
exposing the fact that he doesn’t know his business.
Every business has its points of difference, just as
every man has an individuality of his own. But we
know that human nature, broadly speaking, is much the
same in all. In a like sense, all business moves along
similar lines. It all consists of Production, Marketing,
Financing, Accounting, and Personnel.
The broad principles of modern business science,
therefore, govern all business. They underlie your
problems, no matter how “different” your business may
appear on the surface.
Although the practitioners of business are not
required by law to pass examinations, business is none
the less a profession. Until one masters the funda-
mentals he is not, in a professional sense, a business
man.
.ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Chapter Three
WHAT SHOULD AN EXECUTIVE
KNOW?
FOR the purpose of scientific study, business has
been divided into four fundamentals:
Production —the mechanics of transform-
ing material and labour into goods and
services of greater utility.
Marketing the distribution of that
which is produced, whether it be a
material product or an intangible
service.
Finance—the organisation of a business
enterprise and the financing of its
producing and distribution activities.
Accounting—which records the activities
of the other three phases, reveals
trends in the business and serves as a
guide for future development.
In addition, he needs a definite knowledge of the
laws governing his ordinary business transactions and
business contracts. This must be supplemented by
that knowledge of economics and business conditions,
that will enable him to read and understand the
barometers of business, and consider general economic
conditions, as they affect his particular business
interest.
This is the range of knowledge that every business
executive or potential executive should possess, no
matter what his particular line of business may be.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Progress and
Knowledge
MOST men start their business careers with only
a hazy idea of the relation of their own work
to other departments. How far and fast they progress
depends to a considerable extent upon the broadening
of their knowledge to encompass business activities as
a whole.
A knowledge of advertising principles and adver-
tising campaigns may well make one a valuable
assistant to the Advertising Manager.
The man who would be Advertising Manager,
however, must possess a detailed knowledge of all
activities falling under the heading of Marketing, and
in addition have such knowledge of the principles
underlying other phases of the business, as will enable
him to consider problems of production and finance,
as well as of marketing, in the advertising of his
product.
To advance to the position of executive in charge
of all marketing activities, he must have not only the
knowledge which will enable him to hold the rein
on sales, advertising and marketing geography, but
also that broader knowledge, which will enable him
to co-ordinate the marketing plans with the production
and financial programmes.
As executive head of a business enterprise, he
must have an even broader knowledge of principles,
so that he may be able to discuss production with the
Production Manager, marketing with the Marketing
Manager, finance with the Secretary, so that he may
be able to co-ordinate these activities into a har-
monious whole.
And because economic conditions play so impor-
tant a part in business his plans for the individual
business must always take into consideration general
economic conditions.
Just as the other features of the Course elucidate
the principles of business organisation, so current
happenings arc interpreted by the Institute for direct
application to the daily conduct of his business.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Test Yourself
by These Questions
HERE are twelve simple business questions. They
are typical of the kind that come before execu-
tives every day and must be answered quickly,
logically, and correctly.
What steps must be taken by a company to
secure voluntary liquidation?
What is the place of Preference Shares in
company financing?
What qualities should the carton or package
have?
How would you go about devising and
developing selling methods for a new
product?
Define Working Capital. What are its chief
forms?
What are the four standard methods of com-
puting depreciation?
What effect does trade usage have on collec-
tion policy?
Describe five up-to-date methods of reward-
ing labour.
What is the most effective way to eliminate
responses to advertisements from the
merely curious?
To what extent is a collection letter a selling
letter?
What is meant by the term "Gold Points”?
What are the relations of Value, Price,
Money, and Credit?
The ones you cannot answer, or that leave you
doubtful as to the correctness and completeness of your
decisions, may be typical of the business blind spots
that retard progress.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Help for
Busy Men
WF you have reached the conclusion that a broader
knowledge of the fundamental principles and new
factors of business arc necessary to your progress
during the next five years, you will now be interested
in learning how the Course and Service helps you to
get this knowledge in the hours you have available for
reading.
This training has been likened to that of a business
man taking a business course at a university, excepting,
of course, that there is no interference with his regular
business duties. The great difference is this. At a
university, academic studies receive the first considera-
tion; as a subscriber to the Course and Service, your
own business interests are held uppermost. You are
not expected to adapt your own business outlook to the
Course. On the contrary, you are put in a position
to apply the experience of many other organisations to
your own activities.
The Course is not for study; it is for “finding
out." The Service is not for instructing you; it is
for helping you to find out, and for advising you.
Physically, there is this similarity between Insti-
tute training and university training :
A Text is assigned just as it would be at a
university, together with a Reading Guide which
corresponds to the university lecturer’s suggestion on
what to read, and which indicates the more important
points in the Text.
Then you receive one of a series of written
lectures by a well-known authority, in some cases a
world-known overseas executive, in other cases promi-
nent Australian and New Zealand business leaders,
corresponding to the special lectures at a university.
Each month a Problem is assigned, based on that
month’s reading, and you are given an opportunity to
test your ability to apply the principles discussed.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Chapter Four
WHAT THE COURSE BRINGS YOU
THE Modern Business Course and Service provides
a compact and easily digested reading Course
covering a knowledge of only those subjects which the
Institute, as the result of its twenty-one years of
training men for business leadership, believes are
vitally necessary to men already in executive positions
and to those who are on their way to such positions.
Briefly summarised it consists of:
There is no elaborate routine about the Course,
nor are there any annoying details to burden you.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


What Kind
of Men Enrol
qTHE challenge of modern business is clear. Only
men who know and can apply the fundamental
principles of business can handle the bigger positions.
An essential knowledge of business can be
attained by two methods only.
One is by actual experience in each of the main
divisions of business—Production, Marketing, Finance
and Accounting. The other, the shorter and more
direct road, is the Modern Business Course.
That this latter plan is the more logical way is
proved by the experience of the 415,000 men—over
6,000 in Australasia—who have enrolled.
The Modern Business Course and Service is not
intended to train specialists in any single phase of
business. It will not turn failures into successes, or
double incomes in a week. Nor will it make a man
successful, who would fail without it. But it does
help men to prepare themselves for bigger responsi-
bilities, in a shorter space of time than is possible
without organised business training.
Sixty per cent, of the 415,000 subscribers to the
Course and Service are Senior Executives—Managing
Directors, Directors, Secretaries, Accountants,
Managers, and Business Executives.
It is not necessary to have a university training in
order to profit. Thousands of men with a public
school or high school education have used this practical
method to complete their business education.
The Course is not for boys or immature young
men who want to obtain an immediate increase in
wages. This training is strictly for serious adult
business men, young or old.
What the men who have enrolled have to say of
the Course is of vital interest to other men.
In the files of Hemingway & Robertson are
actually thousands of letters from subscribers, praising
the Course, and telling of its fitness as a means of
preparing for business development.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Those
Who Enrol
Classification of
Institute Subscribers by Positions.
Number
Positions. Enrolled
Managing Directors 70,719
Directors 53,397
General Managers 41,919
Secretaries 32,370
Accountants 18,927
Sales Managers 13,200
Managers 24,898
Advertising Managers 8,623
Salesmen 19,888
Department Heads 21,121
Bank Cashiers 6,222
Auditors 9,634
Credit Manager 4,626
Chief Engineers ,
Chief Chemists
}- 10,081
Chief Metallurgists j
Chief Draftsmen '
Engineers
Chemists
33,171
Metallurgists I
Draftsmen )
Office Managers 18,444
Purchasing Agents 5,050
Professional Men 11,460
Miscellaneous 11,489
415,239
MODE R N BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


In Progressive
Organisations
AMONG the progressive concerns in which a
number of men have been making effective use
of the Modern Business Course and Service are:—
Australian Gas-light Co. Ltd.
Australian General Electric Company Ltd.
Lewis Berger & Sons (Aust.) Ltd.
Berlei Ltd.
British Imperial Oil Co. Ltd.
Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd.
G. J. Coles & Co. Ltd.
Clyde Engineering Co. Ltd.
John Danks & Sons Pty. Ltd.
Dunlop Rubber Co.
Electrolux Ltd.
Felton, Grimwade & Co. Pty. Ltd.
Ford Motor Co. of Australia Ltd.
General Motors (Aust.) Ltd.
Goldberg Advertising Agency Ltd.
Goodyear Tyre & Rubber Co. of Aust. Ltd.
Gordon & Gotch (Aust.) Ltd.
Charles Haines’ Advertising Agency Ltd.
Harris, Scarfe Ltd., Adelaide.
“Herald” and “Weekly Times.”
Hume Pipe Co. (Aust.) Ltd.
Jantzen (Aust.) Ltd.
Kandos Cement Co. Ltd.
Myer’s Emporium.
John McGrath Ltd.
National Bank of Aust. Ltd.
National Cash Register Co. Ltd.
National Cash Register Co. of Australasia Ltd.
Palmolive Co. (A’asia) Ltd.
Sargood, Son, & Ewen (N.Z.)
P. B. Sheather Co. Ltd.
Shell Co. of Aust. Ltd.
Vacuum Oil Co. Pty. Ltd.
Victorian Railways.
Many of the men enrolled in these great com-
panies are heads of their organisations, managing
directors and directors. Most of them are important
officials and department heads: many are men of
smaller responsibilities. All of them are fitting them-
seves for a greater understanding of modern business.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Men Who
Have Enrolled
M MONO the 6,000 subscribers in Australia and
New Zealand who would advise you to enrol
for the Modern Business Course and Service, if it is in
you to succeed in business, are such men as :
Will. Appleton, Managing Director, The Charles Haines’
Advertising Agency Ltd., New Zealand.
J. W. Balfour, Senior Partner, C. A. Smith & Co., Adelaide.
C. Bradfleld, Manager, J. Rattray & Sons Ltd., Invercargill.
W. E. Clegg, General Manager, Vickers, Commonwealth Steel
Products Ltd.
R. H. Gumming, Chartered Accountant, Brisbane.
R. Dickson, Manager, Skipper Bailey Motor Co. Ltd., Perth.
W. J. Broadhead, Asst, Manager, North Coast Co-operative
Co. Ltd. (Norco).
H. B. Duckworth, Manager, Duckworth, Turner & Co. Ltd.,
New Zealand.
James Farquharson, Inspector, National Mortgage & Agency
Co., N.Z., Ltd., Dunedin. y
H. W. Gepp, Economic Advisor, Commonwealth Government.
G. W. Hellicar, Brown & Hellicar Ltd., Sydney.
H. H. Jackson, Managing Director, Electrolux Ltd., Sydney.
Alex. Jobscn, Public Accountant and Actuary, Sydney.
A. S. Maughan, Managing Director, Australian General
Electric Co., Sydney.
A. McVernon, General Manager, Queensland Insurance Co.
Ltd., Sydney.
W. G. Nosworthy, Managing Director, Gunnerson, Nosworthy
Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
O. R. Owen, Partner, Owen & Price, Adelaide.
G. H. Plunkett, Managing Director, Plunkett Builders Ltd.,
Perth.
J. Ringland, Managing Director, The Iron & Steel Co. of
N.Z. Ltd., Dunedin.
R. H. M. Rowe, Sales Manager, Broken Hill Proprietary Co.,
Ltd., Melbourne.
A. E. Russell, Director, Jas. J. Niven & Co. Ltd., New
Zealand.
P. R. Sargood, Chairman of Directors, Sargood, Son, & Ewen
Ltd., Dunedin.
L. R. Seppelt, Manager and Director, B. Seppelt 6 Sons Ltd.,
Adelaide.
B. Y. Smith, Managing Director, H. J. Corder Pty. Ltd.,
Melbourne.
E. T. Spidey, Production Manager, N.Z. Railways.
S. C. Sutherland, Manager, Wright, Stephenson & Co. Ltd.,
Dunedin.
A. H. Sweetapple, Secretary, The Midland Railway Co. of
W.A. Ltd., Perth.
P. S. Trackson, Manager and Partner, Trackson Bros. Ltd.,
Brisbane.
C. C. Westman, Chief of Production, Ford Co. of Aust. Ptv.
Ltd. '
W. H. Winn, Director, W. H. Winn & Co. Ltd., Newcastle.
A. O. Wilkinson, Wilkinson & Best, Public Accountants and
Auditors, Christchurch.
J. D. C. Tanner, Advertising Manager, R. C. Henderson Ltd.
C. E. Blayney, Rootes (Aust.) Ltd., Sydney.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Shortening the
Long Road
YOU probably remember the short cut home that
you used to take in your school days. You
prided yourself on your ingenuity in reaching your
destination with this saving of time and energy.
Nowadays the one thing that is paramount in your
mind is to make progress in your business or your
profession. So far you have been successful: you are
confident that your progress will continue. But have
you ever calculated how many years it will take to
reach the goal you have set for yourself? Have you
figured how you could cut that time in two? Have
you looked for a short cut?
It takes a long time to learn the working of all
departments of an organisation. Being a good sales
manager does not provide one with the requisites for
being a good general manager or managing director.
A knowledge of all the main departments of business
—production, accounting, finance, and distribution—
are essential if one is to direct the destinies of a firm
for himself or for someone else. It’s a long road to
such a position.
Of course, experience is an expensive teacher and
a thorough one. And yet, in some respect we even
claim that the Institute Course is superior to the
experience which most men go through. For it con-
tains the combined and condensed advice of men who
have made outstanding successes in business.
The men who derive the most benefit from the
training, as shown by an analysis of more than 415,000
men who have used it, may be listed as follows:
(1) Leading men successful men Managers,
Directors and the like who need assistance
in solving business problems.
(2) Men who have been in business a number of
years and whose progress is not as fast as it
should be.
(3) Younger men who feel that they have in them
undeveloped ability and are looking ahead to
one of the big positions in business.
A I; K X A N D E R HAMILTON 1 K S T I T U T E


Chapter Five
THE COURSE EXPLAINED
your enrolment application is accepted
» » by us you receive a series of twenty-eight
text-volumes. Each Text has been written by an
authority on the subject covered and approved by the
Educational Faculty of Hemingway & Robertson.
Every month you receive a Reading Guide, direct-
ing your reading and illustrating the practical applica-
tion of the principles laid down in the Text.
Every month you receive one of the series of
Lectures that have been especially prepared for us by
prominent business executives they tell of their
experiences in handling problems of business adminis-
tration.
Every month you have an opportunity to test
your knowledge, and to apply the principles presented
in the Text, through a Problem upon a practical
business situation.
The Course comes to you regularly whether or not
you submit solutions to these Problems. But each
solution you care to submit will be constructively
criticised, graded, and returned with a Model Solution.
A comprehensive series of Business Reports has
been prepared, covering in detail a wide range of
subjects of specific interest to business executives. You
are entitled to a certain number of these Reports, on
subjects connected with your current or contemplated
work. These you may select from a list we will send
you following your enrolment.
Though the Texts, Guides, and Lectures provide
you with the knowledge necessary to promote efficiency
in the internal affairs of your business, a knowledge of
external affairs is also necessary.
Through the Australian Business Conditions Ser-
vice and its Reports you receive each month in bulletin
form, reports covering important developments in com-
modity prices and trends, credit and sales conditions,
analyses of current business activity and forecasts.
These Bulletins interpret current happenings for direct
application to the daily conduct of your business.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


The Field of the
Modern Business
Course and Service
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


The Training Survey
for Modern Business
Executives
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Broader Knowledge
Necessary
"■WERE we have charted the range of knowledge
necessary to the business man who would pro-
gress steadily and substantially in his business career.
To the business man at the head of an enterprise
this range of knowledge is absolutely essential to the
proper conduct and progress of the business.
To the younger man, to the man on one of the
lower rungs of the business ladder, this complete all-
round knowledge becomes increasingly important as
the responsibility increases; while still acquiring a
working knowledge of his own department of business
he must even at this stage of his business career begin
to look beyond the narrow confines of his own work.
Business to-day requires broadly trained men who
understand all departments of a business.
While business demands and pays well for such
properly trained men, it does not produce them.
To offset the narrowing tendency of specialised
work and its limiting effect on incomes progressive
business men are making individual efforts to broaden
their knowledge of business.
The work of the Alexander Hamilton Institute is
to train Modern Business Executives. Its work is
authoritative and time saving, and is used by more
than 415,000 business men, in all parts of the world-
over 6000 in Australia and New Zealand.
The success of this work has been carried still
further by Hemingway & Robertson. From their 35
years’ successful business training experience the
Modern Business Course and Service has been adapted
to the precise needs of Australia and New Zealand.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Business Organisation
[Australasia]
man in business knows that a partnership
is a dangerous kind of organisation How many
of all those men, however, would dare to try to point
out exactly what the dangers are? How many men
really know what to avoid in a partnership, when it
is good, when it is bad, and how to size one up?
The correct application of the basic principles of
organisation and management is essential to the opera-
tion of any business, regardless of its size or nature.
This section of the Course presents these basic prin-
ciples in a clear and simple manner, so that their
significance may be readily grasped and their method
of application to Australian and New Zealand activi-
ties immediately comprehended. A number of the
chapters in this Text are devoted to a discussion of
the typical forms of business organisation in Austral-
asia with special stress upon the various factors to be
considered in choosing the type for a given purpose.
Emphasis is placed upon the relationships which the
departments hold one to another, and to the business
as a whole.
Among many important subjects discussed are :
Essentials of a Successful Business: Forms of Business
Organisation; the Partnership: The Company; Pre-
liminaries to Incorporation; By-Laws and Organisation
Meetings: Shares and Share Ownership: Organising a
Company; Types of Organisation: Principles of Organ-
isation; Management; Analysing Conditions in a Business;
Charting and Writing-up the Organisation: Company
Organisation in Australia and New Zealand; The Manu-
facturing Division; The Engineering, Production Control
and Operating Departments: The Purchasing Department;
Inspection, Power and Maintenance Departments: Indus-
trial Relations Department; Sales Division; The Account-
ing Division, etc.
Business Organisation is explained as you have
always wanted it explained. Simple terms make
every point clear, and make you enjoy it thoroughly.
The intimate knowledge of the subject gained from
practical contact as well as through our research and
teaching experience aptly equip Hemingway 6 Robert-
son for the presentation of this subject.
Text Author* i
EDITORIAL
FACULTY,
HEMINGWAY &
ROBERTSON.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Marketing
Text Author :
GEORGE ROWLAND
COLLINS,
M.A., M.8.A.,
Professor of Market-
ing, School of Com-
merce, Accounts and
Finance, New York
University.
is one of the most difficult problems
facing any business enterprise. If a definite
demand and an extensive sale can be developed for
the goods or services offered by a company, or an
individual, usually money can be obtained to finance
the business, and suitable and efficient means can be
devised to produce or furnish what the buyers want.
These days, men who are responsible for market-
ing a concern’s product know that paths are not beaten
by eager buyers to doors where the best mouse trap
or the best anything else is made. Regardless of merit,
goods actually must be sold. Back of the salesman
with his order book, back of the advertisements, back
of the storekeeper ringing up a sale, there must be
some central plan which gathers all these activities into
one big idea, which is Marketing.
The central plan must anticipate many things. Is
there a demand for the goods or must one be created?
How much can be sold? Who will sell it? When will
it be sold, and how?
Some of the subjects treated are :
The Problem of Distribution; The Function of Marketing;
Wholesale Middlemen of Consumers’ Goods: Retail
Middlemen of Consumers’ Goods: Fundamentals of
Market Research: Market Research The Product;
Market Research The Market: Market Research
Efficiency and Cost Investigation; Market Forecasting—
Fundamentals: Market Forecasting Methods: Product
Policies —Fundamentals; Product Policies—ldentification;
Product Policies—Packing: Price Policies—Fundamentals:
Price Policies—Discounts; Trade Channel Policies: Dealer
Policies: Planning the Marketing Campaign; Modern
Trends in Marketing.
Mr. Collins is well qualified to discuss this subject,
through his intimate relationship with business men
who seek his counsel and advice, thereby giving him
a remarkable background for the presentation of this
phase of business.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Advertising
Principles
AN you name a marketable product that never has
been advertised? It would be hard to do so.
The whole range has been covered from tombstones
and electricity to onions and patriotism. Each thing
advertised has its individual problems, but the cam-
paign behind each one is built on identical problems.
Take for example, the advertising of two such
products as fish and shoe eyelets. Quite a stretch
between them, but each faces the same necessity. Copy
must be written, layouts prepared, illustrations planned
and executed, type selected, and slogans, trade-marks
and designs considered.
These fundamental things are treated in this sec-
tion, and a knowledge of the facts it contains can be
used by any man who has anything to do with any
phase of advertising from newspaper “want ads” to
national campaigns.
Here are a few of the subjects discussed :
What is Advertising?; Some Economic Aspects of Adver-
tising: The Place of Advertising in Modern Civilization;
Business Purposes Served by Advertising: Needs to
which Advertising Appeals; Utilising the Process of
Suggestion: Essential Features of a Good Advertisement:
The Copy Theme: Construction of the Copy; The
Technique of Copywriting: Art and Layout: Pictures that
Help Make Sales; Use of Color; Big Space or Small
Space; Selecting Advertising Media: What the Layman
Should Know About Printing; Trade Marks: Trade
Names and Slogans, etc.
In the next decade probably the keenest compe-
tition in many forms of business will be in advertising.
This section of the Course, therefore, has been written
with the interest of the business man in view.
Text Authors:
HUGH E. AGNEW,
8.A.,
Professor of Adver-
tising, and Chairman
Department of Mar-
keting, School of
Commerce, Accounts
and Finance, New
York University.
GEORGE BURTON
HOTCHKISS,
Professor of Market-
ing, School of Com-
merce, Accounts and
Finance, New York
University.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Advertising
Campaigns
Text Author :
BERNARD
LICHTENBERG,
M.C.S.,
President, Association
of National Adver -
Users,
In collaboration with
BRUCE BARTON,
Chairman of the
Board, Batten, Bar-
ton, Durstine and
Osborn, Inc., Adver-
tising Agents .
TN the process of planning, executing, and placing
an advertising campaign, a dozen skilled special-
ists will take a hand. Copy-writers, space buyers,
artists, printers, engravers, research men, and others
all have their parts to play. Any one of these men
may know next to nothing about the other fellow’s job,
but the man who pays the bills needs to know a lot
about all of them.
The advertisement you see in to-night’s, paper
which makes you say "Good stuff!” is just one little
cog in the big machine which has been built and started
running so that you and your neighbour and thousands
of other people will say, not only "Good stuff!” but
will add: “I am going to buy that.”
This section deals with the ideas and plans behind
advertising—the campaign. It leads you into many
interesting fields.
The subjects treated are :
Objectives in Advertising Campaign: Who Are Your
Customers?; Meeting Competition; The Advertising
Agency; The Advertising Department; The Advertising
Appropriation; Kinds of Advertising Media; How to Buy
Advertising; The Campaign Plan; Newspapers and
Magazines: Direct Media: Selling by Mail; How to Use
Signs; Radio Broadcasting: Retailers’ Campaigns; Jobbers’
Campaigns; Manufacturers' Campaigns to the Dealer:
Manufacturers’ Campaigns to Consumers; Effect of the
Campaign; Advertising Associations and Publications, etc.
The preceding text on “Advertising Principles”
shows a man what advertising can do for his business.
But there is much more to advertising than that.
“Advertising Campaigns” gathers all the diverse con-
siderations and binds them into a unified whole.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Personnel
Management
WN every business organisation the most vital element
is personnel. Financial, Commercial, and Manu-
facturing concerns have found it important to apply
methods of personnel management that instil
enthusiasm, develop ability, encourage initiative,
extend opportunity, and compensate effort among their
employees. Such undertaking cannot be limited
exclusively to executives and certain staff members in
higher positions, but must be extended to include the
clerk, the worker at the machine, the office boy, and
the unskilled laborer.
Throughout this section of the Course the basic
idea has been kept in mind of explaining those elements
that will obtain the best results. Authority and
responsibility for personnel activities are placed largely
in the hands of the workers or employees. Executive
direction is necessary only to keep developments in
line with company policies, and to make sure that the
objectives are successfully attained.
Amongst the subjects discussed in this text-volume
are :
Organisation; The Job; Needs and Sources; Selection
and Placement; Development and Training: Development
of Leadership; Employee Representation; Health and
Medical; Benefits and Pensions: Thrift: Wages and
Working Conditions; Miscellaneous Personnel Activities:
Personnel Administration: Personnel Management.
Colonel Rees is particularly well qualified to write
on personnel, for during the war period he was in
charge of the educational work of the U.S.A. forces.
He was later a member of the Operations and Training
Division of the General Staff, until joining the well-
known American Telephone & Telegraph Company.
Text Author ;
COLONEL ROBERT
IRWIN REES,
Department of Per-
sonnel and Public
Relations, American
Telephone and Tele-
graph Company.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Office
Administration
Text Author:
T. LAWRENCE
DAVIS,
M.8.A., LL.D
Dean of Boston Uni-
versity, College of
Practical Arts and
Letters,
In collaboration with
GRAYDON
STETSON,
Vice-president, F. L.
Putnam, Inc., and
Trustee, Boston Uni-
versity.
WT is a far cry from the old days of alpaca-coated
-*■ bookkeepers on high stools to the modern office
of to-day, with its machines that add, multiply, divide,
and subtract, and its scientific working schedules, per-
sonnel supervision, and intelligence tests
“The office” is here considered from the point of
view of an administrator After outlining the prin-
ciples of scientific office management and illustrating
the application of these principles, the author presents
a practical problem in administration. Its solution
shows the method of approach which leads to the
establishment of a scientifically organised office.
Too often the office is taken for granted. Like
the well-regulated household, it seems to take care of
itself. It actually taxes the imagination to enumerate
its problems. But many a business man confronted
for the first time with actual supervision finds office
problems coming faster than he can enumerate them.
Familiarity with the following contents of this Text
will avert such distraction ;
Administration; Results through Organisation: Physical
Factors: Office Arrangement and Routines: The Office
Manual; General Service; Inter-communication; Stenogra-
phic Service; Mailing: Filing; Control of Stationery and
Supplies: Job Analysis and Job Specifications; Selection
of Office Employees; Employees’ Training and Super-
vision; Employees' Compensation; Personnel Relations;
Employees’ Service; Selection and Use of Office Equip-
ment; Office Costs and Budgets: Office Forms: Adminis-
tration Control.
The distribution of office functions is shown by
means of a chart which is, in effect, an outline of the
chapter subjects These subjects cover all the major
office problems with which the administrator is con-
cerned By holding to fundamental principles, the
authors have succeeded in making a clear, interesting
presentation
The authors have kept in mind the needs of
executives who, whilst not closely associated with the
office, realise that it is of advantage to be acquainted
with its functions.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Business
Correspondence
JBESPONSE to an idea, suggestion, request, or
urge depends so much upon the way the
approach is made that no business man can afford to
be careless with his correspondence. Costly lawsuits
may arise because of indefinite phraseology in letters,
contracts, purchase orders, specifications, and other
kinds of business documents.
Practically every executive position of importance
carries with it the necessity for facility in writing.
Within and without his organisation, the business man
is called upon to express himself clearly, concisely,
directly, positively, tactfully, and convincingly—what-
ever he may write.
Here are a few of the subjects discussed;
Letters that Get Action; Seeing through the Reader’s
Eyes: The Spirit of the Letter; The Proposition and the
Letter: The Proposition Analysed: Fundamentals of the
Presentation: The Aid of Formula in Presentation: Apply-
ing Formulas to the Presentation; Routine and Individual
Letters: Adjusting Complaints by Letter; Credit Letters:
Collection Letters: Working the Mailing List; Planning
the Letter; Writing the Letter; Mechanical Forms:
Getting the Most out of Words.
Detailed attention is given to the kinds of letters,
reports, purchase orders, agreements, and other forms
of communication that find particular application in the
industrial field. Specific information is supplied on
the preparation of many kinds of business letters that
are widely employed for special purposes.
Text Authors ;
H. L. MARCOUX.
M.A.,
Professor of Business
English, Tulane
University.
CHARLES AUSTIN
BATES,
Sales and Advertising
Counsellor.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE
41


Accounting Principles
[Australasia]
Text Author :
EDITORIAL
FACULTY.
HEMINGWAY &
ROBERTSON.
B PROGRESSIVE business men find in a suitably
organised system of accounts and statements a
most efficient aid in guiding their business affairs and
formulating business policies. Accounting is then an
integral part of business administration, and those in
executive control should be conversant with it.
The business executive does not require a minute
knowledge of accounting technique in order to make
the proper use of accounting records. He must, how-
ever, have a firm grasp of the fundamentals of, account-
ing procedure, and he must know how records are
made, even though he never makes them.
Here are a few of the subjects discussed :
Purposes of Accounting Records; Development of the
Account; Single and Double Entry Contrasted; Analysis
of Business Transactions; Simple Set of Transactions:
The Trial Balance: Classification of Accounts: Accruals
and Prepayments; Adjusting Entries: Closing Entries:
Profit and Loss Statement: The Balance Sheet; Account-
ing for Depreciation and Other Reserves; Appreciation
and Depreciation; Modern Books of Record; Specialized
Records; Labor-Saving Devices; Proprietorship; Con-
structive Accounting, etc.
This section of the Course, therefore, presents in
simple, intelligible form the development of the funda-
mental principles of accounting as applied to Australian
and New Zealand conditions. The subject is treated
in such a way that the business man who never expects
to practice accounting will not be required to do
extensive practical work in order to grasp fully the
knowledge of as much of accounting as he will require
in his daily work.
It will enable any business man to determine
whether proper accounting methods are being followed
in his business and also to understand the sources and
nature of the information which accounting statements
bring to him
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Company
Finance
of company financing have under-
gone so many vital changes during recent
years that many of the old ideas have become obsolete.
Many causes have operated to bring about the changes
which have created a number of complex problems.
The Text on ‘‘Company Finance” has been
developed to interpret to the business executive the
new conditions that have come about. It explains how,
when the securities of a company are sold to others
than the directors and officers, means must be provided
for insuring continued control to the management.
In the discussion of these and related subjects, a
sound, constructive financial policy has been the goal.
The large business concerns of to-day, many of
them built up as mergers, have developed financial
policies that can be adapted with great success by the
small business. There are, however, a number of
special problems peculiar to the smaller company. The
text, therefore, covers not only methods employed by
the large company, but also devotes special attention
to the needs of the business of lesser size.
Among the many subjects discussed are :
Company Shares; Preferred Shares; Bonds; Refunding
and Extinction of Funded Debt; Convertible Securities
and Warrants: Short Term Financing: Promotion; Need
for a Financial Policy: The Financial Plan; Selling
Securities; Relations with Bankers; Customer and Em-
ployee Share Sales; Financing the Small Business: Retain-
ing Control of the Business; Management of Working
Capital: Dividend Policies: How to Acquire an Invest-
ment Status: Organisation and Work of the Financial
Department, etc.
The author has based his discussion of the subject,
not upon theory, but upon current observation of
present-day financing methods, as financial editor of
the Journal of Commerce. His clear thinking makes an
otherwise abstruse subject unusually understandable
and interesting.
Text Author :
JULES I. BOGEN,
Ph.D.,
Financial Editor, New
York “Journal of
Commerce.”
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Credit and
Collections
Text Author :
DAVID E. GO LIES,
President , New York
Credit Men's Associa-
tion,
THE tremendous use of credit to facilitate the
world’s business is a remarkable tribute to
business honesty, but many factors other than willing-
ness to pay enter into the situation. Ability to meet
bills, notes, and obligations is of vital importance.
Optimism may prompt a business man to incur expenses
that he cannot meet. Irresistible desire may impel the
individual to buy, on time payments, comforts and
luxuries that he cannot afford. Unexpected disasters
may wipe out funds that should go to cancel existing
debts. In business, poor management may involve in
failure a concern that, at the time it assumed certain
obligations, was a first-rate risk.
In the Text on “Credit and Collections” the author
has aimed to present, in directly usable form, the
every-day working principles upon which the extend-
ing of credit and the making of collections can be
operated successfully.
Among the subjects covered are :
Mercantile Credit; Book Credit: Documentary Credit;
Granting Credit to the Consumer: Instalment Credit to
Consumers: Credit Management; Collection of Moneys
Due; Principles underlying Collection Effort; Granting
Credit to Business Enterprises; Credit Information:
Analysis of Credit Information; Collecting on a Friendly
Basis; Credit Protection: Unfriendly Stages of Collection:
The Role of a Credit Department in Developing Business;
Bankruptcy.
In making collections there is a time to be lenient,
a time to increase the credit allowance in the face of
temporary inability to pay, and a time to close the
issue by forced collection.
Throughout the transaction friendly feelings
should be maintained with recourse to vigorous
methods only as a last resort.
All important credit topics are treated in detail in
this section of the Course, and the author points out
how the credit department, by a judicious, tactful
administration of its activities, can function as a real
builder of goodwill and business for any business
organisation.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Salesmanship
reminiscences of some salesmen would almost
lead one to believe that most of their sales are
made through a system of legerdemain, in which no
consideration whatever is given to the question of
whether the buyer can use the goods to advantage.
Salesmanship consists of taking the buyer’s point
of view, and with strength, poise and a dominant
attitude —always within the bounds of business ethics
and business courtesy—making the buyer see the
advantage to him. It is a sincere desire to serve; not
a deep anxiety to force a sale.
A sale is not a cold, scientific process, but a man-
to-man transaction. The one way in which a man can
develop or improve his selling ability is to improve
himself, to develop strong positive qualities, and to
eliminate weak ones.
The subjects which Mr. Ferris discusses are :
Personal Salesmanship; The Industries and the Company;
The Sales Department: Analysing and Organising Terri-
tory: The Proposition; The Prospect’s Need and Problem:
Inception of the Sale; Progress of the Sale; Difficulties of
the Sale; Suggestions in the Sale; Closing the Sale: The
Creation of Goodwill; Sales Strategy; Utilising the Com-
pany’s Advertising; Buyers; The Job and the Man; Selling
as an Occupation—the Travelling Salesman; A Program
of Self-training.
Probably few men have had such a wide experience
as Mr. Ferris in all lines of salesmanship. Through
training and experience he knows the personal
problems confronted by salesmen in the field as well
as sales managers who have to manage a sales force
dealing either in specialties or in staples.
Text Author :
ELMER E. FERRIS,
Professor of Sales-
manship, School of
Commerce, Accounts
and Finance, Netv
York University,
In collaboration with
FOWLER
MANNING,
General Manager, L.
C. Smith and Corona
Typewriters » Inc.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Sales
Management
Text Author:
JOHN G. JONES,
Business Consultant.
Member, Board of
Directors, Alexander
Hamilton Institute.
HIS section of the Course is concerned with the
fundamental principles of sales management and
the principles underlying the equipment of a sales
manager. Buyer and seller come in touch with each
other to-day through personal representatives, and in
like manner the representative and the product are
linked together with a sales manager who must have
the viewpoint of both the company and the sales
representative.
The problems of sales management are treated in
this section, not from the standpoint of getting the most
out of salesmen, but from that of getting the best they
can give. The keynote, of sales management is the
assumption by progressive sales managers of the moral
responsibility to develop the individual members of
their sales organisation and to enlarge their individual
earning capacities.
Among the subjects so ably discussed by Mr.
Jones are;
Function of Sales Management: Organisation for Sales
Management: Recruiting the Sales Force; Standards of
Selection: Training Salesmen; Equipping the Sales Force;
Supervising the Sales Force: Paying the Sales Force;
Salesmen's Reports and Letters; Sales Contests; Sales
Functions: The Sales House Organ; Salesmen’s Non-
Selling Tasks: The Determination of Sales Objectives;
The Sales Quota; The Sales Force.
The author discusses the qualifications and duties
of a sales manager, building the organisation and selec-
tion of salesmen, sales methods, and selling equipment,
co-operation with salesmen, compensation, and terri-
tory. and the like Attention is given to the important
subject of sales contests, sales conventions, and many
other pertinent points which are fundamental to an
executive knowledge of sales management
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Insurance
WNSURANCE is of unusual importance to the
business executive as a protection against possible
unavoidable losses. But insurance contracts are by
no means uniform, and considerable difference exists
between the clauses in the policies that are issued by
the different carrier companies. These differences are
not always apparent without careful study.
Basic rates for actual insurance coverage are
equalized among the various carrier companies, but
premiums differ because of the variations between the
clauses in the policies of these companies.
These differences exist in practically all forms of
insurance. It is necessary, therefore, that the business
man should understand exactly what protection he is
buying.
The topics thus treated include :
Life Insurance for the Protection of the Man's Family
and His Business; Accident and Health Insurance: Liability
Insurance, including All Phases of the Very Important
Subject of Automobile Accidents: Group Insurance and
Annuities; Workmen’s Compensation; Fire Insurance;
Protection against Business Losses Incident to a Fire that
Stops Production in a Plant; Marine Insurance: Inland
Marine Insurance; Use and Occupancy Coverage: Fidelity
and Surety Insurance; and Credit Insurance.
The text on “Insurance” discusses the subject
directly from the standpoint of the buyer of insurance,
with particular attention to several of the types of
protection intended especially for business purposes
that are growing in importance. It tells the reader
exactly how to proceed to get the desired maximum
coverage at the most economical cost.
Text Authors :
BRUCE D.
MUDGETT, Ph.D.,
Professor of Eco-
nomics, University of
Minnesota,
In collaboration with
EDWARD R.
HARDY, Ph.D.,
SOLOMON S.
HUEBNER, Ph.D.,
G F
MICHELBACHEB.
MODERN BUSINESS CO URSE AND SERVICE


Factory
Management
Text Authors:
JOHN R. BANGS,
Jr., M.E.,
Asst. Professor of In-
dustrial Engineering,
Cornell University,
In collaboration ivith
C. D. HART, M.E.,
Superintendent,
Western Electric Co.
HIS section of the Course presents comprehen-
sively the fundamental principles that have been
developed and are now widely applied to the operation
of manufacturing plants. It is the aim of the Text to
point out basic factors so that an executive may have a
clear conception of their importance.
To assist in applying these principles to specific
phases of factory operation, the authors have had the
privilege and opportunity to include material drawn
from a number of manufacturing plants noted for their
advanced management practice, to which they have had
access. The Text is well illustrated.
Among other important subjects discussed are :
The Problem of Factory Organisation; Organisation for
Operating Control: Financial Management Policies; Pur-
chasing, Production and Personnel Policies: The Location
and Site of the Factory; Laying Out the Factory: The
Control of Production; Job Standardisation and Time and
Motion Study; Plans of Wage Payment; Waste in
Industry, etc., etc.
Both of the authors have had many years of
experience in this field of business activity. Although
this Text is comprehensive, it deals with only the
important principles which are necessary to executive
management.
A L E X A N D BR HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Production Control and
Time and Motion Study
principles of production control are well
understood and firmly established. Details of
practice may vary between industries, between indi-
vidual plants, and with the increasing efficiency of
management. Fundamentals, however, to-day are
definitely recognised and applied throughout practically
all lines of manufacturing.
The author has carefully, clearly and fully ex-
plained the principles of production control. The
Text, therefore, gives a broad and complete grasp of
the entire scope of the subject. The explanation of the
basic factors of organising for control, the staff
required, equipment needed, methods employed, and
objectives to be attained, are developed to enable the
reader to see the connection between fundamentals and
practice, and to make direct application of the ideas
to his own problems.
The elements to be controlled and the methods of
establishing foundations for control are fully discussed.
The subject of planning is thoroughly analysed, and its
influence on control clearly outlined. Motion study,
time study, routing, scheduling, dispatching, and
facilitating operation by the use of mechanical handling
equipment are presented in their relationships to the
production cycle.
The close connection between sales and pro-
duction is pointed out. The newer but well founded
conceptions of the economics of control are fully
covered from the standpoint of business prosperity.
The Text presents a complete business picture of
production control with sufficient engineering detail
to enable the reader to apply the principles discussed
to actual practice.
Text Author:
H. V. COES, 8.5. ,
Manager,
Industrial Depart-
ment. Ford, Bacon
& Davis, Inc.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Transportation
Text Author ;
WAYNE E.
BUTTERBAUGH ,
M.S.,
Professorial Lecturer
(Traffic and Trans-
portation ), University
of Minnesota.
TPRY to think of a man in business who shouldn’t
be vitally interested in transportation. Then
count on your fingers the men you know who have a
fair knowledge of the subject. There are mighty few
products sold without a transportation charge in the
price.
That business man has a great advantage, who
knows the facts about transportation that are offered
in this section of the Course. The subject is discussed
solely from the standpoint of the business man.
The chapter headings will give a good idea of the
subjects covered:
Transportation Facilities —Land, Water and Air Agencies:
Their Physical Equipment, Routes, Terminals and Storage
Facilities: Transportation Organisations—Organisations
and Management, Officials, Co-operative Bureaus, Contact
with Government Departments; Transportation Services—
Freight, Express, Parcel Post, Bulk, Passenger, Line-haul,
Terminal, Handling of Shipments by Carriers; Trans-
portation Charges—Construction of Rates, Classifications,
Rate and Tariff Bodies, Territorial Factors, Rate-making;
Transportation Regulation—Economic, Social and Legal
Factors, Operation of Government Bodies, such as the
Interstate Commerce Commission, Shipping Board, and
State Commissions; Transportation Departments in
Business—Organisation of the Shipper, Traffic Manage-
ment, Packing, Loading and Shipping, Routing, Billing
Rates, Legal Phases, and Costs.
The aim of the Text is to give the business
executive an insight into the effect which transportation
has on business and to give him a basis upon which
he can make the most efficient use of the mediums of
transportation to obtain the best service at the most
economic cost.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Foreign
Trade
WTO subject is more intriguing than that of foreign
trade. Considered from the situation abroad,
it involves an endless maze of facts and figures dealing
with the number and distribution of members of various
races and nations, the habits and customs of people,
their accessibility, pursuits, buying power, likes and
dislikes, and innumerable other social factors. Political
developments, legislative tendencies, tariff provisions,
natural resources, favorable or unfavorable climate,
economic conditions, industrial and agricultural
activities, and popular trends and prejudices, influence
trade conditions to a marked degree.
From the transportation angle, the relative dis-
tances of the foreign markets, the time taken in transit,
the transporting media available, shipping rules, pack-
ing requirements, customs regulations, susceptibility of
articles to damage, and sometimes the handling and
transfer facilities obtainable, enter into the question.
Whether classed as over-production or under-
consumption, conditions in most producing countries are
such that home demand does not absorb the entire
output of the farms and the factories. Outlets to
foreign customers are imperative to the producer. In
any one of innumerable ways, however, the exporter
may err in his foreign trade procedure to the extent
that anticipated profits may be turned into serious
losses.
Mr. de Haas points out the relation of foreign
trade to domestic business and to national prosperity.
He discusses trade barriers, governmental and private
trade promotion, and international trade co-operation.
Markets, direct and indirect exporting, and the trade
in raw materials receive special treatment. Conditions
of sale, the organising and operating of an export
department, co-operation for foreign trade, selling
abroad, making export shipments, transportation ser-
vices, importing, and the relations of banks to foreign
trade, are fully covered.
Text Author :
J. ANTON
DE HAAS, Ph.D.,
Ziegler Professor of
International Eo-
lations, Graduate
School of Business
Administration, Har-
vard University.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Cost
Finding
Text Author :
DEXTER S.
KIMBALL,
A. 8., M.E., LL.D.,
Professor of Indus-
trial Engineering, and
Dean of the College
of Engineering, Cor-
nell University .
WT is one thing to make goods at as low a cost as
possible. It is quite as important to know how to
learn just how low those costs are. A great many men
who are worrying over competition would be able to
sleep better if they went to work with a sharp pencil
and some plain white paper, and figured their costs.
This part of the Course will tell them how to do
it. It is an expert and interesting treatment of the
subject. The author has indicated the means by which
a system that is not too complex may be built up for
obtaining the required data without involving an
expense that offsets any possible gain.
Here are a few of the titles of the chapter :
The Necessity for Cost-finding Methods; Cost-finding
Problems: Identification of Costs; Materials and Labor
Costs; Expense Characteristics and Classification; Depre-
ciation; Methods of Distributing Factory Expense: Pro-
duction Centres and the Machine Rate; Effect of Volume
of Work on Expense Distribution: Standard Costs;
General Expense-Departmentization—Resume of Methods;
Methods of Recording Cost Data; Relation Between Gen-
eral Accounts and Cost Accounts; Cost Reduction and
Expense Analysis; Predetermination of Material and
Labor Costs—of Expense; Application of Cost-finding
Methods.
The author has indicated throughout the Text the
means by which the system of Cost-finding that is not
too complex may be built up for securing required data
without involving an expense that offsets any possible
gain. This is the true function of a Cost-finding
system.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Banking
■BUSINESS houses of all kinds, whether in the
financial, commercial, industrial, merchandising,
or any other field, have close relationship with banks.
The bank is a repository for incoming funds, and,
through the check system, an agent for the payment of
obligations. It acts as medium for the clearing of all
forms of commercial paper, both domestic and foreign.
Few concerns carry on business without occasional, and
often frequent, loans from banks. Bank officers become
specialists in finance, and render valuable service
through advice on many forms of investment.
Although the business man need not become an
expert in banking, it is most necessary for him to have
a working knowledge of the manner in which a bank
handles his affairs, the service it renders, the obligations
it assumes, the responsibilities with which it is
entrusted, and the charges that it makes for its assist-
ance. If the business executive borrows money from
his bank, he must be prepared to render a definite and
accurate statement of his entire financial status, and, in
addition, clearly outline his methods of operation, his
business prospects, and his ability to carry through his
plans.
The topics so discussed include :
Money and Credit; Evolution of Banking; Interpretation
of Bank Statements: Loans and Discounts; Securing Loans;
Bank Notes; Deposits; Clearing and Collections: Banking
Systems; Canadian Banking Systems; Foreign Banking
Systems; British Banking Systems; Commercial Paper;
Cheques.
The detailed explanation of banking institutions,
central banks, the particular organisation of British,
Canadian and American banking systems, and a chapter
on the banking system of many foreign countries,
convey much information that every business man
should have and use.
Text Authors :
E. L. STEWART
PATTERSON,
Canadian Bank of
Commerce.
MAJOR B. FOSTER,
M.A.,
Chairman, Depart-
ment of Banking and
Finance, School of
Commerce, Accounts
and Finance, New
York University.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Financial and
Business Statements
Text Author :
LEO
GREENDLINGER .
C.P.A.,
General Manager ,
Alexander Hamilton
Institute.
"'KJfcTHETHER he is the chief executive of a business,
■ * the head of a division, or merely an individual
managing his own personal affairs, practically every
man is called upon to read financial and business state-
ments, and attempt to analyse the information they
contain. He is solicited through the newspapers, by
mail, or perhaps in person, to buy stocks or bonds of
established or newly organised firms whose financial
statements accompany the argument for investment. If
he wishes to borrow money for his own needs, or
especially for his business, he must furnish data, often
in considerable detail, regarding his financial and
operating status. Careful, accurate and detailed
preparation of the statement may influence the decision
on the loan.
It is one thing to be able to prepare financial and
business statements; it is another thing to be able to
use such statements for the benefit of the business.
This section deals to a great extent with the analysis,
valuation and interpretation of assets and liabilities,
and shows how the well-trained business man reads the
records—on and between the lines.
Subject matter of this text is treated under the
following headings:—
Value of Classified Information: Business Statements;
Interpretation of Business Statistics; Analysis a id Inter-
pretation of Income Statements; Analysis and Interpreta-
tion of Current Assets; Valuation and Interpretation of
Intangible Assets: Valuation and Interpretation of other
assets; The Relation of Income and Working Capital to
Assets: Interpretation of Liabilities, Surplus Reserves and
Dividends: The Auditor; Classes of Audits: < Jo-operation
with the Auditor; Auditors’ Reports and Certi icates; Inter-
pretation of Professional Reports.
‘‘Financial and Business Statements,” therefore, is
a Text filling a most important function. Its author,
Mr. Greendlinger, as a Certified Public Accountant, a
university teacher for many years, and a successful
executive, is in a position to present the subject in a
most interesting and instructive manner.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Budgetary
Control
ALL businesses that are achieving success to-day
t operate under some form of budgetary control.
The plan may be simple for a small concern, or it
may be of great complexity for a huge manufacturing
organisation.
Whatever the type of business, however, a
budgeting system can be developed, applied and
operated with savings that are gratifying to any
executive. At the same time business operation is
automatically directed along a charted course, and
toward a definite objective, and at all times the execu-
tive knows how closely he is following the plans he
has laid out.
There are certain major elements in budgeting.
These the Text very clearly defines. It is possible to
forecast developments with an almost uncanny
approach to accuracy. One prominent concern pre-
dicts its operations a year in advance, and has quite
regularly come within five per cent, of its forecast for
its entire organisation, and within a half of a per cent,
for one unit company.
The Text discusses the major elements in
Budgeting :
Preparing the Organisation for Budgetary Control: The
Forecasting Problem; Obtaining Data Needed for Budget
Forecast: The Sales Estimate; The Control of Sales
Expense Through the Budget: The Advertising Appro-
E nation: Manufacturing Budget—Production—Material—
abor—Expense: Miscellaneous Expense Budget: Budget
of Plant and Equipment: Adjustment of Budget to
Changing Business Conditions; Limitations upon Budget-
ary Control: and Responsibility of Management.
In the Text on “Budgetary Control” the methods
of collecting data and preparing forecasts are fully
outlined. Chapters on variations and adjustments in
business to meet special conditions answer many ques-
tions of a practical nature that may arise in the
reader's mind.
Text Author:
JOHN T. MADDEN,
8.C.5., M.A., C.P.A.,
Dean of New York
University, School of
Commerce, Accounts
and Finance.
MODERN BUSINES S COURSE AND SERVIC E


Purchasing and
Storing
Text Author i
RALPH C. DAVIS ,
Head, Management
Department ,
General Motors In-
stitute of Technology .
JJAND-TO-MOUTH buying probably will be of
permanent duration. The position of the pur-
chasing and stores departments is therefore one of
increased importance. Reduced inventories lower
operating costs. A carefully co-ordinated purchasing
and production programme saves money on materials,
reduces losses due to deterioration and obsolescence,
and cuts material handling charges.
The present Text outlines the relationship -of pur-
chasing to other business activities and develops the
fundamentals of a sound purchasing policy. It describes
the method of delegating authority to do the buying,
and the methods employed to determine the materials
wanted and the quantities in which to buy. The placing
of contracts, obtaining deliveries on scheduled time,
checking of invoices and the legal aspects of purchase
agreements, all of which are fundamental phases of
the purchasing programme, are carefully and completely
outlined. The work of the receiving and inspecting
departments is described, the ethics of purchasing is
given due consideration, and routines are outlined for
purchasing procedure in the cases of both intermittent
and continuous manufacture.
The Text describes storeroom layout, the methods
of classifying and storing materials, the storeroom
organisation necessary, the plans adopted for issuing
stores, inventory control, and methods of preventing
waste by reducing deterioration and obsolescence and
tightening stores control. The advantages of
co-ordinating the purchasing and stores programme
with production and sales are clearly portrayed.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON IN S T I T U T E


Corporate Consolidations
and Re-organisations
HERE is nothing new about Mergers or
Consolidations, or Reorganisations. Groups of
individuals have ever pooled interests for political,
military, or economic ends.
To effect these changes the establishment of
certain standards and principles, therefore, is natural.
This technique is necessarily the prerogative and
responsibility of the heads of participating units. The
average executive hears little of the dickering between
chiefs, knows little of the terms of agreement, and
discovers only at second hand the details of reorgan-
isation. However, not until he understands what takes
place and is capable of working out the process can
he be said to be a chief executive. A study of this
subject will provide the information which makes these
processes clear, as this synopsis of chapters shows :
Economics of Consolidation; Vertical Combinations; Pre-
paring for Mergers; The Best Time to Merge; Methods
of Combination; Capitalisations of the Merger; Negotia-
tions of the Combination; Fixing the Terms; The
Mechanics of Consolidation: Danger in Mergers; Causes
of Business Difficulties; Compositions with Creditors; Aims
of Reorganisation; Effecting a Reorganisation; Restoring
the Business to Health.
For example, the text explains the reason for com-
bining, the circumstances which lead to it, the methods
which bring it about. It deals with savings in pur-
chasing, cutting production costs, reducing selling
expenses, and better management, effected by the
change. It also covers preparatory steps, legal difficul-
ties; methods of combining; fixing of terms, capitalisa-
tion; and the new allotment of functions and duties.
The purpose of the study is to prepare executives
to take advantage of possible opportunities; to initiate
economical combinations, and to carry them through
effectively and efficiently.
Text Author:
MARCUS NADLER,
J.D.,
Associate Professor of
Finance, New York
University; Research
Director, Institute of
International Finance.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Financial and
Business Forecasting
Text Author :
WARREN F.
HICKERNELL,
Ph.D.,
Economist, Halle &
Stieglitz, Members,
New York Stock
Exchange.
BUSINESS for the past century has been character-
ised by alternating waves of prosperity, over-
speculation and liquidation. These periods of depres-
sion and prosperity are not accidental, but they are the
results of the operation of certain definite economic
laws.
The four essentials in successful business fore-
casting are: (1) Business statistics, (2) a knowledge of
economic principles, (3) perspective based on a study
of business history, (4) good judgment in applying
principles to the interpretation of statistics.
Having acquired the historical perspective and a
knowledge of the economic principles involved, one
must learn the application of these principles to con-
crete cases. This section of the Course gives the
business man a practical introduction to forecasting
trade activity, the stock market, the money market,
commodity markets, and credit and sales conditions,
both sectionally and nationally.
Subject matter treated includes :
Authors of the Business Cycle: The Nature of the Business
Cycle; Law of Loanable Funds; Cross-Currents; Yard-
sticks of Trade Activity: Loanable Funds; Forecasting
the Stock Market; Analysis of Individual Stocks: Analysis
of Investment Issues; Forecasting Sectioned Credit and
Sales Conditions: Forecasting Commodity Prices —General
Factors: Individual Commodities: Smoothing the Business
Cycle, etc., etc.
Dr. Hickernell is one of the world’s foremost
authorities on this subject. Every executive will find
this section of the Course fascinating, and the inter-
pretation of current business barometers will mean
much in management, production and finance.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Investment and
Speculation
r question of investment comes home to every
man, and that of speculation to an ever-increas-
ing number. From the beginning of his period of
earning power the young man receives the urge to
save and invest, from banks and brokers, through
advertisements in newspapers, in magazines, and from
those who wish to sell shares. Even before he
reaches maturity his savings and investment account
may be started by his parents. Throughout his entire
life he is faced with the question of how to make the
best use of his money.
This section of the Course, therefore, is designed
to form a guide to the business man in planning his
investments.
Special attention is given to :
What is an Investment; The Investor; Test of Investment;
Types of Corporation: Securities; Mortgages; Federal
Government and State Securities; Foreign Securities;
Municipal Bonds; Railway Securities; Public Utility
Securities; Industrial Securities: Mining Securities; Security
Price Swings: Investment Barometers: Analysis of Invest-
ments; Short-term Investments: Investment Pitfalls, etc.
Extensive discussion is devoted to the important
topics of shares as forms of investment. Bonds are
treated from the standpoint of "financial anchors."
The author carefully points out the twilight zone
between investment and speculation, and explains the
place of “adventure" in handling funds. A topic of
special appeal included in the text is how to keep in
touch with the changing value of investments. A full
explanation is given of the factors that affect the prices
of securities.
Tests for valuing securities, methods followed by
successful investors, pitfalls confronting amateur
investors through fraudulent securities and through
misuse of bona fide securities, form valuable sections
of the Text.
Text Author :
MERRYLB S.
RUKEYSER, M.A.,
Financial Editor,
“New York Ameri-
can”
Lecturer,
Columbia University,
Page Fifty-nine.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Stock and
Commodity Exchanges
Text Author :
ALBERT W.
ATTWOOD, B.A.
Special Lecturer,
Columbia University.
■ HERB, indeed, to the uninitiated, is the mystery of
big business. To others, they are the very
centres of distribution, the great marts where incon-
ceivably large quantities of produce and metals, and
vast amounts of money and securities, find a ready
exchange between buyers and sellers. London, New
York, Berlin, Paris, Chicago, Auckland, Liverpool,
Melbourne, Sydney, and many others react to the
stimuli given by great economic and political develop-
ments, and yet, they are sensitive to the slightest dis-
placement of the economic equilibrium. Psychologi-
cally, they epitomise and balance the rather divergent
views of business men; they are the common clearing
houses of business thought and action.
Among the subjects discussed are :
Functions of the Stock Exchange: Stock Exchange Securi-
ties; Execution of Order, Transfers and Settlements; A
Speculation Transaction: Banks and the Securities Market;
Quotations; Benefits and Evils of Speculation; Influences
that Affect Share Prices: The Future Contract; Leading
and Other Exchanges, etc., etc.
But what are the true functions of the Stock and
Produce Exchanges? Is speculation an economic ser-
vice, or is it nothing more than gambling? How can
hedging and the use of futures protect all who own
primary goods from the producer away in the back
country of some continent through to the manufac-
turer or merchant possibly at the other side of the
world? All these, and many more things the business
man should know, for the exchanges have an important
influence on his business.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Economics
will enjoy Dean Johnson and share the things
his lifetime of research and experience have
taught him. From the foundation stone of economics
on which the science of business is built comes the
principle or the reason back of every business transac-
tion. Economics is the great mysterious force which
determines how much rent you pay, and how much
income you receive for what you do. Just as mathe-
matics underlies all phases of engineering, so economics
is the basis of all business. The business man who
does not understand economics may be compared to a
doctor who knows nothing about the human body. It
is the controlling tide of business. Work with it
understandingly, and it will serve you. Ignore it, and
it will ruin you.
The subjects discussed include :
Scope of Economics; Fundamental Concepts; Land and
Capital; Labour and Enterprise; Consumption of Wealth:
Value of the Consumer; Money; Value of the Producer;
Credit; Money, Credit and Prices: Foreign Trade: Rent;
Interest; Wages; Profits; Taxation, etc., etc.
This part of the Course was prepared for the man
who wants to know those things about economics
which will be of definite help to him in his business.
It will disappoint theorists. There is nothing in it to
“wade through” or go to sleep over. It gets right
down to business, literally, and what might be
economic theory will strike you as being bed-rock
common sense.
Text Author i
JOSEPH FRENCH
JOHNSON,
D.C.S., LL.D.,
Founder, Alexander
Hamilton Institute.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Commercial Law
[Australasia]
Text Authors ;
EDITORIAL
FACULTY.
HEMINGWAY &
ROBERTSON.
TOO many business men learn the laws about con-
tracts in a court-room, their teachers are judges,
and the prices they pay for learning are frightfully high.
When the costs are paid they realise that as the party
of the first part they should have known what the
party of the second part really did mean by this, that
and the other clause.
The different authorities passing legal and taxation
enactments in Australia and New Zealand, can
possibly cause worry and considerable difficulty to
business executives.
Almost every business transaction involves certain
obligations and duties on the one hand, and certain
rights and privileges on the other, all of which are
enforceable by law.
“Ignorance of the law excuses no man,” and we
do not wish our subscribers in Australia and New
Zealand to suffer through a lack of fundamental
knowledge of those phases of the law which affect
practically every important step they take.
Here are a few of the subjects discussed ;
Contracts the Offer; The Acceptance, Performance,
Assignment and Discharge; Negotiable Instruments; Part-
ners to Negotiable Instruments and Their Application;
Bills of Exchange: Sales—Statute of Frauds, Performance
and Rights, Liabilities of Parties; Bailments and Carriers;
Agency—Creation and Termination; Partnerships: Rights
and Liabilities of Partners: Guarantee and Suretyship;
Deeds, Mortgages, Leases; Personal Property; Fiduciaries,
etc., etc.
This is one of the most essential sections of the
Course. It does not attempt to make a lawyer out of
a business man, but it is designed so that the business
man in Australia and New Zealand may know the
basic principles of our laws in a form in which he may
readily comprehend their application to his business
requirements.
There is a growing realisation of the fact by
business executives that a large part of the principles
relating to business is made up of and governed by
law; the essentials of commercial law, therefore, should
form a part of the armor of every business man.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Modern Business
Reading Guides
classified reading.
following a definite plan,
always brings much better results
than haphazard, random reading /
with no definite purpose in /
view. All too often, the latter /
method leaves the reader’s /
mind with a hazy, indistinct /
impression of what has been
read. Therefore the re- /
suits you will obtain from /
the Modern Business / -v, t
Course and Service £ '"■■■***
will depend, in some
measure, on the way in which
you go at the reading of the Course.
It is important that your reading be
systematic and regular; it must be charted along a
definite line.
For that reason, your reading and study of the
Modern Business Course is carefully directed over
the two and a half year period. At definite intervals
you will receive a Modern Business Reading Guide.
This Guide will lay out and direct your current reading
assignment. It will tell you what to read, and why.
It will serve as a reminder that you must read it, that
in this Course you have a kit of efficient tools which
must not be allowed to grow rusty.
These Reading Guides are informal discussions of
the subjects to be treated in the Text. They bring
up specific points, relative to conditions in Australia
and New Zealand, and show why and how the under-
lying principles of scientific business should and can be
applied.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Modern Business
Lectures
THROUGH the Modern Business
Lectures you are brought into
touch with the ideas and methods
of some of the foremost business
\ and professional men in the
\ world.
’\ They have been especi-
al ally prepared by prominent
: \ business executives in Aus-
\ tralia, New Zealand, and
\ Overseas, and they re-
% fleet the experiences of
these men in handling
common business problems
successfully.
They are intended, first, to show
how these men have actually applied the fundamental
principles discussed in the Course; second, to give fur-
ther information about large and highly developed
business concerns and their methods: and third, to
bring you into close touch with a wide circle of repre-
sentative successful men of affairs. Some of the sub-
jects of the Lectures are:—
Forecasting for Business
Fact Finding as an Aid to Management
Development of Modern Office Methods
Accounting as a Business Force
Credit the Motive Power of Business
Organising a National Advertising Campaign
Salesmanship in Print
Profit Opportunities in Cost Finding
Each Lecture has relative application to a text-volume,
the twenty-eight Lectures being supplied one each
month.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Modern Business
Problems
T the close of the reading of a Text, the Guide
and one Lecture, the Service provides you with
a Modern Business Problem which gives you facilities
for applying and testing your knowledge of the sub-
jects treated in the Course.
There are twenty-eight of them. They are
problems such as financiers, bankers and business
managers meet in actual practice. Among the problems
are:—
Marketing a New Product
Several Cases of Commercial Law
A Food Packing Company’s Selling Problem
Developing Business by Letter
An Equipment Company’s
Office Reorganisation
Determining the Perkins
Company’s Line of
Credit
A Fine and Its Conse-
quences
From Partnership to
Company.
A Cost Enquiry in the
Deakin Manufacturing
Company
Planning a National
Advertising Campaign.
They are practical,
and are prepared by us
wholly for Australian and
New Zealand conditions.
The problems have direct
application to each of the
twenty-eight text-volumes.
MODERN B USINESS COU RSE AND SEH VICE


Moderm Business
Reports
TH E Institute’s
reputation for
impartial scientific in-
vestigation has given
it access to many im-
portant business en-
terprises, and has en-
abled it to secure
detailed statements of
policies, practices and
results. Contained in
the files is informa-
tion on thousands of
specific cases, with
subjects ranging, from
advice to beginners,
to the efficient man-
agement of factories.
The results of these
investigations have been incorporated in the Modern
Business Reports.
Four of these Modern Business Reports on impor-
tant problems are included in your enrolment. You
select the Reports from an extensive list of subjects
covering a wide field. You will find among them
many which are of particular interest, and a number
on Australasian practices. They are intended to
give information on detailed methods in the handling
of specific business problems. The Reports cover such
subjects as :
How to read the Financial Page of a Newspaper
A Storeroom System for an Industrial Plant
The Law of Trustees in Australia
Bankruptcy Law in Australia
Cost Accounting Systems
Standard Costs
Commercial Airports
Branch Office Management
Sales Letters
Collection Letters
Finance Company Set Up
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Bulletins on
Business Conditions
A SUCCESSFUL man must have a knowledge of
fundamental principles relating to the organisa-
tion and management of a business. That is what the
texts, guides, and lectures and problems give. But
something more is needed, and we supply that. The
business man must have a knowledge of those factors
over which he has no administrative control, but which
are of vital importance to the conduct of his business.
A knowledge of external affairs is also necessary. To
supply this information we maintain a Bureau of
Economic and Business Research, which is constantly
bringing together and interpreting vital facts of
business conditions. Its findings are brought to you
through the Bulletins of Business Conditions which
come to you regularly during the 2\ year period of
your enrolment. There are three of these Bulletins;—
(a) THE AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS CONDITIONS
BULLETIN.—Trend of future business affairs in the world.
(b) THE TRADE BULLETlN.—Acquaints you with important
events covering the production and prices of general
commodities.
(c) THE RETAIL BULLETlN.—lllustrates for you ideas and
plans that have been tried with success in other business
centres.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Personal
Inquiry Service
'THROUGH the Personal Inquiry Service you will
receive full answers to all inquiries in connection
with your reading of the Course.
At all times Hemingway & Robertson stands ready
to personally co-operate with you as an individual.
Your answers to Problems, which are optional with
you, are examined, marked, and criticised construc-
tively. You are free to consult the Personal Inquiry
Service regarding all questions and individual problems
in connection with your reading or in the application
of the principles of the Course.
This Personal Inquiry Service is not confined to
inquiries on the fundamental principles of business,
developed from your reading of the texts. It also
includes information on current business conditions
given through the Bulletins on Business Conditions,
which cover all the general important information on
investments, commodity trends, and the like.
The Personal Inquiry Service is the feature which
rounds out the Modern Business Course and Service
in every detail, and many subscribers have told us that
this Personal Service alone is worth the entire cost of
the Course.
The relationship between the Institute—through
Hemingway & Robertson —and its subscribers is not a
cold, mechanical proposition. You will find at our
offices throughout Australasia an organisation of men
who are ready to co-operate in every possible way
with you. They are eager to help you directly in your
personal problems. These men, forming the executive
staff of the Institute and Hemingway and Robertson,
are successful men trained to the work of helping you.
And finally, the Course and Service is not difficult
reading: it is a fascinating and vivid occupation for a
share of your spare moments; a satisfaction, not a
task.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


Chapter Six
SUMMING IT UP
THE thing for you to bear in mind is this :
Since 1909 the Alexander Hamilton Institute
has been engaged in the work of gathering ideas,
principles, and experiences which comprise the most
essential knowledge that you must have if you are to
realise and maintain genuine prominence and progress
in business.
Furthermore, these ideas, principles, and experi-
ences of successful men are placed before you in an
interesting and comprehensive manner.
The Course and Service is augmented by the
knowledge, experience and resources which Heming-
way 6 Robertson have gathered in Australia since their
establishment in 1897.
We show you how to focus all your efforts on a
definite goal—financial independence for yourself and
your family.
We give you the most valuable equipment that a
business man can have—a knowledge of the funda-
mental principles of all departments of business —
information that will enable you quickly and success-
fully to cope with the new business problems, the
solution of which will mean success or failure during
the next five years.
Do you think you could go through such a course
of training without improving your business knowledge
and becoming a more valuable and profitable business
man to yourself or your company ?
Doesn’t it offer the sort of knowledge that is
needed to meet the new competition in modern
business ?
Would it be possible for any intelligent man to
fail in business if he had such a training ?
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


The Seven Most
Important Benefits
have seen, in the preceding pages, just what
the Course and Service is, and how it works.
You have seen how you can become master of that
knowledge which has enabled other men to be truly
successful.
But now a question probably occurs to you, and
it is a fair question. You say, “Yes, I see how I
may grasp, in a remarkably short time, and in a
remarkably interesting way, a vast fund of informa-
tion. But how can I use this information ? What
definite results will it make in my life—just how will
it affect my particular work.’’
The most obvious and direct benefit is a better
understanding of sound business principles.
The other benefits are:—
Ability to plan effectively.
Increased confidence in handling business prob-
lems.
Ability to make quicker and more accurate
decisions.
More leisure for recreation and constructive
thought.
Increased ability to handle men.
Insurance against mistakes.
The inevitable results of these gains in personal
power and efficiency are larger incomes and greater
success in business.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


You Are
Paying Now
THAT statement sounds strange; but test it by
your own experience. How many times in
your life have you paid the price of an all-round train-
ing in business ?
There was the time when a promotion was to be
made in your organisation. You might have received
that promotion, but you lacked the knowledge that
would have singled you out in the minds of your
superiors; or you lacked self-confidence to put yourself
forward.
You paid then for business training—paid a high,
costly price.
There was the man who started even in business
with you and who, in five years, achieved a position it
took you ten years to attain. Those extra five years
were another payment; if you will figure out the
difference in income, you will realise how high the
payments were.
Every year that you postpone this training is
costing you hundreds of pounds in real, cold cash.
Why ? The answer is simple mathematics. If you
reach a comfortable income at fifty you have a certain
number of high-salaried years before you. If you
reach that same income at thirty-five, you have fifteen
additional highly paid years. Think what that means
at £5OO, £BOO, £l,OOO, or £1,500 a year !
Every business man—the manager, the salesman,
the accountant—is his own employer, and is deter-
mining by what he knows and does, how much his
income is to be increased.
If you seem destined to failure, if at the end of
last year you were no further along than you were at
the beginning, the chances will be eight out of ten, that
the cause will be due to “the fault of the person
failing.” You may excuse yourself under a more kindly
phrase, but that will not alter the fact.
MOD ERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SER V IC E


Face the
Facts Squarely
w HY not face the facts squarely and avoid figures
spelling trouble to you ? There is a law that
holds inexorably in modern business; generally speak-
ing. you will be paid in proportion to what it would
cost your concern to train or engage someone else for
your place. In two hours a man can be trained to
take the lift operator’s job; in two days a man can be
trained to take the average clerk’s job; but how much
would it cost to replace the business leaders who are
to-day at the head of our business concerns ?
A survey of our files to discover the secret of their
enthusiasm shows such comments as :
"The price asked is very reasonable indeed in view of the
fact that there is no problem which creeps in the ordinary
course of business which cannot be solved.”
“Too high a value cannot be placed upon your Service
for the 'busy man,' for business principles applied lead to
economy of time and efficiency.”
"I am pleased to report a third advance in salary since
signing up just a little over a year ago,”
"One idea alone from the Lectures has saved the cost of
the Course more than ten times over.”
"Information gleaned from one Bulletin enabled me to take
advantage of the market with the result that I made sufficient
profit to pay for the Course twenty times over.”
"It is practical, modern, and so clearly set out that ‘he who
runs may read’.”
“My contact with you has been the most profitable in the
35 years’ history of this business."
These men and thousands of other successful men
of equal prominence are enthusiastic subscribers to the
Modern Business Course and Service.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON I NSTITUTE


Additional
Facts
ADDITIONAL facts are that the Modern Business
Texts have been used as text books in 110
Australian, New Zealand, American and Canadian
Universities. Among that number are:
University of Melbourne; St. Andrew’s College (Christ-
church); University of Queensland; University of Auck-
land: Columbia University; University of California;
University of Chicago: Dartmouth College; Ohio State
University: University of Wisconsin; Yale University:
Cornell University: New York University; University of
Michigan.
Sixty per cent, of the 415,000 subscribers to the
Course and Service are Executives—Managing Direc-
tors, General Managers, Secretaries, Treasurers,
Managers, and Business Heads; 25% are important
department heads; 15% are assistants and clerks who
aspire to executive positions.
One out of every three Institute men is a univer-
sity graduate. Ten per cent, are engineers and other
technical men. The average age of Institute sub-
scribers at the time they enrol is 37.
It follows that the Modern Business Course and
Service is for men who are executives and for those
who aim to be executives. These facts are indicative
of the standing of the Institute in business education.
But let us add further information to help you in
arriving at a conclusion.
The Course covers a period of two and a half
years.
It requires an average of about forty minutes a
day—less time than you spend with your newspaper.
All the material is practical, prepared in plain,
simple style, easily read, easily understood.
The Text volumes are sent to you as soon as you
enrol.
The supplementary material is mailed at regular
intervals.
More important: the Course and Service as now
presented is definitely adapted into the requirements of
business men of our own country—Australia and New
Zealand.
M ODE R_N B DSINE SS COURSE AN D SERVICE


The Years that the
Locust Hath Eaten
IN a very old book named Joel, after the man who
wrote it, you will find this line: "The Years That
the Locust Hath Eaten.”
A solemn line it is, full of sad significance.
The years when there were no crops, because they
were destroyed by the enemies of crops. The years
when men worked and made no progress; when the
end of the year found them a little poorer than its
beginning, because a part of their little span of life
was gone, and had produced no increase.
In almost every life there are some fruitless years;
but the tragedies occur when, year after year, men go
along feeding their lives to the locust of indecision, or
the locust of laziness, or the locust of too great con-
centration on a petty task.
"My experience leaves me only with the regret
that I did not make contact with the Institute at an
earlier time,” says one executive.
For that regret there is no healing. The years
when one might have acted, and did not; these are
the years that the locust hath eaten.
"If I had enrolled with you a year or two ago, I
should be better able to handle my daily problems,”
says another.
Many able men waste years before they learn
this simple lesson before they learn that success
to-day is impossible without training and that the time
to get that training is not next year, but right now.
You can profit by their experience. The need
for all-round knowledge was never as great as it is
to-day. The opportunities to capitalise such know-
ledge are being multiplied by new trends of business.
The dangers ahead of the man who is not equipped
with the latest business facts are appalling.
At this point you may ask: “How can I secure the
executive training and services that go with the
Modern Business Course and Service ?”
The next pages show how—
ALEX ANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


The Highway
of Achievement
paths begin at the bottom of the hill of life.
One of them winds about the base, through years
of routine and drudgery. Now and then it rises over
a knoll representing a little higher plane of living made
possible by hard-earned progress; but its route is slow
and difficult and bordered with monotony.
The other mounts slowly at first, but rapidly after-
wards, into positions where every problem is new and
stirring, and where rewards are comfort, travel, and
freedom from business worries.
To put it in a single sentence, the training we
offer does this—it brings to your office or home the
knowledge and principles of the men who have made
the most substantial success in business, gives you the
results of their experiences, and says, “Take these and
use them as your own.” Naturally any man who has
this advantage over his competitors—whether he be a
manager or a clerk —is bound to have a greater and
increasing financial value.
Our claims are not made by ourselves; they are
made by those who have used the Course and Service.
The Course can be turned into immediate results. It
gives immediate help in your present position—whether
you are a chairman of a board of directors, general
manager, or a potential executive. From the minute
you begin reading you are conscious that a new force
is at work for your financial progress.
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


Time —Thought
—Decision
YOU possess time in equal measure with all; you
may acquire and cultivate the ability to think
straight, but the power to decide, to do things, belongs
only to the truly ambitious and strong.
"I will study and prepare myself,” was Lincoln’s
decision for success. With the greater specialisation
in commerce, it is found more essential to-day that you
study and prepare yourself for your life work. In
fact, it is absolutely necessary, unless you are willing
to accept the mediocre lot of a mediocre man.
You must pay the price for success or failure. You
can pay the price of success early in life, and success
returns increasing rewards. The price of failure must
be paid all through life, and failure exacts a higher
price than does success, is far more relentless a task-
master, and returns no rewards.
Success in life waits only upon those who seek
it. The man who laments the absence of opportunity
from his life is too busy lamenting to build his
opportunity.
The man who waits for conditions which exactly
suit him—for his luck to change—will see the man who
believes in making his own opportunities gather the
honours.
Judgment prompts decision, but in the final
analysis your decision depends entirely upon your will
to act. Against the promptings of their judgment,
some men constantly, year after year, “decide” to do
nothing. Their judgment tells them they should do
it, take an action, but they "put it off.”
Are you waiting? If so, we would strongly
advise that you stop waiting, and work—for your
own advancement. Train yourself—let others train
y OU —that you may acquire the assurance that comes
of a realisation of one’s ability—not to wait for oppor-
tunity, but to make it.
And now success to your purpose.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


And Now
YOU have the essential facts about the Modern
Business Course and Service. No attempt has
been made to inspire you or "sell” you because we
believe that you can see behind all this something
bigger than just a series of texts, guides, lectures,
problems, reports and bulletins. We believe you will
see in this Course a well built plan to help you to
greater success in business.
Your judgment as a business man tells you that
you need all the knowledge you can get about business.
If that same judgment tells you that the Modern
Business Course and Service is the best means whereby
you can attain more business knowledge, then you
know you should not delay your enrolment.
-j v_
The fee is £43, which
may be paid in convenient
terms if necessary. The
application on the back
page will make it easy for
you to make known to us
your desire to enrol for
this Course and Service
immediately. Fill it in
completely and mail to us.
—*t f
MODERN BUSINESS COURSE AND SERVICE


For Your
Convenience
OFFICES ESTABLISHED
FOR PERSONAL SERVICE
MELBOURNE, C.l.
Bank House, Bank Place, off 410-412 Collins Street.
SYDNEY
Barrack House, 16 Barrack Street.
BRISBANE
National Mutual Building, 293 Queen Street.
HOBART
122 Collins Street.
PERTH
Victoria House, 9S-102 St. George’s Terrace.
ADELAIDE
Mercantile Mutual Building, 74 Pirie Street.
NEWCASTLE
A.M.P. Chambers, 57 Hunter Street.
Agents and Correspondents throughout
AUSTRALIA and the PACIFIC ISLANDS, etc.
ALEXANDER HAMILTON INSTITUTE


The Price of
Success
W OFTEN wonder what it is that brings one man
success in life, and what it is that brings
mediocrity or failure to his brother. The difference
can’t be in mental capacity; there is not the difference
in our mentalities indicated by the difference in per-
formance. In short, I have reached the conclusion
that some men succeed because they cheerfully pay
the price of success, and others, though they may
claim ambition and a desire to succeed, are unwilling
to pay that price.
AND THE PRICE IS—
To use all your courage to force yourself to concentrate on
the problem in hand, to think of it deeply and constantly, to study
it from all angles, and to plan.
To have a high and sustained determination to put over what
you plan to accomplish, not if circumstances be favourable to
its accomplishment, but in spite of all adverse circumstances which
may arise—and nothing worth while has ever been accomplished
without some obstacles having been overcome.
To refuse to believe that there are any circumstances
sufficiently strong to defeat you in the accomplishment of your
purpose. Hard? I should say so: That’s why so many men
never attempt to acquire success, answer the siren call of the rut,
and remain on the beaten paths that are for beaten men. Nothing
worth while has ever been achieved without constant endeavour,
some pain, and constant application of the lash of ambition.
That s the price of success as I see it. And I believe every
man should ask himself: Am I willing to endure the pain of this
struggle for the comforts and the rewards and the glory that go
with achievement? Or shall I accept the uneasy and inadequate
contentment that comes with mediocrity? Am I willing to pay the
Price of Success ?
And the Time to Begin to Pay is Now.
modern business course and service


While the facts are
still fresh in your
mind, fill in the enrol-
ment application on
the opposite page.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
J. T. PICKEN 6C SONS PTY. LTD., 265 FRANKLIN ST., MELBOURNE.


