

Mbat of the 3-cws ?
The REV. WILLIAM A. QUICK.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Printed and Published at the Office of the “ Review or Reviews
169 Queen Street, Melbourne.
1890.
All rights reserved.




Mbat of tbe Jews?
The REV. WILLIAM A. QUICK.
Printed and Published at the Office of the “ Review of Reviews,”
169 Queen Street, Melbourne.
1899.
All rights reserved.




PREFACE.
Stolid Russians and mercurial Frenchmen are dis-
gracing the civilisation of Europe by their barbarous
treatment of the Jews. The brutality of the former is
forcing thousands of them to seek new homes, they
hardly know where, and the unreasoning passions of
the latter are placing Jewish life and property in
peril. Anti-Semitism is a spreading madness, and
there is danger df smaller States receiving virus from
the larger. The outlook for Israel is unpromising.
All lovers of the ancient nation are looking on with
deep concern, and many are speculating as to its future.
The writer of the following chapters is of opinion that
the present time is suitable for a review of theories
that have gained popularity, and for putting before his
fellow-Christians a rational and sober, as well as Scrip-
tural, view of the nation’s position and prospects. He
has endeavoured, with all reverence, to express the full
import of the Word of God on the points he discusses.
He has not written in the disturbing spirit of contro-
versy, and he hopes that those who differ with him in
opinion will accept the assurance that he has the utmost
respect for them as Christian brethren who are as
anxious as he can be to ascertain the mind of God and
to do His will. He also ventures to hope that what
he has written may not be misconstrued by any of his
Jewish brethren. His feeling toward them would pre-
vent all that is hard and harsh in expression.
. ■ vJ
WILLIAM A\ QUICK,
Brighton, Victoria.




What of the Jews?
CHAPTER I.
WHY THE JEWS ARE SEPARATE.
The discussion to which the following chapters are
devoted concerns about ten millions of Jews. Such
is the estimate of their number accepted by the Rev.
John Wilkinson, who may be considered an authority
on many, not on all, subjects which relate to the Jewish
nation. These millions of Jews are distributed as follows:
Russian Empire 4,000,000
Austria-Hungary .. .. .. . • •• 2,000,000
Germany . . .. . .. .. • • 600,000
Holland 90,000
Switzerland 8,000
Belgium 6,000
Denmark .. .. .. ~ • • • • 5,000
Sweden .. .. ° • 4,000
Norway .. .. ■. .. .. .. 500
Spain and Portugal 2,000
Italy 50,000
France .. .. • . • • • • • 100,000
Great Britain and Ireland 100,000
Roumania 350,000
Greece, Bulgaria, and Servia 45,000
Africa .. .. . • • • .. • ■ 1,000,000
Persia, India, China, and Japan .. .. 95,000
Turkey - . - 200,000
Turkey in Europe 250,000
America .. .. .. .. . • • • 720,000
British Colonies .. .. 80,000
9,705,500*
* The above figures have been taken from Mr. Wilkinson’s work, “Israel
My Glory.” It contains much valuable information ; but I wholly dissent
from its theories.


A nation of about ten million souls, distinctly marked
by characteristics derived during millenniums of de-
scent, a nation possessing elements of greatness in litera-
ture, science, art, philosophy, statesmanship, yet with-
out a country, and dependent on the tolerance of other
nations for opportunities of developing and display-
ing the various abilities given to it by God! Jews are
everywhere, and are in all places surrounded by dense
populations, yet they live a life of isolation from the
domestic, social, and religious life of the rest of man-
kind. Intermarriages, and a fusion of Jew and Gen-
tile peoples, seem never to have been thought of except
in a few cases, in which rank and wealth have proved
mightier than the strongest barriers of race and reli-
gion.
It has hitherto been assumed that the isolation of the
Jewish nation —its life apart from the life of other
nations —is the consequence of Divine appointment,
a perpetual miracle, in fact; and from this assumption
another has naturally arisen, namely, that the Almighty
has, in His counsels, arranged a great future destiny
for the ancient nation; it is to remain apart from all
other peoples, and not long hence to be restored to
Palestine. That land is to be the scene of stupendous
miracles to be wrought specially for the Jews, who at
length, convinced of the Messiahship of Jesus, are to
become the successful missionaries of His Cross.
Now, before discussing the destiny planned out for
Israel, we may inquire whether the separate existence


of the nation can be accounted for only by assuming
a direct and continuous interposition of God in accord-
ance with a Divine purpose. We will not doubt that
His providence is overruling, but the question is, Does
He will, and 'has He arranged for, the Jewish nation
to exist apart from all other nations? To the present
writer an affirmative reply is a mere assumption which
is found to be some kind of a basis on which to rest
many speculations in regard to the future of Israel.
Amalgamation with Christian nations has been, so
far, an impossibility. In the times of the Apostles the
Churches founded by the first preachers of Christianity
were in great part composed of Jews. Taking into
view the converts at Pentecost and those won by the
missionary labours of apostles and others, it may be
supposed that Israelites formed the nucleus of most
of the earliest Churches. And so while there never
was any national acceptance of Jesus as Messiah, St.
Paul—a loyal Jew —was able to rejoice over many of
his nation who, “ according to the election of grace”
(Rom. xi. 5), looked to the Nazarene as their Sovereign
Lord, their Messiah, their Saviour. Nor can this be
wondered at when we consider the spirit in which the
apostles approached their brethren and compatriots,
that divine charity, that intense longing for Israel’s
welfare which was willing to make the greatest sacri-
fice on their behalf. Said St. Paul, “ I say the truth
in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing witness with
me in the Holy Ghost, that I have great sorrow and


unceasing - pain in my heart. For I could wish that I
myself were anathema from Christ for my brethren’s
sake, my kinsmen according to the flesh: who are
Israelites ” (Rom. ix. 1-4, R.V.) Moreover, the men
who were inspired by so mighty an affection for Israel
had a testimony to bear which was exceedingly simple
Jesus both died and rose again; and a line 'of argu-
ment to pursue which could be easily under-
stood “ Thus it is written.” Oh, that the
Apostles’ spirit, and their method of dealing
with the Jewish reason and conscience, had never
been lost to the Church! What misery had been saved
the poor sons and daughters of Abraham, what a gain
had been secured for the Christian cause!
The first preachers of Christianity had not long gone
to their rest when the foundation principles of the
Church were endangered by a broadening distinction
between clergy and laity, by a pharisaic care for
ritual, by the multiplying of orders in the Church’s
ministry, by the growing power of ecclesiastics. Gra-
dually the Church became an arena for the display of
clerical dignity, and the power which belonged to the
higher offices of the Church was seized bv successful
competitors. The spirit of Christianity—its charity,
meekness, patience, unselfishness—-gradually decayed.
The Church was in an unpromising condition at the
time of Constantine’s accession to the empire, and his
so-called .conversion to Christianity. It thenceforth
became a politico-ecclesiastical institution. Christians


so called sought the destruction of all who opposed
what were regarded as the interests of religion, and the
sword was already hanging over them. Their danger
was increased by that passion for formulating beliefs
respecting the most mysterious and abstruse of all
subjects which had seized the mind of the Church, for
the formularies adopted must be thrust on dissentients
by imperial power. And so it came to pass that in the
fourth century a persecution of the Jews was com-
menced by the burning of a synagogue —an atrocious
act, Which even the holy Ambrose of Milan pro-
nounced to be well pleasing unto God. The persecu-
tion then begun —the oppression, the spoliation, the
torture and murder of Jews —increased in horror as
the Church, by its idolatrous practices—the worship
of Mary as “ the Mother of God,” and of the saints
and of images, and pictures, and relics —made it im-
possible for a Jew to become a Christian. Insur-
mountable obstacles were first put in his way, and then
he was punished by all fiendish contrivances for not
reaching the goal of orthodox belief and practice.
How could be become a Christian ? Why say that God
kept him separate from the rest of mankind? The
Jew has to face the same obstacles in the way of his
• conversion at the present time. The vast majority
of his nation are to be found in countries that are
saturated with such superstitions as 'his soul loathes—
images everywhere, and worshippers adoring them!
The spurious miracle of transubstantiation at the top,


and below the miracles wrought by holy statues and
pictures, holy water, and holy relics, demand the be-
lief of the Jew. How can he believe? How can he
join in the worship of Mary, and in prayers to the
saints? How can he admit for a moment the claims
of a pretentious and tyrannous priesthood?
The Jew is neither child nor ignoramus. He may
be crushed by tyranny, he may be robbed and kicked
out of a country; but he cannot add a thousand and one
articles to his simple creed, or be won to a pseudo-
Christianity by pomp and pretence. Nor can he re-
linquish his nationality by command of potentates, or
at the call of riotous multitudes. The tendency of
persecution is to attach the Jew to his religion. And
in proportion to the hatred shown him by professedly
Christian nations is his love for the religion of his
fathers, the practice of which stamps him with a pro-
nounced singularity. For according to that religion
he cannot worship with Christians, nor can they, while
heeding the words of Jesus, “ No man cometh unto
the Father but by Me,” unite with him in his worship.
Thus the ties that bind men to one another the most
securely—those of a common religion—being absent,
the Jew must of necessity stand apart from the Gentile.
And as though the impossibility of amalgamation must
be made absolute, the domestic and social habits—apart
from those of the Jewish religion—are all out of accord
with Gentile ways, so that Jews and Gentiles cannot
eat together, nor can they dwell together in one habita-


tion. They must at present live in separation. But
the responsibility of this unfortunate condition must be
shared between them, and not be attributed to God.
The religion of the Hebrews made them a nation.
And a nation they will remain until they are brought
to own that their religion is best understood through
the teaching of our Lord and His apostles, that Jesus
of Nazareth was all that He claimed to be — ! a Divine
Person sent of the Father to be the Messiah of Jews
and Gentiles; that “He died for our sins, and rose again
for our justification ”; that He ascended, and is glorified
at the right hand of God, from whence He shall come
to be the judge of mankind. When they shall acknow-
ledge that Judaism is glorified by Christianity as the
morning twilight is lost in the glory of the day, they
will discover that they have in the common brotherhood
of all the nations a common part in spreading the
knowledge of God and of His Son, Jesus Christ our
Lord.
When? Ah, we are in too much haste with our
theories and predictions. We dream of a restora-
tion to Palestine, then we dream of trouble for Israel
in that land such as surely would make them wish they
had remained among the nations; then we dream of
a visible descent of Jesus on the Mount of Olives, of His
enemies destroyed at a stroke, of the Jews convinced
at length of His Messiahship “by a sight of Jesus Him-
self,” and converted to His religion. We believe in
our dreams, and, alas! we try to make the Jews also


believe in them. This is a considerable por-
tion of the Gospel which nowadays is preached
to them. And the preachers rest it, as the Jews
of our Lord’s time rested their carnal views of the
kingdom of God, on forced literal interpretations of
writings which clothe their meaning in the gorgeous
and dazzling things of creation.


CHAPTER 11.
JEWISH DESTINY.
The destiny of the chosen people was revealed to
Abraham, their great progenitor. The key to unlock
the mystery of Israel’s future may be found in Gen. xii.
1-4: “Now the Lord said unto Abram, Get thee out
of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy
father’s house unto the land that I will show thee; and
I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee,
and make thy name great, and be thou a blessing; and
I will bless them that bless thee, and him that curseth
thee will I curse, and in Thee shall all the families of the
earth be blessed.” This promise given to Abraham
was renewed after the separation of Lot from him;
and a more distinct mention of Canaan as the inherit-
ance of his posterity was made to the patriarch. He
had dealt magnanimously with Lot, by giving to him
the first choice of a district wherein to settle with his
numerous flocks and herds; and it may have been with
this beautiful incident in view that the Lord chose
that particular time for making prominent the portion
of His covenant which related to the land of Palestine.
“And the Lord said unto Abram, after that Lot was
separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look
from the place where thou art, northward and south-
ward, and eastward and -westward, for all the land which


thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.
And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth; so
that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then
shall thy seed also be numbered. Arise, walk through
the land, in the length of it, and in the breadth of it,
for I will give it unto thee ” (Gen. xiii. 14-17).
In these two passages of Scripture God tells Abra-
ham what was the Divine purpose in calling him to
leave Ur of the Chaldees and separate himself from
his kindred. hie was to have a numerous posterity
and Palestine was to be the country of their settlement.
But the emphasis must be laid on the last clause of the
first quotation; “ In thee shall all the families of the
earth be blessed.” This was the high destiny fore-
seen and foretold to Abraham. Everything, the pos-
terity, and Palestine as their place of settlement, were
but necessary incidents leading up to this destiny.
Even so the remarkable events in the history of Israel
as a nation, up to the time of the birth of Jesus, which
is of necessity regarded as the opening of a new era
for our world. It was a destiny of blessing for all
mankind. Nations would arise, and in their pride
and arrogancy would become a destroying sword to
other nations, until in turn they would be subdued.
But this nation —it was brought into existence for the
world’s highest benefit. And although in its pro-
gress it had to fight for the land God had given to it,
its ultimate goal was Salvation for itself and for all the


families of the earth.” The grandest destiny ever
ordained by God for any nation!
Ihe salvation of mankind—“ all the families of the
earth ” —their enlightenment and purification, yea,
their continuance and prosperity, depend on the re-
ligion they accept for their guidance and government.
On this point I need say no more than that the asser-
tion is confirmed by the history of departed nations,
and by the present relative condition of European
nations. They are by profession Christian, and al-
though their Christianity is lamentably corrupted by
superstitious beliefs and practices, they are the masters
of the world; and it may be predicted that when they
shall have purged themselves from these, and brought
their various forms of Christianity into harmony with
the teachings of Jesus, they will become the teachers
of all the nomChristian peoples.
Whence has our religion come? It may be traced
to the Syrian, the father of the Jewish nation, whom
God separated from his idolatrous relatives and removed
from the land they occupied. That religion was not
the invention of Abraham, or a discovery made by him,
it was a revelation clear and direct from the Almighty
Himself, whose purpose was for a time to make one
people—this Hebrew people—beneficiaries and guar-
dians thereof, until He should arrange a fitting era for
completing the revelation. That time —“the fulness of
time ”•—had come when, in His infinite love, He sent
His Son into the world to explain and illuminate all


past revelation, to bring- out the spiritual import of
law and ceremony, to abrogate the unfitting, to make
clear the Fatherhood of God, and man’s way back to
Him, and, in a word, to throw open the long-predicted
kingdom of heaven to all men of all nations who would
enter into it. And by means of this wonderful Teacher,
the greatest families of mankind have received such a
‘‘leaven ” of powerful knowledge as is influencing them
more than they know. Rather, it is this knowledge
which has made them great. All has come from the
Nazarene whom His nation despised—despised be-
cause it did not apprehend its own great destiny.
And now consider that vision of glory which first
Abraham saw, and which was more distinctly seen by
psalmists and prophets. It is a vision not yet fulfilled;
it is in course of fulfilment. But all the way along it
has been, and it is now, a rapturous vision to the men
who have known how to behold it: yea, to the very
angels of God. We see it through the medium of
Messianic prophecies and New Testament facts —facts
that are in themselves a prophecy, for they commence
a series of facts which will have their consummation
only when the Son shall deliver up “ the kingdom to
God, even the Father ” (i Oor. xv. 24).
“When the fulness of the time came, God sent forth
His Son, born of a woman, born under the law, that He
might redeem them which were under tpe law, that we
might receive the adoption of sons;’ (Gal. iv. 4, R.V.)
There is a pause in the march of circumstances, and


heaven and earth await the sublimest event in the re-
cords of the world —the incarnation of God’s only be-
gotten Son. The fore-ordained dignity has come,
not to the dominant nation, but to the Jews, and that
in their affliction and depression. For the babe born
in Bethlehem has a lineal descent from the most illus-
trious of that people. He is the seed of Abraham pro-
mised to the patriarch by Jehovah, and in the birth of
this “young child ’ the destiny of Israel is in part ful-
filled. “ A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory
of His people Israel.” Israel’s glory came in the birth
at Bethlehem. That alone had been a destiny to be
coveted by the greatest nation upon earth.
The Jews were destined to be the witnesses, and their
land to be the scene of our Lord’steachingand miracles.
He came “to the lost sheep of the House of Israel.”
“He came to His own,” His own land, temple, people.
They were His first and greatest concern, and His
apostles, themselves Jews, were directed by Him to
open their commission as preachers of His everlasting
Gospel among the people who had despised and re-
jected and put Him to death. They are a chosen and
privileged people destined to have among them, and
closely related to them, the most illustrious of teachers;
and their land, trodden by His feet in weariness and
suffering, and resounding with His voice from moun-
tain and sea shore, is holy as no other land ever can be.
But our Lord’s was more than a teaching vocation.
This sinful world could not be redeemed and saved


by moral and religious lessons alone. It was necessary
in the government of God to deal with men as offenders
against Divine law. Ours was a race of transgressors,
guilty and unclean rebels, and wanderers. As the
whole Mosaic economy and the prophets had shown,
there must be expiation and a fountain opened. The
Christ was to become the substituted sacrifice. His
own blood was to be the element of cleansing. And
while His nation brought upon itself a heavy punish-
ment for an unexampled sin. the nation’s land, as the
scene of earth’s greatest tragedy, was honoured to be-
come the scene of the greatest of sacrifices for the good
of men.
And the scene, too, of the resurrection of the Cruci-
fied One, and of His ascent to the heavenly places.
No wonder that the most enlightened nations under
heaven arc represented by thousands of eager visitors to
Palestine, who form, as it were, a continuous and ever-
broadening stream. They would see the land of Im-
manuel.
Have the Jews realised the whole of their high des-
tiny? All Christians must own that if no additional
honour awaits the nation and its land, they have been
enough distinguished and glorified by the earthly so-
journ and the teaching and work of the incarnate Son
of God. The events that have already taken place
ji Palestine cannot possibly be exceeded in splendour;
no, not if all that is expected by some Christians should
really happen. What would be the return of the Jews


to Palestine, and what even the descent of our Lord
visibly and gloriously upon Mount Olivet; what the
intervention of His might and majesty to utterly des-
troy His enemies and the enemies of Israel; what the
forcible conversion of the Jews and the part which some
Christians suppose they will take in converting the
Gentiles to Christ? All are exceeded in glory by the
Incarnation—Deity and humanity mysteriously con-
joined—by the Son manifesting the Father to man-
kind during the earthly sojourn, and by the audible
voice of God testifying to His Son, and by the miracles
--all deeds of mercy—and the teaching, which is
still spreading its light among the nations, and the
death on Calvary—so awful yet so wide in its issues
—and the resurrection and the ascension to the right,
hand of the Father. Palestine has already seen more
of the glory of the Lord than it can ever see again.
But is there no remnant of blessing left for the Jews?
After the nation’s long life, is it to die in the night un-
blessed, and unblessing?
God has not done with the Jews; they, and
all . non-Christian nations, will have to submit
themselves 'to Jesus, Who is the Messiah of
all nations. Here is what I would call a
supplementary, yet very blessed, destiny ordained
of God for this wonderful people. St. Paul teaches that
they will become Christian, but not yet awhile—not
until “the fulness of the Gentiles be come in ” (Rom.
xi. 25); and that great event has been, and still is,


delayed by the corruption, and unfaithfulness, and
cruelty of the historic Church. Moreover, St. Paul
does not teach that his nation will, in order to their con-
version, be treated in any exceptional way. On the con-
trary, he shows that as Jews and Gentiles are all “ con-
cluded in unbelief,” so all have the same Saviour and
will be -aved in the same way—that is, the way of faith
in Christ. When he writes of the conversion of his
people, he does not hint at any special or miraculous
means to be employed for bringing them to repent-
ance. (See on this important point Rom. iii. 10-31.)
No Christians can doubt the final conversion of the
Jews. It may also be admitted that when converted
they will become successful Christian preachers of the
Cross; for although the fulness of the Gentiles will have
“come in,” that is, “ in ” to the kingdom of God, there
will yet remain a work of conviction and confirmation
for which the Jews may be among the most efficient of
ministers. A people who have for ages stood firm
against Christianity, in spite of all facts and arguments,
and against (they will say) every interest of the present
world, and who have reviled our blessed Saviour, and
spit at the mention of His name, will, when converted
to His religion, and admitting and preaching the di-
vinity of its origin, and the deity of its Author, be re-
garded by all men as having a claim on their attention.
It will be seen that God has accomplished in them a
work of grace greater than a miracle (John xiv. 12).
And besides, the ages told over by the Jews will have


given them some of the best qualifications for a suc-
cessful ministry—seriousness, earnestness, fidelity, and
zeal for the truth.
Yes, something good remains forthe Jews, and for the
Gentiles also, by their means; and who can foretell the
universal joy that will come to the Gentiles when the
children of Abraham, according to the flesh, shall have
turned to Him Who is God both of the Jews and the
Gentiles (Rom. hi. 29)?
To some extent, then, we agree withtheopponents of
our views. The Scriptures concerning Israel arc not
all fulfilled.


CHAPTER 111.
GOD’S PLANS FOR THE JEWS.
The foregoing statement of what the present writer
believes to be the remainder of the high destiny of the
Jews, will stand at a great disadvantage against the
statements that are confidently put forth and accepted
by many as to the restoration to Palestine and the
visible descent of our Lord on Mount Olivet. For it
is not to be doubted that human nature is at present
much as it was in the time of Christ, when the Jews
sought a sign, and again and again demanded to have
their curiosity satisfied by works which would excite
their wonder. Even Christians are in danger of in-
clining to theories that provide for marvellous events
in the physical sphere, rather than to theories which
are confined to the sublimer but less observable
spiritual sphere. The present writer believes in the
conversion of the Jews to Christianity, but in anticipat-
ing the great change that will take place in them he
keeps strictly to St. Paul’s order, which begins with the
proclamation of the Gospel to them, then their personal
faith in that Gospel, then their salvation. And if he
is told that so it may be as to individual Jews, but that
the nation, as a nation, will not be converted until the
Lord personally and visibly comes to Palestine, he
replies that should He thus come, the result is more


likely to be a general terror than a general repentance,
bor repentance is an illumination of the conscience by
Divine truths that relate to our personal guilt, and a
softening of the heart at the sight of our sins and their
consequences. It is a process carried through by the
Holy Ghost—a process, in individual sinners. “The
conversion of the Jews as a nation ” is a phrase that
should be explained. Does it mean that by a sight of
the descending Christ all Israel will be confounded
and overpowered, that a flash of outward glory will
bring the nation into the new T moral state called re-
generation? It must be acknowledged that a con-
version of ten million of human beings (there may then
be twenty millions) by such a method has never yet
had its type, and is altogether out of accord with any-
thing we read of in the Word of God. It by no means
agrees with the prediction of the greatest of allprophets,
“I,if Ibe lifted up, will draw all men unto Me.” Yes,
“ draw all men,” without distinction of race.
There are questions Which in this connection might
be suggested, though we do not wish to urge them to
the annoyance of any good Christians, as, for example.
What of millions of Jews who probably will remain
at all points of the compass? Will it not be a com-
paratively few who will see the glorious descent? Will
Palestine contain the whole nation?
But as we all believe in the boundless resources of
God, and in His ability to carry out any plan that He
has devised, even by means so strange that we cannot


see a continuity of action, or any harmony between
His methods in the future and those in the past, let us
try to ascertain what He really intends shall be the
future of Israel.
Does God intend to restore the nation to Palestine?
Its restoration is confidently expected by a con-
siderable section of Christians who make it a subject
for dogmatising in lectures and sermons and Bible
readings, and denounce their fellow Christians who
hold an opposite view as ignorant of the fact that Holy
Scripture means something, and means what it says.*
Their theory is most ingeniously put together, and as
ingeniously the prophecies are selected and brought
forward for its support. They are quoted with wonder-
ful facility, but without the least regard to the style of
Oriental poetry, which is so manifest in the writings of
the prophets, and with as little regard to the sober,
sacred history of Scripture in which may be seen the
whole economy of Divine grace spread out, and the
ways of the Lord in dealing with mankind clearly
traced. They have adopted a captivating method.
It gives them the Whole range of prophecy, and enables
them to quote without limit. It is an attractive method
to persons who long to know the things that are in
the future. Moreover, there are some Christians whose
desire to obey outruns all prescribed duty. Even so,
there are some whose readiness to believe exceeds the
•Mr. Wilkinson, in his book, page 111, says that the “ Brethren,” and many
n the Episcopal Church, have taught the Church of Christ that the Bible cer,
ainly means something, and that it probably means it says.


demands of any clear revelation. There is piety in
both cases; but the first class of Christians may be
led on to a profitless asceticism, and those of the second
class are in danger of a morbid enthusiasm which
ends in disappointment and discouragement.
There is one point on which all Bible students are
agreed. They believe that the prophecies which re-
late to the reoccupancy of Palestine by the Jews have
never yet been fully accomplished. They differ, how-
ever, as to the reason of their non-fulfilment, and as to
the question of a future fulfilment.
The present writer holds the opinion that as they
never have been fulfilled, so they never will be fulfilled.
He believes it to be a mere assumption that the future will
witness what, for some cause, has never yet been seen,
and because it has never yet been seen—the restoration
of Israel to Palestine. This assumption, which is
common to many commentators and other writers, is
to a great extent accountable for wild expositions
(those of the Anglo-Israelites and many besides), and
for expectations raised ever and anon which have ended
and must end in disappointment and sorrow.
But losing sight, for the present, of the conflicting
views referred to, we will go to the prophets in the
hope of understanding what they say regarding Israel’s
restoration.
i. We are at once struck with this: Babylon is con-
stantly before them. It excited awful forebodings in
those who wrote before the captivity, and to Ezekiel,


Daniel, and others it gave experiences that were un-
speakably mournful. Babylon seems never to have
been out of their thoughts. More than a hundred
times it is mentioned by them under one appellation or
another. Their writings are saturated with the idea
of Babylon. Take out Babylon, and what remains?*
Wherever else individual Jews might wander during
the period of captivity, Babylon is to the prophets the
place of the nation's sojourn. The thoughts and the
phraseology of the prophets take their form from
Babylon. Indeed, it may be said that their writings
receive no colouring from the present-day dispersion
of the Jews, from the countries they inhabit, the scenes
that pass before them, or the circumstances that make
up their lives. He must be bold indeed who would
venture to affirm that the prophets had in their mind’s
eye Russia, Austria, Hungary, &c., as the countries
of the Jews’ sojourn, or that they w r ere thinking of the
present-day circumstances, political and social, of their
nation. Of course, the Spirit of inspiration could
place before them, as in a panorama, all the shifting
circumstances of, say, twenty-five centuries; but the
question is, did He do so? There is no evidence that
He did. It may be said that the prophets speak of all
the land's of the dispersion —that they use the expres-
sion, “from the four corners of the earth.” Yes, as
they knew the earth thirty-five centuries ago—that is,
+ I mean, of course, wliat retrains fts to captiyity and release ?


before and after the captivity of Israel and Judah. Yet
not as we know it. There is not the least evidence
that they had any conception of the present geography
of the earth. Isaiah (xli. 9) speaks of the seed of
Abraham as originally brought from the ends and
corners of the earth; but who would think of giving a
literal interpretation to such a statement? The pro-
phetic mind goes no further than lands lying near to
Palestine, Babylon, and Egypt. Hence Isaiah’s men-
tion of Pathros, Cush, Elam, Hamath, and so forth as
lands from which the Jews were to return (xi. 11).
But where are now the peoples that occupied those
lands? Where are the exact localities?
2. The next thing that strikes one in reading of the
Restoration is that captivity is implied. It is matter
of notoriety that thousands of Jews have of late gone to
find a home in the land of their fathers. There is a
population of 50,000 in Jerusalem, and two-thirds of
these belong to the Jewish nation. There can be no
doubt that if the anti-Semitic excitement continue in
the countries of Europe; and if wealthy Jews will charge
themselves with the maintenance of their poor brethren
in Palestine, the number will considerable increase.
But the return of the Jews and the Restoration of
the Jewish nation are widely different events. The
question is. What is the prophetic conception of a res-
toration? It certainly includes a deliverance from a
bondage to which the Jews had been carried away
after an invasion and subjugation of their land by a


powerful enemy. It takes into view the miseries of
the nation in a strange land among a people of a
strange tongue. But the present condition of the
Jews is a development unforeseen by the prophets. So
far from being captives in a strange land, no single
Jew is held in slavery anywhere. Nor is there any ob-
jection to an exodus of Jews in any land where they
have settled. They may go to Palestine, or, if they
have no desire to be pent within so small a strip of
land, they may, like the British people, make homes in
untrod regions of fertility.
3. Again, the prophetic conception of a restoration
is that it must be preceded by national repentance and
turning to God with the whole heart. I know that
in the Jewish liturgy there are admirable forms of con-
fession, and that on the solemn days of the nation these
are used with apparent sincerity. But the great sin
is never bewailed, and there is at present little sign of
any national acknowledgment that a frightful wrong
was perpetrated when Jesus, “ the Son of David,”
was shamefully treated and crucified. It is not yet
seen and confessed that the national sin bars the
national salvation.
4. A prevailing idea of the prophets was that God
would specially and miraculously interfere for the de-
liverance and restoration of His people. Their return
from the captivity of Babylon was to be after the pattern
of their release from the bondage of Egypt. “ And
there shall be an highway for the remnant of His people,


which shall be left, from Assyria, like as it was to Israel
in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt ”
(Isaiah xi. 16). The country of their captivity was to
be as completely overthrown as Sodom and Gomorrah
(Isaiah xiii. 19). And as their wn land had been swept
of its inhabitants, so it was to be again wholly occupied
by Judah and Israel (Isaiah xiv. 1). “The ransomed
of the Lord ” would return to Zion with singing; their
way would be made plain before them, and the very
wilderness would join them in celebrating the praises
of God by its beauty and fruitfulness. To facilitate the
return of His people, the Lord would exalt the valleys
and lay low the mountains. Isaiah again refers his
people to the escape from Egypt (that event was kept
well before the prophets as a pattern and pledge of
future deliverances), and he tells them that Jehovah
had once made the depths of the sea a way for them to
escape, therefore the redeemed of the Lord should have
a triumphant and joyous return to Zion (Isaiah li. 9).
The prophets every where fort ell that the Restoration
would be more remarkable in all its circumstances than
the “ carrying away.” It was to be a real Restoration
of the nation.
Such a Restoration has never yet taken place. The
people had permission to return from Babylon, and
many facilities for the long journey were conceded to
them; so far the providence of God had wrought
wonders on their behalf, but their patriotism did not
equal their opportunity. It is believed that the whole


number of exiles who chose to continue in captivity
was about six times the number of those who returned.
Comingto the present period, it may be asked: Would
not this proportion of captives remaining to captives
returning be greatly exceeded by those who would
in our day decline the privilege of settling in Palestine,
if, say, their wealthy men were to do as some have
proposed —pay the Sultan a price and acquire the
country? But will anyone venture to affirm that such
a transaction was ever thought of by the prophets of
God? The events that led up to the decree of Cyrus
were foretold, but as to what is now happening there
is perfect silence. It is the opinion of the present
writer that the thoughtful and wealthy Jews of Europe
will not readily commit themselves to schemes which,
though plausible, can never stand out in history as the
fulfilment of prophecy, or as any arrangement made
by the Almighty for liis ancient people. It cannot be
shown that He is lifting a finger in favour of a Restora-
tion to Palestine.
But does not God even fix the time for Israel’s Res-
toration? Let us suppose that He does—that the
“ time, times and a half” of Daniel are now expiring,
does it add strength to the contention that Israel’s
Restoration is unconditionally promised? Jere-
miah, without using mystic figures, but in plain
terms, fixed a time (seventy years) for a Re-
toration such as the prophets predicted (Jer.
xxv. 1 2). Yet there was a failure; it did


not take place in the manner described. If there
was a failure five hundred years before Christ, may
there not be a failure nineteen hundred years after
Christ, the same cause operating in both cases?


CHAPTER IV.
ARE THE PROPHECIES CONDITIONAL?
As there is a general admission that prophecy ha -
not yet been fulfilled by what its writers would regard
as a Restoration of the nation, we may now inquire
what has caused the conspicuous failure—an inquin
which brings us face to face with the conditions upon
which the predictions relating to Palestine were made
to rest.
I think it can be shown that such predictions differ
widely in their nature from those which relate to the
redemption of mankind by the atoning sacrifice of our
blessed Saviour, and to the universal spread of the king-
dom of God. In the former case a locality and its
comparatively few occupants are concerned; in the
latter, mankind of all periods in all lands.
Moreover, the grace of God to the entire race
of Adam is magnified, not only because of
its extent, but because it is not limited by
conditions; it rests, indeed, on the fact of man’s re-
bellion, and guilt, misery. It is, therefore, folly to
affirm that one class of predictions being uncondi-
tional, prophecy of the other class must be the same.
It is necessary that we go back to an early period of
Jewish history—to Moses—if we will undertsand the


prophets. What he said could never be absent from
the minds of subsequent writers. It was uttered with
an impassioned solemnity, and in impressive circum-
stances. One cannot conceive of a soul among all Israel
being unmoved by those addresses of Moses, which
utter threatenings of such horror as must have made
the ears tingle and the flesh creep. But they were not
arbitrary threatenings. The judgments denounced
were all righteous, and a power was given to the nation
to avoid them. They would descend surely and swiftly
in case the nation violated the covenant of God.
The promises which Moses uttered were equally
contingent. Such a falling away from the worship
of Jehovah as the prophet and leader of the people
saw to be a future possibility could be forgiven only on
their deep and sincere repentance. “If they shall
confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers,
with their trespass which they trespassed against Me,
and that also they have walked contrary unto Me,
and that I also have walked contrary unto them, and
have brought them unto the land of their enemies; if
then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
then accept of the punishment of their iniquity, then
will I remember My covenant with Jacob, and also
My covenant with Isaac, and also My covenant with
Abraham will I remember, and I will remember the
land ” (Lev. xxvi. 40-42). The same condition is
made prominent in Dent. iv. 29: “ But if from thence
thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find Him


if thou seek Him with all thy heart and with all thy
soul.” Note well the “ ifs ”of these and other pas-
sages in the Old Testament, and note well also what they
demand of deep humiliation and sorrow, of abandon-
ment of national sins, and renewal of covenant engage-
ments with God. In a word, they demand a national
uprising and reformation such as the world has seldom
witnessed.
In the twenty-eighth chapter the curse of God upon
idolatrous Israel is painted in yet more lurid colours
than elsewhere, nor are they relieved by any gleam of
hope for the nation. We read on until we come to
the thirtieth chapter, where again the conditions of a
restoration of the people to the land of their fathers
are laid down. They were to return to the Lord, and
render to Him an unreserved obedience.
When the first temple was dedicated to the worship
of God, the conditional character of His covenant with
the ancient people was again recognised. They were
not permitted on that great occasion, when they were
surrounded with every evidence of peace and pros-
perity, to carry to their homes the false assumption
that their part in the covenant of God was receptive
only—that they had nothing to do but to enjoy. The
remarkable prayer offered by Solomon their king as-
sumed that they had to serve Jehovah with the per-
fect loyalty of their hearts if they would enjoy the bless-
ings of His covenant made with their fathers—a truth


which many sad events in their history had already
illustrated and enforced.
That dedicatory prayer was tremulous with the
thought of a possible defection from God and His
oidinances, and with the fear that He might for their
sins give them to the sword of their enemies. Indeed,
if Solomon had seen in vision the terrible events of
later reigns—the invasion of Israel by the Assyrians,
and, afterwards, of Judah by the Babylonians, and ‘The
carrying away’ —he could not have entreated the Lord
with more fervour of soul on behalf of the Jews in
captivity. “If they sin against Thee (for there is no
man which sinneth not), and Thou be angry with them
and deliver them over before their enemies, and they
carry them away captives unto a land far off or near;
yet if they bethink themselves in the land whither they
are carried captive, and turn and pray unto Thee in the
land of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we
have done amiss, and have dealt wickedly : if they re-
turn to Thee with all their heart and with all their soul
in the land of their captivity, whither they have carried
them captives, and pray toward their land which Thou
gavest unto their fathers, and toward the city which
Thou hast chosen, and toward the house which I have
built for Thy name, then hear Thou from the heavens,
even from Thy dwelling-place, their prayers and their
supplications, and maintain their cause and forgive
Thy people which have sinned against Thee ” (2 Chron.
vi- 36-39)-


The very covenant of God repeated again and again
was a conditional covenant. He was never under obliga-
tion to restore the people to Palestine if they remained
in impenitence, nor could He restore an unwilling
people; they had to desire and pray for a Restoration,
“ Thus saith the Lord God, I will yet for this be en-
quired of by the house of Israel to do it for them.”
The dealings of God with Israel are much like His deal-
ings with individuals. He announces the conditions
upon which they shall be received into favour; He will
allow of no compromise; a refusal of them inevitably
brings the punishment of obstinacy. All this was
thoroughly understood by David and by his son
Solomon (i Kings iii. 14, ix. 5).
When the prophets came upon the scene, did God
alter the principles of His government? By no means
How could Pie do so without causing such a terrible
rupture in the moral as is not to be found in the physi-
cal world? Unconditional salvation is no salvation
in the case of both nations and individuals, the human
will must accord with the Divine will, and deeply
stirred emotions must precede a great deliverance. “O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets
and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often
would I have gathered thy children together even as
a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and
ye would not ” (Matt, xxiii. 37). “ And ye would
not.”
A few quotations from the writings of Isaiah will


serve to show that the prophets regarded the covenant
of God as a covenant between two parties, and its ful-
filment as dependent on the character and conduct of
the one as well as on the goodwill and fidelity of the
other. Isaiah predicted that the captive Jews would
“go out with joy and be led forth with peace ”; but be-
fore his prediction he had exhorted them thus, “ Seek
ye the Lord while He may be found, call ye upon Him
while He is near; let the wicked forsake his way and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return
unto the Lord and He will have mercy upon him;
and to our God; for He will abundantly pardon.’’
Again, after the prediction he says, “ Keep ye judg-
ment, and do justice, for My salvation is near to come,
and My righteousness to 'be revealed ” (Isaiah Iv. and
Ivi.)
In his forty-eighth chapter and twentieth verse we
have a passage which shows that the return of the Jews
from Babylon to Palestine would depend, not on their
character and conduct alone, but on their own longing
for restoration and determination to return to the land
of their fathers. “Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye
from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye,
tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth; say ye
the Lord hath redeemed His servant Jacob.” The
nation could not be restored if it willed not to be res-
tored. There could be no such return to Palestine as
would answer to the prophetic writings if there were
no national repentance, no reformation of religion,


no return to the ordinances and commandments of
God, no longing to be brought again to the fertile hills
and valleys of their former inheritance, and to the
scenes of former glory. Jeremiah writes to the same
effect (see Jer. xxix. 10-14).
Those who believe that the covenants, promises, and
prophecies which relate to the Jews and Palestine are
all unconditional, and that God is still under obligation to
fulfil them to the very letter, think that they have proved
their whole case by quoting the Eighty-ninth Psalm;
“ If his [David’s] children forsake My law, and walk
not in My judgments, if they break My statutes and
keep not My commandments, then will I visit their
transgressions with the rod, and their iniquities with
stripes. Nevertheless, My loving kindness will I not
utterly take from them, nor suffer My faithfulness to
fail. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of My lips. Once have I sworn
by My holiness that I will not lie unto David. His
seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun
before Me. It shall be established for ever as the
moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven” (30-37).
Now, who will be so bold as to say that such words are
to be understood in any literal sense when, as is well
known, there has been no throne of David during a
period of about twenty-five centuries? Moreover,
the Psalmist goes on to complain that God had made
void the covenant, and profaned the crown by casting
it to the ground.


When the seventy years of captivity had expired, the
attitude of the nation towards Canaan was that of com-
parative indifference. The house of Israel carried as
captives into Assyria could have found little difficulty
in accommodating their religion to that of their con-
querors, for they had already become estranged from
the temple worship in Jerusalem, and had sunk into
the degradation of idolatry, under a succession of
seventeen idolatrous kings, whose policy had been to
keep them apart from the house of Judah. The
ancient religion of the Jews having once been bartered
for the superstitions of paganism, what remained to
prevent their mingling freely with the pagans among
whom they dwelt? What remained to prevent the
loss of their identity as descendants of Abraham? It
may be that when Samaria was invaded by the Assyrian
kings, some portion of its inhabitants fled southward
and took refuge within the bounds of Judah: it may be
that when the time came for the carrying away of
Judah also the refugees of the ten tribes were com-
panion exiles of the two tribes, and that on the ar-
rival of all these in Babylon some of the captives of
Assyria would seek out and join the newly-arrived of
Judah and Israel. For common misfortunes draw
individuals to each other with a force which is un-
known to prosperity. It is possible that after the de-
cree of Cyrus a few of the captives of Israel joined
those of the captives of Judah who chose to return to
Palestine. But we know very little of the house of


Israel as captives, and those of them who returned to
Palestine have no prominence in the sacred record.
From the time of the division of the kingdom under
Jeroboam the northern division of the nation led the
way in apostacy. Moreover, the Messiah was not to
come of any of the revolted ten tribes, but of the tribe
of Judah. Why, therefore, should they participate
in the honours which would even yet be given to the
Jewish nation ?*
The ten tribes! We ask in vain, where are they?
Those writers who think that the whole nation will yet
be restored are bound to find them. It is utterly vain
to say that the Lord will find them in His own time.
And if the house of Israel and the house
of Judah —the whole of the twelve tribes —could be
identified and assembled, they would be but an as-
sembly of covenant breakers who have failed to per-
form the conditions upon which all promises and pro-
phecies are made to rest. Individuals may set aside
God’s most gracious purposes of blessing by rebellion
and impenitence. And as to temporal things, they
may render it impossible for intended good to reach
them at any future time. Even more may a nation,
whose sole sphere of existence is this present world,
thwart the intentions of God and bar from itself both
present and future blessing. Is not this what the
nation of the Jews has done?
* The sentence ot God against them may be seen in Hosea i. 6, viii. 8,
ix. 3, 15 17.


Has it not become a moral impossibility that the
nation as such should see the fulfilment to it of the
glorious predictions of the prophets? If we read the
prophecies and then the history of events in the times
of Ezra and Nehemiah, we must acknowledge
that the return of the Jews from Babylon
was a comparatively poor affair, and that while
it was intended to be, and might have been,
like the departure from Egypt, it was the exodus
of a few thousands, many of whom were accompanied
by Babylonian wives, whom they afterwards put away.
1. The tribes that returned to Palestine were almost
exclusively the two that composed the southern por-
tion of the nation. ‘‘Then,” that is when Cyrus had pro-
mulgated his decree, “ rose up the chief of the fathers
of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests and the Levites,
with all those whose spirit God had raised, to go up
to build the house of the Lord which is m Jerusalem ”
(Ezra i. 5). When Ezra made proclamation that those
Jews who had defiled themselves by intermarrying with
pagan women were to come to him to Jerusalem, “ All
the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves
together ” (Ezra x. 9).
2. We have in the same book of Ezra the estimate
which that good man himself formed of the Jewish com-
munity of returned captives. On being told of their
sins and corruptions, he rends his garments and plucks
off the hair of his head and of his beard, and sits down
in astonishment until the evening sacrifice. Then he


falls on his knees and offers the affecting - prayer in
which these words occur;—■“ And now for a little space
grace hath been showed from the Lord our God, to
leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail
in His holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes
and give us a little reviving in our bondage ” (Ezra ix.
8). The Jews that returned, though numbering
several thousands, were but a remnant, and they had
returned to a contracted territory. In number and
in strength they were in the eyes of their enemies but a
despicable people (Nehemiah ii. 19).
3. Ezra’s estimate of their religious state is as low
as his estimate of their number. “The princes came
to me saying, The people of Israel, and the priests,
and the Levites have not separated themselves from the
people of the lands, doing according to their abomina-
tions, even of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Periz-
zites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the
Egyptians, and the Amorites . . . the holy seed
have mingled themselves with the people of those
lands; yea, the hand of the princes and rulers hath been
chief in this trespass ” (Ezra ix. 1,2).
Here, then, are the returned captives, few in number,
and the few demoralised. Ten tribes of the nation are
scarcely represented: they seem to be rapidly passing
out of existence. Their territory is occupied by
strangers, insomuch that if they come back from As-
syria, no place can be found for them in the land of
their fathers, Samaria is no longer theirs. It is held


by a hostile people. The returned captives have no
government but such as is controlled from Persia.
Where now is the throne of David? Where the
dominion of Solomon? Candour must compel the ad-
mission that, while there has been a return of captives,
there has been no such Restoration as was predicted
by the prophets. Ihe question, Why was there not?
has already been answered.
It has already become apparent that the present
writer believes that such a Restoration as was predicted
is now an impossibility—that the assumption enter-
tained by many as to the prophecies, namely, that not
having been fulfilled they remain to be, and must yet
be, fulfilled, is a false assumption.
The nation, considered as twelve tribes, is broken up.
Of ten, nothing is now known with any certainty. In
these days of travel and discovery, their locality is un-
discovered. Indeed, there seems nothing to prevent
the conclusion that they have no separate existence.
Most of them mingled with other peoples, and em-
braced strange religions. Others of them may have
unrecognised descendants among the ten millions of
the scattered nation.
Even Judah and Benjamin, for the most part, missed
their opportunity. The seventy years of predicted
captivity expired; the heart of Cyrus was turned to
them; his proclamation was issued, the tide was in full
flow to bear them onward. A few thousand em-
barked, but, as Josephus informs us, many stayed in
Babylon. Content with their possessions and pros-
pects in the land of their captivity, and doubtful as to
the ultimate issue of their brethren’s enterprise, they


stood motionless as mere onlookers, satisfying their
patriotism, it may be, with the help they had rendered,
and with the intention to send remittances for the
maintenance of religion in beloved Jerusalem. The
book of Esther throws much light on this part of our
subject. In the time of Ahasuerus the Jews existed in
great numbers within his empire, and were permitted
to live under their own laws. —Esther iii. 8.
All this twenty-four centuries ago! 'How has the
world altered since then! Countries named by the
prophets are now unknown. The inhabitants of them
have, like Israel, passed into oblivion. True, there
are millions of Jews remaining. But if these may be
reckoned a nation, they are a nation fallen into con-
fusion. No tribal distinction now; no reliable re-
gisters; no authentic priesthood; no literal throne of
David or heir to his dominions. The unfulfilled pro-
phecies cannot now be fulfilled. The time is past, the op-
portunity is borne by on a relentless tide. Pity that
the Jews do not see it to be so; greater pity still that
Christians teach them otherwise!
To the present writer it seems as though some
Christians are trying to revive that old form of Cal-
vinism which insisted that the salvation and damnation
of men are matters of Divine decree, and not of their
will and conduct—-that God decrees, promises, and per-
forin's, apart from what men may be or do. It is now
taught that the Jews will have Palestine restored tv
them, thong'll they be in sin and unbelief!


CHAPTER V.
OUR LORD’S TEACHING ABOUT THE
JEWS.
Is any light thrown upon this subject—the Jews and
Palestine —by our Lord and His apostles? Have they
anywhere distinctly told us that the nation shall exist
apart from all other nations, and shall re-occupy the
land? They appeal to the prophets on many subjects,
do they set themselves to expound what had been
written on this subject?
Looking at the political condition of the nation in
their time—the domination of Rome with its army
of occupation, and the consequent unhappiness of the
Jewish population, who are reminded on all hands of
the conquest of their country, and having in view the
loving patriotism of Jesus and His apostles—one might
expect to find them making large quotations from the
prophecies, and fondly dwelling on such portions as
pointed to a light on the horizon indicative of coming
national glory, of a land freed from invaders and pos-
sessed to its fullest extent by the sons and daughters
of Abraham, a happy and prosperous race, one
might expect this—if Jesus and the apostles saw such
a reserve of glory awaiting the nation as some modern
writers have described.
Yet only one utterance of our Lord is quoted as proof
that He saw and spoke of it. This is the text: “There


shall be great distress upon the land, and wrath unto
this people. And they shall fall by the edge of the
sword, and shall be led captive into all the nations;
and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles,
until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled ” (Luke xxi.
23, 24). There is here no reference to ancient pre-
dictions, nor does Jesus follow the example of the pro-
phets, who, with few exceptions, opened up scenes of
brightness after they had painted in darkest colours the
judgments that were imminent. The language em-
ployed by our Lord is somewhat obscure, and no one
can say with certainty what is meant by “until the times
of the Gentiles be fulfilled.” The phrase undoubtedly
refers to a time, then, in the future. But what of that
time? Jerusalem would then no longer be “ trodden
down of the Gentiles.” Our Lord does not say that
the Jews shall then become the sole occupiers of Pales-
tine, or that the throne of David shall be set up; or that
the ancient people shall again be a nation with a king
descended from David, and the necessary institutions
of a kingdom in Church and State. When He uttered
the words quoted, He had before Him the horrors of
the Roman siege—-the city compassed with armies,
the inhabitants in consternation, some fleeing, others
put to the sword, many led into captivity, the temple
utterly demolished, the city trampled and profaned by
blaspheming 'hosts. And all that Jesus says is that
a time was coming when the Gentiles —Roman in-
vaders —who would have had their day of conquest and


tyranny, would cease to make Jerusalem flow down
with blood. In accordance with this prediction, the
city had a long respite after the conversion of the
Roman Empire to the Christian faith, and while it was
under the protection of the Eastern emperors.
The very structure of the phrase warns off the pre-
sumptuous dogmatist. And the many failures of ex-
positors who have fixed “times ” and seasons, and
have identified Antichrist himself, should teach a
lesson of modesty to all who take in hand to reveal the
future. But the exposition here put forth has its
confirmation in the utter silence of the greatest of all
prophets on the subject of the reoccupation of Pales-
tine by the Jews. How strange is this silence if their
Restoration was the certainty wWi'ch it is now repre-
sented to be! How strange if it had in our Lord's
mind, and in the dispensations of God, so large a place
as it occupies in the imagination of some modern
preachers and lecturers.
There were occasions in our Lord’s ministry when,
as we may suppose, He would with great appropriate-
ness have introduced the subject of a Restoration into
His discourses—if He foresaw such an event. But
those occasions were allowed to pass. His prophecy
of the destruction of Jerusalem and its temple is re-
markable as describing the chief features of the awful
tragedy. Yet He throws in no relieving circumstance.
A patriot speaking to patriots utters not a word of
comfort. He does not indulge a single hope of res-


toration for His nation and country. There was the
same silence when on His way to Jerusalem, “He be-
held the city, and wept over it ” (Luke xix. 41). He
was deeply moved: nor was His emotion relieved by
any thought of future glory for His people. Such
silence is emphasised by reproofs administered to the
chief priests and elders in the parable of a certain
householder who planted a vineyard and let it out to
husbandmen. Upon this vineyard much capital had
been expended in order that it might be made both
secure and fruitful. He did all this in expectation of a
proportionate return. But his tenants would pay him
no rent; they even beat, and stoned, and slew his ser-
vants. “ But last of all he sent up to them his son,
saying, They will reverence ray son. But when the
husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves,
This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize
on the inheritance. And they caught him and
cast him out of the vineyard and slew him. When
the lord, therefore, of the vineyard cometh, what will
he do unto these husbandmen? They say unto him,
He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will
let out the vineyard unto other husbandmen, which
shall render him the friuts in their season. Jesus saith
unto them, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The
stone which the builders rejected, the same is become
the head of the corner; this is the Lord’s doing, and it
is marvellous in our eyes? Therefore say I unto you,
the kingdom of God shall be taken from you and given


to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And
whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken; but
on whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to powder”
(Matt. xxi. 37-44). Thus does our Lord leave His
nation without hope of future greatness. Its day is
gone. The sunset leaves it in darkness. We do not
even read of any future probation, with its possibilities.
There is now no national hope. If there were, would
He not have said so? There are several Old Testa-
ment prophecies which seem to point to the end of
Jerusalem as a city of the Jews: Jer. xix. 8-11; Ezekiel
vii. 2-6; Zechariah xi. 10, it, and many others.
Zechariah teaches that God’s covenant with His people
is actually broken by Him.
All this agrees with the King’s account of His King-
dom. It is “not of this world T ’; it “ cometh not with
observation”; earthly splendours are unknown to it;
its power is immediately from God Himself, acting
upon the will and affections of men and upon their
consciences to illumine and awaken them. The king-
dom “is among you”; for every man, woman, or child
who submits to the kingship of Jesus and acts his part
here on earth has the kingdom “ within.” The king-
dom is ever widening, and yet the extending power
operates in quiet, and goes on operating until it is all-
pervasive. It is “ like unto leaven which a woman
took and hid in three measures of meal till the whole
was leavened ” —a reproof this to the impatience which
looks and longs for terrestrial and celestial manifesta-


lions. Not one of the parables recorded in the thir-
teenth chapter of St. Matthew’s Gospel hints at am
agency for the salvation either of individuals or nations
other than the word of the kingdom and the ever-
operating influences which render it efficient. How
then can Christians return to those carnal views re-
garding the kingdom of God which prevailed among
the Jews of our Lord’s day, and against which He pro-
tested? Has He two methods of converting men to
His religion, one for the Gentiles, and another more'*"
effective reserved for the Jews? Too little is affirmed
when it is said that Jesus was silent as to any future
Restoration of His nation to Palestine. His language
to the woman of Samaria shows how free His mind
was from the narrow prejudices of countries and locali-
ties, at what a distance He dwelt from the contracted
Samaritan and Jewish minds of His day. How large
and noble were His views on the religious questions of
the time! To Him there could be no difference in the
dispensation of judgment, whether His own beloved
nation or the Samaritans provoked the Almighty by
their sins. “ Believe Me, the hour cometh when ye
shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem,
worship the Father.” “ The true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth.” “ God is
a spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him
in spirit and truth” (John iv. 21, 23, 24). The re-
ligion of Jesus is altogether spiritual. What to Him,
then, is the most interesting locality under the sun?


What to Him the people whose records date to Abra-
ham, and whose history, resplendent with mercy, has
been soiled and darkened by sin?
Our Lord’s silence upon what many nowadays re-
gard as all-important and imminent events is made still
more remarkable by the silence of His apostles.
John the Baptist’s ministry, like that of our Lord,
had conveyed no hints of a restoration of the nation to
Palestine after a final “ carrying away.” It was an
eminently spiritual ministry, and its main objects were
to revive religion by awakening the Jewish conscience,
and especially to direct the nation’s attention to the
Messiah, who would presently appear —the King of the
Kingdom of God, whose reign would be established
by spiritual means —the Holy Ghost in the gospel of
salvation. The dispensation of Moses and the pro-
phets is past. It was a dispensation of many carnal
elements: they are done away, and it cannot be sup-
posed that God in dealing with mankind, or with any
portion of mankind, will ever again call them into use.
Now and ever after man shall be saved by the direct
dealing of God with the soul and in the soul. John
saw this when he said, *’ Begin not to say within your-
selves, We have Abraham to our father, for I say unto
you that God is able of these stones to raise up chil-
dren unto Abraham.” What is a race of high descent
if it turn from the way of truth and righteousness, and
disgrace a noble parentage? It is but a doomed tree
against which the axe will be plied. Such was the


Baptist’s view of his nation. Nor did he entertain
it with any false hope that such a tree would again be
planted and flourish. To John the day of carnal
things was past; he could see only the brightness of a
spiritual dispensation with its spiritual objects and
methods. The Baptist’s tree, with the axe laid against
it, is the Jewish people. Their thr'one, their temple,
their priesthood have all been brought down by that
axe, and its stroke is the final stroke. Suppose it were
true, as is affirmed, that “ the whole body of the people
still exist ” —a gratuitious assumption—-and supposing
they numbered twenty millions, their number would
make no difference, because when they were more of
a nation than they are to-day, they, as a nation, com-
mitted their great sin, and it is unrepented. They
cannot, as in every respect the same nation as then,
turn, as a nation, to God. The conversion of the
Jews to Christianity must be one by one, irrespective
of national existence; and it must be on the lines
marked by St. Paul (Rom. x.)
John the Baptist has been here introduced because
he was the first preacher of Christ and His kingdom.
Those who came after him and preached a fuller
gospel that he did are equally silent with him as to
any such restoration of the Jews as is an important
article in the faith of some, so important and pro-
minent that one would expect to find the writings of
our Lord’s apostles full of the idea of restoration and
national conversion.


CHAPTER VI.
APOSTOLIC TEACHING.
St. James wrote an epistle “to the twelve tribes*
which are of the dispersion ” (R.V.), and, with the ex-
ception of a few words of comfort, his epistle deals
with practical religion. It has not a word as to the
future of his nation, not a word about any descent of
Christ, or about Olivet, or about aught that concerns
the land of their fathers.
St. Peter wrote two epistles. The first is addressed
to “ sojourners of the dispersion ” (R.V.), and the
second, inasmuch as it contains many references to
Old Testament prophecy and history, is intended for
Jews especially. Yet this Jew, writing to and for
Jews, is utterly silent on the theme which calls forth
so much of sentiment and feeling in these times.
And what of the Epistle to the Hebrews? Surely
the writer, whoever he may have been, will tell them
something of their future destiny—will introduce, as
favourite topics, the Jews’ return, the trouble of Israel
when resettled in their land, the rise of Antichrist, the
descent of the Lord on Olivet, the dividing of that
mount, the conversion of the nation by a sight of the
Messiah, the destruction of His foes, &c., &c. Mar-
vellous and disappointing! He omits all such topics,
* He wiites as a Jew to Jews, and with such delicacy that he would not
remind them of the broken and disordered condition of their nation. He
mentions the tribes as though they remained intact.


and more than this, he writes as though they had
never been thought of either by Jesus, His apostles, or
the early Church.
What of St. John, who is understood to have known
more of the mind of the Master than any other apostle?
His three epistles contain not a single word as to a
Restoration of the Jews.
We now come to the writings of St. Paul, a man who
loved his nation so intensely that he could have died
for it. and who certainly would have omitted from his
epistles no topic that was likely to afford hope and
comfort. Yet we go through his writings without
finding the slightest hint of any other than purely spiri-
tual blessings in store for the Jewish nation. They
perfectly accord with 'his address to the opposing Jews
of Antioch. “It was necessary that the word of God
should first have been spoken to you; but seeing ye
put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy
of everlasting life, 10, we turn to the Gentiles ’’
(Acts xiii. 46). Yea, St. Paul goes further, and boldly
and repeatedly states the doctrine —to him established
and incontrovertible —that the Christian dispensation
has so obliterated distinctions, that the various nations
of mankind are heirs of the common rights and privi-
leges of Christianity. “ For ye are all the children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you
as have been baptised into Christ have put on Christ.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond
nor free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are all


one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ’s, then are
ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the pro-
mise ” (Gal. iii. 26-29). Nationality is nothing; even
sex is nothing; rank is nothing. St. Paul treats these
as mere accidents that cannot interfere with a spiritual
status, or be a hindrance to spiritual blessing. To
this effect Ephesians ii. 11-22, and Col. iii. 10, 11, may
also be quoted.
First of all St. Paul sees in God a common Father-
hood. “Is He the God of the Jews only? Is He
not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also ”
(Rom. iii. 29). It is as though the Apostle had said,
Your narrow views of God contract all your thoughts,
and give you false notions of your importance. You
think meanly of other nations as though your God
could have no interest in them, but only in you. I tell
you He is equally the God of the Gentiles.
St. Paul bases the doctrine of common Christian
privilege on the common guilt of mankind, “For we have
before proved both Jews and Gentiles that they are all
under sin ” (Rom. iii. 9, 23; xi. 32), and on the common
inheritance of judgment, “ Who will render to every
man according to his deeds ... to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentiles; for there is no respect of per-
sons with God” (Rom. ii. 6-11). And as both Jews
and Gentiles are involved in one common calamity,
so the deliverance of the one is the deliverance for all.
Again, “ There is no difference “It is one God which
shall justify the circumcision by faith, and uncircum-


cision through faith ” (Rom. iii. 30, 31), a passage of
Scripture which agrees with St. Peter’s teaching (Acts
xiv. or rather with what God had taught hum by the
vision of unclean beasts, creeping things, and fowls
of the air (Acts x.) He had not forgotten his lesson,
but when at length the crucial question, Is circum-
cision essential to salvation, was discussed in the first
Christian Council, Peter stood up and insisted that as
God had saved both Jews and Gentiles in like manner,
and had given to them the Holy Ghost irrespectively
of national distinctions, He “ put no difference between
us and them, purifying their hearts by faith ” (Acts
xv. 7-9)- Justification, sanctification, free access to
the common Father of all, a place and a name in the
one Church of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a common
heirship to eternal life—all these blessings belong to
Gentiles as well as Jews. And much as the Jews
prided themselves on their descent from Abraham,
the highest of all the privileges and dignities that came
through him—not a country on earth, or a local reli-
gion, but a citizenship in the Jerusalem built by God
—was the inheritance of Gentiles as well as of Jews. For
the faith of all Christians puts them into relation with
the “Father of the Faithful.” “He is the Father of
all them that believe [the humblest of all Christians
rather than of the greatest Rabbi] though they be not
circumcised . . . who also walk in the steps of
that faith of our father Abraham which lie 'had being
yet uncircumcised” (Rom. iv. 11, 12).


St. Paul was not a man to undervalue the past, and,
it may be said, the then present glory of his nation,
fie saw it distinctly, and wrote of it, “ What advantage
then hath the Jew, or what profit is there of circum-
cision? Much every way; chiefly, because that unto
them were committed the oracles of God ” (Rom. iii.
i, 2). But this acknowledgment increases the value
of his assertions in regard to the circumcision, inas-
much as it gives good evidence of a fair and well-
balanced mind. We may rely on his judicial de-
cisions.
Now, then, what is St. Paul’s judgment on the sub-
ject of circumcision? “He is not a Jew which is one
outwardly; neither is that circumcision which is out-
ward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one in-
wardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the
spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men,
but of God ” (Rom. ii. 28, 29). “ Circumcision is
nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keep-
ing of the commandment of God ” (1 Cor. vii. 19).
So much then for a rite of which the Jews were proud,
and which secured for them, as they believed, an ex-
ceptional place in the Divine regard. According to
St. Paul’s reasoning there is no nation of Jews.
1. We are taught, then, that the religion which has
succeeded to the Mosaic, and which God intends shall
reach to and govern all nations, supplanting every
other religion, and thus fulfilling His word to Abra-
ham, is in all its features intensely spiritual. It knows


nothing: of the rites and ceremonies of Old Testament
times, except as they were types and shadow that
have in these latter days lost their value. It is a re-
ligion which knows, and is to know, nothing of locality.
2. Christianity is framed for universality. Such
is its genius. All countries are alike to it; equally so
all nations. It suits the need of all mankind, and is
intended for the whole world. “There is no respect
of persons with God.” Have we not in this religion
the noblest of all conceptions? Does it not agree with
what we know of the Infinite—His universal love and
compassion? And how consistent it is with the whole
tenor of the teaching of Jesus. True, that for a time
the Jews were, here and there, preferred in the distri-
bution of blessing, yet His ministry is a miracle of
adaptability to men of all climes and countries, and Its
key-note was early given, “ For God so loved the
world that He gave His only begotten Son, that who-
soever believeth in Him shall not perish, but have
everlasting life. For God sent not His Son into the
world to condemn the world, but that the world,
through Him, might be saved” (John iii. 16, 17).
There are, nevertheless, many excellent Christians
who teach that Jews —they who are outwardly such,
but, according to St. Paul’s judgment, not Jews at all
—will for ever remain Jews, and be distinguished by-
and-bye with special indulgence; they will have their
land given back to them, and that before they repent
of their sins the Lord will come from heaven to con-
vert and make them Christians. He will be their


King, and will destroy Antichrist and all other op-
posers. And when Jesus shall have descended on Mount
Olivet, all the electric wires are to be requisitioned
for spreading the news, and, of course, ships and trains
will be chartered; for, as has been confidently stated,
men will go up in multitudes to see the throne of David,
and the Son of God sitting thereon!
Will it be deemed profane if we say that many of the
best men can be carnal in their views, and a little
grotesque in expressing them?


CHAPTER VII.
THE FUTURE OF THE JEWS.
The present writer has already expressed his belief
that the Jews will yet receive Jesus of Nazareth as
their Messiah, “ And they also, if they abide not in un-
belief, shall be grafted in, for God is able to graft them
in again. For if thou wert cut out of the olive-tree
which is wild by nature, and wert grafted, contrary
to nature, into a good olive tree, how much more shall
these, which be the natural branches, be grafted into
their own olive tree? For I would not, brethren,
that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye
should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness
in part is happened to Israel until the fulness of
the Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel shall be
saved ” (Rom. xi. 23-26). “ Shall be saved,” that is.
“ if they abide not in unbelief.”
From this deliverance of St. Paul it follows that the
conversion of the Jews to the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ is an object to be earnestly sought in prayer,
and by unwearied effort. And in all effort there
must be affectionate fidelity. Their conversion can
never be brought about by flattering any hope they
entertain of exceptional blessings, either temporal or
spiritual. Plow did St. Peter deal with his brethren
at Pentecost? ” Therefore let all the house of Israel


know assuredly that God hath made that same Jesus
whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. Now
when they heard this they were pricked in their heart,
and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the apostles,
Men and brethren, what shall we do?” (Acts ii. 36, 37).
They had to repent of their great sin, and they did re-
pent; they had to accept the risen Jesus as their Saviour
and their King, and they did accept Him. “ And
the same day there were added about 3,000 souls.”
The wonderful day of Pentecost was a day of the
Lords coming; the power of the Holv Ghost accom-
plished the great work of conversion.
With believing prayer and faithful preaching there
must be a removal of all stumbling-blocks out of the
way of their conversion. There are millions of Jews
who have been denied a sight of Christ. Christians
so-called have put forward the Virgin Mary and the
saints for worship. The historical Church has thrust
upon the Jews idolatrous tenets and formularies which
even millions of Christians decline to accept as ex-
piessions of their faith, and then have persecuted the
Jews to death because their consciences would not be
bound by them.
When Christians shall have put away their idolatry
and banished all ecclesiastical pomp andambition, when
they shall no longer pretend to define the indefinable,
and try to bind men’s consciences within the four
corners of their poor definitions, when imperfect
human beings shall cease the arrogance which has


taught men to regard them as gods who can open and
shut heaven at their will, then the conversion of the
Jews in numbers may be hoped for. The prospect
of such a conversion will still further brighten when
the morality of Christian populations —traders, ex-
porters, importers, and manufacturers—can show a
higher standard of morality than the Jews have risen
to, and when domestic life becomes manifestly purer
and sweeter among Christians than among Jews. The
conversion of the Jews will be nigh at hand when all
professors of Christianity go back to Christ and learn
of Him to be humble and meek and loving, not seek-
ing each man his own interest, but the temporal and
spiritual benefit of others. The fulness of the gospel
of peace among Gentile professors of religion—this
first, then “ the fulness of the Gentiles,” then the con-
version of the Jews —in the end all Israel.
The writer of these chapters cannot venture to ex-
pect that they will be read by any son or daughter
of Abraham. Yet in case they should be, the reader
may rest assured that its author is pained beyond ex-
pression by what history has recorded of the wrongs
that have been inflicted on the Israelitish nation, and in-
flicted, too, by what has been called the Christian
Church. Shame, shame on Christendom! The re-
ligion it has professed during long ages is not known
to the New Testament of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ. If the Jew will but search the Christian Scrip-
tures, he shall find for himself what a wide difference


there is between their teaching and the religion taught
by pompons, pretentious and tyrannical priesthoods. But
he may be assured that Christendom is getting weary
of falsity and pretence, and is raising the cry, “ Back
to Jesus.’ Ihe age of falsity is passing away, the age
of truth is rapidly advancing. “ Back to Jesus ” means
back to the Old Testament and to the New; to the Old
as containing God’s earliest revelation of Himself, and
to the New as the brightest outshining of Jehovah
upon a dark world.
The most saintly and earnest of Christians have a
deep sympathy with the Jews in the heavy afflictions
that have come upon them. Their lives are a burden
by reason of the ignorant hatred of their enemies.
Thousands of them have become the victims of bellow-
ing crowds, who know no more of real Christianity
than do the cattle of their fields. The problems that
are perplexing the leading minds of Israel are a puzzle
to good Christian men. The present writer does
not think that a solution can be found in an exodus of
Jews from Russia, and other lands of oppression, to the
country of their fathers. He 'has tried to show in the
foregoing pages that the prophecies of the Jewish
Scriptures cannot apply to the present-day circum-
stances of the nation; and if his theory be a true one,
there is nothing but sentiment to bind the heart of the
Jews to Palestine; but sentiment may be very mis-
leading, and may be especially so if it lead the nation
to rush into a strip of country which is now under


Turkish rule, or if it induce a company of wealthy
Jews to subscribe capital in order to purchase the land
of the Sultan, and to make it the scene of a religion
and a worship that are left behind by an advancing
Christian civilisation. It would be matter of regret
if the Jews volunteered to become the Sultan’s sub-
jects, or made a bargain with him for the purchase of
the desired territory. And what security would they
have for a peaceful and permanent possession of the
land?
What then is to be done for the national benefit of
the Jews? Absolutely nothing until they consent to
give a frank consideration to their position in relation
to the Christian religion —a religion which has a Jewish
origin, and which should be the glory of the ancient
nation. That religion must no l longer be treated con-
temptuously. And why should it be? Was not
Jesus a patriotic Jew? Did not His apostles boast
of their Jewish descent? Did they not revere and
love “the oracles of God”? No difficult analysis
is required to make discovery in the New Testament
of the living water which has streamed into it from the
Old Testament. There are Rabbis who think that
Jesus borrowed much from Judaism. Very well,
we need not quarrel over their opinion. It should make
His teaching the more acceptable to the Jewish mind.
It is admitted that Christians, so-called, have helped
to place the Jews in isolation. Herein lies a great
difficulty in solving a great problem. With what ex-


pectation of being listened to can the present writer
utter his opinion that the hope of the Jews lies in the
Christianity which they scorn? It lies, “ whether they
will hear, or whether they will forbear,” in a religion
which recognises all nations as “ of one blood," and
all as standing in one relation to Jehovah. They
must yield all hope of being treated exceptionally in
the future dispensations of God, and learn to rc-
receive with humility and thankfulness the common
privileges of a “ common salvation." Such a course
it may be found difficult to pursue, for will it not obli-
terate the distinction of race and involve incorporation
with Gentiles? Will it not abolish the synagogue and
its worship and its Sabbath? All this most certainly.
But, as the writer sees, the alternative is isolation and
misery in the future as in the past. Ihe Jews will
never accept Christianity for the mere purpose of
escaping suffering. But as in apostolic times many
of them were brought to see that their own Scriptures
spake of Jesus, so again the Jews may be induced by
proofs drawn therefrom to move onward into the
citizenship of a “Jerusalem which is above, is free, and
the mother of us all” (Galatians iv. 2.6), that " new
Jerusalem which cometh down out of heaven from my
God " (Rev. iii. 12).


An article in the “ Nineteenth Century " (Septem-
ber. )8y8) is to some extent confirmatory of much that
is contained in the foregoing- chapters. Its author,
Oswald John Simon, himself a Jew, and writing for
Jews, speaks in condemnation of what is known as
Zionism among his people. Ile says, “ Palestine is the
last place on earth to select for the settlement of a
Jewish state first because it is Palestine. A settle-
ment there means a final settlement. For good or
for evil it would represent the end of all things, an
absorption of every principle, for which we have
struggled since our ancestors were exiled. And we
know that the whole of Palestine could not contain the
Jewish population of the world, for it is no bigger than
Wales.” “National separation is not the goal of Jewish
history. Our aim is purely a religious one.” “There
is a growing school of religious thought among earnest
and devout minds within the pale of Judaism, with
whom the conception of the Jewish religion is abso-
lutely at variance with the notion of national separate-
ness.” “ The multiplication of separate nationalities
does not tend in the long run to the civilisation of
mankind.” The whole article is well worth the at-
tention of Jew and Gentile. Does it not indicate an
advance towards the Kingdom of Christ?


(


