

WHAT ARE WE
DRIVING ATP
A FEW
REMARKS ABOUT GOLD:
ITS USE TO THE WORLD IN GENERAL AND THE COLONY
IN PARTICULAR;-ITS ABUSE IN THE HANDS OF
RAPACIOUS MONEY MAKING INSTITUTIONS
AND A VENAL MINISTRY.
Melbourne:
W. FAIRFAX AND CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
78, COLLINS STREET EAST.
1859.


W»?
M
M.
Ila-L E


INTRODUCTION.
This little pamphlet is divided into two chapters, the subjects of
which are treated in widely different styles. The ﬁrst, on gold, has
no local limitations; whilst the second is strictly local. Had it
been desired to write an exhaustive treatise to enter deeply into
either of the two subjects, the coupling them together would have
been inappropriate. But such has not been the purpose of the
author 3 he has jotted down a few reﬂections, which, if not novel in
themselves, may claim the consideration of being novel in their
bearings, with the wish to suggest further research in alike direction.
Dozens of valuable works on gold, in its economical, political, and
ﬁnancial relations, are in existence, the result of years of thought;
but their depth and dryness, as well as their bulk, are such as to
secure them few ordinary readers. Yet gold, with its effects in a
comprehensive sense on the human race and human institutions, is
a subject so vitally important as to make its general study a result
much to be desired 3 and if in the familiar form in which he has
presented his ideas, the author has appeared to deal empirically with
his subject, he has but erred in the direction most likely to secure
his end, the obtaining the greatest number of readers.
In the second chapter, Where he enters more into details, his
remarks and reﬂections are not directed by any personal or political
feeling ; honestly and conscientiously he has referred to dangers he
deems imminent, and to mismanagement and impolicy he considers
scandalous.
If his reﬂections should serve no other purpose than to engender
further reﬂection, his suggestions than to bring forth renewed sug—
gestion, if he has only succeeded in launching upon the tide of
popular discussion a vitally important subject, which, when tossing
'on the sea of controversy, will insensibly be eliminated of its grosser
particles, and come forth puriﬁed and reﬁned, condensed in form and
clearer to the judgment, if these objects be secured, he asks no more.
In justice to himself he may add that circumstances have compelled
him to hasten a task, well worthy more time and attention.
JULY, 1859.




PART I.
GOLD—ITS INTRINSIC AND MARKET VALUE.
Several treatises have recently been written on the probable
depreciation in the value of gold. Eminent authorities have con-
curred in foreseeing the most serious social revolutions as a result
of the depreciation. The object of the present remarks is not to
argue with the profound theories adduced by these learned authori-
ties, but, avoiding the depths of ﬁnancial science, to show that on
the surface, which these great men at once plunge through, ﬂoat
reasons which must ever act as a safety valve to prevent any of the
serious effects they anticipate. The writer maintains that beside the
market alternations, there is always a constant variation in the
intrinsic value of the precious metal; that this variation, working
by direct causes, only produces indirect results; that it can never
be productive of a serious or sudden social revolution; that the
changes it works can only be guaged by the thermometer of history 5
and that these changes can never affect the welfare of the community
at large; and only press, with a not unreasonable harshness, on
individual portions of the community. '
If gold be amenable to the same laws as govern any other article,
a vast increase in the supply must diminish its value. This is the
argument employed by those who anticipate the depreciation. Let
us admit that gold is amenable to the same laws, and that the
deduction founded on the supposition is correct. We may go a
step further, and following the good old Latin axiom, majus et minus
non variam speciem, we may gather the further deduction, that the
consequences that would follow a vast addition to the stock of gold
must, however miscroscopically, be put in motion in some minute
degree by an increase, however small. A decrease in the produce,
or a larger demand for consumption (for manufacture), should pro—
duce an opposite result; in short, as the supply of gold is always
ﬂuctuating, its value should "be always changing. The immense
increase since the discoveries in North Western America and South
Eastern Australia should already have produced startling results;
gold should have already depreciated, and the consequences to follow
such depreciation should have already manifested themselves.


But here the alarmists stop short—they adduce reasons why the
effects have not yet made themselves apparent, and talk about new
channels having been found for the enlarged supply, forgetting that the
general“ law on which they frame their arguments, admits that
though an increased supply induces a diminished price, it also leads
to the opening up of new channels of consumption. If they will
honestly follow out their arguments, they must admit that the
increased stock of gold has already been productive, in a degree, of
the effects that will follow a continued increase in the same direction.
But no effects in the slightest measure partaking of the disastrous
nature they anticipate have as yet shewn themselves. The inference
that follows is one of two things, either the general law of supply
and demand does not apply to gold, or if it do, a depreciation in the
value of gold does not manifest itself with such injurious results.
We will adopt the latter and more rational supposition. We will
admit that gold is liable to depreciation in its intrinsic value, but we
maintain that the effects to follow are innocuous.
Perhaps the whole of the dispute lies in the question, what will
be the exponent of a general decrease in the value of gold? As long
as £3 17s. 105 d. in sovereigns represents an ounce of gold, and an
ounce of gold represents £3 17s. 10.];d. in sovereigns, it must be
evident that it will be impossible that a permanent decrease in the
value of gold can be represented by monied terms. It is true that
a temporary demand for available capital may, as in the days of the
ﬁrst discovery of distant gold—ﬁelds. send gold below the price at
which, all costs and expenses paid, it could be coined into sovereigns.
But such depreciation, in the nature of things, could only be
evanescent ; it may be stated broadly that there can never, for any
length of time, be a greater difference between the value of native and
coined gold than the actual expense involved in transit, insurance,
interest, and conversion.
Gold is subject to many ﬂuctuations from local and incidental
circumstances. These may be termed market variations, but with
them we have not to deal; we are treating of its permanent and
world—Wide intrinsic value, and it must be patent that while money
is merely another expression for coined gold, a general depreciation in
the raw material must be shared in by the manufactured, and that
consequently monied terms will not be available as exponents of
the decline in intrinsic value. How, then, is the depreciation in the
value of gold represented? The answer to this we unhesitatingly
give—by the amount, not of money, but of articles of value, or of
labor procurable for it.
Gold bears the peculiar relation to any article, that admits of a


value being placed on it, of being the representative of that value,
whilst in itself it is only valuable for What it procures. If we are to
suppose that gold, the arbitrator of value, itself ﬂuctuates in worth,
the exponent of the ﬂuctuation is readily shown in the amount
which it represents, not of itself, but of goods procurable in exchange
for it.*
Let A stand for the amount of gold that would purchase B repre-
senting a certain quantity of goods. Supposing gold to fall ﬁfty per
cent. in value, as anticipated by Mons. Chevalier, instead of A being
equal to B the formula would stand thus :
.A x A = B.
If, instead of changing A, we say for the same amount only half the
quantity of B can be procured, we have the formula—
.g= A 5
in either case showing the same result. Instead then, of A (the
gold) purchasing B (the goods) A will only purchase—J; or 2 A
will purchase B ; in other words, the price will be doubled, the
same amount of gold will only go half the extent it did before. As
long then as there is a ﬁxed standard of value for gold, the depre-
ciation in worth will Show itself in an increase in general prices.
This we hold to be good to any extent, we care not if gold become
plentiful as iron 3 as long as the standard is maintained the only effect
will be a rise in prices, in which every branch of industry will
participate.
Goods are affected by a totally distinct cause of ﬂuctuation, the
extent of supply and demand, and it is difﬁcult clearly to deﬁne
therefore how much of the rise and fall in prices is due to the
ﬂuctuating value of gold. The difﬁculty meets one when he would
inquire the general effects of the depreciation of gold, I'. e., of the rise
in prices which it occasions. Still, for our present purpose it
may be safe to assert, that when prices for all articles of consump-
tion and luxury, and for labor are highfl‘ this is not likely to be
the result of any unusual scarcity or demand for the same, but is
the consequence of the low value of gold, 73. e. of the community
being ususually wealthy, and possessing an unusual amount of gold.
Now is it not an ascertained fact, that when general prices rule
high, an unusual tone of prosperity prevails.
9“ For convenience sake we Will substitute for articles or labor representing value
the term “ goods.”
1' It should be recollected that sometimes the rise though actual may not be
apparent. There is a. constant tendency to decline in all articles of manufacture,
and even in produce, as experience and an increased demand enable them to be
supplied cheaper.


This instance, of course, only speaks of a partial depreciation in the
value of gold. We, therefore, do not say that a general decrease would
produce a general prosperity, but we deduce from it that there is nothing
injurious in the decrease itself, but ; on the contrary, the tendency of
the decrease, in its partial action, is productive of prosperity.
However plentiful gold may become, it will still be unevenly distri-
buted ; and however materially the value of gold may decrease, com-
munities will still bear disproportionate relations to each other, in
the amount of their comparative wealth.
In this colony the effects of an increased supply of gold, and of its
decreased intrinsic value, have been at work for the last four years?!<
The increase makes itself so generally felt that with one exception
(which we will allude to directly), it does not alter the relative
positions of the various members composing the community ; but in
comparison with its neighbours, the community becomes a wealthy
one. Wealth is, indeed, but a comparative phrase 3 the income
which a few hundred years ago would have been considered splendid,
would now rank as a moderate competence. When an individual
leaves a place where gold is of a low value, and prices are high, and
gains admission into a community amongst which gold is more
valuable and prices lower, by comparison he becomes a wealthier
man. This tallies exactly with our text. He has carried his
possessions to a better market 3 they rank higher in value, and he is
proportionately richer.
There are members of a community, however, who fail to proﬁt, and
are therefore injured by a depreciated value in gold ; these are annui-
tants, whose revenues always remain the same. As money becomes
of less value they are placed at a disadyantage with the rest of the
community. ‘ These are the drones of society ; were their capital
invested in industrial pursuits, it would, as money decreased in value,
increase in quantity. No doubt the fall would deal hardly with
them, but the fault is in the fact that the ﬂuctuations to which gold
is subject, have never been taken sufﬁciently into account when esti-
mating the value of annuities.
We have argued as though gold could fall to any extent 3 but we
are prepared to assert that there is a limit below which it cannot
decline, and that this minimum point cannot be maintained, but when
it is reached the price must again rise. The less intrinsically valuable
gold becomes, the less will it pay to procure it. Were gold, for
* We do not mean to infer that the value of gold has been uniformly depreciating
since the gold discoveries, on the contrary, probably immediately after the ﬁrst dis-
covery, when large stores of wealth Were conﬁned to the possession of a few thousand
inhabitants, the intrinsic value of gold was lower than it has since been. Its market
value was also at the lowest point, but this was the effect of a. scarcity of coin.


instance in the colony, materially to decline in value, half the miners
who now barely make a living would be compelled to abandon the
pursuit, and less gold would be procured. That this is the case has
been amply illustrated in Siberia, where the imposition of a heavy
export duty seriously and rapidly aﬁ'ected the yield of the mines.
Admitting then that as gold materially declines in value, the
supply becomes diminished 5 it is clear that the turning point must
at length be arrived at, when the annual consumption* will exceed
the supply ,' and as the stock diminishes, the price will again rise.
The argument in the opposite direction also holds good 3 sup-
posing, starting from the present standard, that owing to a diminished
supply gold were to become less intrinsically valuable, many
auriferous deposits, which now do not pay to work, could be proﬁt-
ably mined. Indeed, with a continually decreasing supply, in time,
a grain to the ton might be deemed a magniﬁcent return, and
Wicklow pyrites become of greater value than the present worth of
the gold-studded quartz daily being raised at the gold ﬁelds. It is
very certain that, with the rude appliances at their command, the
ancients at times found it pay them to mine ; when, under more
favorable conditions of skilled labor, at the present day it would be a
losing speculation. The Romans invaded England attracted by its
gold deposits ; it is certain these never existed to an extent that
would make them attractive to modern gold seekers. Recently some
extensive gold workings have been discovered in Wales. Some of
the raised mineral was found yet unreduced ; it contained gold, but
an Australian gold miner would pass by such washing stuff with the
remark, that it only yielded the color.
It is noticeable, that while the diminished supply, produced by a
decreased value in the precious metal must inevitably, after a certain
limit tend to again raise the value, that when the diminished sup—
ply, instead of being an qfect of a diminished value, is the cause of
an increased value,——the consequence of a cessation of sources
of snpply,—there is no limit to the value gold may reach.
In the course of ages every gold mine may be worked out, and a
grain of gold attain a fabulous value. As in such case its scarcity
would render it unavailable as a circulating medium, there is far
more danger of the gold currency being disturbed by an excessive
rise in the value of gold, the result of a diminished supply, than by
a depreciated value, the consequence of an immoderate supply
However, it is with the causes and consequences of a diminished value
we have to deal, and apologising for the digression, we will resume.
=x= Mr. McCulloch estimates the annpal consumption at the enormous amount of
£23,300,000 sterling, a very small portlon of which is recoverable.


When gold—mines (now as before we use the term to express any
source of supply of the precious metal) are temporarily abandoned,
there are many contingencies that lead to the land being put to
other uses, and in time their very existence being forgotten. It is a
well authenticated fact that in this way many valuable mines have
ceased to be available. Some discerning reader will say this is
inconsistent with the previous allusions to the ancients having found
it pay them to extract from mines which would be too poor to work
in the present day. But, gentle critic, whatever the new theorists
may say, history teaches that variations in gold from a minimum to
an excessive value are not only to be deduced from inductive
reasoning, but are events of real occurrence. Times have been
when the world, or rather portions of the world (the inter—communi-
cation between different countries being then so imperfect), has
known a plethora of wealth, a larger! supply of gold than there was
ability to absorb. But no vast social revolution followed ; the evil
worked its own cure 5 as gold declined in value the number of gold
miners fell off, the supply diminished, and the value again increased.
The supposition adopted by Mons. Chevalier that gold can become
depreciated to the extent of 50 per cent. its present value is absurdly
high. Were gold in this colony to decline 20 per cent, two-thirds
of the gold miners would abandon their occupation,* and would
turn their attention to cultivating the lands. When the cessation
of renewed supplies increased the value of gold, very little of the
cultivated ground would be torn up on the chance of its proving
auriferous. Not only, then, is it the tendency of a depreciated
intrinsic value of gold to check the supply, but it even leads to the
closing of the sources whence that supply is derived.
It may be added that as every year intelligence spreads amidst
the masses of the people, and their newly created wants, like the
eddying circles of a disturbed pool, know a wider sphere, there is
an increasing demand for the mighty engine of civilization—gold.
Providence which at various epochs of the world’s history has revealed
to man new and unexpected deposits of the precious metal, seems to
have consulted one of the necessary laws of human progress. It
is remarkable that gold is not only the type and representative of
civilization, but it is the leader in whose path civilization follows.
The wild prairie, the lone desert, and the desolate bush, have been
peopled by its agency ; there is scarcely a corner of the wide globe to
’X‘ If the decline were occasioned by the individual miner obtainin large amounts
of gold, his position would be unchanged. But the increased supply may be occa-
sioned by a larger number of miners at work; or, the same amount of gold being
procured, the stock might accumulate till it produced a decrease in the value of the
whole.


which it has not attracted the presence of man. In our time its
irresistible inﬂuence has created the nucleus of an empire in the far
south of the southern hemisphere, and even as we write the footstep
of the white man, of the all pervading Anglo—Saxon race, is tending
toward the far north, is rapidly advancing to the inhospitable regions
of the Arctic seas, which for ages have been deemed inhospitable.
Gold has been and ever will be potent for good or for evil, it has
been called “the root of all evil,” but this is only the converse of
the proposition that it is “the source of all good.”
PART II.
PAPER MONEY AND COLONIAL FINANCIERS.
The present rate of exchange is nominally 1% per cent.,* but this
is for 60 days’ bills,- the real rate of exchange is 2% per cent. for
bills at sight. The cost of transmitting gold to England is 2 per
cent.,+ which includes the charge of freight and insurance. Un—
coined gold bullion is subject to an extra expense of 2s. 6d. an ounce.
Whilst sovereigns can be shipped home at a cost of 2 per cent., and
exchange rules at 2% per cent., a clear margin of g» per cent. is left
to the shipper ; and hence it is, as many sovereigns are being shipped
now as can readily be procured}:
Paper money is nominally of the same value as specie, but it can-
not be substituted for shipment, therefore does not partake of the
premium of % per cent, in other words is worth less by ~§ per cent.
than coined gold. For instance, A has a thousand sovereigns, B a
thousand pounds in notes ; A ships his specie to England at a cost of
’X‘ This was written before the arrival of the last mail, since which the exchange has
risen 1 per cent. As, however, in consequence of the war, there is also an addition of
1 per cent. on the premium for insurance, our calculations are not in the slightest
degree affected by either alteration.
1' We are adopting the calculations employed by the bankers. In estimating the
worth of gold, Is. 6d. per ounce (equal to 2 per cent., if gold be estimated at £3 15s.
an ounce) is always allowed for transﬂ: expenses, and 1 per cent. is added to the rate
of exchange for the interest on 60 days’ currency of bills. Although not perfectly
accurate, these estimates are suﬂimently so for all practical purposes.
I It is clear that when the banks ﬁnd it pay them to ship specie and draw drafts
against it, the merchants who purchase the drafts would ﬁnd it to their advantage to
be themselves the shippers and intercept the intermediate proﬁt.


2 per cent., B purchases a bill, payable at sight, at 2% per cent. dis-
count. The account stands—
A, 1,000 sovereigns —*—.2 per cent. expenses, £9BO.
B, 1,000 notes -—2% per cent. exchange, £975.
The relation the sovereigns bear to the notes, then, is as 980 to 975,
or, in other words, if a sovereign be worth 205., a pound note is only
worth 198. 10'77d.
So startling a fact as this is, doubtless, but little known 3 few
conceive when they inform the dapper bank clerk who changes
a cheque for them that they prefer notes, they are putting money into
the coffers of the clerk’s employers. Yet so it is 3 notes are really
not so valuable as coined gold. The paper currency has deteriorated,
and what is more, there has been a tendency in this direction for
years 3 and the ﬁnancial policy pursued of late has encouraged and
is encouraging a ruinous progress in the same course.
The calculations above given would imply, that if the exchange
were lowered to 2 per cent, paper money would recover its depre-
ciation 3 and such would be the case if the depreciation were solely
the effect of the high rate of exchange, instead of the high rate of
exchange being in a measure the effect of the depreciation.
It is notorious that the banks have never made any proﬁts in
their gold buying transactions 3 but, on the contrary, have always
purchased at what has amounted to a loss. Putting on one side the
enormous expenses of their countless establishments on the gold-
ﬁelds, almost entirely devoted to the purchase of the precious metal,
it is known to every one conversant with the subject, that they have
always paid an excessively high. ﬁgure for gold—-—a ﬁgure, that allow-
ing for the proﬁts in the exchange, has left them a decided “loss.
They ascribe this to the effects of competition, and no doubt, when-
ever they have been able to effect combinations, they have not
shown themselves unwilling to buy as cheaply as possible. But
the effects of competition have their limits 3 it is not to be supposed
that a corporation, any more than an individual, would day after
day be insane enough, for instance, to pay £4 for what is only worth
£3 198. It would be impossible to believe that they have submit-
ted to continual loss for the mere sake of gratifying an idlé rivalry 3
some ulterior end must be looked for, and that readily presents itself ,-
they have purchased gold for the purpose of circulating their notes,
and in paying what appeared too high a ﬁgure for gold, their notes
purporting to represent a certain amount, have in reality been intro-
duced at a depreciated value. Let any one who wishes to prove the
truth of what we have said, take a parcel of gold, so small a one
even as 150 ounces, to a bank, and ask what price they will give in


sovereigns. SuppOsing aey do not say that they are not purchasers
at present, let him notice the price they offer, and send the same
parcel by another hand back again, and oﬁ‘er it in the ordinary
course, for notes. He will ﬁnd a material difference in the quoted
price.
Paper money is in itself valueless ; when lying idle in the bank cellars
it is not even a representation of value ; it is only when placed in
circulation it becomes floating capital, and it follows that it is so
much the more serviceable to the issuers in proportion to the length
of time the holders refrain from converting it. An eminent authority,
writing before the year 1844, when the Act came into operation
which limited the issue of notes by joint-stock banks, says, “Some of
the joint-stock banks have an extraordinary number of branches;
and the multiplication of these subordinate establishments all over
the country is not one of the least striking features of the system.
Neither is it very difﬁcult to discover why banks of issue, at least,
are so very anxious about the formation of these outworks‘. They
are bound, it seems, by the present law to pay their notes only at
the parent establishment; so that by issuing them at a branch bank,
perhaps a hundred miles distant from the head bank, the chances
are ten to one that they will continue for a much longer period in
circulation, and that they will consequently be able to carry on
business with a less amount of capital, than if they were, as they
ought to be, obliged to pay their notes at the branches as well as at
the principal ofﬁce.” ‘
Some of these remarks do not inaptly apply to the present subject.
The notes issued in exchange for gold are mostly payable in Melbourne,
few of the banks have any distinct issues for separate branches,
where, as a consequence, they scarcely keep any coined gold. The
larger the number of branches, the more outlets there are to get rid of
the paper money, and the larger the amount that will get into
circulation. A depreciated paper currency, the result of an unduly
forced circulation, has again and again produced the most disastrous
results, and previous experience has shown .that it is rarely the
depreciation can be recovered without one of those convulsive throes
that every now and again agitate the commercial world. In a country
Whose chief produce is gold, where millions of ounces of the precious
metal are yearly exported, one would think that a remedial measure
might be found. .
Before, however, looking for the cure, it would be well to more
thoroughly understand the disease ,' not only the symptoms, but the
causes that have produced them. _
The colony has the advantage of a large number of banks, some


of them With local, others with foreign pr(%rietaries ; still it may be
doubted whether the absolute capital at the command of these
institutions is suited to the magnitude of the business they carry on.
Their last quarterly return showed a net balance of £3,085,143, the
excess of assets over :liabilities ; certainly a small capital for the
heavy operations that are conducted with it. Their gold buying
transactions alone extend over £10,000,U00, in the course of the
year. But mere ﬁgures, as usual, prove nothing; it is to other sources
we must look for conﬁrmation of the supposition that the banks are
overtrading, and this may be gathered from an incident connected
with the Railway loan. The ﬁrst instalment of debentures were sold
at a bare margin on What may be termed the reserve price ﬁxed in
the contract. The circumstances attending the sale were singularly
unfavorable, and nothing but the most pressing necessity could have
induced the agents to sell, supposing they were acting in good faith
to their principals. The value of the debentures, judged by the price
ruling for similar stock of neighbouring colonies, was 7 per cent. in
excess of what they were tendered for. Supposing a fall of 2 per cent.
to be natural to the introduction of a large additional parcel of such
stock, there is still a margin of 5 per cent. which must be considered
loss. The reason of this decline was not a matter of secrecy, the
opposition of the Geelong Railway shareholders, and of the magnates
of the London Stock Exchange, was quite sufﬁcient to account for it.
Ordinary prudence would have dictated a delay of a few months
to clear up matters which were susceptible of explanation ; and that
the sale was hurried on and effected at the bare margin of the reserve
price, is sufﬁcient to induce the strongest grounds for believing that
the agents representing the contracting banks were compelled, by
instructions from their principals, to sell. ‘
The course they took is susceptible of one other explanation, but
it involves so deliberate and gross a dereliction of commercial honesty
that one can scarcely entertain it for a moment. There is no doubt
that the agents and connections of the banks were amongst the
principal purchasers, but this is quite compatible with the latter
using all their inﬂuence to push the sale. Still it gives rise to a
darker suggestion ; within a few weeks of the forced sale the stock
rose considerably in the market, the effect of representations made
to the committee of the Stock Exchange. How far did the banks
proﬁt by the rise? did they merely as agents make a sham sale them-
selves, by their connections becoming the purchasers, or were they
really uninterested in the rise, which, had they waited a few days,
would have put many thousand pounds into the pockets of the
issuers of the bonds. It is impossible to credit that they could have


connived at so gross a figud as the sale of the stock at a depreciated
price to beneﬁt themselves by the rise, and we are thus thrown on
the inference that they were compelled to sell at the barest margin
to place them in funds. Of course as agents who had undertaken
to make advances, the banks were justiﬁed in wishing to realize as
speedily as possible, although. perhaps they were to blame in pre—
tending to offer facilities it was not Within their means to carry
through. But, after all, a controlling power was left in the hands of
the Government, Who had the option of withholding repayment of the
advances for several months to secure a favorable market. The con-
tract did not permit the agents of the banks to sell, unless under
instructions as to price and terms * from the Government.
No words can sufﬁciently condemn the Victorian Ministers, who
permitted the sale to be made at so great a disadvantage. One of
their number stated in the House, and placed on the table a minute
to the same effect, that the Ministry calculated on realising 112 per
cent. nett for the debentures, and yet the Cabinet must have
authorised the sale at a reduction of 6% per cent. on what was stated
to be the legitimate value. For a government to obtain money on
such terms, to submit to an extra cost of 6% per cent., is sufﬁcient to
create doubts of its solvency 3 but the fact is, the Victorian Govern-
ment were not in the slightest degree interested in the forced sale.
The contract permitted them to 'hold over repaying advances till Ist
October proximo. With such a time as this before them, with no
public object to serve in expediting the sale, it was clearly their
duty to obtain the most favourable chance of the market, and not to
submit to a forced sale. This was their duty as members of the
Government; unfortunately, the Cabinet, amongst its most inﬂuential
men, numbers representatives of the banks. The interests of these
institutions required, as we have seen, the power to realize at once,
and the bank director came into collision with the minister of the
Crown. Perhaps the too faithful bank servants should be canonised
by the institutions they so served, but there is no question they
ought to be impeached by the people they so wronged.
But whatever may be the cause, whether the banks have really
overtraded or not, or whether these institutions are immaculate in
point of conduct and condition, there can be no question that the pre-
* The tenth clause of the contract imposes this restriction. It does not apply to
debentures which are given to the banks under the ﬁfth clause, in repayment of
advances, but to those handed to them for sale. The ﬁrst instalment of a million of
debentures, sold in London in January, was of the latter character, as Mr. Miller
acknowledged in the Council that no repayment of advances had been made to the
banks in Melbourne till the latter end of the same month. The debentures sold in
January, then, must have been under the tenth clause, and could not have been sold
except at the ﬁgure authonsed by the Government.


sent position of the country calls for the rs>st serious consideration.
Whenever it becomes a clearly proﬁtable speculation to ship specie,
the banks have a right to expect that they be called on to redeem
their “ promise to pay on demand,” to pay specie for" their paper.
A merchant desirous of remitting £20,000 would save considerably
by shipping sovereigns. For the same cheque with which he pays
for a draft he can, if he like, obtain notes, and these he can present
across the counter and demand sovereigns. A run once commenced,
there is no telling its limit, nor the direction it would take. The
banks, at the very ﬁrst breath of such an occurrence, would be pre-
cluded taking the step they have yet time to do, reduce the exchange;
to equalise, as far as they are concerned, the value of paper and
coined money. It is- true this course might put them to consider-
able loss. But it would be wrong to put it down to present cir-
cumstances ; it would be but redeeming the transactions of the
past. It would, in effect, be taking up the paper money which
they have hitherto issued at a depreciated value. They would be
placing the currency on a healthy footing at their own cost, instead
of making it come out of the pocket of the people. Were a run Once
to commence, the banks would be powerless, as far as ruling the
exchange, for they could not purchase gold. Bank notes would not
be received in exchange for it. In respect to them it would rate at
-an extravagant price 5 Whilst, with respect to coined gold, unless, as
would probably be done, bar gold were made, by Act of Council, a.
legal tender, it would be at a sensible discount.
It may seem absurd to make an appeal, ad nzisei‘icordiam, to the
banks, when the people have the redress in their own hands, by the
establishment of a mint. With a mint the redeeming the depreciation
of the paper currency must fall on the banks : and feeling this it is
that makes them so bitterly hostile to an institution that would afford
relief to every class in the Colony. But the people are shut out from
what would be so much to their advantage, because, alas I in the
high councils of the State bank inﬂuences predominate. They have,
in fact, a banking ministry ; one which, if chosen expressly for the
purpose of representing bank interests, could not more uncompro-
misingly sacriﬁce every consideration in favour of their consti-
tuents. The negotiation of the Railway loan with the combined
banks will ever stand as a monument of political proﬂigacy. Every
day shows how ruinous the negotiation was to the Colony. If Baring
had taken the loan in hand, foreign capital would absolutely have
found its way into the Colony 5 but it may be doubted whether the
whole strain of the expenses will not now fall on its own resources.
It is possible that the unusual demand for gold, the extravagant


exchange that now exists, is due to the demands of the Government
on the resources of the banks. But it is equally probable, when the
parties have shown themselves so little scrupulous, that it may be
in part an attempt. to enrich the banks at the expense of the
Colony. The ﬁfth clause of the contract made between the Govern~
ment and the banks, contains the most extraordinary provision, by
which the banks reap the entire beneﬁt of the exchange, supposing
it to be at a premium. The Government are to give certiﬁcates of
advances to the banks, which certiﬁcates are to be presented to the
agents in London, and be paid by them in full. If on presentation
there are not sufﬁcient funds in hand, the certiﬁcates are to bear
interest, not from the date of presentation, but from the date at-
which they were drawn. Supposing the Government to have over
drawn, as it is currently reported they have during the last two
months, the banks can claim certiﬁcates for the full amounts ;
whereas, if the Government were allowed to repay the advances by
drawing on the agents in London, they could sell their drafts for a
premium of 2% per cent. This amount they lose, it goes into the
coffers of the banks. .
The tenth clause of the contract allows the Government the right
of drawing drafts against money to their credit in the hands of the
home agents, and the banks are to negotiate the drafts at half per
cent. below their selling rates of exchange on London. In February,
a sum of upwards of a million was lodged t 0 the credit of the
Victorian Government with the home agents. Against this, accord-
ing to Mr. Miller’s statement, the Government, on the 26th January,
“ reimbursed the banks to the extent of £300,000.” Some £700,000
was thus left, which, it is probable, the Government drew against
before the rise which has lately taken place in the exchange. Their
bills would thus be negotiated at a disadvantage ; whilst, when from
the failure of funds at home, they are again thrown on the certiﬁcates
of advances, as before-mentioned, they are subjected to a loss of
2% per cent. The contract makes no mention of allowing interest
for the ﬂoating balances in the hands of the agents at home, so that,
as far as the Government are concerned, their drafts might as well be
paid at sight as have a two months’currency. Thus, with exchange
at a discount or at a premium, the banks can ring the changes
always to their own proﬁt.
The Government have not published any account of their transac-
tions with the banks. Beyond the mere fact stated by Mr. Miller
of the reimbursement of the £300,000 in January, nothing is known
of the moneys they have received or drawn against. The banks have
been studiously silent 3 it is said the directors are not even permitted


to see the Government accounts. We are driven thus to conjecture,
and viewing the whole course of the negotiations, it is not an
extravagant inference, that the recent rise in exchange is partly due
to the desire of proﬁtably disposing of Government certiﬁcates
of advances.
But it is vain to waste time in surmises when facts of substantial
importance claim attention. A long course of ﬁscal misrule has reached
its acme 5 with exchange at a rate at which the exportation of sover-
eigns becomes a proﬁtable transaction, the commercial community stand
on the brink of a precipice into which_a single hand may hurl them.
It is true they may take measures to protect themselves, they may
insist on the establishment of a mint, which will effectually prevent
the consequences which otherwise may ensue. The Government
devoted to the banks, will not lend themselves to a course which will
deprive these autocratic rulers of their despotic sway over the monied
world. The people must take the matter in their own hands, every
member returned for the new Parliament must be pledged to use his
best endeavours to procure a mint. The question must be brought
on without delay, and with it the whole ﬁnancial policy of the
Cabinet.
It is frightful to think ~ what deplorable results may follow the
stubborn tenacity which the ministers evince in continuing in their
present unpopular position. It is well authenticated that when the
Duke of Wellington, in 1832, persisted in retaining ofﬁce against
the Wishes of the people, two gentlemen patriotically went to the
expense of £2O in posting every dead wall in London with large
placards, on which were printed, “ To stop the Duke go for gold.”
A run immediately took place on the Bank of England, and some-
thing like half a million was drawn out in a few hours. The effect
was complete ; before the day was out the Duke gave in. It is
sincerely to be hoped that the long-suffering people of this Colony
will never be driven to so desperate an expedient, one which, what-
ever its temporary political effect, must entail private ruin on
thousands. But they have a remedy in their hands open to no
objection, let them only be true to themselves, honest and out-
spoken at the ensuing elections, and the O’Shanassy ministry cannot
stand a week after the New Parliament assembles. .
w. FAIRFAX AND (20., GENERAL PRINTERS. COLLINS STREET EAST.




