

PRICE ONE PENNY.
When Germany
Occupied France
in 71
Critchley Parker,
Flinders Lane,
Melbourne.
1923.


A great deal of carefully prepared pro-
paganda has spread throughout Australia
in favour of Germany’s fraudulent effort
to evade paying reparations to France and
Belgium.
Do the people of Australia remember
zvhat actually took place when Germans
were victorious in the Franco-German
zvar of ’7OF A cold statement of the facts
of that period by so eminent an
authority as Stephane Lausanne, Editor-
in-chief of “Le Matin,” must be read by
everyone claiming an opinion on the Ruhr
Valley question. The follozving was zvritten
for the April number of the National
Review, a periodical which has been re-
sponsible for many enlightening articles
on Germany’s deznous methods of zvinning
the Peace.
Critchley Parker.


WHEN GERMANY OCCUPIED
FRANCE.
“I suggest that a comparison be made by
an impartial court between Germany’s oc-
cupation of France in 1871 and the French
occupation of Germany in 1923,” our old
acquaintance, Count Johann von Bemstorff,
recently declared. An excellent suggestion,
indeed. Comparisons are always instruc-
tive —although dangerous at times. At all
events, let us sit as an impartial court
and compare the two epochs.
In 1871, Prussia, having defeated France,
imposed a war indemnity of £200,000,000,
despite the fact that the entire war had
been fought on French territory and that
Pussia, sp to say, had not even suffered
as much as a broken window. To be sure
that France paid to the very last penny,
Prussia stipulated in the Peace Treaty that
the German Army would occupy nineteen
French departments, equivalent approxi-
mately to the area of Scotland, as a guaran-
tee. These nineteen French departments
were to be evacuated only one by one, ac-
cording to payments made by France. And,
in fact, the last German soldier left the
French soil in September, 1873, when the
last French million had been paid.


In 1919, France and her Allies, haying
defeated Germany, did not impose a war
indemnity, but merely asked reparation fer-
tile terrible destruction of life and pro-
perty. These reparations, at the London
conference of May, 1921, were set at
£6,600,000,000, of which France and Bel-
gium were to receive about £3,600,000,000.
Unfortunately, France and her Allies com-
mitted an enormous blunder in not exacting
guarantees. The Treaty of Versailles stipu-
lates but one: the left bank of the Rhine.
It has some value as a guarantee of security
—but it has absolute!} 7 none as a
productive guarantee. The Allies on the
Rhine could not receive a single pfennig
in taxes, nor were they permitted to take
so much as a stick of wood without pay-
ment. In consequence of this, Germany
paid nothing, or next to nothing. That
is why France and Belgium have
decided to take productive guaran-
tees. They have decided to render
productive the Rhineland already in their
hands and to occupy the Ruhr, the principal
mining and industrial centre of their debtor.
Between the two occupations—that of
some fifty years ago and that of to-day—
there is therefore one resemblance: both
have been effected to obtain productive
guarantees. To be sure to get her 200
million pounds sterling, Germany in 1871
took a strong grip on nineteen French de-


partments. To be sure to get something
on their three billion pounds sterling,
France and Belgimn have caused Germany
to mortgage the Rhineland and the Ruhr.
“We shall not hold this mortgage a single
day longer than it is absolutely necessary,”
stated both Premier Poincare and Premier
Theunis. By this they mean that they will
evacuate the Rhineland and the Ruhr as
soon as they have been paid—just as the
Germans did evacuate the east of' France
as soon as they had been paid.
Here we have the only analogy between
the two occupations. Aside from that, all
is different. The people in the occupied
territory in 1871 were not possessed of the
same state of mind as those of 1923, when
the tables have turned; nor have the French
ever thought of employing in 1923 the
beastly methods that the Germans employed
in 1871.
President Thiers, who was in 1871 at
the head of the French Government, and
who was posssessed of a large soul in a
little body, had but one idea —the execu-
tion of every clause in the Peace Treaty
as soon as possible, in order to be rid as
quickly as was humanly possible of Ger-
man occupation. He wrote a characteristic
letter on May 4, 1871, after the conclusion
of the peace preliminaries, before the
Treaty of Frankfort had been signed. This
letter'was addressed to General Von Fab-


rice, Commander-in-Chief of the German
troops of occupation. It was as follows; —
When, with deep pain, I was obliged to sign the
peace preliminaries, I resolutely decided to accept
the inevitable, as I saw that, despite all, France had
more to gain from an immediate peace than from
the continuation of a war that had a deplorable
inception and which was carried on in an equally
deplorable manner. Having come to this conclu-
sion, so cruel for me, I did not desire to re-plunge
my country into war because of an inconsequence,
I thought of but two things—to make a definite
peace with Germany; and to end our civil war.
I cannot imagine, therefore, that my intentions can
be misunderstood.
My confidence in the fecundity of my country has
always been great; and it is this confidence that
has caused me to contract engagements that are
terribly cruel. Then, again, I had thought, and
I still think, that every day that France delays
the revival of her commercial and industrial acti-
vity, she will suffer a hundred times more than any
good that may accrue to her from an attenuation
of the peace terms by further agitation.
It is thus that President Thiers addressed
himself to the German Commander-in-
Chief. It is very doubtful whether Count
von Bernstorff could produce before any
court a similar missive addressed in 1919
by President Ebert either to Foch or to
Degoutte. It is still more doubtful whether
President Ebert has issued instructions
to his “ Regierungspresidenten ” of the
Rhineland and the Ruhr, similar to those
issued by President Thiers to the Pre-


fects of the French departments occupied
by Germany.
Versailles, February 11, 1872 — noon.
I have already issued, and I again reiterate the
formal order whereby all conflict with the German
Army and its leaders must be carefully avoided.
This order is of highest importance, as it concerns
to the greatest degree the safety of the State and
the alleviation of the suffering inflicted .by the
occupation!.
Two points in particular must be given every
consideration—the billeting of the German troops,
and the celebration of religious ceremonies on Sun-
days and holidays by the Germans,
With regard to billeting, housing facilities must
be arranged for as soon as possible, and care must
be taken to be on good terms with the local heads
of the German Army, so that they may have no
pretext whatsoever for complaint.
With regard to religious ceremonies, assure the
Germans of all facilities, so that they may follow
out the precepts of their faith. Should you be
unable to decide the French priests to lend their
churches for a few hours, find premises for religi-
ous worship elsewhere—preferably the Town Hall.
Break any resistance that may be offered by the
mayors, who cannot insist in refusing your requests,
which are in the higher interests of the State. Speak
in the name of the Government and enforce obedi-
ence.
Serious motives cause me to order these disposi-
tions.
( Signed ) A. Thiers.
Not only did President Thiers desire to
avoid all unpleasant incidents, but he even
wanted the French officials to show every
courtesy towards the German occupying
forces.


Incidents that occurred during the cele-
bration in honour of the birthday of the
old Kaiser Wilhelm, March 22, 1872, are
typical.
Eight days before the birthday celebra-
tion, an order was issued by Berlin advising
General Von Manteuffel, Commanding the
Army of Occupation, to cause his troops
to celebrate the day as solemnly as if they
had been in Germany. Joy was to be
shown in military reviews,
parades, military music, artillery salvos,
and special dinners for officers and men.
Count de Saint-Yallier, who was then
French High Commissioner with the Ger-
man Army of Occupaton, advised Presi-
dent Thiers of this order, and asked: “Is
it necessary, in order to be perfectly cor-
rect, that our Prefects and Sub-Prefects
call on the German commanders and leave
their cards'?”
To this President Thiers replied:
We are now at peace with Prussia. We therefore
owe the German Government the usual politeness,
extended by one friendly Government to another—
as the Government claim to be now that peace has
been made. . . .' . We must not ask our military
leaders to observe these calls, as their souvenirs
of the war are still too recent and too painful to
ask them to forget so soon. But, I think that our
Prefects and Sub-Prefects ought to pay the usual
visit demanded by etiquette, without too much
show. I think that a personal visit would be much
better than simply the leaving of a card.


Such was the spirit that prevailed in
French official circles during the German
occupation of France from 1871 to 1873.
Is there anything approaching this in
official circles of the Rhineland and the
Ruhr during the present occupation? Has
President Ebert ever issued instructions
as dignified as those issued by President
Thiers? And, what would the Germans say
if, on the next birthday of President Poin-
caire, the French troops were to parade
and French artillery fired salvos in Dussel-
dorf and in Essen? Would the German
officials pay their respects to General
Degoutte and to High Commissioner
Tarard? ....
Let us see now the spirit that prevailed
in German military circles during the oc-
cupation of France. It was a spirit of
domination and of conquest. It was a
spirit of brutal authority. The conquerors
did not allow a single demonstration on
the part of their victims. Not a single act,
not a single word, not a single gesture of
insubordination was permitted to pass with-
out severe punishment.
The first incident took place in July, 1871,
at the Palace of Versailles.
General Von Manteuffel, Commander of
the German Army of Occupation, came to
see President Thiers, but made a mistake
of one day in the appointment. He called
just twenty-four hours sooner than he had


been expected, and arrived in the midst
of a luncheon offered to French generals
and deputies. President’Thiers saw that
he was obliged to ask him to lunch; but
there were two prominent French soldiers
present, Marshal MacMahon and Gen-
eral Ducrot. The Marshal refused to shake
hands with General Yon Manteuffel, and
General Ducrot refused to sit at the table
with a Prussian. President Thiers took
General Ducrot to one side, and said:
It is absolutely necessary in the interests of
the Republic to show one’s self to be polite with
a personage who by his official standing is entitled
to all our respects. However, if you cannot sup-
port his presence, I permit you to leave.
And General Ducrot retired.
The incident, however, did not escape
the attention of General Yon Manteuffel,
who, immediately after lunch, called on
the French Minister of War, and asked
for immediate apologies, .which both Mar-
shal MacMahon and General Ducrot were
obliged to present.
Another incident that occurred several
weeks later, was more serious. A fight had
taken place between German soldiers and
French civilians in the suburbs of Paris,
and two German soldiers were wounded—
one mortally. The French civilians who
were guilty of this murder were arrested
and judged at Melun. The attitude of the


French magistrates and of the Prosecuting
Attorney was irreproachable. The latter
demanded the application of the severest
penalties, but the jury, carried away by
the oratory of Lachaud, who was one of
the most eloquent of French lawyers, gave
a verdict of acquittal.
Prince Bismarck was furious when he
learned of the verdict. On December 7,
1871, he addressed a note to his Paris repre-
sentative, Count Von Arnim, of which Gen-
eral Von Manteuft'el, himself said: “I am
really surprised at its brutal violence and
outrageous perfidy.”
Were it possible (Bismarck wrote to his ambassa-
dor) for us to adopt the judicial doctrines of the
Melun Court, the law of reprisal would cause us to
leave unpunished all murders of Frenchmen resid-
ing in German territory. But the moral culture
and, the honourable sentiment of the German people
exclude anything of the kind In the future,
with regard toi German feelings, we shall not hold
ourselves back, but shall be obliged, in similar
ruses, to demand the extradition of the culprits and,
should this extradition he refused, to arrest other
Frenchmen and take them as hostages to Germany.
We may even be obliged, in cases of extreme neces-
sity, bo take even more severe measures
Never before had such a brutal threat
been recorded in diplomatic archives. If,
in 1921, after the acquittals of the Leipzig
Court, one of the Allied Governments had
sent a similar note to Berlin, what would
Germany have said? What would the rest
of tfie' world have said?


This continued for thirty months, from
March, 1871, to September, 1873. An im-
prudent phrase in a newspaper article, or
a strong expression of opinion in public,
gave immediate rise to reprisals. A small
Parisian sheet, the “ Soir,” having, for in-
stance, remarked that “ the inhabitants of
Nancy turned from the Germans in disgust,
when they encountered them in the street,
as from so much detritus/ * the entire Ger-
man staff frothed at the mouth with rage.
And, the following day, when the Mayor
of Nancy called on General Yon Treschkow,
the German Commander, to ask him a pro-
mised favour, the latter replied in red rage,
banging his fist on the table: “The detritus
of the streets can accord nothing to those
who thus qualify it.”
Another example of the treatment ac-
corded by the Germans, is that of a monu-
ment put up near the Marne in memory
of forty-nine French soldiers, who had
been made prisoners by the Prussians dur-
ing the war, and who were shot down when
the} r tried to escape. The inhabitants
rather imprudently engraved the following
inscription on this monument:
Here the Prussians have massacred forty-nine
French soldiers, who had been disarmed and were
without defence, being prisoners of war, August
25, 1870.
The German Headquarter Staff immedi-
ately demanded that the Mayor of the town


who had permitted this inscription be court-
martialled, and General Von Manteuffel
spoke of sending a squadron of Uhlans
to forcibly remove the inscription.
This same general who, despite all,
showed himself to be human enough and
generous enough during the occupation,
having learned that, contrary to the orders
of President Thiers, a theatre had been
put at the disposition of the German troops
for their religious services, wrote to the
President at once:
I beg your Excellence to give immediate orders
that theatres shall no longer be offered to us for
our religious services. This causes my blood to
boil, just as it does that of my soldiers.
And Count de Saint-Vallier, the French
High Commissioner, himself wrote to Pre-
sident Thiers:
You know how the Germans are touchy and how
much they stand on ceremony. In my daily busi-
ness with them, 1 must show a great deal of re-
serve and circumspection. I am also forced to
ask much from the'staff of my mission. J 1 conse-
quently beg that you send me only secretaries who
Will not offend the Germans and who will be
“persona grata” to them.
A mountain of similar documents might
be piled up and produced before the impar-
tial court demanded by Count von Berns-
torff. They would clearly show the marked
difference that exists between the occupa-


tion of 1871 and that of 1923. There can
be no question as to the verdict of an
impartial jury: on one side stands bru-
tality; on the other leniency and self-
restraint.
But the most impressive document before
the court would indeed be the Treaty of
Frankfort itself. It stipulated that the
French must pay before March 4, 1874,
an indemnity of £200,000,000. Now, the
last penny of this indemnity was paid on
September 5, 1873—six months before the
time set.
The old Kaiser Wilhelm I. was amazed
when he heard that he would get his money
before it was due. He called himself on
the French Embassy in Berlin, and, seizing
the hand of the French Ambassador, Count
de Gontaut-Biron, he exclaimed: “I can’t
find words to express my astonishment
and admiration. It is simply wonderful!”
Of course, it must indeed have seemed
wonderful to a German monarch. France
had lost at the terrible game of war, and
she was willing to pay. A Prussian cannot
understand this: if he loses, he never pays.
It was so fifty years ago—it is so to-day,
But France and Belgium will see to it that,
at least once in the history of the world,
Germany, having lost, will pay.
STEPHANE LAUZANNE.
Kentlng-Paice Pty. Ltd., 36 Lonsdale St., Melbourne.
