

When War Ceases
The World’s Greatest
“Growing Pain”
WALTER SAMUEL SINKS
“ What the dew from Heaven is to
the grass of the field, this information
is to the world. I*—A 1 * —A Header.
Price: 3d; 2/6 per dozen.
flftclftournc:
FORD & SON, PRINTERS. DRUMMOND STREET, CARLTON.
1916.


M Wfj J'erguson CoixectionAW
I || Rational |J|


When War Ceases:
The World’s Greatest “Growing Pain”
WALTER SAMUEL BINKS
“What the dew from Heaven is to
the grass of the field, this information
is to the world.” —A Reader.
Melbourne:
FORD & SON, PRINTERS. DRUMMOND STREET. CARLTON,
1916.


I looked around upon humanity and saw that it was
overshadowed by sorrow and scorched by the fierce
fires of suffering. It was a stormy day, and my atten-
tion was aroused by a mournful sound—the moaning
of the wind through a mass of suspended telegraph
wires; then gazing deeper than the surface of materia!
things, I seemed to perceive that the secret of the
wire was hidden in its heart, subtle, silent, and unseen.
Through it were flashing many messages; words of
love and wisdom, power and progress, although the
outer eye could see only the entanglement of the wires,
and the outer ear hear only the moaning of the wind
through the wires. So, too, in these stormy days,
with their bitter lingering wails of sorrow, and million
mournful and moaning sounds, there are to be recog-
nised, though invisible and inaudible, messages of
love and wisdom, power and progress.
And I dreamed of preaching a sermon which would
help men and women, whether rich or poor, learned
or unlearned, worldly or unworldly, and the dream
remained with me; it finally became substantial, and
now, realising that it is filling a very wide and genuine
want, I continue to send it forth into the world on its
mission of healing and cheeriness and blessedness,
knowing that it cannot fail to reach the hearts of
those who are longing to receive it.


When War Ceases:
The World’s Greatest "Growing Pain”
“Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy Jesus.
War, like most things, may be studied from different
points of view, thereby revealing unlike aspects. Some
may have thought it a difficult task to survey the fiercest
conflict in the history of the race without deep feelings
of pessimism. But as the optimistic conclusion is
the only true and final one, it is my aim to present to
you certain great laws and forces, several essentially
spiritual principles which must inevitably convince
that the cloud is temporary, but the sun eternal; that
even now “the blue is larger than the cloud”; that the
very cloud itself has a silver lining.
The first clause of our text comes right home to us
all in these days—we are sorrowful! If you try to hide
it under a pleasant smile, all credit to you. If you
would become angel-like! Christ-like? God-like! then
remember that the world is sad enough without your
woes ; that it is gloomy enough without your carrying
about a long face. Still, in the innermost shrine of
the heart we are sorrowful. We are beginning to realise,
in some slight degree, what war is. Some single
description of the parting of friends, or of the devotion
of the wounded, some ghastly incident from the actual
battle, or the last message of a dying hero; in brief —
something unthinkably sad has served as a standard
by Which we try to measure the whole tremendous
scene. We can tell in some feeble way what the march
of a great army means, when the harvest fields are
swept away before it, and all the cattle slaughtered,
and famine and desolation left behind. We can imagine
what the battlefield means, when night closes on an
unfinished conflict, and shrieking horses rush madly
among the unburied dead—and the more pitiable dying.
We are sorrowful I God knows our sorrow lies too
deep for tears! hut—
“Amid the maddening maze of things
And tossed by storm and flood,
To one fixed trust my spirit clings—
I know that God is good,”


And the right must survive, for it is the fitter.
“Right is right since God is God,
And right the day must win!
To doubt would be disloyalty!
To falter would be sin.”
The world has not had enough of war, or else war
would not be: fire burns the child to inject into its mind
one of the truths of the universe—that the property of
fire is to burn; thus, too, does the world learn. Life
is a great kindergarten; man a tiny child, learning
his little lessons, enjoying his little pleasures, suffering
his little sorrows; and the suffering in the world to-day
is to teach the world that war brings sorrow.
There are people who hold that God should interfere,
and prevent such wars and strikes and tragedies as
darken these days; but the facts of life are the school-
masters of God’s great kindergarten, and such arbitrary
interference on the part of the Supreme Intelligence
would utterly frustrate the whole purpose of life’s
education, and would positively stagnate human evolu-
tion. Experience may be a hard school, but it is Abba
Father’s kindergarten, and effects irrevocably follow
causes; and when trouble and despair seem almost
intrinsically intersphered, there may be heard the
still, small voice saying: “What I do thou knowest not,
but thou shaft know hereafter. I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee”; and one remembers that what men
want, above all else, is to have their hearts softened;
and that sorrow softens them sooner and more effec-
tually than anything else.
Scripture contains many instances where the siftings
and scourgings of sorrow have been valuable producers
of pious rectitude, and none more so than the inspired
poem of Job. The book of Job is just the record of
an earnest soul’s perplexities; and even he ultimately
recognised all his apparent misfortunes as sparks of
fire from the furnace of God’s burning heart of love,
triumphantly exclaiming: “When He hath tried me,
1 shall come forth as gold.” And Job is not the only
chastened child of God who will confess at the last that
sorrow and temptation and disappointment are the
prime producers of all that is great and noble and grand
in human character; that selfishness requires the fierce
fires of affliction to burn it away; and that the
translucent sphere of a tear-drop in the eye often


becomes a moral telescope, through the lens of which
we see a brighter future. Therefore, do not grudge
the Hand which is shaping and forming the individual,
and moulding and rounding the world ; but rather
learn to say with Whittier: —
“Oh, sometimes gleams upon my sight
Through present wrong, the Eternal Right;
And step by step since time began,
We see the steady gain of man.”
Battles, strikes, and revolutions, so far as they are
composed of evil, are of man; but in this evil develop-
ment are to be recognised the controlling purposes and
the overruling goodness of the Most High. For in-
stance, the wars that marked the Protestant Reforma-
tion on the soil of England, Scotland, Holland, France,
and Germany spread round much of sorrow, and even
wrong; but who could spare from history the seeds of
truth and life, liberty and progress, that those struggles
scattered ? The good by far outweighed the ills.
We are, throughout the world—once so peaceful-
feeling the terrible ills of warfare; but are we—because
of the crops that it tramples down, and the hospital
couches which it covers with human sufferers, the rivers
that it colours crimson, and the myriad graves that it
fills —to say that it has ever repealed a prayer or a
Sabbath ? Has it abrogated the gospel or banned the
further descent of the penetrating Spirit of God ? If
none of all these, then God is in the struggle! Too
prone we are to forget this. No language is forceful
enough to point out that God is in the Struggle. And
for His Church, and for the nations, and for the whole
world, great good shall arise from all these dark and
stormy scenes.
4 VI know there are no errox*s,
In the Great Eternal Plan;]
And all things work together
For the final good of man.”
It may be that through bloodshed lies the one all-
important path to peace. It may be that God will show,
by this last struggle, that a nation in defence is mightier
than an army, it may be that He will confirm halcyon
peace by the absolute overthrow of those vast forces
which hitherto have menaced it. What would it have
profited Germany if she had gained the whole world
and lost her own soul ? Germany must be born again!


She is being born again; and the New Germany may
be a wonderful nation. And within our own nation
the unthinkable abyss betwixt rich and poor is rapidly
filling up; if England is to be crowned with the laurels
of victory, she must be one nation —not two —rich and
poor bound together with cords of friendship, chains
of love. When the great World Crisis is over, men will
think as they have never thought before. When the
gigantic struggle ceases, and the forces of suspicion,
hatred, and revenge have spent themselves, it is hardly
possible to formulate in words what we may look for-
ward to. Then shall “your sorrow be turned into joy.”
As we uplift the curtain of history and reveal the great
military theatre of the ages, we observe that from the
scenes stand out in bold relief numbers of rugged moun-
tain peaks, where dark and dense war-clouds have
gathered together and shadowed the earth with their
darksome gloom and deluged the land with sorrow; but
“after a storm comes a cairn/ 5 and no sooner have the
clouds rolled away than we see that many a mighty
gorge and chasm and ravine have been purified; that
the atmosphere has become refreshed, the meadows
moistened, the valleys verdant. And when, after a
little while, we again withdraw the curtain of history,
and observe this present war-cloud rolling over the
mountains of human corpses—but as a thunderstorm
that is passed—it will all form the great black back-
ground which will give strength and tone to the high
light and colour of the great panoramic scene of the
future —a veritable millennium —a kingdom of heaven
upon earth.
Your sorrow shall be turned into joy. This brings
us to a simple and concrete consideration of the
dominating principle of nature, that of “Polarity”;
and the law with which we ai:£ to deal is one of
stupendous import, utmost gravity, and cannot be
exaggerated. Everything has poles. Everything is
dual. Everything is constituted of a pair of opposites.
These opposites are such as joy and sorrow, good and
evil, heat and cold, light and darkness, noise and silence,
large and small. Between the two poles, positive and
negative, there is a constant swinging from one extreme
to the other, like the measured motion of a pendulum.
There is an unceasing rise and fall, high tide and low
tide, action and reaction.


Thus throughout Nature there is a constant com-
pensation, a continual “balancing up” of force. Every
joy brings its sorrow, and every sorrow its joy. The
measure of the swing of the pendulum in one direction
will determine the measure in the opposite direction.
We see sometimes the sudden transition from intense
love to intense hatred, and vice versa. That transition
which on a Palm Sunday will cheer its Favourite into
the Holy City, and five days afterwards shout Him to
the Gross. We saw what the great drought meant to
our farmers—the poorest season Victoria has ever
experienced; and the following year’s rains raised them
the most abundant harvest Victoria has ever realised.
And now, in coming to the application of this great
principle, we recollect that history has always been
marked with periods of peace and war, war and peace,
until, at last, war lias reached its climax. Universal
war! the greatest vortex of stress and strife and struggle
this world has ever known / And I say with all the power
God Almighty has given me there must be, there will
be, a corresponding reaction. As surely as day follows
night, as surely as the receding tide returns, as surely
as summer follows winter, we shall soon enter a con-
scious living realisation of universal peace—the most
tj'anscendenv peace this world has ever known —never to
return to war, for the great fact of facts is that the
world has already been engulfed in it all, and the positive
always neutralises the negative, the higher controls
the lower.
This great truth is rapidly becoming more and more
recognised, and now, when men and women are plunged
into the wild chaos of a lime like this, when the very
sun seems blotted out of the heavens, there is an ever-
increasing awakening to the consciousness that the
whole atrocious catastrophe will prove to be the mighty
moving and moulding force of the universe, that by it
birth may be given to ever-widening circles of beauty
and power which will uplift mankind beyond its fondest
imagination, creating the wider vision and the vaster
and more splendid activities upon which the race and
individual alike will enter.
Moreover, I do not believe, but I know, that this
world-war is but a logical and necessary development;
that these dark days are the prophecy of a new day just


dawning; that this partial evil is universal good. There
is thus truth in Napoleon’s saying, “Civilisation some-
times gets a lift on the powder-cart!”
History has always been marked with advances
and retrogressions! A moral retrogression has marked
the last three years! Thank God, the receding tide has
about reached its limit. The returning wave will carry
humanity further God ward than it has ever been before!
To quote President Lincoln, “It is quite possible that
God’s purpose in a war is something different from the
purpose of either party; and yet the human instru-
mentalities, working just as they do, are of the best
adaptation to effect this purpose.”
In the words of the late Mr. Gladstone, “I think of
Jesus as the one central hope for our poor wayward
race.” He alone opens the fountain of Divine Life within
men, which is the source of the highest and truest
religion. This word “religion” is made up of two
Latin words, “re” and “ligio,” to bind back; and,
therefore, true religion means to bind humanity back
to God.
“Ring in the valiant man and free,
The larger heart, the kindlier hand;
Ring out the darkness of the land,
Ring in the Christ that is to be.”
The Christ, in His simple, open-sky, hillside mes-
sages, taught that self-sacrifice was essentially the
first, the foremost, the highest law of life; and know
this, O disciple, there is more self-sacrifice in the world
to-day than has ever been dreamed of in the past.
Then, when you gaze upon the seeming chaotic con-
dition of the race, remember that the Infinite looks upon
not the actions, but upon the heart, the intention, the
motive. Try to think of it all as one of the great “grow-
ing pains” of the transition from the lower to the higher
plane of life, from the Adamic to the Ghristly conscious-
ness; for, despite all that puny pessimists parley,
they can no more reverse the progress of the human
race than they can crush back the soaring eagle into the
confines of the egg; and in that fair future we shall
realise these secrets which now we see “as through a
glass darkly.”
I have sometimes indulged my imagination by
supposing i beheld the morning sun arise, and
nature appearing in all her glory, but every human


countenance sad and looking sorrowful, revealing
hearts of heaviness; a face is blotted by weeping because
a soldier bids his lover a last good-bye; a family is
drowned in tears because the son and heir is on final
leave; great regiments of infantry reluctantly, but
bravely, return to the firing-line; millions of mothers
stand in stolid grief or wild frenzy, and desolation
darkens the earth. Suddenly, in a moment,
PEACE IS PROCLAIMED!
Like lightning the news flashes over the whole planet!
The good tidings of great joy fill the earth! Gladness
spreads from heart to heart like a fire in a dry forest!
The effect is electrical! All belligerency immediately
ceases! The soldier drops his gun to shake the hand
of an enemy; the troopship half-way to its destination
returns home; and the lad on final leave never sees the
camp again. Every life becomes the incarnation of
exquisite bliss, speechless ecstasy, ceaseless delight;
every countenance the irradiation of happiness unspeak-
able! An old man’s features light up like those of a boy!
Ten thousand lame leap for joy! All business instantly
comes to a standstill! The churches are thronged;
and rising into the divine atmosphere of the Doxology,
overflowing hearts involuntarily burst forth in a manner
excelling all other occasions, as the sun exceeds all other
stars:
‘Praise God, from Whom all blessings flow;
Praise Him, all creatures here below;
Praise Him above, ye heavenly host;
Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.”
Then shall the Spirit of the Living God, which is in the
universe as our soul is in our body, emerge and dominate
the minds and hearts of men, fulfilling the promise:
“All the ends of the earth shall remember and return
unto the Lord; and of the increase of His government
and peace, there shall be no end.”
But why, it may be asked, has not this sublime
state of existence been brought about ages ago ? The
answer is plain. God is in no immediate haste. He
takes months to ripen an apple, a hundred years to
grow an oak tree, a million years to make a ton of coal,
countless aeons to create an ideal humanity; but,
nevertheless, we are gradually evolving from a lower to


a higher, and eventually from the material to the
spiritual plane. Here we have the solution of the
knottiest problem of the present. Indeed, we are on
the eve of entering upon “a new heaven and a new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness.” We stand upon the
threshold of that “spiritual temple whose builder and
maker is God.” There is a Divine Hand leading us
right up to that grand ideal so finely voiced by
Tennyson;—
“One God, one law, one element,
And one far-off divine event.
To which the whole creation moves.”
The supreme period in the life of every nation has
crowned its fighting period. Israel and her emancipa-
tion, Greece and her memories of Marathon, Scotland
and her Covenanters, England and her Commonwealth,
France and her Revolution, the United States and her
Civil War, Japan and her resistance of the encroach-
ments of Russia. The mammoth monuments of our
entire Christian civilisation stand in resplendent glory
on the sacred soil where a thousand battles have been
fought for the progress of truth and righteousness.
And this, the most furious carnage of all, is speedily
forming a firm foundation for the erection of the great
shrine of universal brotherhood.
This will be the last war the earth will see. The
heroes who have laid down their lives will have made a
way for the state of civilisation that in times of peace
would have taken hundreds of years to bring about
that longed-for time
“When the war-drum throbs no longer,
And the battle-flag is furled
In the parliament of man—
The Federation of the World.”
Healing peace shall fall like a sweet benediction upon
the torn and scarred world ; “the night of weeping shall
end in joyful morn,” and “sorrow and sighing shall flee
away.” Therefore, in the meantime, for God’s sake,
for humanity’s sake, for your own sake, take the attitude
of cheeriness, always looking on the bright side, rather
than the blue, determined to hold yourself in an opti-
mistic, never-down-in-the-mouth, but courage-always-
up attitude of mind and heart, through faith in the
Infinite Source of life and power which is back of all,
for you are now well assured that there are better sides


to this war than Its photographers can show, its drama-
tists imitate, or its pessimists comment upon.
In conclusion. But a short time ago I spent a few
days in a rural part of this country, and one morning
at daybreak I beheld the soft, silvery, and golden light
arising from beyond the horizon of mountains, and
Stealing through the dewy stillness from its unseen
source. When, presently, nimble cloudlets in profusion
veiled the glowing sky, and the dark pall of night seemed
again thrown over hill and valley; but only for a little
while, for soon the effulgent rays of the sun streamed
forth; the clouds were painted golden and crimson;
animated beings quitted their wonted repose; and all
nature began to stir. But, lo! again the landscape was
shadowed by gloom ; a great ugly black cloud was
wafted towards the horizon, and darkness hung over
the earth, and even the birds ceased their twitter-
ing—until—all at once the sun arose—blazed out in all
his glory—poured his beams down upon all nature’s
widespread loveliness. Day had dawned !
There is a close analogy between this and another
day-dawn. The primitive Christians of the New Testa-
ment believed in the sudden establishment of an ideal
Commonwealth upon earth. This was how they under-
stood the Lord’s prayer: “Thy kingdom come, Thy
will be done on earth as it is in heaven.’’ They were
watchers waiting for the morning. But many a nimble
cloudlet flecked their mental horizon, and they, in turn,
escaped from their bodies without ever seeing the
inauguration of the reign of righteousness and universal
peace.
Three years ago this world was a different world
to what it is now; all was growing bright and sunshiny;
men even talked of universal federation, but a great
war-cloud has overshadowed the earth with its dark-
some gloom. But your sorrow shall he turned into
joy , for the darkest hour is that which immediately
precedes the dawn —coming events cast their shadows
before —and soon the Great Sun of Righteousness shall
arise with healing in His wings, dissipating the clouds,
and piercing the gloom, till all animated beings bask
eternally in the cloudless sunshine of love, forever
surrounded by the balmy atmosphere of peace .
Food & Son, Printers, Drummond Street, Cariton. (7457)
