

fill 6 V <ifO
k Where “EMPIRE” PRODUCTIONS
are Made
EMPIRE WORKS CO
57-59 GEORGE ST. (North)
SYDNEY
P
&
CO
rN
co
vn


ENLARGEMENTS on
EMPIRE PAPER.
If you have no time to make
your own enlargements, it will
repay you to send your small
negatives to us to enlarge for you.
Enlargements show all the beauty
and detail not visible in the small
print.
PRINTS on
EMPIRE PAPER
Developing and Printing are also
special features of our business. 1 *^
So in the event of your being too
busy to finish your own photo-
graphs, you can send them to us
to develop and print for you.
OUR STAFF ARE EXPERTS
Send for our special Price List for this work
HARRINGTONS Ltd,
Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Auckland
Perth : A. L. TILLY, Agent


Empire Papers
As a prefatory note to this little booklet, it may be of
interest to readers to know something of the
Empire works where the “ Empire Productions”
are manufactured.
Photographic specialities bearing the “ Empire ” trade
mark need no introduction to the colonial photographic
fraternity. They have been steadily gaining in popu-
larity for many years, and it is fairly safe to say that
" Empire ” papers for Bromide and Gaslight printing and
enlarging are known to almost every photographer—
professional and amateur—throughout Australasia.
" Empire ” specialities are made under the most favour-
able conditions conducive to the very highest quality of
product.
The most approved methods of manufacture, together
with a perfect machinery plant and expert supervision,
ensure evenness and uniformity of quality in the coating,
drying and cutting processes, all very important factors
in the manufacture of high-class photographic printing
papers, etc.
With such facilities at hand it is small wonder that
“ Empire ” papers, etc., have reached such a state of
perfection, and rank, as they do, among the best Bromide
and Gaslight Papers of the present day.
ON THE SELECTION OF A PAPER.
We are often asked the question, " Which paper shall I
use ? ” The query is rather a difficult one to answer, and
therefore the individual qualities of each grade of Empire
paper have been enumerated, and the selection left to the
good judgment of the operator.


For all classes of work Bromide and Gaslight papers are
eminently suitable, and offer great advantages in speed
of manipulation and simplicity over any other of the
known printing processes.
For winter work and for those whose time is limited to
evenings, papers which are printed by artificial light are
a great boon. The Empire Papers answer to all require-
ments. By simple development in practically any of the
well-known formulae, fine black tones may be obtained,
and the papers may subsequently be further toned to
practically any desired colour.
The various grades of paper are indexed, and may,
therefore, be readily referred to.
All Empire papers may be obtained in the form of post
cards, and the working instructions are precisely the
same as for the various papers after which they are named.
EMPIRE CORALYTE
BROMIDE PAPERS
Empire Coralyte Bromide Paper (salmon colour
packets) is made in two speeds, Rapid (H & D,
No. about 30) and Ordinary, and eight surfaces—
Glossy, Matt Smooth, Matt Rough, Velvet B, Satin,
Cream Crayon Smooth, Cream Crayon Rough, and Linen.
It is an excellent paper both for contact printing and
enlarging.
Generally speaking, the Ordinary Coralyte tends to give
vigorous results and strong contrasts, while the Rapid
grade inclines to softer results.
It is therefore obvious that bright prints may be
obtained from soft negatives if required, or vice versa.
The choice of surface is, of course, more or less a matter
of taste. The Rough Matt, Rough Cream Crayon and
Linen surfaces are suitable for large prints, portrait studies
and enlargements, and where broad effects are required.
These surfaces are particularly adapted to enlargements
which are to be subsequently “ worked up ” with stump
or crayon.


N. Pioq-O 6 b
oc_of ' s.—' Q <3
The Glossy and Smooth Matt surfaces are more suited
for contact and other work, where the utmost detail is
required.
Coralyte paper is like all other bromide papers, ex-
tremely sensitive to light. It must therefore be opened
only in the dark room. While so quickly affected by
light, Coralyte paper is not so fast as ordinary dry plates,
and it is not necessary to use a red lamp.
Plenty of yellow light may be admitted, so that the
operator may work in comfort, and for this reason most
dark-room lamps are now fitted with both red and yellow
glasses. However, it is perhaps necessary to say that
the paper should not be unduly subjected to even the
yellow light.
There are two ways of printing on bromide paper, viz.,
by contact and by enlarging. Contact printing means
printing with the sensitive paper in direct contact with
the negative, and is adopted when the print is to be the
same size as the negative. Enlarging is resorted to when
bigger prints are required.
CONTACT PRINTING.
Bromide papers are so sensitive to light that printing
by daylight is a matter of extreme difficulty, and it is
foolish to attempt to do so.
The following are the stages of Bromide printing by
contact :
Filling the printing frame (done in the dark room).
Exposing to gas, lamp or candle light.
Developing the print (done in the dark room).
Fixing the print (done in the dark room).
Washing the print.
Drying, trimming and mounting the print.
FILLING THE PRINTING FRAME.
Any frame may be used for Bromide printing, whether
the back opens or not, for inspection during printing is
both useless and unnecessary.
Only one of the needful size is wanted, as the exposure
is very short, and it is not advisable to try and do more
than one print at a time.


The frame is taken into the dark-room, the negative is
dusted and put into it, and then, in the yellow light only,
the packet of Bromide paper is opened, and a sheet taken
out and laid with its sensitive side in contact with the
gelatine side of the negative. The back of the printing
frame is put in position and fastened, and the rest of the
paper is wrapped up safely again, or put in a box away
from light. In handling Bromide paper, care must always
be taken not on any account to touch the sensitive service
with moist or dirty fingers, or the resultant print will most
certainly be marked. If the paper is not of the required
size, it should be cut with a pair of scissors, and not folded
and torn, as this also may lead to marks.
EXPOSURE.
The rapidity of Bromide paper is such that gas or lamp-
light answers excellently for printing purpose?; it is
therefore a good method of working in the evenings or
in the winter, when it is often almost impossible to get
prints in any other way.
Printing should, as far as possible, always be carried on
by the same light. If a paraffin lamp is used, then it
should always be employed at its best, i.e., with the wicks
carefully trimmed and turned up as high as possible
without smoking. If a gas jet is the light preferred, then
it must in the same way be turned up as high as go
without roaring. If the pressure is poor, the loss of light
should be allowed for when exposing : and in this connec-
tion, it is well to remember that in towns the pressure is
generally at its worst on Sunday evenings. By attention
to these points it is possible, and indeed quite easy, having
once found out what exposure a negative requires, to make
as many prints as may be wanted, either all at one time
or at intervals of months apart without wasting a single
piece of paper through under or over-printing. No other
process whatever has this advantage—an economy which
makes Bromide printing by far the cheapest of photo-
graphic methods.
The printing frame then is placed at a definite distance
from the light and the exposure made. The best distance
for the frame is 18 inches from the light, and this distance
should be measured —not guessed —and adhered to. It
is easy to make a mark on the table or wall at 18 inches
from the source of light or to tie a piece of string to the
burner with a knot at 18 inches from the flame. With
an average negative, the exposure at this distance from
an ordinary burner should be from 4 to 8 seconds ; but
as the term “ average negative is of a very loose de-
scription, one or two trials will have to be made. For
this purpose an extra strip of paper is given with each
packet of Empire Paper. It should be cut into three or


four pieces, different exposures given to each, and marked
on them in pencil, and then all. developed together. One
such experiment should be quite sufficient to give the
beginner at Bromide printing a perfectly clear idea about
the exposure required. The distance from the flame
may be varied according to the density of the negative;
printing close up decreases contrasts, while a greater dis-
tance is beneficial when printing from weak negatives, and
tends to increase contrasts.
The advantage of always working with the same light,
and printing at the same distance is that when once the
exposure of a negative has been determined, the number
of seconds may be written in one corner with a pencil,
and when another print is wanted it may be made straight
away, with the certainty that the exposure is correct.
After a certain amount of experience, however, most
workers can tell at a glance the approximate exposure
required by a negative, and not the least important
feature of Empire Papers is extreme latitude in exposure.
DEVELOPING THE PRINT.
This, of course, must be done in the dark-room. The
exposed paper is taken from the printing frame, or, if an
enlargement, from the enlarging apparatus—both contact
prints and enlargements are from this stage onwards
treated in the same way —and laid face upwards in a
clean dish.
If the prints are small ones, say, up to and including
10 x 8 ins., the developer may be poured straight on to the
paper without first wetting it in water. For larger prints
than this it is best to allow the print to soak for a minute
in clean water, to pour this off and drain it for a moment,
and then to flow the developer over immediately. While
in the water the print should be examined to see that it is
wetted all over, and that there are no air bubbles clinging
to its surface. This preliminary wetting is designed to
prevent air bubbles, which, if occurring during develop-
ment, would produce an innumerable number of small
white spots in the prints. With the large sizes it is a
good plan to rub the surface gently with a tuft of cotton
wool as soon as the developer is applied, but with little
prints, as a rule, it is best tb see that they are evenly
covered with developer, and not to meddle further with
them.
Some workers prefer to hold the paper in a half-hoop,
with the sensitive side outwards, dry, and, beginning at
one end, rapidly immerse the paper face downwards in
the developer. The whole is then quickly reversed, and
bubbles, if any, removed with the bare fingers. This is an
excellent method for prints up to and including 15 x 12.
The only precaution necessary is to be careful that no
hypo is on the fingers.


The developer being poured on, the dish is rocked gently,
so as to keep the liquid moving over the surface of the
print. If the exposure has been correct, the image will
make its appearance in a few seconds, the actual time
depending upon the strength of the developer and its
temperature. Over-exposure makes the image appear
much quicker than it should do ; with under-exposure the
picture is very slow in appearing, and will lack strength.
In these respects Bromide paper resembles the ordinary
plate used for making negatives, and anyone who has
developed a few negatives will have no difficulty, when
taking up Bromide printing, in recognising at a glance,
under or over exposure.
The same developer may be used for six or even a dozen
prints in succession, but it should not be employed when
it becomes very slow in action, or the tones of the print
will not be good.
No attempt must be made in developing prints to
correct errors in exposure. The solution must be poured
on as aforementioned, and if the exposure is wrong, then
another print must be made. If the exposure is right,
development will be complete in something less than two
minutes. With good negatives and correct exposure
there is little likelihood of over-development, as the action
of the liquid seems to stop almost entirely when the image
is fully brought out. This is especially the case with
Amidol. This stoppage of development may be taken
as an indication that the process is finished, but should not
be relied on to the extent of leaving the print in the de-
veloper too long, or the whites of the picture will be
degraded.
When the print is judged to be fully developed—and it
is well to remember that in the light of the dark-room
it will look darker than it will in daylight when finished —
it is placed straight in the fixing bath without washing,
or, if preferred, a slight rinse may be given. On no
account should more than 15 seconds elapse between the
print leaving the developer and reaching the hypo bath.
DEVELOPERS.
With the exception of Pyro, nearly all developers are
suitable for Empire Bromide papers. Amidol, however,
gives perhaps the best results.
Amidol Developer.
Amidol 50 grains 3 grammes
Sodium sulphite (cryst.).. 650 ~ 40 ~ •
Potassium bromide .. 10 ~ 0.75 ~
Water .. .. .. 1 pint 500 c.c.


For those who prefer to use Amidol without Potassium
Bromide, the following will give excellent results :—
Amidol
30 grains 2 grammes
Sodium sulphite (cryst.)..
300 „ 20
Water
10 oz. 300 c.c.
If Anhydrous (or dry) Sodium Sulphite is used, half the
above quantity will suffice.
It is often recommended to keep a stock solution oj
sodium sulphite by itself, and to take some of this when
wanted and add the Amidol to it. Long experience shows
that this will not do, as Amidol when used with stale
sulphite solution develops very slowly, and there is a
great loss of brilliancy in the resulting prints—a result
for which the manufacturer often gets the blame. The
developer given above should therefore be mixed up as
directed and used within three days of mixing, and pre-
ferably at the time of mixing.
A single solution developer which keeps indefinitely,
is non-staining and is suitable for plates, films and
Bromide and gaslight papers, is the following :
Mexol-Hydrokinone Developer.
Metol .. . . ~ 50 grains 3 grammes
Hydrokinone .. ..40 ~ 2.4 ~
Sodium sulphite (cryst.)..
Potassium bromide
Sodium carbonate (cryst.)
Water, up to
40 „ 2.4
500 „ 30
25 „ 1.87
500 „ 30
20 oz. 500 c.c.
The Metol must be dissolved in water first, and then the
other ingredients in the order named. The solution may
be used half strength for Coralyte paper.
Empire Amidol and Metol-Hydrokinone Cartridges are
compounded to the preceding formulae, and are strongly
recommended. Empire “ Special ” Developer Powders
(3d. pkts.) and Harrington’s “ Perfect ” Developer
(6d. and Is. pkts.) also give excellent results.
For those who prefer a concentrated liquid developer,
requiring dilution with water only, for instant use,nothing
excels Harrington’s One Solution Developer in Is. bottles.
Whatever developer is used, it should be remembered
that the print becomes flatter and more of a brownish or
greenish colour the more Bromide there is present in the
developer. A weaker or more highly-restrained developer
than those given, with a full exposure yields a softer and
greyer result. Vigorous images with good, rich blacks can
only be obtained by giving a short but sufficient exposure,
and developing with a strong, but slightly-restrained
developer, such as those given above.


The fixing bath
recommended is made up as follows ; —
Hypo
4 ounces
100 grammes
Water
1 pint
500 c.c.
4
Acid Fixing Bath.
Hvpo
4 ounces
100 grammes
Potassium meta-bisulphite 200 grams
13
Water
.. .. • • 1pint
500 c.c.
FIXING AND WASHING BROMIDE PRINTS.
If preferred, the following excellent acid hypo bath may
be employed :
There are other more elaborate methods of making up
an acid fixing bath, but none are so simple and easily
prepared as this, nor are they more effective. The water
may be warmed to make solution take place more quickly,
but it must not be hot, or the potassium metabisulphite
will have its power greatly reduced. The bath should be
made an hour or two before use, and must not be em-
ployed until it is quite cold. This hypo bath does not
discolour like a plain hypo solution does ; but it should
not be kept from day to day. Proper fixing is essential
both for the purity of the prints and to ensure their per-
manence.
Insufficient fixing is responsible for more spoilt prints
than any other process, and is one for which there is
absolutely no excuse, since six pounds of hypo may be
bought for a shilling.
The following points should have careful attention :
The same dish should not be used at one time for
developing, and at another fixing.
On no account should any hypo be allowed to get
near the developer or Bromide paper before
the proper time.
A freshly mixed hypo bath, by reason of its low
temperature, is likely to cause blisters, there-
fore it should be prepared some time before use.
The print must not be exposed to any light except
that of the dark-room until it is fixed.
To ensure complete fixation, the prints should be
immersed face downwards ; they should not
be allowed an any account to float on top
of the hypo bath, otherwise discolouration is
liable to occur.


After the prints are fixed they must be washed. Many
people pay little attention to the sufficient fixing of the
prints, and devote a great deal of time to washing them.
The reverse is better, although neither process should be
shirked. Prolonged washing is a mistake ; what is re-
quired is to get as much as possible of the hypo out as
quickly as it can conveniently be done. For this there
is nothing like running water, and there are lots of washers
made in which prints may be washed without attention.
It it is to be done in a dish, then what has been said about
fixing applies with equal force to washing; the prints must
not be allowed to overlap unless they are kept in continual
motion. Consequently for small prints, if there are
many of them, a big basin will be found more suitable
than the flat photographic dish.
A washer, which works admirably, may be extemporised
out of any big basin by taking a piece of thin muslin or
net, standing the basin containing the prints in the middle
of it in the sink, and drawing up the edges of the muslin
to the sides of the basin, and tying the cloth round the
tap A little arrangement will show the best position
for. a small stream of water from the tap to fall so as to
give a constant circulation to the water, and so keep the
prints apart and moving. The muslin allows the water
to flow away, but prevents the prints from washing out
of the vessel.
Washing performed in basins or dishes in which the
water overflows from the top must be done with the water
constantly in motion, otherwise the hypo solution sinks
to the bottom and does not flow away as it should. If the
water flows out of a hole or syphon at the bottom of the
vessel, as in most of the ready-made washers so much
motion need not be given to the water, becauses the hypo
solution passes away more easily. Whichever plan is
adopted, washing should be finished in 30 minutes if the
water has been running all the time, or has been con-
stantly changed, and the prints and dish drained between
each change.
DRYING, TRIMMING AND MOUNTING BROMIDE
PRINTS.
‘
When the washing is quite finished, the prints must be
taken out one at a time and dried. The simplest way
of drying if a few small prints have to be dealt with, is to
mop off the superfluous moisture from back and front
with good photographic blotting-paper or a clean cloth,
and then to lay them face upwards on a clean sheet of
paper in a place free from dust. They must not be
allowed to dry between the blotting paper, or—owing to


their surface being composed of gelatine—they will stick
to the paper, and it will be impossible to separate them
from it, unless the whole is put back into water and soaked
for some time.
Large prints are most conveniently dried either by
putting them over a line or hanging them by one corner
by means of clips. A number of small prints may be
dealt with by running a pin through one corner of each
and sticking it into the edge of a shelf, or a piece of wood
supported at its ends, so that the prints hang and drip
and dry away from contact with anything. They dry
quicker in a warm room in this way than in any other.
Wherever prints are dried there must be no fluff or
dust about, or it will adhere to the surface and spoil them.
No attempt should -be made to dry prints by heat.
In dealing with a large number of prints the whole may
be washed and dried without handling as follows : —With
a strong needle and stout thread run carefully through
a corner of each print until fifty or more are so treated.
Tie one end of the thread to the tap of the household
bathroom and fasten a tack at the opposite end, to which
tie the other end of the thread. Replace the plug of the
bath with a cork, through which has been bored a small
hole. Work out each print an inch or so from its neigh-
bour, and fill up the bath, adjusting the flow of the water
suitably. After half an hour allow the bath to run dry,
leaving the prints suspended. When quite dry they may
be collected, but need not be touched before.
Bromide prints are trimmed after drying. This opera-
tion can be done in the usual way with a sharp knife and
a glass cutting shape, or, in the case of large prints, with
a steel straight-edge. Any of the ordinary forms of print-
trimmer can be used, and the process calls for no special
remarks.
For mounting, few adhesives are better than ordinary
starch paste, prepared by stirring a teaspoonful of sfarch
in a tablespoonful of water to a cream and carefully adding
boiling water, with constant stirring, until the mixture
jellifies. When cool it is ready for use. This paste, how-
ever, does not keep at all well, and for those who are
constantly mounting a few prints, Harrington’s Mountant
in 4 oz. or 8 oz. pots is far preferable.
This is always ready for use, keeps well, and may be
thinned with water if desired.
The dry trimmed prints to be mounted will need to be
placed in water and the samples blotted off again. One
must have at hand a pile of clean pieces of paper, and the
first print, when blotted off, is laid face downwards on
the top. Using a stiffish brush, or the fingers, the back


of the photograph is brushed over with some of the
mountant, taking care not to apply too much. It is then
placed quickly in position on the mount, a clean piece of
blotting-paper is put over it, and the whole is run over
with a roller squeegee to press the print into contact with
the mount and to expel any air-bubbles. The rolling
must not be done violently, but just enough pressure
exercised to get the print down smoothly. The blotting-
paper is then removed and the mounted print put aside
to dry.
GLOSSY SURFACE BROMIDE PRINTS.
This paper yields prints with a surface resembling
that of P.O.P. without any further treatment whatever.
Owing to its glossy surface it is liable to surface markings
or “ streaks,” which may present themselves, and which
it is desirable to remove before mounting. These marks
may be removed entirely by gently rubbing the surface
with a tuft of cotton-wool while the print is wet.
If a highly-glazed surface is required, then the glossy
paper may be dried upon glass or a ferrotype plate in the
way usually employed with P.O.P. The waxing solution
is best made by dissolving 60 grains of beeswax cut up
into shreds in 10 ounces of benzol (4 grammes in 300 c.c.).
It may be shaken at intervals for a day or so, and then
the clear solution of wax poured off into a well-corked
bottle for use.
r
The clean glass or ferrotype plate should be waxed all
over by applying a little of the above solution with a rag
or tuft of cotton-wool, and then well polished with a
clean cloth. The wet prints are laid face downwards,
squeegeed into contact, and allowed to get thoroughly
dry before attempting to remove them. If preferred, the
print may be placed in contact with the plate under water,
to ensure absence of air-bubbles, and then squeegeed.
On no account must any attempt be made to dry the
prints by heat, or a peculiar mottling will result, and it
may be difficult to remove the print from the ferrotype.
While there should be no difficulty about stripping the
prints, some workers experience trouble in getting them
off. This can be prevented entirely by drying the prints
first, and then rewetting and squeegeeing them to the
glass or ferrotype plate.
TONING BROMIDE PRINTS.
The introduction of methods of toning Bromide prints
to a rich sepia colour, in a very simple way, with a result
as permanent as the original untoned print, has greatly
extended the popularity of the process. Empire Bromide
papers yield a particularly fine colour when treated as


described below. Prints for toning must be vigorous, and
if they are a little darker than is thought best in their
untoned condition, they will be all the better afterwards.
The “ Ordinary ” and “ Rapid ” papers, both rough and
smooth, and especially cream crayon, are particularly
suitable for this process, as they possess, when finished,
a “ Carbon effect ” with very rich shadows. The process
is equally applicable to glossy prints on those on Empire
“ Artlyte ” paper, but the “ Brillyte ” paper is not suited
to this process.
For Brown or sepia tones two stock solutions are re-
quired, both of which will keep for a long while. The
first is made as follows :
Potassium ferricyanide ~ 400 grains 27 grammes
Potassium bromide .. 600 ~ 40 ~
Water .. .. . . J pint 300 c.c.
The other is made by dissolving 1 ounce of sodium sulphide
in 10 ounces of water (30 grammes in 300 c.c.). The solu-
tion should be placed in a glass flask and boiled briskly for
ten minutes and then set aside to cool. A dark-coloured
precipitate will settle at the bottom, and may be left there,
using only the clear liquid above it, which forms the stock
sulphide solution. As the boiling sulphide has a most
unpleasant smell, it is best done in the open air, or in a
room with the windows wide open. On no account should
it be done near the stock of plates or papers, nor should
they be kept anywhere where there is a risk of sulphuretted
hydrogen, which causes the smell, getting at them. This
is most important. The stock solution of sulphide keeps
indefinitely.
N.B. —Boiling is not necessary if the Sodium Sulphide
is pure, and it is far better to use the pure salt.
If preferred, the stock solution of Sulphide may be
made up with the same weight of either Ammonium Sul-
phide or Barium Sulphide, any of which will give ex-
cellent results.
The print is first immersed in—
Stock solution of ferri-
cyanide and bromide .. 1 ounce 30 c.c.
Water .. . . . . i pint 300 c.c.
In this the image will almost disappear in something under
five minutes. The print should be left in this solution
until there is no doubt that the action has gone as far as
it will. It is then rinsed in water and immersed in
Stock solution of sodium
sulphide .. .. | ounce 15 c.c.
Water .. .. ~ | pint 300 c.c.


In this the image gradually reappears, of a fine sepia
colour. It should be left until there is no doubt about
the action of the solution being complete, when it may
be washed in several changes, or in running water for a
quarter of an hour.
The sulphide solution must on no account be stronger
than that given above, or there will be a risk of the print
blistering. With this strength there is no chance of
trouble from this cause. Unless the print is properly
fixed and washed before toning, the colour will be impure
and irregular, and light patches and stains may be met
with. Prints that are delicate rather than strong should
not be toned. Enlargements on Coralyte Cream Crayon
paper are very suitable for dealing with in this way.
The finished print, after toning, may be mounted on a
stout card, and “ encaustic paste,” or a solution of wax
in turpentine, well rubbed into the print all over, wiping
as much off afterwards as is possible. This gives great
richness to the print, and is particularly suitable when
the enlargement is to be framed up close. Enlargements
so made can hardly be distinguished either in colour or
quality from the best sepia carbon prints.
TONING WITH COPPER, URANIUM, IRON.
Besides the sulphide method, very pleasant colours
ranging from a warm black to a bright crimson may be
obtained by copper toning, by what is known as Ferguson’s
process. Three stock solutions are required.
A. Neutral potassium citrate 4 ounces 100 grammes
B. Potassium ferricyanide .. 1 ounce 25 grammes
Water to . . . . .. 10 ounces 250 c.c.
C. Copper sulphate .. 1 ounce 25 grammes
/ Water 10 ounces 250 c.c.
Five ounces of A are taken and to this is added half an
ounce of B and half an ouce of C (in metric measures, 100
c.c of A, 10 c.c. of B, and 10 c.c. of C). The bromide or
gaslight print, after it has been fixed and well washed, is
dried, or, if more convenient, is treated wet. The print,
if dry, is soaked in water till it becomes limp. The wet
print is placed in the toning bath, and watched. It will
be seen to commence changing colour at once, passing
from black to warm black, brown, chocolate, and finally
red. When it reaches whatever colour is desired, it is
taken out, washed for ten minutes in several changes of
water, and is then dried.
Another series of tones from black through brown to
red, but in this case to a yellower red, may be obtained
with uranium. For this purpose the solution B (above)
will be required, and also one as follows ;
D. Uranium nitrate .. 50 grains 3 grammes
Water to .. ~ 1 ounce 30 c.c.


E. Ferric ammonium citrate \ ounce
10 grammes
Water to
10 ounces
200 c.c.
The actual toning solution is
made by mixing
Water
10 ounces
300 c.c. r
B
1 ounce
30 c.c.
E
1 ounce
30 c.c.
Nitric acid ,. ..
dram
2 c.c.
Just before toning, two drams of B, one dram of D, and
two drams of glacial acetic acid are added to ten ounces
of water. (In metric measures, 10 c.c. of B, 5 c.c. of D,
10 c.c. of acetic acid and 400 c.c. of water). The print is
toned in this exactly as described in the previous para-
graph, except that after toning to the extent desired, it
should be washed in two or three changes of dilute acetic
acid (1 part of acid to 100 of water) and then in two or
three changes of plain water, the whole washing not being
prolonged over a quarter of an hour. If the washing takes
too long, the image will be weakened.
Blue tones may be obtained by toning with iron. In
this case, besides the solution B mentioned above, the
following will be required
The prints are toned in this exactly as described above,
and after toning may be washed for ten minutes or a
quarter of an hour, and are then finished. In this process
and in the uranium one, if the whites of the print are not
clear by the time the washing is ordinarily finished, it
may be carried on longer until they are seen to be clear,
always remembering that if the washing is too prolonged,
the print will be weakened.
There seems to be some doubt that these toning pro-
cesses, or at least the uranium and iron processes, leave a
print which is not so permanent as the untoned print on
“ Coralyte ” Bromide or “ Artlyte ” Gaslight Paper, or
as the sulphur-toned print. The copper toning process
seems reasonably permanent; but as prints by either of
these methods are more easily attacked by an impure
atmosphere than others, it is well, if permanence is re-
quired, to stick to the untoned prints, or to sulphur toning.
Still as these processes are oftpn used, they are given here
for what they are worth. There is little to fear if the
prints are to be properly framed.
CLEARING AND REDUCING BROMIDE PRINTS.
It is sometimes necessary to clear up and brighten a
Bromide print. It may have surface markings or yellow
stains from some defect in the manipulations, or it may
have been slightly fogged. In such cases the following
bath will be found of great service. It should be applied


after fixing and washing, the prints being left in it until
the desired clearing has taken place, and then removed
and well washed :—-
Clearing Solution
Thiocarbamide . . 20 grains 2 grammes
Citric acid .. .. 10 ~ 1 gramme
Water to .. .. pint 400 c.c.
This hath will not work unless all traces of hypo have
been removed from the print.
LINE DRAWINGS IN PEN AND INK.
Bromide Paper will be found to be very handy for this
purpose. If we have a negative of some subject from
which we wish to make a line drawing in pen and ink, we
first make aßromide print, which after fixing and washing,
must be well hardened in an alum bath (made by dissolving
an ounce of alum in a pint of hot water). It is then
washed again and dried. This print is then gone over with
a pen, using indelible Indian ink, sold at most artists’
material shops for the use of draughtsmen. The line
drawing is made on the surface of the print with this ink,
and then, when dry, the whole of the silver image is re-
moved, either by the action of the reducer just described
and hypo, or by the following bath, which will of itself
entirely remove the image in from a quarter to half an
hour, leaving the line drawing untouched :
Thiocarbamide . . 120 grains 8 grammes
Nitric acid .. 2 drams 8 c.c.
** Water .. .. half a pint 300 c.c.
ENLARGEMENTS ON BROMIDE PAPER.
The great sensitiveness of Bromide Paper makes it
possible for enlargements to be made on it by artificial
light or by daylight with great ease. This subject is dealt
with separately on page 22.
CORALYTE BROMIDE POSTCARDS.
These are made with matt, glossy and other surfaces,
and the manipulation is in every respect the same as has
been described above, for ordinary prints. It is only
necessary, to enhance the attractiveness of the card, to
use masks which may be made by the photographer
himself, or can be purchased of photographic dealers.
The postcards are printed on the back in the usual way, so
that there is no difficulty whatever in judging the sensitive
side. The part on which the writing is to appear is masked
off, and the picture, of course, will appear, after the usual
procedure of printing, developing, etc., in the space left
for the purpose.


EMPIRE "ARTLYTE”
GASLIGHT PAPER
“ Artlyte ” Gaslight Paper (green packets) is made in
one speed only, viz., fast, and four surfaces—glossy,
matte smooth, velvet B, and satin.
It is, of course, very much slower than “ Coralyte ”
Bromide Paper—that is to say, it is much less sensitive
t 6 light. For this reason it may be safely handled in full
gaslight, provided the rays do not fall directly on the
paper. Nevertheless, the same illuminant may be used
for printing purposes, and the dishes may be quite close to
the light, but protected from the full glare with a piece
of card. There is extreme latitude in exposure, and for
good prints from average negatives it is unequalled.
Artlyte, like Coralyte, is, of course, a development paper,
the effect of exposure not being apparent when the paper
is removed from the printing frame. The formulae recom-
mended for Coralyte Paper (p. 8.) will be found excellent
for Artlyte. The general manipulation is in most respects
similar, but far easier owing to the possibility of handling
in full gaslight. The Metol-Hydrokinone formulae given
for Coralyte is highly recommended for this paper, except
that it should be used full strength, that is, undiluted,
both for the fine tones given and its excellent keeping
qualities. Messrs. Johnson & Sons’ “ Gaslight Scaloids ”
are also highly efficient, as are their other various prepara-
tions. Most of the formulae given in this little book may
be obtained in " Scaloid ” or tablet form, and any further
advice as to their use will gladly be given at any of Messrs.
Harrington’s various Branches.
The action of the developer on Gaslight Paper is some-
what different from that of Bromide Paper. The image
appears with greater rapidity and development is complete
in a much shorter space of time.
Exposure.— Little further need be said regarding
this operation. The general instructions for the manipula-
tion of Coralyte apply to Artlyte, except, as already
pointed out in this case, the whole operation may be
performed in full gaslight. The sensitive side. of the
paper may be easily determined by laying a sheet of the
paper on the hand, when it will immediately begin to
curl slightly with the sensitive side inwards.
S Negatives should be exposed at an even distance from
the source of light. Six or eight inches is a good distance
with negatives up to 6 x 4, but for larger sizes the distance


Amidol . . .. .. 50 grains 3 grammes
Sodium Sulphite (cryst.) . 500 ,, 30 ,,
Potassium Bromide .. 2 ,, 0.12 gramme
Water .. .. .. 10 oz. 275 c.c.
(This developer gives pure bluish-black tones, but will
only keep for about three days.) For softer and more
greyish effects, dilute with an equal bulk of water.
The above developers may be used repeatedly until
slowness is apparent, and while the prints are free from
stain. It is hardly necessary to say the solution should
then be discarded and fresh made up.
After development, the prints should be transferred
without washing, or, if preferred, after a slight rinse, to
Hypo .. . . 4 oz. 100 grammes
Water .. .. 20 oz. (1 pint) 500 c.c.
should be increased to avoid unequal illumination. The
exposure must be determined as already described for
Coralyte, using the test pieces enclosed in each packet.
With incandescent gas, one half of the exposure necessary
with ordinary gas will suffice, while with an oil lamp three
to five times the exposure may be required.
The latter method is somewhat slow, and for those who
cannot obtain gas, magnesium ribbon is recommended.
This yields an extremely actinic light, and half an inch
will generally be sufficient for each exposure. The
magnesium ribbon must be held in a pair of pliers or some-
thing similar while being burnt; on no account must it be
held in the bare fingers. Exposure may also be made by
subdued daylight, but as this is so variable, it is not
recommended.
Amidol developer is sometimes employed at full strength
for plates, films, and bromide and gaslight papers, but
most other developing agents are used at double strength
for gaslight papers.
The Metol-Hydrokinone formula, already given for
Coralyte, yields excellent results with Artlyte, but perhaps
the following Amidol formula will be found to give better
results than that given for the Bromide paper. This it
will be noticed, is almost double strength : —-
If kept submerged and moving, fixation is complete in
five minutes. Prints must not be left in a mass, or par-
tially floating on the hypo ; either discrepancy will pro-
bably lead to stains. Wash as directed for Coralyte.
TONING ARTLYTE PAPER.
While the methods given for toning Coralyte Bromide
Paper are equally applicable to Artlyte Gaslight Paper,
the following method is far preferable, if sepia or brown
tones are required. The distinctive emulsions required
for gaslight papers do not so readily lend themselves to the
sulphide method of toning as do the emulsions of Bromide
papers.
19


Sodium Hyposulphite ..
. .. 2 oz.
Alum (powdered)
Joz.
Water
20 oz.
■4$
HYPO-ALUM BATH.
Dissolve the hypo in boiling water, add the alum and stir
occasionally until dissolved. A slight precipitate will
form, but this must not be filtered off. The bath should
be well stirred before use, and be made up at least a day
before it is required. It improves with use and age, and
may be replenished from time to time as necessary.
The temperature of the bath should run from 120° to
150° Fahr. The dish containing it should be kept hot by
placing it over a gas or oil stove. It is preferable to stand
the dish containing the toning solution in a larger dish
of hot water, with two thin strips of wood under it to
keep it off the bottom. This gives a more equable
temperature and prevents uneven toning. Enamelled
iron dishes are very suitable for this work.
As this toning bath has a reducing action the prints
should be deeper than the final results are required,
and the more they are to be toned the deeper should
they be printed.
The prints should be fixed, thoroughly washed, then
alumned and after a slight further washing be placed in
the toning solution. The solution should not be too
hot when the prints are first placed in it or the film may
be injured, but the temperature may be raised as soon
as they are in.
The prints should be kept covered by the solution and
the dish rocked occasionally to avoid uneven toning. t*
The alum bath can be dispensed with if the prints
are put into a cold toning solution and allowed to soak
for about five minutes before the solution is heated.
Toning takes from ten minutes to an hour according
to the temperature of the bath and the tone desired.
A cold bath would need as many hours as a hot one would
minutes.
When toning is completed it is advisable to transfer
the prints to tepid water, or a tepid solution of alum,
for a few minutes previous to washing them in cold
water, or each print may be cooled by exposing it for
a few minutes to the air.
Any deposit on the prints should be sponged off before
they are placed to dry. ,
The tones procurable by this method are sometimes
improved if the whites are slightly tinted by soaking in
a cold solution of coffee after toning.
In addition to the above method, excellent tones may
be obtained on Artlyte by the Copper, Uranium and
Iron methods already suggested for Coralyte,


( Buff-coloured Packets.)
Brillyte Gaslight Paper is a comparatively recent intro-
duction, but is already, perhaps, the most popular of the
Empire papers. While quite suitable for normal nega-
tives, it is the paper par excellence for thin or fiat nega-
tives' and yields really marvellous results from these.
It is largely used in Harrington’s Printing and Develop-
ing Departments, and gives prints of exceptional crispness
and brilliance ; hence its name.
Brillyte paper is made in one grade only and six sur-
faces—Glossy, Matte Smooth, Cream Crayon Rough,
Cream Crayon Smooth, Satin, and Velvet B. The paper
is particularly well suited for reproductions of line draw-
ings, plans, photo-micrographs, and all other subjects
where detail and brilliancy are assets. With full exposure
to a strong light, however, beautifully soft effects may
be obtained, and, therefore, it must not be imagined that
Brillyte is adapted for detail work and bright results
only. It is a paper which must be tried to be properly
appreciated.
The manipulation and general treatment is precisely
the same as for Artlyte Gaslight Paper, except that the
exposure necessary is about double. It may, therefore,
be handled with impunity in full gaslight, and unless
foolishly exposed to the light will be absolutely free from
any trace of fog. Abrasion marks, so prevalent on most
gaslight papers, are generally absent on Brillyte, and
when they are found can generally be traced to faulty
manipulation, or unsuitable developing solutions.
The various formulae given or recommended for Artlyte
are equally suitable for Brillyte Paper, and it should be
remembered that stronger solutions are necessary for
gaslight papers than for bromide papers, otherwise grey
tones will result. The paper may be toned in a similar
manner to Artlyte.
As with Artlyte, better tones will be obtained on this
paper with the hvpo-alum bath than by using the sulphide
method. In hot weather many operators are troubled
with blisters, and these are practically always caused by
variations in the temperature of the working solutions,
washing, etc.


If prints are placed in an alum bath, after fixing and
slight rinsing in still (not running) water, frilling, etc., will
not trouble the worker in the slightest. The above re-
marks on this evil (and evil it undoubtedly is) are equally
applicable to Coralyte and Artlyte papers, but are given
here because Brillyte is more largely used by beginners
than by advanced workers.
The remarks for washing, drying, trimming, mounting,
etc., are exactly as given for Coralyte paper.
Brillyte Post Cards.— These are treated exactly the
same as the paper.
Enlarging on “EMPIRE”
BROMIDE PAPER
0 = 0
V
The popularity of the hand camera has led to the
production every year of thousands, it might
almost be said of millions, of small negatives.
Many of these are capable of yielding first-rate enlarge-
ments that may be framed up and used as pictures of
considerable size, and with far greater effect than could be
obtained from little prints. Moreover, there are many
subjects that cannot by any means be taken direct on
large plates that may easily be secured with a quarter-
plate camera and subsequently enlarged.
Enlarging is simply re-photographing, only for con-
venience, certain alterations are made in the disposition
of the apparatus. The photographer knows that as he
places his camera nearer and nearer to his subject the
picture gets larger and larger on the focussing screen ;
and the camera has to be extended more and more in
order to get a sharp picture. If a small negative is
fixed up so that it is evenly illuminated from behind, and
we have a big enough camera and one that will extend
far enough, all that need be done is to set such a camera
in front of the negative, focus to the required size, and
then, instead of using a plate, to use a piece of “ Empire ”
Bromide paper, on which to make our negative of the
negative. On development this will be found to be a
positive print, just like a contact print of the same negative
—only of a larger size. This is enlarging in its simplest


form. But as, in order to get an enlarged picture, the
lens of the camera must be nearer to the object —in this
case the original negative —than the bromide paper is to
the lens, and as this latter distance may have to be
several times the focus of the lens, it is not usually con- ,
venient to employ a camera of the ordinary type for
enlarging, because it requires so great an extension, there-
fore some form of special apparatus is used.
ENLARGING BY DAYLIGHT.
The method which requires the least quantity of special
apparatus is one in which the workroom itself becomes
the camera, (shown in the above sketch). Here the neg-
ative to be enlarged is shown at N. The opening
there represents the window of the workroom, which
is blocked up completely, so that no light can
enter except through the negative. A reflector out-
side, R, is covered with white paper and so illum-
inates the negative evenly. On a table or other support
inside the room is placed the ordinary camera, with its
lens pointing into the room, while at some little distance
beyond it is fastened a drawing board, B, on which
the bromide paper is fixed.
This, it will be seen, is re-photographing, with the whole
of the darkened workroom as the camera.
The bellows of the camera, C, only serve to block out
strong light from the room, and a focussing cloth or some
similar object must be put at D to make a light-tight
joint between the back of the camera and the board
carrying the negative.' The focussing screen of the camera
is, of course, removed, focussing being effected on a piece
of white paper fastened to the easel, B.
When such an arrangement can be fixed up, this is a
very cheap and convenient way of making enlargements.
They can be made, working in this manner, every bit as
good as by any other arrangement whatsoever ; but it
means darkening an entire room carefully, and the work
can only be done in daylight.


The lens, L, may be provided with a red glass cap, which
is put on it after focussing. This allows the image on the
easel, B, to be seen clearly enough for the bromide paper
to be adjusted in the correct position, exposure being
made by taking off the red glass cap.
EXPOSURES IN DAYLIGHT ENLARGING.
As daylight is very variable, it will be found a good
plan to make it a rule always to measure with an exposure
meter the light falling on the reflector, R, as near as
possible at the time of the exposure itself. Then if this
is done, and a note is kept of the stop used and of the
negative, it is simple enough to ascertain approximately
what exposure will be needed for any other negative.
Different negatives require different exposures in
enlarging, just as they do in contact printing, according
to their density and colour. The stop value in enlarging
like this is not that which is engraved on the lens, nor
anything like it. We must measure it for the particular
exposure in hand.
For this purpose, supposing that the lens is fitted with
an Iris diaphragm, we may measure once for all the
diameter of the opening for the different gradations, a
thing which is easily done by unscrewing the lenses and
pushing into the iris, a.s far as it will go, a piece of card
cut into a V shape. We can then make a little list like
this, say ;
F/8 | inch diameter.
F/ll yx inch diameter.
F/16 J inch diameter.
F/22 inch diameter.
F/32 £ inch diameter.
This list is kept at hand when enlarging. When all is
ready for exposure, the distance from the iris of the lens,
L, to the easel, B, is measured with a tape measure, this
is then divided by the diameter of the stops, and the
answer is the real value of the stop that is being used.
An example will make this clearer. Let us suppose
that the stop in use is that marked F/22 above, and that
the distance from the iris to the easel we find on measure-
ment to be 35 inches. As F/22 has a diameter of - X 2 L - of
an inch, we divide 35 by ■&. That is to say, we multiply
35 by 11, which gives us 385, and divide this by 2, getting
192. So that under these circumstances we are -using
F/192 actually, although the stop is marked F/22.
This calculating may seem a bother, but it only takes
a minute or two, and it means preventing the waste of
a great deal of paper in trying to guess at the exposure ;
because when we have done it, and have made a correct
exposure, we have some clear data to go on. Using that


same stop, and the same negative, the exposure will then
always be strictly proportional to the time taken for the
meter paper to darken.
It is well to have a little projection, P, on the reflector,
where it will not interfere with the even lighting on the
negative, and always to put the exposure meter on that
projection when measuring the light. If the reflector
cannot be got at from the outside, which will be the case
if the work is being done in an upstairs room, a sleeve
or door may be provided in the blocking-out board at
S, so that the meter can be passed in and out.
Another example may help to make its use clearer.
Let us suppose that one day using ‘ Empire Bromide
paper and F/192, we find that the exposure meter placed
on P takes 28 seconds to darken to the standard tint,
and that with a certain negative an exposure of 6 minutes
proved to be correct. A week later we want to make
another enlargement from the same negative (or from
one identical in density and in colour), and of the same
size, and we test the light again and find that the meter
now darkens in 16 seconds. A simple proportion sum
gives us the exposure.
Six minutes is 360 seconds. We multiply the former
exposure by the latter exposure-meter-time, and divide
by the former exposure-meter-time. That is to say,
we multiply 360 xl6 = 5760, and divide this by 28—
= 206 nearly. The correct exposure under the
altered conditions is, therefore, 206 seconds, or say 3£
minutes.
Should the degree of enlargement be altered, or the
size of the stop, or both, it is easy to calculate the corre-
sponding change in exposure. We must first find out,
as described above, the new value of the stop. Then, the
exposure varies as the square of the ‘ F ” value of the
stop.
Let us continue the example. We have just seen that
under certain conditions we found that with stop F/192
the exposure was minutes. But we will suppose that
we have altered the scale of our enlargement, so that, on
working it out, we find we are no longer using F/192 but
F/150, and we want to know the corresponding exposure.
We multiply 192 by 192, getting 36,864, and 150 by
150, getting 22,500. Then we know that the exposure
under the new conditions bears the same relationship to
the exposure under the old conditions that 22,500 does
to 36,864. We can ignore all the hundreds and deal with
the thousands only. So the relative exposures are 22,000
and 36,000, or 22 and 36, or 11 and 18. Multiplying the
three and a-half minutes by 11 and dividing by 18, we
get 2 minutes 18 seconds, which would be the exposure
under the new conditions.


It is well to understand how to make these calculations,
as they are a 1 merely a matter of simple arithmetic, and
if they take a minute or so to do, r at least save the cost
of a piece of bromide paper, wasted in the attempt to
find out the proper exposure. Those who do not care to
follow this course must make a trial exposure, as will be
described later on. A strip of paper is given with each
packet of Coralyte paper for this purpose.
Before eaving this part of the subject, it should be
pointed out that it is most important to ensure the easel
being square with the negative, as otherwise the picture
will be distorted.
If the lens used is that with which the original negative
was taken, it wilFgive a satisfactory enlargement to any
size that may be required ; if not, the lens must be one
that is at least capable, in the ordinary way, of covering
a plate the size of the original negative right up to the
corners.
FIXED FOCUS DAYLIGHT ENLARGERS.
There is another kind of daylight enlarging, in which a
special enlarging apparatus is employed. This may be
adjustable to take negatives of different sizes, or to make
enlargements of different sizes, but the form usually met
with is not adjustable, but is a fixed focus arrangement,
.n section similar to the sketch shown below.
As before, N represents the
negative, L the ens, and B the
bromide paper, S being a shutter
actuated by a knob outside the
apparatus, by which the expos-
ure is effected. In its simplest
'form, there is a lid at B, and the
whole apparatus is taken into
the darkroom, a piece of
" Empire ” Bromide paper is
put inside it at B, by means of
the lid; this is then fastened,
and the apparatus is carried
out into the open air, so that
there is an unlimited view of the
sky above the negative N. The
exposure is then madejby means
of the shutter S.
In a fixed focus enlarger of this sort there is no need to
trouble about stop value ; the apparatus always works
at the same stop. So that as long as the same (or a
similar) negative is used and the same brand of paper, the
light can be measured by means of an exposure meter,
which may be stood on top of the arrangement before


exposing. If once the correct exposure is ascertained,
and the then strength of the light.known, other exposures
will be strictly in the same ratio to the time taken by
the paper in the meter to darken. The. rule is to multiply
the known correct exposure time by the latter time taken
for the meter paper to darken, and divide by the time
taken by the meter paper to darken when the known
correct exposure was made. The result is the exposure
under the fresh conditions.
The fixed focus enlarger is the simplest form of en-
larging arrangement that can be obtained, and except
that daylight is almost a necessity with it, it has no
drawbacks beyond the limitation of size. The greatest
number of enlargements, however, are made by means of
an enlarging lantern.
ENLARGING WITH A LANTERN.
An enlarging lantern is simply a magic lantern, in which
special care has been taken to prevent light leaking out
into the room in which it is being used. The negative is
put into the position occupied by the slide, and then this
being sharply focussed on the easel, the lens is capped
with the red glass cap, and a piece of “ Empire ” Bromide
paper is pinned on the board and the exposure is made.
The condenser is an important part of an enlarging
lantern. It bends aside the , rays of light so that they
pass through the negative and also through the lens. A
large condenser is a very heavy and costly thing, so that
this limits the use of the enlarging lantern. It is only
for quarter-plate or 5x4 negatives that it enjoys any
great popularity, though here and there half-plate or
even whole-plate lanterns are in use. For quarter-plates
the lantern is as convenient a form of apparatus as can
be wished. A form of lantern is made in which instead
of a condenser behind the negative there is a reflector
lit by one or two incandescent gas lamps so fixed that
no light from them strikes directly on the negative. This
apparatus works very well, but exposures are much
longer than when a condenser is used.
The illuminant may be an oil lamp, incandescent gas,
an incandescent mantle and spirit burner, acetylene,
electric lamp, electric incandescent, electric arc, or the
limelight. Any of these will be found suitable, and the
choice is simply a matter of convenience, and should have
no effect on the quality of the enlargement. Properly
managed, any one of these will give just as good results
as j:any other. Perhaps the most convenient forms are
incandescent gas, where gas is available, and a mantle
and spirit burner where it is not.


The action of the condenser is to bend aside the rays of
light so that after passing through the negative they
all pass through the lens, generally more or less through
the middle of the lens. Consequently it may happen
that the lens can be stopped down without cutting off any
of the light passing through it. An important point for
the enlarger to remember is, namely, that when a con-
denser is used, the effect of stopping down on exposure
no longer follows the rules that apply when using the
camera in the ordinary way. If the stop is altered, there
is only one satisfactory way of ascertaining its effect upon
exposure, and that is by a trial exposure.
In setting up an enlarging lantern for work the first
thing to be done after lighting up is to put the negative
in position and settle the size of the picture on the easel.
This decides the position of the different parts, and it is
only a waste of time to attend to the even illumination
of the picture until this has been done. When the
negative has been focussed on the easel it is taken out
again, and the position of the light altered, until the
screen shows a perfectly even illumination. Some forms
of enlarging lantern have the position of the light fixed
once for all, but in most there is scope for a little adjust-
ment to get the best result. The negative is then put
back and focussed as sharply as possible, the red cap is
put on the lens and the exposure made.
The processes that have been described up to the
present are those that differ according to the form of
enlarging apparatus that is in use ; the following apply
to all enlargements on bromide paper, unless otherwise
stated.
Focussing should be done on a sheet of white paper the
same size as the piece of bromide paper to be exposed, so
that there may be no doubt about the selection of exactly
the part of the original negative that is to appear in the
enlargement.
It will be found that little pinholes or specks in the
negative are the best guides to the sharpness or other-
wise of the focussing, because the details of the original
may not be quite sharp, but the edges of a pinhole are
sure to be.
It is a mistake to use any smaller stop than is necessary
to get the required definition. It not only prolongs ex-
posure, but with some forms of illumination it makes the
lighting uneven.
In enlarging either with the camera in the first described
method, or with an enlarging lantern, the photographer
can stand beside the sheet of paper on the easel and by
means of cardboard can shade parts of the picture so as


to let the rest have longer exposure and so come darker.
This- is a very valuable power, and a great deal can be
done to improve the result, with comparatively little
skill. The card must be held well away from the face of
the paper on the easel or must be kept moving, to prevent
its edge from showing as a hard line. If all but a small
piece of the picture is to be darkened in this way, a ball
of cotton wool may be fastened to the end of a wire, and
used to shade the one part that is not to be darkened ,
while if only one little piece is to be darkened a card
may have a hole cut in it and the hole so arranged that
the light required passes through it.
PUTTING CLOUDS INTO ENLARGEMENTS
It is a comparatively easy matter to print clouds into
enlargements in this way. The landscape is first sharply
focussed on to a large piece of paper on the easel. This
must be larger than the bromide paper, as it must project
each side of the bromide paper when this is pinned on.
On this is placed a piece of card, also a little larger than
the bromide paper, and on this the skyline of the landscape
is carefully drawn with a sharp pencil. The card is then
cut into two pieces with a sharp knife. This gives two
masks which may be used to shade the landscape while
the sky is being exposed, and the sky while the landscape
exposure is being given. As there is no visible image on
the bromide paper, it is not possible without some guide
to know where the skyline of the landscape comes,
so that one of the masks is put back on the
easel and its outline is traced in pencil on the white
paper. That part of the outline which will be covered
up by the bromide paper need not be marked, but the
two extremities which will be seen when the bromide
paper is pinned up, should be marked. If the whole of
the negative is to be got on the bromide paper there will,
of course, be no skyline beyond its edges, in which case
the outline on the card may run off in a straight line,
which is marked on the paper on the easel. Ihe idea is,
of course, to provide some guide, so that when the land-
scape negative has been put in the enlarger the exposure
made, and the cloud negative substituted, one may know
where to hold the card mask so that it protects the in-
visible landscape image on the paper, while the cloud
exposure is given. The masks must be kept moving as
before, and it will be found advisable to use the sky mask
when exposing for the landscape, even if this has a fairly
dense sky.
There is another method of putting in clouds with which
some workers are very successful. In this the landscape
is first exposed, shading the sky as much as possible, and
is then developed. If the exposure is correct, a little
longer in the developer does no harm, so that after the


paper is developed it can be washed for a minute or two,
drained, pinned up again on the easel while still wet,
and exposed for the clouds, shading the landscape with a
card. 4 his is easily done, as the picture is, of course,
quite visible. The enlargement is then put back into
the developer until the clouds have developed, and is
then fixed in the ordinary way.
BOLTING SILK IN ENLARGING
Some very effective work may be done when enlarging,
by the help of a material known as " bolting silk ” or
“ bolting cloth,” and sold under that name by most of
the large photographic dealers. It is a fine, even textured
fabric, made primarily for sifting or bolting flour. A
piece a little larger than the largest enlargement that is
to be made should be obtained and stretched on a frame,
or may be bought on a frame, or else should be mounted’
by its edges to a clean piece of glass, for protection. It
is u-ed by being placed just in front of the bromide paper,
on the easel If it is placed with the bolting silk in con-
tact with the bromide paper, it breaks up the image into
a series of little dots, something like a very fine half-tone
picture in a magazine. This is useful, if the original
negative is too harsh in its contrasts to give a soft enlarge-
ment, as the deepest shadows then do not come so black
and the result is more harmonious.
If it is separated by the bromide paper by about the
thickness of an ordinary sheet of glass, this texture no
longer can be seen, but the effect is to soften the lines of
the picture. The further it is from the paper the greater
will be the diffusion, and in this way any degree of soft-
ness that may seem necessary can be got at will.
It is quite a different softness from that got by leaving
the picture out of focus, and is often the making of an
enlargement, which without some such device would be
cuttingly sharp. It also hides pinholes and other slight
blemishes on the negative. A magnificent effect can be
got by the use of a suitable negative, enlarging up very
considerably on to Coralyte Cream Crayon paper, using
bolting silk to soften the definition, and then sulphide
toning the result. A quarter-plate negative or less can
in this way provide a striking picture 24 x 18, or even
larger.
It is important when using bolting silk to have the
separation between the bromide paper and the silk
uniform over the whole enlargement. If it is not the
character of the definition will alter unpleasantly in
different parts. For this reason it is best to stretch the
silk on one side of a sheet of glass. If no separation is
required, it is then pressed down on to the bromide paper
and secured with dark-room pins. If a slight separation


is required, it is turned so that the glass side is in contact
with the bromide paper and fastened as before. A
similar effect may be obtained by lightly placing a piece
of fine chiffon over the lens during the exposure.
The subsequent operations in enlarging Coralyte Bro-
mide Paper are the same as for contact prints. For then
negatives, or where duration of exposure is of no account,
Artlyte may be used instead of Coralyte “ Rapid ” or
“ Ordinary ” and with excellent results.
EMPIRE OPALS
Pictures on these are sometimes called Opalotypes.
Opals are made by coating opal glass with an emulsion
similar to “ Coralyte ” paper, and the working instruc-
tions, whether for contact printing or enlarging, are
exactly similar. Either polished or ground-glass opals may
be purchased, and the latter give a very pleasing matte
effect. Exquisite pictures may be obtained, and by
reason of their firm, semi-transparent nature, may be
displayed most effectively.
1508
00052178


Every Photographer
SHOULD SUBSCRIBE TO
Ibarnngtons'
flbbotograpbfc
journal :: ::
(ESTABLISHED 1892)
BECAUSE
IT will keep you in touch with
all things photographic.
IT is full of bright, chatty
information.
IT is beautifully and profusely
illustrated.
PUBLISHED MONTHLY
PRICE 4d Per Copy
SUBSCRIPTION 4/6
PER ANNUM s: POST FREE
PUBLISHED BY
HARRINGTONS Ltd.
386 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY
