

After reading this Pamphlet please pass it on to your friends.
PROTECTION or EREETEADE
THE BETTER
FISCAL POLICY
NEW SOUTH WALES ?
JOHN LUCAS, M.L.O.
Price, Gd. Post Paid, Bd.
•® tfmea:
To be had of J. W. R. CLARKE, Bookseller & Stationer,




WHETHER IS
PROTECTION OK FREETRADE
THE BETTER
FISCAL POLICY
NEW SOUTH WALES ?
By JOHN LUCAS, M.L.O.
Sydney
F. W. WHITE, PRINTER, 39 MARKET STREET, WEST.


I2ST3D.HIX:.
Whether is Freetrade or Protection the Better Policy P 3
Our Imports and Exports the Balance of Trade ... ... ... 4
English Imports and Exports not her Balance of Trade 4
The Eesults of our Trade with America 4
The Advantages of England and America Compared with New
South Wales ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Nations must have Equal Advantages for Freetrade to be Mutually
Beneficial ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Universal Freetrade would Enable a Few Nations to Control the
Whole World ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
The Cause of Distress and General Depression 7
The Advantage of Home Manufactures 7
The Difference between our Public Debt and the National Debt of
England ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Our Borrowed Money Eemains in England 9
England’s Machinery Power 9
English Capitalists and our Absentee Proprietors 9
The Interest we Pay English Capitalists 10
The Eesults of Freetrade and Protection in America 11
Judge Haliburton’s Description of Canada 13
Comparison between the United States and Canada ... ... ... 14
What will Make New South Wales Prosperous P 17
Wine and Iron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Let us Manufacture our Eaw Material ... ... ... ... ... 18
Cheap Labour a Curse ; and the Eesult of High Wages 19
Protection from Low Wages and Cheap Capital ... ... ... 19
Protection Cheapens the Price of Articles ... ... ... ... 22
The Advantage of Keeping Money in the Colony 24
How Imports should be Levied and What we should Tax ... ... 26
Should not Agriculture Flourish in New South Wales ? 28
The Price of Bread ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
What we should not Tax ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
Mr. Parkes obtains a Committee on the Condition of the Working
Classes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
Brings up a Eeport in Favour of Protective Duties,, and Moves its
Adoption 34
Extracts from his Speech Advocating Protective Duties ; the Adop-
tion Negatived ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
Again Moves a Eesolution in Favour of Protective Duties 35
An Extract from his Speech in Eeply 35
Parkes said just before forming his last Government that any new
Government must adopt a Modified Protective Policy 35
Eeligious Intolerance ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
How Freetrade has Affected Ireland ... ... ... ... ... 38
A Duty of 2s. per dozen has Eeduced the Price of Preserved Fruits 40
The Eesult of a Duty on Sugar 41
The Eesult of Tobacco Duties ... ... ... ... ... ... 42
Eeasons why Protective Duties Lower Prices 44
The Duty on Kerosene, Vinegar, Candles, and Biscuits 44
The Traders’ Profits ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
What Parkes calls Progress ... ... ... ... ... ... 48
The Number of Young Australians Leaving School Seeking Employ-
ment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 50
Twelve Eeasons worth Consideration 51
Barristers’ Inconsistency 51


LETTER No. I.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sir, —Whether is Free Trade or Protection the better fiscal
policy for New South Wales? There cannot be a doubt that it
is of the utmost importance that the people should arrive
at a correct judgment on this important subject; and as I know
your columns are at all times open to your correspondents, I take
the liberty of sending you a series of letters, in which I shall
•endeavour to show the effect that the protection of native
industry will have on the balance of trade, or imports and
•exports—the currency, labour, capital, manufactures, agriculture,
revenue, the resources and general prosperity of the country, and I
will also mention those commodities which should and should not pay
a duty. However unable I may be to present a clear view of this
question, I hope to lay before the public a sufficient number of facts
to enable them to arrive at the conclusion that, in the present
condition of the colony, no delay should be allowed to take place
in an inquiry every well-wisher of the" colony is called on to
make. When my attention was first called to this subject,
I believed the principles of Free Trade were the result of a just
consideration of the real question at issue between them and the
Protectionists. Many circumstances, however, created doubts in
my mind of the soundness of the opinions I had adopted, and
facts were daily brought under my notice which I found it
impossible to reconcile with the views I then entertained ; and,
after further inquiry, I was compelled to surrender the principles
of Free Trade, as I found it impossible that a young country
could prosper to the same extent under that policy as under Pro-
tection.
Free from the interested views of the manufacturer or pro-
ducer, my only motive for making the inquiry is to advance
Australia; and I conscientiously believe that protection to her
industry is the only policy that will make her independent, and
her people prosperous and happy. My conclusions have, in a
great measure, been drawn from a consideration of the actual
condition of the people, which can never be overlooked without
the danger of being led away by false and pernicious principles.
One of the first principles of economy, for either individuals or
nations, is to live within their means. The labourer has to make
his daily wages pay his daily expenses, on the judicious expendi-
ture of which the happiness of himself and family depends. The
man of fortune, no matter how great his income, is governed by
the same principles ; if his expenditure exceeds his income, his
resources will continue to waste, until he finds himself a bank-
rupt. The shopkeeper and tradesman regulate their profits so


that, after paying their expenses, they will have a balance in
their favour at the end of the year ; they know if they trade with
a profit they will grow rich, and if they trade with a loss they
will grow poor. And the principle is quite as applicable to a
nation as to an individual, as an individual has to make his
income pay his expenditure. A nation should regulate its trade
so that its exports and profits should pay for its imports. If her
exports do not p y for her imports, she is trading at a loss. The
imports and exports are her trade, and the balance of trade in her
favour is her profit, and the balance against her is her loss, and,
like an individual, must be her ruin if continued. I know there
are exceptions to this rule. But all uncertainty arises from
failing to collect and put forward the facts which make the rule.
It would be fallacious to say that a country that sold to the value
of three millions and bought to the value of five millions was two
millions loser, without considering the place, and by what means
the value was ascertained, and to whom the profits belonged.
For instance, England’s imports may exceed her exports without
impairing her prosperity, because the value is taken in England.
That is, goods imported into England are valued after her
merchants have received their profits and her shipowners the
expenses of importing, which, in many cases, amounts to 100 per
cent., so that the original cost of her imports is much added to
when they reach their destination. She also values her exports
at her own warehouses, and exports them in English ships, and
in some instances they receive 200 per cent.; but on the average,
taking light and heavy goods, England gets 50 per cent, profit by
the trade of sending them over the seas and selling them in
foreign markets, which profit is carried to England in money
or goods, on which they make a further profit, so that
England’s export returns are fully one-third more than they
are set down at. These profits are only to be made by nations
possessed of large shipping interest and money capital. The
interest on the latter, England’s writers say, brings them in the
enormous sum of £200,000,000 per annum ; so that if her
imports actually exceeded her exports by £190,000,000, the
balance would still be in her favour, and her internal trade would
make her keep her position.
America is in the same position : she buys and values
at her own shores, and on her exports she makes large profits,
which are brought home principally in cash, as her trade with
Sydney shows. Americans sent £600,000 worth of goods
here (exclusive of breadstuff's) in one year; her ships only
took £40,000 worth away, so the balance, £560,000, they
took in cash. Besides, a very large portion of the imports of
those nations which possess large shipping interest is the produce
of their enterprise. I may mention whalebone, oil, pearl, and
many other such commodities which swell the amount of imports,


although they don’t cost the nation one shilling; they are got by
their own ships fitted out and insured in their own country, and
manned by their own sailors, who spend their money where they
are paid off in their own port. These descriptions of imports are
the same as if they were the produce of the soil; and what is our
position ? We have neither shipping nor capital, and from our
position we cannot by commerce make any very great profits so
as to pay any balances that may be against us. Our exports are
valued at the highest price ; we have to pay out of the proceeds
for shipments, brokerage, and many other expenses attending the
shipment from here to England or other nations. Our imports
are valued in the countries in which they are produced, and we
have to pay all the expense of bringing them here. We don’t
possess a single ship, and from our position we have no oppor-
tunity of making any profits on them ; so the trade profits and
value are against countries situated as we are, while the trade
profits and value are in favour of countries possessing large
maritime interest, as England and America. To them Free
Trade may be advantageous ; to us it is injurious.
To show the advantage that nations like England and
America, possessing shipping and money capital, have over a young
country possessed of neither, we will suppose an English firm
sends a trading ship a voyage ; she takes £IO,OOO worth of goods
to America and sells them for £12,000 ; she ships £12,000 worth
of American goods and takes them to China, and sells them for
£14,000 worth of tea, which she brings on to Sydney and sells it
for £16,000 worth of our wool, which she takes home to England
and sells for £IB,OOO. The above shows the advantage of Free
Trade to old countries, and injury to young ones ; it gives the
English firm an opportunity of making £2OOO by bringing the tea
from China here, and £2OOO by taking our wool to England !
because we have no shipping, neither are we likely to have, unless
we obtain them, as the English and Americans did, by protection
and navigation laws. The illustration also shows that the
imports and exports of nations possessed of these advantages are
not a true test of the balance of trade, as the ship above alluded
to only took from England £IO,OOO, and she returned with
£IB,OOO, which she made by her trading voyage; but she is
shown to have fleeced us of £4OOO. So much for the difference
of old countries and young ones.
Nations must have all advantages and circumstances equal
in order to ensure Free Trade working mutually beneficial. Any
difference in condition, any advantage in science, skill, capital,
or shipping, any long-established organisation, would give a nation
possessing them the advantage ground, and enable it to put all
others under contribution; old nations by it would subsidise
young ones. A high degree of manufacturing skill, with a large
carrying power, and money capital, would enable a nation


possessing them to keep a hold on all the world. When the
system of reciprocity and Free Trade was proposed to
a French Ambassador, his remark was that the plan was
excellent in theory, but to make it fair in practice it would be
necessary to defer the attempt to put it into execution for half a
century, until France should be on the same footing with Great
Britain in marine, in manufactures, in capital, and in many other
peculiar advantages which England now enjoyed.
England, possessing all these advantages in a high degree,
may well cry aloud for Free Trade, for she will gain most by it.
Make trade free, let all buy in the cheapest market, and a few
nations will absorb the capital of the whole world. Free Trade
suits England and old nations which have come to their full
growth, but Australia and all young countries require protection
to develope their resources. Everything in creation, while young,
requires support —the young vegetable, the young animal, and so
does the young country, and none more than young Australia,
possessing neither capital, shipping, nor manufactures, a crippled
agriculture, the resources from which we get our exportable com-
modities decreasing, while her population is doubling every ten
years. Under these circumstances, are not our future prospects
gloomy in the extreme, and has the time not arrived to make
some change in our political policy ? Will any person say that
our exports and imports are not a true and correct test of our
balance of trade ? The valuation is not in our favour, and the
profits are against us and in favour of the English, American,
and German merchants. As they are the shipowners, they have
the whole of the profits of transit from one shore to the other.
We sell them our wool for Is. Od. per lb., and buy a portion of it
back, for which we pay 12s. to 20s. ; that is how Free Trade acts
with New South Wales. We give from sixteen to eighteen pounds
of wool, and get one in return. But even admitting that the
imports and exports are not a true test, there can be no mistake
which way the balance of trade stands, while the commercial
exchange is against us. We are suffering a perpetual drain on
our money; it is being drawn from us daily ; all coin that is
current in Europe and America is already gone, and were it not
for our mint we should be without a metallic currency. Instead
of paying for our imports with our exports, we are paying with
our cash, and when all is gone we must meet the balance as we
did in 1843 and 1844—through the insolvent court—which may
be a very easy mode of getting out of our difficulties, but certainly
not an honourable one, and one to which a country like Australia,
blessed with all the ingredients of wealth, should not be driven.
But bankruptcy or pauper labour is our only resource while we
encourage foreign manufactures instead of protecting our own
workmen.
Yours respectfully, JOHN LUCAS.


LETTER No. 11.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sir, The history of all countries shows us that commercial
distress, want of money, loss of credit, and general embarrassment
invariably and immediately follow large adverse balances of trade.
We know from past experience that it has shook this country to
the very foundation, that she suffered severely from 1827 to ’34
or ’35, during which period labour and colonial produce were
miserably cheap ; again, in ’43, ’44, and 45, although meat was
selling at Id. per lb., and bread from 2d. to 2£d. per loaf, the
mechanic and labourer was starving, private individuals not
having the means of employing them. They petitioned Sir
George Gipps, then Governor, to find them work at 2s. 6d. a day.
Those who could not get work as mechanics were compelled to
work at 2s. per diem to keep themselves and families from actual
starvation. W T e are again suffering from the same cause,
business men of every description are complaining, and all
acknowledge it is getting worse. Thousands of men are out of
employment, and none are sure of a week’s work.* How is it to be
otherwise, when millions of pounds yearly sent out of the
country for goods that these men, women, and children should be
employed in making ? Stagnation of trade and want of employ-
ment are caused by the extraction of money to pay foreign
manufacturers, and those liabilities are caused by buying more
than we sell. If we sell more than we buy money will come to
us, and when it leaves us it is to pay our debts; while we continue
to buy £5 worth for every £3 worth we sell, our creditors will
still cry for more money ; and when money leaves us it becomes
the money of another country, and, as far as we are concerned, it
may as well be at the bottom of the sea.
No internal trade can cause a want of employment, stagna-
tion of trade, or want of money, for if it is not in one colonist’s
pocket it is in another ; it is never away. The country cannot
become poorer ; it must become wealthier, for the circulation
through a country is sure to create internal improvements —the
best and most permanent feature of a country’s wealth and
prosperity—one that gives work to her labourers one that
cannot leave her nor be taken away from her. But getting into
debt for our imports (bad as it is) is not our greatest misfortune.
That of creating a premature national debt is far worse. Our
liabilities to foreign merchants can be, and are, often cleared off
by the Insolvent Court; but our liabilities to English capitalists
cannot be so easily got rid of. For while there is an acre of land
in New South Wales, while there is a shilling of revenue collected,
they come first—they are sure of their pound of flesh —for the
* Such was the state of things in 1858. Is it not our present state
in 1889 ?


country belongs to them, bone and sinew, as security for two-and-
a-half millions sterling.* [£41,000,000 in 1889.]
There cannot be a better illustration of the difference of
borrowing money in a home or foreign market than the operation
of the National Debt of Great Britain, which amounts to the
enormous sum of 800 millions sterling, and for interest on which
the nation pays 28 millions sterling per annum ; but this interest
is paid to her own people. She takes it out of one pocket and
puts it into another. It is hers still, and the recipients of the
interest spend it in England. Twenty-eight millions of money
circulating yearly by a sort of perpetual motion—going in one
door and coming out of the other ! It is paid to the butcher,
baker, grocer, tailor, and others, who, in their turn, send it round
again, and by the taxes the whole of these people pay. It is again
collected into the Treasury, and again starts on the same course,
unimpaired by its former journey. It may well be compared to
the blood that supports animal life, which issues from the heart,
circulates through arteries to the very extremities of the body,
and is by veins again collected to the heart during the passage,
giving life, health, and vigour to the whole being. If you open
the veins and let the blood flow, the body will soon wither and
die. The circulation of the interest of the English National
Debt has the same effect upon the trade of that country as the
circulation of blood has on animal life. If England owed
this debt of £800,000,000 to foreigners—if this £28,000,000
a-year interest had to be paid to France, or America, and her own
people to lose the benefit of its circulation—how long could she
maintain her position as an independent nation ? If there is this
difference in England between borrowing in a home market
and a foreign one, must such borrowing not have the same effect
upon us 1 Let us borrow (if we borrow at all) from our own
capitalists, even if we have to give a little more interest ; the
country will not be a loser, but a gainer. The interest paid to
themselves is sure to get into circulation, giving work to our
labourers, and stimulating trade in every direction.
And so much only of this borrowed money remains in
the country as was paid for the animal food that the men
consumed while they were executing the work ; the giant share
has found its way back to Europe and America (a large portion
never left Europe), where it is now circulating and employing
their people instead of ours.
* When 1 wrote this letter I little thought that within twenty-seven
years the country would owe £41,000,000, paying to English capitalists
£1,600,000 per annum as interest, with power to borrow £10,000,000
more, which will increase our interest to £2,000,000 per annum, or £2 per
head on every man, woman, and child in the country. Who can tell
where we are drifting to, or what will be the result of this great indebted-
ness ? Protection will be the only remedy.


Are we for ever to go on depending upon other countries for
everything we put on our backs, for everything we put in
our mouths, for everything we make use of, from the cradle to the
grave? The manufacturer produces in value nine times as much
as those employed raising the raw material. England has, for
instance, 400,000,000 spindles spinning cotton, and she makes 50
millions profit, nine times as much as all the cotton-growers make
by producing the raw material. They sow and England reaps ;
they grow and England manufactures. And England stands at the
head of the list both for wealth and manufactures. She has
more money than all Europe besides ; and the question is, how
did she acquire her enormous wealth ? Not by her agriculture,
for the utmost she ever did was to feed and support her own
people ; not by her fisheries, for these barely supply her own
wants ; not by working gold, silver, or diamond mines, for she
has none. Jt is by her skill in manufactories, the labour of her
people, and the commerce based upon it, which she created,
brought into existence and fostered by prohibitory and protective
duties.
England has now become a giant amongst nations. The
power of her machinery is equal to 700,000,000 men, by the aid
of which one man can do the work of two hundred. Could
England, or any other place, by Free Trade, bring such power
into operation ? At least history answers, No ! And if New
South Wales gets to that glorious position—which I believe she
will if she adopts a protective policy, but not else—she may then
challenge the world to open competition ; but not till then.
This country, as well as Ireland has her absentee proprietors,
who drain their tens of thousands from her slender resources
annually, which they spend in foreign lands, drawing from her
her very life’s blood. There are also absentee holders of bank
shares, insurance shares, and shares of hundreds of other com-
panies drawing immense sums from us every year without
advancing a farthing of capital, merely trading on their credit.
They form a company in England, send out a manager who opens
a house of business, and draws from 20 to 40 per cent, on a large
imaginary capital, while in reality they have not a copper in the
country. If this is not bamboozling us out of our money, I know
not what it is. It has become so glaring that even the Freetrade
Sydney Morning Herald could not but notice it. I find the fol-
lowing extract published in that paper, from which you will see,
Sir, how selfish people are. Mr. Fairfax is a Free Trader in
everything but money; he is mixed up in most of the monetary
affairs of the country. “We should go to the cheapest market
for everything but money,” says the Herald , “ and it is high time
the Legislature interfered to protect our money bags from foreign
capitalists.”
The S. M. Herald , in a leading article, stated :


Paid-up Capital.
Capital in Colony.
Bank of Australasia ...
<£900,000
£89,739
Oriental
1,260,000
65,533
English and Scotch ...
500,000
302,087
London Chartered
700,000
102,671
Union
820,000
nil
“ COLONIAL CAPITAL.
“At the time of the famine in Ireland, when that country had
to appeal to her sister island for assistance in her dire necessity, a cry
went forth that Ireland was being ‘ ruined by her absentee landed
proprietors, who drained the country of her wealth to disburse in more
favoured England/ This cry, from similar circumstances, may some
day be heard from this colony ; indeed, should be raised even now, for
some of the same causes which led to Ireland’s necessity are at work
here, and which the colonists will do well to look to betimes. Quarter
after quarter, as each three months comes round, the national debt of
the colony is increasing in volume; and quarter after quarter, in the
onward progress of the colony, is her wealth being abstracted for the
benefit of other lands, where the fortunate enjoyers of rents and
dividends are free from the cares of the colony, and are exempt from
having to contribute to the increasing taxation on New South Wales,
which must inevitably follow her increasing debt.
“ To argue with individuals against their particular self-interest is
a matter seldom attended with success, and hence we shall always have
numerous absentees, even after the responsibilities of property towards
the national welfare are clearly laid down by an Act of our Legislature ;
but the case is far different with the community, and it is now to the
whole body of colonists that we would direct attention to at least one of
the channels by which the profits of their earnings, the real wealth of a
country, are being gathered up and exported for the benefit of English
capitalists.”
An examination of the Colonial Treasurer’s abstract of the
five English banks’ liabilities and assets within the colony of New
South Wales, compiled from the sworn returns of those banks for
the quarter ending the 30th June last, points out the startling
fact that, while those banks have at the other end of the world a
paid-up capital aggregating £4,180,000, this colony, on the 30th
of June last, was only enjoying the use of less than one-eighth of
that amount, as shown in the following memorondum :
£4,180,000 £560,000
From this amount of £560,029 must be deducted a sum of
£56,260, due by the Union Bank to the colony (that bank for the
past twelve months showing an average debt to the colony of
about £75,000), thereby leaving an amount of £503,760 of
English capital at present employed by the five banks above
mentioned.
The same returns inform us that these five English banks
paid their proprietors dividends for six months (ending December
last), amounting to £261,875, being at the rate of upwards of half
a million per annum, or above 100 per cent.
The surest and only way to remove these evils is to establish
a National Bank, which should be done with as little delay


First there is our imports last year
Our absentee colonists and proprietors
Our absentee shareholders —
The interest of our present debt
£6,384,540
500,000
600,000
130,000
Together
*£7,614,540
as possible ; for what country with the slender resources now
available to New South Wales can stand the draining she is now
suffering.
Our exports, £3,611,141, to pay £7,611,141 ! Is it any wonder
that labourers and mechanics are idle ? Is it any wonder that
business is dull? The colonists should discourage this system
of fraud upon the country by every means within their power.
We have a colonial insurance company, why not insure in it?
We have colonial banks, why not bank with them ? Their profits
are our profits ; the profits of the English establishments must go
to their absent proprietors.
I am, &c.,
LETTER No. 111.
JOHN LUCAS.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sir, —If we look into the history of America we shall find
that from the peace of 1783 till the adoption of the Federal Con-
stitution of 1789 there was no power under the confederation of
the States to establish a protective policy. The consequence was
that Great Britain reaped the same advantage on the basis of
Free Trade, after America gained her independence, as she did
before. Her imports were at one time six to one of her exports,
and the States became involved in the greatest commercial dis-
tress and embarrassment. Their money had all gone to pay for
English and other foreign products, so the constitution was formed
to confer the power of Protection against the evils. Though the
protection at first afforded to the manufacturer was slender, the
period from 1790 to 1807 was one of comparative prosperity,
resulting chiefly from the neutral position of the States during
the wars that agitated Europe. From 1807 to 1815 the succeed-
ing events of non-importation, non-intercourse, embargo and war,
were themselves a protection to the manufactures of the country,
and they prospered ; but after the Peace of Ghent Free Trade got
the upper hand of Protection ; and again the States were over-
burdened with imports that exceeded their exports, in the short
space of eighteen months, by £12,200,000, and the Government
had to pass the Protective Tariff of 1816. This protection was
limited to three years ; but just as the country recovered Free
* This was in 1858. The drainage is now quadrupled.


Trade got the ascendancy. Again the country was plunged into
ruin by the excess of imports, until the tariff of 1824 was passed,
which entirely changed her condition. Mr. Clay, speaking of the
periods seven years before and seven years after the passing of the
Protective Tariff of 1824, said in his place in Parliament: —
“ If I were to select any seven years since the adoption of the present
constitution, which exhibited a scene of the most widespread dismay and
desolation, it would be exactly that term of seven years which immedi-
ately preceded the establishment of the Protective Tariff of 1824. If
the term of seven years were to be selected of the greatest prosperity
which this people have enjoyed since the establishment of the present
constitution, it would be exactly that period of seven years which
immediately followed the Tariff of 1824.”
In 1831, from the influence of the Southern or Slave States,
because they had slave labour , they wished to banish from the
States what even the slaves called the poor whites , and their
masters were pleased to call a nuisance. They thought the
easiest wav of effecting their object was to establish Free Trade,
so there became a trial of strength between the Protectionists and
the Free Traders; the Protectionists were to a man Free States'
men, who thought the labourer worthy of his hire, and who wished
to pay every man a fair value for his labour. The Free Traders
were the proprietors of the Slave States, where they looked upon
their fellowmen, their wives and children, as beasts oj the field,
and paid them for their labour as they did their horses—with
the whip. The Free Traders, or Slaveholders, had great power
in the Parliament of the country, they being allowed a vote for
every five slaves they held, consequently they returned any
member they liked, and forced the Protectionists into a
Compromise Tariff, in 1831. The reduction of the Protective
duties by that Act induced the merchants to make excessive
importations, which in the years 1835 and 1836 amounted to
£12,000,000 ; hence the general depression of 1837, which
continued up to 1842. The Protective Tariff was again passed,
after which, for a considerable period, her exports exceeded her
imports the balance of trade was in favour of the United
States, and so prosperous did she become, that her treasury was
overflowing with money, and the difficulty was not to find articles
to tax, but to find those from which to remove the tax. And
again, in 1846, they reduced the duties, and substituted
ad valorem for specific duties, which opened the door to fraud.
The nation was saved for a time by the gold discoveries in
California and these Colonies, but even that could not save her
from financial embarrassments, which was assisted by the
construction of railways and other works that (like ours) will
not pay with British capital. The draining of the country to
pay the interest caused a crisis, which affected all Europe,
Another instance of the evil of making improvements with foreign -
capital. Still the advocates of Free Trade will tell you that


America would have been in a better condition under Free Trade
than Protection. Why did she not prosper under Free Trade ?
the experiment was tried five times , and upon every trial she was
compelled to return to Protection to raise her to the position she
lost under the Free Trade policy. If Free Trade would have
done so much for the United States, why did it not do something
for British North America? Hear what Judge Haliburton says
in speaking of that Colony :
“ Nothing but ocular demonstration could teach them, however, as
his residence of half a century had taught him, that the colonists there
had nothing but their wood, their water, their soil and its productions,
but what came from England. That was a fact which spoke volumes.
He believed he might say he knew every inch of Nova Scotia, and he
could give an illustration of what he had just been alluding to. The
child who was born in that country was washed—first thing, in an
English bowl, put into English flannel, English petticoats, and an
English frock trimmed with English lace, and the first word he spoke
was English. When he went to school, his hat, his coat, his shirt, his
trousers, and his shoes, all came from England; his satchel was made in
Manchester, and his slate was from English slate quarries; his book
and paper, his lead-pencil, his ruler and copy-book, were all sent from
England. The moment he began to use a horse, his saddle and bridle,
spurs, crupper, girths, whip, halter, reins, bits, currycomb, brush, and
iron shoes, were all made for him in England. If he enjoyed the sports
of the field, his gun, his flask, his shot-bag, powder and shot, and
percussion-caps, were English. If he went fishing, his rod and line, the
sinker, the floats, and even the flies were English. If he built a vessel,
not a single thing in it belonged to the country in which it was built.
If he built a house, the trees were cut with an English axe, sawn with
an English saw, planed with an English plane ; the boards were nailed
with English nails, the windows were of English glass, puttied with
English putty ; and the carpet, knives, forks, plates, were English, and
so were the decanters. He thought, too, it was something touching that
the colonist still said he was going “ home ” when he paid a visit to
England. And though it might be thought that the man he had been
supposing, having brought nothing into the world took nothing out, yet
he was put in a coffin lined with English flannel, covered with English
cloth, screwed down with English screws and screw-driver, and his name
was on an English coffin-plate. The priest, in an English gown, read
service over him out of an English book, and the earth was shovelled
over him with English shovels. From the cradle to the grave the
colonists are thus depending on England for every thing they make
use of.”
Does not the description of the state of Canada given by
Judge Haliburton exactly describe our dependent condition?
And however humiliating it may be, we must acknowledge that
we depend upon Europe for everything we make use of from the
cradle to the grave.
Surely if Free Trade could do anything for a country,
British North America ought to be ahead of the United States
in commerce, population, railways, and other improvements.
Let us compare the United States and British North America:


The total free population of the United States is 23,000,000 ;
that of British North America 3,250,000. In the United States
the population to the square mile is seven ; in British North
America, one. The population of the six principal towns in the
United States is 1,559,000. The population of the six principal
towns in British North America is 198,000 ; while the population
of the city of New York alone is 515,000. There is a larger
population in the single State of New York than in the whole of
British North America. In British North America there are
only 852 miles of railways ; while the United States have 23,700,
or 27 miles in the United States for one in British North
America. The value of exports from Great Britain to British
North America, in the year 1850, amounted 3,250,000; in the
year 1855 it fell to 2,750,000. The exports from Great Britain
to the United States in the year 1855 amounted to £21,000,000
sterling, two-thirds as much as the whole British Colonies. The
total exports of British North America, during the same period,
amounted to £5,600,000 ; while the exports of the United States
amounted to £55,200,000. British North America has no army,
no navy, nor manufactories, she has nothing but her wood, her
water, her soil, and its productions. Still they will tell you
*• that protection cannot be given to one branch of industry
without injuring some other—just as America, protecting her
manufactures, cripples commerce.” How absurd! In what
country does commerce stand higher than in America? In
what part of the world can you go without finding American
manufactures, from a clothes-peg to a carriage ? In what harbour
can you go ? In what seas can you sail, without seeing American
ships ? Are there not now hundreds of them whaling in our
seas, taking our resources from our very shores ? And what has
placed them in this enviable position ? We have a right to say
the Protection Tariff* of 1824, for after that was passed they
went a-head ; before that, they were in a worse condition than
we were in 1843 and 1852 ; but they took a more honorable
mode of extricating themselves Protective Law instead of
Insolvent Courts !
Surely these facts will convince every unprejudiced person.
Compare England with Ireland, the United States with British
North America, and then compare Free Trade with Protection,
and what is the result? But to return to the subject of this
country, what do we want? What will make New South Wales
prosperous ? What will give employment to labour ? What will
create manufactures ? What will develope our resources ? What
will open fields of enterprise for the rising and future generations
of Australia? What will keep our children from wandering
about the streets for want of profitable employment, as thousands
are now doing? Will Free Trade do this ? If it will, why has it
not already done it. We have experienced Free Trade ;we are


the only Free-traders in the world ; all other places protect their
people, more or less, whilst we tax our own people instead of
foreigners. Many talk of Free Trade in England. There is no
such thing. I fearlessly assert that the policy of England is more
of a protective policy than even America, as America taxes both
manufactures and the raw material, while England admits the
raw material free ; and she taxes all manufactured goods from 5
to 500 per cent., and many articles she prohibits ; and I will defy
any person to point out any article which England can manufac-
ture which she admits free. We tax our exports ; and what has
the policy done for us ; let us trace the history of New South
Wales from the year 1825, when the colony was at least out of
debt, and everything bringing a fair price. About that time
several new settlers arrived in the colony, and the following year
the Australian Agricultural Company came into operation. These
new settlers and the agents of the Company rivalled each other
in raising the price of cattle and sheep, with which to stock their
new establishments. The people thought their fortunes were
made, and that it was beneath them to make or grow anything
for themselves. Agriculture was completely abandoned, nothing
was thought of but raising stock; and asuich people will have rich
dress, rich furniture, fine houses, and smart equipages. But the
great mistake they made was they commenced an expensive
career in anticipation of their future riches. The merchant
imported large quantities of wheat, flour, and foreign goods of
every description, and when the money was all gone the merchants
took bills, the payment of which was secured on lands and stocks.
Forced sales brought down cattle from £l2 to £ls, sheep from £2
to £3 per head, to as many shillings. There was no money in the
colony to buy, it had all gone to pay for imported goods, which as
new colonists they should either have grown, made, or managed
without. It was eight or nine years before the colony recovered ;
and had it not been for the Government expenditure of about
£400,000 a-year to pay the expenses of the penal establishments,
I believe the colony must have been abandoned. Loss of credit
acted as a protection, and to help us, Port Phillip became a
market for our surplus stocks ; but in consequence of our neglect
to cultivate large quantities of grain, &c., enormous importations
of wheat took place. “ Between the years 1837 and 1842 about
a million pounds sterling was sent out of the colony to pay for
immigration. In consequence of so large an addition to the
population, common necessaries got up to famine prices, flour
being £95 per ton.” We (a community of about 95,000 souls)
had to send away above another million sterling,for supplies—
chiefly bread stuffs, —besides having to import the necessary
amount of manufactures for both old and new colonists. The
consequence was, the whole of our money was drained from us.
We had none to pay our debts, or to pay for the labour we


had imported; able bodied men were begging in the streets.*
A<*ain, the loss of credit and low wages acted as a protection, and
we grew and manufactured, and our exports gradually increased
over our imports up to 1852, when our exports were <£4,600,000,
and our imports £1,900,000; hence our sudden prosperity. It
may be said it was in consequence of the gold discovery ; no such
thing. It was having the balance of trade in our favour. With
all the gold in the universe if we import £5 worth and export
£3 worth, we must come to ruin.
LETTER Nc. IV.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sir, Let us look at our present position: if we take the
last three years, you will find the imports exceed the exports by
the enormous sum of £6,597,571, or nearly £2,200,000 a year;
or, for every £2 worth of goods we have sent out of the country,
we have brought in £3 worth. Can this state of things continue 1
If you add the overland exports to Victoria, it will reduce the
excess to about £1,600,000 a-year the last four years. Our
overland exports to Victoria are doing us an injury instead of a
benefit. The owners of the flocks are sending the female portion
of their herds, killing the goose for the golden egg. Last year our
imports exceeded our exports by about £2, <33,000. We bought
£5 ss. for every £3 we sold. Hence our present position, which
is only the commencement of our difficulties. In ’59, I believe
we will be in as bad a state as we were in 1848, and what is to be
our future 1 The past and the present tell us that the only way
to prosper is to keep the balance of the trade in our favour. The
* The gaols were crowded with insolvent prisoners, and the general
inability of the Colonists to meet their liabilities was so transparent that
Judge Burton framed a Bill for the relief of insolvent debtors (then
known as “ Burton’s purge”), and during the first month after it became
law hundreds of persons with large liabilities sought its protection, and
all trade and commerce were paralysed.
I left Sydney in January, 1841, just before the crash. On my return
about twelve months after, and when walking up George Street, I was
astonished to see fifteen or twenty carriages and pairs standing opposite
Hunter Street. I remarked to a friend, “ Polack has a large sale of traps
to-day” (Polack was an auctioneer who held his sales in the building now-
occupied by , and the block of land between his rooms and
Hunter Street, and half the distance to Pitt Street, Polack used as horse
and cattle sale yards). My friend replied, “ These traps are not for sale,
they are hackney carriages,” a thing unknown when I left about twelve
months previous. The fact was the depression was so great that at the
auction sales of the insolvents’ effects carriages and pairs, which in many
cases a few months previous cost £2OO or £250, were knocked down tor
£25 or £3O, and as a rule the insolvent’s coachman became the purchaser
and converted them into hackney coaches.


past also tells us there are two ways of effecting that—one is to
increase our exports, and the other to diminish our imports; but
remember, we have not only to increase our exports, to make up
our present deficiency, but also to meet our daily increase of
population. At this time the squatters produce 9-10ths of our
■exports. It is deplorable that we should “to such an extent
depend upon such a precarious revenue. We know that droughts
or disease amongst our flocks and herds materially diminish the
produce of fat stock, wool, tallow, hides, &c., &c. ; and the few
people engaged in pastoral pursuits are scattered over 150,000,000
square miles of territory, far away from the enjoyment of society
and civilisation. They waste their lives from youth to the grave
in raising wool, tallow, hides, &c., for English manufacturers; our
people get 10 per cent., and the Englishmen get 90 per cent, of
the total value. And although 9-10ths of our exports are
obtained from this occupation, comparatively few persons are
engaged in it, whilst thousands of our people are walking about
unemployed.
An author on political economy says—
“ The first duty of all good government is to look to its labour —
insure it not only full occupation, but the- greatest productiveness.
Political economy abhors idleness worse if possible than nature does a
vacuum. It is worse than a vacuum, because gravity rushes forth to fill
the vacuum; but idleness is a grave where lies dead and buried the
creative genius of man, the means given to him by the God of nature to
improve his condition.”
This country requires an extensive variety of occupations, so
as to give employment to suit the physical and intellectual
capacity and taste of the people. Now we have only two classes:
one, those who are engaged in trade and commerce, “the drones”;
the other, “the working bees,” those engaged in producing the
raw material. We want the third, manufacturers, as a connect-
ing link between the other two, to encourage enterprise, to spur
on and develop the energy, talent, and inventive capacity of the
young Australian, thousands of whom are anxiously seeking, but
without the slightest chance of obtaining, any suitable and profit-
able employment.
This country is destined to be a great manufacturing nation ;
then why not commence at once 1 No place in the world is more
abundantly provided “ by nature.”
With all the elements and raw materials necessary for the
manufacture of every article used by the human family ; in
metals, we have gold, silver, copper, lead, iron, coal, and other
metals of the best quality and in the greatest abundance.
We have every animal production : wool, tallow, hides, skins,
<fec., which we export instead of manufacturing.
We have every description of land and every variety of
climate; we can produce every vegetation known to mankind,


wheat, maize, sugar, tobacco; the raspberry, gooseberry, and
strawberry of the lower arctic, and the more luscious fruit
of the tropics. The guava, banana, and pineapple grow with
the greatest luxuriance. And although richly endowed by nature,
and having thousands of people, young and old, seeking employ-
ment, our imports exceed our exports by several million pounds
sterling per annum.
Let us consider whether it is possible to increase our exports.
Can we not export wheat and other grain 1 No ! The Americans
can undersell us at our own doors. We have plenty of the best
alluvial land, and, with the exception of England, our acreage
production is higher than any other place in the world, and our
climate is suitable. Cannot we produce and export cotton and
tobacco? No! Those commodities are grown in America by
slaves. We cannot pay labour and compete with them.
Cannot we grow, manufacture, and export wine 1 No ! The
vineyards of Spain, Germany, and France are only hundreds of
miles from the wine markets, whereas we are thousands, and
labour in those countries costs only 6d. or Is. a day; so wine
won’t pay to export. There is no vegetable production that we
can produce that the Europeans and Americans cannot also pro-
duce at half the price, they having the double advantage of near
markets and cheap labour.
Our iron has been pronounced equal, if not superior, to any
in the world. But the chief value of iron, as well as wool, con-
sists of labour, directly or indirectly, employed in its production.
In England it is calculated that it takes 4 tons of coal to produce
1 ton of iron. This shows how one occupation acts favourably on
another. Miners of iron and all classes of labouiers employed in
bringing the crude ore through the several stages of progress,
until it assumes the shape of bar, are to be clothed, fed and sup-
ported. All this creates a demand for provision and various agri-
cultural products, in the production of which a large quantity of
various descriptions of labour is employed ; and is it not to the
advantage of every working man that every interest that acts
favourably on the labour market should be encouraged ; and is it
not also evident that if 50 men are employed producing bar iron
that they give employment, indirectly at least, to 100 others of
various callings 1 If our mines were poor and of an inferior sort,
the case might be different. But richer mines, or mines more
easily worked, do not exist; and with regard to our Fitzßoy
mines, they possess an advantage, which, I believe, no other in
the world was ever known to possess; that is, having a coal mine
in their immediate neighbourhood. And what benefit is that to
us —the English price of merchantable bar iron was from <£4 15s.
to £lO per ton—a price that would scarcely pay for the carriage
of our iron from the mines to Sydney, not to speak of smelting


In 1851 we
exported
£468,000 worth
In 1852
?)
2,660,000 „
In 1853
)5
1,781,000 „
In 1854
))
773,000 „
In 1855
?)
209,000 „
And in 1856
5)
only 138,0o0 ,,
and a hundred other expenses. We have copper ; it has been
tried, it won’t pay. Our gold has decreased as follows :
To increase our exports, we require cheap labour ; yes, cheaper
than the flooded labour of Great Britain, cheaper than the 6d.-a-
-day labour of Germany, cheaper than the prison or slave labour
of America.
I believe cheap labour to be the curse of any country ; but
to New South Wales it would be utter ruin an 1 destruction.
The first thing we want is population ; and will low wages, and
consequently low profits, bring population 1 ? Will the capitalist,
the mechanic, or the labourer, leave his friends, his home, and
everything he holds dear, and undertake a voyage of 13,000
miles, unless he is satisfied that he will improve his condition ?
And will he improve his condition by coming to New South
Wales, and paying higher for everything he consumes, unless he
gets a higher price for his labour or capital than in the country
he left; and how can he get a higher price when the very article
he comes here to make is imported perhaps from the very factory
or workshop he left. Is a country ever so prosperous as when
wages are high? Is it not the working man that circulates the
money ? And is it not better to have one of our own sovereigns to
circulate than a shilling? In each exchange of the shilling there
will not be above Id. profit, but in exchange of the sovereign you
might get as profit 2s. We will prosper better when everything
is at a high remunerative price than at starvation point. Take
ourselves as an example; from the year 1844 to 1850 everything
was cheap, we could employ labour at any price we liked to offer,
yet we could not build or improve; men in business if they could
make both ends meet thought themselves well off. We have seen
both high and low wages in this country ; we have had. the
mechanic working from 2s. 6d. to 30s. per day ; we have seen the
shepherd hired from £l2 to £7O a-year—under which state of
wages did the country prosper most? I will ask the grazier, who
wishes to get cheap labour to tend his flocks and herds, whether
he was in a better condition when the labour was low than when
it was high ? At the time he could get shepherds at £lO or £l2
a year, the wages of the mechanics or labourers in the city were
equally low, and so was the price of beef and mutton. Both
stations and stocks were mortgaged, and the squatter was com-
paratively as poor as the shepherd. As wages rose, so did beef
and mutton, the squatters became rich, cleared off their old debts


from the rising price of their fat stocks, which rose because the
people could afford to use more and give a corresponding price
with their own increase of wages for the articles they consumed.
I ask the farmer how stood his profits on his hay, butter, poultry,
and*eggs ? I ask the landlord how stood his profits during the
high wages ? I ask the merchant, the draper, the grocer, the
butcher, the baker 1 ? Yes, and the lawyer? I will ask all ? If
they will tell the truth they will acknowledge that they were all
making large profits during the high wages. Look at the city of
Sydney and ask yourselves whether it has improved. Look at
thatgrand and noble structure, the new University, rising in all
its beautiful proportions of architectural design and artistic work-
manship. Look at the new Exchange, the new banks. Look at
the,, massive and princely edifices, public and private, that meet
the eye in every direction. I again ask whether you think that
low wages and low profits could produce the buildings and
improvements in this city, the suburbs, and the country, that
have been produced by high wages and high profits—profits and
wages keep close company —they rise and fall together; and,
lastly, I will ask the working man if he is not in a better con-
dition when receiving £1 a day than when getting 2s. 6d. Look
at the well-dressed mechanics and labourers, with their wives and
children, clean and well clad. Go to the Savings Bank and count
the deposits of the working men—go into the suburbs and see the
hundreds of small freeholds belonging to that class. I know there
are improvident people in the country—people who, if you were
to throw gold into their doors with a spade, they would shovel it
out at the window. If some of the working men have not
retained the money they earned during the high wages, they have
at least had the gratification of spending it. Mr. M'Culloch, one
of our best writers on political economy, on the subject of the
importance of high wages has expressed himself in the most just
and sound terms. He has laid down maxims on this subject which
lie at a nation’s prosperity in its highest state —this is what he
says—
“ The best interest of society requires that the rate of wages should
be elevated as high as possible; that a taste for the comforts, luxuries,
and enjoyments of human life should be widely diffused, and, if possible,
interwoven with the national habits and prejudices. Alow rate of wages,
by rendering it impossible for increased exertions to obtain any consider-
able increase of comforts and enjoyments, effectually hinders any such
exertions from ever being made, and is, of all others, the most powerful
cause of idleness and apathy that contents itself with what can barely
continue animal existence. The experience of all ages and nations that
high wages are at once the keenest spur, the most powerful stimulus to
unremitting and assiduous exertions, and the best means of attaching
the people to the institution under which they live.”
Yours, &c.,
JOHN LUCAS.


LETTER No. V.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sir, — As we cannot increase our exports without cheap
labour, and as it is impossible to obtain cheap labour, and, if
possible, it is not desirable to do so, the only way left to create a
balance of trade in our favour is to decrease our imports. Two
very different things may effect this object; one, that of becoming
too poor to obtain credit; the other, that of levying such a duty
on the importation of such articles that we can manufacture from
the raw material which can be produced in the Colony—a duty that
will enable the Colonial manufacturer to compete with cheap
foreign labour, and to give such bounties as will induce capitalists
to invest their money in works and factories—to develope the vast
resources, both vegetable, animal, and mineral, of this great country,
and create for us wealth that would never forsake us, that, if
fostered, would open up a wide field for that enterprise so much
wanted by the rising generations of Australia. If we continue to
import everything we make use of, what on earth are we do with
our children ? there will be no field of industry, or even employ-
ment open for the large number now growing up around us.
There are at this moment thousands of youth of both sexes
without education, or employment.* Too commonly trained in
infamy, these might be profitably employed, if it were not for
that abominable doctrine of buying in the cheapest market; this
cursed system of encouraging foreign instead of our own manu-
factories, abominable and cursed, for while it lasts our children
never will have a field of profitable enterprise open to them.
Now we cannot send them to cultivate the soil, we cannot
apprentice them to the sawyer, the carpenter, the cabinetmaker,
the wheelwright, the smith, the tailor, the shoemaker, or any
other trade of skill. If we do so, they, like their fathers, would
be driven from their trades, to make room for the cheap products
of foreigners, while they are left to pay the taxes. This is a most
serious matter. I appeal to such of my readers who are rearing
families, who have three, four, or six boys to provide for. I ask
them whether it does not cause them the greatest anxiety to
know what to do with them ; but if we manufactured many of
these articles that we now import, we need not look for profitable
employment for our boys or girls either. It is our duty as indi-
viduals, our duty as parents, and our duty as Australians, to pro-
tect ourselves, our children, and our common country, from
pauper, slave, and prison cheap labour of foreign countries.
Now then as to the objections to Protection. The first
charge is that we want to protect one against the many. That is
a fallacy ; for there is no fear of any particular branch of trade
* At the present time there are 33,000 young people leave our Public
Schools every year. What is to become of them ?


enjoying for any period any extraordinary profits, for as soon as
it becomes known that any one business pays better than others,
so soon will labour and capital flow in that direction, and reduce,
by competition, the profits to a level with other pursuits; and any
man, so long as he cultivates or manufactures in the country, will
have the right of directing his labour or his capital in any direc-
tion he may think fit. What man has a right to complain of my
making a fortune as a farmer, a butcher, a baker, a tailor, or any
other business I may choose to follow, while he has an equal
opportunity of embarking in the same pursuit, partaking of my
profits, and, if he likes, reducing them by his competition to a
level with any other business. If I should be engaged in a trade
that it requires any time to learn, any person can import labour
of that class, and at once enter into competition with me. For
the advocates of Protection don’t want to protect man against
man, so long as both are inhabitants of the country, grow produce
or manufacture in the Colony, and pay a share of the taxes levied
to support the Government of the country. But we wish to pro-
tect labourers, mechanics, and agriculturists—men who pay the
expenses of the country —against commodities which are made
out of the country by people who are not colonists, and who con-
tribute nothing towards the taxes of the country. How does the
argument of protecting the one at the expense of the many hold
good, while the many, if they think proper, may pursue the same
occupation as the one ? If the one is a butcher, they can become
butchers; or if a farmer, they can all turn farmers. Competition
regulates the price, supply, and demand of everything ; for what-
ever affects either the supply or demand affects the price. If the
supply be above the demand, the price falls ; if the demand be
above the supply, the price rises; if the supply and demand
remain steady, so does the price. If the price rises, others will go
into the trade and increase the supply, which will reduce the
price. If the price falls below a fair remuneration, the people
will leave that pursuit, and embark in some other that is more
profitable. Then the supply is reduced, and the price increases ;
thus competition regulates all things, and brings them to a fair
level. It is advantageous to a country that its business should
be prosperous, for if a man is doing well, if there is none to com-
pete with him, he is sure to extend his business so as to meet the
demand, and what money he makes is in the country, and is sure
to get into circulation ; those around him are sure to participate
in his prosperity.
The second objection to protective duties is that they raise
the price of those things which are protected. In America, Pro-
tection has had quite a different effect, and why not have the
same effect here ? There it lowered the prices until America
could export and compete with England in the markets of the
world. At the same time it raised the wages of the operative,


and kept the money at home. Henry Clay, the great American
advocate of the protective policy, speaking of woollens in 1852,
says;—
“ Every gentleman’s own observations and experience will enable
him to judge of the great reduction of price in most of these articles
since the tariff of 1824. The average price of four descriptions of flannel
during six years :—ln 1826 it was 38f cents per yard ; in 1827, 38 cents;
in 1828, 46 cents ;in 1829, 36 cents; in 1830, notwithstanding the high
price of wool, 32 cents; and in 1831, 321 cents per yard; and that
although a yard of flannel that would sell in England for 15 cents, in
America would command 22 cents, the difference of 7 cents is the exact
difference between the cost in the two countries of the six ounces of wool
contained in a yard of flannel.”
The following statement of a merchant at Boston enumerates
the wholesale price of the principal articles manufactured at
Lowell for eleven years—that is for three after the compromise
tariff of 1832 to three years after the protective tariff of 1842,
including the two years of 1835 and ’45. He says—
The prices of cotton fabrics under the system of Protection have
fallen as follows : —For shirting, from Is. a yard to 2^d.; for sheeting,
from Is. 4d. to 3d. a yard; checks from Is. 4d. to 4d. a yard ; ginghams
from Is. Id. to 4d. a yard; printed calicoes from lOd. to 4id.
The Honorable Charles Hudson, in a report from the Com-
mittee on Manufactures, clearly shows that Protection tends to
decrease the price of manufactures. The following are some of
the facts shewn in that report :
The fall in price of 23 kinds of manufactured iron from 1840 to 1844
averaged 23 per cent.-a result effected under the increase of protective
duties ; the chief materials for shipbuilding have fallen 17 per cent, after
the passing of the protective tariff of 1842. In a list of nine articles of
hardware protected by the tariff of 1842 fell 1 o per cent. Mr. Hudson s
report goes on with quotations of price current before and after the tariff
of ’42. Window glass prior to the protective tariff sold at oOs. per hun-
dred feet, now sells for 155.; nails with a duty of 3d. per lb. sell for 2 2 d.
It is shewn in a small work called “ Facts for Labouring
Men,” published in 1840 —
That a family of seven persons, whose entire wages in 1816 in a cot-
ton factory were only 180 dollars a year, could get in 1836 in consequence
of the increase of wages 651 dollars a year, while the prices of their pro-
ducts had fallen about two-thirds.
The town of Lowell, in Massachusetts, has risen from nothing
in twenty years to a population of 20,000 j has between eleven
and twelve millions of dollars invested in her manufactures j
employs upwards of 9,000 labourers, male and female; pays for
their work annually $1,800,000; about 50 per cent, on the aver-
age, or $900,000, they can save or lay by after paying their board
and necessary expenses. In one manufactory alone SIOO,OOO of
stock is owned by those who work in the factories for wages ; in
another factory $60,000, and so on. A third objection is that
Protection would interfere with the revenue, destroy commerce


and retard the general progress of the country ; why has it not
had this effect upon other places 1 Surely no person will deny
that England prospered under Protection, that she owes to it her
present position in power, in manufactures, and commerce. And
as to America, hear Daniel Webster, one of the greatest states-
men of the day. He said eight years ago—
“It was my painful duty to present to the House of Congress a pic-
ture of the general distress pervading the whole land. We must all yet
remember some of its frightful features. The people were then oppressed
and borne down by an enormous load of debt. That the value of property
was at the lowest point of depression ; that ruinous sales and sacrifices
were everywhere made of real estate; that stop laws, that relief laws,
and paper money were adopted to save the people from impending
destruction. That a deficit in the public revenue existed, which com-
pelled Government to seize upon, and divert from its legitimate object,
the appropriation of the sinking fund to redeem the national debt; and
that our commerce and navigation were threatened with a complete par-
alysis—this was eight years of Freetrade. I have now, he said, to perform
the more pleasing task of exhibiting an imperfect sketch of the existing
state of unparalleled prosperity of the country. On a general survey we
behold cultivation extended, the arts flourishing, the face of the country
improved, our people fully and profitably employed, the public counten-
ance exhibiting tranquility, contentment, and happiness. A people out
of debt, land rising in value, a ready though not extravagant market for
all the surplus productions of our industry, innumerable flocks and herds
browsing on ten thousand hills and plains, our cities expanded, villages
springing up as it were by enchantment, our exports increased and
increasing, our tonnage, foreign and coastwise, swelling and fully occu-
pied, our rivers animated by the perpetual thunder of countless steam-
boats, the currency sound and abundant, the public debt of two wars
nearly redeemed, and, to crown all, the public treasury overflowing ; this
transformation from gloom and distress to brightness and prosperity has
been effected by protecting and fostering American instead of cherishing
foreign industry.”
But I am prepared to prove that the price of an article is
nothing to the country, so long as the money is not sent out of it
to produce it. There may be a difference to an individual, but to
a nation it don’t matter whether an article costs a shilling or a
sovereign ; if the producer, the manufacturer, the article, and the
money, remained in the country. It is like me taking money out of
one of my pockets and putting it into another ; I am none the
poorer for the exchange; but if I take a sovereign out of my
pocket and throw it into the sea, am I not a pound loser ? Again,
if I sent a pound to England to buy a hat, the money has left the
country, and I and the colonists lose sight of it for ever. The
money is gone, and as far as the country is concerned, it might as
well have been at the bottom of the sea. But suppose I buy a
colonial hat with my pound, the hatter spends a portion of it with
the grocer, another with the shoemaker, and they, in turn, send
it round; it may pass through a hundred hands, each man
getting a fair profit by the trade, and the whole of the goods, the
profits, and the £1 also, remain in the country. Thus, money


spent in colonial manufactures, is always circulating in the
country, always doing duty ; but if you send your money to pay
for the importation of foreign manufactures, it is lost to the
colony for ever, it is like throwing it into the sea. To shew you
the utter impossibility of us ever again seeing money that has
gone out of the colony, I will give you our trade with America,
or rather their trade with us. Our imports from the United
States of America, amounted in the year 1885, in round numbers,
to £600,000 exclusive of breadstuffs, while our exports to that
country were only £40,000, so they must have taken away in that
year the enormous sum of £560,000 in cash. So much for free
trade ; that money is now circulating in America instead of New
South Wales; it is now giving employment to their mechanics
and labourers, while ours are idle.
The free traders tell us if one occupation don’t pay, let a man
go to another; but are there not men whose physical strength
will not allow them to go to any other work than that to which
they have been trained. Again, is it just after a man serves sor
7 years in acquiring a trade, to compel him to abandon it, and
look for some work for which his previous habits of occupation
have unfitted him ? Place, for instance, a tailor against a navvy,
a surveyor against a hodsman, and what is the result ? what the
labourer could do with ease the others would sink under. I w ill
give you an illustration of the policy of putting a man to the
occupation he is most fit for, and for this purpose I will create a
John Smith, a bootmaker, who in consequence of the importation
of English and American boots, is compelled to go shepherding,
at which occupation he receives 3s. a day ; his employer gets a
profit of 2s. a day on his work, so John raises an exportable
commodity of wool, tallow, &c., to the value of ss. per day, which
sum his labour is worth to the country. Now, protect his trade
and put a duty of 2s. a pair on English boots, and set him at his
proper work, he will at least make one pair daily. The imported
costs the country 10s., thus, according to the old proverb, “a
penny saved is a penny gained”j he is worth to the country as
a bootmaker 10s. a day, or 3s. more as a bootmaker than a
shepherd, for the boots cost the country his day s as a
shepherd, 35., his employer’s profit 25., duty 25., in all, 75., besides
the benefit the country would receive by manufacturing the
leather and other materials required to make the boots, tut
free traders will tell you we don’t want these men, they are not
the class required in New South Wales. Then why not tell the
people so ? Why not advertise throughout the world that we
want nothing but pauper labour, Coolies and Chinese, with a few
hawkers and agents, and a sprinkling of merchant princes and
shepherd kings ? Tell them that we want no middle class, no
mechanics. Let us in all candour tell them that we have u»


occupation for their children; let them go to America or
elsewhere ; let them improve and produce there, and send it to us ;
they can do it cheaper there, and all we want is a cheap article.
I am, &c.,
JOHN LUCAS.
LETTER No. VI.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
g IBj The free traders assert that the protectionists wish to
have a duty levied at once upon all importations. I can only
say, that it is not my wish, but I would like to see a fair duty
levied upon all those commodities that we can manufactuie fiom
the abundant raw material we produce, which I would regulate
in this way. If an article could be produced in England for 55.,
the cost of importing it say 35., in all Bs., and in consequence of
our money capital being worth 10 per cent., while it is worth only
5 per cent, in England, and labour being 100 cent, higher, we
■could not produce the same article for less than 10s., I would put
2s. duty on the imported article; then our manufacturers would
be able to compete with the cheap labour of the old countries.
And as an inducement to develope the resources we have in
embryo, I would give a bounty. For example, for the production
of iron, flax, cotton, hemp, silks, and other such commodities as
we know can be produced in this colony, I would give bounties
of so much per ton, cwt., or lb., as the case might require, until
the producers could show that they were able to raise sufficient to
supply our own consumption, and then, if found necessary, I
would put them on a footing with other commodities.
I will now mention a few articles that I think we should, at
once, put a protective duty on. First, I would put a duty on all
imported timber and articles manufactured out of the colony.
Our timber is not to be surpassed in the world for beauty,
durability, and strength. I have seen wood worked up here, that
is not to be beaten for its capability of receiving a polish, nor for
its richness of grain. I can shew you doors and sashes that have
been made 60 years—they are, to all appearance, as sound as
ever; and the strength of our iron bark and box has been well
tested by bearing with ease a weight that has snapped the
boasted British oak asunder. We have sawyers, carpenters,
cabinetmakers, wheelwrights, coopers, and mechanics, equal to any
in the world, walking about the streets idle, and thousands of
youths ready and willing to learn those trades, if inducement
offered, while our warehouses are groaning under the weight of
imported wooden ware. Let us see how much the country
would save by manufacturing instead of importing timber and


wooden ware. In the year 1855 there was imported into Sydney,
timber to the
value of ... ... ... ... ... £139,000
Doors, sashes, &c. ... ... ... 44,000
Buckets, tubs, &c. ... ... ... ... 12,000
Carriages, carts, drays, &c. ... ... ... 19,600
Furniture ... ... ... ... ••• 50,400
Total ... £265,000
The next article would be leather and all its productions.
With the exception of wool, there is nothing we lose so much by
as the exportation of our hides and skins and the importation of
saddles, harness, boots, and shoes. We send our hides 14,000
miles although we have plenty of tanners and curriers, and
mimosa bark, I believe superior to oak for tanning. We import
saddles, boots and shoes, and harness, which have been made from
our hides, although we have saddle and harnessmakers, boot and
shoemakers, by the hundreds, idle. We sell for 9d. or Is. as
much raw material in England as for which we pay, in saddles
and harness, boots and shoes, 20s. or 255.- And, mind, there is a
class of men fit for no other occupation. And what does it cost
the country for imported leather, saddlery and harness, boots and
shoes 1 In 1857 there were imported into Sydney—
Boots and Shoes to the value of ... £251,597
Leather, Saddlery, and Harness ... 47,180
Other Leather Goods ... ... ... 32,000
Total £330,777
Then in 1855 we imported £65,000 worth of butter and
cheese. Surely from our extensive flocks and herds we can pro-
duce sufficient to supply our consumption; we did so formerly,
and I don’t see why we cannot do so now. Of beer and ale we
imported £368,000 worth. I know there are several brewing
establishments shut up ; and even the Messrs. Tooth, who have
four-fifths of the trade in their hands, have half of their new
brewhouse idle ; they having to import their malt, hops, and other
materials, which ought to be grown in this Colony, and without
which they cannot brew strong ale at the price at which they can
import it. We import—
Blacking to the amount of ... ... ... ... £5,500
Candles „ ... ... ... ... 65,000
(while we export large quantities of tallow)
Confectionery to the amount of ... ... ... 16,000
Salt Fish 17,000
(although we have innumerable fishing grounds on
the coast of Brisbane Water and other harbours)


Ironmongery to the amount of
Lime „ „
£306,000
3,000
Machinery „ „
87,000
(while engineers for want of employment are hiring
themselves as shepherds)
11,000
Nails to the amount of...
Total
£510,500
I remember a few years ago you could not go through any
street in Sydney without hearing the nailers hammering away.
I am now told there are but two nailers at work in Sydney, and
they are merely kept at manufacturing a kind of nail that it is
not thought worth while to import, being required in such small
quantities only. Pipes to the value of £6,000. I remember when
there were five or six pipe factories in this city. Where are they
now 1 Pickles to the value of £5,000. We have vegetables of
every description ;we can manufacture vinegar; then why not
make our own pickles? Hams, bacon, preserved meats, £29,000.
That is certainly bringing coals to Newcastle. Soap, £16,000.
Why do we export tallow and import soap when it is past all
doubt that our Colonial soap is superior to any other. Cordage
and rope, £18,700. We had several rope walks in Sydney; I
remember to have seen 20 or 30 men and boys employed in one
walk in Hyde Park ; that is gone like the rest.
Should not agriculture flourish in a country like this, a
country with every description of soil and every variety of
climate, in which every vegetable production known to the
civilised world is grown to perfection ; where the most useful
grain so essential to the human race, where the gooseberry, the
currant and raspberry of lower latitudes, and the more luscious
fruits of the tropics, the guava, the banana, and pineapple, spring
up as it were spontaneously. A country in which we can gather
three crops in a year off one piece of land, and the acreage pro-
duction is higher than in any other country in the world, Englamd
excepted. And should such a country depend upon foreign
nations, twelve or thirteen thousand miles oft, for its daily bread,
and under such favourable auspices ? Who can for a moment doubt
that New South Wales can produce enough to supply her own con-
sumption of these vegetable productions, so necessary to the health,
strength, comfort, and prosperity of a country, namely,wheat, maize,
barley, oats, potatoes, wine, tobacco, and every other commodity
which can be raised from the soil ? With reference to wheat, the
following is the opinion given of that grain by the Commissioners
of the Liverpool Board of Trade at the Paris Exhibition, namely,
“ That the samples of wheat from Australia we thought excelled
all others that we saw in size, cleanness, and fullness of the
grain.” After this, what stranger unacquainted with our imports


would believe that New South Wales, with a population of only
266,000, sent £717,779 out of the country for breadstuff's in one
year; and must there not be something wrong ? I know it is
said, “ Open up the lands, and it will cure the disease.” I grant
it would do much; but a Protective duty, with a liberal land
policy, would effectually cure the evil. Under the present circum-
stances, the cry of “Open up the lands” is absurd, uidess the far-
mer is protected against importations ; for is it not a fact, patent
to all, that it costs more to carry wheat or flour 40 or 50 miles
over our roads than to import it, not to speak of the difference in
the price of labour. As that is the case, how is it possible for
our farmers to sell as low as the importers 1 Then what do we
want land to cultivate for if we buy from foreigners instead of
inducing men to buy and cultivate our waste lands; to settle
down, and ultimately creating what we so much want in this
country—a settled yeomanry. Let us send our producers to
America, let them improve and cultivate the lands there—grow
what we want and send it to us ; i.e. the British-Colonial policy
of buying in the cheapest market. I say let us send our farmers
to America if we don’t protect them against importations; it will
be more just and more honorable than to induce people to lose
their little by turning farmers in New Souta Wales ; for I am
confident that no man can pay a fair remunerative price for
labour by farming while grain is imported duty free.
Upon inquiry, several farmers have informed me that they
would be satisfied if they had a steady market at ss. 6d. per
bushel for their wheat, so I would put a sliding scale of duties
on imported wheat and flour that would keep the selling price of
wheat up to that price; and with wheat at ss. 6d. per bushel
bread could be sold at less than 3|d. per loaf. If thre are any who
wish to buy for less I can tell them they never will while they
depend upon the importers instead of the agriculturists. I know
it is the opinion of many that we cannot grow sufficient for our
own consumption, but that is a mistake, for we have land enough
on our own seaboard (without going inland) to supply us, even if
our population were ten to one what it is. All we want is a
steady market, which we never will have while we depend on the
merchant instead of the agriculturist. What causes the unsteady
market 1 It is this : the flour gets up to famine prices, the mer-
chant imports, and the farmer plants every available piece of land,
consequently the supply is above the demand, and down go the
prices. Then both importers and agriculturists lose. The impor-
ters cease to import and the farmers to grow, which would not be
the case if a fair duty was put on imported wheat. The farmers
would soon find out the quantity of wheat required for our
market; each one would have his wheatfield if sure of a fair price.
I remember asking some farmers during the high prices why they


did not grow more wheat, as it must pay at the price it was then
selling. ""The reply was, “Yes, it would pay at half the present
against our crop was fit for market the prices would be
so low, from importation, it will not pay us for carriage to
Sydney.”
I know this is a very unpopular subject, as the people have
brought the cry of “cheap bread” with them from the old
country ; but let them fairly consider the difference of the corn
law of England and such a duty as I propose to put on in New
South Wales. In England the corn law was ruin to the farmers,
poverty to the agriculturists and labourers, and starvation to the
poor. ” For these reasons, England belongs to the aristocracy
(comparatively speaking, a few individuals), and directly the corn
law was passed, as fast as the leases expired, they raised the far-
mer’s rents to such a height that he could not live, and land
which was let for 10s. an acre per annum was raised to 725., and
all the difference of price caused by the tax went into the land-
lord’s pocket and not in the farmer’s. What was the consequence?
The farmer who could stand a bad season or two at low rent was
ruined by the bad crops at the high, and in his turn had to cut
down his labourer to starvation pay, to enable him to satisfy the
exorbitant demands of the gentry; he could not find a farm else-
where ; all was taken up ; so he, like his labourer, must submit
or starve, , . ,
There was no room for competition to reduce the monopoly
to a fair level; the quantity of agricultural land was limited, and
these gentlemen knew it; they got their exorbitant demands,
which in most cases they squandered in London and Paris, and
»ambling-houses. But I believe a protective duty in New South
Wales would be a general benefit. Our farmers are small free-
holders, a hard-working and industrious class of men, to whom
Protection is necessary to enable them as well as others to com-
pete with foreigners. It would also be a general benefit if the
£700,000 that was sent out of this country in one year was in
our own farmers’ pocket. Would it not also be to our advantage?
They (the farmers) would not lock it up; they would circulate it
in some way ; and let us see what it would do ! It would build
700 houses at £I,OOO each, which would have given employment
to 4,000 men : sawyers, carpenters, bricklayers, plasterers, &c. ;
these houses must be furnished, and then the cabinetmaker would
get his benefit. The tenants would want bread, meat, boots, and
clothes. I believe every man in the country would receive either
a direct or an indirect benefit from the circulation of such a sum,
but from the system of Freetrade it is now circulating in America
instead of New South Wales.
There is no danger of agricultural pursuits becoming too
profitable where there is an abundance of land, which must be
shortly within the reach of every man, for so soon as it pays


.better than any other occupation so soon will labour and capital
flow in that direction. Butchers and bakers, tinkers and tailors
indeed all in New South Wales must have an equal right, have
an equal chance of turning farmer and get a good and respectable
living by cultivating the soil, and would by competition reduce
the profits to a fair level with other occupations; and such are
the superior allurements belonging to the cultivating of the soil
to all other branches of industry that it would be preferred when
it can profitably be followed ; and no country on earth, by the
extent of its surface, the richness of its soil, the variety of its
climates, contains within its own limits more abundant facilities
for supplying its own ■wants than New South Wales j and is it
not a shame that we depend upon foreigners for it—our daily
bread 1
I am, &c.,
JOHN LUCAS.
Camperdown, May 4th, 1858
LETTER No. VII.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sir, — An article, the produce of the soil, that I would pro-
tect is wine. It is now established past all doubt that the climate
and soil of Australia are admirably adapted to the culture of the
vine. Our wine, the produce of the Hunter and Camden, two
counties 150 miles apart, have been highly prized at the Paris
Exhibition; indeed, so good that, if I remember right, the old
wine-producing countries could not produce (from their stocks,
150 years old, of vintages 50 years before the first white man set
his foot on the shores of Australia) above three or four samples
superior to ours. In a report published in the Sydney Morning
Herald by the Hunter River Vineyard Association, they put
forth two long paragraphs, in which they say they hope they may
have the effect of mitigating in some degree the ridicule that
awaits us in London on the perusal of the nonsense on the
doctrine of Protection which has lately found advocates at a
public meeting of the citizens of Sydney. In the same report,
these exceeding clever fellows, this Freetrade Association, return
thanks to a Member of the British House oj Commons for his
endeavours to get the duty levied on Colonial wines reduced,
although our wines only pay 2s. 9d. a gallon , while foreign wine
pays ss. 6d. So, not satisfied with the 2s. 9d. Protection, they ask
for a further Protection, and in the same report they abuse Pro-
tection, and call the policy nonsense; so much for the consistency
of this Association. But is it possible that this Association
imagines that they will be able to compete successfully in the
English market with the wine-growers of Spain, Germany, and


France, where labour may be had from 6d. to Is. a day, besides
the difference of expense in the voyage, agents, and delays, which
are in favour of the Europeans and against the Australians. If
we could get labour at 6d. a day they could still undersell us; but
why this cry for supplying the foreign market with wine 1 Why
try to achieve that which is impossible ? Why send our produce
16.000 miles when there is a market at home, while we import
such large quantities of wine 1 Why should the country pay
merchants, agents, and shipowners for exporting our wine and be
at the expense of importing a much inferior article. Our wine-
growers pay the expense of exporting, and our wine-drinkers for
importing. Let the vineyards supply our own market with wine,
brandy, vinegar, plums and raisins, and when our market is fully
stocked it will be time enough to look abroad ; for I find that
New South Wales imported in 1855, 288,218 gallons of wine,
valued at £104,000, and last year there was 375,000 gallons,
valued at £136,452, and 114,029 gallons of brandy, valued at
£61,600. Last year there was £207,000 worth imported.
1.239.000 lbs. of raisins, valued at £36,473; 2,251 packages of
vinegar, valued at £5,083; in ail, during the year 1855, £210,103,
and last year £384,935. There is something for the Hunter
River Vineyard Association to do; let them supply sufficient for
our own market, not to speak of our sister colonies, and they will
deserve the thanks of the colonists. If they cannot with a Pro-
tection of 2s. a gallon, and the protection of a long sea voyage
and many other expenses—with these advantages, if they can-
not successfully compete with foreigners in our own market,
how can they expect to have the shadow of a chance with the
German, Spanish, or Frenchmen in the markets of Europe—no
matter how cheap we get labour, they can and will undersell us.
Instead of exporting, which cannot pay, let us consume our wine.
Let us put a duty of 6s. a gallon on wine and 3d. a lb. on raisins,
and we shall soon have our vineyards flourishing, and £210,000 a
year kept in this country which is now sent away.
Now, money that is sent out of the Colony to import these
articles that I have mentioned amounts, in round numbers, to
£2,220,000, which, if a duty of say 25 per cent, was levied, would
create a revenue of £555,000.
I would then give bounties for the production of glass, agri-
cultural implements, earthenware, flax, hemp, hops, iron and
steel, cotton and silk, and any other such articles which can be
produced in the country.
I will mention a few articles that we should not tax:
we should not tax those commodities that we cannot produce,
because that is taxing the people without the country receiving a
corresponding benefit—such as tea and coffee. We cannot
produce those commodities, then let them come free. Neither


should we tax our exportable commodities; if we cjo, we will be
taxing our own people to benefit foreigners. It would be like
going into one of the shoemakers shops and laying a tax upon his
own work, and letting English work come free. W hat would the
people of Manchester say to a Government who should propose to
tax calico prints or cotton manufactured in Manchester 5 What
would the men of Birmingham say to the taxing of their knives,
forks, and spoons, and other hardware 1 Wdiat would the Staf-
fordshire men say to taxing glass and crockery ware ? and what
would the Americans say to the Government that would propose
to tax the notions that they are pleased to send us 1 Why should
the gold-digger pay for the gold he digs out of the bowels of the
earth ; for every ounce he raises the country is richer by £4.
Why should he bo taxed for the police protection any more than
any other colonist ? Are vve not all protected by police, for which
the gold-digger pays his share, the same as any other colonist, by
indirect taxation! Then there are the squatters ; they are a
much abused class in tins country \ it has become quite fashion-
able to abuse them ; but they are the most useful class in
the Colony. It should not be forgotten that they produce nine-
tenths of our exportable commodities. They are. and will be
until we get manufactories, our whole and sole dependence , they
are the pillars on which the prosperity of the country rests, and
will rest until we get protective duties to develope other resources.
Besides, they are more of ourselves ; they form homesteads. We
have less absentee squatters than absentee merchants and proprie-
tors of any other class. Squatting is a pursuit that requires the
constant attention of the master, or it will not pay. A stock
station cannot be successfully managed by the daybook ana the
ledger, and carried on by an absentee proprietor. Besides, they
are the pioneers of the country. If the squatters were swept
from the face of the country of what earthly use would be the
ground they occupy, and occupying it what harm do they do it %
They only use the grass that would be burned by the bush fires
or eaten by the kangaroo, and they produce from that grass a
great exportable commodity on which we all depend, and still the
grass grows again and again, and will grow every year until it is
wanted by the people to cultivate, when the squatters will have
to give way \ for land that is required for cultivation must not
continue a sheepwalk. But until then let it remain : better be a
sheep walk than nothing. It is better that it snould laise wool,
tallow, and hides to export, and beef and mutton for us to eat,
than the grass should be burned by the blacks. The squatters
should be dealt with liberally, but they must not stand in the
pul.lie thoroughfare. All lands that are likely to be required for
cultivation should be let from year to year, and then it should be
clearly understood it should be til ways open for selection, and all
lands within five or seven miles of navigable rivers, harbours, or
highway roads or towns, should be reserved for purchase. And, in


conclusion, all I need say is that if I have failed in my efforts to
make myself clearly understood I am sorry for it. I have
3ndeavoured to explain my views in as few and plain terms as
oossible. I know there are arguments that I have repeated, but
it is those passages that I thought of the greatest importance,
and which I wish the public to consider without prejudice.
I remain, Sir, your obedient Servant,
Oamperdown, May 12, 1858. JOHN LUCAS.
The above seven letters were published in the Empire news-
paper in May, 1858, and before the type was distributed 1,000
copies were printed for me in pamphlet form by the then editor
and proprietor, Sir Henry Parkes.
Parliament was dissolved on the 18th April, 1859, and the
new House met on the 18th of August following.
On the 30th of September of that year, Mr. Parkes obtained
a Committee to inquire into and report upon the condition of the
working classes.
The Report was brought up on the 18th of the following
April, and “ The Official History of New South Wales” states :
“ The evidence proved that considerable distress prevailed in
Sydney, and the Committee recommended the fostering of Colonial
manufactures.”
The following is a copy of a section in the Report referred
to above, which Mr. Parkes in his speeches stated was the most
important portion of his report, and the only one which the long
debates were directed to :
“Your Committee are of opinion that the connection of cause and
effect is in some measure to be traced between the fiscal laws of the
Colony and the existing social evils, and they consider that a revision of
our entire taxation is a matter of necessity. We have the authority of
eminent economists in raising revenue in a new country by the imposi-
tion of duties that would tend to foster manufacturing enterprise ; and
such encouragement to our own people, within well-considered limits,
would not be inconsistent with practical freedom with our commercial
intercourse with the world; while no nation affords an example of the
establishment of manufactures without such encouragement. But it is
respectfully submitted that we are not to follow blindly the courses of
other countries, but to be guided in our economical arrangements by
such principles as are most applicable to the peculiar circumstances of
our own.”
On the Bth of May Mr. Parkes moved the adoption of his
Report, and the following are extracts from his speech as reported
in the Herald upon that occasion :
“He was now going to show the effect that moderate duties have
had in the establishment of factories in other countries. But before he
showed some of the results of manufacturers’ enterprise and industries
in the United States he would state his opinion that this country was
peculiarly suited to become a manufacturing country, physically and
geographically; physically, by the possession of nearly all the materials
necessary for use in manufactures ; and geographically, as being in a
position as likely to command an extensive market. They had wool, the
cotton plant grew in the Colony; tobacco grew most luxuriantly, with
many other valuable vegetable products proper for commerce; rich coal-
fields ; fisheries on the coast ; woods and metals equal to any in the


world; they had all the material articles of progress known to the
human mind ; they commanded the trade of Polynesia, and would have
a fair share on the coast of America, North and South; and other Colo-
nies not so favourably situated as New South Wales. For these reasons
lie conceived this was to be a great manufacturing country.
It was not necessary, as some thought, to stop until our population
amounted to millions before manufactures could take root. . . They
had instances before them of manufactories being planted in deserts and
prospering there. . . . The town of Lowell, within a generation, had
sprung from a mill planted on the edge of a stream to a large city, com-
peting as to its production with the great city of Manchester. In 1853
there were no less than twelve incorporated factories in Lowell, three of
which were joint stock mills, all the people working in them holding
portion of the stock. At the present time (I 860) it contained 35 mills,
320.000 spindles, and, 9,954 looms, employing 11,458 people, working up
735.000 lbs. of cotton, and producing 2,137.000 yards of cotton cloth per
annum. With a population of only 37,000 persons, there were 6,227
depositors in the savings bank; the amount of deposits to workmen
alone in the factories were 1,060,000 dollars. . . And as he had just
said, this growth of manufacturing enterprise was caused by moderate
duties on the foreign manufactures imported, and this impost had the
highest sanction of all great authorities.
“ In 1852 Mr. William Chambers visited America , and gave it as his
•opinion that it was the small duties which protected them that caused
the great manufactories in Lowell to flourish, and if these duties were
removed these thriving towns would be destroyed.
“ America had 1,054 cotton factories, using 60,421 bales of cotton, and
producing goods to the value of 43,207,565 dollars, and giving employ-
ment to above 280,000 people ; and these factories were of recent growth,
from 1832 to 1860. It was considered by some that America should do
as we are doing, go on producing the raw material for England, in
return taking back the manufactured article, and he must say they had a
striking resemblance to the opinions he had heard uttered within the last
year or two in this Colony. . . . If we continue as mere producers of
raw material for the manufacturers of Yorkshire we shall be divided into
two great classes of traders and producers of raw material. . . . We
would have no means of employing the talent of the country, . . The
mere traders, although useful in their place, yet it must be borne in mind
were non-producers. ... If we did not adopt Protective duties we
could not establish manufactures. ... We would continue in our
present backward state for unknown ages ; we would continue to go on
raising raw material for older countries. . . . And as to our popula-
tion, it would be exceedingly difficult to employ the rising generations.”
The adoption of the Report was negatived by 27 votes to 6.
Again, on the 22nd of May, Mr. Parkes proposed a series of
resolutions.
The second resolution was :
“That a revision of the entire taxation of the Colony is necessary,
and that in any such revision revenue should be raised by the imposition
of duties that would tend to foster manufacturing enterprise.”
The following are extracts from the speech made by Mr.
Parkes in reply to the debate on the above resolutions (see Sydney
Morning Herald , 23rd May, 1860) :
“ It was remarkable that this long debate had been almost entirely
confined to the question of Protection; the other recommendations had
been nearly lost sight of. The authority he had before mentioned —John
Stuart Mill —had never been answered. Mr. Mill maintained that it was


quite allowable to impose these Protective duties in a new country. The
doctrine of Preetrade,, which had been so much talked of, could not be
carried out absolutely under all circumstances. It was very easy to say
that the effect of Protective duties would be to heighten the price of all
commodities of life; but it had been proved in America that, by taking
that course, the manufacturers there had been eventually enabled to
undersell the world.
“America could produce many articles cheaper, and more acceptable
to all the markets in the world, than any other country ; but she would
not have been able to do this had it not have been for the encouragement
offered to her manufacturers in the first instance in the form of Protec-
tive duties. The alternative of not accepting Moderate Protection duties
would be our continuing in our present backward state for unknown
ages; we should continue to go on raising raw materials for the better
circumstanced peoples of older countries. And as the increase of our
population went on it would be an exceedingly difficult thing to employ
the rising strength of our population. To carry out this Preetrade doc-
trine in its spirit with regard to political affairs, to be consistent, non.
members ought to follow the course taken by Mr. Bright and Mr. Cobden,
and to object to Government interference in all such matters as military
preparations, or the education of the people.
“The advocates of Preetrade admitted that the principle, if carried
out, led to an actual stoppage of the population ; this competition system,
which was the soul of Preetrade, would go on beating down the wages of
labour till the result was the stoppage of the population by artificial
means. This has been to a great extent the case in England. On the
other hand, we were told by Mill that a high range of remuneration of
labour was a sign of healthy prosperity to a nation. In concluding this
portion of his reply, he reminded the House that all the great men who
were the authors of the Constitution of tne United States were in favour
of Protection to Native Industry. From that time to the present, all the
great men of America had been Protectionists to the extent of supporting
their own manufacturers by Protective duties. The authority of such
men as these ought to be of great weight, and ought to far outweigh the
opinion of Mr. Gladstone. . . . And whatever might be the fate of
these Resolutions, he had no fear of taking on himself the character of a
prophet, and foretelling that before five years were passed over their
heads Protection laws would be adopted in this country. With regard
to the other Resolutions, he had not considered it necessary to take up
the time of the House by adducing arguments in their favour.”
The above extracts are lengthy, but Sir Henry’s speeches
“ all through ” bear evidence of such great research—“ he quotes
from five or six English economists ” deep study and convincing
arguments in support of Protective duties for this country —that
I had some difficulty to know where to begin or where to leave
off; and the Protectionists should have a full report of his speech
printed and circulated at every polling place at the next general
election; and any person who may be in doubt let him read these
speeches, and if they do not remove his doubts I do not know
what will.
Is it not marvellous that the man who made the inquiry
above referred to, drafted the report, framed the resolutions upon
the report, and delivered the speeches from which the above
extracts are taken, would in public meetings state that the
Protectionists were generally public robbers, dishonest, fools,
idiots, brainless creatures, who could not see a day a-head, and


woi’se than Chinamen. In fact, no language was too foul, insult-
ing, or abusive for this gentleman to hurl at his opponents,
thousands of whom, to say the least, are his equals in decency,
morality, honour, honesty, and all other qualities that make a
man a good Christian and a desirable member of society.
I saw a letter written by a gentleman who had been Premier
of Victoria, in which it was stated that Sir Hercules Robinson told
him that he had the greatest difficulty to prevent Parkes going
over to the Protectionists. This letter was,written to a gentle-
man who is a member of our present Parliament.
Mr. Kidd, M.L.A., told me, in presence of several persons,
that “ at a dinner given by Mr. C. Roberts, M.L.A.,” in answer
to a question, Sir Henry Parkes stated that any Ministry which
took office would have to adopt a Modified Protective Policy.
This was said just before he formed his late Government, little
over two years ago.
In the last Parliament there were only 38 Protectionists;
the last general election increased the number to 68; and Protec-
tion I find is still gaining ground, and I would not be astonished
that in a year behce Sir Henry again, in 1890 as in 1860, was of
opinion—
« That a revision of the entire taxation of the Colony is neoess ary,
and that in any such revision Revenue should be raised by the imposition
of duties that would tend to foster manufacturing enterprise.”
“We have the authority of eminent economists in support of raising
Revenue in a new country by the imposition of duties that would tend to
foster manufacturing enterprise; while no nation affords us an example
of the establishment of manufactures without such encouragement.”
Religious Intolerance.
No doubt much can conscientiously be said on both sides of
this important question. Then why cannot we advocate and dis-
cuss it with deliberation and calmness, giving each other credit
for being actuated by conscientious, pure, and patriotic motives 'I
The disgraceful and abominable religious discord was, “ by
interested persons in high positions, for their own selfish ends,”
fanned into a flame, “ particularly at the last general election; it
was first whispered forth with bated breath, and then trumpeted
forth in loud declamation, that the Public Schools Act was to be
repealed and, that the Government of the country was to be con-
trolled by Cardinal Moran . . . and as the Roman Catholics
were voting for Protection, all good Protestants were urged to
vote against Protectionists.
I am a Protectionist of over 30 years’ standing, and have
had as much to do with educational reform and the present Act
as any man in the country; and I and all belonging to me are
members of the Church of England, and as staunch Protestants
as any Orangeman in the Colony; and, old as I am, I would fight
to the death to uphold my faith; but I wish to do to others as I
wish to be done by. Civil and religious liberty has always been
my creed.


Why cannot we 'professed Christians live in brotherly love?"
We are all believers in a Supreme Being, in a Saviour, and in an
enemy of mankind ; in fact, in all the great principles of Christi-
anity ; and only differ in minor matters, and Church Government,
etc. Then why should we always have our hands on each other’s
throats ! Well might the Sultan of Turkey exclaim, “ How those
Christians hate one another ! ”
It is time the native-born Australians of “all creeds” should
unite and stamp out the cursed religious bigotry and intolerance,
and tell all comers, whether Protestant, Catholic, or Jew, that
they are welcome to cast their lot amongst us, but that we will
not have the peace, goodwill, and happiness of our country dis-
turbed by faction, bigotry, intolerance, and hatred of more than
300 years’ standing.
As to the Roman Catholics being Protectionists, I cannot
conceive how an intelligent Irishman who has inquired into the
last hundred years’ history of his country can believe in the
policy of Freetrade. In my opinion he must be a Protectionist
or a renegade.
The following few passages will show what this glorious
Freetrade policy has done for Ireland.
According to the Freetrade theories, Ireland should be a
very prosperous country ; it is a large and fertile island, with a
genial and temperate climate ; with noble rivers and harbours,
and stores of mineral wealth ; and as fine, strong, and intelligent
race of people as there is on the face of the earth ; and above all,
Ireland has enjoyed 60 years of Freetrade, and has had every
facility afforded her of buying from England, which is the most
wealthy nation and the cheapest market in the world.
Then, if Freetrade is the great benefit, the glorious boon
which its advocates claim for it, ought not Ireland, which has
been so richly endowed by nature, and has for so many years
enjoyed the great privilege of buying in the cheapest market, be
wealthy and prosperous, and her people enlightened, prosperous,
happy, and contented ?
But what has this half-century of Freetrade done for her I
Why, no tongue can describe, no parallel exists to illustrate half
the misery and wretchedness of that unfortunate country.
She has millions of acres of good land lying waste, which ought
and would be cultivated if all her money was not drawn from her to
buy in the cheapest market, which leaves her landowners without
the means of improving their estates. Her trade, her commerce,
and her manufactures are smothered ; her gentry are beggared ;
her poor and labouring classes, although crying aloud for employ-
ment, are still idle, and in many instances starving ; and during
this period of Freetrade 6,600,000 of her people have fled for
their lives from their country and starvation to seek employment
and a home in more favoured countries.


And thousands of her able-bodied people are shut up in work-
houses, where they drag out a miserable and wretched existence
until they are thrown in a pauper’s grave.
And, worse than all, over 2,000,000, over one-fourth of her
sons and daughters, died of actual starvation in consequence of
the potato blight.
And this dreadful sacrifice of human life occurred within
sight of the most abundant and cheapest market in the world.
The cheapest market ! What a farce to talk to those poor and
unfortunate thousand people of cheapness—bread to them would
be dear at a penny a loaf when they could not find the p nny ;
when hundreds of thousands were penniless and houseless,
clothed in rags, dying in the fields, dying on the highways, dying
in the hedges and ditches from actual starvation. Yes, and this
sacrifice of human life occurred during fifty years of Freetrade;
glorious Freetrade, which makes the rich man more wealthy, and
the poor man more miserable.
Do we not all know that we have freqfuent demands made
upon us to relieve the distress of Ireland when anything happens
to the potatoes. The potatoes ! Does any person think that the
potato blight would so impoverish the country that 2,000,000
human beings would die of starvation if they had manufacturing
industries ?
Ireland was never so wretched before Freetrade was adopted
there. Glorious Freetrade which, as I have already said, makes
the rich man more wealthy and the poor man more miserable.
Before the Union, Protective duties existed upon many English-
manufactured goods; amongst others, on woollens, calicoes, muslins,
silks, cotton yarn, cotton twist; in fact on all cloth manufactnred goods.
The Act of the Union continued these duties for twenty years, when
they were gradually reduced until 1825, when they ceased altogether.
Now let us see the glorious result of this national elevator
Freetrade, and what it has done for Ireland.
In Dublin and Cork there were
Under Protection. After 10 Years of Freetrade.
731 Carpet Manufacturers Nil
2,509 Silk Weavers 213
1,034 Braid Weavers 42
5,109 Woollen Manufacturers 622
2,171 Worsted Weavers 90
707 Hosiers 20
714 Wool Combers 127
2,723 Cotton Weavers 218
571 Linen Check Weavers Nil
3,265 Blanket Manufacturers in Kilkenny 924
2,075 Cotton Looms in full work in Balbriggan 225
1,094 Flannel Looms in full work in Wicklow Nil
In Dublin and Cork there were thousands of persons employed in
cotton spinning, bleaching, calico printing, and scores of other industries
which were completely smothered by ten years of glorious Freetrade.
One year before the duties were taken off there was expended
£lll,OOO in Mayo in the purchase of coarse linen web, and in the same
year there was no less a sum than £214,000 expended in Ireland in the
same coarse, unbleached, home-made material.


Whilst all other countries have during the last half-century
doubled, and in many instances quadrupled their population, the
population of Ireland has, from famine, starvation, misery, and
migration decreased from 8,000,000 to 5,000,000. Such has been
the result to Ireland of 50 years of glorious Freetrade. Is it any
wonder that “as a rule, ” Irishmen are Protectionists ? But
instead of being stamped out, if those industries had been
encouraged with increased instead of a decreased population,
with the power and means of consumption, with, improved
steam appliances, with the improved mechanical and chemical
agents, Ireland should be one of the most prosperous and happiest
countries in the world ; but Freetrade and the blight of English
competition at once withered the power of production and the
means of purchasing.
At any rate, if the manufacturing industries in Ireland
under Protective duties had gone on and increased as they ought
and would have done witii the modern improvements in steam,
mechanical and chemicil appliances, there would not have been
any necessity for 150,000 Irish people to fly from their country
annually ; neither would 2,000,000 of these unforunate people
have died from starvation because the potatoes got the Rot.
Preserved Fruits.
The Woodstock, Mr. Walter Lamb’s Fruit Preserving Estab-
lishment, is another proof that Protective duties reduce the price
of articles protected.
American and other canned fruits were imported duty free,
and the selling price was 13s. per dozen.
At length an import duty of 2s. per dozen tins was levied on
all preserved fruits.
The Hon. Walter Lamb took a trip to Europe, and in pass-
ing through America he visited several of the largest tinning
establishments there, and it struck him that with the abundant
supply of fruit in this Colony the industry could be made to pay
here. He at once purchased the best and most modern machinery,
and engaged a gentleman of high reputation as a practical man
and manager. The consequence is that Mr. Lamb has success-
fully established an-extensive and remunerative fruit preserving
factory at his estate, Woodstock, Rooty Hill, which gives employ-
men to 150 men, women, boys, and girls, the whole of whom
appear to be happy and contented, and are well paid for their
labour. A man and his five daughters are employed there ; the
girls’ pay average from 3s. to ss. per day at piece-work and 3s. to
3s. 6d. at day-work. 18 tons of fruit are consumed there daily.
Last year Mr. Lamb preserved 120,000 tins, and this year will
have preserved 240,000 tins, besides 350 tons of very superior
jams ; the latter he sells at 4s. per dozen tins. Last year he
planted 100 acres, and is preparing to plant another 100 acres
this year, with the best description of fruit trees, and he intends
to extend his fruit plantation to 600 acres. His factory is


capable of preserving the products of 2,000 acres, the cultivation
of which will give employment to about 500 adults together with
their families, which will number 2,000, and adding the 150
engaged in the factory, will give 2,150 persons living upon this
industry.
When first starting, Mr. Lamb was met with the usual pre-
judices against Colonial productions, and several leading grocers
refused to purchase, stating they never kept Colonial manufac-
tured articles; but the Woodstock preserves attained such a high
character that those grocers found it to their interest to keep
large stocks of the previously despised Colonial manufactured goods.
Hear the result of establishing this industry in this country :
Before the 2s. per dozen duty was levied the Americans had
a monopoly of this market, and the price was 13s. per dozen tins.
After the duty was put on Mr. Lamb’s establishment got to work.
The importers at once reduced the prices to crush the Colonial
article, but the 2s. per dozen saved him, as he can sell his fruit at
10s. per dozen wholesale, and at that price makes a fair profit,
and pays a fair return for the capital expended. Consequently
this duty of 2s. per dozen has been the cause of giving employ-
ment at good wages to 150 persons, and will when in full working
order be the support of above 2,150 persons, and reducing the
price of the article from 13s. to 10s. per dozen tins ; and will any
person believe that had it not been for Mr. Lamb’s competition
that the importers would ever have made the reduction.
Sugar.
Until a duty of ss. per cwt. was levied on imported raw
sugar we depended upon two or three merchants for our supply
of that article, and the average price for many years was 3d. per
lb., or £27 per ton, and refined sugar, such as the Colonial Sugar
Refinery Company sells, w T as from sd. to 6d. per lb. Let us
inquire what this ss. per cwt. has done.
In 1863 we had 3 acres under sugar crop
1868 „ 2,584
1873 „ 6,670 ~ „
1880 „ 16,971
1887 „ 15,287
There were 1,065 men employed in 1877. The number was
increased in 1887 to 2,645 men. The production in 1877 was
1,049,572 lbs. of sugar and 274,400 gallons of molasses; in 1887
the production was increased to 50,444,800 lbs. of sugar and
880,000 gallons of molasses. On the rivers there are 57 sugar
mills worked by steam of an aggregate of 2,210 horse-power, and
7 horse mills of 26 horse-power ; and Mr. Coghlan, in his official
report on “The Wealth and Progress of New South Wales,”
states that “The Colonial Sugar Refinery Mills on the Richmond
River are among the most complete in any part of the world, and
the sugar manufactured is equal to the best Mauritius and West
Indian samples.”


Now as to prices.
The raw sugar for which we used to pay from 3d. to 4d. per
lb. no person will use now, in consequence of the refined sugar
having been so much reduced in price.
The refined sugar which our mills produce, and is now sold
at from 2|d. to 3d. per lb., we used to pay from sd. to 6d. per lb.
for; and all these glorious results have been caused by an import
duty of ss. per cwt. on raw and 6s. 6d. on refined sugar.
Had it not been for this ss. per cwt. duty we should not
have had 15,278 acres of sugar plantations and 57 steam sugar
mills, giving employment to 2,646 labourers No, nor would wo
now have cheap sugar, but we would still be at the mercy of three
or four merchants who could control the market and make us pay
any price they liked for sugar. But our Colonial competition has
paralysed them.
In this day’s (24th April. 1889) issue of The Daily Telegraph
appears a leading article drawing attention to the unsatisfactory
condition of the sugar-growing industry in Queensland, in conse-
quence of which I think it necessary to inform my readers that I
obtained the above information on the sugar-growing industry in
New South Wales from pp. 252-3-4, 403-4-5 of Mr. Coghlan’s
(Government Statistician) book on “ The Wealth and Progress of
New South Wales,” for the years 1887-88, on consulting which it
will be admitted that the sugar-growing industry of New South
Wales is in a most satisfactory condition, whatever it may be in
Queensland with black and cheap labour.
Tobacco.
Sir, — Tobacco is another production of the soil that should
bear a higher duty. There is no ground better adapted for its
growth than the alluvial flats of the Hunter, the Williams, the
Paterson, and Clarence Rivers. Nor is there a climate more con-
genial to its growth and manufacture than that of those localities.
We all know the fair prospect we had of this country becoming a
great producer of that article, which next to salt is the most uni-
versally used ; and, properly managed, tobacco will yet be one of
our staple commodities. I find that last year wo imported
£227,030 worth of tobacco. Now, under a Protective policy, I
am sure we could not only save that amount to the country, but
soon be in a position to supply our sister Colonies, Victoria,
Adelaide, and Tasmania, whose climate is too cold to grow
tobacco. Up to the year 1851 there was a duty of 2s. per lb. on
imported tobacco, in consequence of which our tobacco growers
had become so successful in the growth and manufacture of that
article that the best judges, the oldest consumers, could not tell it
from American. Well, under this duty of 2s. per lb., let us see
what progress was made in planting; in the year 1848 there were
201 acres under cultivation of tobacco, in 1849 there were 453
acres, in 1850 510, in 1851 731 acres; in that year the duty was
reduced to Is. per lb. Mark the result. In 1852 the plantations


fell from 731 to 58 acres, in 1853 to 32 acres, in 1854 only 8
acres. But did the selling price of tobacco fall when the duty
was reduced Is. per lb. ? No, certainly not, but rose in price !
Immediately the merchants knew they had settled the growth of
tobacco in the Colony they could then monopolise, which they
did, as tobacco never was so dear while it was paying a duty of
2s. per lb. as when it was reduced to Is.—another instance of
Protective duties lowering instead of raising the price to the con-
sumer. Then the duty was again risen to 25., and the conse-
quence was that in one year the ground under crap of tobacco
rose from Bto 116 acres. This was in 1855, and to 218 acres in
1856, that is the last return I have seen ; but from such informa-
tion as I have received I believe it is again rising to the old
quantity of 700 or 800 acres*
From 1856 this industry made wonderful progress up to
1887, when we had in this Colony 2,371 acres of land cropped
with the tobacco plant, and seven large tobacco factories. There
were employed in these factories 760 hands, and fully 450 persons
obtained a living in connection with these institutions; besides, as
I am credibly informed, above 600 persons were employed in cul-
tivating the 2,371 acres of land and in preparing the leaf for the
factories. So that during 1887 there were above 1,700 persons
engaged in this industry, who turned out 2,147,418 lbs. of
tobacco, 16,400 lbs. of cigars and cigarettes, the total value being
£350,544, and tobacco was gradually getting cheaper. During
the sessions of 1887 Parliament in its wisdom increased the excise
duty from Is. to Is. 3d. per lb. on all tobacco manufactured in
the Colony. What has been the result of taxing our own
industry ? This 3d. per lb. was more than the manufacturers*
profits, and as capitalists will not work and employ their capital
at a loss the industry is languishing. The factory hands have
already decreased from about 760 to 400, and unless they get
some relief this important industry will close altogether, when
smokers will find that the importer, when free from Colonial com-
petition, will soon increase the prices, as they did in 1853-54,
when the reduction of the duty crushed the Colonial product.
Woollen Mills.
In Mr. Coghlan’s official reports on “ The Wealth and Pro-
gress of New South Wales” I find the following :—ln 1883 there
were (with a population of 857,741) 9 mills employing 385 per-
sons, and in 1887 (with a population of 1,042,919) the number of
mills had decreased to 5 and the hands employed to 172,” and I
am informed on reliable authority that 2 out of these 5 are
merely dragging on with the expectation of better prospects, and
unless some protection is afforded the industry will be stamped
out. In carrying on this business four firms have become
insolvent.
* The above was written in 1858; I now in 1889 continue the subject.


A gentleman writes me that “ the cause of the falling off is
the large amount of cheap and inferior goods imported into this
market.” These cheap goods are composed of old clothes deviled
(torn by machinery), known as shoddy, cotton and a little wool ;
and as this stuff pays the tailors better than the colonial aticle,
they recommend it to their customers and keep the better article
in the background.
Kerosene. —Kerosene when free from duty was selling at
from 2s. 6d. to 3s. per gallon. An import duty of 6d. per gallon
was placed on it, which has reduced the price to Is. Bd. per gallon.
And our kerosene mines, (besides the oil,) in 1887 produced
<£87,761 worth of shale.
Vinegar. —Vinegar is another commodity which a Protective
duty has reduced the price of. Before the import duty of 6d. per
gallon was put on that very useful and extensively used condi-
ment, its price was from 2s, to 2s. 6d. per gallon in large quanti-
ties, after the duty of 6d. per gallon was levied the price was
reduced to from Is. 4d. to Is. Bd. per gallon, and one vinegar
manufacturer made about 150,000 gallons per annum, and em-
ployed from 35 to 40 men. Since the duty has been taken off,
his output has been materially decreased, consequently he has
been compelled to discharge two-thirds of his men.
Candles. —Before a duty of Id. per lb. was levied on
imported candles they were selling at from lOd. to Is. per lb.
Since the imposition of the duty the prices have been reduced to
from 6d. to 7d. per lb. During 1883 there were £169,000 worth
imported, whilst in 1887 only £53,000 worth were imported.
Biscuits. —A duty of Id. per lb. has caused a reduction of
Id. to 2d. per lb. During 1878 there were £14,900 worth
imported, in 1887 £5,300 worth.
The above reductions are facts known to every housekeeper
in New South Wales. A proof that Protection reduces the price
of every article protected.
And why 1
Mr. Higginbotham, when Attorney-General of Victoria,
stated in his place in Parliament that he was a Freetrader ; that
he was astonished to find that most of the articles protected were
selling cheaper than they were before a duty was put on them.
He said he could not understand the reason, but nevertheless it
was a fact.
It is very evident that Mr. Higginbotham had studied Law
more than Political Economy, or he would have discovered that
there are three reasons why protected manufactured articles can
be sold cheaper than imported ones.
1. The workmen in time become expert, and can do their work
better and much quicker, which of course reduces the cost
of manufacturing.
2. The quantity manufactured is a considerable factor in reduc-
ing the price; for instance, if 100 articles only are manu-


factured at say £1 profit each that would give £lOO ;
if 1,000 are manufactured at ss. profit each, £250 would
be the result; so it will be seen the number reduces the
cost by 75%, and the manufacturer gains an increase of
150%.
3. The manufacturer would receive the profits now made by
the merchants, brokers, &c.
The Traders’ Profits.
There cannot be a doubt that the profits of the merchants
are very large. Then is it any wonder that these gentlemen sub-
scribe so many thousand pounds sterling? “Only last week,” as
stated in the daily papers, “there was a further call of £2,500”
to carry on the contest.
No doubt many of these gentlemen conscientiously believe
that if a Protective policy were established here they would be
great sufferers. (I think otherwise.) Consequently no person can
blame them for warding off the evil as long as possible. I am
sure there are many of our traders who would sacrifice their own
interest to benefit the country. On a superficial view of the
question, many persons would think if the traders profits are so
great that, with the two advantages above mentioned, industries
of which we produce the raw material could be profitably carried
on here. Yes, half the profits would suffice; but manufacturers
know right well that if they started an industry here the traders
would import inferior goods, and sell even at a loss until the
Colonial industry was crushed. And after they had gained their
object they would increase the prices higher than ever to recoup
their losses, as they did with the Liverpool Paper Mills and other
industries started here. It must be plain to any unprejudiced
mind that, to establish manufactures in New South Wales,
we must have Protective duties; not to increase the prices of
goods, but to prevent the crushing business. When established,
home competition will decrease the price of goods.
Basis of Value.
Labour, physical or mental, is the basis of all values. Gold
and silver have a standard value, but it is only relative, because a
sovereign will not at all times, and under all circumstances, pur-
chase the same quantity of goods.
I know a house that was sold by auction in 1849 for £400;
in 1856 the same house was sold for £1,160. The same property
can now be bought for £650. Thus in 1849 sovereigns were
dear, as the house would only realise 400; in 1856 they were
comparatively cheap, as the house did realise 1,160 ; and now in
1889 they are getting dear again, as the house can be bought for
650. During the whole time the house was of the same intrinsic
value ; it afforded the same accommodation, comforts, and enjoy-
ments; in fact, it was more valuable in 1849 than it was in 1856,
as it was new, having only just been built. The sovereign main-
tained its standai'd value, but not the same intrinsic value.


During the time our goldfields were very productive, the
price of bread was from 6d. to Bd. a loaf; but as wages were high
and money plentiful and cheap, no person complained of the high
price of bread.
Now, when bread is 3d. per loaf, from want of employment
and low wages, it is more difficult to obtain 3d. at this date than
it was to obtain Bd. during 1853-54. So, in reality, bread is
dearer now at 3d. per loaf than it was at Bd. formerly. At both
periods a loaf of bread was the same weight, the same quality,
and afforded the same amount of nourishment; the only differ-
■ence being it took more pence to buy it, but it was easier to earn
a shilling then than threepence now.
Is the Country Progressing 1
At political meetings in the City of Sydney and suburbs,
and whilst stumping the country, Sir Henry Parkes’ stock argu-
ment in advocating Preetrade was the progress of the country
under that policy.
Having given some attention to the financial condition of
the country, I was much astonished on reading some of that
gentleman’s speeches; and to satisfy myself whether he or I were
mistaken I consulted the official and public statistics, in which I
found the following records : —That during the three years 1885-
86-87 new mortgages were registered on landed property to the
extent of £24,818,620, on the growing crops £2,900,000, on live
stock £7,500,000, on wool £4,267,000. In the City of Sydney
and suburbs there are over 4,000 empty houses, and rents have
decreased 30 per cent. Real estate in the best position in the
■city has decreased in value from 20 to 30 per cent., and in the
suburbs and country on an average fully 50 per cent. In this
morning’s (11th April) Herald Richardson & Wrench advertise
for sale by auction to-morrow eight valuable properties, by order
of the mortgagees , and in all probability not one will be sold, as
auctioneers find it most difficult to get a bond fide bid.
Tradespeople in every line of business state that trade has
not been so slack for many years.
We are overloading the country with public debt, which now
amounts to forty-one millions sterling, and to pay the interest of
that great debt we are compelled to send one million six hundred
thousand pounds out of the country every year. This money
would build 1,600 houses, and give employment to 12,000 men at
£3 a week each.
During the four years ending 1886 the Government borrowed
twenty-two million seven hundred and eighty-seven pounds, being
at the rate, in round numbers, of five million six hundred and ninety
thousand pounds per annum, and sold three million eight hundred
and eighty-four pounds worth of land, hence our apparent pros-
perity ; but since 1886 a reaction has set in, and in relation to our
small population of a million the enormous debt—and being com-
pelled to withdraw from circulation every year in this country


£1,600,000 to pay interest to absentee capitalists—is most
severely felt by the trading community • in fact, by every class
■of the people of this country.
Hundreds of our skilled mechanics are tramping the streets
of Sydney and the roads of the country unsuccessfully seeking
employment.
The Government had to provide relief work for above six
thousand men, “to keep them from actual starvation,” at wages
from three to five shillings per day. And this day, April the
4th, 1889, I saw above eight hundred men standing opposite the
Colonial Secretary’s Office, who loudly stated that if the Govern-
ment did not find them work they would drop dead in the street
from starvation.
During the Centennial festivities the distress among the
working classes was so great that the Government were compelled
do issue tickets for the supply of bread, meat, and a little quantity
of tea and sugar to eleven thousand persons, each of whom, at a
low estimate, represented five individuals : himself, his wife, and
three children. So that, during this festive week, 55,000 persons
were pauperised through being compelled by necessity to apply
for these miserable supplies. These facts are known to every
person in the country, nevertheless Sir Henry Parkes says the
country is progressing. Yes ! So it is—towards Bankruptcy,
Misery, Destitution, and Starvation.
Imports and Exports.
Reverting to our exports and imports during the five years
ending 1876, our exports were sixty-one million five hundred and
fifty-one thousand two hundred and thirty-three pounds, and our
imports fifty-six million eight hundred and forty-one thousand
seven hundred and sixty-eight pounds; thus our exports during
the said five years exceeded our imports by four million seven
hundred and nine thousand four hundred and sixty-five pounds.
Everyone must remember that wages were high and employment
constant; property of every description was productive ; in fact,
the sun of prosperity cast its rays over every city, town, village,
and district in the country, and not a cloud darkened the com-
mercial or political horizon ; and as a proof of the country’s pros-
perous state when the Government of which I was Secretary for
Mines resigned office, we left in the Treasury one million seven
hundred and thirty thousand pounds of a surplus revenue.
During the three years ending 1879, our imports exceeded
our exports by four millions seven hundred and thirty-six thou-
sand nine hundred and thirteen pounds, so we lost twenty-seven
thousand four hundred and forty-eight pounds more than we
gained in the previous five years. It will be remembered that
business was a little depressed, but a relief occurred during 1880,
when the balance of trade was again in our favour to the extent
of one million two hundred and two thousand seven hundred and
forty-nine pounds, and taking the seven years ending 1880 the


country was one million four hundred and seventy-five thousand
three hundred and one pounds on the right side of the ledger.
With this overplus and seven millions of borrowed money we
appeared to be prospering, although the trade was against us of
above a million per annum up to the end of 1883.
During the next three years, 1884-5-6, the imports exceeded
the exports by the sum of sixteen million nice hundred and
eighty eight thousand three hundred and seven pounds, being an
average of five million six hundred and sixty-two thousand seven
hundred and sixty-nine pounds per annum ; and although we
have during the three years last-mentioned borrowed sixteen
million five”hundred thousand pounds, and from 1877 to 1887
received nineteen million one hundred and six thousand three
hundred and eighty-two pounds from the sale of Crown Lands,
and borrowed twenty-nine million three hundred and nine thou-
sand eight hundred and thirty pounds, the country has drifted
into the depressed and wretched state I have described.
Our Progress During Ten Years of Freetrade.
The following tabulated statement will show at a glance how
New South Wales has progressed under ten years of Freetrade:—
When the Government of which I was a member left office in
1877 we left in the Treasury a surplus of £1.730,000
Prom 1877 to 1887 we borrowed 29,309,830
The receipts during the same period for the sale of Crown
Lands 19,106,382
Our present deficit, say 3.000,000
£53,146,212
Or at the annual rate for ten years of 5,311,621
Nevertheless, Sir Henry Parkes says we are progressing. So we
are—downhill.
Can any better result he expected when we consider that
hundreds of thousands of pounds have been expended in all parts
of the countiy in the construction of unnecessary works? Court-
houses and gaols seem to be a favourite Sinking Fund. <£20,000,
£30,000, and up to £IOO,OOO are expended in localities where
the work is unnecessary. 1 was staying in a provincial town
where the people were agitating for a court-house, gaol, and post
and telegraph office. I met a gentleman who was taking a lead-
ing part In the movement, and said to him, “Your present accom-
modation for these institutions appear to me to be quite ample. I
don’t think you require more.” “ Perhaps not,” said my friend ;
“ b u t large sums of public money are being expended in other
places, and we don’t see why we should not have our share, and
we will not stop until we get it.’
Leaving out of the calculation the imports and exports,
including wool, tallow, hides, and all other products obtained
from pastoral and agricultural pursuits, also all revenue proper,
including all returns arising from the leasing, temporary occupa-
tion, and all other benefits arising from Crown Lands other


than their absolute sale, the money received from the sale of
Crown Lands is not in any sense of the word revenue; It is not
a return from an investment. It is not an annual profit from
land, such as taxes, customs, and excise duties, but an absolute
sale of the capital or fee-simple, and the principal asset to meet
the large public debt of the country, and the sale of the above-
mentioned £19,000,000 worth of land has made the country
poorer by that amount.
All moneys received from the sale of Crown Lands should be
set apart for the redemption of the public debt. It is argued that
the borrowed money is expended on such works as will improve
the public estate.
When a loan is proposed, it is stated it is for the construction
of reproductive works. Then let the rents, earnings, or other
productions pay the interest on the cost, and any receipts from
the sale of the public estate should be employed in paying off* the
original cost.
New South Wales may be compared to a spendthrift who
has obtained a valuable inheritance, and in consequence of living
beyond his means is compelled to sell a portion of his estate every
year to pay for his extravagances, and, in course of time, he dis-
covers that he has to seek relief in bankruptcy. A true exempli
fication of a country that is annually
selling a large portion of its
territory, and putting the proceeds
meet its annual expenditure.
into the general revenue to
For the
following illustration
I have taken the middle year of
the three. During 1885 our imports amounted to £23,737,460,
and our exports to £16,758,107. So in that year our imports
exceeded our exports by £6,987,353, and among those impor-
amounted to £23,737,460,
tations I find that there are £7,164,405 worth of which we pro-
duce the whole of the raw materials required to manufacture
them, as the following list will show
Agricultural implements £54,260
Glue 2,693
Apparel & 510p5,£1,270,510 ; Wheat, oats, barley, &c. 379,173
half of this item ... 635,255 Pollard and sharps ... 16,600
Arrowroot ... ... 2,563
Bags and sacks ... ... 18,312
Preserves ... ... ... 27,411
Other Pres.,vegetables, &c. 26,170
Baskets and basketware 6,707 j Slates ... ... ... 29,989
Beer 419,454 i Grease ... ... ... 1,693
Slates 29,989
Beer ... ... ... 419,454
Biscuits ... ... ... 7,898
Blacking ... ... ... 8,997
Bran ... ... ... 58,072
Butter ... ... ... 159,536
Candles ... ... ... 82,130
Iron and steel .. ... 170,149
Iron castings and tanks 20,258
Iron pipes... ... .. 131,273
Galvanised manufactures 25,170
Jams and jellies ... ... 73,104
Cordage and ropes ... 44,429 Leather, manufactured... 67,710
Carriages, drays & waggons 45,986 Boots and shoes ... ... 582,418
Confectionery 24,978 Machinery 326,316
Leather, manufactured... 67,710
Confectionery ... ... 24,978
Drapery, includ. woollens, Pickles and sauces ... 65,561
£2,887,111; half of this 1,443,555 Saddlery and harness ... 55,634
Fish 102,991
Flour and bread... ... 649,327
Fruits ... ... ... 280,802
Soap 24,226
Starch ... ... ... 24,746
Paper ... ... ... 248,545


Timber
434,560
Preseved meat ... ... 32,929
Doors and sashes
45,642
Condensed milk ... ... 66,599
Tinplate
55,322
Nails 43,530
Tinware ...
13,478
Bolts, nuts, and rivets ... 22,445
Turnery and wood houses
Vinegar ...
29,599
10,074
Total ... .£7,164,405
Matches ...
66,226
If the above articles were manufactured in the Colony the
benefits which would accrue are incalculable. £7,164,405* annu-
ally circulating, fluctuating, and creating wealth in every direc-
tion, as I have previously shown at page 24. It would give
employment to 47,600 persons at £3 a week each, and every shilling
would get into immediate circulation, and not a person in the
country, from the most wealthy merchant to the street basket-
man, from the highest educated to the most illiterate, but would
be substantially and permanently benefitted. But to the rising
generation, the many thousands of young people who are annually
leaving the public and private schools, the establishment of vari-
ous descriptions of factories is absolutely necessary, unless we
educate them and then abandon them to larrikinism and crime.
Tup: Number of Young People.
There are 240,000 children between the ages of 5 and 13
attending the public and private schools- of the country; that
number divided by 8 will give 30,000, which will be the number
of young people who leave the schools every year, requiring
employment, and the number will increase as the population
increases, and how are they to find employment 1 At the last
general election one of the leading Freetraders was asked, “ If we
don’t establish some industries what shall we do with our boys ? ”
“ \y e will build gaols for them ” said this Freetrade apostle. A
more cruel and heartless answer never came from the mouth
of a human being. Is it possible that we are expending
so many hundred thousand pounds annually to educate the
rising generation, to pass their days in gaols and other penal
establishments, to disgrace their country, and be a curse to
society 1 How different is the object of the Protectionists—they
wish to establish industries, to enable the young Australian to
learn a useful and profitable employment, so that he can exercise
* If the whole of .£7,141,948 worth of goods were manufactured in
this country, it would take under the most favourable circumstances
several years to introduce and construct the necessary machinery and
buildings. There would still remain £16,595,512 worth for the merchants
to import; besides, they would soon open up a profitable trade with our
manufactures, which could be produced cheaper than such goods could be
produced by any of our neighbours, they having to obtain from us coal,
the most essential ingredient in manufacturing enterprise. And from
the geographical position of this country, her merchants would command
the whole of the trade of the Islands in the East and other places not so
bountifully supplied by nature with the various products necessary for
manufacturing enterprise.


his ability and inventive talent in developing and bringing to the
highest perfection the vast natural resources of his country. To
effect this object we must not be content with a few trades, but
must create as great a variety of industries as we can produce the
necessary raw materials for. The young mind must be occupied
either for good or evil. If it is not led in the path of honour and
morality it will most likely take the path of immorality and crime.
Fathers and mothers ! which course do you desire for your chil-
dren ? That of larrikinism, immorality, dishonour, and crime; or
morality, honour, honesty—useful and respectable members of the
community ?
Barristers.
No class of persons in the world is so protected as the barri-
sters of the Supreme Court. Nevertheless, two-thirds of them
have the audacity to bark and snarl at, and try to howl down
Protection ! I with all respect desire to direct their attention to
the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. vii. 5), “ Thou hypocrite, first
cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see
clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother’s eye.” Let barri-
sters cast off their cloak of protection and throw open the doors
of the Supreme Court to the public. If we have Freetrade in
Commerce we will have Freetrade in Law.
They should have no more right or privilege in that institu-
tion than the general public, as all its costs are paid out of the
General Revenue, and they contribute no more to it than any
other eitizen. Nevertheless, no citizen, nonnatter how intelligent
or respectable he may be, can approach the Seat of Justice unless
through the Wig and Gown.
Twelve Reasons,
1. That the balance of trade in favour of a new country is its
income ; the balance against it is its loss. 2. That the imports and
exports constitute the trade of a country. 3. That a country should
never allow her imports to exceed her exports. 4. That if incapable
of increasing her exports she should decrease her imports. 5. To
effect this she should produce and manufacture more at home,
and buy less from abroad. 6. In order to make New South
Wales produce and manufacture more we should follow the
example set us by England and America, viz., to foster our
industry so as to secure the home market, until we arrive at
sufficient strength to compete with other countries. This can
only be done as they have done it, i.e., by placing protective
duties on imported goods. 7, That our natural productions fur-
nish an ample supply of raw materials to form the basis of a
variety of manufactures. 8, Nearly the whole of which we send
away in the raw state 13,000 miles to be manufactured, which
costs nine-tenths of the whole. So if we send 25 lbs. of wool to


England, which costs 205., and import 1 yard of broadcloth, which
weighs 1 lb., for which we pay 205., the country in reality loses 19s.
9. That we had several woollen cloth manufactories, which were
yearly increasing in number and also in the quality of their goods.
That in the year 1883 there were 9, in 1887 only 5, and if that
branch of industry had been fostered there would in all proba-
bility be double that number, and the quantity and quality of
the cloth so much improved by competition that they would now
have been able to supply our own market with all the woollen
goods we require, and have saved the country £480,000 a year ; it
also being a description of labour which gives employment to
large numbers of women and children; for them there is now no
profitable employment. 10. That in consequence of Freetrade
these factories, with their expensive machinery, are now going to
ruin, that used to give employment to hundreds of hands, who
are all thrown out of work, some of them houseless and hungry,
that could not be profitably employed at any other occupation by
the destruction of this branch of industry alone, for which we
have to thank Freetrade and the desire of buying in the cheapest
market. 11. That competition will prevent one occupation from
paying better than another, as capital and labour will reduce the
price of articles protected, as it has done elsewhere. 12. That it is the
duty of the Government to make such laws as will prevent foreigners
from taking the profitable employment out of the hands of our
people ; and last, that New South Wales wants population, that
high wages will bring population, and good profits will bring
capitalists. That population, high wages, good profits, and
capital will soon make Australia a great nation, her people
prosperous, and, with God’s blessing, virtuous and happy.
Camperdown, 1889.
I purpose shortly to publish a Comparative Statement of the
Progress and Prosperity of New South Wales and Victoria.




