

Baptism IN Water, or Baptism
WITH Water ?
A PAMPHLET
REV. JAMES S. H. ROYCE,
WESLEYAN MINISTER.
. . . “ Certain Anabaptists do. falsely boast.”— SBth Article Church of England.
“ Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.”— Ninth Commandment,
“ Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.” —Communion Service,
“ And let all the people say, Amen.” —Psalm cvi,, 48.
MELBOURNE:
EERGUSSON AND MOORE, GENERAL PRINTERS,
48 FLINDERS LANE EAST.
1869.


';
&‘-i- J
i,O


MS>33S If IS HZ
WHICH IS SCRIPTURAL P
BAPTISM IN WATER; OK, BAPTISM WITH WATER.
“For Christ sent me not to baptise, but to preach the gospel.'
1 Cor. i. 17.
We have chosen this passage, not so much for the purpose of text,
as we have to indicate our views in regard to the value of an
ordinance, compared with the important duty of preaching the
gospel. Not long since, we heard an exposition of the eighth
chapter of the Acts, when, among other statements, we heard this:
“ I’ll preach baptism! lam not ashamed of the gospel of Christ:
for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believeth.” Now, if that expositor had had the power of
penetration, he would have perceived that he confounded things
that differ, and between which Paul makes a very important
distinction; for he says, “Christ sent me not to baptise, but to
preach the gospel.” But, setting aside the comparative merits of
these two points, we proceed to a question, which is by
no means regarded as unimportant, viz., Which is Scriptural,
baptism in water, or baptism with water? The former of these
propositions is regarded as the correct one by a recent author,*
in what some think a masterly production, where he has tried
to establish this point through the medium of execrable English,
barbarised Greek, false premises, illogical conclusions, plagiarised
patches, empty bombast, misquoted texts of Scripture, and
wretched attempts at scholarship; the whole forming a hetero-
geneous jumble from which no logical 'sequence can be drawn.
The author has also stooped to personality, referring to another
minister by name, and has likewise sneeringly designated him
*“ Believers’ Immersion, the only Scriptural Baptism: A Sermon. By A.
F. Porter.”


by the slang phrase of—“our learned friend over the way;”
besides reflecting in no choice language on all other Christians
who dare to differ from him. We need scarce premise, that if
others, in warding off the attacks he has made, handle their
antagonist without gloves, they only do what should astound no
one.
In all literary battles it is a serious affair when false positions
assumed by an antagonist have to be bombarded and demolished;
and still more serious is it when such work has to be done in
connection with the interests of religious truth; but to the task
of exposing the sin of bearing false witness we are now about
to proceed. Our author has had the audacity to cite certain
witnesses in defence of his position. In some cases he has put
statements into their mouths which they never uttered; in other
instances he has furnished garbled extracts from their works
shorn- off from the context, and in re Dr. Halley, has made
him the exponent of the very thing that the doctor calls in
question. Turning to page 7of that masterly production,
Barnes is cited as a witness to immersion; that excellent com-
mentator is made to say, in reference to Christ s baptism,
“He was baptised in the Jordan in water.” Barnes says no such
thing! Here is his note on Matt. iii. 16:—“This shows that he
had’ descended to the river. It literally means he went up
directly from the water. The original does not imply that he
had descended into the river.” That is one false misrepresen-
tation. Take another. Turning to page 8, section 4, we come to
the proposition purporting that all scholars hold the views of
the Baptists about immersion. He says previously, “To a Greek
nothing else but immersion would be baptism —baptize to a
Greek is dip.” Our mental vision no doubt is defective because
we cannot see that dip and immerse are precisely the same as our
author here makes out, while, as scholars invariably tell us, there
is an important distinction. But here is another witness. Having
dismissed the Presbyterian Barnes, who has turned “king’s
evidence,” we are now to examine a Congregationalist, Dr.
Halley: “It may be said that men were baptised into Moses,
baptised into Christ, baptised into His death, baptised into
the name of the Father, &c., which expressions, if literally
translated, would be immersed into Moses, immersed into
Christ, &c.” Now, doctor, you are on your oath. Are these your
sentiments? Did you write this? Well, to be sure, says the
doctor, I wrote it, but as to my sentiments, that is another
thing; however, “what I have written, I have written,” and I


will quote to ’ you how I wrote. Congregational Lecture,
vol. x., p. 288:—“Our case is, that in the New Testament the
words baptise and baptism occur in appropriation to religious
rites in which there was no immersion, either in the strict sense
of dipping, or in the loose sense of covering, at least, in the
emblematical and visible acts. Let me explain the reason of
introducing the last clause. It may be said that men were
baptised into Moses, baptised into Christ, baptised into His
death , baptised into the name of the Father, which expres-
sions, if literally translated, would be immersed into Moses,
immersed into Christ, and so on; so that the force of the
verb may expend itself through its own preposition eis into
its own noun Moses or Christ, and leave the mode of using
water indefinite.” So much for Dr. Halley being a Baptist; he
has not only been misrepresented, but libelled.
We now proceed to cross-examine a third witness, the founder
of the Methodist Church; the importance he attaches to this
witness is clear from the insertion of his name on the title page
of the sermon; doubtless, this is also to answer the purpose of
warning wicked Wesleyans of their apostasy from dipping. On
page 9, after citing Penn, the Quaker (who did not believe in
baptism at all) he introduces John Wesley, and he cites the note
on Horn. vi. 4, but he suppresses that on the parallel, in Col. ii. 12,
where Wesley says: “The ancient manner of baptising by
immersion is as manifestly alluded to here as the other manner
of baptising by sprinkling or pouring of water is, in Heb. x. 22.”
Then, to clinch the matter, our author refers to two incidents
in “Wesley’s Journal” of 1736, to show that Wesley was a
Baptist, and observes: “This was quite different from our
time. Now, his followers not only practise sprinkling almost
exclusively, but call the act of their founder ‘ vulgar and inde-
cent.’ ” All this is produced to prove Wesley a Baptist; and,
in fact, many of the disciples of our author have been persuaded
that Wesley was a Baptist. No satire would be too keen in
exposing the dishonesty, or the profound ignorance of any one
who would quote “ Wesley’s Journal” of 1736, to prove him a
Baptist. Why, he was not an evangelical clergyman then :
not only did he hold to Baptismal Regeneration and Apostolic
Succession, but he deemed himself a sacrificing priest. All this
he afterwards renounced; and of it he was heartily ashamed.
About two years after the above events he stated, in his “ Jour-
nal,” that he who went to America to convert others was not
converted himself. His treatise on “ Baptism” was written


twenty years after the formation of the Methodist Societies, in
which he says: “ And as there is no clear proof of dipping in
Scripture, so there is very probable proof of the contrary. It is
true, we read of being buried with Christ in baptism. But no-
thing can be inferred from such a figurative expression. Nay,
if it held exactly, it would make as much for sprinkling as for
plunging; since, in burying, the body is not plunged through
the substance of the earth, but rather earth is poured or sprinkled
upon it.” And, finally, this witness says: “ The greatest
scholars and most proper judges in the matter testify, that the
original term translated baptise means, not dipping, but washing
or cleansing.” After all this, we need scarce ask the question,
Was John Wesley a Baptist after the formation of the Methodist
Societies? We indignantly repudiate such an insinuation,
coming as it does through a gross caricature of his sentiments.
“ I speak as unto wise men, judge ye what I say.” The fact is,
when an author quotes in this manner, all the rest of his evidence
is invalidated. How could we trust him? In a court of justice,
not only would a jury refuse to have their time occupied by any
farther examination of witnesses, but the judge would declare
that a clear case of perjury was made out. Perjury ! that is the
word!
We shall now proceed to notice the value of the statistics
given by our author, and his Greek quotations, neither of which
appear reliable ; we say nothing about the thousands of martyrs
he refers to on page 3, who, we have always understood, died
for their Christianity in general, and not for their baptism in
particular. We pass on to that jumbled paragraph near the foot
of the third page, and terminating on the fourth. He there says,
in America they number “ seven millions” in their congrega-
tions. In the Australasian Wesleyan AlmanacTc , issued at the
Book Depot, Lonsdale-street, Melbourne, we find statistical
returns given, on page 11, of all denominations in America,
taken for the most part from tbeir own official documents. It is
there stated, that the adherents, including the members, num-
ber “ four millionsso there is a discrepancy of only three
millions —that is all—only three millions! We need not say
mtich about his 2500 arguments against forty, on another point,
after tracing this discrepancy.
But, to go on with the subject:—He informs us that Baptists
are found “ in Europe, Asia, India, China, and the Islands of the
Sea.” Fancy a geographer reading that nomenclature. “Indeed!”
he would say, “ I have always placed India and China in Asia j


but from this description it would appear they are outside of it.
But, as to the Islands of the Sea, does he mean by that expres-
sion—Polynesia ? If so, I challenge the assertion ; for, though
there may be a few cases of the London Mission and the Amer-
can Board of Missions employing Baptists, yet I know of no one
Baptist Society in Polynesia, and I laboured myself in that held
for some years. By this time we shall perceive the necessity of
exercising great care in quoting such an authority as the one we
are now criticising.
But let us look at his Greek references. He remarks, page 5,
“ Let us away to the Greek language. And here is Donnegans
Greek Lexicon, one of the best authorities extant, published
under the supervision of the faculty of a noted Presbyterian
College, and with him all lexicographers agree on this word.
No doubt, his neophytes listened to this bombast with dilated
mouths and eyes, while they thought, “ What a great man he
is!” But such is our dulness in appreciating empty rhetoric,
that to us it comes like sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal.
Why, to Donnegan, in our college days, we just doffed our hats
and said, “ Thank you, sir; but we prefer Liddell and Scott s
for the classical, and llobinson for the Hellenistic Greek
say the Fello\fs of Oxford, Cambridge, and the students of the
London University. Donnegan, at the time referred to, was to
be had at London bookstalls at a mere fraction of the original
cost. A wonderful authority, indeed! Yes, you may say what
good things you can for Donnegan, but speak the truth about
others! The Greek barbarisms that we are now about to point
out are certainly amusing. At the bottom of the 6th page he
gives the word ehaptisonts. We find no such word however in
Matt. iii. 6, but we read ehaptizonto. On page 7 he gives
en udata, and says that it is so in the original. No such thing.
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John knew how to write Greek, and
they all put the word in the dative case, and give udati; and the
grammar tells us that the dative case is the one of instrumen-
tality, and the Lexicon also says en governs the dative; but
here our author gives the accusative plural and not the dative
singular. Not only a text misquoted, but a blunder in the
Greek over which a schoolboy would laugh. And though he
has the rashness to say “ baptised with water’ is not in the
original, I put the four Evangelists against his statement, and
each has udati (case of instrumentality,) and not the accusative
plural; and for my part, I much prefer the Evangelists, as they
give me what our author demands, a “ Thus saith the Lord.


We have sometimes questioned the truth of the old adage, “ A
little learning is a dangerous thing,” but, verily, we think there
is some truth in it after all. And though we are told, on page 6,
that the New Testament contained the language of “ illiterate
fishermen” and the “common people,” yet it would appear that
some people, who “ away to the Greek language,” know hut
very little about its meaning.
We shall now proceed to a consideration of the question,
Which is Scriptural, baptism in water, or baptism with water?
In pursuing this inquiry we lay before you a few propositions.
I.— Baptism by immersion is not Scriptural because it is
antagonistic to the spirit of the Christian dispensation. The
ways of religion are those of pleasantness, the yoke of Christ is easy
and His burden is light; and He who “knoweth our frame” and
“ remembereth that we are dust,” says, “ I will have mercy and
not sacrifice.” Such sentiments ill accord with the idea of
public immersion being an ordinance of the Christian dispensa-
tion.
1. On account of its repulsive nature. I speak advisedly
when I ask, Is not modesty itself outraged by the public
immersion of females? A strict regard to modesty was not
overlooked by Paul himself, when he directs that a woman
should not remove her veil in an assembly, though for the
purpose of an act of religious worship. “We are not so
particular,” says one, “in our notions of modesty as the Jews
were, yet we should regard it as an indelicate thing for the
sexes to bathe each other. He then suggests, What would be
the opinion of the public, if the proprietor of sea-bathing
machines were to announce, that because of the superior safety,
his men would attend both sexes in their ablutions ? Why, the
force of opinion would soon lead him to a different course. We
know that it is not easy to speak on this point without giving
offence, and yet we have sufficient reason. A powerful writer
asks, “ What impression would be made upon the minds of
unbelieving Jews and Gentiles by witnessing the ceremony as in
some modern instances? Imagine a young minister like Timothy
administering the ordinance to a number of virgins in the
presence of grave Jews. Having descended into the water, he
orders the juveniles to stand aside that others may see the sight,
and says, ‘Make way for this sweet audience to come down into
the water.’ He receives the ladies very carefully, puts them
under the water, and then, dripping wet, they return from the
water through a crowd of saints and sinners. What sort of an


impression would all this make on the venerable sons of
Abraham? They, of course, could not view it from a Christian
stand-point, and would only compare it with their own religious
ceremonies; and, methinks, the sentiments pervading their
minds would be those of thankfulness for the superiority of the
morals of their religion, which never allowed them to violate
one of the rules of common decency, for the sexes t(T bathe each
other.” Daniel Isaacs says, “ I am informed that, in some
places, dresses are kept for immersion with lead inserted at the
bottom; this,” he adds, “is proper, being acquainted with a case in
which considerable distress was felt for the want of such a conveni-
ence. Scenes at immersions have at times ill accorded with the
precept, ‘ Let all things be done decently.’ ” We have read of the
shrill cry of a female as she felt herself going under the water; of
another, who wrenched herself from the hands of the minister
and fell with a loud splash into the water; of others who have
fainted in the ordeal; and there has been a vivid recollection of
the ghastly face of a female, hanging wet and motionless over
the arm of a person dragging the figure to the vestry door. “ I
speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say.” Is this a Christian
requirement? Which is Scriptural, baptism in water, or
baptism with water? This can be settled, without Greek,
from such a stand-point.
2. Immersion is not Scriptural , because it is not capable of
universal application. Christianity possesses this grand pecu-
liarity—the principle of universal adaptation; it will flourish in
any climate and bloom under any sky. You cannot say this of
the idolatrous religions of India and China, because, if you gave
them a change of climate they would soon die a natural death.
When, therefore, we find anything militating against the uni-
versal adaptation of the Gospel, we have our suspicions at once
about its family connection. No wonder, then, that we refuse
to claim alliance with immersion. There are two insuperable
difficulties in the way of our believing it “the only Scriptural
baptism:”—
(t.) There is a physical difficulty in regard to the frozen regions
of the earth, where the water is a solid block of ice for nine
months of the year, and where water for culinary purposes has
to be procured by melting the snow. There are also the arid
spots in tropical regions, where vegetation, under a vertical sun,
languishes amid the sand and rock; or, even in such cities as
Samaria, where one deep well was the only source of supply to
all the people—the spot pointed out by our author as “ one of


the two places ” where infant baptism was not practised. Baptists
like to lead us to well-watered plains, but they are very careful
to avoid these dry and frozen places.
(2.) A similar difficulty presents itself, and a serious one, too,
as it regards persons of delicate constitution, and others in
dying circumstances. I ask, if immersion is the rule under
such circumstances ? Why, we know it would he madness and
murder. Yes, there are instances in which Baptists themselves
would not administer immersion. We know that some have
tried to evade this point by saying that no ill effects have been
known to follow ; but this is contrary to experience. We have
not to travel many miles to find a case of severe cold ensuing
from immersion; we know of another in England of a more
serious nature still; and we have read of others where fever and
death have followed. Two young ladies, in England, who had
been teased to go under the water, in whom were the seeds of
incipient disease, at once consulted a physician on the matter;
his judgment was strong and decided, predicting disastrous
results, on the nervous system in particular, as well as the
constitution in general. His advice was wisely adopted and
immersion dispensed with. A minister of the Methodist Epis-
copal Church, in America, was once called to visit an unconverted
man in dying circumstances, who had been brought up under
the Baptist persuasion, and whose wife was a member of that
church. Through the blessing of God, under the instructions
received, the man was led to an enjoyment of peace with God,
but he had never been baptised. The Methodist, not wishing
to proselyte, handed the dying man over to the two Baptist
ministers, under whose pastoral care he had hitherto been
placed, and said, “ The man wishes to be baptised and receive
the Lord’s Supper, but,” he added, “it is my firm opinion, if
you immerse him he will die under it.” “ Oh, well,” they said,
“he is your convert, take him and do what you like.” “He
replied, “If I baptise him, it will be by pouring or sprinkling.
If I do this will you receive him?” They gave him an emphatic
“No!” saying, “we will have nothing to do with him.” Turning
to the dying man, he said, “ What shall I do? They refuse to
immerse you, and if I baptise you, they refuse to receive you.”
He said, “Do what you like, the mode is not essential! ” The
dying man was then baptised and the Lord’s Supper adminis-
tered to him, when the Baptist ministers wore invited to join,
which they absolutely refused to do. I ask, if an ordinance
presenting such anomalies as these can be of a Scriptural


character? Yes; Which is Scriptural, baptism in water, or
baptism with water?
11. Immersion is against Scripture interpretation. In dealing
with this part of the subject, we are at once launched on a sea
of strife where many a battle has been fought, and where, yet,
some of the combatants are ever renewing the strife. We can
positively declare that not a word ever came from our lips on
the subject in any way referring to any other body of Christians,
nor did we ever, on a baptismal occasion, utter a word that
bordered on controversy. Never, no, never! Not till the
present champion of the battle entered the field and defied the
whole world did we ever think of occupying our time in such
a way as he has set the example, though he said once, “ he did
not come here to draw swords with anybody.” I suppose he
was going to slay us outright. But, forsooth, if we put ourselves
on the defensive, and prove too, that our assailants are not
invulnerable, then they have the effrontery to charge us with
being intolerant, and to say, as on page 3, “ Baptists are not
persecutors.” Oh, no! Seepage 17, sec. 5: “You will expect
me to show when this innovation was made, and this worthless
counterfeit for baptism was passed .” Page 13: “We shall
utterly reject it, and preach against it, as being unscriptural and
a harmful innovation.” Why, the spirit of intolerance and
persecution breathes through each line of this. According to
this indictment, others, who differ from the Baptists, perpetuate
a counterfeit, that is to say, in plain English, they carry on a
religious swindle. Hark ye! Episcopalians, Presbyterians,
Congregationalists, Wesleyans, and all who dare to differ from
this divine; ye are perverting the right ways of the Lord by
practising a swindle! Oh, yes! It is perfectly right for Baptists
to assail others, but to say a word reflecting on the views of a
Baptist, that would be shocking. “ Try might and main to
convert one to immersion, that is laudable ; but touch the pre-
judices of the other, and, if you do not wish to be covered with
hornets and stung till you are frantic—flee ! ”
Now, in entering upon the critical examination of baptize, we
must refer you to some foolish and rash assertions made by our
author as to the original meaning of this word. Page 6, he
says, “If sprinkling were the original word, then we should
have rantize instead of baptise .” Yes, and if haptizo meant to
dip, then the word duno would be employed, and if it meant to
immerse and nothing else, then we should have the word kata-
kluzo and not baptizo. He makes no distinction between dip


and immerse, whereas, they are two different things; the one is a
double action, viz., to put in and take out, the other is to cover
up. Then the author winds up by saying that Christ commanded
the disciples to “ teach and dip ” when in the original it is not
dip, duno, but haptizo. On page 7he says, the German Testa-
ment is right in calling John the Baptist the dipper. Query —
Does he know German? Johannes der Tauter is John the
Baptist, and the German for dipper is not Tiggpr, but Tuncker,
hence the name of the sect called Tunckers, or Dunkards, who
baptise by dipping three times. This piece of German inform-
ation which he has given us is about as reliable as that of King
James and the English translation, as there is another version of
that matter. To climax his point, however, on page 7 he
intimates that his veracity would be questioned if he affirmed
that dipping of people was putting a few drops of water on them;
then, he says, he would be telling a falsehood, or, he does not
know the meaning of the most simple words. Well, if he
affirm that dip and immerse are precisely the same, we are
prepared to accept this latter alternative, and tell him that he
does not know the meaning of the most simple words. In that
case he does not understand English, much less Greek, or
German.
But, for the sake of an argument, let us assume what is taken
for granted, that haptizo means only what our author wishes to
fasten to it. In that case I have a word to say about the word
deipnon, the Greek term for the other sacrament; this term not
only means a supper, but the most substantial meal of the day.
Now, if it is necessary to adhere to the primary meaning of a
word, where is the consistency in calling out for much water in
the oneTcase, and being satisfied’with a little bit of bread and a
sip of wine in the other, when it means a full meal? A Baptist
was once pushed on this point. He replied that it was not neces-
sary to eat much bread and drink much wine to carry out the
spirit of the sacrament, because the action was the same, whether
we eat and drink much or little. Yes, we reply, and in baptism
precisely the same principle is recognised; it matters not whether
we use much or little water, as the mode is non-essential , unless
the Baptists can prove some secret charm in being dipped in
cold water.
But while the meaning of deipnon , supper, is fixed and
unequivocal, so it is not with haptizo; classical and Hellenistic
Greek, and lexicographers, too, are in array against the position
assumed, that haptizo has only one meaning; they say it means


not only dip and immerse, but also to pour, sprinkle, tinge, wet,
moisten and to cleanse; moreover, classical authors make a
distinction in the meaning of terms. Aristotle, referring to a
certain spot, says, that the coast, with rushes and seaweed, was
not baptised, but it was emerged a clear proof that
baptism did not always mean immersion.
Take another instance, where sprinkle is understood of bap-
tism. Psalm li. 7: “Purge me with hyssop” is rendered in the
Septuagint, “ Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop.” Theodoret,
in his commentary, applies this to baptism. “ Thou shalt sprinkle-
me with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed, for the gift of baptism
alone can produce this cleansing.”
But, perhaps, we shall be told that these are only human
authorities, and our author only wants the Word of God.
Yes, and so it is with ourselves; in fact, we are delighted
with the idea of turning to that source. Let us see what
evidence can be found there. One of the most ancient records
of baptism in that source is the baptism of the Israelites, when
passing through the Red Sea, where St. Paul says, they were
baptised. Yes, says one, here is a case for you, they were
baptised in the sea; here is a clear case of immersion. Well, I
suppose our mental vision is defective, as we do not see it, and
as we are told, too, that the waters were driven back and stood
like a wall on either side. Moses says they passed over on dry
ground, and Isaiah says, dry shod. Baptists say, “ Scripture
"knows nothing for baptism but immersion.” The sacred writers
being judges, here were 600,000 men, besides women and
children, all baptised while they were on dry ground, and dry
shod. Yes, it is replied, but what of the cloud, they were
immersed in that, surely ? Immersed in a cloud! Dwight says,
that will do for poetry, but not for sober prose. We prefer the
interpretation of the Psalmist, when referring to God leading
Moses and Aaron, he has these remarkable words, Psalm Ixxvii.
16, 17, “The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee;
they were afraid, the depths also were troubled. The clouds
youred out waterP This is an undisputable proof that baptism
did not always mean immersion. Yes, there was immersion,
though! But it was not the Israelites who were immersed.
The Egyptians were, and they all sank like lead in the mighty
waters, and their bodies were not seen again until they floated
on the shores, as evidences of Jehovah’s wrath.
I now call your attention to another instance of the term
baptise being employed by St. Paul, where, he says, it meant
sprinkle—l refer you to Hebrews ix, 10, where we read, “divers


to#
14 J * WHICH IS SCRIPTUEAH?
washings:” In the Greek it is divers baptisms (hacpopoi;
V and what they are is explained in the 19th and following verses,
where we are informed that Moses sprinkled both the book and
the people, also the tabernacle, and all the vessels of the
ministry, and he distinctly calls these sprinklings, baptisms.
Query. —Did anyone ever find fault with the Apostle for what
our author would regard as a senseless ceremonial ? Some of
these subjects were not living creatures, they were inanimate
objects! We have now in mind our author’s strictures, where
he refers to idiots and maniacs almost in terms of profanity.
We, with him, do not suppose that they are the particular objects
to select in preaching the Gospel, but, somehow, we cannot help
regarding them, unfortunate as is their position, as a part of the
redeemed property of Christ, and as possessed with immortal
spirits, and hence, a part of the nations Christ has told us to
disciple. But our philanthropical author reminds us that there are
“other creatures in the world” after ranking Infant Baptism
with the baptism of idiots. What does he mean ? —horses, cows,
sheep, goats ? Hark ye! Page 3, Baptists “ never ridicule,” and
they “ respect the honest convictions of all Christians !”
Take another instance of the term baptizo being employed
Y where no immersion transpired. In Dan. iv. 33, it is said that
\ Nebuchadnezzar was “wet with the dew of heaven in the Greek
Iwe read baptised with the dew of heaven. Here the idea of
5 immersion would be absurd.
J I now invite your attention to those baptisms (denominated
washings in our translation) connected with the domestic
customs of the Jews, where their religious proclivities were
often exemplified in the observance of ceremonial formalities.
In Mark vii. 4, we have a reference to these customs. “ And
when they come from the market except, they wash (baptise)
they eat not; and many other things there be which they
have received to hold, as the washing (baptism) of cups
and pots, brazen vessels and of tables,” klinon. Now, to
know what these baptisms were, and how the term was
employed, we must go to their manners and customs; and
we find distinct information about the manner of the purify-
ing of the Jews. At a certain marriage feast there were six
waterpots of stone, intended for the ablutions of the guests
as well as for drinking purposes; these pots contained two
or three firkins apiece—critics say about 15 gallons; quite suf-
ficient for washing the hands or the feet of visitors, but by no
means a sufficiency for the entire immersion of an individual.
There is one term, however, here employed that would render


he idea of immersion perfectly ridiculous, “ tables.” The
Greek word is klinon, which means a pallet or couch. Why the
word tables should have been introduced in our translation may
be accounted for from the circumstance that in the East, where
no chairs form part of the furniture of a house, the couch is
used as chair, bed and table, the meals being taken upon it in a
reclining position. The word klinon is often used in reference
to the pallet, or mattress, composed of a thick quilted cotton,
such as is used to this day in the East, and the same as that on
which the sick man was laid and brought to Christ, when he
said, “Take up thy bed ( klinon ) and walk.” We admit the
possibility of this being immersed; but is there a rational pro-
bability that several times in the day they would saturate with
water the bed on which they laid ? But the term klinon is
more frequently used in reference to the couch on which the
pallet was laid, and these varied in size. That of Og, king of
Bashan, was fifteen and a-half feet long and nearly seven feet
wide. Whenever an unclean person sat on these couches, by
the law of Moses they were rendered unclean. Whoever after
sat on the couch before it was purified was regarded* as unclean
likewise. To guard against the least possible impurity, the
Pharisees carried their ideas of purification to a superstitious
excess, and frequently there was the ceremonial baptism by
lustration of these articles of domestic use, but that they were
taken to a river and immersed, surely, no one in his sober senses
would suppose!
Now let us pass on with the subject of baptism as it
relates to persons connected with the ministry of John the
Baptist, our Lord and His Apostles. In dealing with the
case of John’s baptism we shall refer you to an astounding
paragraph by our able author. On page 12 he gives us to
understand John's was a Christian baptism. He says, “ Not a
Christian baptism? what a sweeping assertion!” “But our
Lord Himself was baptised by John to fulfil all righteousness.
Was not His a Christian act? and was not here a perfect
pattern for the Christian Church in ages after?” That an
individual claiming the reputation of a “ Teacher of the people”
could have committed himself to such jargon as this astounds
us. Be it remembered, too, that he is now dealing with Infant
Baptism, and hence he wants to blind the eyes with dust; but
our mental vision has not been so affected with dimness as
to recognise John the Baptist as-a Christian, in the conventional
sense of the term. The disciples were first called Christians in
Antioch; that occurred in the year 41, about eleven years after


John’s death. Because others do not recognise John’s baptism
as Christian, he says, “ Ah! who told them so ? They do not
learn this from the Bible.” Here he presumes again upon our
ignorance of the Oracles of God, and opens the door of sugges-
tion that we are sceptics, or perverters of the ordinances of
Christianity. Let us, however, tell our author that the great
Robert Hall, a Baptist minister, of whom all churches are
proud* distinctly affirms that John’s baptism was essentially
different from Christian baptism. But we can give him a higher
authority than this for our views; no less than St. Paul himself.
When he visited Ephesus, the place at which the people had
not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost, he said
to them, “Unto what then were ye baptised?” and they said,
“Unto John’s baptism.” Then said Paul, “John verily baptised
with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they
should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on
Christ Jesus. When they heard this they were baptised in the
name of the Lord Jesus.” I have just simply to ask a question,
If John’s was a Christian baptism, why did not Paul recognise
it as such? I leave those who believe Johns baptism to be
Christian to settle this matter with St. Paul.
But the mode of John’s baptism is the point that now
concerns us. Because it says John baptised in the Jordan, it is
triumphantly concluded that he put all his candidates under the
stream; the very thing we call in question, and ask, where is
the proof? Our author himself would not interpret in as being
under, where the same wbrd occurs in another place about John,
in which it says he baptised in Bethabara, beyond Jordan.
Why, if we were even to ask some of those little children, who
can tell our author the meaning of baptism, what was the import
of in there, they would tell us it meant at Bethabara. Or if
we were to ask the meaning of into , neither would that help us
to the conclusion that immersion was the mode. Because it says,
Jesus Avent up into the mountain, no one supposes that he was
immersed under it. And although the English translation says
that John baptised in the Jordan, and that Jesus came up out of
the water, and that Philip and the Eunuch went down into the
water, in no one instance does it say they were immersed.
During my residence in the tropics I have often forded rivers
by going down into the water from the bank and by coming up
out of the water on the other side; and you can do this with the
i Jordan, which in many places is very shallow. “The fact is,”
Vfiays one, “there are eminent men among the Baptists who


would scorn, for the sake of a pulpit triumph, or party purpose,
to impose upon the credulity of their hearers by declaiming on
the terms in, into , and out of. They have confessed that these
terms decide nothing.” .
That John baptised by immersion appears highly improbable
from the vast numbers that flocked to his ministry. The lowest
computation of the population of Judea in his time is one
million and a-half. Now it is stated that all Judea came to him
for baptism. Suppose we deduct two-thirds of that number, and
say only half-a-million were baptised by John; allow him two
minutes for each candidate, and ten hours for each day then
he would baptise about 2000 a week, or 100,000 in a year,
which would be much below half-a million, and the ministry of
John lasted about a year; some say only five months. If we
take the computation of population by Josephus, the difficulty
increases, as he states the population at 2,700,000, and if you
take a-third of that number to be baptised by one man, then you
have work laid out for some twelve years. The probabilities
here are strongly in favour of sprinkling. John was the son of
a Jewish priest; hence he would be conversant with those
divers baptisms that Paul tells us were done by sprinkling, and
without doubt this would be his pattern. Hear John Wesley’s
note on Matthew iii. 6, which our author has wisely (for his
own purpose) avoided: “It seems that they stood in ranks on
the edge of the river, and John, passing along before them, cast
water on their heads or faces, by which means he might baptise
many thousands in a day.”
In Buck’s “Theological Dictionary” there is an article on the
Sabians, who are said to be a sect in the East numbering
25,000 families; they emigrated from Galilee and called them-
selves the diciples of John the Baptist; they go down into the
river to receive the rite of baptism, but never administer it by
immersion, only by pouring, and they affirm that the way in
which they baptise is precisely that which was used by John.
Let us now pass on to notice the baptism of the 3000 on the
day of Pentecost. Here the difficulties of immersion seem to us
insuperable from the scarcity of water, the time required to
immerse 3000, and the want of preparation for such an
emergency. The period of the year we know—about the
middle of the hot season—just as the first fruits were coming in,
so that four months must elapse ere the rainy season returned.
“Oh! but there was Kedron,” we are told. Yes, and that is
dry nine months of the year; and as to Siloam, we are informed


that in the hot months there is barely a sufficiency of water
there for the washing of clothes; and as to the tanks ot
water for domestic use, they were as precious as ours in
the hot season, and kept solely for drinking purposes;
and as to the Apostles having access to the laver at the temple,
this is most unlikely of all—that was in the hands ot Christ s
enemies It has been suggested that it might have been placed
at their’ disposal, if they had an idea of drowning the people;
and as to their going out of Jerusalem to some water,that is
inadmissible, Jerusalem was now about eight miles long, and
no doubt the preaching of Pentecost was in the centre ot the
citv and there is every reason to believe that baptism was
administered on the spot. Fancy immersion being the mode;
the 3000 dipped in their ordinary clothing, and then, dripping
wet, returning hdme in that picturesque condition, to the
edification of the scoffers in Jerusalem!
We shall pass by the case of the Eunuch as we have already
seen that into and out of do not prove immersion, though we
mio-ht observe that there is a reference m the context, to the
portion the Eunuch was reading about Christ, which is rather
against immersion: “So shall nations. We
do not say the argument is there is a strong probability
that this mode would be presented on the occasion. As to
those baptisms at Samaria, where it is said no infants were
baptised, I conclude, for stronger reasons, that there were no
immersions. The general opinion is that this is the same city
that our Saviour went to; and if so we know what the accommo-
dation was for immersion. Jacob’s well was there , and the well
was deep Surely it will not be contended that they were
immersed down the well. And as to Paul’s baptism, that was
in the house where Ananias found him; and after fasting three
days, with the physical powers prostrated, it is not likely that
hc y was plunged into a cold bath. In the baptism of Cornelius
there is strong presumptive evidence that water was brought to
the room where the preaching took place. And as to the jailer,
that was in an ancient heathen prison ; there, the luxury of a
bath was as probable as a bed of down. As to the P r ep°sterous
suggestion that the Apostles could have dug a dam, to dip the
people, the idea is so palpably absurd that a serious consideration
of it may be dismissed without any further remark.
We now come to a brief notice of that famous figure so often
employed, yes, and tortured, too, like other passages, viz.:
Juried with Christ in baptism The burial of Christ in the


tomb is tbe model of the service. Here is a grand theological
error on the face of it; as they say, going down into the
baptistry is to signify the death of Christ. For the honour of
truth, we protest against such a perversion. Dr. Halley says,
the subject is thus made to assume an awful importance; a man
of like passions with ourselves put into the water is to represent
Christ laid in the tomb, having died for our sins'. What a
caricature of the atonement! The fact is, says the doctor, we
might as well try to literalise such figures as the believer
“going in at the strait gate,” “putting on the helmet of
salvation,” “anointing the eyes with eye salve,” “mounting up
with wings as eagles,” “crucified with Christ, and planted with
Christ.” In literalising such figures as buried with Christ and
rising with Christ, an absurd mode is adopted of drawing a
parallel between an English grave and a Jewish sepulchre; and
they think that baptism in a baptistry resembles an ancient
burial service. Is it likely that Paul had this in view when he
wrote to the Romans, who frequently burnt their dead and
placed the ashes in the urn?—that was their burial service. As
to the Jewish sepulchres, they were places in which we are told
“demoniacs found shelter and robbers a refuge.” Those who
not only torture, but dragoon Scripture into their own meaning,
should be consistent with their parallels, and complete the
picture. If baptism is a burial service, why the absence of
some parts? why are not all the parallels carried out? Parties
to take the place of the sexton, with ropes duly adjusted, and
the candidate let slowly down into the water, and when once
lowered, covered up and left to emerge without the assistance
of a man. Immersion is to cover up ! and if baptism is a burial
service , make it a burial service. We are fully aware that
Baptists admit that it may be an emblematical washing away of
sin, accomplished at the time of the believer’s burial with
Christ. Now, we maintain that the association of the two ideas
is incongruous, because a grave is not the place of washing, it
is the place of loathsomeness. “ Fancy,” .says one, “ washing in a
grave, or, dying in a bath,” If this view is correct we might
adopt a new formula, and say, Arise and be baptised (not to
wash away thy sins, but) to represent the death and burial of
Christ, so that the candidate would have to show forth the
Lord’s death, ere he is allowed to show forth His passion
in the Supper.- In this highly figurative language we believe
there is a remote reference to the ordinance, but by no means
to the mode; and, though the inadvertences of great and good


men may be interposed here, we reply that their candour at the
time of writing is no proof. Many of them wrote a century ago,
and that they regarded the figure as having only a remote
allusion is clear from the mode they practised, that of sprinkling;
and further, we must remember that since their time the
customs of the East have had a large amount of light shed upon
them; the rock-hewn caves have been discovered; in some
places chambers and galleries, with a narrow passage at the
entrance, against which a slab is placed, or a stone rolled such
as that at the grave of Lazarus, or the sepulchre of Jesus. The
parallel between such places and a baptistry is remote indeed.
Devout critics in Biblical interpretation generally agree that in
this figurative allusion there is a reference to the work of the
Holy Spirit, when he raises us from a death of sin to a life of
righteousness; and of this, the water is only a symbol. Those
who experience this change are baptised, not only in the letter,
but in the spirit. They are virtually and legally united to
Christ in the “fellowship of His sufferings,” “power of His
resurrection,” and they are “made conformable to His death.”
Will any Baptist say that this is done by immersion? If it is,
they are on the horns of another dilemma, i.e., Baptismal Regener-
ation! The Ritualists quote these very texts to prove their
point, and say: “We are baptised into Jesus Christ,” “baptised
into His death,” and “buried with Him by baptism,” That is
precisely what the Baptists say. Yet our author has the face
to charge us with this error. Page 16, he says, “This curious
doctrine shows no distinction between the Church and the
world—here we see them walking arm-in-arm—if the children
are all saved on the faith of the parents. Baptise all the infants
and bring them into the kingdom, and of course they are all
saved. They are regenerated in childhood, in baptism, by the
parents’ faith.” Such assertions as these are the offspring of an
intolerant mind, showing a profound ignorance of the sentiments
of others, and a lamentable want of respect for truth. Suffice it to
say we have never uttered the above formula; we have said that a
child was baptised on the faith of its parent , we never said saved , or
regenerated; we have always made a distinction, too, between the
visible and invisible Church, believing all are not Israel who are
of Israel. If believers’ immersion is so wonderfully efficacious
as our author insinuates, how comes it to pass that its efficacy
is not more powerfully demonstrated. We have watched its
results. “By their fruits ye shall know them.” Yes, at no
very remote date have we seen the Church walking arm-in-arm
. V , sfivj y vf'Vi
hr \
vW


with the world! I would remind those who insinuate what
they have about others, that they ought to be immaculate
themselves. On page 16 he says, “Now, what do you say of
such a church as this? I say, they have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid him. We hope to he kept
from this man-made religion, and to enjoy the blessings of the
covenant of grace by faith in Jesus?' If the last clause was by
immersion into water, we would have believed him. We indig-
nantly reply to such rant, “Therefore thou art inexcusable, O
man, whosoever thou art that judgest; for wherein thou judgest
another thou condemnest thyself.” And as to his feeble
attempt to raise the dust about circumcision, I will just give a
dogmatic assertion of his own. He says, in regard to circum-
cision, that it “ had no effect on the soul.” What does he
mean by this? That it only referred to Canaan? Then, how is
it that no male was received into the Jewish Church without
circumcision, and that no male was allowed to partake of the
Passover who was not circumcised? It was the initiatory
rite into the Jewish Church, besides having a reference
to the land of promise. Baptism is the initiatory rite into
the Church now; we, therefore, conclude that baptism has
taken the place of circumcision, and we would remind our
author that the latter was said to be “a seal of faith.” _ If an
objection is attempted about circumcision only applying to
males, then we say, “ In Christ Jesus there is neither male nor
female.” I would recommend a consideration of these weighty
words. “If infant baptism be rejected, the Christian dispen-
sation will be the only one not admitting infants. In the
Abrahamic and Mosaic dispensations they partook of the rite of
circumcision; and in the world of glory they will be equally
privileged with ourselves,” As to circumcision having no
spiritual meaning, the words of Paul are a proof to the contrary.
Horn. ii. 29 ; “ But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and cir-
cumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter.”
I shall now briefly notice the mode of the dispensation of
the Spirit, which is at direct variance with immersion; and
of the dispensation of the Spirit, baptism is only a symbol. In
no one instance have we a reference to a dipping into the Holy
Ghost; on the contrary, the promise of the Spirit is under the
fio-ure of pouring. “ I will pour My Spirit upon thy seed, and
My blessing upon thy offspring.” “ And it shall come to pass,
in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of My Spirit on all
flesh.” Between the prophecies and the fulfilment, the accor-


dance is exact. “The Holy Ghost came upon those that
received,” He “fell upon them,” was “shed,” “poured upon”
those that believed. We expect, therefore, that the visible
symbol shall correspond with the mode represented. Immersion
or dipping does not symbolise the work of the Spirit; but if we
pour or sprinkle, the harmony is at once complete.
And now I must refer you to the pedigree which our author
has claimed for the Baptists, but would suggest that he has
forgotten one important branch of the family, viz.;—the Mor-
mons ; they immerse, and are therefore hona fide Baptists. My
veracity is questioned, on page 20 by our author, respecting the
date of the founding of the Baptist Church, and then an assertion
is made that a regular succession of churches can be traced,
holding Baptist sentiments, back to the Apostolic times. Good !
I hope that clergymen will no more he ridiculed who believe in
Apostolic Succession. But here is the pedigree, and the order
in which it is given to us. He says they were called (1)
Christians in Antioch, but this is recorded in Acts xi., about
those who believed, and not a word is said about immersion.
(2) In Augustine’s time they were called Heretics. Augustine
lived in the fourth century, and we find that Heretic was
employed in the first century respecting those who denied the
Lord. It is also true that in Augustine’s time there were those
denominated Heretics, but this was in reference to the spirit of
Gnosticism that prevailed in those times, although heretical
baptism caused much disturbance. (3) Donatists, ancient schis-
matics in Africa, originating about 311. They were ultimately
blended among the Mahomedans. (4) Novatians (same as
Cathari or Puritans,) founded by Novatian, a presbyter of Rome.
He was connected with a schism in the election of Cornelius as
Bishop of Rome in 250 (here we go back a century.) When
Cornelius was elected, Novatian withdrew and got three other
bishops to consecrate him, which caused great disturbances.
(5) Faulicians. The time of their origin is disputed; some give
600, some 711. They rejected the Epistles of Peter and all the
Old Testament. They also adopted the Gnostic dogma, that
this world was not made by the Supreme Being. (6) Henricans;
followers of a monk who settled in Toulouse in 1147. He was
persecuted, thrown into a dungeon and soon ended his days.
(7) Fetrobrussians, 1110 (37 years back again,) founded by
Peter de Bruys. He is represented as a reformer, but not
without a mixture of fanaticism. Among other things, he taught
that it was idle to build churches for the service of God, who


would receive sincere worship wherever it was offered, therefore
the churches already erected should he pulled down and des-
troyed. Some of his followers held on to the end of the
thirteenth century. (8.) Mennonites; they owe their name to
Simon Menno, of Friesland. He left the Romish Church, about
1536, and collected together proselytes from the Anabaptists.
Among other things he taught that Christ did not derive from
Mary the body he assumed, but that he was produced by the
creative power of the Holy Ghost. There is a colony of the
Mennonites near the Sea of Azof, who do not administer baptism
by immersion, but by pouring. (9) Albigenses ; a party of refor-
mers in the twelfth century (300 years back again.) The Albi-
genses were persecuted, not for their views on baptism in particu-
lar, but for their Christianity in general. (10) Waldenses, 1160.
Some of the Waldenses denied Infant Baptism, hut they were
only a fraction of the body; some rejected water baptism entirely,
but Wall has proved that infant baptism was generally practised
among them. (11) Anabaptists took their rise in Saxony, about
1522 (the date questioned.) In 1533 John Bockhold became
their leader and brought the sect into great odium by lawless
proceedings, so much so, that Munster became a theatre of all
the excesses of fanaticism, lust, and cruelty. r lhe possession of
common stock among Christians was one of their tenets, hence
the 38th Article of the Church of England. As to not having a
word of proof respecting the founding of the Baptist Church at
the period named, we may judge from the following:—“Although
there were several among the Albigenses, Waldenses, and the fol-
lowers of Wickliffe, it does not appear that they were formed into
any stability until the time of Menno, about the year 1536, About
1644 they began to make a considerable figure in England, and
spread themselves into several separate congregations. They
separated from the Independents, about the year 1638, and set
up for themselves under the pastoral care of Mr. Jesse; and,
having renounced their former baptism, they sent over fine of
their ministers to be immersed by one of the Dutch Anabaptists,
of Amsterdam, that he might be qualified to baptise his friends
in England after the same manner.” “Buck’s Theological
Dictionary,” Art., Antipcedohaptist. Possibly some will say.
We have proved nothing! We have shown facts, though, and
as some are fond of dealing in fact (professedly,) we submit the
above, and they are welcome to the full benefit.
Finally, if Baptists contend that their mode of baptism is the
only Scriptural one, then they may say what they like; but they


make baptism an essential, and they have no room to throw out
such impious insinuations as that we arc a “man-made Church.
Their creed and their practice under such circumstances are at
variance. If we are a man-made Church, how is it that God has
owned us as a part of His Church in the abundance of our
labours? And this they cannot deny. And farther, if we are
perpetuating a lie, as is insinuated by the dogmatical assertion,
that there is no such thing as Infant Baptism , why is it that they
hold any intercourse with any other body of Christians . Our
author says of them, they respect the honest convictions of all
Christians? Then, why don’t they? .
As to the statement, that not a syllable was uttered, during the
first and second centuries of the Christian era, on the subject of
Infant Baptism, and which is contradicted by history, we would
only say, it is much on a par with their line of ancestry being
traced to Apostolic times. This reminds us of a statement once
made by an American, who, in extolling his country, said “I
know this to be the strongest country in the world, and I expect
soon to hear that it is the oldest.
The rash intimation that baptism is a more important sacra-
ment than the Lord’s Supper, and on which he says there is not
half so much said as on the former, needs no comment from us.
“Search the Scriptures” and see. Read what St. Luke says in
the chapter xxii., and what St. Paul says in 1 Cor. xi., and then
tell us if there is anything half so plain on baptism!
In conclusion, I know of no language more apropos than that
of Daniel Isaacs. “ Now, sir, surrender at discretion; or I shall
give you no quarter. If, however, you will implicitly submit,
I will set you at liberty on your parole of honour, never to serve
again in these wars against our children as long as you live.
Taknagulla,
September, 1869.
