

:] i-*',"; K' ;.;:4 J/ ,n - 3 - ' • '
1111131


White Witches


By the same Author
GAMING GODS
HIBISCUS HEART
REAPING ROSES


©
©
©
©
©
©
©
|
i
White Witches
by
M. FORREST
©
©
©
©
HUTCHINSON & CO. (Publishers) LTD.
34-36 Paternoster Row, LONDON, E.C.4


Made and Printed in Great Britain
The Gainsborough Press, St. Albans. Fisher, Knight & Co., Ltd.


DEDICATED
To my fellow Queenslander,
The distinguished aviator,
CAPTAIN KINGSFORD SMITH
Co. Commander of The Southern Cross
Trans-Pacific Flight, 1928


THE verses heading each chapter are from the
author’s own poems, previously published in The
Australasian, Aussie, The Bulletin, The Bystander,
The Daily Mail (Brisbane), The Sydney Mail, and
The Wentworth Magazine.


,nu<* *><*->
IS - I - -oh
They found her with her lover in a wood;
The great brown trunks were dry from weeks of drought;
The bracken crisp about the seekers’ feet
Crackled to warn the quarry: but she stood
Fearless and smiling in her rind-red gown;
Parted above her wide white brow, her hair
Hung in twin heavy plaits on either side;
And down her back there streamed a fleecy veil
As water hangs above a boiling pool
In summer falls—that pool her passionate love,
Pulsing the hollow in her slender throat.
Upon her slim soft hand no ring was set,
But like a chain about her lover’s life
Her heart was firmly knit.
"The Fruit’ ’
If she be small and subtle, with a face moon-pale and fair,
Twisting scarlet rowan berries in the storm-cloud of her hair
With a mocking mouth and dewy, and a firm breast almond white,
Then the curse of Seven Magpies will be on me like a blight.
"Seven For The Witch"




WHITE WITCHES
CHAPTER ONE
Now the witches so white they worked a charm.
—R. H. Horne
Her cloak could barely cover her;
Her costly gown showed many a stain,
And every little powdered curl
Was diamonded with driving rain.
"My Lady"
The wet wind moaned amongst the tall gums that
spired at the foot of the mountain carrying a load of
cloud on its summit. Through a break in the storm
a pale moon thrust a thin figure, silvering for an instant
the satin-white boles and then withdrawing as though
afraid of the sobbing shadow that lay at the foot of
the loftiest of the circled trees.
In the district they were known as the nine White
Witches, so christened by an old Yorkshire drover who
had read R. H. Horne and who quoted behind the
straggling ewes : “Nine white witches sat in a circle
close’’ when he passed by the foot of the mountain.
Possibly at some time there had been a forest of these
trees, but bush fire, or drought, or the timber-getter’s
axe had thinned the group away, and now there were
only the nine giants in a semicircle to attract the
appraising eye of men on the outlook for building
materials in the sparsely-settled districts. But
somehow, though selectors came and went to the


better-grassed lands beyond the mountain, the nine
towering gums remained in statu quo.
Perhaps superstition accounted for something. It
was from a greenhide rope dependent from a lower
branch Teddy Hynes had hung himself come two years
this very month. Dry weather had killed off Teddy’s
stock, and then his wife had laughed and gone with a
man who had a drapery store in the city. She was a
"dressy piece”, so the neighbours said, and was sure
to follow her fancy.
There wasn’t much besides the rope of greenhide
left in Teddy’s shack when he decided to make final
use of it. There were dingoes yapping round the dang-
ling feet when they found him, and the nine White
Witches reared their delicate green plumes where in a
fair December sky the colours of dawn were gathering
above the mauve and silver earth-mists.
Men drove off the dogs, cut him down and buried
him, and his wife read about it in the papers and said
she had always thought he was mad (perhaps he was
when he married her) and shuddered over her escape
as she tried on summer hats; for, just then, she had the
run of the millinery. Later it was different, and she
was glad to go to the Salvation Army Home for a
left-off straw.
Such is fortune’s wheel! But when that turn of it
came, Teddy’s bones had long been at rest beneath
the new green springing grasses.
It was a soaking night. Permeating showers, spaces
of scattering wind, effort of a ghostly moon to discover
exactly what sobbed beneath the gum trees, a swoop-
ing bird-wing shaking off the rain drops, a few stars
doing their best to prick the grey tent overhead, no
light anywhere to prove warm hearth or hint at a


watch-fire tended, and a woman sobbing in the wind
and rain under the tallest of the white witches.
Clop-clop came the sound of unshod hoofs on the
mountain path. She caught her breath to silence,
drew her cloak about her. Would some more acute
and present fear be added to her already tearing
sorrow ? Why should she dread anything now ?
Was she not a rootless plant with only death to look
forward to ? Yet such is the tyranny of trifles that
even now she trembled afresh at thought of meeting
with a tramp —a bushranger, perhaps, here in the
unsubstantial night.
In a voice brittle with fear she answered the hail
from the road.
"Good Lord !” came a crisp, hearty reply, “what a
good thing you spoke. I had my revolver out, thought
you were a dingo, and I’m sore about a Jersey calf
the brutes got last night. What the deuce are you
doing— out here in the rain ?”
She huddled closer to the trunk of the White Witch.
The clouds rolled back as though a great hand moved
them. The flushed whiteness of a full December moon
looked down. He almost thought he could distinguish
her poignant mouth, her shadowed hair. Moonshine
caressed again the soaked and tranquil land; lit the
sombre dripping boughs of smaller, blunter trees that
filled the mountain slopes. They heard the soft thick
settling rustle of some animal’s body in the grass.
Perhaps only a strayed cow.
He slid from the saddle and was trying to lift her
to her feet. A woman, and young, here at midnight,
far away from even a bush hut, wrapped in a cloak that
was damp with rain, the hands that repulsed him ice,
her tears evidently all wept, and only a blank hard


despair in a face that should have been soft and
sweet.
“Go away,” she moaned. “I hate all men.”
Her eyes when they met his were as a steel blade.
They struck sparks from his own.
“l’ve no doubt about that,” he said cheerfully.
“If it’s through a man you are out here in this miser-
able night . . . but . . . see . . . the rain has
almost gone.”
He felt her shuddering as he forced her to
stand.
“There ! Don’t try to tell me anything. .
It’s lucky I happened to leave the township late.
I'll give you a foot up to my horse and take you
back to my hut, that’s all I can do . . . and you are
to do what you are told.”
His pleasant voice could not conceal his arbitrary
temper. He was accustomed and well qualified to issue
orders. He had occupied positions that gave him the
opportunity, but he had chucked it all to be just mere
Jackson again, fighting the forces of Nature on the
land, and prospering as Teddy Haynes had never
prospered.
He was of the type to trouble women more than to
be troubled by them.
Perhaps sheer physical fatigue had broken her spirit.
There seemed no fight left in her, though she had walked
miles that night to escape an unbearable affront.
She presently found herself in the saddle, the man
walking beside her, a hand on the swinging stirrup.
Then, it seemed to her, they began an interminable,
haunted journey, always passing on through aisles
of gums. She could smell strange almond fragrances,
washed by the rain from flowering shrub and vine.


She could see dark tunnels of leaf and bough, over-
arching roofs of twigs through which the stars looked
pertly.
Once she looked back. She thought she could make
out the nine White Witches guarding the terraces that
ran to the plain. They may have been but wraiths of
imagination or of mist, for she felt she had been long
in the saddle.
A dog barked. There was a moony clearing with a
two-roomed bark-roofed hut. The horse hurried, then
halted whinnying, as does one who knows he is come
home. The man lifted her from the saddle, and went
ahead. There was the blue spurt of a match, leap
of flame where a kerosene lamp stood, dilated by a tin
reflector. Beyond, was the dull ruby glow of coals
amid grey ash of a banked-up fire, where a black pot
hung.
Her strangely mercurial nature sent butterflies of
light and speculation over the bleakness of her thought.
She realized she was hungry and thirsty.
He indicated an inner room over whose doorway a
thick hessian curtain hung, and handed her the lamp.
“Go in there,” he said curtly. “Strip off your wet
clothes and wrap yourself in a blanket. I'll bring you
tea directly it is made. Do as you are told.”
Amazed, she found herself doing it.
Magpies woke her under the paneless window. Hot,
yellow sun streamed in the room, motes of dusty gold
floated in the drift of shadow. She was content to lie
flat on her back without speculation, in a delicious


drowse of bodily warmth and rest. At least for a space.
A trail of pale-blossomed creeper lashed the slab
wall, from which the sun drew a fresh gummy odour.
She heard a horse cropping grass.
Then she remembered.
She had given up her job as typist in the city, she
had spent every penny but her coach fare, on an
elaborate trousseau. A foolish outfit for a girl who was
to live the rest of her days in the bush. . . . But
. . . how was she to know ? Armand had told her
about his “roomy station home”, the position he
occupied in the district. Why, she would be Queen
to his “Merino King”, as he called himself. Perhaps
her Irish temperament, added to the force of her
naked passion for this man, made her credulous.
Maeve claimed amidst ancestral relatives holy men who
had died for an ideal, dignitaries of the older Christian
faith, devout nuns who had lived long lives of cloistered
self-denial in the belief of a heavenly spouse. School-
mates had often teased her about putting all her
eggs in one basket. Everything had been Armand,
and Armand had been everything, and had he declared
the moon to be literally of green cheese, Maeve would
have been disinclined to doubt him. For Armand was
perfection.
Physically he could lay claim to a fair share of that,
but imagination ran away with him and galloped over
all obstacles. He really thought he would be a Merino
King some day, though he must have expected to
arrive at crown and sceptre by some magical process
unconnected with ordinary sheep breeding, so it was
sufficient for him to instruct Maeve that such was
already the case.
Then, at the eleventh hour, when she was actually


on her way up to him, he tried to intercept her with a
telegram. There were more reasons than the fact that
he could not give substantial proof of his kingship,
as to why he did not want Maeve to arrive at the
shabby weatherboard cottage he dignified into his
“roomy station house” and where the bailiffs threatened
to call any day. Another woman had intruded before
Maeve, with a greater right, if not a legal one, to the
weatherboard cottage in fact and the Merino King-
ship in embryo ... or mirage.
Of course, since Fate is clever at tripping rogues
with the unexpected and unprepared for, the faithful
friend who promised to take the wire got drunk at the
bush shanty and forgot to despatch it. Maeve and her
box arrived at the slip-rail, and were put down by the
coach-driver, and neither the handy little church
(“you’ll love it”) nor the amiable parson (“such a
good sort”) who was to marry them, materialized
out of the vast scrublands.
Perhaps she had read a sufficiency of English novels
to imagine the tin-roofed weatherboard cottage in
sight between the moving leaves, the lodge at the gate
of the “roomy station house” of her Merino King.
The lean dog that dragged at a chain, the dark sallow-
faced woman on the verandah, told her nothing at
first sight, and in any case she would not have dreamed
of being instinctively jealous of the dark-browed
woman, because she was not wise enough in the world
of men to know that if a man has once loved an ugly
woman, she retains a hold on him a merely pretty face
never succeeds in accomplishing. Particularly when
the plain woman has straight, thin lips. But there was
so much Maeve didn’t know !
She accosted the dark woman and heard this was


Armand’s home, and that, at present, he was out on
the Run.
And she heard a good many other things.
When she spoke of his engagement to marry her,
the woman laughed once, then went on with her sewing.
She was mending an old waistcoat of Armand’s.
In travelling hat and cloak Maeve quivered with fury
on the wooden steps that led to a desolate enclosure
which might once have dreamed of being a garden.
A hen cackled drowsily at the rear of the cottage.
The dark woman put down her work and went to the
kitchen to examine something in a three-legged camp
oven. Returning in a leisurely fashion, she continued
her mending. When she walked, Maeve noticed a
grace of movement. Still, she could not believe Armand
loved anyone but herself.
It was made pitifully plain.
"You can’t stay here,” said the woman.
“Where can I go ?” Maeve was fierce. She would
wait and confront her lover.
The woman glanced at the sky where an arm of
cloud crept in menace across the north. Crows cawed.
The air became oppressive.
"Go anywhere you like. To the White Witches, if
you wish. Perhaps they will make you a charm.
The bailiffs may be here any day. One woman in the
place is enough.”
“For Armand ?” asked the girl.
"I intend it shall be,” said the dark woman, and she
re-threaded her needle.
Maeve remembered that, as she went back to the slip-
rails, she seemed to move through a fog. A black
and white pee-wee danced with wide wings on her new
box. From head to foot her body burned, but her Irish


pride kept her backbone rigid to the other woman’s
gaze. She need not have bothered. The other woman
did not raise her eyes from her sewing till the girl
was out of sight.
How much she had known before Maeve came,
how much she was protecting the man, Maeve was
never to know. Even when he had come riding along
the fence and halted at the slip-rail, slowly flushing up
to his fair hair, consternation in his blue eyes, he
would not talk about the dark woman.
Maeve believed he sobbed as he told her the truth.
Certainly he was suffering from shock, his hand
trembled.
Naturally, he had never expected Fate to deal him
such a back of the hand. He had never dreamed the
crude possibility that the telegram to prevent his
expectant bride from arriving at the "roomy station
house” would miscarry.
He muttered unintelligibly then, turning towards
the house, leading his horse, that he would try to make
some provision for her there for the night, and she
could catch the down coach in the morning, whimpered
and stumbled over the lie that he had never
thought in the beginning she would take him “so
seriously”.
She did not tell him she had but a few shillings in
her purse, and that she would rather die in the oncoming
rain than spend one night under his roof.
Before he returned she was gone, a blind, maddened
creature seeking, she believed then, only death to
cool her shame, only everlasting oblivion to heal her
hurt. For a shattered faith is as the Shirt of Nessus,
and the bleeding soul asks only a Lethe draught, and
no awakening.


On and on, through the gathering drops, with wet
wind lashing her face, the rain-patter corrugating and
smoking on hot bridle tracks, and washing the dust
from great glossy leaves of plants hitherto unknown to
her, even in Botanic Gardens.
It was a curious chance that she took the direction
in which the White Witches lay, while Armand was
looking for her on the road. He had at least that grace,
for which the thin-lipped woman called him “Fool”.
Perhaps she fainted on the slope where the nine
White Wtches sat in their sighing circle; she had never
walked so far in her life. She woke to weep, weakly,
despairingly, with perhaps, deep down, the secret
satisfaction of a belief that she would die here and
Armand would be blamed, would bear through life
the cross of self-accusing remorse.
She did not know Armand. He had such a wonderful
gift of weaving rainbow hues about himself and seeing
that self as a misjudged hero under all circumstances.
Besides, the bailiffs, very wet and affronted bailiffs,
were in possession at Armand’s.
Rested in body, but with renewed agony of mind,
she thought of it all now, while the magpies carolled
joy to the sun, pollen-gold of the blue flower of day.
A savage burning heat pricked her skin. Bathed in
the light of candour she was suddenly to herself a
weak poor thing.
She should have found this man out long ago.
She would form a determination and keep to the steel
rails of that determining. Armand should never hear
of her again, unless it be in some fashion whereby
she could cruelly hurt his pride. She realized now that
there was only vanity, no heart, to be hurt. Wise in a
night she had become, with the wisdom of witch-like


things that brooded under the huge flooded gums.
And this man who had rescued her ? She must make
explanation to him . . . who . . . and what . . .
was he ? Somehow she could not but trust him. His
personality left no room for doubt. Who else would
have taken her up, and in, and housed her and cared
for her without waiting to hear who and what she was.
The very daintiness of her bridal garbing might have
made him suspect Adventuress.
She could hear him now, moving in the outer room.
He tapped at her canvas door.
Noon stillness had solidified the morning’s mists
to a golden and blue gem of day. The hours in their
march of accomplishment drifted sweet savours of the
bush into the little two-roomed hut, where there was a
glossy handled stockwhip on the wall, a rifle, the
picture of the man’s dead mother in a bean-wood frame,
some brilliant panels of light quandong-wood, which,
he said, almost served him as a shaving-mirror, and
over the vast fireplace an army of pipes.
A bachelor’s room. Yet, in this room, after hearing
her story, he was asking her to relieve it of that
reproach. The girl whom he had only met last
night.
“Will you marry me —instead of Armand ?” he
asked briskly. She started, coloured, looked at him
with wistful eyes.
“I can never love any man again,’’ said Maeve.
Her small face was pinched, her beauty utterly dimmed.
“I did not ask you that,’’ he said, running his palm


over his dark head, ‘T said marry” —Then he smiled.
"Come, you have no one in the world. You don’t
want to go back to a city office, even though your
debut in bush life has been such a rotten one. I am
lonely and you’re straight. I’m as good a judge of a
woman as I am of a horse. You won’t regret double
harness. Say ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ . . . besides,” the smile
wrinkled round his eyes, “there’s all the finery in
that box—if the rain hasn’t got through the lid.
I’ll take a spring-cart over.” She had read many
novels. He hurt her. Could such a bargain be made
without, at least, a profession of love-at-first-sight P
Any port in a storm ! That had been an expression of
easy-going Armand’s. Her face hardened.
This would be a way to scarify Armand’s vanity, and
that dark woman mending his waistcoat. What had
she said (something she could never tell the man
before her) that had left her own pride so raw ? She
folded her hands, leaned back a little in the rough
wooden chair.
“Yes, I’ll marry you,” she said.
He touched her wrist with his strong right hand,
but that was all.
Two days later they were married in the small
wooden township church, with an inquisitive billy-
goat looking through the vestry window, and the
minister’s charwoman, and the bow-legged groom from
the hotel in borrowed trousers, for witnesses, and
Maeve, who had dreamed of being a Merino Queen,
went to live in the two-roomed bark-roofed hut with
dark-haired Stuart Jackson, whose name she bore.
The sweet-scented trap of marriage was not for either
of them. They had gone with wide-open eyes into a
calm and satisfactory partnership. They were content


without any roses and raptures. At least,Maeve thought
she was.
But the Celtic temperament is a fairy temper. It
is always reaching out imploring hands for that which
it hath not. Like Yeat’s Man who went to Fairyland,
it cannot quite forget.
Maeve had known ardent love, all fire and fury of
protestation, even though it burned out like a straw-
parcelled fire. She, too, grew sensitive over the fact that
Stuart addressed her as “old woman”, without affec-
tionate diminutives, and never noticed the way she did
her hair, or didn’t do it. He was kindness itself, teach-
ing her all manner of housewifely arts, and never
grumbling about her very rudimentary cooking.
Good friend, he was, warm lover never.
She became restless as the months went by. Armand,
she had heard through her husband, had gone to the
city, the dark-browed woman had gone too. At
times she dreamed by the window in the dusk over
the experiences of that thin-lipped woman who knew
how to hold a man. Life knotted a bitter tangle round
her heart, but the pluck new-bred in her closed her
mouth on any complaint, and there was always her
Irish pride to reckon with.
She grew to love the bush. High mountains inter-
rupting stars, parrots painted like a lady’s fan, wind
threshing in tree-tops, the light of the lamp she set in
the window for Stuart enamelled on the soft ebony
of night, the flagon of day poured full of sun empty,
and refilling with the dust of night, yet bearing on its
lip one drop that was a star. . . . But the very
beauty of it all made her ache for the woman’s
crown.
She grew fanciful, and still. Stuart began to wonder.


But so strong and self-reliant was he, he never ques-
tioned. He had vowed to trust, to cherish her. He saw
to that, and her romantic soul starved amidst the
tranquillity of the background he made for her.
He always was contriving improvements to their
home. Built a skillion on spare Sundays, made a
wonderfully ingenious grooved draining-board and a
real citified sink for the washing-up, and a covered
way to the galley, and dug and raked the soil for a
garden. A year slipped away in the give and take of
ordinary married life with its humdrum tendencies,
and December suns crackled on the new galvanized
iron roof he had put over the bark, and on geraniums
redly glowing in the little garden where Maeve made
feeble war on encroaching marsupials.
She began to take long, solitary walks ; the house-
work was automatic now, not much to do for a woman
who must be most of the day alone. Stuart talked of a
run down to the city later, but she shuddered away
from that suggestion. There might be a chance of
meeting with Armand, who, although she despised
him entirely, might yet reveal to her all too plainly
what she missed in her married life with Stuart.
For Armand had sworn he adored her, and perhaps
for a time had really done so. He had the adoring
habit. And Stuart had never shown anything—but in
deeds. Words mean so much to a woman.
He came home from a tiring day on his property,
where with a neighbour’s help he had been setting dog-
traps, to be at once aware of the uncanny silence about
the hut now some months grown to the dignity of a
house. A book, one of the love-stories Maeve delighted
in, was open on the table, but there was no sign of his
wife with her brown soft hair, her magnetic hands,


and the dear grey Irish eyes that had haunted him all
“Maeve,” he called, but only the whistle of a bird
swinging in seme fairy hammock of petal and twig
replied.
“Maeve I”
Only an echo . . . hollow as a dream. . . . He
began to have strange superstitious presciences that
she had gone like some faery thing out of his life in
the sunlight, just as she had come into it in the storm.
His dog—it had been with him all day —frisked round
his feet, then abruptly seated itself in the doorway,
threw back its head and howled. He kicked savagely
at it, to its supreme astonishment, having never before
incurred its master’s wrath. Dog-like it fawned and
cringed, but unavailingly. Stuart felt blood pounding
at his temples and wrists, a cold shiver down his spine.
It was a lovely sunsetting. Far hills were Prussian
blue, and all kinds of wonderful mauves and purples
and rose lay in the hollows of the peaks. But Stuart
had put the saddle on his horse again and was riding,
nding as a man rides who fears to meet with what he
seeks to find.
There was a tiny half-hoop of a new moon taking
the down-trail of the blue, over the big flooded gums
where the nine White Witches “sat in a circle close”.
The air was heavy with sun-saturated bush blooms
giving their day-time gleanings to night. Here and
there a mosquito hummed in the ragged nettles or a
cricket strummed in the grass. As he rode to White
Witches, Stuart heard unseen waters making stony
son §- His ears were strained for other sounds. . . .


A dingo howled far away. He heard the red bull
by Davidson’s bellowing as if infuriated. Lord send
she had not ventured through the red monarch’s
domain. Last week it had charged and broken
Davidson’s thigh, tossing him like a leaf into the cactus
—lf the pedigreed beast had not cost so much and had
not Davidson been a canny Scot and wanting his
money back, the red bull would be carrion now. Bull’s
meat is no lure to the butcher.
How wraith-like in the twilight dusk and the thin
moon lantern sat the nine White Witches!
He remembered the story of Teddy Hynes, and could
almost believe he saw something dangling in the
broken shadows.
Maeve wouldn’t. . . . Perish the thought! That
was sheer rot. . . . Why should she ? But women had
strange ways, queer fancies ... he believed, when
they were going to have babies.
“My little wife—” Only the nine White Witches
holding the fate of the man in the moon, blanched
fingers, arrested in their everlasting half-circle. Only
the trees, pale spirits of the forest . . . semaphores
of despair ... or signposts to recovery. . . .
Stay. ... He reined his horse on the slope, looking
down. Yes. There was a deeper pool of shade there.
and was that a white fallen branch, the ghost of a
hanged man, or a woman’s light summer frock ?
He clattered down the stones. “Maeve ! Maeve!”
he called.
Was ever a sweeter name ? But Maeve did not stir.
He remembered how she had cried that night in the rain.
. . . Maeve. . . . He remembered the cloud of her
hair, the damp cloak, the little foolish sodden shoes.
Maeve, Maeve.


Did the light move in the shadow ? Was the moon
a curved, yet indicating finger. . . . Was the gate of
hell open ... or the door of Paradise ajar ? Was she
dead ... or sleeping ? He let his horse go and crept
down through the trees to her. How still she lay!
He recalled the sheep-dog’s howling. ... He had
left him chained at home in punishing consequence.
There were people who believed a dog could scent
Death coming. . . . His throat contracted, his lips
were dry and cold as he tiptoed nearer. He leaned over
her, raising her in his arms. Grey eyes opened sleepily,
there were tears on her cheek.
"Maeve, my darling . . . my beloved one,” he
groaned, and caught her close to him. “Say you are
all right, unhurt, little wife, little wife! I would die
without you.” He felt the blood burning the cheeks
he pressed against his own.
“I ... I am all right.” She touched his face
curiously, lingeringly, with her fingers. They clung
together, drawn closer in spirit than they had been
in all their married days.
Maeve lay in his arms, content. Here was such love
as Armand could have given, but love sincere. The
thin-lipped woman was beaten on her own ground. And,
since the wisdom of the White Witches stayed with
her, she would not trouble Stuart’s peace of mind with
her real reasons for having run away-—again.
“I walked too far, like a silly . . . and fell asleep, ”
was all she said. That night in the cool dawn hours,
her child was born, born prematurely. The hastily
summoned bush Gamp said : “She should have had
more sense than to walk so far.”
But when had Maeve ever had any sense ?


CHAPTER TWO
Who cares for gardens that have departed ?
Who leans to weep o’er their cenotaph?
The wraith of a word of passion spoken,
The slender ghost of a broken laugh ?
“Lost Gardens
Did any cold-eyed gallant trace
The mark of kisses on her throat,
The ribbon torn, the crumpled lace ?
“My Lady’’
Olga Arnold was forty-one. But only her baptismal
register, and old friends, with the unpleasantly accurate
memories of their kind, could testify to that. Her
appearance certainly did not. She had, in a becoming
frock and a mellow light, been taken for twenty-five.
To-night in the thin maize gown and Dolly Varden
bonnet with the corn-coloured ribbons tied under her
round white chin, she might even have passed for less.
Then she had such innocent eyes ; fifteen years of
married life to sophisticated Basil Arnold had taken
nothing from the innocence of those tell-tale features.
Basil had never in the least understood her. He had
been proud of owning a virtuous woman, his previous
experiences of female property not coming under that
heading. Olga had the kind of mind over which evil
things but wash and disappear in a tide of freshness
and sweetness. Her mental attitudes retained no black-
ness: she accepted facts of life as she accepted every-
thing—dulcetly, pleasantly : she turned from ugliness
to beauty always, so found it everywhere. She had a
liking for pretty faces amongst her women friends ;


she admired statuary and pictures, but not the then
rudimentary cubist work. She disliked grotesques.
Perhaps the fault of her house was that there were no
strong contrasts of force. Everything was harmonious,
exquisite in its limited way. Just as her food, her
frocking, were always of the daintiest. Her doctor
told her she “fined away” the flesh too much, dwelt
on the ethereal plane, but knowing herself as the doctor
did not, Olga may have found a certain amount of
protection in this.
It was October weather: the mystic month when
the sun has power, and the silky oaks are tawny with
blossom : the jacarandas a purple foam on the green
wave of spring. The world seemed athrob with passion-
ate life, and Olga, now three years a widow, was restless
with the world. She had come up to Brisbane on a
whim which she put down to October : stayed at a
big hotel with a Greek front and chill corridors, had
gone out this evening to a classic concert where only
very high-class music was rendered, and somehow,
suddenly mutinous of soul, she felt a comic song, which
as a rule she didn’t like, would have brought some
manner of relief. All round her people had been
talking learnedly of Chopin, Brahms, Beethoven,
the Slav school, and the sixteenth century music.
Olga loved music and flowers, but she had studied
intently neither the great composers nor handbooks
on botany.
She inclined to the Slav music and the German,
but she could not intelligently define why : she took a
sensuous pleasure in a tune even which was “not done”
m Higher Thought circles. Many revolutionary stirrings
against the Things That Are Done and for The Things
That Are Not had attacked Olga from girlhood upwards.


She had never let them undermine her : she had
outwardly conformed. Her sweetness of disposition
had made her extraordinarily adaptable when it was
a question of another person’s comfort, and it nearly
always had been. But now, with an unexpected rise
in the value of shares and consequent dividend from
some property willed to her by her husband, with her
forty-first October in her blood beating at the doors of
accumulated restraints, as she walked slowly down
one of Brisbane’s side-streets with a crumpled pro-
gramme in her ungloved hand, Olga was asking herself
“Why?”
October, opal eyed, gold handed, the “mystic”
month, was also asking “Why ?”
Why had she not sometimes yielded to the clamour
of the Thing One-Wanted-To-Do and should not ?
Why had she always kept her pretty arched feet in
the way of women who were conventional—conven-
tional tastes, conventional friendships, conventional
loves ? Why had she not broken out and let herself
go ? Given rein to some of the surging instincts for
colour . . . variety . . . danger perhaps ? . . .
that murmured in a great wave behind the locked
gates of custom to-night ?
In a city previously strange to her, with the smell
of flowers blown from city gardens and women’s
breasts, with the bubble of jacaranda blossomry against
a sky all moonwashed and white, with the rich-hued
silky oaks, lion-yellow in the open parks, wind that
smelled of roses and dust, echoes of some of the Slav
music still in her ears, why couldn’t she do something
bizarre, queer . . . untoward . . . relieving . . .
before she grew down to the sombre years, which, she
was assured, lay beyond the gate of the fifties


the years of growing indifference to anything but
material comforts ?
She shrugged her shoulders, laughed; a faded rose
she had fastened on her dress slid from its pin and fell
on the still-warm pavement. She stooped to recover
it: half-dead as it was, it yet smelled sweet.
Why ?
Because there was not going to be any opportunity !
That was one reason !
She knew no one here. She wondered now why she
had rushed away from all her acquaintances in the
south, and come to Queensland ? A swift impulse,
.the beginning perhaps of the crumbling of the habit
of years ! She wanted to get out of her groove. Her
Indian summer was coming upon her. Whenever an
old friend told her, with a little natural reproach behind
the flattering imputation, that she was looking well
and amazingly youthful . . . for “the forties”, a
quick rebellion rose. ... If it were true . . . what
was the use ? She gave no lover joy of her youthfulness
and beauty. . . . She used no women's weapons,
as they were meant by Nature, to be used . . . she
just went on going to tea-parties . . . paying calls
spending chaste, dull, and physically entirely
comfortable, week-ends in spots lovely enough for
unlicensed lovers.
She looked alluring . . . for herself alone.
Sometimes she had stood by her bedroom window
ut night, her rounded shoulders rising softly from
their cambric and lace, knowing she was fair, knowing
she was desirable still, and knowing, too, that the years
°f grey hair and deep-bitten wrinkles were waiting
to pounce . . . drawing nearer every day . . . when
She would be put in a corner, carefully wrapped up


. . . and left to watch the younger generations taking
all the gay and colourful things life had withdrawn
from the hands that had never dared to fully grasp them.
Yet she did not wish to marry again. . . . Men
of "suitable ages’’ had cast an acquisitive eye on
herself and her charming little home. Sometimes she
had been tempted, but the thought of those fifteen
years with Basil Arnold arose and became the angel
with the flaming sword. No : she did not want to be
tied to a husband, however adoring. She only now
realized how terribly marriage had restrained her.
The pity was that Basil divided women into two
classes. Women one did not speak about to one’s wife,
but with whom one felt perfectly at ease, and the good
women of whom one’s wife was naturally the head,
who were there to be considered and worshipped but
with whom a chap had to mind his masculine p’s and
q’s. So she never really became Basil’s comrade.
Always the mistress of his house and the woman who
"must be considered.”
Sometimes she thought, if Basil came home drunk
and swore at her, it might have supplied the savour
her days lacked, but doubtless she would have been
horribly affronted ... on the surface, anyway,
had he done so.
If she married again, she might get another Basil.
There were strong points about belonging to oneself.
Either one must be often annoyed, more often bored
(that meant marry again) or one must sometimes be
lonely (that meant remaining unattached).
She was lonely to-night. When lovers passed her,
arms entwined, she envied them; little common
girls “keeping company” with common men in unspeak-
able neckties and plum-coloured shoes tied with wide


bows. She envied them the language of October
nights they were, nevertheless, translating. . . .
Suppose she made believe to-night she was just twenty-
five . . . twenty-five, standing tiptoe at the edges
of Romance.
The petals dropped from the rose she held, a
sunburst with a heart like golden fire. Sup-
“How do you do ?” said a voice at her elbow, a
soft southern voice that matches the dark eyes and
olive-tinted skin. “How do you do ?”
She knew she did not know him. It had happened
to her before, this cheap kind of salutation, when she
had been out late after a theatre or concert. She had
always maintained the frigid silence that effectually
chills : the only thing she knew a nice woman can
do —ever does —under these circumstances, and the
accosting male had faded away into snubbed darkness.
Sometimes they smelled of wine or whisky, sometimes
they had just been impertinent without that excuse,
feeling their way; often they were cultured men.
blown here from some port of the world, over-anxious
for women’s society, taking risk. . . .
At times it had made her cheeks flame with the
thought; “Do I look like that ?” She scarcely knew,
so little did she dwell on the seamy side of life, what
“women like that ” did look like. At others, she had been
fiercely indignant for the honour of her sex. Surely
some women must answer them . . . accept their
attentions ... or men like this . . . wouldn’t
d are .. . And she had caught her tram or her train
With an intense white virtue burning against these
Women who did betray their caste.
Funny to think of it now . . . funny. , , . But


she knew she did not know this man. He was too
good-looking for her to be mistaken. He wore his
clothes as a gentleman wears them : his long hands
were well cared for, firm, sinewy, brown from out-door
sports : there was nothing soft about him except his
voice : his dark eyes sparkled with delightful imps of
mischief as he stood beside her, his limp dark hat in
his hand, daring her not to recognize him
“I met you at that musicale last week . . . pardon
me ... lam sure lam not mistaken . . . don’t you
remember ?”
That damned him utterly, for she had not been in
Brisbane last week, but in the train pounding over the
stony ways by Tenterfield. Another petal fell from
the golden rose. October winds swept up the street.
The lights went out in the hotels. Eleven o’clock :
a girl passing, wrapped in an emerald cloak, let
loose a whiff of damask roses on the summer
October, the mystic month, the golden, golden
month . . . and Olga Arnold just twenty-five !
The man was about twenty-seven . . . two years
older than herself, she thought.
The tides beat against the barriers of years of pres-
criptive usage. . . . She was lonely . . . and it wasn’t
as if she were a young girl who could be enticed away
into danger . . . unspeakable . . . sordid happenings.
She knew just what she was doing ; she was
not afraid : she could take care of herself.
On other occasions when she had administered the
rebuke of complete silence, or the sharp “I do not
know you : I have never met you before”, she had
sometimes allowed herself to wonder what would
happen if a woman fell in with the suggestion, pretended


not to see the insult, replied “Yes : I remember quite
well.” Would the man look shamefaced . . . would
he . . .
She glanced up at him now : her innocent eyes
clear as day. “I remember quite well,” she said gently :
"Isn’t it a lovely evening ?”
He was pacing beside her now, replacing his hat.
"I saw you at the concert,” he said. “Followed you”—
he opened one hand and showed in its palm the deep
yellow petal of a crumpled rose. “I picked this up
where your flower fell.”
Olga thrilled, despite a tendency to laugh aloud.
In a minute she would leave him, she would signal a
cab or take the tram round to her hotel, it did not
matter which, she would let him see she knew all the
time his salutation was an affrront. . . .
But they continued to walk side by side. Something
in his jaunty air, his movements, made her think he
belonged to the ways of many waters, a stranger, a
naval man possibly in plain clothes . . . she had seen a
gunboat in the river this afternoon, but she was not,
of course, going to ask him that. He was so sunburned,
he looked like the open air life . . . his eyes as those
accustomed to scan far horizons.
She remembered a man friend in Sydney (he was
going bald, her friends had hoped to make a match of
) she remembered his saying that the almost
invariable blue eye was passing among seafaring
11160 •' as many brown-eyed sailors were to be found
now aboard ship; he supposed it was because the wind-
jammer drew the Nordic races, and the day of the sail-
ing ship was over . . . the engineer, the man with
Bie ‘machinery mind”, was coming more to the fore,
loneers were mostly blue-eyed men. Everything in


life was becoming more a matter of mental commuta-
tions. . . .
Still they paced side by side. . . . He began to
discuss the concert. He too, it appeared, liked “some-
thing with a tune in it.”
She laughed. She had a delightful laugh. Basil
Arnold had never heard her laugh quite like that.
He thought a nice woman should modulate both her
voice and her mirth.
The laugh she gave now had youth and perhaps a
hint of abandon. . . . For October, with her opal
eyes and her hands of gold, whether she come in sun
or shower, is never cold in Queensland.
“Supper?” he asked lightly, and they went down
some steps into a cafe where the windows were screened
with Oriental blinds—impossible parrots in gorgeous
hues, apples as large as pumpkins. “A touch of the
Arabian nights or of the wand of the jinn in ‘The Brass
Bottle’ about it,” he said as she hesitated on the thres-
hold.
She could see the cabs on the rank, one man,
alert for a fare, watching them; she could hear
the tram halt at the corner. She went down the
steps.
“Coffee ?” he said. “I don’t think we can get wine
here, in your Godly city.”
“It isn’t my city—” she answered, then bit her lip.
Presently she would be giving herself away. She was
keeping up the pretence that she really believed they
had met at the musicale. She wondered where the
“musicale” had been—in his imagination probably.
She fingered the scarlet gerberas in the copper vase on
the white cloth. The waitress, yawning, hovered
near.


"Coffee ? Sandwiches ? Cakes ? Sorry it’s such
paltry fare.”
He was leaning over the table, looking hard at her,
some puzzlement in his dancing eyes. She caught
a breath of some fragrant light mixture tobacco, a
faint suggestion of Russia leather : the smell of serge.
She became thoughtful. Anyway, he had not been
drinking. What did one do now ? Did one commence
to flirt with him ? What did one do under these
circumstances ?
He looked again into her limpid eyes. He was non-
plussed, but one never could tell with women, he was
not likely to make a mistake. . . . She had let him
speak to her in the public way, yet, perhaps she really
did think they had met before—lt was interesting,
if likely to be disappointing in the finale. But . , .
one never could tell with women. . . . They were the
most deceptive creatures, and wore their smiles and
their innocent eyes like masks. . . . He ordered
coffee and sandwiches.
She discovered she was hungry, hungry and excited.
Did he really think she was a girl ? She managed under
the tablecloth to slip off her wedding-ring. He had
apparently not noticed it, or not cared. Perhaps men
who spoke to women they did not know did not care.
• • • Because they did not expect those kind of
Women to care. She flushed.
She thought two men who entered the cafe were
staring unpleasantly at her. One chuckled and said
something to the other. Her dark-eyed companion
wheeled his chair about and fixed them with a hot,
youthful frown. They dropped their eyes, appeared
confused.
She’s a damned pretty kid, anyway,” said the


younger of the two ostentatiously, and they fell-to
on meat pies and did not look again at the table where
the red gerberas blazed against the copper jar.
Olga and her companion came out into the street
again. Some young people on their way home from a
fancy-dress dance were passing. The girls Columbines
in short white skirts and red pom-poms were swinging
red balloons ; every now and then one exploded with
loud report. The men in black and scarlet Pierrot
suits, blew whistles and hit at each other with long
pale green bladders. The girls had tight white skull
caps : the men were bareheaded. October danced
with them up the street, they began to pirouette
along the pavement. Olga clapped suddenly, exul-
tantly. To-night was surely carnival!
Then the street was as swiftly empty ! They could
hear the chatter of gay receding voices. In the shadow
of a verandah the dark-eyed man caught both her soft
palms to his. The little Dolly Vardon bonnet was
tilted back, he was kissing Olga’s lips as she had never
been kissed in all her days. Scarlet with mortification,
and a strange exaltation, the women stepped back,
pushing her from him.
“I’m ... I’m .. . not —” she never afterwards
knew if she was going to say she wasn’t twenty-five, or
that she wasn’t “that kind of woman”, for he released
her as quickly and stood, his soft hat in his hand,
his eyes full of laughter that strove with something
akin to boyish confusion.
“I know,” he said, “I know. I’m not a fool. To tell
you the truth, I was puzzled at first. I am more puzzled
now . . . but I knew . . . directly I kissed you.
You can’t be angry, you know, for you had to be
punished. Don’t take risks again with strange chaps,


my dear . . . you might meet a fellow who did not
understand, next time.”
Laughter was near her lip, but there were quick tears
in her innocent eyes. “It’s .. . it’s .. . only October,
she whispered.
“Springtide madness ? Don’t worry girlie” ("girlie”
—and she forty-one !) “but it’s hardly a fair game for
you to play, you know. ” His mouth grew grave. “I’d
be .. . terribly hurt if I thought you made—a habit
—of it . . . though it is only what I deserve, too. . . .
You’re laughing up your sleeve, maybe . . .no
with compunction—“l know you’re not . . . but
She was going to tell him she was old and wise
that she had played the folly game with open eyes.
She was going to try to find some reason for it all.
but he stopped her by his words.
“My boat leaves early to-morrow. You will never see
me again and I am not going to ask your name, and
you are not going to ask me mine . . . but I am going
to thank you for this hour. You don’t know how a chap
hankers for a woman’s society when he’s been weeks.
months, afloat and met nothing but men. It’s that as
much as anything ... to hear a woman speak . . .
to see a woman laugh . . . that sends us to . . .
women different to yourself, as different as . . . well,
there’s no time to seek for similes.”
Olga drooped her head under her Dolly Varden
bonnet. . . . Was she so very different after all ?
Poor women, of whom men made substitutes for
the smiles and voices of nice women . . . poor women
who had lost the chance of innocent fun.
She shivered in the warm night. Carnival had passed
from the street, a solitary policeman watched them
stolidly, yawning. The shadows were long and black,


the moon looked cold, contemptuous, aloof in her sum-
mer weben of fine cloud. Slowly the tides were receding,
taking with them the perfume of a dying rose.
He did not attempt to kiss her again, his face had
become sterner, older; he looked tired, a little sorry,
somehow, but he closed his big brown hand over hers
as he saw her to a cab and told the man the lady would
give him the address to which to drive her, later.
Only one thing he asked of her, that was the remnant
of the yellow rose she had repinned in her dress. It
was little more than stem and a few wrinkled insecure
petals now.
She gave it to him without speaking. There was
nothing to say. He understood too well for her to
make excuse, to need to excuse herself.
The wind was cold from the river. She saw him
standing bareheaded on the pavement as she left
him. A hot surge followed the thought: “Will he
accost some other kind of woman now?” But she
thrust back the thought and the shaming knowledge
of jealousy that came with it. He was twenty-six
. . . maybe twenty-seven . . . but he was years
away from her . . . and his boat went at daybreak.
As she gave her destination to the cab driver through
the glass, her voice had suddenly grown thin and
weary.
She heard a boat’s syren crying down the river at
dawn. There was a silver-grey fog on the world, through
which faint rose and amethyst tints showed in the
East. All the wharves along the river front looked
like monstrous furniture of night, swathed in white
samites for the day’s uncovering.
Olga kneeled against her open window. There were
little fine lines about her mouth and eyes, she looked


more like a winter’s day when the westerlies are blowing
than the golden October conjures. Last night she had
been twenty-five, to day she was forty-one, with the
lean fifties stalking her.
The syren hooted down the river, down to the Bay,
the open sea, the other side of the world. . . .
Day, clear, hard, disillusioning, leapt, a conqueror,
over the crouching hills.


CHAPTER THREE
To-morrow is to-day. The lines unwrit
Nag at my mind, though all the while I see
A warm white moonlight on a warm white tree;
And when I think at last “I gather it”,
Some strange enchantment snatches from my hand
Blossom and moonlight—back to fairyland !
"Moonlight on a Blossoming Plum Tree”
All her life-long beliefs in herself seemed to have left
Olga Arnold. For a time she was like a drifting water-
logged wreck, or a white pleasure yacht that, having
kept to safe waters, upon a more daring voyage enters
inadvertently into the path of a tornado in tropic seas,
and though it escapes complete foundering is so changed,
its white paint so smirched, its dainty pennons so
utterly destroyed, its gleaming woodwork matchwood,
only the semblance of a thing of beauty left, that its
owner despairs of getting it ever again to appear as
the fair white bird it once seemed, and so leaves it
unsalvaged in some inland lake, commercially unsound,
sentiment keeping him from selling it for what it will
fetch as salvage, or as “parts” towards the building of
another vessel.
She had lost her self-assurance. Somehow it seemed
to have been twitched from her on that October night
and to have revelled and floated in the wake of the
ship of the brown-skinned youth whom, as far as he
personally was concerned, she forgot within a very
few months of his departure. Women who have lived
restrained, too restrained, lives, sometimes wait till


well into the forties (years that cease to be the burden
they used to be, to the woman of a later day) and the
grande passion is more likely to occur in a mature
woman than in a young one. It is a curious fact, because
it is more rarely the case with men. There was some-
thing incongruous about Olga. Her very name Olga
—how badly it blent with Arnold !—seemed a misfit.
She was not of those who dare put it to the touch to
win or lose it all, and as the memory of that October
night of carnival faded, she was left only with the heavy
years and a growing tendency to let herself go in her
personal appearance. Within sight of fifty, she decided
to give that self a mental and physical shake. Socially
she was popular, and her little home at Cremorne
Point in Sydney, overlooking the sudden blues, the
swift fine grey, the lilac distances of the harbour, was
a popular rendezvous; but she felt herself slipping too
easily into old age, surrounded by lovely things she
had gleaned at art-dealers’ sales through her unerring
flair for the truly harmonious; and, her backbone
stiffened as does sometimes the backbone of women
Who have decided to accept middle age but not rush
at old age too swiftly, Olga became a saner, a mentally
less morbid woman, and the invitation of a friend to
visit her on a back-block station in Queensland was
accepted with that same wholesomely stern attitude
towards herself which prescribed change of scene and
less drifting for her mental welfare.
She let her house and took the mail train for the
larger state almost before her cronies had completely
realized it. They brought flowers as to a funeral, at
Central Station, and the kind of books one buys
hurriedly at railway bookstalls.
Some of them thought Olga a little mad. “At her


age, of course, women become eccentric,” murmured
the medically-minded, but the bald-headed man, who
wore now a complete full moon of pink-glowing skull
and who had remained faithful, in theory, for the past
eight years, was the only one who felt there was going
to be a real blank in his life.
Between paying the taxi-driver and getting checks
for her luggage, he managed hurriedly the oft-repeated
formula, but Olga shook her head. She felt her body
was settling into the rigid lines that meant the passing
of youth’s elasticity : she knew her mind was. She
was proud to think she had given that mind its
necessary jerk. More and more as physical cravings
for romance had died, the love of beauty grew, and
sometimes she dreamed of a child she might have had
(quite unlike Basil Arnold) who would have been a
lovely thing of flesh and blood, to take the place of
majolica vases and Eastern ambers.
At times it seemed to her as the train beat out by
beautiful Hawkesbury into the clear green twilights
of spring, that the barrenness of wasted beauty was
a tangible thing, aching all through her being, and that
if in her quest she could find a child whom she could
make legally hers, all the derelict discontents of her
days would be assuaged. As the footprints of that
brown sailor-boy—probably now the father of a child
himself in some distant English home —had intagliated
the smooth sands of her life, so the longing, once born,
for a visible breathing beauty of youth that could be
hers to taste and handle, stayed like a moulding dream
with her all that night of darkness and noise, through
the quivering sheen of enchantment where a full moon
blanched a lovely, lonely world, seen through the
sleeping-car window in the night watches. Her bunk was


over the wheels, a lack of foresight on her part, which
showed how she had even forgotten how to travel
comfortably; and she was shaken and jostled and half-
choked with coal dust, until, part-waking and part-
sleeping, the knowledge grew that to find a child which
would embody in itself the youth that was hers for a
little hour on a past October night, would be to her as
the finding of the Holy Grail was to a bygone and an
ambitious Galahad.
This to be lived for . . . the satisfying thing. All
else she had left too late. ... It might not be too
late for some women : one saw them every day fighting
back age with their lovers, their sports, their deter-
mination, their damnable courage.
She had not that kind of courage : she had proved
that when she was forty-one —-there had been no more
October nights. Something seemed to have shrivelled,
to have let go . . . atrophied. . . . She had gone in
for art collecting, for the loveliness of harmless inani-
mate things that could neither stifle with caresses,
nor desert, not strike back, did one strike at them in a
frenzy of ennui. Sometimes they were broken, that
was true, but one could buy others. One could not
buy again a broken dream.
Besides, she had rich friendships, preferred love
from respectable elderly gentlemen who found her
sweet and decorative. But the fire of youth had
passed her by . . . since that golden night of masked
carnival.
What had the sailor-man thought about it all after-
wards ?
Bid it matter ? Perhaps he pictured her throwing
her cap over the mill —“going gay.’’
“A gay old girl,” as a young man might phrase it.


laughing with another young man. A gay old girl
even that thought was not going to hurt her.
She did not try to look young now. It saved a lot
of bother. Hard to live up to the mark always, and
she was not really young at heart any more. It required
self-discipline to refuse to yearn after soft, low-heeled
slippers and cosy flannel dressing-gowns.
Morning, beating towards the Queensland border.
Hills, green filleted with spring; grey tors with
Harlequin coats of lichen, eyed and dappled with
moss ; close-crowded dusky timbers that seemed to
resent the railway engine’s whistle ravishing their
silences ; the sheen of swampy pools ; rich chestnut-
hued bracken ; a wide river glittering as tinfoil; high
wind like a cavalry charge in the trees ; a blur of rain,
then sun again above the deep windy cleft of a hill;
a little secret town with sleep-drugged homes, mountain-
top flushed with draughts of day’s red wine, foothills
swathed in rags of mist. The irregular indigo line of a
water shed, and in the dark a pin-point of fire. Out-
crops of stone-grey eyebrows on the face of the plain.
An argument abouts seats at Wallangarra and insistent
voices calling the conductor. Amicable settlements
and weak hot tea . . . and all the time a heart
poignantly aware of the only thing it needed now.
Where the engine paused for water once on the Queens-
land side, amid the waves of light on the wind-stirred
leaves of the surrounding gums, stood a tree, bright
with orange-coloured flowers, and on its branches half
a dozen little green parrots with breasts barred in
primrose flashing a blue and rose underwing as they
dipped beaks the colour of the blossoms into the honey
trumpets of the flowers. Olga moved to the window
to watch the birds feeding away undisturbed by


the hiss and drip of the engine at the rust-red
tank.
She could hear two men talking in the next com-
partment.
“When you are old,” said one, finishing a sentence
the first portion of which had not reached her.
“I won’t grow old,’’laughed the other in a high, clear
boyish voice. “Let myself become a rattling stringy
bag of bones, or of an unwieldly bulk with a paunch
I can hardly look over. . . .”
“Must it be one or the other ?” said the deeper tones.
“Some people, you know, manage to grow old grace-
fully.”
Lazily the younger voice replied ; “Not me. I’m
too fond of the fleshpots, old chap. I’ll go out . . .
at the flood.”
Olga was never to now that he did . . . years after,
but before his crystal youth was dimmed, and at
Gallipoli.
The parrots made sharp sound in the trees. They
seemed to have so much to say to one another between
sips. . . . Perhaps the heady mead of the honey
blooms went to their little shining heads.
The train clanked on. Olga pulled out a magazine
from her rugs. It was one the bald-headed ancient
love had thrust upon her. She would appreciate it
no more than she did his years of devotion.
It slid to the floor. In a dream dusty with unseasoned
coal, and green and gold with spring, she saw only the
eyes of a child, heard a little piping voice calling —
calling down the years.


CHAPTER FOUR
When the moon rose, ripe and big,
And the trees were black as pitch,
What yon thought was just a twig,
I knew, surely, was the witch.
Pointed hat and high-heeled shoon
Swinging right across the moon.
■—"Witch in the Tree’’
Whist ye, whist ye. The fairies have run out
In the dew-hushed garden they are scampering about.
The yellow cat is watching. Does he take them for a mouse?
Amazed at the enchantment that has come about our house.
• —"Magic Glasses’’
Synfye Jackson sat on the wooden step in front of
the long queerly-built house which was her home,
and contemplated the green silences. The top of her
head was bleached to a pale straw colour because
Synfye was disobedient and wouldn’t wear her hat.
It lay at her plump brown feet now, a straw, coloured
like dry pineapple rind, and lacking the trimming her
mother’s fingers had stitched there. Maeve Jackson’s
sewing always came to pieces. Good housewives said
she sewed with a red-hot needle and thread. Even the
pretty gowns she contrived for herself parted company
with their wearer at the most inauspicious moment on
occasion . . . once when the Duckett twins were
being christened, and everyone in the district knew
how respectable the Ducketts were—but that came of
Stuart Jackson marrying the queer way he did;
though no one could deny Maeve Jackson-outlandish
name ! —had grown more sensible with the years. Now
when the baby Synfye was bcrn, she might have died.


walking all that way to the White Witches on some
goblin hunt of her own. White Witches, indeed !
What a place for a pregnant woman to go to . . . not
to be surprised at the child was half a gipsy and, as
if in premonition, her novel-devouring mother had
given her a gipsy name-—Synfye Jackson ! There had
been Synfyes far back in Maeve’s own family, though
Jackson looked more of the gipsy when it came to that.
Synfye Jackson . . . and she with never a hat to her
head nor shoe to her foot, though, after all, that was
the way with most bush children. Snakes in the under-
brush were naught to them. Indeed, there was some-
thing about Synfye rather terrifying to her fond mother
at times, so utterly devoid of ordinary fear was the
little girl, and in the scented dusk often she seemed
to talk with the sprites and hobgoblins of her own acute
imagination, an imagination which peopled the dark-
ness and the unsubstantiality of distant trees with
ouphes and gum-tree pixies, and who found the stars
as windows through which the thoughts of a child
could peer.
Indeed, the nine White Witches that in a circle sat
might easily have been a company of silvery-bodied,
eerie godparents to the child.
In her slumber of exhaustion there the few hours
before Synfye was born, perhaps something of the
witchery of the place passed into the quickening of
the baby’s mind, if the child-mind feels prenatal
influences as most of us believe. The windows were
wide when Synfye was born, wide to a night of shimmer-
ing splendour of moving leaf and small soft rustlings
and little furry scampers on turf and bough, and a half-
drowsing parliament of feathered things ; there was
bush wattle blown over the birth chamber, and the


drift of the purple sarsparilla which Maeve had set in
a tin of water on the window sill; there was a lamp
burning low where a brown moth wriggled to its death,
the face of the kind old German midwife, wrinkled
like a dry prune, and, now and then, the pale sweat-
marked visage of Stuart Jackson at the dividing door
. . . the dog whining on the chain again . . . and at
the moment of Synfye’s birth a bird, whose name they
never knew . . . sang in the soft dark from which
the wisp of moon had fled.
The old midwife declared the child laughed before
she was born, so full of vitality was she, so anxious
to come into a world that she believed held a magic
of faerie for her.
She was very like her father at birth ; dark-haired.
dark-complexioned, but the months drew her some-
times in the likeness of one parent, sometimes of the
other, and Stuart Jackson, sucking at his cherry-wood
pipe which was dark as coffee now with its long use,
would declare he was blessed if he knew which of the
two she really belonged to-
The first time Synfye was able to express an opinion
clearly in words, she settled the question ;
“Synfye ’ite ’tches baby most,” she said, and Maeve
shivered a little as she drew her head against her
breast.
“She has never forgotten the day we took her picnick-
ing there and you made the swing for her," she
explained to Stuart. “Do you remember the bird’s
nest with the dead bird in it she cried over ? Some-
how the swing and the dead young bird seem
to have made a deep impression: she’s a funny
child."
“Half a fairy, like her mother, I believe,” said Stuart,


but he frowned a little. “I expect she’ll drop all the
fairy nonsense when she grows up.”
Maeve smiled vaguely . . . her eyes saw far horizons
Stuart would not find. She loved him dearly, but he
was practical first of all.
She had no particular memory of Armand to trouble
her now. He belonged to some past of ugly things,
but evil things sometimes have a strange glamour,
before one draws too near . . . like the blue gas from
decaying vegetation in a swamp.
It seemed one could not have romance and absolute
safety. . . . not often ... so seldom as to be almost
never. Perhaps Stuart felt that about their child.
He did not want the White Witches to leave too deep
a seal, although they had spoken to him in wisdom on
the night, that Christmas night,before Synfye was born.
In two ways he owed the White Witches gratitude
. . . might not there be a third way in which he would
not be left with so much cause to thank them ?
He sucked his pipe, and Synfye babbled on. She
said she had been talking to a lizard about a wren.
But that was some years before the summer’s day
on which Synfye sat on the steps of her house, and
looked at the scrub. The bark hut where Stuart had
brought Maeve on that wild night of tempest and des-
pair was the kitchen now. A roofed-in wooden passage
ran from that to the new house, more commodious and
pretentious in every way. Inside, Maeve had stained
the floors a deep chestnut-brown. There were scarlet
rag mats and dark lacquer-red painted chairs Stuart
had made : he always was a hand at carpentering.
There was a bookshelf containing the rubbish Maeve
liked, and some heavier books he read in the winter
evenings. In the summer ones they generally sat on


the steps of the verandah, where Synfye now was, in
two squatter chairs up on the boards.
At the back of the house Maeve and two black gins
were busy washing, the gins doing the work and
Maeve superintending from over the top of a novel.
Synfye had become frightfully bored with her share,
bluing the smaller articles and staining her fingers
surreptitiously with the "squeedge” of the blue bag,
till the small things had to be all rinsed out again.
She couldn’t resist colour. She had purposely knocked
over her father’s red ink to discover what it looked like
on a white dinner napkin. Like all experimentalists,
she was occasionally blown up, but in her case after
the experiment was over.
With a particularly innocent expression in her hazel
eyes, Synfye was even now planning an experiment
which might mean disaster. In her haste to light a
fire, to cook vegetables she had forgotten, though they
stood prepared in their twin saucepans on the American
oven, Maeve had thrown some kerosene on the chips
before applying a match. That had been two days ago,
but Synfye, who admired the sudden blue and gold
leap of magic that was flame, had not forgotten.
She knew how to work the kerosene pump that stood
in the punctured tin behind the kitchen door. There
were red coals smouldering on top of the oven under
the black bars where the kettle stood. It would be
rather fun to see them spring up full-armoured after
the application of the oil.
Did not her father sometimes sing a song ‘T fear no
foe in shining armour” when he was under the shower
on a hot day ? Neither was Synfye going to fear any
foe that made such a brave show. She pattered
noiselessly into the house. Outside she could hear the


soft liquid voices of the gossiping gins, an occasional
higher pitched word from her mother. There is always
something childlike about the aborigine’s voice,
especially that of the women.
Maeve, for her part having disposed of both hero
and heroine with a close embrace on the last page of
her novel, was yawning and preparing to seek her
too-quiet offspring, when the sound of a sudden
explosion from the kitchen, the rattle of falling tin-
ware, and a terrified shriek from Synfye, made her
drop her love-story and fly up the back steps, upsetting
the bluing tub and the fresh rinsing as she did so.
Running flame met her eyes in the kitchen.
Jimmy, the tailor, who had drawn his tilt cart into
the shadow of the trees a few hundred yards from the
homestead and who was just adding dry sticks to his
crackling fire of oily dead gum leaves, with a mild specu-
lation in his not-easily disturbed mind as to whether
he could possibly “get them grey pants done’’for Peter
Prow’s wedding-day up the river, Jimmy having
undertaken to rig out the Best Man, too, when a shrill
scream shattered the leafy quietude and made him
hastily stamp out his promising flames (for Jimmy,
if a tailor, was too much of a good bushman to leave
an unprotected fire in the dry weather), and proceed
at an amble in the direction of the screams. His rosy,
hairless face, his snub nose from which the skin was
always peeling from an exposure it could not get used
to, and his chubby body that fell in rolls of fat over his
tightly girt trousers, concealed one of the kindest
hearts in the world. His matrimonial story had been
that of Teddy Haynes, and when his wife left him for
the butcher in the next street, Jimmy had bought the
tilted cart and laid in a fresh stock of waxed thread


and some lengths of tweed and moleskin, and had
fared forth to “do” for the back-blocks men what
previously could only be done by a visit to the city.
The voice of a woman raised in terror would draw
Jimmy to the rescue at any time or any season, and
so he made a loping bee-line for the house and the
kitchen where Maeve strove in vain with the fire her
too-ambitious daughter had instigated.
Taking in the situation at a glance, Jimmy rushed
to the bedroom, tore the blankets from the bed, gave a
backhander to a chattering gin who was spreading the
fire with water recklessly applied, and wrapped mother
and child in the thick blue bed coverings (blue, because
no aboriginal could resist a theft of the red) and, having
quenched the smouldering of Maeve’s clothing, pro-
ceeded to deal with the child and the kitchen. There
was not much damage done there, and only Maeve's
hands were scorched, but Synfye’s hair was frizzled
and her plump feet badly burned. There was an oil
drum in the corner of the veranda filled with salad oil
which Stuart had meant to use in a blend for re-staining
wood—for he, too, had his experiments. Stripping
off all but her little cotton shirt, Jimmy dipped Synfye
right into the drum, only her tear-stained face with its
frizzle of singed hair appearing over the top. Maeve
was hysterical with fright, the black gins pale under
their ebon skins. Bidding them see that Synfye did not
get out of the oil drum, Jimmy ambled off again to
his cart, where he surprised a saffron iguana already
taking inventory, and returned with his bottle of
picric acid, for Jimmy was many things beside a
tailor.
For days afterwards Synfye, in the big rocking-chair,
took a certain amount of pride in her yellow toes


escaping from the bandages, and it was Jimmy’s pet
vanity in later years to recall how little trace remained
of the scars of her daring venture with kerosene.
When the pain subsided, she got a good deal of excite-
ment out of the position of invalid. After scolding her
roundly, Stuart rode into the township, had a chat with
the doctor, who commended Jimmy’s promptness, and
brought Synfye back a picture-book from the chemist’s,
the chemist’s being the only place where one could buy
literature.
In the meantime, Synfye had made friends with
Jimmy. Pressed by grateful Maeve, he refused to doss
in the lean-too she would have made so comfortable
for him. There were those wedding garments to finish
and take up the river, so he could not tarry long, but
he put in a good deal of swift stitchery and Maeve
pressed the result. Jimmy had a cleaner’s and presser’s
outfit in his cart —for he did little jobs that way, too,
for would-be-smart selectors and budding Romeos—
but an ironing-board and a stove were roomy luxuries
compared with the contractions and makeshifts under
a canvas-covered cart, and he thought Maeve beautiful.
They were so grateful, too, that Jimmy, as all human
beings are wont to do, expanded under their felicitations
and became the thoroughly good fellow they all—
even the black gins—believed him to be. Indeed, the
gins thought him a kind of graceful mixture of a debble-
debble and beneficent Big Spirit. Tony, the big full-
blooded buck, came to be measured for a coat, but
Jimmy, so rushed with the up-the-river wedding,
compromised on an old one of his own and, with a
grey sacque coat and bare legs, Tony strode belliger-
ently through the camp brandishing a spear and calling
all (including the mangy dogs) to witness what a man


he was. He brought a dilly-bag of rather dirty honey
for Synfye, and the smallest piccaninny arrived trailing
a roast ’possum for “little white Mary”. Maeve
had a tactful fashion with the blacks, and both honey
and ’possum were buried in the garden secretly and
by night, the simple souls being fully convinced that
Synfye had devoured the lot for her tea.
The little girl was heartbroken when she had to
farewell Jimmy the tailor. His round rosy face, his
snub nose, his lovely folds of fat that overlapped the
leather belt at his middle, his oft-repeated and hoary
jokes, his flying needle, his waxed thread and the
marvellous fashion in which he attached buttons to
coats and trouser-flaps, were a source of never-falling
interest to Synfye, who had occasionally even in her
short life become aweary of her own company. Her
mother she believed to be a kind of fairy, and thus
to be more loved than respected : she was a little
afraid of her father, though she believed he could do
anything in the world he tried to do. Of course, he
was the strongest man and the handsomest and
“goodest” that ever existed, but gods are a trifle
alarming at close quarters. Jimmy was something
hitherto quite unknown in her philosophy, and to her
excursion-loving mind that had its charm. Besides,
he was masculine.
Nobody could be afraid of Jimmy, and he smelled
of tweed and yellow soap and cobbler’s wax and hot
irons. Jimmy did not smoke and he said he did not
drink, but there were times when the latter at least
ceased to be an accurate certificate of character.
Every man must have his outlet.
The day came when he harnessed the old flea-bitten


greys in the tilt cart (the greys were twin foals and
nearly as old as Jimmy—he had bought them from a
rubbish remover who was going in for a motor-car)
and went to take Peter Prow’s grey pants up the river,
in answer to a lurid message from Peter by word of
mouth through the mail man.
Synfye, in her rocking-chair, flung her picture-book
across the room and began to tear off her bandages.
She wanted Jimmy . . . and she howled until, in
spite of her being still considered a partial invalid,
Stuart arose and smacked her.


CHAPTER FIVE
On window-panes that catch the light.
Sills that the rose has kist.
The marks of baby fingers leave
A magic ring of mist.
"The Christ Child’’
The coolness of the night proved dawning not far
distant. Despite the sawdust burning in the empty
half kerosene tin at the door of the tent, a mosquito
still buzzed insistently about the pillow, but there was
a sweetness of earth and leaf, a faint hint of blossoming
things, the wider pools of the creek were as mirrors
breathed upon, the lesser ones became luminously
green as Moorish jade, little winds already sipped morn-
ing amidst the bush flowers.
Olga Arnold looked across the earth floor of the tent
to where something vaguely huddled and heavily
breathing meant her spinster friend, with whom she
was tasting her first experience of camping out in a
sheep-mustering camp. Some twenty yards away was
the men’s tent, the cook, the overseer, and the station
hands who did the work, some of them lying in the
open, their booted heels still to a smouldering fire of
red coal and mouse-grey ash, and Algeron—the black-
fellow, half-brother to Tony—who had come over from
Stuart Jackson’s place to help with the mustering and
be off-sider to the half-caste who looked after the tents
and the spare horses. Dirra the half-caste had a kindly
contempt for Algeron, who was a full-blood aboriginal,
Dirra having an Englishman for a father—some said a


titled gentleman—in any case, probably an efficient
rotter.
Dirra was "horse-tailer” to the camp, and it was he
Olga heard now astir in the dark, moving out a little
late to-day to bring in the hobbled horses and to follow
up the sound of the clonk-clonk of the iron horse-
bells on the others. Dirra, knowing he had overslept,
was swearing softly and forcefully at Tony’s brother.
Neither wished to wake the overseer. Olga could hear
the spare horses feeding down beyond the men’s tent :
she had learned enough to know that the horses used
to-day would not be yesterday’s, for Grass Tree
Flats station grass-fed its hacks. During the day
there would be only herself and Sarah Blunt, her old-
maid friend who ran the station property since her
brother’s death as well as any man could run it, and
who, in her corduroy skirt and thick green-hide boots,
looked almost as much a man as any of the musterers
at the camp. Sarah, much against her inclination, did
not take an active part in the mustering now, and was
out here only to give Olga a taste of real bush life and
work. She had a tolerant admiration for Olga’s
femininity. She had been a senior when Olga was at
boarding-school, and had always made a pet of the girl.
Sarah was now nearly sixty, and a bad fall from a
bucking young ’un had left her with a weak back,
strained muscles which would not “come right” with
any medical advice or treatment, and she had to leave
more to her overseer than inclination urged, but, as
she said philosophically to Olga on her first evening on
the station : “When one gets short in the wind and
spavined in the leg with age, one has to submit, that’s
all.”
“Grass Tree Flats” was a comfortable enough home


to submit in—almost approaching a luxurious one for
an out-back property —and Sarah was a great reader.
She also grew vegetables, or thought she did, for the
Chinaman gardener did the growing more or less under
her direction, and Sarah was the society leader of the
little society the district boasted. She dosed and cared
for and instructed the body and soul of the station
hands’ wives and children, and was a stern moralist
within limits, for if you managed to touch her sense of
humour, you generally also managed to get off with a
caution. Make Miss Sarah laugh, and your blackness
became no more than a robust grey. That was why
the Irish amongst the station hands found her soft side
so quickly.
Olga had deliberately chosen to come out to what to
her were “The Wilds” after Sydney, to tonic her spirit
with new and healthy experiences. She had an idea
she would rough it; so far she had found it very plea-
sant roughing. Even in the tent there was American
cloth spread under soft flock mattresses to keep out
damp, though the earth was dry enough Just now.
The cook was quite a chef, and the “horse-trailer”
was a crack shot and brought down pigeon and duck
for the pot. Olga found, so far, more ease than tonic
in her experiences.
Algeron and Dirra had disappeared into the breaking
cloudiness of the ragged shrubs and dew-dark trees.
She must have dozed, for the sound of trotting horses
and clanging bells and rattle of hobble chains was the
next thing to drown the wistful dawn-murmurings
of trees. She could breathe the tang of hot tea blown
over from the black quart pots ; an appetising aroma
of hot meat sizzling in a frying pan—perhaps the greasy
rissoles the cook was so fond of serving up. Presently


the men would be lighting their pipes and looking for
the lunches the cook would be preparing and wrapping
in newspaper while they breakfasted, which, with little
coarse calico bags of tea and sugar, were stuffed
into saddle pouches. Then began the job of catching
and saddling the loose horses in the open, and this was
sometimes a difficult one, for there was no yard and
no handy wire fence to run them up against, and the
horses after the day’s rest were often inclined to pig-
root and turn flash. Olga had seen some exciting buck-
ing competitions, and once red-headed Larry—a pet of
Miss Sarah’s and a dare-devil Galway boy—had been
thrown and stunned, but he recovered and he himself
declared he was ‘ 'fine for the gallows yet, ” as he rode out
for the day’s work little the worse. Presently the men
and horses would move away, the riders laughing and
blowing wreaths of smoke, towards the paddocks
to be mustered that day, first taking observation of
the wind, because a sheep will always move towards the
direction from which the wind is coming, whether from
some bygone ancestral instinct filtered through the
years from a land where wild animals might be on
watch to “wind” the sheep, or whether from some other
unexplained reason ; the sheepman knows this when
he goes to look for mobs in the wide, partially-fenced
country. Anywhere near water in thirsty weather is
also a place for the musterers to seek, though a sheep
does not require watering every day as cattle do.
In a loose line the men rode, and when they had
scoured the paddock and cleaned out the pockets,
the flock was driven to drafting-yards where grading and
lamb marking would be done and rams and ewes
separated and taken off to different paddocks. In the
evening they returned after a tussel with the restless


"weaners” that are so hard to drive, and a mighty
thirst for slushy’s tea and appetite for damper and
beef. Olga and Miss Sarah did not intend to move on
with the musterers when they shifted camp ; by then,
as Miss Sarah rightly believed, the novelty would have
worn oh and both would be ready for mosquito-netted
steel beds at the old station home. The men liked
Miss Sarah, but they would not be sorry when “the
two old tarts” chose to return to the head station.
They did not much care about women in the camp at
night. It restricted a chap’s language and freedom,
since the overseer had some strict notions as to what
was due to “wimmin folk”, by whom he, however, set
no great store.
Thus it was that Olga found her dream baby.
Stuart Jackson had occasion to pass the camp on
his way to Wells’s grazing farm, where he wanted
to look at a draught horse, one of his staunchest having
been struck by lightning, and as a treat Synfye was
allowed to go with him to stay one whole night away
from Maeve, who hated the jolting buckboard, and to
have her tiny garments packed amongst her father’s
pyjamas and shaving tackle in the small portmanteau.
Synfye sat up very straight, her feet in shoes which
felt uncomfortably tight, but that very fact made one
important since she never wore footgear, holding on
to the iron bar at the side of the American leather
upholstered seat and trying not to feel nervous when
they went over a specially big jolt or dipped into a
treacherous “melon hole”. Her round face became
red with excitement and the hot wind blowing towards
the grey mobs of feeding sheep the musterers were
after, and when noon brought them wthin coo-ee of
the camp she was feeling a little sick from excitement


and the jolting and the sun on her eyes, for there was
always so much shade about the homestead, even
though the top of her head was bleached from the
tempered rays.
Her short legs stuck out straight in front of her,
each finished with a new lace-up leather boot which
was at once her glory and her torture, since the heat
had made her feet swell and a too-attentive black gin
maid had laced the boots so tightly “Synfye cobbon
fella, my word, Synfye grow a lady now, my word,”
Synfye began to feel tired of being a lady and sitting
up straight, she began to wriggle.
“Take care!” said her father, "Don’t fall out.”
The next minute that was precisely what she did do.
The buckboard leapt the root of a tree that ridged across
the path. Synfye, neglecting to clutch her iron support,
was shot over the wheel and rolled, a dusty bundle,
amongst the white powdered bushes that closed in
the trail. Jackson pulled the horses back on their
haunches, knotted the reins round the arm of the seat,
and leapt after her.
Temporarily stunned, she was presently able to
prove no bones broken, and very few bruises, and he
was amazed to find, even though he knew his daughter
full of surprises, that she did not intend to cry. Her
trouble was her soiled frock. She stood, legs wide apart
the aching toes for a space forgotten, determinedly
trying to brush the mealy dust from her “party gown”.
Stuart whipped out his pocket-handkerchief, intending
it for natural tears, but instead, lustily rubbed and
succoured the “gown” ; but before he returned her to
the buckboard reaction had set in. He went to adjust
a buckle near the roan’s head and turned again to find
Synfye busy unlacing her boots. She had suddenly


completely wearied of holiday attire, and after she had
dragged off the offending party-boots and socks, and
wriggled her brown toes comfortably in the dirt whilst
he sat on a log and had a smoke to keep the clouds of
mosquitoes at bay, he was obliged to order her to
desist from removing the greater portion of her clothing.
“I’m so hot, dad,” was her excuse. "I’d be ever so
much better in nothing.”
"But we might meet the musterers,” said Stuart.
"And little girls can’t go about in nothing here. . . .”
She readjusted her dress, mutinous.
“I will when I’m big,” was her retort, and she climbed
into the buckboard again.
A hundred yards farther on they could see the
glimmer of tents and a bough-shelter where the
musterers had their meals at a table of pine boards
laid over trestles. The camp was quiet, for the men
had been gone all day after scattered mobs. Only
the cook was singing over a stew he was making in an
iron pot in the leaf-thatched galley, and inside the
tent they could hear women’s voices.
Jackson went to speak to the cook about the sheep
they had passed, and Synfye climbed down over the
wheel as soon as his back was turned to investigate.
So Olga Arnold looked up from the mattress where
she was resting between a rather stupid novel and some
unfinished needle work and a palm leaf fan for the flies
to see the child of her dreams framed in the pyramid-
shaped opening of the tent, the sun on her tangle of
gold and brown hair, the dreamed-of dimples in knee,
and brown arms that came from the short-sleeved frock,
all the kissable roundness and beauty of her and the
hint of adorable deviltry her dark mischievous eyes
held. Synfye had left her boots and her hat in the


buckboard; her crushed party frock stood out like a
frill about her; behind her was the slow yellow sunshine
of late afternoon, seeming to outline her small body
in light.
Olga sat up quickly, flinging the novel and the fan
away. Her blood hammered at her temples ; she flung
out her hands, palms upwards. “Come and kiss me
before you vanish, dream child!” she whispered.


CHAPTER SIX
Where winds like Cossacks ride the trees
In leaping southerlies 1 know.
The flurry of some blossomed bough
Lends perfume to all airs that blow;
Enchantment weaves a quivering sheen
Across the dimming far-bound hulls,
And in and out the grey and blue
Are tost the ever-restless gulls.
“Sydney Harbcmr”
From the windows of her house at Cremorne Point
Olga Arnold could look right across the loveliness of
Sydney Harbour to Pinchgut, brown as stale fruit skins,
Pinchgut on its rock where lie the secret torture-
chambers for the delinquents who were ordered star-
vation cure for insubordination, in the old dreary
convict days of misunderstanding and tyrannies that
would seem hardly possible in a more enlightened
age, if it were not for the fact of those subtle cruelties
that lie dormant in most human beings, and never seem
entirely eradicated, and which it takes only a position
of power to develop : the tyrannies of men dressed
in a brief authority who play fantastic tricks before
high Heaven. But the yellowish brown of Pinchgut
is not a dominant note in this most beautiful of the
world’s sea entrances. Blue, grey, and red, the swift
geranium red of wave-tossed harbour buoys, grey of
the gun-boats lying by Garden Island, in cut sapphire
of still pools; turquoise of sunlit reaches, reds and
greys are fragrant Sydney’s chief hues, reds, and greys,
and white of pouncing seagulls, for who can think of


Sydney Harbour without its gulls ? Green foreshores
where are roses and, seen from the north side, the city
at even and at early morn is a place of lilac towers
like some citadel of fairy-minarets an elfin princess
might have found, or an Arabian genie conjured from
space with one wave of his magic wand.
The witchery of Sydney Harbour is a tangible thing,
and to properly understand Sydney town, one must
get it from the sea.
At sunset there are pink-touched creamy sails on
darkening waters ; twilight is longer here than in the
Queensland capital. At gloaming, home come the
quaint craft that have been out prawning, trailing in
with rushy creel and black lobster-pot, manned by a
dusky crew. Then there are hundreds of northshore
dwellers hurrying down to the ferry boats to dine and
go to a theatre in the city. About the post office tower
by day, blue pigeons whirl. They cling to bare wall
and time-stained balcony, city dwellers, a brotherhood
of beak and feather, so close to the white clouds that
drift shadow over Martin Place with its red-striped
awnings, huge bunches of cactus dahlias, drooping
pink roses, cornflowers in season, a riot of golden core-
opsis casting sulphur-coloured pollens to powder the
pavement, orange carnations and tango-tinted lily,
violets of wintry days that come from Melbourne, and
wallflowers in tight, thick-leaved bunches, blood-
spotted, gold, and ardent primrose-petalled. In the
parks are canna plants, peach-pink and topaz yellow,
cinnabar and claret, with murrey-tinted snapdragons
and cowslip-pale.
When she came back from the long blue-grey miles
of the gum-tree places, the vivid colour of Sydney
Was almost a shock to Olga, a regalvanizing of her


acute artistic sense, her love of bright things which
seemed to increase as she grew older, as though thin-
ning blood and waning passion cried for stimulation,
and during the latter part of her stay at Grass Tree
Flats she had been restless, ill at ease : restless to
clasp again the little dimpled wriggling body, to kiss
the soft moist lips, to feel the dark bleached head
against her breast, for Synfye had consented to be
petted by the lady who let her powder her face with
her big puff, and play with her rings, and who was not
even angry when Synfye snapped the string of her
fifty-guinea pearls, a wedding present from the
long-gone Basil, for Basil was of the kind who
believe you can only keep a woman happy with gifts,
and buy her complaisance with cheque-book and
gem.
Olga had begged a loan of Synfye for a few days at
Grass Tree Flats after that chance meeting in the
musterer’s camp, and Miss Sarah, who had known
Stuart most of his life, and who had at the time been
rather shocked at his come-by-night meeting with
Maeve, and his hasty marriage, had backed her up.
Surely Maeve and Stuart could spare the little girl for
a week ?
They spared her, laughing and warning Miss Sarah
that she was lucky if Synfye did not manage to burn
down the station homestead, fall into the reedy lagoon,
or break some of Miss Sarah’s famous Waterford cut
glass, during even a short stay.
“She has a dangerous craving for sensation,” said
her father when he brought her over, sitting in front of
him on the saddle, for heavy rain had made the roads
almost impassable even for the buckboard. Synfye
was shy, her finger in her mouth, her feet again laced


into the offending new boots, her mushroom hat tied
under her chin with one of her mother’s veils, for
Maeve occasionally tried to take care of her com-
plexion.
When her father had ridden away again on the
following morning, Synfye felt suddenly very small.
Grass Tree Flats had such big rooms compared to her
own home : there were white servants, and hot water
in the bathroom. She had been put to bed in a cot on
the verandah —a cot Miss Sarah had herself occupied
as a child —with the nets drawn tightly over her, for
mosquitoes were out for blood of man or beast,
after the wet season. Day was struggling to break
over a steaming world, trees veiled in fog swathed the
lagoon misty as a cloudy mirror. The housemaid,
after giving Stuart Jackson some breakfast, went
yawning into bed again for another nap. Miss Sarah's
back had been troubling her so she had only waved
him farewell from the inner room, looking like an old
soldier in a red flannel wrapper uncomfortably hot and
long, so Synfye crawled from under the nets and started
off in her nightdress to investigate. Somewhere near,
the lady who smelled of nice powders and gave one
sweets, and rings to play with, was asleep. Synfye
thought she would find her. One wouldn’t feel small
and lonesome then.
Leaning from the square window that framed an
exquisite picture of sea and sky, Olga Arnold closed her
eyes a moment to remember what it was like to wake
to the pressure of little stealing hands, to feel the dawn-
chilled plump body slipping in under the sheet beside
her own and then, as she played ’possum., loving the
nearness of the “dream” baby and wondering what
she would do next, to know the flutter of those


determined little fingers trying to gently prise open her
apparently sleeping eyes.
It was not exactly a comfortable process, but her
mouth trembled a little with regrets as she thought of
it now. Had there been no possible way in which she
could have kept the dream child with her ? It was
obvious the Jackson’s were not well-to-do people.
Sarah had said a bad drought would about break
them : there was not sufficient water frontage on their
property, and Maeve was not the sort of woman to be
of much use to a man in a crisis, though they were
very attached to each other—yes. Miss Sarah really
believed they were, though it had been a peculiar
manage. Hasty, mysterious —Miss Sarah did not
believe in mystery ; there was generally something
wrong when people kept tongues too still. But . . .
one could not go to the Jacksons with a cheque-book
and ask for their only child. No infatuation could
persuade even babe-hungry Olga that such an
action was either seemly or likely to bring prac-
tical result. One did not buy in the slave
market any more, nor could one hire desperadoes
to kidnap little girls with any reasonable hope of
success.
She frowned. Some people had all the luck. She
looked restlessly round her pretty room, the cool
greens, the tall amber-tinted vase where a single flower
nodded in the wind that came up from the sea. She
scowled at an etching that had been an extravagance
to satisfy a sensuous craving for a living beauty denied.
She fingered the black and red Delhi brass bowl on
the table and turned over a Chinese carved card-case,
an intricate thing of amazing workmanship in time-
mellowed ivory.


Discontented. What had her trip into the whole-
some windswept back blocks, the journey that was
to make her take sane and philosophic views of life,
done for her after all ? Left a sharp agony where had
been but a dull aching.
Synfye, with those little stealing fingers, Synfye
with her brown face against her barren bosom, Synfye
sprite of the green forest lands, Synfye, the White
Witches’ baby. For the little girl first, and her
mother afterwards, had told Olga Synfye’s quaint
notion that she was “White Witches” child first
of all.
Olga had spent a few days at Jacksons’, had gone
out to see the nine White Witches in a circle close . . .
had made tea there in a black billy to the sound of
Synfye’s ceaseless chatter, had seen Maeve kill a snake
with a stick and nearly collapse afterwards, had
listened to the eerie moaning of the dry wind in the
tops of the great flooded gums, and watched the
grey apostle birds wing and settle, fighting for
scraps of bread and butter and cake Synfye threw
them.
For the most part Synfye had been very naughty
while the lady who smelled of nice powder and had so
many rings stayed at the homestead. Sensing some-
thing of Olga’s love for her, she had a thoroughly
human and child-like instinct to take advantage of it.
She played up for admiration, and earned and received
some hearty slappings. Maeve was thankful when
Olga went back to Grass Tree Flats. Synfye took some
managing at any time : she was quite unmanageable
while Mrs. Arnold was about the place.
“The woman positively gloats over her,” she said
to Stuart when a weeping Synfye had been put to bed


on the day of Olga’s departure. “I believe she’d steal
her from us in a minute, given the chance.”
Stuart laughed. "No one would regret it more
quickly than she would. She had a beautifully furnished
home in Sydney, and all kinds of things Synfye would
rather enjoy smashing. I don’t know what we are to
do with the little devil, Maeve, if she grows up in the
same pattern.”
Maeve sighed . . . then laughed with her quick
Celtic change.
“She’s very pretty, though . . . perhaps the White
Witches will watch over her.”
“As they watched over you ?” Stuart took his
pipe from his mouth and laid his rough tanned hand
over his wife’s.
She blushed a little, dropping her eyes.
“Yes . . .” softly, Maeve was happy now. Armand
had faded into something remembered at rare intervals
and with vague distaste. If the seasons remained good
they might put a little money in the bank . . . have
a trip somewhere . . . then, later on, Synfye must
be educated. Stuart had not time and she had not
the ability, and she sensed that the child would be
clever. Later on . . . and Olga Arnold, sitting in the
dark on the roomy verandah at Grass Tree Flats, stared
hungrily into the night in the direction where she
thought Jacksons’ lay.
She had no sense of locality. Jackson’s place was not
there, but the belief that it was was sufficient to make
her miserable.
She was hungry still as she looked over Sydney
Harbour to-day. Perhaps, after all, she had better
make an “old marriage” with the bald-headed man,
be smiled over as elderly Romeo and Juliet. No, he


would bore her horribly. It was better to be lonely
than bored. A woman was often at the cross-roads :
had to make her choice between one or the other.
The old thought of that warm strange gold October
night came back to her now ; her fingers had fumbled
at the door of romance . . . had slipped away. She
had not the courage : she was not of the stuff of those
who sin splendid sins, break themselves on radiant
follies . . . better so. . . . Splendid sins turned
tarnished, sordid; radiant follies became blurred,
broken . . . the end of life was mostly sad ; the end
of romance too often agony. But for all that she was
haunted again by that vague sense of something missed.
something no philosophic nor worldly-wise argument
could entirely stifle. Joy missed meant pain escaped.
To shun responsibility was to escape reward.
Life was full of compensations. Things balanced
extraordinarily at the last . . . was that true ? Or
was a life unlived a gift unused ? Was dormant love
to become a canker instead of an atrophy ? Was it
not better to experience . . . She thought of the
olive-skinned sailor as she had thought of no man for
many a day; she thought of little Synfye with her
insatiable greed of experience always carrying her
into danger, of the white scar on one fat foot which
her mother had told Olga was left by a burn she carried
from one of her more daring experiments . . . Synfye
one could picture her grasping the ripe fruit
of life that hangs on the topmost bough for those
who have the pluck to take it, tearing it down with
her eager hands, stuffing it into her laughing red
mouth. ... A Synfye, woman grown, snatching
at - love, at carnival, a Synfye who would not be
denied.


There was a shadow on the sea; a coal barge went
by, black as a pirate sloop, sinister. In the north clouds
gathered, purple dark with a coppery tinge . . . the
lingering daylight over Sydney was strangely metallic,
menacing like the glow above a fierce and destructive
fire.
Olga shivered and shut the window.


CHAPTER SEVEN
Oh, dear fine singer of the fairy word.
Oh, gallant spirit, haunted by a sound
That fell from Heaven, and planted in the ground
A blossoming pipe the Irish poet heard;
For poet he, who shaped his books between
God’s rainbow and earth’s grasses springing green.
“To Bonn Byrne’’
Liam M’Piieris lay on his back with a wooden flute
against his puckered mouth, and stared between the
flickering gum leaves at a patch of soft blue sky. He
was remembering, even as he played “Come Back to
Erin” on his flute, the high old family pew in the
Dublin church along the Rathmines road, and his
nervous glee over a secreted white mouse : the increase
of both nervousness and glee when the mouse, to whose
tail he had tied a fine string, escaped and ran across
the aisle to the pew wherein sat the roman-nosed, high-
bosomed wife of the clergyman : the added zest and
horror of the occasion when the mouse ran up the lady's
gown and down the lace jabot into her bunchy bust;
her start, her half-checked scream, his own despairing
tugs at the unrolling string.
Detection, punishment, the efforts his father made
to hide his laughter even while he punished. Other
times, too, when he had got into trouble with the
gardeners in the public park for teasing the imported
herons ; his escape into the Roman Catholic chapel:
the rosy kind-eyed priest who had sternly called the
pursuing gardener to task for daring to “disturb this
little boy at his prayers. Faith ! and couldn’t the


Lord’s own have their sanctuary ?” Himself, arch-
hypocrite, gabbling prayers before the high altar and
crossing himself with holy water, while the irate
gardener waited with a stick, the priest, leading him
forth by the hand into safety and blessing him, while he
admonished pursuing justice.
What a little devil he had been ! Liam smiled
dreamily now over that and other equally discreditable
recollections of his boyhood.
That was the Irish . . . revolting always against
the established rule, loved for a laugh, protected by
the very laws they outraged.
Here in the Queensland bush, hundreds of miles
inland from the sea, was dullness lacking incident,
but ineffable peace, where a man could lie on his back
in an old cotton shirt open at the throat, disreputable
worn tweed breeches, and play a flute and look at the
sky. He had come up from the city with the returning
wool wagons. He had remained here in odd jobs,
drifting about in his wholly impracticable and poet
fashion, full of wit and laughter and working hard
at a job while it lasted ; but Liam’s jobs did not last
because he tired in a groove and, having neither kith
nor kin —which might have hampered him, for the
Irish are more clannish than the Scotch when it comes
to their own blood—and no particular object in life
except to just pay his way and be happy in doing it :
he considered the question of putting money in any-
thing as dull as a bank not at all. Blue-eyed, with dark
crinkly hair which constantly brought him the accusa-
tion of curling irons, he was popular with station hand
or station owner, and with the wives and daughters
and little children. Trust the Irish eyes and Irish tongue
for that !


Liam played the flute. He had also kissed the
blarney stone, but no special pair of red lips nor appeal-
ing eyes had tethered him yet to a consideration of
life’s greater purpose. He was only nineteen and had
left Dublin a year ago. His heart was free as the sweet
notes drawn from his flute now mounting on wings of
song to meet the bright wings of soaring birds, finials of
delicate green twigs.
To-day was Sunday. He had washed his spare shirt
in the creek where the gaudy parrots bathed their
painted wings in golden shallows, and hung it on the
galvanized iron wire near the musterers’ huts, and
because he did not care much for the kind of conver-
sation the average working man with leisure indulges
in, ranging from horse-racing to doubtful women, and
because he was not at all inclined for the “two-up”
school to-day, he had gone off alone with his flute
and had walked a mile and a half away from the huts
tp find the tranquillity of green solitudes and his musical
recital.
While he embellished “The Harp That Once” on
his instrument, he was aware of interruption in the
shape of the sound of breaking boughs on his left;
now and then the stroke of a small axe on hard material,
the clean pungent smell of dripping sap, the tang of
splintered wood. Somebody was chopping at the small
trees or tearing down branches over there. A chap,
he supposed, making a bough shelter, perhaps a wander-
ing swaggie who thought he would like to camp here-
abouts for a while. Liam went on playing. It was
amazing what he could do with a second-hand wooden
flute. The bough-breaking ceased. A magpie carolled
by the unseen creek, sang its own green song to the
summer skies under the lean of the wild apple trees.


Liam felt the sunshine in his eyes : he became drowsy;
the flute slid away from his mouth, his long black lashes
lay on his tanned cheeks.
A touch, feather soft, woke him. Had he dreamed
that his mother, long gone from earthly caressings,
had bent to kiss him as she used to do long ago before
putting out the nursery light and leaving him in the
palpitating dark she had herself filled with the tale of
pixy and gnome, of haunted wraith and fairy gold ?
Surely as he slept a shadow had passed, hung over
him, and there was the rustle of a woman’s gown.
Cunningly he played ’possum, keeping his lids half-
closed, lying still, between his lashes glimpsing some-
thing blue that was not sky. He opened his eyes wide.
Nothing there; but the branches of that palisade
of feathery gum saplings and bush oak quivered, as
though they rocked to a hurried passing. Something
or someone who came and went as fairies do whilst
human beings are asleep.
Someone had been close to him, Liam M’Pheris, had
leaned above him as he slept, someone lightfoot as
Atalanta; but—had he only dreamed that kiss ?
A dead leaf fallen from the topmost bough of the white
gum lay yellow as a coin near his cheek. It might have
been that.
Going home at noon he made a detour in the direction
of the bough-crashing he had heard an hour ago.
This brought him to the foot of the mountain where
the nine White Witches, as the Yorkshire drover had
christened them long ago, grew, and whose name
Liam M’Pheris had never heard, for most people in the
district had almost forgotten the appellation now,
and they were the number of the Muses no more ; a
recent big storm had sent a lance of lightning amongst


the circled trees, and one satin-boled giant had crashed,
and, with its splintered bole upraised like a pillar of
desolation scorched and raked by the shorthand of
the storm, the crested boughs lay in all directions, still
green but on their way to death. It was evidently
amongst the feather-crown of this slain giant the
wood-cutter had been at work. Someone was building
a little cubby-house here. Four uprights, straight
saplings with the bark still on them, forked at the top
for the four corners of the roof, shining white gum boles
oozy with sap, a roof part-thatched with the fading
boughs, walls in preparation. Was it a child’s play-
house or an adult’s make-believe home ?
It was certainly no swaggie’s doss. There was no
calico-swathed caterpillar of blue blanket in the
corner, no black billy-can set in smouldering ash, no
reek of strong tobacco, no sweat-sodden rag of shirt
swaying on a bush, no dusty blucher boots upturned
for the necessary goanna oiling. None of the homely
touches the old-timer sets about his few days’ camp.
In the trodden earth round the bough house lay a scrap
of blue cambric like the glimpse of colour his drowsy
eyes had imagined he caught through the veiling lashes.
A sharp splinter, a thorny trail, had left a clue for him.
Liam stooped, picked it up, and placed it in his pocket
with the wood and metal flute. He could walk this way
again, watch the bough house rising, perhaps.
Another Sunday morning brought him here where
the broken wood bore sallow leaves now, all the
green having died under the warm suns; the bleeding
jagged bole of the lightning-scarred tree showed
as yet no renewal of life. Liam sat amongst the debris
and waited. Presently he heard the rustle of something
coming down by the mountain. In the flooded gums


there were parrots. He knew nothing about the bird
life of Australia but he liked to commune with the wild.
A girl in a blue frock, a girl too thin for beauty,
angular with youth but exceedingly swift and graceful
of movement, was looking at him round a bush, a
bush where a spider web swayed golden and a fat grey
spider watched.
Her dark eyes inquired of him with a shy audacity.
He supposed she was fourteen, or fifteen at the most.
Was this the girl-child who had kissed him (but had
she kissed him ?) because he was young and good-looking
and asleep like a Pan in the sun ? Of course he knew
he was good-looking because he had hair that crinkled
and eyes like summer seas, and a wicked little devil
on his bow-shaped mouth. Had she kissed him, this
girl with the slumbering fire in her child eyes . . .
the woman fire ... or had it been only the leaf which
was yellow as fairy gold and passing as swiftly into
dust as did that magic coinage in books of fairy lore ?
“Good day,” said the boy.
"Good day,” said the girl.
“Are you building a house ?” asked Liam.
“I am,” said the girl, “one of the White Witches
has fallen.”
"White Witches do,” said Liam feeling for his flute.
“And who helped the lady down ?”
“Your’re silly,” said the girl. “The nine White
Witches are these trees, my trees, the storm last week
has left only eight now. . . . They have been here
for ever,” she said, “as long as I can remember,
anyway.”
“And that must be a long time, sure,” said Liam.
"Is it a witch ye are yourself ? You might warn a
man.”


“You’re not a man,” said the girl. She sat down on a
branch of the prone tree. “You’re just a spirit, a some-
thing that comes out of the scrub heart in a cotton
shirt and old trousers and no hat —suppose you are
awfully proud of your hair ?”
“I am,” said Liam and he winked. When he winked
it was as though a bird wing dark as night dropped
a second over a blue sea that sparkled. “I am," said
Liam M’Pheris, and he began to play “Killarney."
The girl did not like that. She said the bullock
driver sang it through his nose whenever he got drunk,
and that was often.
“I know who you are now,” said Liam, for he
remembered that Jackson’s had employed a bullock
driver with that habit, though he had never been to
Jackson’s.
“I don’t care,” said Synfye, but she grew red. She
supposed her father would be angry if he knew she
was talking out here to young men, especially if he
knew about last Sunday. When he was asleep the
shadow of the gum leaves had made him look like a
tattooed native.
Synfye laughed suddenly at a secret thought. The
young man laughed too. He began to play “Oft in the
Stilly Night.”
“I think you might help me build my house,” said
Synfye, “instead of sitting there and playing ‘Tom
Moore’.”
“Oh, you knew it was ‘Tom Moore’, did you ?”
he said softly.
“My mother is Irish,” said Synfye, “she sings that
sometimes. Father, of course, is Scotch.”
“And you ?”
“A mixture; no —l am the White Witches’ child.”


She remembered a story her mother told her of her
babyhood.
“What do you want a bough house for ?”
“Just to think in . . . besides, I might come here
to hide.”
“Hide? What from?”
"They are sending me away to school in Sydney,”
said Synfye, her mouth drooping. “Father says I’m
running wild and there’s that old Mrs. Arnold —she
gave me my pearls and sends me books—she always
calls me the 'dream babe’, and though she’s old she’s
still pretty, and smells of jasmine and things and wears
soft lace about her neck, and there’s a bald man want-
ing to marry her for years. She wants father to let me
stay with her and be finished. You see, I’ve played hell
with my governesses.” The expression was Stuart
Jackson's, but Liam did not know that. He laughed
now.
“You’re a funny kid. I’ll help you to build your
bough house if you will let me come and talk to you
often.”
She considered him wisely. There was a challenge
of brown eyes to blue.
“H’m,” said Synfye, “I think I’d rather hear you
play the flute. Somehow I don’t fancy your con-
versation,” but her mouth took an upward curve.
“What a lark !” she said, and proceeded to gather
material for the walls of her sanctuary.
Because a certain type of Irishman is about the
most decent-minded chap in the world, and a judge
of innocence, Synfye took no harm from her co-oper-
ative building, and Liam played Moore’s Irish Melodies
from “The Last Rose of Summer” to “I saw From the
Beach—” and Synfye tried to sing her mother’s songs


and went out of tune and was admonished by the
wandering minstrel. Liam told her of his boyhood’s
pranks in Dublin and of how he crossed the Irish sea,
and about the Isle of Man of which she had read in
Hall Caine’s books; did not Maeve sing “Mona?”
—the story of the song is in “The Deemster” —and
where his mother used to take him in the holiday season,
and of how there were so many rabbits amongst the
rocks.
Synfye had only heard of rabbits as an imported
pest for the squatter, but the young Irishman gave
them a touch of pixy. She teased him and quarrelled
with him, feeling her feet at the rim of the river of
life and love, an experiment new to Synfye, who had
kept up her baby craze for playing with fire and novelty.
And one day Stuart Jackson rode this way after a
stray horse and came across the idyll. They were
making billy tea at the entrance to the bough shelter.
He read the young Irishman rapidly and fairly
correctly. But this kind of thing would not do.
Synfye was packed off to school, and Olga Arnold,
whose hair was delicately white now, gathered a very
wayward and yet somehow adorable dream baby,
maid-grown and promising a rare loveliness when the
angles were gone, to her greedy heart.
They met, to part, at the bough shelter ; Liam with
his flute and Synfye mutinous and in tears.
She thought it would be a good thing if they were to
elope. But wandering minstrels know their limitations.
"You’re only a kid,” said Liam, and he put his flute
to his lips and played “She is Far From the Land.”
Synfye kicked dead leaves over him. Liam had
smoothed down the jagged knife-like edges of the split
tree with his axe; Synfye sat on the stump now in


the broad sunlight. Liam thought it was safer to keep
the flute at his mouth. He was yearning to dry the
tears of the child, the angry tears, as a man dries the
softer ones of a woman, but she was only a child.
“I kissed you the first day I saw you,” said Synfye
defiantly, ‘‘you were asleep. You are much better-
looking asleep.”
“The divvil you did,” said Liam, “and what made
you be after doing that now ?”
"I thought you were the god Pan—not that I
suppose you’ve ever read the classics (Mrs. Arnold
sends me the classics), Spirit of Youth, or Young
Bacchus with red hair . . . fallen asleep after
gambolling with the nymphs.”
“Those nymphs must be a naughty lot,” said the
man. He was looking past the girl at the eight White
Witches. On the sheeny bole of one insects had scrawled
Egyptian hieroglyphics.
Far away they could hear a horse’s hoofs beating
through the timber : the cry of young lambs from the
brush yards. In the boughs a scrub dove watched,
head aslant.
“I’m not going to kiss you now,” said Liam calmly,
and he began to play “Kathleen Mavourneen.”
A stone, flung with too-sure aim, just grazed his
cheek. He shook his head like a retriever coming up
from the water with a duck in its mouth. He went on
fluting.
“I hate you,” said Synfye, and was gone, all fury
and darting haste.
Liam was looking at the bough house of so many gay
memories as his fingers danced up and down the wind-
holes in the flute. What would be the end of it ? Would
it fall to some lazy old good-for-nothing swaggie to


hang his dirty socks in, to tear down the crisping boughs,
too indolent to go far for tinder, or would it be just
left to the birds, the grey wood lizards, the yellow and
black goannas, wandering cows, a brindled dingo
with red running tongue, sitting on his haunches
planning a kill by midnight in the stud sheep’s pad-
docks.
And the sound of his fluting followed Synfye long
after it was really physically impossible for her to hear
it, followed her through the ghostly boles of the serried
ranks of trees, the shadows of twilight, on to the twinkle
of the homestead lights. Followed her till the rage died
in her heart and she felt only a little girl, humble, weary
with the heartache of a woman.


CHAPTER EIGHT
Love halts —where a light song can fly;
I fashioned my song on the harp of the wind.
’Tis the ache in a heart makes it loiter behind
While a song takes the road of the sky.
—“A Light Song'
To draw his soul away
To those horizons where men seem
For ever following a dream.
‘ ‘Fairy’s Man’
A horror of slaughter. . . . The grey leaping figures
hunted by dogs and men, driven to the wing of paling
and wire added temporarily to the kangaroo fence.
A big old man at bay there, throwing dogs, ripping
one with his fierce hind leg, canine howling, men shout-
ing, hideous battue in that sapling wing. . . . Bodies
piled high on one another, a doe kangaroo throwing her
joey under a bush, either to save it or lighten her load
for escape . . . one of the dogs was worrying the
joey now. Synfye slipping from her horse hit it with
her riding whip, fiercely slashing at the lean thin-
skinned kangaroo dog, saving the trembling marsupial
to take it home and make a pet of it . . . though what
was the use of collecting pets when one was going
away to school ? And her participation in the kangaroo
hunt at Grass Tree Flats had been by way of a “last
treat.” . . . Ugh . . . blood . . . helpless driven
things . . . and above, between the gum boughs, a
sky so serene, so blue . . . and crows gathering, black.
evil, smelling the slain. Eagle hawks higher still.
reddish-winged . . . soaring near to God. . . ,


God, who allowed men to torture and to slay
God, who made man master of the Wild ... for
this !
Of course, kangaroo eat grass the sheep should have
had, but since a beneficent Father instructed kangaroo
to eat grass, why should the poor things pay so dearly
for a natural instinct ? Something wrong somewhere
. . . that Irish boy was such a rebel, he was very
plain-spoken about things like this. He said the world
had a grinding-wheel of injustice. . . . He quoted
something about harbours the English made in Ireland
which had no draught for ships : he went back to
hundreds of years ago, and the Wild Geese rebellion,
and the spurious coinage politicians foisted upon
Ireland. Her father had said the Irish “always had a
grouch, they couldn’t live without it.” As far as Synfye
could see at present, most things in the world- —both
Irishmen and kangaroo —had some good reason to
“grouch” about the Eternal Plan, if it was an Eternal
Plan and not only an excuse of man’s to tyrannize over
that which it lay in his power to hurt.
The thoughts of youth were long, long thoughts with
Synfye Jackson to-day. She had her horse’s bridle
looped over her arm ; he was restless, kicking at the
waspish March flies: in her lap she held the now
quiescent joey, its dark terrified eyes turned on her.
She was soothing it as Synfye could always soothe
frightened wild creatures. Her father said she mes-
merized them : her mother said she had the fairy gift.
Every now and then she could feel a shudder run
through the soft grey body she cuddled there.
The air seemed tainted witl the smell of blood,
though, where she sat now, the close timber kept the
slaughter-yard hidden from her. But she could hear


men’s voices. They had taken toll of innocent lives,
they were enjoying cold beef sandwiches and hot tea
. . . Synfye’s lip curled . . . but she was only a girl,
she couldn’t alter the ways of the Universe.
Here and there she could rush in and succour, that
was all, and perhaps it was the natural rebel that
caused her to protest against the fixed order of things
more than the stirrings of the humanitarian. She
considered Miss Sarah; growing old, leaning on a
stick now, never quite upright because those tiresome
muscles in her back had lost all their elasticity. Miss
Sarah hobbling about Grass Tree Flats home station,
sharp with her tongue, quick with her wits, slow of her
movements. . . . What a funny life for a woman !
Had Miss Sarah ever had a lover ... an Irish lover
whose hair went in dark crinkles over his forehead,
whose eyes were wickedly blue with the sparkle of
the wild Irish sea on a sunny day. ... H’m. . . .
Perhaps. When Synfye was quite grown up she would
have many lovers. . . . Play them off against one
another and marry a rich man who could take her
overseas to the places she wanted to see. She certainly
could not do that if she married a wandering minstrel
with a shirt or two, and an old pair of tweed trousers.
In fancy she heard the sound of a flute . . . calling
calling.
She sighed, and concentrated on the problem of
taking the joey home.
The comparative luxury of Olga Arnold’s home
woke the latent coquetry in Synfye. She went
to a girls’ school in Sydney and stayed with
Mrs. Arnold for the week-ends, while at home Maeve
and Stuart skimped and saved and missed her, as


only parents can miss only children, quietly, uncom-
plaining, never letting her know in their letters the
blank left in the home where there were no startling
experiments now, and no dark eyes and quick feet and
mischievous babbling tongue. Middle age seemed to
swoop on the two left behind by youth. Maeve buried
herself more in her novels, though often her husband
would see her with the open book in her lap, her eyes
fixed on the ghostly twilight-deepened greys of the
gum trees, her head bent slightly forward as though
she looked and listened for a young girl’s laughter, a
young girl’s dancing footfalls. The habit of years is
not easily broken ; some things tear and leave frayed
heart-strings that bleed. After the first homesickness,
Synfye was enjoying the experiences beautiful Sydney
offers, of Saturday-night theatres, of picture gallery,
and school-girl dances, and Mrs. Arnold for her indulgent
and devoted slave, spoiling her as she had so many
years dreamed of having a daughter to spoil. Inherited
pride made Synfye at first refuse the smart frocks and
dainty shoes Olga was for ever buying for her, but
custom sapped; after she had taken one creamy befrilled
chiffon dress as a birthday gift, it became easier to
please Olga Arnold by a smiling acceptance. Then
there were bottles of perfume and scented bath salts,
and powders such as the little bush girl had never
conceived. Home, dear though it was with the joey
growing into a personable kangaroo, and the lame
magpie at the back door looking for scraps of raw meat,
and the black and white cats that went by the name of
“buggy horses’’ and which could leap so high they
could catch a swooping swallow on the wing, began
to lose a little of its inherent charm. There was so
much to make one forget in Sydney, and if other


people spoke of Olga Arnold as an old woman now, she
still kept the charm of the young heart, quick sym-
pathies and readiness to see a joke and to hear a con-
fidence about a lover, that linked her with Synfye
Jackson, who was not of her blood. But Olga was
jealous. Synfye began to find she had to use tact ;
her benefactress wanted to "know everything”,
wanted the girl constantly with her : wept if Synfye
missed the North Shore boat by which she expected
her to arrive, and was peculiarly sensitive when Synfye
had letters from home : for always there lurked in
Olga’s starved heart the certainty that Synfye would
have to return to the home of her fathers some day,
and there were the holidays, when her appeals to Stuart
and Maeve to allow the girl to stay in Sydney with her
till the term commenced again were met with a
somewhat curt refusal. Stuart Jackson was growing
restless under the sense of benefits heaped upon his
daughter : though he did not guess to what extent.
Maeve hungered for the few brief weeks of the maid
who was rapidly growing into a beauty, and whose
holiday visits brought tethered horses to the verandah
rail and all and any kind of excuses for the young men
in the district to call to see Stuart Jackson while they
remained to look at Synfye.
Time, that determined manipulator of destinies,
refuses to stand still for fond parent or self-sacrificing
friend, or doting mothers-by-adoption. Synfye was in
her last term at school and she was piling her dark
curls on top of her head, for neither shingled head nor
exposed knees, nor the more hygienic fashions of the
hour, had yet arrived to scandalize (or delight) man-
kind. A girl friend of hers was giving a dance, an
almost grown-up dance, and Mrs. Arnold had bought her


a flame-coloured frock, with a butterfly bow sash, full
skirt and low neck, and had lent her a string of amber
beads for the occasion. A feverish cold laid disappointed
Olga by the heels that day and she was a little resentful
at Synfye for still wanting to go to the dance, resentful
but at the same time anxious for her protegee to be the
prettiest girl there.
She would have been pleased if Synfye had refused
to leave her at the last moment; indeed, when she
heard the light feet running down the front steps,
amid the rustle of silk and soft swish of chiffons, to
catch the seven-thirty boat to town, so eager to go
even after her soft, pitying words to Olga and the light
kiss she insisted upon dropping on the fevered brow 7
despite a half-hearted warning against germs, that the
woman’s eyes filled with the slow hurt tears of age that
feels itself shelved, and apparently of no account, while
youth rushes after the painted wings of pleasure with
feet too swift for age’s hobbling gait. As she sipped
her thin gruel and told the housemaid to draw the
blinds over the window that looked harbourwards,
Olga Arnold was feeling that bitterness against time,
Fate, life, which it seems so weak and useless to express
but which comes almost inevitably, and always pain-
fully to the disillusioned heart of middle age, no matter
how wide the philosophy. “Out of the running.’’ Why
had she not acquired some "John Andersen, my Jo
John” with whom she could climb the hill tergither . . .
while there had been time ... to sleep tergither at
the foot and let Youth prance in its own madness, its
own way on shimmering horizons.
But she had not ... so she must resign herself to
her gruel. Besides, had she a John Andersen, my Jo,
he might have been a disagreeable, grumbling John


with the faults of old age, old age itself finds it so hard
to stomach ! Olga smiled, a little ruefully, over her
gruel. “Better the deil we know . .
She hoped Synfye would enjoy the dance . . . but
she listened in the small hours for the soft, stealthy,
happily-wearied feet . . . coming so slowly by the
steps they had flown in the early eve. The moon rose
late. . . . Boats going Manly way rocked out full of
golden eyes . . . decks of big liners were awash with
electricity, there were bands playing on some of
them . . . the water was smooth, ink-black with here
and there a crisp wave like a pale mermaid’s face,
looking up, fringed with curl of foam.
Close to the stone balcony of the old convict-
built house where Synfye’s flame-coloured frock
made its debut, there was a magnolia in bloom.
Its heavy incense conquered the faint odour of
fish and weed, and minor blossomings blown over
the strip of garden below, from the harbour. The
glossy leaves of the tree tapped against the lower
stone balustrades, rustled by a light wind. The sky
was full of palpitating stars, and like golden flecked
beetles the ferry boats threaded the darkness of the
tides. . . . There was a string of scarlet balloons
hung just above the girl’s head, part of the decoration
scheme of red and gold oozing from the wide old room
which had been turned into a ballroom for the night.
The band was hidden by a screen of palms, a violin,
a piano, and a ’cello played by a greasy Italian who
constantly mopped his beaded brow and kept his eyes
on the grandfather clock visible through the open door
leading into the hall through the mazes of the chiffon
and broadcloth whirlings of the dancers. He was
longing for a supper of oil and macaroni and a certain


golden wine that had not paid duty. Disappointed in
love, he now lived for his food, and his’cello brought
him that ; the wine he had his own way of getting for
nothing. But even if he declined entirely on stomach,
the ’cello had soul. Synfye remarked upon this now
to the round-faced youth with the fine sleek flaxen hair
who had coaxed her on to the balcony, where only the
lap of the waters against the wall at the foot of the
strip of garden and the rustling wind could disturb
their tete-a-tete.
“You are fond of the ’cello ?’’ said the youth,
proffering his case and lighting a cigarette. She took
one, but held it unlit between her long slim fingers.
“Yes . . . it is like a big sobbing human heart
somehow . . . not quite articulate, but aching with
feeling.’’
“By George, I did not know you went in for poetry,
Synfye Jackson.”
“Didn’t you ? Then you can’t know much about
me !”
"Not half as much as I should like to. . . .” She
laughed. She was young enough to enjoy being thought
mysterious.
“Men never understand women,” she said fatuously.
The youth prided himself he did. He leaned against
the rough stone ; the light streaming from the inner
room showed his slim-hipped, wide-shouldered figure
in the smart dinner-suit. He was typical of a certain
kind of Sydney youth, athletic, much given to surf
bathing and to dalliance on the primrose way. He
never dreamed of an evening not spent in some place
of amusement, he hated early rising or “hard graft”,
but he could steer a sailing boat through a white
squall and never fear of losing his head nor finding it


anything out of the day’s work. He had once dragged
a mate from the very jaws of a grey sister shark, and
though the friend used the incident as an excuse for
borrowing more than his rescuer could afford from
him, he had the Humane Society’s medal "somewhere
at home.” He would never have thought of such a
thing as in any way parading his pluck : these things
were, that was all. So the breed holds true even in far-
away Australia and unto the second and third gener-
ations. He was under the impression that he was a
labour man, almost an anarchist, and he was fearfully
particular as to the cut of his collar and the shape of
his tie. He wouldn’t be seen in "reach me downs”
and would much prefer to be in debt to his tailor to
sport a slop-made suit. He would go as far as any girl
would let him, and think himself a fool if he missed an
opportunity. He was conceited, he was in some
matters quite beyond his parents’ control, thought
he knew better than his father on every subject, but
did not dare say so, and frequently contradicted his
mother. Entirely sufficient to himself, he yet cherished
the secret belief that there was no one quite as fine
an “old pof’as his father, and that his mother could
lick anyone of her age for looks and style. But nothing
would have induced him to tell either parent this.
Synfye liked him; but sometimes she thought him
rather an ass. The girls at school teased her about him
and told her he would come into a lot of money when
his father died. Caroline de Bruck, who always measured
people in the terms of ready or expected cash, sighed
as she talked about the “tons of money” that would
be Reg Powis’s some day. "I wish he’d look at me as
he does at you, Sinny.”
But Caroline was as fair as Reg himself, and he


admired dark girls. He probably would have called
Synfye his “nut browne mayde” had he read the
English classics, but he never read anything but the
labour papers, and some Russian works on reform he
liked to be seen studying. The racing tips and yachting
notes were his real interest. There was no pose about
his love of sport.
At the present moment he thought he and Synfye
might easily find a more secluded spot to court in.
The balcony ran right round this end of the time-
stained house that always exuded a faint smell of damp
and decay, even above the garden’s potpourri. On
the other side it faced the street lined with flats and
apartment houses of the better class, with their urns
of bright ivy-geraniums and their elegant window-
boxes. Synfye accepted an invitation to extend their
ramble, and they were presently looking out on to
the flickering street lights and the rows of buildings
notched into the star-strewn sky. There were few
passers-by; now and then the turning wheels of a
vehicle, flash of a motor-car now determinedly replac-
ing the old hansom of the revellers.
“When are you going back to the bush ?” said Reg
bringing his black sleeve close to the thin girlish arm
that gleamed its ivory from the short frilled sleeve.
His voice had a deep note, a note that made Synfye’s
throat tighten, her little hands become restless, beating
a tune with her fan on the grooved stone railing.
“I finish this term, and then I go for good . . .
unless dad lets me stay a week or two with Mrs. Arnold.
I hope he will. I want to take you out on the
harbour. . . . ”
“You might wreck me.’’ He could see the dim


paleness that was her face and throat, in the murk
of the balcony, unbroken by the swinging street
lights.
“I wouldn’t hurt a hair of your head . . . darling.”
Synfye shrugged.
‘‘Don’t be silly. .
But she liked it. She wondered if he would kiss her
in a minute : Whether she had better pretend to be
angry if he did. ... It wouldn’t be the first time she
had been kissed. . . . And once she had kissed, and
not been kissed again. ... It almost seemed as though
a window opened in the night. She could see the sun
coming down from a sky, soft and blue as the petals
of a delphinium . . . the tattoo of light and shadow
of leaves on the sleeping face of a dark-haired boy, a
boy whose hair crinkled absurdly, whose lashes were
black as a raven’s wing. . . . Pan or young Bacchus
asleep, with his flute beside him. . . . She could hear
a bird calling drowsily in the green distance . . . the
honk of a horse bell . . . past and present seemed
confused. She had on that skimpy blue frock with the
white muslin collar and cuffs she wouldn’t be seen in
now. . . . She had leaned over that sleeping Pan . . .
she had
Pooh . . . what a softy she had been then ! Synfye
Jackson, bushwhacker . . . she bet no man would wait
now to be kissed . . . given the opportunity he would
kiss her first.
And she would like it . . . but one must pretend
not to. . . . How shocked dad and mother would
be . . . and Mrs. Arnold . . . would she ?
Jealous perhaps of anyone, man, woman, or child.
who kissed her "dream baby” . . . but possibly
. . . quite understanding . . . didn’t she quote


sometimes "Gather ye roses while she may” as if she
regretted some rose she had not gathered . . . dear
Mrs. Arnold . . . she had not wanted Synfye to leave
her to-night . . . but youth must be served, of course
. . . it was ridiculous of old people . . . and here was
Reg coming closer.
Suppose he took her tight in his arms the way they
do in books . . . asked her to marry him . . . rained
kisses on her eyes and lips and hair ?
That was what they did in novels . . . Reg who
pretended to be "in sympathy with the masses” and
who left a cafe where he used to lunch because he did
not like the way his neighbour held his knife and fork.
. . . She laughed. . . . She felt Reg’s eyes were
glowing, the dark something was making her afraid
. . . something was going to spring. . . . Was it in
her own heart . . . or in Reg’s ... or ... or
something from outside their lives waiting ... to
pounce.
She drew back suddenly afraid. . . . And up from
the misty darkness of the street where the lamps were
pools of light in an opaque sea, there came the sound
of a flute . . . light, sweet, clear. . . .
' ‘ She is far from the land
Far from the land . . , “Where her young hero sleeps”
Far from the land . . . but the smell of crushed gum
leaves was all about her, the dancing shadow of leaves
the warmth of the summer sun coming from a
sky of speedwell blue.


CHAPTER NINE
Two lingering lovers with their happy eyes.
While in a flag-screened balcony, the dance
Evokes gay music.
"Moonlight’
I have no bargain with the world,
The price I name is high to pay;
But I would stretch my hands to love
If he as beggar came my way.
"Love and Stars’
"You’re mad," said Reg, crossly; "want to go down
to speak to a disreputable chap playing a tin
whistle ”
"It isn’t a tin whistle, it’s a flute, a degree higher in
the scale, Mr. Equality and Fraternity : the mob should
put your head on a lamp-post ‘ ala lanterne, messieurs’
Synfye, who had been reading a novel of Stanley
Weyman’s, swept him a curtsy. “How do you know
that street player isn’t an old friend ?”
“Well, challenge him from here; look, there's a
shadow by that electric light out there, some shabby
pickpocket possibly ... a garroter from lower
Colledge Street. . . .’’
“What a character you give your own city !” jeered
the girl. "And I thought you believed all men were
brothers, and wanted to blow up capital ”
“So I do,” said Reg gravely, then a smile rippled
on his mouth, “but not to-night. There’s a time for
all things, my dear."
“And no time like the present: I want to see my Phil
the Fluter ... I’m sure he’s Irish by the way he


plays ‘Tom Moore’.” She wondered why her hands
trembled and why her feet were cold and her cheeks
burning. There might be a dozen men in the town
playing in the streets and playing Irish melodies . . .
why should she want to do more than throw a coin
to them ? Liam M’Pheris would hardly be here, playing
for pence in a city. . . . She had seen him last
amongst the gums, where the White Witches reared
their grey-white trunks in stately loveliness . . . and
how angry she had been with him then !
She had not heard of him since. . . . Someone had
said he drifted west . . . but she had refused to ask
questions about a man who had so affronted her
pride. . . . But now she wanted to go down in her
gold dance slippers into the road to look for a fluter
who played an old time. . . .
Reg was quite angry. He did not seem to want to
kiss her so much now, or perhaps he wanted to more
than ever and was angry at her determined interruption
of their tete-a-tete in the warm, friendly dark.
The moon was rising now, she could see the bloom
of it on the far sky rim ; presently the great gold flower
would break red through the horizon fog and dust.
Then it would not be so dark on the balcony.
The strains of the band were lively now . . . calling
them back to the lit room, the scarlet and red balloons,
the tapping feet . . . the dance of youth.
Synfye had evaded his arms ; she was running across
the wide panelled hall and away down the creaking
shallow stairs at the corner of which stood a marble
statue of Venus under a bracket lamp with a mellow
golden shade—it threw patches of orange on the worn
steps and the hall beyond. Reg heard her open the
front door, heard the chain swing, and still the flute


played in the.road, rising like the song of a bird up to
the white, aloof stars ... a cab flashed a searching ray,
moon-pale, on her dainty figure, but failed to illumine
the shadowy player by the electric light. A drunken
man in careful cultured accents called something to
her from the cab. Reg was following her now out into
the road, baffled, unaccountably furious. To leave him
like that . . . for some problematic . . . street
player. . . . The girl was silly. It was all very well
for a chap to believe in levelling classes and all that,
but one must draw the line for women.
“Synfye . . . come in. I’ll give the fellow a bob
you run upstairs again.”
White Venus, against whose smooth limbs the orange
light from the bracket shone, making them glow as with
life, seemed in the flicker of shadow on her face, to
smile.
Synfye Jackson was looking up and down an empty
road ... far away in the direction of the ferry boat
there came a distant defiant fluting :
‘ 'She is far from the land
There were tears of vexation in her eyes as she faced
Reg in the hall.
“You needn’t have frightened him away ... I
suppose he thought you were the police . . . big, thump-
ing feet.” The school girl was uppermost. She poked
the point of a red tongue at him.
“You ought to be slapped, Synfye Jackson.”
“Just you try.” She had passed him and was up
the stairs again, and when he arrived in pursuit it
was to find her whirling round in the arms of a luckier
man in the ballroom. She would not relent even for


the supper dance, but over the weak claret-cup,
spurned him with her dancing brown eyes. . . . She
picked upon sandy-haired Jock MacPherson to take
her home across the harbour, most lovely now with
the benisons of the full moon. . . . One could see
out to North Head, untamed and grim and wonderful,
and South Head with its lighthouse and its huddled
red roofs—there were mermaids and water pixies and
spirits of the wave and moon-ray abroad to-night.
Jock MacPherson, the most practical of Scots born in
Australia, felt the influence of the night and became
sentimental.
And Synfye, her arms heaped with scarlet balloons,
her cheeks still hot, her eyes full of visions, leant over
the rail of the ferry boat and practically ignored him.
Above the dance tunes running in her head, above
the reminder of the ache of her feet in the gold slippers
vanity had chosen too small for her, she could hear
the sound of a flute coming out of the darkness. . . .
' • She is far from the land
Perhaps dimly, her waking woman’s soul realized
that she was still very far from her rightful country,
her own heart’s kingdom.
Something had made her tender to women to-night,
disappointed women men perhaps had hurt. She
slipped into Mrs. Arnold’s room and came between
her and the opal night-light, a figure of carnival
carrying her gay spoils; she laid a kiss on the worn
cheek that was yet so soft and delicately scented.
“Good-night, dear,” she whispered, seeing the
woman’s eyes were still wide open.
Olga hugged her suddenly against her hungry bosom.


‘Did you have a good time, pet ?”
'Oh . . . yes. . .
'Dance with anyone . . . particular ?”
‘Oh, Reg . . . and Jock . . . Jock brought me
home . . . and that middy from the Solterne . . .
de Purvis something or other, someone said he was
heir to a title; he spoke very bad English, so perhaps
“A good band, nice supper ?”
“Oh, ripping. . . .’’she yawned . . . and as she left
Olga’s room Mrs. Arnold heard her whistling softly
under her breath. ... A melody that woke some
response far back in the older woman’s brain, some-
thing that belonged to youth and a barrel-organ with
a monkey on it at the corner of a London street.
Olga couldn’t recall the tune, but she went to sleep
satisfied. She really believed Synfye Jackson was
fonder of her than she was of her own mother.
Wherein Olga Arnold was, of course, entirely wrong.
But the comfort to her heart was the thing that
mattered.
For the man who said what the eye didn’t see the
heart couldn’t grieve for, was exceeding wise in his
generation.
Synfye slept as much as Sydney ever sleeps
the trams were quiet for a space but across the silver
wind-tossed waters the chimes of the post office clock
rang out. . . . Sick people tossing on miserable beds
turned and hated them ; happy lovers woke and
murmured and kissed and slept again : men doing
dark deeds in slinking alleyways started and thought
of the feel of handcuffs round deserving wrists ; there
was threat for them in those chimes whose notes
rushed in where angels feared to tread, breaking up


safe silences and waking ever-present fears. . . .
Dying men heard them as they went to the great
white sleep where no chimes can come . . . the babe
just born found them its welcome into the painful
and exciting world: hopeless women huddled on
park benches felt more hopeless and more homeless
at the sound : for somehow, one needs to be happy
to enjoy those Sydney post office tower chimes in the
small hours, happy and safe. . . .
And Synfye Jackson at her window staring out at
the water as far as Pinchgut and beyond, was wide-
eyed and wakeful still, hearing the chimes, but as a
background to the notes of a wooden flute that brought
always with it a flicker of gum leaves in the sun across
a sleeping face.


CHAPTER TEN
So though I wear a shabby coat
And strum a lyre with rusty strings,
A thought makes flowers out of words,
And other things than bees, have wings.
“Poet’s Plea’
The man working in Mrs. Arnold’s garden stopped to
wipe the sweat from his brown neck and stared out at
the dancing blue of the water, seen between the green
crests of the trees that flanked the path below the
terrace of houses running along the harbour. He did
not particularly care for gardening, but when a chap
was down on his luck he had to take what work he
could get. A Labour Bureau had sent him here, doing
up gardens “by the day”. Pretty well paid, he thought,
taking into consideration the fact of how little he knew
about gardens. He would very much rather have been
out in a boat on the water. He could do almost any-
thing with a boat. Hadn’t he been in the Irish sea
in blinding rain and wild wind ?
Now he was digging in a woman’s garden overlooking
Sydney harbour. What ups and downs his life held . . .
rather fun some of it; he enjoyed his evening’s occupa-
tions very much —it meant odd shillings and more
frequent pence and queer meetings with interesting
■ —if shady—characters ... a way to study life. If
his mate had not got away with his pack and purse
and left him nothing but the clothes he stood in, he
would never have been so long in the city. He had only
come because the mate had pressed it, and was now just


waiting a chance to get back again to the bush. Might
jump a train or get a job as drover’s cook—not that
he could cook much, either —but he was game to try,
and, like the man and the violin, one never knew what
one could do till one tried a thing—who would have
suspected him of being an expert gardener ? Olga
Arnold, watching through the blind, knew he wasn’t
but she admire the way his hair grew close to the base
of his neck and the jaunty Celtic twist of his old
felt hat. It stirred a memory long stilled. What a
brown neck ! Such as a bushman—or a sailorman —
might own.
Then she fell to wondering what kept Synfye so long
in town this morning. To-morrow she was going back
to the bush, and Olga grudged each moment the girl
spent away from her ; after all, she was only going to
do a little shopping and meet Reg —didn’t she say
Reg ?—for morning tea somewhere . . . but that
wouldn’t keep her till the two o’clock boat. There,
the wretched man with the brown neck was cutting
into the root of the twisted wistaria creeper that
covered the little pergola by the steps.
“Hallo there, you !” called Olga.
The man turned, swept his hat to the ground in a
courtly bow. She saw his blue, dancing eyes, his crisp
wavy hair.
“You’re cutting the wistaria,” she said, leaning
through the window.
"Sure . . . am I ? Isn’t it good for it ... a little
pruning?” Olga frowned and then laughed.
“What did the Bureau send you to me for ?”
she said. “I don’t believe you know a thing about
gardens.”
“ ’Deed, I doubt if I do,” promptly, but his laugh


disarmed. “Can’t Ido something more useful for you,
madam ? Build a garage ?”
“But I haven’t a car ?”
“Well, a hen coop, a fowl-house, solder old sauce-
pans—surely there’s something. . . .’’He looked
ruefully down at his spade and the root of the wistaria.
“I might scrub the kitchen.” He wrinkled thoughtful
brows.
“The labourer should be worthy of his hire, but
where’s the work in the vineyard ? I think I should
have tried being a sandwich man before I took this on ;
anyway, I won’t take any pay, madam; I know my
landscape gardening runs too much to landscape.”
He looked round dolefully, pursed up his lips ready to
whistle.
“Do you want any pictures hung ; cobwebs brushed
down ?”
“No ! we’re not moving, and we don’t keep spiders.
Haven’t you any trade : any ambition . . . above
this . . . this day-labour ?” waving a doubting hand at
the rueful results of his experiments.
He laughed again, shrugged his square slight
shoulders.
"I have, sure,” he said, looking down shyly. She
suspected a soaring ambition supressed by empty
pockets. She became arrested by more than his good
looks.
“What is it ?” Romance fluttered a ribbon over
grey horizons. One never quite knew in life when its
nodding plume, its rainbow streamers, would not gleam
suddenly through earth-monotonies.
"Pigs,” he said. He was quite serious now,
twisting a blade of grass round his forefinger like a
ring.


dark steel morion.
“Really ?” Olga was studying him, the pupils of
her eyes large. "And you look ... so
different .... musical ... I think.”
... so
“Pigs !” She thought he was joking. “But
how ?”
"Beeding them.” He lost his “r”s and said "heed-
ing” in the Dublin way. It seemed to make him doubly
boyish, somehow pathetic, to her. She was sure at
some time in his life he had been “A Mother’s Boy”,
probably favoured her in appearance. “Yes, if I had
any capital I’d go in for pigs. There’s such a lot to be
done in Australia that way. They don’t seem to quite
understand . . . perhaps it takes an Irishman—who’s
been brought up with one under the bed” —he laughed,
and she did not know if it was a figure of speech
or a statement of fact—“to do well with pigs. They’re
not particular enough about the strain here
seem to think a pig’s just a pig. Droves of them I’ve
seen out west, a blot on the face of the earth- —long
bodies, long snouted, lean rake-hell looking diwils ;
leggy, skinny, as a pig should never be ; tails straight,
even. Faith, an’ I don’t know how they be calling the
likes of them pigs.”
He had a fine scorn. He had bared his head and the
sun made the curls of his black, crisp hair gleam like a
“An’ couldn’t one be musical and yet kape pigs ?’’
His eyes danced. Hers danced back again. How
Synfye would enjoy this strange lad whom an undis-
ceming Labour Bureau had thrust upon her!
If she was a benefactress, now . . . wouldn’t it be
intriguing! Help him to his pig farm, or whatever they
called it; see him launched, this Pan-like being, on
a sound commercial career. But would he work ?


Was he not perhaps one of the drifters on the face o:
our big continent ? He might be anything, untrust
worthy. She remembered how often the man with th<
bald head had warned her against young men who mak(
widows their mark . . . young, attractive waster;
looking for sympathetic women with money.
Bah, the man with the bald head was too suspicious :
the years seemed to have sapped his belief in anything
good in the world. Perhaps she, in condemning him
to his lonely bachelorhood, had helped to sour him.
Olga was seized with a desire to ask the young
man in for a cup of tea, but the cautious side of her
nature weighed the balance, as it always did, lying in
ambush for her to destroy spontaneity, for only
once in the dear dead years had she yielded to a foolish
impulse, and now impulse, from constant repression,
was becoming atrophied. So Youth eternally dies !
She did not invite him in, but looking up the road
streaked here and there with shadow of green things,
she did ask him his name. When he told her it conveyed
nothing. And he was gone before Synfye came ; a
flushed Synfye whose eyes wavered and who hid a hot
face with surprisingly boisterous show of affection on
Mrs. Arnold’s daintily-powdered neck.
“What have you been up to, Synfye ?”
Ah, what had Synfye been up to ? She did not tell,
but her eyes were full of dreamy light and shades :
she forgot to take her soup, she sent away the fish
untouched, and when Mrs. Arnold began to tell her
about the amazing gardener the stupid Bureau had
sent to her, she obviously was not listening.
Had she been, she might have wondered why Mrs.
Arnold had told the quite inexperienced workman to
return on the morrow. On the morrow, after Synfye


had left Sydney . . . to-morrow, when the aching
loneliness would be all about Olga’s life again . . .
when the silence of her home would be more than she
could bear, when she would fill it with friends, and over
chatter and the tinkle of tea-cups, still hear that silence
empty of her dream-babe’s voice. And to-night, her
last night with Olga, Synfye wanted to go out with
Reg.
Hurt tears came to Olga’s eyes.
“I did think this last evening-—” But she was too
much wounded to complain ; only something burned in
her heart, the kind of thing youth, unthinking, sets
alight so surely in the heart of yearning age.
Lying in her bed in the dark, Olga Arnold clenched
her hands tight on an old regret. Too late now —she
with others like her, must bear her cross of loneliness
to the end. Lonely, with so many friends ? Aye, said
the cheated mother-heart; aye, lonely. And out in
the gum-scented bush, Maeve and Stuart would be
killing the fatted calf for their prodigal, would be hang-
ing bush-blossomry in the pine-lined bedroom, baking,
and brewing the silver-top ginger-beer Synfye liked,
filling the tin on the top shelf of the pantry with the
ginger nuts she had been fain to ever since she was big
enough to eat them without crying because they burnt
her tongue; planning, plotting, in love, for their
girl’s present and future ; anxious, happy, excited,
nervous about trifles, hoping the weather would be
fine though rain was needed, hoping that the White
Witch where the white ants were visibly tunnelling
would not crash before she came—they were no longer
“nine White Witches in a circle close”—wondering if
Bill would remember those chocolates from the town-
ship when he came through with the mail; perhaps


seeing far ahead the day when Synfye would marry
some decent well-set-up bushman and live within
“coo-ee” of her old home. Hating a little the idea of
any man brushing the bloom from her sweetness and
innocence, and yet glad to think that when they were
gone there would be another strong arm than Stuart
Jackson’s to fend for her; thoughts circling round and
round their child as the thoughts of parents do, self-
less, dreading, hoping, praying.
And Synfye ? Up in her room overlooking the har-
bour, with a half-filled trunk foaming laces and silks
on to the carpeted floor, she was drawing from the
bosom of her white frock a little trinket, holding it
up to the light, frowning over it, kissing it, laughing,
shaking her head, then putting it back in its hiding-
place to dive under her bed in search of a missing pair
of scarlet-heeled slippers she was bent on wearing when
she went out with Reg to-night.


CHAPTER ELEVEN
The King mused with a furrowed brow and slowly darkening face.
Silent with a ring-ed hand that cupped a trembling chin,
“Priests may read me penances, coffers I may fill.
But you cannot grow fresh flowers from the seeds of sin.”
“The Rivals”
"You ought to write to Reg Powis,” said Stuart
Jackson, folding the Brisbane weekly he held, and
turning to the price of wool. “It’s pretty rough on
the family, all this.”
Synfye spilled her tea and Maeve made a little
clicking sound with her tongue.
“Synfye, this is a clean cloth.”
On the breakfast table the letters and newspapers
lay scattered, for the mailman had just come through,
and the leather bag, slack now, was on the chair by
Stuart’s chair. He had cut the string with the carving-
knife and immersed himself straight away in the papers.
“Write to Reg!” Synfye was pale, then red. She
stammered a little as she asked :
“Why, dad, don’t I always write ... to my friends
• . . but why particularly, now ?” She searched
Stuart’s not-seriously perturbed face with alert eyes.
“Oh, well, I don’t know them, of course, but I
remember you went to a dance there, or something,
dressed as the Scarlet Woman, didn’t you ? And I
don’t think they will pay a shilling in the pound.
Besides, there’s a nasty rumour about Trust Money.”
Maeve came to the rescue.
"The child never reads that part of the papers,


Stuart. What your father means is, that Startt &
Powis have gone smash . . . and Reg . . . that boy
you know, has been brought up with every luxury.
It will be hard on them. Your father says there has
not been such an utter commercial crash for a long
"The drought, of course, has had something to do
with it, but they say Mr. Powis took Trust money to
try to tide over a bad time, and something happened
in the market and he didn’t make the coup he expected
and couldn’t pay it back. I don’t really understand
these things much better than you do. Synfye, get
some cold water and a bowl and steep this bit of the
tablecloth—they say that takes tea-stain out most
quickly-
Synfye got up dumbly and went to the pantry.
She was a long time at the running tap and couldn’t
find the bowl she wanted.
Reg’s father . . . fraudulent . . . how horrid
and there would be no money to end the romance off
in a brilliant way—those trips abroad, the jewels,
the things Reg was going to do when he "came into his
own.” Hard old man, his father, Reg had said, even
though he had indulged him in some ways. Hard old
man, tried to make the boy promise not to marry before
he was thirty . . . something about tying up the
property. Hard old man . . . bad old man, it seemed
. . . not commercially honest . . . how unpleasant.
What would Olga Arnold think about it ? What
did she, Synfye Jackson, think, really—? Had she ever
considered it in the right way ? Romance rainbows,
bright balloons, stars reflected in the ink-dark waters
of the harbour. Sydney, irresponsibility, kisses, warm
young blood racing, love of experiments, burnt fingers.


She stood stock still, the basin of cold water in one
hand, looking out to where a mob of rose-breasted,
french-grey plumaged galahs strutted in the clearing
beyond the window.
How her castles in the air had crashed! Horrible
of her . . . but would she care in the same way for
Reg ... if his father was that disagreeable thing.
an uncertified bankrupt, and Reg . . . Reg with his
expensive tastes, his wonderful socks and collars,
hard up, poor like the Irish boy with the flute who
played by her cubby-house that summer’s day ?
Poverty did not spoil the Irish boy; somehow it took
the glamour from Reg.
How abominable of her !
“What are you doing, Synfye?” her mother called.
“Come and finish your breakfast; never mind about
the table-cloth.’’
That was like Maeve, easy-going, procrastinating,
giving an order and rescinding it in a breath. There
must be something of harder-headed Stuart Jackson
in his daughter.
Synfye was thinking deeply as she went back to
the dining-room where Stuart had forgotten Startt &
Powis in the study of the rising price of wool.
Maeve was pricking at cold bacon with a dreamy
fork, while she tried to read a magazine balanced
against the teapot.
It was a peaceful family scene ; a shaft of sun coming
across the verandah and touching the jar of scarlet
geraniums in the centre of the table ; early flies
buzzing about the sugar ; a wasp sitting boldly on the
rim of the honey-jar. Peaceful . . . home life. . . .
Synfye did not know that she wanted anything but
peace and security at present.


Father . . . mother . . . dears! Browsing at the
edge of a volcano like two nice old comfortable sheep.
Oh! she was frightened now with the starshine mirrored
in blue treacherous harbours so far away, with the
croon of the moony wave no longer in her ears
the heavy smell of magnolia blooms left behind in
Sydney!
She had become more of a child again, wearing short
holland frocks, walking out among the gum trees.
going to dream in a swimming haze of green and gold
and wholesome sights, and smells and sounds under
the White Witches, those dear tall gums that were
like bride-satin with their polished trunks
"flooded” gums they called them here, though the
true flooded gum some bushmen said belonged to
nearer the coast and to the more hilly places; these
were fair white gums found all over Australia, and even
grown abroad as hygienic and decorative trees, when
Australia sacrified them hourly to the axe.
There was something symbolic in that. Hadn’t she
sacrificed dear "homey”, wholesome, “well-kenned”
things as her father called them, for trees of foreign
origin and artficial growths ?
Oh ! well, there was the bacon . . . greasy, cold
sticking to her plate, a blue-bottle fly hovering
over it.
Ugh, she did not want any more breakfast!
Should she write a special letter to Reg, in time for
the return mail ? But this had altered life so ; dare
she . . . show any marked affection for Reg now ?
That might bring him up here. She felt hot all over.
then shivered. Somehow, whatever happened, she
would hate Reg to come here . . . close to her . . .
with rights . . . with privileges.


For this experiment had burned her with fire as
had the one made in those childish days. There was
no Jimmy the tailor to save her now.
No : she couldn’t write to Reg. She would wait—
there was no harm done by waiting ; she wished she
had waited more for things in the past. She bit her
lips. She could hear the rustle of wings : the galahs
perhaps had been frightened by the dogs : a grey and
tortoiseshell cat came from under the table, rubbing
against her legs, purring, inviting her to come for a
walk in the sunshine. Bother Reg ! It was mostly his
fault! How heartless she was! He must be miserable,
but he had not written much lately . . . and she
had not cared. . . . That was the worst of it, she had
not cared when there was no envelope marked in his
black running hand (he never crossed his “t’s”) in
the mail bag.
She had not cared ! Could one make oneself
care again ? How awful it must be for wives who were
married young to suddenly realize that they did not
care any more for the man they had married, and yet,
the law might oblige them to live with that man for
forty, fifty years. How they must wish for death—
for one or the other. How awful! One came to the
edges of precipices on warm bright mornings like this,
with galahs pouting their breasts and moving with little
pecking jerks of their heads, in the gum-encircled
clearings, and dogs running about and playing clumsily,
for very joy of life, and cats purring their simple hearts
out because you bent to rub behind their ears and under
their soft chins the way cats love !
Oh, dear ! If one could only blot out things, start
again. Oh, dear! Father and mother . . . sheep,
dear things ; unknowing, every step as they fed happily


along, took them closer to the flaming edge of that
canon of fire where she had burned herself !
Oh, Reg ! Dam Reg ! But it was she, Synfye Jackson,
who apparently was most deeply damned.
“Collapse of Startt & Powis” —she could see it written
on the air, the blue clear air, now without having
to read the newspapers spread all over the room.
Father absolutely ate newspapers when the mail
came . . . prices, wool, stock, then the cables from
overseas. Mother read the literary page, the fashion
notes, sometimes the social. She was also interested
in the doings of the Royal Family.
But she liked a novel or magazine best.
And Synfye liked books, history poetry, mythology,
anything romantic, difficult, too : she enjoyed books
on scientific research, liked to try to unravel mysteries
that had puzzled historians and made them take sides
to prove theories set down in heavy tomes, anything
that needed some thinking out; couldn’t keep her
fingers out of pies that had been awkward things for
writers and critics and biographers of the Past to get
their fingers into. Something to conquer, that was what
Synfye liked : no easy roads for her. But why by delib-
erate choice seek a path that must end in disaster,
now, for herself ? Why put herself on the rack ?
She was young, but not a fool, she told herself, looking
out with frightened eyes at the bright landscape
and the old familiar things about her home. The
water-cask that leaked (the grass was very green in a
circle about it : a fairy ring); the swing in the bent wild
apple tree she had sat in before her legs w r ere long enough
to reach the ground; the wire-netting fence by
the fowl-house where the scarlet geraniums straggled ;
the spot where Maeve had been trying to grow lettuces.


The gnarled old box-tree where she used to sit cross-
legged in the fork to read fairy tales and where one
night at dusk she had seen a pretty little love-scene
between her father and mother, which she had never
said anything about; one couldn’t laugh at them for
that, though it did seem queer with people married as
long as mother and father . . . but even then the
flippant, mischievous child had felt a sacredness.
Familiar, homelike-scene, backgrounding all her baby-
hood and girlhood, and she now the unfamiliar thing,
the stranger in its midst, ever since that conversation
about Reg and his father at the breakfast table.
Should she tell her mother, her father ? No, not after
keeping silence so long—not now of all times.
She must try to see a way out first; she knew
instinctively that they would think there was but one,
and that one the way of all she least wished to take.
Father, she was sure, was old-fashioned in things
like this. Mother, being a fairy, might be different, but
she would let father guide her. Besides, mother had
been married too long not to think with most married
people on conventional lines, the “human woman”
way. She closed her eyes.
She was in Sydney again. Sydney, which she had
declared to Reg smelled of sea, and oysters not quite
fresh, and soup, and carnations, and he had retaliated
that it just depended upon which part of the city
you were in. She considered the North Shore, lacquer-
red roofs, dark-green foliage, window-boxes with
geraniums, the purple shadow cast sharply on the
sunlit stones, a brigantine from the Islands that
seemed to whisper “Stevenson and Vailima”, a wool-
boat greyish-heliotrope; a Chinese shop near the
quay on the city side with a suggestion of forbidden


opium : the cathedral by Hyde Park, smoke-yellow
and grey. Smell of wet grass in the suburban quarters
where there are more red roofs, more tiles, more
gigantic hydrangea in scalloped vases and portulaccas
red and gold in sandstone urns; Athol gardens side
again, gum boughs and little blue flowers in the grass.
Aye—she had crushed and trodden these along forbid-
den ways with Reg’s arm about her. It was here she
had lost that hatpin with the Sarawak coin on the head,
and had to make excuses to Olga Arnold about it.
Manly beach, smelling of pines and ocean ; here he had
given her a shell, emblem of eternity. Their love, he
had said ! She laughed a little unkindly here. Manly,
where one walked by the path to Shell beach and had
to lie to Mrs. Arnold again with a reason for being so
late. The lover’s walk, where folly began things
that must end in tears. Oh ! she was not a girl any
more. She was woman with a woman’s bitterness of
knowledge. The Spit; that, too, smelled of the sea
and a little of coal-dust, and new paint drying some-
where, with a vaguer suggestion of prawns. The
Botanic and Palace Gardens smell of freshly watered
earth, honeysuckle, ham sandwiches and hot tea ;
cigarette smoke; and curious stale cellar-like damp-
ness always reminiscent of Sydney, where there is
outcrop of rock. The Rocks, where they had gone
exploring; drains, frowsy washing hanging in back-
yards; hair-oil, sweat, grubby ill-kept children, and a
starting wind that brought a whiff of unseen roses.
Aye, even in the poorer quarters Sydney had its
sudden glimpse of beauty, royal-blue seas at the
end of dirty cobwebby lanes where old houses seemed
to lean, whispering of violent things that are done in
silence and in night. Lavender Bay with the unreal


mauve mistiness through which pricked a shadowy
spar. The post office tower with blue pigeons pressed
against ochre-tinted walls ; boats coming to the ferry
like fabled monsters with a hundred golden eyes ;
a little half-starved grey kitten prettily marked which
she had wanted to fondle ; Reg said it might have a
disease ; a monster Moreton Bay fig casting a patched
pattern of shade on the front of an ancient hostel
—faint smell of beer and dead leaves. Bondi, all wind
and open sea and a tram climbing. Coogee with white
waters breaking.
There were tears creeping from under her closed
lids, splashing on to her clenched hands.
Sydney, so beautiful in some ways, so evilly secret.
Sydney, all blue and gold and laughing waves—how
you could betray into a belief of the permanency of
the impermanent !
Sydney, lovely lady, how you beckoned and caressed
and lured on to foolish and impossible vows! And
Sydney, how you lied.


CHAPTER TWELVE
I can give her winter frost and flaming skies at morn,
Pools of ice for mirror, and a cup of horn,
Carpet of pine needles laid upon our cabin floor,
And the heart from out a breast that never loved before.
■—“The Rivals’
I must close the windows of my mind
Upon the sombre tints, and open wide
The door of dreams where polychromes abide,
And there is sunlight for the soul to find.
“On a Grey Day'
Liam M’Pheris sat in the sun on a log, making a rope
pig-net. At his feet was a stick of soft wood some
eighteen inches long, rounded at the edges. The mesh
stick which would keep the size of the mesh equal;
his hands were busy with the first knotting of the rope
which was to make the pig-net to carry his light porkers
by wagon to the nearest point of connection with their
market, and it seemed to the man almost a sacred
rite. In the stump of a post of the wire-netted yard,
where the cross-breds grunted happily over the remains
of a meal, or lay in the shadiest places by the bark-
roofed sheds, he had driven a hook which was to be
used in making the mesh. During the four months
since they were farrowed, he had become rather
attached to the sturdy youngsters, and there was a
little regret even mingled with the complacency of
the knowledge that light porkers were bringing a good
price in the nearest market just now. They had been
jolly little beggars. Still, one did not grow pigs alto-
gether for pleasure, and old hands had told him he


would never make a success of pigs here. He didn’t
seem the kind of man. Yet he was proving himself
that kind of man now as he stood erect deftly tying
the knots in his mesh which grew like a thick spider-
web under his long brown fingers. A musician’s fingers,
perhaps, but able for more than that. He had trouble
with this litter, too, in the beginning, had had to do
wise things with lime-water and copperas, and had
worked himself to the point of exhaustion with the
help of the cheerful cheeky little State orphan he had
annexed as his handy-man, and had almost cleaned
out the local storekeepers of rice, to boil vats of it for
his piggery; but the sow and the litter had recovered
and flourished exceeding well, and the old superstition
that pigs were dirty and waxed fat in surroundings of
filth, was not for Liam. He read pamphlets, belonged
a Pig Club. He had thought more deeply than he
had ever considered a horse or a woman, as to what
breeds he should experiment with, and finally a
Berkshire boar and a Tamworth sow seemed to meet
his demands most effectually. There was trouble, too,
in keeping the leggy wild pigs out of his paddocks;
they had insinuating ways of opening gates and squeez-
ing through wire fences, but his system of defence had
proved fairly strong and, knowing how an animal
whose normal temperature is, amazingly, no less than
102 degrees, must feel the hot months, he was careful
to make his pig paddocks in the timbered part of his
property, including the shallow-pooled reedy swamp
where they loved to wallow. Beyond the chain of
fairy-cupped pools where the pigs rioted among the
lily roots to the destruction of the beauty of the ponds,
was the farming area providing most of the food for
the animals. This was leased to a Scotsman, a man


of still tongue and mighty muscle, who looked after
the crops in return for the use of the land and a per-
centage of his growings. Liam, the wandering minstrel,
had not proved himself such a bad business man after
all, though he called it his “luck” more than his
sense.
A good water frontage, a steep-banked, deep-
running creek which supplied Mack with all the water
needed for the farming operations in dry weather, was
another tribute to that “luck”, or horse sense; and the
fact that the previous owner of the land had shot him-
self when he did not back the winner of the Melbourne
Cup and let the old homestead go to rack and ruin
and carelessly dossing swaggies, had given Liam
M'Pheris his chance.
But the biggest chance of all had been his through
Father O’Flaherty’s will—Father O’Flaherty had some
property apart from the church, on which he had
kept his pudgy hand. Belonging to a branch of the
family who, unlike Liam’s forbears, had not broken
away from the Ould Faith to embrace that of the up-
start Martin Luther, he had always declared that not a
penny of his should be thrown to the “black Protest-
tants”, but Liam believed now it must have been
with his tongue in his cheek and that worldly twinkle
fasting and prayer could never subdue in his dark
eyes. He had brought Liam sweets in the old Dublin
days, and had told him as he rode a cock-horse to
Banbury Cross on his plump knee, that he and his kin
would surely burn in Hell for their desertion of the
True Faith, and through all his merry scoldings the
boy had felt somehow that Uncle O’Flaherty loved him.
Letters sometimes passed between them after Liam
came to Australia, and the priest had occasionally


chided him for his wandering ways, and said he ought
to settle down at some “stiddy job”, Father O’Flaherty
who hated "stiddy jobs” himself like poison : and
Liam in his brief answers had replied, half in jest, he
would never settle anywhere unless it be "among the
swine,” like the prodigal son. Evidently Father
O’Flaherty had taken him at this word. The substantial
legacy that came to his nephew a year after the old
man’s sudden death in the pulpit at Barrydown Chapel
had been more than enough to "set him up in pigs.”
He had written to the Government Departments in
two States for pamphlets on the pig, and studied them
far into the night in his camp, for since leaving Sydney
he had been with a survey camp inland. He had pre-
sently drawn his cheque and gone out inquiring for
likely land. He had meant to try nearer the coast, but a
newspaper paragraph recalling the suicide at Deep
Dell Farm (there were no deep dells in the place,
but that was a detail) and some sapient remarks about
a fine property going to waste on the banks of the river,
had led him to look here for his piggery. Plenty of
wide-branched shade timber, water frontage, tolerable
soil for crops, good grass, and though the summer was
hot, one could keep pigs cools with all these advantages.
A trip to Brisbane Show, a look at the sale-yards, the
careful purchase of his first boar, soft, pliable, silky
skin, the width between the eyes, the deep chest,
the regular even breathing, the absence of "the Devil’s
grip” behind the shoulders, the strong, fully-fleshed
loins, the length and depth of the animal, before the
guarantee of the herd book decided him that the stud
Berkshire boar "Shamrock”, apart from the suitability
of the name, was worth the fifty pounds asked for him,
a lot for a young pig-breeder to pay though it be.


But "Shamrock” was to prove his mettle. Then
came the Tamworth sows to look for, decendants of
the grey and grisly wild hogs of that English Tamworth
on the borders of Warwick and Staffordshire, wild and
savage as their forbears were. The domesticated
Tamworth pig was becoming popular in Queensland,
though, like Cyrano de Bergerac, the length of his nose
had, in the first instance, been against him. The dry
inland parts of the country suited the Tamworth,
which does not love the cold places, and, unlike many
other pigs, does not suffer from sunburn.
Liam loved to see their deep reddish skins under the
dapple of light and shadow in his paddocks, and the
old notion that long-nosed sows make prolific mothers
held good. Working from dawn to dark, and sometimes
by moonlight and by starshine with a lantern, Liam
and the boy found their hands full. The boy, a cigarette-
smoking foul-mouthed imp in the city, developed into
quite a new creature under the clean sweet conditions
of the bush and home, the night’s rest when he seemed
almost to die, so deep was his sleep after the manual
labour of the day, the quantity of wholesome food, the
milk (for Mack kept hens and cows and provided milk
for man and pig from well-grassed paddocks and
lucerne hay) was making a man of the city urchin,
and he would have died for Liam, who played the flute
sometimes on Sundays in a clean shirt and trousers,
lying flat on the grass beyond the gruntings and sweak-
ings of the profitable porkers. The boy drove the
wagon into the trucking yard and was reliable where
anything to do with his beloved master’s interests
was concerned, and Mac would sometimes come and
sit and listen to the flute and, making no remark,
sigh and go heavily home again.


It was believed that Mack had a wife somewhere in
Sydney, of whose very unlikely arrival he lived in
dread.
Mack never said anything about her, but the rumour
had spread.
Long miles to the south-west lay the White
Witches and Stuart Jackson’s home where Liam
believed Synfye was still with her parents. He seldom
thought of her; he thought of little but pigs and the
price of bacon and the new American pig-housing
inventions, and whether some of the young Berkshire-
Tamworths were developing as they should; were
the foreheads too narrow, the ears too thick, the loins
weak ? Points ; he was always looking for points and
referring to notes. Life was all pigs, not women, nor
even much music nowadays. That could come when
he made his pile. It was towards the end of spring, a
dry September, though August rains had supplied
plenty of feed on the land; the bush was full of blossom-
ing and of busy bird life ; by December Liam would
have both sucking pigs and porkers for the Christmas
market. Light porkers at from forty to fifty shillings,
sucking pigs say at half a guinea; working expenses,
according to his arrangement with Mack, not very
heavy : perhaps he would give himself a bit of holiday
in the New Year.
The mesh was growing under his swift fingers; this
pig-net would soon be ready. Then he heard the sound
of a cantering horse’s hoofs on the other side of the
swamp ; a flight of birds rose from the reeds, disturbed
by an intruder ; the horse’s feet were squelching now in
the sedgy rim beyond where the pigs were feeding,
dark brown oily bodies and one interloper who had a
touch of the Gloucester spotted white, and which Dick


the orphan called the “Blunder”, with an adjective in
front of it. Glancing in and out between the gums and
coming to the patent gate, a contrivance of Liam’s that
was supposed to close itself without the touch of a
hand, a slim figure on a brown horse with a white
forefoot.
It wasn’t the mailman ; some traveller looking in
for a yarn or a pint of tea.
Liam went on with his weaving—dash them,
wasn’t he busy? However, he could work and yarn
too, if he had to ; couldn’t be inhospitable, whatever
else he might achieve. Wasn’t he Irish first ?
But when a woman rode up to the gate and swung it
to behind her brown sweating hack, he did cease his
labour for a little, out of sheer astonishment, if nothing
else.
She wore a felt hat turned up at the back over her
dark hair, her brown eyes were challenging bright
under the shadow of its brim.
“The fluter,” she said, “and at work . . . after all
these years !”
“Not so many years,” he answered calmly, bowing
to her over his rope. “Come inside and I’ll make you
some tea ; you must have had a long ride if you came
from Stuart Jackson’s.”
“Oh, I stayed at Tregurtha’s last night.” She looked
down, twisted her riding switch, slipped from the
saddle and stood looking out to where the rusty-red
broad back of the sow was surrounded by darker
skinned piglets ; beyond, in his temporary monastery,
rooting under a wild apple-tree, was the prize Berkshire
boar, the white-tipped tail jerking with his nozzling
movements, his white blazed face concealed in the dust
he was raising.


“Your pigs ?” said the girl, squeezingup her eyes in
the glare of the straight rays of the sun and looking
from man to pigs with raised eyebrows. “You have
acquired property, Mr. M’Pheris ! What is it—the
property sense found you at last ? And pigs for profit,
of all things! Or perhaps you are just working
here?”
“It’s after being kind you are to take such an interest
in me,” he said coolly, giving her insolent smile for
smile. “But, as it happens, the pigs are mine, and the
bit of land and the house —such as it is, rather shaky
in places, but a roof still—and there’s a kettle on the
hob, sure, for chance visitors.”
"And inquisitors ? I am cool,” she said, lightly
hanging her horse’s bridle to the hook from which his
nets depended. “Perhaps you will teach me how to
do your job . . . fishing for whales in the lagoon ? ”
“No, for pounds, shillings, and pence from the
markets. Haven’t you ever seen a pig-net ?”
"I don’t believe I have. Father doesn’t keep pigs on
the place—we buy our bacon from the hawker. Yes ;
I would like some tea, and then I want to know all
about the pig farm.”
“That would be a long story.” He led the way
through the little gate at the back of the low, bark-
roofed house. It had been shingled, but a sundowner
had used some of the rotting shingles for fuel, and the
windstorms had dismantled part of the rafters, and
Liam and the boy had been busy with new bark which
still curled at the edges and smelled warm and sappy
in the sun
Inside the house it was cool and dark ; indeed, looking
from the living-room window the world seemed a
golden blaze in contrast with the dusky interior. There


were comfortable, ungainly old chairs of bush workman-
ship, a settle covered with bags and bright cretonne,
even a footstool made from a round of log with a sheep-
skin, wool uppermost, tacked on it.
"I think I wouldn’t mind living here,”saidSynfye,
when she was seated in one of the softest of the chairs
with an enamel mug of tea in one hand and a chunk
of brownie in the other. Liam had explained that the
boy always broke china and they used tin themselves,
with enamel for special guests.
“Don’t say those kind of things to lone bachelors,”
said Liam, shaking the teapot. He liked his tea black
and strong. “It’s tempting Providence ye are.”
Synfye’s eyes sparkled. She was remembering many
things.
“I wish you would play the flute to me,” she said.
"But, my dear, I’ve work to do ; take a rest now on
the settle, and there’s a tin basin and a clean towel of
sorts (though I believe it once was a dish-clout) in
that room beyond, and when I’ve got on with my net
I’ll come in and play ye a tune, even if it sets the pigs
to dancing and getting down their condition, which is
what I don’t require of them.”
When he had gone back to his work Synfye explored.
His room beyond was Spartan untidy, littered with
pipes and leather leggings and copies of treatises on
the pig, with cuttings from agricultural journals laid
out on a bench that looked like one from a carpenter’s
shop under the window, which was never closed summer
or winter. Beyond, she could see the pig paddocks.
She thought she could hear the sound of a man’s voice
raised in calling to a dog or speaking to a horse. It
was really Mack, who had no ear for music, singing
on the farm, as he harrowed the soil for the October


planting of his soya beans. Mack, who had little or no
conversation, sometimes sang. His lucerne patch had
yielded grandly this year. He would not sow again till
March ; five cuts had been the annual average of the
little patch, and he considered much of the excellence
of the MTheris pork was owing to the lucerne hay
Mack had scythed.
Being Irish, Liam naturally inclined to overestimate
the value of the potato in feeding; Mack declared
potato-fed bacon ran to waste in cooking too fatty,
but he grew potatoes, grumbling, for Liam, because
he liked them with beef for himself, and the State
orphan adored them. Beyond the farm an old enclosure
with a sagging paling fence that had once been a sheep
yard made a splendid growing ground for pumpkin.
Mack, with the help of two black-boys from a timber
camp up the river, had just finished his September
sowing. There was a faint smell of what Synfye, with a
little wrinkling of her nose, dubbed “pigs” on the air,
but nothing unpleasant, a tang of gum trees, a honey-
drift from some small blossomed wide-leafed creeper
swaying over a disreputable fence. She supposed Liam
really had no time for an orthodox garden, though
apparently at one time this homestead had boasted
both garden and orchard ; there were quince rods
springing amongst old, gnarled, fungus-spotted trees,
and apricot with the white ants in it, a rose on a single
stem, some sucker in the grass. A woman could make
a lot of this old house and the hint of what had once
been a garden. By that rusty broken pump there must
have been a trellis of some sort; weeds sprang boldly
by it now, nodding tasselled heads where a great black
and gold butterfly swooped and circled aimlessly.
It was very peaceful here : even distant gruntings


seemed only to accentuate the tranquillities. No Reg !
No devoted parents who might be so horribly disillu-
sioned at some near date. No echoes of a folly now
impossible to remedy, yet she was so young to know
that feeling! Had Liam M’Pheris ever done silly
things—and lived to regret them ?
She would never have believed that the wandering
minstrel had the hard work, the grit, this pig farm idea
proved, and he seemed to be making a success of things.
Where had he got the money from ? A successful
burglary ? Did he speculate in mining shares ? A
legacy, perhaps—but who could leave him money ?
Her interest, her curiosity, was alert; she had been
impertinent before, she would be impertinent again.
He was too Irish in his politeness to really show chagrin
to a guest, though she had noticed the flush on his
face at her questioning. It would be interesting to see
him really angry.
He had made her angry once, it seemed such a long
time ago now.
Then she chuckled, looked at herself in the tiny
greenish-tinted mirror, adjusted her hat over her gloss
of dark curls.
Wonder what he would say . . . if I kissed him
again ? How dreadfully improper, too, in a bachelor’s
house—no chaperon but the pigs, and pigs don't
care : fancy a pig flirting! Fat things can never be
successfully coquettish. . . . Then Liam came in with
his flute.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
What is Spring doing in my blood?
It cries of blossoms—and of you!
It bids me to a far-off wood,
Where trees run down to meet the blue;
Each sandal bears a beating wing
Of this strange Folly—that is Spring.
"‘Spring’
Since a child Synfye had always liked the Tregurthas.
She couldn’t have exactly explained why in so many
words, but in the first instance it was because they had
a ’possum rug, lined with scalloped red flannel, on
their big double bed, and amongst the dyed pampas
grass and crinkled-paper decorations on the mantel-
piece, Mrs. Tregurtha always kept saccharine and highly
dangerous-looking little purple cakes. How she coloured
them like that was between herself and her Maker.
Stuart Jackson suspected permanganate of potash,
but had no data to go upon. Mrs. Tregurtha’s kitchen
was a sacred shrine where no mere man dared enter.
It was roofed with galvanized iron, had a tank at the
corner and a cooking galley outside, where the boiler
for jam-making stood and an American oven inside,
with coals on the top as well as underneath, and a
perfect army of shining pots and pans. Here Mrs.
Tregurtha, who was massive and moist at any time,
sweated through the summer days over her concoctions.
Synfye was always bilious after a trip to Tregurtha’s,
but Maeve allowed her occasionally to risk it. Perhaps,
she said, it did her no harm to have her liver stirred up.


The purple cakes invariably achieved that, and Stuart’s
facetious christening of them as “The snake-bite
remedy” left Synfye undeterred. Her first visit to
Tregurtha’s had been when she was five, sitting in front
of her father on the saddle and staring nervously between
the horse’s ears. That time she had been homesick,
and cried a little in the narrow bed stuffed with corn
husks in the lean-to, but Mrs. Tregurtha came to the
rescue in a rose-pink flannelette wrapper and hair in
curl rags-—a thing Synfye had never seen before and
which so intrigued her that she fell asleep on the ample
bosom that smelled of camphor, and from that moment
found a visit to the Tregurtha’s one of her events.
They had a worthless son who was killed by an
accident and a runaway horse. They canonized
him in early death as they could never have done had
he lived to middle age. Often Mrs. Tregurtha used
to bemoan the fact that she would now have no grand-
children to whom to feed her little purple cakes, and
Synfye again supplied a want in a babe-hungry heart.
As the girl grew, it became an established fact in
her secret heart that Tregurtha’s, like the White
Witches, should be one of her sanctuaries. There was a
warm humanness about Mrs. Tregurtha, and her big
Cornish husband was silent, and though apparently
always immersed in his own thoughts, just as really
kind. Synfye must queen it over somebody. Once
when Stuart had slapped her for an obvious fault, she
was found a mile from the house by the mailman, a
change of clothes in a big handkerchief slung over
her shoulder, like Dick Whittington’s bundle, on a
gum switch, her stout legs determinedly set for
Tregurtha’s and the purple cakes.
He took her home on the pack-horse, kicking.


Now, when life at home appeared secretly compli-
cated by a possibility of claims put in by Reg to parents
who were entirely in the dark as to her relations with
the young Sydney man, Synfye had saddled her bay
hack, popped a nightdress and slippers into a valise,
and ridden to Tregurtha’s; and growing restless next
day, perhaps with the incipient indigestion Mrs.
Tregurtha’s hospitality always engendered (because it’s
almost a surety that the eupetic peoples of the earth
are too sleek and comfortable to ever feel that divine
discontent which arises from a disturbed stomach,
more often than from the “heritage of intellect”),
she had told Tom Tregurtha she was going for a good
ride "to think about things,” and would turn up again
at nightfall.
“Be sure you’re in time for dinner,” shrieked Mrs.
Tregurtha from the front verandah, where Tom, with a
patent arrangement of net and wire for keeping mos-
quitoes from his stockinged feet, sat in his rocking-
chair after attending to the immediate business of
the grazing farm.
“Yes, I’m going out to get a big appetite,” shrieked
Synfye back again, patting the saddle pouch Mrs.
Tregurtha had stuffed with cake and cold meat sand-
wiches in terror lest her guest should faint by the way
if she went riding late, and she had set her hack to a
canter, gone exploring and laughed at care, and the
breath of a pig farm had met her the other side of the
river, and she had come on to find another experiment,
or an old one resuscitated, to her willing hand.
She curled up amongst the tropical-looking reds and
ye lows of the cretonne-covered settee, and listened
whdst Liam on a three-legged stool played to her.
Drifting from little-known Irish melodies to the


better kenned, from "Take a Pair of Sparkling Eyes”
to "The Mountains of Mourne”, and finishing up
plaintively with “Home, Sweet Home.”
"Is that a hint ?” said Synfye, slipping off the settle
and walking to the windows. Shadows were printing
themselves on the waving grasses of the paddocks :
Mack was coming across to give a hand with the pigs.
It seemed to Liam that her face was like a pearl
in the brown wave of dusk that began to fill the room,
though outside the world was still yellow as sauteme
with afternoon sun. He did not answer her query.
She looked round.
"Your room is like a Dutch interior —the colours on
the settle, that red-brown cushion . . . Dutch painters
loved rich colours. My mother says I have the zest
for colour that the fairies give.”
It seemed to him that her sane and winning natural-
ness was the prettiest thing about her. How had she
ever called herself “White Witches child” ? No white
witch here ; all warmth and colour and glow. She
wasn’t like any other girl he had known : her very
unconventionality in being here like this . . . she
was new-minted work, alive and beautiful. Naked
passion leapt in him, surcharging life’s smooth sur-
faces. ‘ ‘Ah, the Irish! ” he laughed secretly at himself,
" What emotional devils we are !” There was sympathy
between them, there always had been from the first—
sympathy lacking frontiers, a strand in God’s design
when he was worth about the clothes he stood up in—
a pedlar of nothing—a wandering minstrel!
But she was alone in his bachelor house—he must
guard himself—he might frighten her away just at
the beginning of a delicate dream.
If pigs paid now ! Like the better type of Irishman


he never contemplated anything short of marriage for
a woman he respected as an Irishman must respect the
woman he is going to love. This fickle race are the
sternest moralists where their abiding women are
concerned.
“I want you to have tea with me, scratch up some
kind of a meal,” he said, standing close to her, but care-
ful not to touch her. “Then I'll ride to Tregurtha’s
with you. There is going to be a great moon to-night.”
Ride down the sandy road under the dropping
blossoms, under the long thin fingers of the pungent
blue gums, with the shadows of leaf and bough in
the sheen of enchantment that was moonshine on
flat roads, the water of the shallow crossing glittering
like polished pewter, boulders shaggy with old moss
where the land tilted up to the dark grove, and once
one reined one’s horse to catch the savour of the pines.
Under a full moon the blanched and lovely world with
fragrances rushing on the summer air from every little
spicy bush along the trail. Barrenness of wasted
beauty if she rode back to Tregurtha’s all alone ! She
turned to look into his blue eyes that gave her back a
baffling glance. They seemed to her, as they stood side
by side, like two secret conspirators watching the
creeping smoulder of a time-fuse. The explosion was
due some time or another, but both were determined to
ignore it.
Tremulous, exultant with the first knowledge of love,
he scarcely seemed to take in the import of her words
at once.
"Yes, I’ll stay,” though even as she spoke Mrs.
Tregurtha’s broad, moist and anxious face rose up
before her, the dinner spoiling on the stove, or growing
cold on the table. Tom Tregurtha going backwards


and forwards from the dining-room to the verandah and
back again to watch the moonlit road for the horse and
rider that did not come. Perhaps they would be
offended ! Perhaps they would talk in low tones
about her under the ’possum rug in the watches of
the night.
Tom Tregurtha suffered from chronic cold feet.
He kept the rug well up over them, and Mrs. Tregurtha,
because she loved Tom with utter selflessness, suffered
to sweat under it in silence, though she always took a
palm-leaf fan to bed in summer. Of course, Synfye
arraigned herself, she should not have stayed. She
knew that just as well as anyone could tell her. Her
father would be very angry if he ever knew, but he
probably never would, for the Tregurthas could always
be managed. It would be fun to stay here with this
Irishman, all the more so because she had felt more than
a little reckless since she had heard about the Startt &
Powis collapse, and realized all it meant to her.
Then, at, say about eight at latest, they would take
the road through the moonlight and pause a moment
on the pine-ridge and break the quick silver of the
shallows with their horses’ feet, and feel the little
yellow wind-blown blossom on their shoulders as they
rode under the sandalwoods, and hear the tlot-tlot of
the hacks’ pacings on the hard red road that went
by Barker’s deserted hut, where Tom Tregurtha
declared a ghost had been seen by a drover who was
perfectly sober at the time, and had remained so, out
of fright, ever since. So ghosts really did do good
sometimes ! They might be called in to the aid of the
Prohibitionist movement if the advocates of water-
drinking knew this.
“Take off your hat in my room,” said Liam, ‘T


don’t think you’ll find any hairpins. I hope not —it
might be after giving the place a bad name, but there’s
green-hide strips if you want to tie up your bonnie
brown hair. I’ll see what’s in the cupboard. ” He came
to the living-room presently with a tray, upon which
was an assortment of pickles, very verdigris-green in
very yellow vinegar ; half a tin of plum jam ; a crock
of butter; hunk of cheese, mouldy, but, he assured
her, toothsome ; a bottle of lime-juice, and a damper,
crisply brown, with the ashes still clinging to it.
“The bread wouldn’t set, so had to make damper this
week, but there’s Johnny cakes!’’
Something rustling in the room beyond was explained
to her as the State orphan who was “too dead scared”
to sit down with a lady. Liam, waving a huge blue
enamel teapot in one hand, was presently talking
eloquently on the “rearing of pigs” having forgotten
where the tea caddy was, but finally the scrappy but
cheerful meal was disposed of, and the unseen orphan
told to do the washing-up in the kitchen, connected
with the house by a bark-roofed passage-way. Presently,
a clatter of crockery with an occasional crash proved
him to be doing the work thoroughly according to his
lights, and Liam and Synfye sat on in the dusk that
flowed into the room now like a dark river filled with
ripples of the outside world, yet enclosing them in a
secure privacy which not even Mack’s singing tunelessly
of the “Border Ballad” could spoil.
“A’ the blue bonnets are over the border,” drawled
an execrably out-of-tune, became in after years to
be associated with moments of great tranquillity and
content to Synfye ; the smell of hot water and yellow
soap, the faint breath of pig, and occasional gruntings
and squealing from the farm quarters, the crowing of a


cockerel who was either showing oil or mistook the
great red globe of the rising moon for day. There was
no light in the room now. Their faces and hands
glimmered faintly like lilies in obscurity. Now and
then they spoke fragments of words meaning little.
“How red the moon is to-night.”
“Horizon dust, isn’t it ? Did you know it rose at
the rate of a thousand miles an hour near the sky
rim ?”
“No : I don’t think I did —how much you can teach
me. . . .” A muffled laugh.
“It is like an apple out of the garden of God.”
“But God doesn’t grow apples to make dissension
in Eden. If there had never been an apple, now' —”
“Perhaps I wouldn’t be sitting here in the dark
with you.”
“Apple of discord. Didn’t Paris throw an apple of
gold to the most beautiful woman ? Let me be after
looking round, I might find a golden apple somewhere.”
“In the pigsty ?” Perhaps Synfye’s laugh was one
of the most alluring things about her.
If she laughed again like that, all witch-like in the
dark, he would surely kiss her.
Well, if he did ? She was a woman now, able to take
care of herself as that most idiotic of all sententious
sayings goes, and he . . . why if pigs paid ... he
might be in a position to make a permanent home next
year, and a permanent home meant, naturally, a
woman in it. And it was sure natural enough for young
things sitting in the dark to be after kissing one another,
now wasn’t it ? ”
Dare he put that proposition before Synfye, or had
he not better kiss her without asking ? Usually the
best, surest wav . . .


Besides, didn’t he remember something about a
man asleep in the sun of a Sunday morning and the
glimpse of blue frock through waking eyes ?
He had never quite got to the bottom of that little
episode. For a moment, the sight of the moon clearing
the trees at last held them spellbound, so great, so
silver-bright, a platter of heaven where one might be
served ambrosia of the gods.
What did it matter about Mrs. Tregurtha’s roast and
boiled now, or poor old Tom slip-slopping from veranda
to dining-table with puckered lips and frowning brows,
mosquitoes following him in a blood-thirsty cloud ?
He couldn’t walk with his patent mosquito bags over
his ankles —had to be a fixture in a chair for that.
It was very selfish of Synfye.
Something seemed to be throbbing in the room-—an
echo of old music ? The beat of that drum of warning
which is in young blood, handed down from one gener-
ation to another—warning, or calling ?
Which ? Nature, who cares naught for the individual
but all for the race, would call it the drum that
summons to the fulfilling of the greater end, and civilized
prudery would call it warning.
These two in the shadows had no name for it, only
it was a something that lured to the Holy Grail,
shining like a light in the black heart of a forest.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN
The shadows on the waving grass were soft as feather plumes,
And by the honeysuckle hedge one guessed a thousand blooms,
As God looked through the Paschal moon into the earth's wide
rooms.
As slowly I came up the hill and looked from east to west,
I felt, God looking at the world, saw only what was best;
'Tis thus He takes our holiest thoughts—forgiving all the rest.
“Easter Moon"
They drew rein, as Synfye had intended, at the top
of the sandy rise where the pine-trees grew. They
were silent, taking deep breaths of the resin-scented
air.
Before them the gum trees billowed and the sound
of the wind in them was a great sea.
To Synfye, it seemed that not only the moon, but
some wonderful and silver budding of the heavens,
had swiftly burst into full flower.
Every pulse of her body beat to a new rhythm,
great spaces of delicate untranslatable mystery were
these billowing gum boughs ; the light wind seemed to
bring news from a great distance, news that she knew
was of a marvellous thing, yet whose import she could
not entirely gather, only she knew she was more truly
alive than she had ever been; and, over all, the influence
of the radiant flower of light whose petals were the
rays that stole in and out of the perfumed blackness
of close foliage and tightly packed bole. Her whole
frame was as a violin to be played upon by fingers
whose touch was becoming a sweet compelling necessity.
The gum forest was quiet as primeval night when great


beasts were not yet alert to kill, to trail, to love. Here
a little track was like a thread of silver blown down a
darkness of timber ; as though some silken shuttle
was unwound in a magic maze, and she and Liam were
bidden to follow to find. . . .
Find what ? Her senses were tuned strings ; the night
seemed now a scented wave which might close over her
head. Only their own and the breathing of the horses,
the occasional light clink of a buckle or creak of
leather . . . Synfye and Liam . . . why, they might ride
together over the rim of the world to-night, shoot down
like stars themselves, in the amazing purple planet-
blazing night, over the rim of things, to make the great
Discovery, Death, that was perhaps only a larger life ?
Such a solution of all problems . . . and she was
so young . . . and so was Liam.
Irresistibly she laughed.
“What would become of the pigs ?” she murmured
under her breath. He turned quickly, his voice was
uneven, husky, he seemed a little out of breath like a
man who has been running.
"Wht did you say. I did not hear ?”
She shook her head. “I forget—” She was silent
again, looking out to the trees beyond trees, and a
faint skein of cloud. The moon was like a shining fruit
hung on the blue bough of the tree of God. No longer
only a flower ; it had come to fruition while they waited.
When Liam looked at her his eyes seemed violet, there
was a shadow on his lips.
His lips. . . . Was love itself a flower of the moon-
light, to die always in the practical hard gold of noon ?
The night was vast and cruel, yet how beautiful—
and beauty made one lonely, made one ache for the
clasp of a hand, the strong enfolding of a lover’s arms.


She was so young . . . where was that secret store
of experience she could never have experienced, from
which she drew these strange anticipations, tremors
memories ?
What was Liam feeling ? He sat now like a soldier,
erect in his saddle, staring at the vast shadowy wood-
lands as though suspecting an ambush, or waiting
an open foe
In the gloomy lairs of the deeper growths there would
be little soft birds in their nests, or asleep, head under
wing, on some shadowy branch : there would be slinking
dingo going to bloody work ; kangaroo intent on the
feeding grounds, small creatures of hair and fur, sly-
foot, hungry, lusting owners of the sparsely settled
bush at night when men and dogs were not abroad —
her imagination was like a winged thing itself, beating
out beyond the trees, beyond the hills, down to where
the waters creamed under the dusky blue of Sydney
Harbour at night.
No! No! She was all virgin lover again—she wanted
this to be her first experience, she wanted to be all
maid-heart now if ever, keeping the door shut—for
that other hand upon the key.
Not active memory, only dreaming, and hope, and
Liam. The moonshine spun faint silvern tissues on
the topmost leaves of the highest branches; it spilt
a silver gleaming rain down the trunks, and little
spidery twigs. Tree and shrub appeared to have
personality, to speak to them in poesy, warnings, calls,
stimulations, treacheries perhaps.
She did not quite know what she wanted to say to
Liam, nor what she wished Liam to say to her, but she
knew acutely that if it were not said she would ride
on to-night feeling a sense of loss, or rather, a sense of


having missed something she was entitled to, and
certainly most ardently desired to be made acquainted
with.
Perhaps the moonlight made her a little mad. Once,
when staying a night near Parramatta, she had
awakened to hear screams, and someone had said the
poor souls at Gladesville always screamed on nights of
full moon : perhaps it had been an old wives’ tale,
perhaps truth. Moonlight certainly at least unbalanced
Synfye Jackson, so she concluded.
Well, then, there was nothing to do but laugh and
ride on, ride into the shadow of the trees once more,
—the road farther on ran under boughs that met over-
head, lightwood trees, some of them, branches springing
low down brushing one’s shoulders where the cattle
had cropped them as far as they could reach.
“You are lovely in the moonlight,” said Liam.
“I am mad, perfectly insane,” said Synfye sharply,
"not fit to be trusted out, in fact.”
They were riding down from the sandy ridge now;
she made her hack amble. Liam's questioning followed
her : his horse merely walked.
“Why are you mad ?”
“I don’t know.” She turned in the saddle, looked
back at him, flicking her horse’s shoulder with her
switch. "Did I ever tell you that when I was a little
girl I was always trying experiments, getting hurt over
it ? Once I was badly burned trying conclusions with
flame and kerosene oil."
“Well, what has that to do, I'd like to know, with
madness and moonshine ?”
"Only that—that I think I’m still —trying experi-
ments —so still in danger of burning—more than my
fingers.”


"As long as you don’t burn your boats, and like a
good general have your line of retreat ready, I don’t
see that this matters so much. But still, I am not after
seeing your logic.”
“How could an Irishman ever see, handle, or taste,
logic ?” she said witheringly,” and, after all, lunacy
and luna do go together, don’t they ? Luna and her
orphaned stars.”
He did not know the quotation, so he smiled. His
hand was steady on the rein now, his voice controlled.
Perhaps he had been thinking of nothing more exciting
than the prices of pork and the weight of his bacon,
up there in the cool wildness of the sighing pines. She
felt chilled, cross.
"I suppose you are far too practical nowadays to
ever feel silly about anything?”
“And in faith it’s wrong ye are there !” The Dublin
accent slurred his speech as it always did in emotion,
his eyes were like stars in the dusk of the meeting
boughs.
“Would it be silly ye’d be thinking me if ye knew what
I was ponderin’ up there in the pines ?”
“No, but I’d like to know,” softly. Their horses’
shoulders touched, she felt Liam’s hand warm over
hers.
“It’s to kiss you I was minded, alannah, and without
a by-your-leave.”
“Would that have been so silly ?” murmured Synfye.
As they rode up to Tregurtha’s slip-rail they could
see the oblong of light in the Tregurthas’ front room
crossed and recrossed by a tall agitated figure.
“Looks as though I was going to get a lecture this
time,” said Synfye, for Tom Tregurtha had evidently
discarded his mosquito protectors and quite forgotten


his own discomfort in his anxieties over the non-appear-
ance of his guest.
“It’s too bad of me, ’ ’ said Synfye guiltily. ‘ ‘Perhaps
you had better go back from here : it would be a pity
to spoil our evening by the memory of a great old
bust-up at the finish,wouldn’t it ?”
Liam nodded. “But perhaps I had better come in ;
I may help to make the peace.”
“No, you know very well you shouldn’t have come
so far . . . you’ll never be up in time to feed the pigs
in the morning. Shoo, go away now. Besides, I can
assure you I’d have Mrs. Tregurtha scolding me as
well as Tom, for riding by moonlight with a personable
young man. Do go now, you’ll just spoil everything
if you’re in at the undesirable finish.”
He rode away ; she could hear him whistling softly
and then that he put his horse to a canter. He must
hurry back to bed or he wouldn’t be fit for the day's
work. That pig-net, now . . . had he finished it ?
She couldn’t remember. After all, she wasn’t really
afraid of old Tom Tregurtha. He would draw his
brows down but would be so glad to see her safe and
sound that he would soon forgive her. And Mrs.
Tregurtha would have a good deal to say about the
spoiled dinner and Synfye’s irrepressible gadding
ways, but she would be coaxed back into smiles, even
if Synfye had to eat a purple cake to pacify her.
She rode up to the verandah rail and hailed Tom
heartily. He stood in the doorway staring at her.
“Hush,” he said.
"Why, dear,” chirped Synfye, “surely there’s no
one dead in the house ?” And even as she spoke a cold
shudder ran down her spine and her limbs shook as
she slid down from the saddle. Surely in the warm


moon-whiteness above the sound of those far-off dulling
hoof-beats something laughed, high, evil, mocking ?
Tom Tregurtha had come to the edge of the verandah.
She could not see his face for the strong light from the
globeless lamp behind him, but something in his whole
body seemed to sag, his upraised hand trembled as
with a palsy. And from the inner room she could hear
someone sobbing, sobbing . . . slow, tired sobs, as
though they had been going on for a long, long time,
and might go on for hours, dreadful hours.
“Not in this house,” said Tom Tregurtha, and when
she came closer she could see that he, too, was crying,
noiselessly, terribly.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Then went she through the gate upon whose bolt
Drifts ever the grey dust that means decay.
And where dust is the food of those who died
.... In the dark they sit
And never see the mellow light of day
Dropt, like a golden fruit, through crevices.
“The Gates of Aralu’’
“I must go to mother.” Mother, the fairy, the devourer
of sentimental novels, the woman she had never
quite understood, and yet felt she should in some way
protect from trouble—trouble she would herself
probably cause her. Mother—and father.
It had become almost impossible to separate their
lives even in thought, more so since the day she had
unwittingly surprised unseen their little love episode.
Perhaps it had seemed a trifle silly to her then, romantic
passion of middle age.
Now it was the very voice of grief made animate in
that lonely figure—mother—in widow's weeds. And
it had happened all in a minute. The White Witches ;
the fateful White Witches. Stuart had gone out with
his axe to make an end to that rocking tree the white
ants had riddled, and Maeve had said she would go
with him, Synfye being away, to “make a picnic of it.”
“A picnic.” It was the anniversary of his birthday.
A picnic.
He was too good a bushman to get in the way of a
falling tree, but he had called out to Maeve to move
further to the left. She was setting out the luncheon


things ; the billy was boiling ; she was measuring the
tea in the palm of her hand.
The tree crashed, and they were both clear of the
fall, but who could have believed that in crashing a
bough should strike a chip from the bole, and that
chip, flying up, hit a man on the temple with such force
that it would kill him !
What a tiny aperture let life out! A bullet was a wee
thing ... a few grains of poison, and a life that had
passed through great rushing log-ridden rivers—escaped
from leaping flame, from germs of foul disease, from all
accidents of flood and field, from the congested traffic
of busy streets, hung on the edge of Death’s precipice
many a time, and laughed to draw back safe and sound
to the secure paths, gone like a puff of smoke, a breath
upon the glass.
Stuart Jackson of all men- —why, he was such a good-
looking, virile man even at his age, and that was not
very great measured by the average years of a healthy
man.
It could not be possible ; and Jimmy the tailor had
brought the news through : How queer—Jimmy,
who owned a shop in the city now come up to the bush
for the holiday, driving a buckboard with a flash
pair of black horses ; Jimmy who had found a distraught
woman wandering in the bush, and had gone for help ;
Jimmy who now on the lean chestnut with the white
blaze, the fastest and most evil-tempered horse on
the place, was riding hell-for-leather to the township
for the Sergeant and the doctor, only to get the latter
to certify that life was extinct when everyone knew it
had been so for hours.
Father, on trestles in a rough coffin in the dining-
room. Father with bush blossoms about him and his


long brown hands so queerly dark beside the blanched
face from which every drop of blood had been drawn,
on which every relaxed line was smoothed away.
Mother, moaning in the room beyond—always moan-
ing—moaning like those doves in the Sydney gardens.
This was what Synfye found after her strange and
terrible galloping by Tom Tregurtha’s side through
the black and silver night, which was white as a skull
now, and black as death. The shadows on the ground
were as dusky fingers stroking a dying face.
That this thing could be, had been, while she joked
with Liam M’Pheris and heard him play his flute in
the love-songs of Ireland !
Life a red pulsing flower, and the author of that life
among the fallen timber, among the not-yet faded
leaves. A chip—a few inches of wood. Death’s instru-
ment. Mother with her hands all scarred, her dress
torn, no hat on her bright greying hair, wandering
amongst the young saplings, crying, crying.
Jimmy the tailor, not so fat and yet no more grizzled,
taking her home, trying to soothe her, then giving her
over to the waiting black gins ; Mother lying face
downward on her bed, always moaning.
What was Synfye to do ? The doctor would be here :
the Sergeant. Men would come with spades to bury
father. Put earth on his face where the tiny creases
laughter made were all erased from about his kind
eyes.
Father. . . . Mother’s husband. Mother, widowed,
moaning, moaning, her face in wet pillows. Everything
but this was purged away: she felt clean-washed with
grief. Other things could not hurt now while father lay
there sphinx-like, and mother’s grief was a thing so
dreadfully alive.


Would they read a service over father ? Would a
clergyman appear miraculously from somewhere among
the whispering gum trees ? How the trees did whisper
in this cold dawn! Before dawn how chill and grey
it was, but there were golden handmaids at the door of
day ; the crests of the trees took on a beautiful water-
lily-blue, a hint of warm rose, the little glades were dim
lawns where birds woke but slowly; the outlines of
the world seemed unreal, blurred, sleepily heavy from
the embrace of that black and silver night; vague
pipings, whistling, a growing stream of bird-song
flowing towards her: there was a choir of feathered
sprites now in a chapel of leaves lit by the rising sun.
Material things dissolved, re-formed, sky-flame and
shadowy amethystine vapours ; the bushes, the grasses,
would begin their sunbaths, their drawing of life for
themselves out of air and moisture; the very leaves
breathed in nourishment. A tissue cloak of spun gold
fell on the open grassy spaces, branches seemed virilely
upthrust to the light. In the reservoir, the blue lilies
Stuart had said were identical with the lotus of Algiers
would be wide, filled to the lips with morning; there
would be shoals of little smoke-coloured fish darting
from gloomy corners into the yellow pools. Mullet, a
silver arrow-head piercing the brownish gold of the
water, would leap—now that water would be trans-
formed to green-bronze, cloven by a swimming water-
rat.
Father had bathed here ; mother-naked, his strong
limbs cleaving the weed-rank tides, shaking the water
from his dark hair, she had watched him, sitting like a
fat Buddha herself on the edge of the bank, waiting
for her own dip. Afterwards, when she grew big, they
had both donned some kind of bathing suit and gone


in together. He had taught her to swim and dive and
float on her back, staring unblinking at the morning
blue of summer skies.
There were so many things he had taught her :
To ride, to shoot straight, not to lie.
Not to lie. Ah, one lesson had not been thoroughly
learned! She was a humble thing in the presence of
Death, by the cold body of the man who had ridden
well, shot straight, kept his word.
Mother was not moaning now ; exhausted, she slept
at last; she looked very frail, and suddenly grown old ;
her mouth sagged; occasionally in her sleep a little
jerking sob caught her breath.
Mother would never get over it. Synfye clutched her
hands across her heaving breast. As in a vision she
seemed to see those two reunited, somewhere, somehow,
and herself alone, alone.
She, the flower of their mating, rooted here still,
Life to be lived alone.
A thought of Reg was swiftly thrust aside —she
couldn’t bear any more, just now.
Her mouth twisted, she felt for a moment as though
one side of her face was paralysed, would remain like
this always, in a horrid grimace.
Then she pulled herself sharply together; the sun
was high now. How long had she been standing by the
window ? She could hear sounds of everyday life, the
chink of crockery in the kitchen, the smell of burnt
toast. Poor Sally always burned the toast.
A kettle was hissing on to the oven, boiling over.
Someone was riding up to the station; voices of men,
bark of dogs. She did not now how much time elapsed
before Jimmy the tailor, smelling of sweat and a little
of rum and saddle-leather, stood beside her.


"The doctor’s here. Miss Jackson, and the burying
gang. They are trying to catch the Scotch minister
as he goes by the lower road on his way from christen-
ing Bates’s baby. They think it won’t live the night ;
don’t want it to snuff out unbaptised.”
So, other people were dying—it was not only in
Jackson’s home. She remembered Bates’s baby—
a sickly child with a wobbly head, too big. Someone
had said—she believed it was her father —that it was a
pity it had survived.
Apparently it was not going to. It would be a
frightful thing if babies with senile faces and wobbly
heads lived while Stuart Jackson lay cold and stiff
on trestles.
Where had they got the trestles ? Funny; she
couldn’t remember any about the place.
Yes —in the harness room there had been one in use
for saddle repairing.
Then the carpenter’s bench at which Stuart had
loved to work ; he had lately installed a turning-
lathe.
People touched things intimately every day, not
knowing now soon they would be part of their panoply
of death. She might have her hand on something now
that would be utilized in the disposal of her dead body.
We think we keep Death at bay with nostrums,
magical remedies and precautions, and he is grinning,
sneering up at us from our most everyday belongings.
That silk nightdress Mrs. Arnold had sent by post
yesterday, it might be Synfye's shroud.
Pity to waste it in the dull old earth ! All lacy and
ribboned for a lover’s fingers, fondling the dear flesh
beneath.
Father, now —had he loved mother as bridegrooms


love, burningly—adoringly ? Bridegrooms' love,
which old people tell us does not last. How dark every-
thing was, and it only mid-morning-—how dark! She
was very cold, too ; was this death ?
Soft blackness, welcome, enclosing her, an arm
suddenly about her.
A coming back ; her heart like a little leaf buffeted
in a high wind. How hateful to come back to things
that hurt! Someone was pricking her arm with a needle,
too; painful this ; irritating, uncalled for.
Then a stranger’s voice.
“Hasn’t eaten, I suppose. Here, someone, make a
cup of tea- —strong, yes, better than whisky for her;
lift her feet, keep her head down. That’s right, she’ll
be round in a minute; overstrain, shock, that’s all.
Bates’s baby ?—Oh, yes. It died at dawn; they can
hardly regret that.”
She supposed the doctor was talking, only he would
have courage to say that about Bates’s adored baby.
Water on her face, someone rubbing her wrists,
the stranger’s voice again :
“She’s all right now. Where’s that tea ?”
She could smell the tea, hot, hateful —it made her
feel sick, the very thought of it. All right now ; with
father on those trestles, and mother moaning again,
worse than the monotony of lonely crooning doves—
dreadful, in the next room.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN
This is the thing I could not grasp: that you
Who were so vital and so masterful.
Could let them put you in a quiet place
Beneath a cross, where others lie asleep. . . .
I know ... I never could believe that you were dead.
•—“lf You Were Dead”
Sleep in her fingers holds the greatest gift,
Sleep is so kind—when all the world is hard;
About her yellow head the moon clouds drift,
And on her hand there burns a ring of sard.
“The Gifts of Sleep’’
Synfye, looking so slim in her black muslin frock with
the little Puritan collar and cuffs, made Liam feel
awkward, all hands and feet, as she came into the room
and he stood up to greet her.
A week now since they had buried Stuart Jackson
under the swamp gums by the bathing pool. Maeve
had chosen the spot; she would not be denied. Some-
times she arose with stubborn determination to have
things done her own way, but for the most part she
sat idle in the shadow of the verandah doing nothing,
only endlessly watching the road by which Stuart
had been wont to come home at night.
The doctor had advised Synfye to get her away as
soon as possible.
“It is always wise to change your backgrounds fora
time after grief or shock; it is wonderful what healing
it works.”
Synfye had agreed and entirely disbelieved him.
Here was a tree rotting up from the roots; no back-
ground could change that.


That her mother was dying by inches she was quite
convinced, though there might be no actual organic
reason to give basis to that conviction. She was dying,
assuredly, as a Malay dies when he makes up his mind
his hour has come, as the Solomon Islander sits down
and lets his perfectly sound body pass to swift dissolu-
tion at a mere mental suggestion.
Synfye talked to her and cooked little dainty dishes
for her, and insisted on a glass of milk laced with brandy,
and when she gave it to her she felt as though she was
already pressing food upon a corpse, or as the Egyptians
placed roast duck and the fruits of the earth in the
darkness of tombs for the sustenance of the hungry
spirit, only that the Egyptians had faith in this matter
and Synfye had none.
Perhaps she was going mad herself: perhaps she had,
as the doctor had said, not yet recovered from the
shock of the thing Tom Tregurtha had told her, and
the fatigue of the wild galloping through the cruel love-
liness of that broken dream of moon and star. She felt
curiously tired always, her hands too heavy to lift,
her feet too heavy to drag after her, but she kept
going. She must do all she could for Maeve, while
Maeve tarried, but already she seemed to hear the rust-
ling of the growing wings of her flight!
Yes, of course, she agreed with the doctor, she
would persuade her mother to go to Sydney, Mrs.
Arnold would take them in, gladly. The background
would be entirely changed. Quite sensible, yes.
Remarkably sensible girl, but what curious eyes—
seem to be always staring at something behind a man's
head, her own head slightly bent to one side as though
she listened always for a thing beyond the words
of the speaker . . . not quite normal perhaps after


the fright she had had—very united family. Mother
looked a little like T. 8., but nothing discoverable . . .
sounded her heart and lungs—both working, if a trifle
enfeebled; well, she was not a very young woman and
had apparently been much attached to her husband ;
sad case. Why were people not more careful chopping
down timber ?
Why chop timber at all—didn’t he employ labour ?
The doctor was only a scientist, not a bushman.
Synfye left her mother very little, but she had been
called away from her now because Liam had ridden
over to know if there was anything he could do for
Mrs. Jackson and Synfye. His blue eyes were wet,
his bow-shaped mouth trembled. He felt clumsy and
self-conscious, sympathetic to tears.
And Synfye would only talk about the pigs. She did
not seem to be able to bear to speak of her father.
She went cold as marble and became extraordinarily
aloof when one mentioned Stuart.
His emotional temperament expected tears, the
pleasant task of taking her in his arms, permissible
with all this trouble, and petting her gently.
She was so rigid, so stern, he could scarcely credit her
with being the girl who had burned and palpitated on
that sandy crest in a night that was heavy with the
scent of pines.
He rode away, having refused an invitation to lunch,
discomfited. He could not realize that part of Synfye’s
nature was atrophied just now.
After nights of watching and waiting upon her
mother, who never appeared to sleep now, nights when
she seemed to grow to know the position of every star
in the sky, and the trees about the homestead took
on new characteristics viewed at all hours of pearly


dawn, still midnight and early dusk. Synfye did not
wake one morning. She had gone to bed in the small
hours like something drugged, had fallen into her
sheets as though she slipped from great heights to
oblivion ; Nature meant to have its way with this
child of hers, and when Sally looked in it was nine
o'clock, and she could hear the even breathing of the
girl, who had not stirred from her position since she
toppled into bed. Maeve, brighter and more active,
had warned Sally against waking her daughter. “Let
her sleep all day if she can," she had said, and then
taken up her seat on the verandah again, watching the
road. Sally had prepared the milk and spilt the brandy,
and placed the glass with a plate of biscuits on the
little red milking-stool Synfye had painted, beside
her, and had gone back to the kitchen.
Synfye slept on. Sally pulled the blinds, for the sun
was hot on that side of the house, drawing the aroma
of gum from the planed wood. Flies buzzed drowsily.
Synfye slept. Maeve watched the road.
Noon, and a bird hovering in the unclouded blue.
Sally yawning over some potato peeling, a man
whistling as he mended a bridle rein in the harness-
room, mounting his horse at the gate, riding out to
see how things were going without a master on the
run, a crow cawing somewhere, a sultry, tranquil
day.
Presently the chair in the verandah was empty;
hatless, in the blazing sun, Maeve had gone quietly
down the steps and out, skirting the house in the
direction of where Stuart lay by the green waters
where the blue lilies were.
Synfye slept on : once she turned, murmured a
little, threw one arm clear of the bedclothes, her hair


damp, her cheeks flushed. Sally, glancing in, was struck
with her beauty, her helpless child-like look as she lay
there. She set the potatoes to boil and ate some treacle
out of a tin with a tablespoon.
The mailman would be here later. He might have
some news to break the boring monotony of a house
of mourning after the corpse has been put away and
the pleasurable excitements are over.
Maeve, a dapple of light and shadow on her face and
her ruffled hair, was looking down into the green waters
where the little quivering shoals of fish came and went
and where water-spiders skated. She had not gone
near her husband’s grave, she was staring at the water.
. She knew, of course, that Stuart would presently
come swimming to her, brown and bare like a bronze
figure of Mercury: naked as a god, wonderful as a
lover.
Stuart would come, of course, and she would go to
meet him. He would shake the gleaming drops from
his hair, call; “Hello old girl, come for a dip. It’s a
gorgeous to-day; slip off your things behind the hop
bush, there’s no one about—oh, well, keep one garment
if you want to feel decent about it, though you are
pretty enough in nothing for the trees and birds to see
without criticising.’’ And she would feel the water
folding about her heated body and Stuart’s hand on
hers : perhaps he would kiss her with wet lips, just
where that sulphur-heated blue lily floated : the one
with the canary-coloured moth drifting above it.
How very beautiful the pool was to-day ! A crane
fished from a blackened log. Stuart hated people to
shoot these cranes ; he was always quarrelling about it
with the bank clerks who rode out from the township
and thought they were men, full of bush-lore they had


gleaned in American novels. Stuart wasn’t a patient
man ; he took what he wanted and he would be master
in his own house.
But he had loved her. She remembered so vividly
to-day the night when he had found her in the rain
and wind and tears, where the White Witches in a
circle sat. She remembered how he had sat her on a
horse ; how curtly he had told her to take off her soaked
clothing; how he had suggested her marrying him.
‘‘l am as good a judge of a woman as of a horse.”
She remembered, very dimly, Armand who had so
entirely ceased to matter in the end : Stuart had opened
the gates of joy to her that night that Synfye had been
born ; Synfye who seemed something of an experiment
in a marriage like theirs. Though she could recall, as
figures in action are said to be photographed upon
the retina of the eye by a lightning flash or upon a
darkened window pane, every incident of her initial
meeting with Stuart at White Witches, she could
now remember nothing of their parting there. From
the moment she had looked up to meet his eyes and
hear him say “Move a little to the left, darling,”
she found her recollection ceased. He did not often call
her “darling”. She was glad now he had used what
had always seemed to him rather an extravagant
term for daily use to one’s wife, for the last time
she heard his earthly voice. She had no memory of
the still figure on the trestles, nor the dead face behind"
the panel of wood and the clots of earth falling, a sound
that was to re-echo in Maeve%dsfain for many a day.
She could hear him still—“ Move a little to the left
darling--” followed by a deafness, a blindness.
She did not even remember Jimmy the tailor and that
hideous journey through the bush when the trees


seemed to rush at her—-menacing, striking her, murder-
ous in their thick fusing in her path.
Her days were haunted dreams ; her night a dream
more acutely haunted than her days, that was all.
She often made a brushing motion with her left hand
in the palm of her right, believing that the dry tea
leaves she had been just going to drop into the bubb'ing
water were still there. They seemed all a part of the
finale to the chapter whose colophon was “Move a
little to the left, darling.”
Yet, quite clearly she could mentally retrace her
steps on the night of Synfye’s birth ; how she had
wandered, hungry of heart, to the White Witches ;
how she had dozed there on the warm earth ; how
Stuart had come to find her. He had taken her home,
fondling her, whispering words of love such as she had
not believed possible to hear issue from his close-kept
lips. The tenderness ; the sudden jagged agony of
child-bearing ; the dimness ; the little house “they
built to be so gay in” ; the swift importance of herself,
Maeve Jackson, seeming the one person in the Universe,
the kindly wrinkled old bush woman who wondered
over the lusty babe she had helped to usher into life.
Synfye, gipsy child with the black hair and storm-
dark eyes ; Synfye who seemed almost a changeling
child. “White Witches” child, as she later christened
herself. She wondered even now if she had ever quite
understood Synfye. Synfye and White Witches,
White Witches where she had last heard Stuart
speak. . . .
What had White Witches done to her ? Brought
herself and Stuart together. Yes . . . that was good,
but something else —some price they had made her
pay for her happiness ? Something the trees with eerie


cries and creakings and crashing to a fall had exacted
for her halcyon years ?
Perhaps Synfye could explain things, but Synfye
might be cross with her for coming out here all lone,
she had kept such watch and ward over her lately—■
those glasses of milk and brandy, how she loathed
them ! Who wanted to be strong and well if one was
to be always parted from Stuart like this ? It seemed,
when Synfye urged her to eat and drink, she never was
able to say “If you do this and that you will be able
to find father again”. Synfye never promised that,
she merely said it was “wise” to take nourishment.
Synfye, who seemed so much older and wiser than her
mother nowadays.
Maeve did not want to be old, nor wise. She only
wanted Stuart. She wanted him so terribly she might
go half-way into the pool to meet him since he was so
long in coming to-day. She began to unfasten the neck
of her frock.
Synfye slept less heavily now, but st'll the weary
lids refused to lift from the aching eyes. Nature
cried: “Not yet enough: I must have my child sane
and sound!”
Jangled nerves craved the narcotic of this rest;
the body refused to be driven any more. Sleep, divine
sleep ; this was Nature prescibing and Dame Nature
would have no refusals of her prescription to-day.
The afternoon shadows grew long. Sally, with flies
buzzing about her head slept, too, in her little scullery.
Since Missus had apparently gone for a walk and the
mailman had not arrived and Sally felt a bit liverish
after all that treacle, she might as well have a nap.
Her nap lengethened, snoringly, and Synfye’s quiet
slumber continued.


It was growing dark in the room. Synfye opened her
eyes. She reached out her hand for the little wristlet
watch Mrs. Arnold had given her, and looked at it.
It had stopped at three o’clock. It must be later than
that. Yet surely she couldn’t have slept all those hours
away! She set her bare feet on the warm pine floor,
dragged a silk kimono from a peg, yawned and tossed
back her thick dark curls. Whatever had mother been
doing all this time ? But despite the recollection of grief,
how much more fit and "real” somehow she felt after
that sleep. She did hope everything was all right.
“Mother!” she called brightly.
The mailman rode up to the gate, hailing the house-
hold in the subued coo-ee he thought merely a matter
of good form under the circumstances, while he
composed his always cheerful countenance into an
expression befitting the pitch of the coo-ee.


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
A woman by a lattice, where the light hangs like a star
Hugging ’neath her shift of muslin, where the heavy bosoms sag.
Grooved with amulet and token, some once-cherished doll of rag.
“Dolls’'
Love, I can tread the white moon rays to you;
Love, I can make a pathway of the stars.
And bear you to the furthest rim of blue.
“Sleep’
People who live too much alone sometimes take
antipathies to certain inanimate things, feeling almost
as though they became personal enemies.
There was a tap that dripped in Olga Arnold’s bath-
room, the cause of much discussion between herself
and the plumber. The plumber did not mind the
discussion because he was paid by the householder
for his time. It was an obstinate tap and rarely behaved
itself for more than two days after the plumber’s
argumentative visit. It was also a remunerative tap
as far as the man was concerned, and a cause of hateful
irritation to Olga. She seemed to hear it all over the
house at night, even with closed doors, when she could
hardly have done so in reality, because, like most North
Shore houses, hers was well and compactly built.
More than ever she withdrew into herself; her
friends found her distrait, easily offended. Yet she
was wise enough not to hide from that self the truth.
She was too much alone. Heart and brain consumed
with self-destroying fire. She wanted something of
her own to love, to absorb herself in ; and so, since
deep-down, self-preservation is a thing not to be entirely


crushed from our selfish consciousness while life remains,
despite genuine samples of self-immolation and lives
of altruism, she was glad there was no one but herself
ever to know her first thought when she recovered
from the shock of the telegram sent by someone whose
name she did not know, telling her of the double
tragedy that had left her dream-baby fatherless,
motherless.
All hers now, for the taking ... no one to dispute,
for surely it would be to her almost-fostermother
Synfye Jackson would turn in her black hour.
She forgot about the dripping tap whose ceaseless
drop-drop had made her want to scream many a time.
She forgot the things she had brooded over night
after night, turning restlessly on her point lace-edged
pillows.
Stuart Jackson and Maeve his wife were reunited,
somewhere beyond those gum trees, eternally whisper-
ing of hidden things, the splash of those bronze-
green waters in the haunted pool.
Synfye was at Tregurtha’s prostrated with the
tragedy upon tragedy; the finding of that quiet
floating body with its face like ivory uplifted from
amongst the jade of the lily pads, the blue and sulphur
of the faint muskily-scented lilies . . . blue lotus,
emblem of lasting life ... a face that smiled in death
like a young girl’s or a bride’s.
The mailman had a story to tell that blanched ruddy
cheeks and left wet eyes and trembling lips along his
route. And the whole district uprose and offered
sanctuary to the bereaved girl, but it was to Tom
Tregurtha and his broad-bosomed wife she fled:
rows of little purple cakes on the mantelpiece ; the
Tregurthas’ own bed with the suffocating ’possum


skin. Not too warm, though, for Synfye was cold, so
cold, frozen to the very heart of her.
How she cried ! The doctor said that was best.
Thin and shaken and white, her eyes burning like two
dark fires in her pale face. When Olga arrived at the
Tregurthas’, she hardly knew her dream babe.
Synfye fell in with her plans for her future : all she
wanted was to get away, and Tom Tregurtha had
promised to make arrangements to lease the property
and homestead —one of the Blicks up the river was
looking for a place- —it would suit him, and he would
see the grave by the pool, the grave that held two dear
ones now, was not neglected.
Synfye felt she never wanted to see her old home
again, yet it was almost inevitable that some day she
would come back.
Olga Arnold had the strength of ten younger women
as she made arrangements for the journey south ;
she was all tact and tenderness, and Synfye in a dul,
way appreciated this.
Liam M’Pheris, too, came offering help a second ti me
and she sat and stared at him as though he was someone
she had never even seen before.
It was a very discomforted young man who again
went back to his pigs and to play in the dusk on his
flute songs sweet and sad that expressed only too ful y
his innermost yearnings as well as his chagrin. For,
after all, he was a personable lad, and both Stuart
Jackson and Maeve his wife would have passed in
time and have left Synfye alone, if Synfye did not
marry. It was the common law: springing blade and
falling grass. The manner of their going had been
so terribly swift, that was all. Maeve’s sadder than
Stuart’s. And yet, he wondered, would Maeve hcAa


ever been anything but a bird with a broken wing,
dragging on in pain and dependence all the rest of her
widowed days ? After all, there was consolation in the
thought of those two bright spirits, free of the upper air,
disembodied but linked by the divine chain that even
death could not break.
Synfye would come to see this some day, as the man
with his flute trilling “Who is Sylvia” to the uninterested
pigs as he leaned over the enclosure and appraised
the weight of his prize sow (she was getting too fat
for breeding : he must see her diet was changed)
could actively realize it now.
For all the scoffers, love was a big factor, a thing of
life itself with some natures, the love of man and woman
passing all understanding.
Maeve Jackson’s love for her husband had grown
to be like this.
Maeve who, as she died, thought Stuart kissed her
again amongst the blue lilies, as he had kissed her that
night he found her under White Witches, the night
that Synfye was born! Surely the daughter of this
love must have her own deep well-springs to flow like
a gushing stream of the man of her choice ?
The man of her choice. Liam looked at the pigs and
played “Who is Sylvia . . . what is she?” Ah, what
was she to be ... to Liam ?
Synfye lay on her back along the seat of the reserved
railway carriage Mrs. Arnold had wired for, and stared
at the ceiling. There were water-waves of light on
the cream ground amongst the brown woodwork;
she did not seem to be thinking at all; she was too tired :
her brain had a grey fog in it, nothing was clear.
She turned a little on her side. She slept. And Olga
Arnold with a novel in her lap sat by a window and


watched the long yellow plains flit by, the patches of
purple indigo plant where there had been rain, making
the yellow plain faintly green, the shimmer of iron roofs
in the distance looking like water between the dark
foliage of orange trees, the hills transparently blue,
the endless wire fences, the black smoke, the coal dust-
grit blowing past the pane. Grieve as she must for the
girl’s grief, her secret heart had its little triumph
song, suppress it as she might. After all, she
had never been very attached to either Stuart or
Maeve.
For jealousy is cruel as the grave ... it never
really forgives.
She would not notice the dripping tap in her home
on Sydney Harbour any more ; she would be expansive,
friendly to the world, because here, asleep before her
gloating eyes, was her one ewe lamb.
We human beings have a curious argument that
more often than we will admit we apply to our own
destinies, and that is, that Fate works behind the cur-
tain in special ways for our individual benefit, rather
than for the benefit of the whole world of men. We
secretly believe we have a Deity in reserve, who keeps
an eye upon our lives and arranges that we shall be
protected and our wants catered for, oft-times at the
expense of the other fellow. Perhaps Olga Arnold,
without, of course, acknowledging it to her secret
Star-Chamber of judgement upon her own actions, really
believed that there was a dispensation of Providence
to fill the lack in her lonely life, when barriers—
(Stuart and Maeve being naturally the strongest barriers
between herself and her heart’s desire) had been thus
violently and unexpectedly removed. For there is no
end to the Vanity of Man : the hidden belief in our souls


that the world revolves about our ego, personal wants
and needs. .
God, working in mysterious ways His wonders to
perform, was good ; Synfye Jackson was hers, her
dream baby, her darling maid, her child in all but
blood. The failures of the past wiped out, to be for-
gotten —plans laid for her future, their united futures.
Perhaps some day, Lord send it distant, the Prince
Charming must come for Synfye as he came for other
girls, but even then she would arrange that Synfye’s
married life be near her own and she would play Fairy
Godmother till the end, till Synfye closed the lids of
her eyes on life for her.
The landscape fled past, windmills, grey patches
that were feeding sheep . . . cattle on the high road,
red and white, being driven to the butcher. Long shadow
of hills, small shadows of stunted trees, grey tors, ferns
on the banks of the cutting, the train mounting into
the ranges.
Synfye still asleep through the jolt and jar. Olga
Arnold with a novel in her lap, planning, planning.
An impish fate laughing in its sleeve at all vain and
foolish plotting which time and absence make as a
thing of naught.


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
They have laid their fingers upon the latch and smiled in each
other’s eyes.
And challenged a world that they left behind to burk them of
Paradise.
■ —‘ ‘ The Half-way House ’ ’
A woman like an apricot.
With black hair banded to her ears,
Where like hot dawn across a cloud
A red pomegranate flower appears.
"The Rebel”
Trees like shadows on the opaque whiteness of the
fog. Doves picking in newly-turned earth. Now the
grass began to show faintly green and there were sub-
dued whistlings and chirpings from unseen bird-life
beyond the blinding veil. A little wind stirred in the
native chestnut trees ; a cypress stood like a spire
somehow caught in mid-air having no earth-found-
ations ; a roof seemed to advance ; a pointed morion
in a battle of shades ; the pear-shaped leaves of a low-
growing bush were still weighed with moisture ; and
now the sun like a blurred reflection on glass suddenly
appeared in a heaven of swimming blue. A salvia
flared—a candle in a chapel dimmed with floating
incense ; the cannas were as yellow sponges soaked in
opal rains, and from the fresh-clipped hedge a brown
bird dived into a silver sea.
No matter how time pressed, nor how late she pro-
mised to be for breakfast in this little mountain home,
Synfye Jackson could never resist loitering to watch
the mist lift from the garden. The slow revelations of


the fog showing here a scarlet bloom, a yellow-rimmed
daisy, a glittering web all diamonded with damp as
though some careless fairy, hurrying to a secret wedding,
had lost her bridal veil in her haste. There was always
a fresh miracle for the girl in unexpected revealings-
waking itself to a new day was an adventure, for who
can say what a day may not bring forth, especially
when one is young and strong and a little reckless, as
a reaction from leaden griefs ? Youth’s resilience having
its way. .'. .
She pressed her soft bosom against the high window-
sill wreathed in copper-red Virginia creeper. She made a
glowing picture herself through those filaments of
moving mist shredding away from the golden face of
day. The cobwebby laces Mrs. Arnold bought for her
nightdresses left the arms bare to a shoulder, looped
with blue ribbons. Synfye’s lingerie had been the cause
of some discussion in the little town; it had for a time
cast doubts on her respectability, particularly as she
had come here alone, having swiftly and wilfully
escaped Olga’s clinging affections, and decided she
must have a little breathing space and belong to herself.
She had been wilful about many things, utterly spoiled
by this doting adopted mother: the nearly nine
months’ old tragedy that had robbed her of her parents
had leavened Olga’s passionate attachment with a
surface layer of pity; doubly deprived, she must
be doubly loved.
Lacking her father’s determined authority, Synfye
was a law unto herself, except on such occasions as
when the acute realization that she really had hurt
Mrs. Arnold’s feelings deeply, a quick repentenace
and a warm response to the older woman’s wishes
made her obedient until the swing of the pendulum


set in, with its automatic consequences. In a sense Olga
Arnold had herself to blame, and suffered as does all
poor humanity, refusing to believe the idol’s feet of
clay really there.
There had been a sharp battle ending in a decisive
victory for Synfye, over this question of the girl’s
retreat to the little country town, of which Sunfye
had heard from an artist friend who came here on a
walking tour when she was doing studies of gum trees
for her annual exhibition. Synfye had been talking of
her White Witches, her beautiful satin-boled gums
that “in a circle sat” with a rising nostalgia for the
places her childhood knew. Stuart Jackson’s old home
was leased to a reliable man, a bachelor, who held the
place in fee for Synfye. The lease brought her in a
modest sum; as Tom Tregurtha had advised it was
better to let for a little and have it well looked after
(and there wasn’t much profit for a man in the place,
anyway; Jackson had found that out) than to ask a
breaking price and have the holding deserted and pro-
bably some swaggie putting a fire-stick in the home-
stead in dry weather. Tom Tregurtha’s advice was
worth listening to. This was one of the rare occasions
when Synfye took advice.
So the months went by and the sorrow became less
sharp, though at times an agony of tears tore open the
wound in the child’s heart and a green world went grey;
but Synfye was too full of vitality ever to become
morbid, and she had other anxieties that made curious
antidote. Some things Stuart and Maeve had died
without knowing. To-day there seemed little care for
grief’s past or present about Synfye, watching the mists
unravel from the brown and scarlet, green and gold.
Below her window the natal grass, from a feathery


lightness, had become in the night a dull rose carpet
flattened down by the weight of the nacreous vapours.
Three sparrows, digging in freshly turned earth amongst
the madder off-shoots of a rose, had draggled plumage,
and the mystic veil about the olive-dark shrubbery
was filled to bursting with song, minor pipings, vague
rustlings, and bell-like calls.
“I’ll never be in time for breakfast,” said Synfye,
dragging a dull green and gold-dragoned silk robe
over her fine white lawn, and thrusting her feet into a
pair of heelless black and yellow Chinese slippers.
“Now for the bath.” Along a passage, shivery before
the sun was up, to the white enamelled bathroom, a
turned tap and a lit match and the hot water bubbling.
This spoiled darling of the gods must have her baths
hot nowadays. To lie like an ivory white urn one’s-
self in the white bath was to admire one’s shapeliness
for a moment and the pink toes looking up through the
greenish waters, and then to leap on the wooden mat
with a hurried lunge for a big bath towel while the
breakfast-gong went clamouring through the little
house perched like a pink and cream nest on the top
of the rise.
It was beautiful here to-day. No one to ask “Do
you love me !” No one with feelings to be hurt.
Beautiful to-day ; dull presently.
Synfye was alone in the aerie. Autumn months
were not the time when visitors came here. Midsummer
or Christmastide brought a few, but just now she had
the earth and its fullness to herself. Synfye was always
a great walker : she had been out all the previous
afternoon with a big stick she called her alpenstock,
climbing high and coming home with a sheaf of red and
yellow leaves touched by the fiery finger of Australian


May, and roots of moist clean earthy smelling maiden-
hair which she meant to take back to Olga’s garden.
This morning she began to wonder if it wouldn’t be
more pleasant to have a companion, preferably a
man, on these tours. To wish for a thing with Synfye
was half-way to the contriving at getting it, but she
could not see any open road by which a young man could
be obtained. So far she had only seen one and he rode
a motor-bicycle very fast, and she did not like the look
of his back.
Perhaps the midday train that stopped three miles
away on the lower spur might bring a wayfarer who
would be amusing without being too exigent.
From her window she could see its engine-smoke,
like a plume between the dark wooded hillls, a feather
of romance beckoning. She was content to have it
beckon from a distance yesterday; to-day she wondered
if the vanishing dream was sufficient. She was more in
the mood for the tangible : the answering laugh in a
male eye ; the pleasant skirmishing which led to
nothing. Synfye hated things that led to too-definite
goals. Some elfin thing in her heart refused bonds.
After breakfast she decided she wouldn’t have such a
strenuous day to-day. She would take a book and her
stick and wander along the leafy trails, the mossy
cul-de-sac, the stippled by-ways between the railway
station and the hostel. She wouldn’t meet anybody,
of course, but she would wear a becoming hat.
That russet-brown straw with the scarlet ribbons
that tied under her chin. Shady, but infinitely becom-
ing. Its shadow on her eyes, only an impudent chin
with a dimple meeting the sun.
Tired of the by-paths where nothing but a cow and a
horse with a bit of ragged rope round its rough-haired


neck were encountered, she flung herself down on a
mat of fallen leaves, drying after the fog and smelling
spicily sweet in the filtered sun. Lying flat on her back
she contemplated the tips of her tan brogues, remember-
ing those tight lace-up boots she alternately loved and
hated as a child.
For a moment she saw the brogues through a
mist, a tribute to this and other memories of her
father.
Olga Arnold’s love at times made her feel as though
she suffocated in a bath of scent and heat. Stuart
Jackson’s never. He was so strong and clean in all
his emotions, pungent, like the smell of those broad
shiny box leaves that grew about her old home, leaves
she used to bleach to draw and paint on, taking the
blue bag, the dry starch, a crushed red geranium petal
for her colour box.
There was an old Scotch word that just fitted her
father —“halesome. ’ ’
Yes : he was "halesome”, and one did not replace
men like that—not easily. “Halesome” —domineering
—not exactly intellectual, she supposed. He did not
talk of Art and Literature as men in Sydney talked
about it; he did not know the latest canons of either
but “halesome fairing.”
And her mother ! Oh, Maeve had been a fairy,
an Irish fairy, burned up with love for her man, so
much so that she could not live without him!
It was all with reverence now she could think of
that trysting in the lilied lagoon. For a time she had
blamed her mother for selfishness in leaving her
daughter all alone as she went to her beloved.
She understood dimly now the inevitableness of it
—“reunited”.


There would not have been any separate existence
for Maeve when Stuart was gone.
It just . . . had to he. Something outside, some greater
power, had helped this thing.
Would she, Synfye, never care for any man like that ?
She knew herself a thing of sudden fires that died in an
ash so grey, so cold, that the very memory of the fire
was abhorrent to her—to be put away, hidden, for-
gotten, at any price. Aye, at any price !
What had become of Reg Powis ? He had, they told
her, left Sydney after the disgrace, the smash; gone
to America, his friends said. No one was quite sure,
and she had returned one letter to the firm’s address,
unopened. Rotten of her, perhaps. Rotten, of course.
Her father would not have done that.
How came she to be Stuart’s child ? Perhaps, some
day, she would do something so decent that she, too,
would be a “halesome fairing”, and show her affinity
to his blood. Perhaps, possibly, very improbably.
She did not want to do anything “very decent” if it
was to interfere with her happiness, her material
comfort. She must have a rotten strain somewhere.
She laughed to the toes of her brogues.
“If people knew!” And then she realized that she
was sleepy ; this mountain air drugged her, like wine.
Wheugh, what a yawn ! She was sure the corners of
her mouth cracked. Yeu-gh.
Sleep. She was a child again ; Stuart was riding
through the timber to the White Witches. She was
sitting on the saddle before him—she could see between
the horse’s ears. The horse’s ears frightened her.
They were brown and hairy with veins. They pricked
forward. They were laid back like a mule’s when it
bites. Who had told her about mules ? Something in


a picture-book. Mules were half-horses. They had big
ears. You insulted a horse when you said it was like a
mule. She was frightened, yet she wanted to whisper
in this horse’s brown ear : ‘‘You’re a mule” and see
what it would do ? Shout it, if necessary: "Mule —
mule!” Wouldher father’s hack buck, and topple them
both into the road ? They might be very much hurt
■ —and her mother waiting at home in a new frock to
get tea for them. It was her mother’s birthday. There
would be pouf-ta-loonas for tea, those fried scones
she liked but which sometimes gave her indigestion.
This would all be spoiled if she shouted "mule” in
that brown ear that had long hairs inside it and
twitched, yet she must do it. She must say "Mule”
loud, very loud, to that ear. She leaned forward. The
brown ear brushed her lips. Somehow she was trying
to speak and couldn’t. Funny the brown ear smelled
oftobacco. “Ruby Mixture”: she knew that because the
man who came to see father about buying the steers
smoked it.
She woke; here was a whiff of crushed autumn foliage,
a warmth of sun on her body, a pain in her shoulder ;
she had been lying on a twig perhaps when she fell
asleep. The green sun-stabbed boughs above her were
part-hidden by a man’s face. He was standing looking
at her ; he seemed to have just straightened himself
as though he had been stooping down. He was flushed :
he was broader, bigger, than when she remembered
seeing him last.
But through the fleeing mists of sleep she remembered
him at once.


CHAPTER NINETEEN
The moon, like a curtsying Columbine,
Is peering over the hill.
At the mingled shadows of branch and vine
She is flirting a silver frill.
She has trodden Night with her shining shoon
To the broken lilt of an old waltz tune.
"Winter Moon"
Thunders the train by fire-tortured hills,
Charges the tunnel arches and sweeps on;
And silence grips the passes of the trail
From which the echo of lost tides has gone.
■ — " Toowoomba Ranges ’
The companion of her walks was provided by Fate
in no unkindly fashion for Synfye.
“How could you leave your pigs —lave your pigs, I
mean, of course,” she said as they walked back together
along the autumn-misted ways between the shadow
of wooded hills, with the smell of blown almonds from
unseen blossomings, and the tang of pine and bracken
by the straggling trails.
“A chap must be after having a holiday sometimes,”
said Liam M’Pheris.
"Yes, but I’d like to know why a chap comes up
here ? Surely the city is more of a change for a bush
man ?”
“Now it’s news you want! Shall I flatter you by
telling you God’s truth—and truth it is? It was
yourself I came to see, Miss Jackson. I went to your
friend’s house on the North Shore. Missed a blessed
boat, of course, and had half an hour’s wait and me
eating my heart out on the wharf with a man trying


to sell me bananas—rotten bananas—and over-ripe
prawns before I passed the turnstile, and another
handing me tracts on the pontoon, and sure she told
me how you’d bolted up here all on your own ; said I,
‘lf she’s for Pat Malone it’s no use bothering her, ’ and
then, of course, being Irish, I did the very thing I knew
I shouldn’t do, came to look for you, and, by God . . .
or the devil’s luck, find you a sleeping beauty by the
roadside, so no need to ask at your lodgings.”
“You can come and stay there yourself”- —she looked
at the suitcase in his hand—“they have several empty
rooms.”
“It’s one will do me fine,” he answered, caressing
her with his eyes.
“You’ve grown into a beauty,” he added coolly.
“Oh . . . only grown into it ? I’ve an idea you
admired me before, or were the pigs too distracting ?”
“It is years since I have seen you,” he said softly.
Her face contracted. No, it was not a year since
they had taken her away from her dear dead, only
barely nine months, and already life was good to her
again. Was she heartless ? Or was this human nature,
this flinging of the sods on a dead face, this covering
up, this comparative forgetting ?
They walked in silence for a long time. He felt,
somehow, he had unintentionally hurt her.
“By the way,” said Liam presently, “your aunt —I
always call her that somehow —Mrs. Arnold’s too formal
—was very tickled to discover in me the Irishman who
nearly spoiled her garden for her a few years ago.
She did not tell you ? Do you know, she wouldn’t
have connected the two if I had not recognized the
summer-house and the wistaria I chopped, and brought
it all back to her recollection. I was right down, then ;


my mate cleared out with all my cash. Started playing
my flute for coppers at night!”
Synfye stopped, swung round and stared at him.
Her mouth was a straight line : her colour faded under
the bright ribbon of her hat.
She was remembering a night on a balcony, an old
stone balcony, convict-built. In the dark garden
was a magnolia in bloom, heavy, sweet. It tapped
against the stone balustrade, tapped like a warning
finger. The sky was full of quivering stars. The ferry
boats, like golden scarabs, crawled over indigo tides.
There was a string of scarlet balloons, the throb of a
’cello through the wail of the violin.
She felt Reg’s eyes. They were like an animal’s,
hot, red, looking out of a cave.
Up from the foggy dusk of the street where the lamps
made pools of light in a cloudy sea, there came the sound
of a flute, high, sweet, clear : “She is far from the
land. . . . ” And she had not been so far from the
land of her girlhood then, not so far as she was now ;
not so far.
Here in the smell of the autumn bushland, here
among the quiet hills, she realized swiftly, dreadfully,
that distance.
“I did not know ... it was you,” she said. He
failed to understand; perhaps he did not catch the low-
spoken words.
“There I go boring you with old stories, mavourneen,
and you that weary, you look fit to drop. Now isn’t
there any way of getting a trap to take us to your
home ?”
Her colour returned to her smooth cheeks; she
shrugged her shoulders with a gesture as though
determinedly flinging off a burden.


"Oh, yes, just whistle a cab up ! It will be here in a
minute. Where do you think you are, Mr. Liam
M’Pheris ? Unless you’re going to carry me, or Bram
Wilson passes with his ramshackle dog-cart coming
from the train, I don’t see any other mode of progression
but such as my own legs supply. What a goose you are !
Haven’t I had my beauty sleep ? I’m fit for a five-mile
stroll right away.”
"You were fast asleep, sure enough,” said Liam.
“Indeed, so fast I was thinking of getting my own back
again.”
“Mysterious soul. What do you mean ?”
But he would not tell her, not now, nor when they
watched the sunset burning out in cinnabar and gold
among the violet hills. He said there were certain
things a man did not tell
“So the pigs are paying ?”
They were coming through the dusk to where an
orange light burned in the window of the cream
and pink house.
Synfye brushed aside the tall tasselled weeds with
her alpenstock.
Moths blundered by in the twilight and the mist was
beginning to rise again on the flats, ghostly cinctures
for the star-crowned costuming of the night.
“Yes, pigs is pigs. I can tell you. Sure it’s after
settling down I’ll be next year. How do you think a
wife would look in my old shack ?”
Synfye felt herself grow warm, a little nettled ;
commonplace young man, and she had thought he
savoured of adventure and romance! Wanting to
settle down amongst his pigs, rear children, grow fat
and red himself, look no farther than the horizon of a
pig farm and the price of pork in city markets. Ugh !


‘‘l hate the notion of marriage for anyone I like,”
she said abruptly.
‘‘And what about yourself ?Do you mean always
to comb St. Katherine’s hair.”
She shrugged, decapitated a weed with venomous
strokes. “I think, if I were married, by any accident—”
‘‘People don’t get married by accident,” he said
laughing. “Marriage by capture is out of date by a
few thousand years.’
"I’m not so sure,” she said dreamily, "I’m not so
sure.”
“Well . . . perhaps there were points about it. . . .
But what were you going to say when I was after being
so rude in the interrupting ?”
"Oh, that if I found myself married my first desire,
I’m certain, would be to find a way out of it!”
“Every church has another door, the French say,”
he teased back, “but you might like it fine.”
“Oh, no, no. I want . . . to be free.”
“You’re free enough, sure, aren’t you, coming up
here all alone ? Someone might run away with you
and no one be a penny the wiser.”
“They might,” she said. Her shoulders dropped:
the wave of weariness he had previously noted seemed
to pass over her again.
“You’re tired or depressed, my dear, ”he said, gently,
linking his arm through hers. “Shoudn’t go to sleep
with your shoes on. The Irish say that’s bound to
bring ill-luck.”
“The Irish!” in the dusk he could guess how
deliciously she pouted, quizzed him, soft dewy lips
above that dimpled darling of a chin.
“I think the gloaming time suits you better than
any,” he seemed to muse aloud, looking at her, "for


there’s something mysterious about you, Synfye Jack-
son ; moths in twilight places, and perhaps a black-
winged bat swinging in a dark tree, and moonflowers
that come out at night, and ”
“Oh, it’s a poet we are! Tom Moore reincarnated.
Whurra. Whurra. Erin go bragh. I ’ll race you to the
house —away !”
Running, laughing, stumbling, recovering, two child-
ren under a sudden blaze of excitement that made
them tremble and tingle in the chill twilight ways,
they came to the cream and pink house hand in hand.
Mists enclosing the world of hills and valleys made the
air moist after tea, which they had tete d tete in the
little dining-room, with its Family Bible on the circular
corner-table, and its caged canary, the pride of the
spinster landlady. Synfye was for losing nothing of
the open air life, and tucking herself into a fur coat,
went hatless into the dark with Liam, her aim the banks
of the railway cutting where one could see the night
train pass, securely seated above the belching smoke
and flame amongst the bracken.
“Won’t you be after catching cold ?” inquired Liam
tenderly as he helped her down the hillside.
She tossed her uncovered head. “Not when I’m
happy—”
“You are happy, then ?”
“Of course. I was just beginning to get dull before
you came. I like a man—any man —to talk to some-
times.”
“You’re not too complimentary, are you, my dear ?”
“Did you come up here to be flattered ? Surely you’ve
enough natural vanity to keep you going ?”
“Oh, sure,” he said gravely, holding back a ragged
blackberry spray from her frock, “Sure. What would


a man be without it, anyway ? Such a help when things
go wrong to be able to say to yourself : ‘l’m as good as
the other fellow, and a damn’ sight better’—’specially
when one has been making a fool of one’s self, and feels
small about it.”
They came to the bracken-netted space above the
red-soiled cutting where great lichened stones jutted
over the narrow canon floored with the straight line of
rails. Far away they could hear the engine shrieking
through the hills. Presently a rush of sparks, golden
commas on the murk, an orange point of flame, a red
monstrous eye, two black figures silhouette on a glow,
one with a shovel: the engine driver’s head looking
like one of Norman Lindsay’s silhouetted devils,
peering round the cab, clank, clank, clatter, beating
out. Squares of pale yellow windows, shutters up in
the sleeeper. A lonely figure on a rear platform.
The stillness of the fern and the softly lisping trees
broken with rush and rattle. A taste of coal on the
scented air, and a ruby rear-light flashing; silence
again with a distant murmur of the passing.
They were sitting very close together amongst the
fern. Now it would have been quite different if Reg
had been here—unsafe, somehow.
A certain type of Irishman was always careful of
a woman’s reputation. Someone had said to her —she
thought it was Tom Tregurtha—that a good Irishman
was the best man in the world, a bad Irishman the very
worst. Liam had twice suggested it was getting late,
perhaps they had better go home. She smiled in the
dark, because she felt it was a half-hearted suggestion—
a bowing to the conventions which he thought should
hedge about a nice woman.
A nice woman. It would be funny, if he knew.


But would it be funny ? It seemed to her she might
some day be very much afraid of this crinkly-haired,
blue-eyed Irishman . . . might have occasion to
cower.
Not she! Synfye Jackson was not of the stuff to cower
before any one, least of all a boy like this. There was
that about Liam which would always make him seem
a boy to her—that Pan asleep after gambolling with
the naughty nymphs. How much was the man in him
still asleep ?
She was not for experimenting that way.
"We are going to stay here to see the moon rise.
Do you remember the moon on Pine-ridge ?”
Even as she said it, the horror of the end of that ride
smote her. She could not have for even a moment
forgotten the coming home to Tregurtha’s. “Surely
there is no one dead in the house ?” Tom’s shadow pass-
ing to and fro. Tom, tall, ungainly, from verandah
to living-room and back again. The smell of hot saddle
leather ; the sweating horse, her sliding from the saddle,
going into the house, and finding the black end of the
moonshiny ways. She shuddered.
“You are cold,” said Liam ; he put his arm round her
to adjust the slipped fur coat.
“Do I remember that moon ?”
Through the dark she could feel his eyes. She looked
up at the stars, needle-bright in an unclouded sky.
By morning the fog would have them both remote in
the cream and pink house, shut in from the outer world.
As though they floated on a fairy island in a fairy sea
of billowing white.
The mountain mist was clammy about them now,
fine and soft, yet not as cold as the wind it had hushed
away.


“If I may keep my arm here, I will wait to see the
moonrise,” he whispered in her curl-embedded ear.
Synfye laughed. “I don’t know, but perhaps, after
all, it’s warmer.” She thought she could feel his heart-
beats making his arm shake with their vibrations.
It was certainly beautifully warm with his arm
about her; gave an amazing sense of well-being,
content
Safe. Synfye Jackson who had forfeited the right
to feel “safe”. How clearly that came to her now, as
though a sudden moon had arisen in her soul, showing
some of the dark places, flooded the nakedness of
others!
A faint light appeared behind the black irregular line
of the tree-capped ridge beyond the cutting. Upthrust
from the shelves of day was cast the newly-polished
globe of the moon. How swiftly the radiance grew!
Now the swirling fog caught the bright globe, made it
look like a phantom, a curiously white lantern in the
hands of the peering watchman night, seeking some-
thing through the muslin window-blinds of the world.
What was the Watchman seeking as he cried: “All’s
well” along the corridors of heaven —corridors paved
with little twinkling stars and minor suns and glittering
spil ed jewels of planets ? A footpad of the brown earth ?
A masked lady trailing her robes to a forbidden tryst ?
A gallant with a rosy rendezvous ?
As the moon glimmered in Synfye’s eyes, the Irish-
man’s blood leapt.
One arm wasn’t enough to keep her warm. He he’d
her close to him, murmuring endearments, little broken
words. “You won’t be angry with me, Mavourneen
. . . you are more than flesh and blood can stand . . .
with the moon in your eyes . . . two moons to dazzle


a man —can you be ever after caring for me, Synfye
Jackson ?”
The Watchman of the Night turned his white lantern
full upon them now . . . the mist seemed to retreat
before it till the world was a white-and-silver dream.
“I adore you,” said Synfye, kissing Liam’s mouth.
The fog closed round them again, rising in great
swathes from the vadey below, making the railway
cutting like an ashen river of foam.
Then they rose and moved softly homewards, two
ghosts in a ghostly world.


CHAPTER TWENTY
Be not too hardy, adventurous trees.
For winter yet has a card to play;
He can bide his time while we take our ease;
He will have his price for this golden day.
With usury, too, till our joy is spent
For the one warm day that the summer lent.
“Warm Days in June”
Synfye sat in the window-seat, embowered in cretonne
curtains with big pink roses running over them, that
looked on to the harbour. It was a cold bright day :
there were many white wings and little chugging fussy
motor-boats passing to and fro over the blue waters,
blue waters dragon-green in places, and here and there
flecked with white like frozen snowflakes.
She had an open letter in her lap and she was frown-
ing. So he had come back with this amazing proposition
to put before her.
There were tears in her eyes, her mouth was hard.
Two vertical lines had come between her eyes just over
her nose. Synfye was concentrating on a problem
too knotty for her years, yet the deep-rooted instinct
of self-preservation was speaking to her brain with
no uncertain voice. Something subtle in her was upper-
most, the least commendable part of us which cries
a sauve qui pent when we are in a tight corner —sauve
qui peut and an open door to that world of safe and sane
and sweet and wholesome things.
A way to Liam. Did she really want a way to Liam ?
Her eyes grew dreamy, the furrows smoothed away.


She watched a sailing-boat heel over, the sail sunk
in the bright harbour . . . the men’s heads were black
dots on the blue; a motor-launch came like a flying
bird, cutting runnels in the water —a rescue. She saw
the yacht right itself, the men sitting on the side of
the boat. They would laugh, and swear a little and
thoroughly enjoy their experience after the way
of young Australia with an hour or two’s holiday.
Mrs. Arnold had said the Australians were an amazingly
light-hearted race —saw a joke everywhere. To-night,
these men would be immaculate in dinner-suits and
glossy linen, dancing with girls in the different cabarets,
recounting their experiences of this afternoon. Laugh-
ing, always laughing . . . the girls laughing with
them.
Jolly life this, as long as one was free. The frown came
back, the marks of concentration were deep. . . .
She read the letter through again. She would tear
it up. “No, fool,” said the sauve qui peut, “keep it!
It may be the means yet of unbolting that door to
the garden you wish to enter, where are no poison trees,
and where the herbs are sweet and halesome things—
the kind of garden Stuart Jackson would have walked
in.”
It was a strange letter this . . . was it true, was it
a lie ? It seemed she and the writer of this letter were
in agreement at last. Both wanted the same thing in a
different way. And how could it be managed without
all the publicity . . . the letting of others into the
secret . . . the thing she hated most ?
On the face of it the letter was not quite convincing,
and yet it might be true—it might be, gloriously,
shamefully true.
Whom should she consult ? If Tom Tregurtha were


here now. . . . Somehow she could tell him things
she could not tell Olga Arnold. Hysterics, and worse
than that, a severe wound added to the minor ones
she had already inflicted upon Olga with her wilfulness.
But was Olga not a little to blame, too ? What kind
of love was that wishing to suffocate its object in a
smother of perfumed cotton wool, wishing to bind her
with garlands of flowers that hid links of galling
steel: hating her out of her sight, grudging her youth’s
freedom and yet ready to die for her if necessity
arose ?
Synfye sighed. The letter slid to the floor. She
examined the toes of her pointed scarlet slippers—
Synfye loved red —as she had examined the blunt
caps of her brogues in the mountain nest.
What was Liam doing to-day ? They had had a
jolly time, and he had come down by the train with
her, and Olga had been at first resentful and then wel-
comed him. They had taken Olga to the theatre
with them, and Olga, very sleepy and determined to
be jolly, had thought she enjoyed herself though her
back ached and her feet were cold; at least she wasn’t
“out of things”, and Synfye had marvellously contrived
that Liam should see her as little alone as possible, and
he had gone back to his pigs once again more than a
little puzzled and quite a lot resentful. Why wouldn’t
Synfye let him speak to her guardian ? Why wouldn’t
she consent to wear his ring ? Why— so many “whys”
that he scowled for more than half the journey back
to Queensland and was under suspicion of being a
Sinn Feiner and quite a number of other alarming
things, by the time he reached the border. His mercurial
temperament found excuses for her before he again
hung over the stys and poked the sides of the finest


sow, who really seemed glad to see him again, and
estimated weights and measures for slaughter.
It wouldn’t be long before he saw Synfye again :
he knew the Tregurthas wanted her up, and she had
said she would like to look at her property, since it
made her feel "landed gentry" and quite respectable
to know she owned something besides two hat-boxes
and six trunks full of frocks and stockings.
And even while he considered bacon and market
prices Synfye, locking away the cause of her distur-
bance in the drawer of her dressing-table, was deciding
that, Olga Arnold or not, she would lose little time in
going “bush” again and laying her very complicated
case before Tom Tregurtha.
“I shall hate it like hell,” said Synfye, kicking off
her red slippers.
Olga expostulated furiously. Synfye was always
running away from her now : what companionship
did she get out of the girl ? Old and lonely. Oh, God,
how lonely, the one bit of real sunshine in her days
seemed to play will-o’-the-wisp down the aisles of life
with her.
When she was dead and gone Synfye could do as
she willed, but now—!
Synfye raged, then relented, but underneath her
compromise was a settled purpose. If she agreed now
to go to these beastly dances and hateful teas, she must
be free when the season was over to make tracks,
and by herself, for Tregurtha’s and her old home.
Olga promised with a secret amendment that she
would go with Synfye, though the idea of the long
journey into the back-blocks irked her more than she
would confess. But stronger was the maternal jealousy
against all who might take Synfye from her, even for


a week or two; other lives that intermingled with
her adopted daughter’s were marked for suspicion
with Olga Arnold now, so had her cheated motherhood
brought its own complexes. Synfye, given by a stroke
of the sword of Death to her arms, must stay in those
arms now.
It became an obsession with Olga Arnold, and her
doctor puzzled about her, ordered more rest and a
tonic, and failed to divine the only healing for her
perturbed spirit.
Yet when September came with its Cootamundra
wattles in canary coloured bosses on the green stems
at Hunter’s Hill, its wild boronia and native rose rioting
between grey rocks, its call of many birds in the sanctu-
aries of feathered things, its restless fevers in the blood
of the prisoned beasts at Taronga Park, a bout of
rheumatism left Olga Arnold with a temporary lame-
ness, and the journey into the bush was most emphati-
cally impossible.
Synfye said nothing, but she grew irritable, lost
weight, spent hours looking listlessly out on the rain-
grey harbour —for the early September days were
wet ones—and Olga (strangely subdued since she had
lain long in her cane lounge by the window, and seen
Synfye trying hard to be unselfish, steadily striving
to show the warm sympathy Olga craved and remaining
by her side when Olga could see the slim-arched feet
tapping impatiently on the carpet and the furtive
movements of the restless fingers) was at first grimly
blind to the girl’s unease. “You can go to Tregurtha’s
later, darling,” she would say half a dozen times a
day, and then silence would fall between them.
Then one night in the small hours when the chimes
were borne faintly over the harbour to her, a blacker


thought came to Olga. “Perhaps if I keep her here
against her will, she will grow to hate me, leave me
all together. I must be sane about the thing. I’ve
muddled my life enough so far—an old woman hasn’t
time to make big mistakes.”
Next morning she greeted Synfye with a cheery
"I’m much better, darling, and I want you to pack up
and get your tickets and be off, before I change my
mind. You may have to wait till next week ; you won’t
be able to get a sleeper at such short notice, but I
want you to go.”
The kindly lie did not serve. If Olga had any linger-
ing hope that her magnanimity would make Synfye
equally magnanimous, and that she would refuse her
liberty, she was mistaken. But the permission given
she abided by it, and even hid her chagrin when
Synfye wangled a sleeper from a too-susceptible clerk,
and came tearing home from Challis House with her
long concertina-like ticket and her small cardboard
"open sesame” to sleeping-car and parlour chair.
Her cheeks bloomed like the rose : she kissed Olga
with spontaneity, and the older woman was at last
obliged to feel something of the glow of her protegee’s
pleasure.
A hundred little demonstrations of affection during
the next twenty-four hours somewhat compensated,
and she was wise enough not to allow the still small
voice that wickedly insisted “She is only doing this
to show her delight at getting away from you,” to
obtain too-unbiased a hearing.
Yes, she was too old to make big mistakes : she must
grin and suffer this as she had suffered so many things
in her somewhat ineffectual life. "I shall never be


anything much but an old nuisance,” said Olga to
herself when the sound of the wheels that bore Synfye
off to the station had died on the rainy road. Yet,
lying by the fire, she had a sense of comfort. After all,
there is something in self-sacrifice.
For the time being it makes us feel nobler. Deep down
in us all is a certain bitter consolation left among the
ashes of self-immolation. Our “inner-court” sees to
that.
Synfye, steaming out by Granville’s dark station
and on to the green rain-drenched loveliness of Hawkes-
bury-reaches, had her immediate problem to face,
and the most acute was in the letter carefully tucked
away in her jewel case. Tom Tregurtha must see to
this, since the time had come when disinterested advice
was as rare gold to her. . . .
The woman in the lower berth snored. Being in
such a hurry to get away from Sydney, Synfye had
been obliged to take an upper bunk. Fumes of stout
arose, and one had no difficulty in deciding the form
the lower berth’s sleeping draught had taken. She was
fat and red and good-natured. She would probably
be fun in the morning. Pity it was improper to travel
with a man : much more interesting. They were always
so ready to do things for one, too —liked it. One could
manage them. . . .
What a dark night—no moon, only rain ! Newcastle
had been soaked. Funny, dusty, has-been looking,
Newcastle, and glimpses of a tall ship. . . . She would
like to stay there some day, and investigate. She alway
felt Newcastle was interesting in some fusty secret
way of its own—like old tins, and sudden trails of red
nasturtiums on rubbish heaps that might hide gold
coins a careless hand had spilled.


Half-asleep, she seemed to see Liam’s face pressed
against the sombre pane, eyes blue and scornful,
mouth severe, or suddenly laughing, whole face lit
up as with an inner lamp. Spiritual face, yet full of
mischief—a face that might “take religion” if things
went wrong.
God forbid ! What had Synfye Jackson to do with
the orthodox ? Liam’s face tender, Liam’s face full
of hate, outraged love.
Liam’s face
A snore from the lower berth. Ugh ! how hard the
mattress was. Rain on the window blind, blank . . .
a blurred light like a red and orange “Irish Beauty”
rose she had seen in a florist’s last week. Irish beauty,
Irish faith, Irishman’s love, Irishman’s luck. . . .
Was he lucky to have loved her ? Synfye Jackson ?
With her problem, her damning problem and that
letter tucked away among her corals and her glittering
trinkets, and a bit of mountain heather Liam had
plucked. . . .
She slept. Her cheek was warm against Liam’s.
His arm about her, she felt so safe.


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Two brown lovers spied the empty jar.
Filled it with wine right merrily to sip
Between their kisses, in a madcap mood;
Nor dreamed so fair a thing could taste of blood.
"The Rouge Pot’
Red is her mouth as a coal—-and rare as a jewel’s glow.
When she beckons I must arise—and take my staff —and go
Though it be Love—or Death—the call —the call of Fire to Snow.
"North to South’’
Tom Tregurtha was stone deaf. Synfye’s wasn’t
the kind of tale that could be shouted at an old man
with a bad cold in his head, arising, he declared, from
his permanently cold feet about whose number elevens
he was already arranging his mosquito bag, though it
was early for the winged destroyers.
Certainly the bad cold he had been nursing under
the ’possum skin rug—a little mangy at the edges
now —had settled pro. tem. in his ears, and his wife
talked to him by signs. Of course, Synfye could have
thrust the volcanic letter under his poor red nose and
have watched while he adjusted his spectacles—bought
from a hawker and out of focus —near the tip of it,
readjusting them a dozen times and finding all angles
unsatisfactory, but her being rebelled against this.
She must wait till, as Mrs. Tregurtha expressed it,
“Tom’s cold cleared” for his advice, and sit in the
atmosphere of black-currant tea and eucalyptus oil
while Tom alternately sneezed, choked, and sniffed,
and sighed his patient soul out.
She wouldn’t be idle these glorious September days


with life of bird and bee and marsupial and shrub and
tree athrob with the sense of spring, birds swinging
in dainty woven nests, wild things mating and fight-
ing and food-seeking, in the scrubs and dim valleys
already filled with mauve-and-silver heat-mists.
The bush telegraph had informed Liam M’Pheris,
who was "sit down alonga Tregurtha’s place”, and
Liam came riding with an invitation to tea at the pig
farm. He had some dear little pink sucking pigs to show
her and a newly dug-over garden. He was making a
fresh trellis, too, for grape vines, and a white pergola.
But she wouldn’t go alone to Liam’s, not even when
he offered to play the flute and all the tunes she loved
the best.
Obstinate lines appeared about the young Irishman’s
mouth. He wasn’t the kind to give way easily once
aroused to do battle for his girl. Some day he would
catch Synfye Jackson napping and would corner her
and wring a definite promise from the lips that had been
so warm upon his own. Girls didn’t kiss men quite
like that unless they meant to marry them. Not girls
like Synfye. Liam, in love so wise was he !
And Synfye evaded and teased and glowed with
health and happiness, enjoying the escape and the
pursuing; of course, in the end, everything would
come right. Tom Tregurtha’s deafness and all other
shadows would melt away under the influence of these
golden Queensland suns, these thin and magic young
moons slipping behind dark battlements of boughs
and waxing slowly to a yellow fruit of God, caught
on the shimmering points of stars. Everything would
come right, old mistakes be rectified. . . . And the
letter remained locked away, waiting an anwer, and
there were no more letters from that source. Only long


epistles from Olga, beginning already to bear post-
scripts.
“And when do you think you will be coming home ?”
There were alluring things at the theatres, promise
of opera, “when you come back to Sydney.”
Dear Sydney! Synfye loved it; she could shut her
eyes and see Fort Denison asleep, with all its bygone
cruelties hidden in its black moist cellars, washed by
great foam-crested waves, by soft and sleepy summer
seas; but just now there were things she loved more
intimately, and Sydney still kept hid for her, some-
where—a dagger-—or a jewel ? Time and Tom
Tregurtha would prove which.
And Tom this morning had declared he heard the
kookaburras laugh.
But he had failed to hear the bull bellow in the
swamp oaks, so Mrs. Tregurtha pulled the ’possum
rug up to his big hairy ears and said she thought he
was suffering from imagination, a thing she had never
credited to him, as well as deafness.
But Synfye knew her hour was approaching. Perhaps
it was that certainty that made her saddle up the
brown hack Tom had put aside for her riding while
she was with them, and ride on the road to White
Witches again, that road at once so mournful and so
fair.
Bush telegraph, perhaps, was busy, but she had no
forewarnings that chance or some subtle instinct should
lead Liam M’Pheris that way ; for the chances of life,
the turning this road or that, the swing of a bough,
the closing or opening of a door, that brings leaping
passion or black hate to remould our lives, is one of
the strangest things in a world which we dub common-
place, and yet know its happening to be as dramatic


as anything we have ever seen on the boards of theatres.
Monotony of life ! Ye Gods ! Where there is a human
heart, a man, a woman, there is stark drama ; though
it move to many unseen, it stalks these pavemented
ways, the dusty, apparently empty bush-tracks,
till there is blood upon the stone and fallen tears upon
the grass. He was there smoking, sitting on a log by
the diminished White Witches, still polished like bridal
satin, with their rustling dull green crests; their air of
aloofness from the other trees ; their touch of mystery.
His head was bare, a slanting sunshaft caught the
crinkly black waves of his hair, his blue eyes deepened
with laughter.
"So you have ridden right into the ambush this
time,” he said, rising and coming towards her. His
horse, with bridle reins on neck, was quietly cropping
short turf : it would not stray far from him. Liam,
too, had a gift of making friends with animals. Synfye
had to hook the bridle rein of her hack to a low-bending
bough ; she was not too-well acquainted with Tom
Tregurtha’s loan, she told Liam.
“He might stray and then I would have to do Jock
o’ Hazeldeane and take you on my saddle-bow,” he
said, pointing to the log. “All the throne I can offer
to the Queen at present. How are you? . . . and how
are the Tregurtha’s.”
“Did you notice that an Irishman always says
‘How are you’ and the typical Englishman inquires
‘How do you do ?’ ” she answered.
“And what about the Australian ? I suppose he
doesn’t care a dash how you are ? The typical
Australian ?”
“He says ‘Good day’ if he’s a bushman.” Synfye
took the proffered seat.


"Tom has a cold, he’s deaf,” she added.
“Just as well for him, with two women in the camp ;
won’t have to listen to your chatter.”
She made a face at him. “You haven’t improved,
anyway, amongst your pigs.”
“Faith, it’s after being pretty nigh crazy I am with
you like a fairy light flittering about the land and never
giving a chap a chance to get a holt of you.”
"If you hold lights, they burn,” she parried.
“Well, where’s the man who wouldn’t be after burn-
ing a finger a little for the sake of settling the light in
his window, flaming steady-like ?”
T don’t want to be set in windows.”
‘But, Synfye Jackson, the day must come-
‘The day musn’t; why can’t we go on as—we are ?”
“Because I’m flesh and blood. Nothing stands still;
sure you know that; first the blade, then the leaf, then
the bud in the leaf?”
“You’re misquoting, aren’t you ? Buds don't come
in leaves.”
“I don’t care a dam’ if I am misquoting. I don’t
care about anything but getting a straight answer to a
straight question. Synfye Jackson, when the hell will
you marry me?”
She fidgeted with her rough leather gloves, drew them
slowly from her slim hands, examined a little scratch
near her thumb. “Mrs. Tregurtha’s cat scratches ;
they opened a tin of salmon last night and it just rushed
it. I tried to push it off the table.”
He put a firm brown hand, smelling of gum leaves,
ovfe her mouth.
“Stop, you’re like the running stream, accushla,
when you start. It’s no good. I’m not discussing cats.”
“Oh, yes you are more, or less.” She smiled into


his angry blue eyes, pouted her lips. Perhaps if he
kissed her he would leave off contending on matters
to which she had as yet no adequate reply.
He saw her intent ; grew grim, shook his head.
“No more of that; you’d kiss a man’s reason away
and make him crawl at your feet for a crumb of comfort,
and blurr his mind, so you would, that he wouldn’t
be able to see clear or hear anything but his own
heart-beats. It’s a straight answer I’ve having from
you Synfye, to-day, if I keep you here all night.”
“We’ve a goodish way to ride back. I mustn’t
frighten the Tregurthas. They are sure to think I
have been thrown and am lying somewhere with a
broken leg, screaming for help with only the crows
answering me. There will be a search-party out, includ-
ing the mailman, and you know he’s censorious.”
“I neither know nor care. It’s enough of your dilly-
dallying I’m having. Say ‘No’, allannah.”
She was prepared for even that, but the word faltered
on her lip. To her own chagrin and confusion her eyes
filled with tears. How she loved him ! She wanted to
be close to him always, to merge herself in him and be
done with foolish experimentalizing. Wouldn’t he
see she wanted to answer ! Had he no pity, had he no
suspicions ?
“You fool!” she answered curtly, got up from the
log, walked to the tallest of the White Witches, and
leaned her face against the humid-smelling glossy
bark. “O help me, Mother Tree !”
The wind in the crests stirred like a whispering voice,
it seemed to her the tree pulsed with life . . . was
there some hamadryad prisoned here, who had her
own pitiful tale of loving and losing, whose little
white breasts ached against the grain of the wood,


whose frail hands beat against that outer casing of
bridal-satin bark ?
Was she moaning herself, or was it the prisoned
hamadryad in the tree ? There were drops of moisture
on the bark—tears ? Liam did not attempt to follow
her at once. He relit his pipe and smoked. Glancing
under her lashes Synfye saw him rigid, stern, a sphinx
who looked, for all the hot blood of this most impatient
of all races, as if he could wait for hours, days, weeks,
and force her in sheer desperation to give him answer.
It was no use any more dodging Liam, verbally or
physically. He had suddenly grown up. She was
against granite where she thought was only rippling,
sunsoaked waters.
What was she to do ? There had been no time, or
opportunity rather, to consult Tom Tregurtha. It
was a matter she was too unwise to settle for herself,
and now she was afraid of Liam ; a Liam no longer to
be coaxed with sweetmeats of warm kiss and close
caress a Liam whose young blood would blind him
no longer; Liam a man asking a fair deal from his
chosen mate.
Dear God, dear dead in the blue uncaring skies that
peered cloudlessly down through the thin foliage of
the gum, dear dead ones who had so greatly loved,
give help and heed to her now !
Oh, White Witches, hiding hamadryads, and strange
all-seeing tree folk in your boles and boughs, give her
aid !
Only the wind in the topmost aeries : only a bird
singing as though life was all of glorious things ; away
in the dusk of green beyond the trees only the faint,
far sounds ; of the being of bird and beast on the
mountain ; only the throbbing of her heart; and


Liam aloof, like a sentinel ready to unsling his rifle
and fire on the foe, the betrayer of his love.
He rose to his feet, shook the ashes from his pipe,
put it in his pocket, walked deliberately towards her.
He was like a stranger. She put up her hands to cover
her eyes—three paces more, one pace more, and he
would be here. He would take her hands from before
her eyes, he would look straight at her—blue eyes
black with determination ; there would be no escape.
He would not let her turn her glance aside ; he would
force confession, and then, and then —what would he
do ?
Here alone, at White Witches, White Witches that
in a circle sat and knew the hearts of women, and men,
and White Witches that had seen old tragedy and new,
White Witches that had robbed her of her beloved
ready to rob her again, what evil thing had made her
ride here to-day ? White Witches, for whom she had
never lost her childish affection, despite the black
grief they had caused—surely, if once she escaped from
here to-day, she would never come back again. Oh,
no, she would go to Olga, to Sydney; would see the
blue of the Harbour once more; would look for that
jewel, would dare that dagger. It was that horrible
ineradicable part of her, the experimental side, that made
her, woman-grown, play with fire as she had done as
a mere babe. She did not surely get that trait from
Stuart Jackson.
She could not translate that the White Witches
moaned of a wild rainy night, and a figure crouched
at the foot of this very tree, and Stuart Jackson riding
out of the dark to gather a strange woman into his
heart and home. She did not quite know her “hale-
some” father, or the thwarted agony of her mother’s


heart, turning from the false love to that refuge with
the true.
The White Witches knew. There were laughter and
tears mingled in the wind in the boughs.
And Liam M’Pheris was drawing her hands gently
down from before her wet, terrified eyes.
She tilted her dimpled chin defiantly. “How dare
you . . . bother me so ?”
“I dare because you’re not going to be after playing
fast and loose with me any more, Synfye. Play cricket
now. If you don’t want to, well. I’ll make you.”
He was gripping her wrists till he hurt—she did not
know he was so strong. He was Peter Pan no more,
but a man she feared and—God help her! —loved as
she had never loved her Pan.
“Why won’t you marry me, Synfye Jackson?”
The wind in the trees was to her as a tempest; a parrot
all blue and rose settled on a small feathery tree at
the edge of the clearing—she noted its brilliancy,
like something seen through the tiny oval of an old-
fashioned kaleidoscope.
And Liam’s eyes, they were so densely blue now,
they looked cold, like water seen through broken ice,
or a bitter day on the Harbour, twilight approaching,
and cold wind from the Heads.
When she spoke it was to her as though she was the
mouthpiece for someone else, someone who used her
almost unfairly to state a fact that for ever damned
her in the eyes of love. She wished the person whose
mouthpiece she was could have thought of some
kinder way to phrase it, it was all so bald; it was
bloodless blue, hard, like new steel cutting into flesh,
cutting further than one had ever meant it should ;
the worst of new knives with unblunted edges, the


fault of truth, the crime of sincerity that comes too
late. Surely there had been a better, nicer, way of
putting it. There was something wrong about words,
looks. Kisses, little close touches, said so much more.
But there would not be kisses, little close touches,
friendly yearning looks any more, perhaps.
“I cannot marry you, because I am married already,”
said Synfye Jackson.


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
I am old,
But not so old that I cannot hear
The voice of many a vanished year.
And when the gloaming folds me in blackness of the vine,
I count again the kisses—the lover’s greedy kisses
That once were mine.
The little old lady sat in the sun, at the edge of the
sanded foot-way where the shadow of leaves wrote
their varying impressions of the wind coming in from
the sea. Opposite to her Kirribilli Point flaunted red
roofs, steps running to the water’s edge, bathing
enclosures. A motor-boat lying by an applewood brown
wharf, conventional gardens and a riot of roses cas-
cading over a trellis. Farther out there were ferry
boats rounding the Point, a white-sailed yacht dipping,
a big boat bound for the Heads and Queensland, a
long grey warship lying in mid-stream.
The old lady was enjoying it all. She had no teeth,
and her fore-shortened face looked as though it should
rightly be surmounted by a witch’s peaked hat, but,
instead of that, she had an old-fashioned rusty black
bonnet with a shaded purple feather. Her hands in
grey cotton gloves were folded in the lap of her brown
stuff frock upon a clean white handkerchief edged
with black and worked with a large monogram in
white-flax thread.
Her dark eyes between their wrinkled lids gloated
upon the panorama of sea and sky, distant ship and wav-
ing tree. Every detail of the scene was familiar, yet


always new to her. She would sit here till the sun
retreated behind a cloud, or the needs of the flesh took
her up the tram-line to the little furnished room, dark
and small, but as she expressed it with her incurable
optimism, “so compact”, where she lived as frugally
as her means obliged. But she never had time for
self-pity: her only regret was that some day, and
perhaps before very long, she must leave this world
where seas were blue and trees green and where ferry
boats passed and lovers wandered down shade-flecked,
sunlit ways especially for her amusement. Every ounce
there was to wring out of existence in old age, she
greedily claimed. It had always been the way with
her; when she was a personable dark-eyed girl,
she grabbled life with both hands, she suffered for it,
she sinned, she made amends, but she never stagnated ;
though she left drops of heart’s blood on old by-ways
of stumbling, she could always get up and begin
again. She had grandchildren and great-grandchildren,
some of them prosperous.
She never bothered anyone. If they chose to look
her up or send her presents, she was grateful; if they
did not, she was philosophic. Nothing could shake
her determination to have as good a time as possible
under the circumstances: though sometimes the
circumstances might have drawn tears from a sym-
pathetic onlooker’s eyes, they never brought them even
near the old lady’s. She loved sweets, but they had to
be soft because, although one of her grandsons had
bought her a second-hand set of ready-made teeth,
they hurt her gums, and as she had long ago ceased
to be really interested in her appearance, she generally
left them in a drawer in her cold dark furnished room
with her birth certificate, the certificate of her three


marriages (she had been once divorced and twice
widowed) and a letter she had never shown to any-
body, but which she sometimes took and held in her
blue-veined gnarled old hands on winter nights when
she felt a little lonely. It was to her, and would have
been to many others not personally interested, one of
the most beautiful and satisfying love letters ever
penned. And the man who wrote it had been married
to someone else, and had been drowned in a boating
disaster in Queensland years ago. But the letter was
alive, alive as the intrepid old lady. Perhaps it was
the memory of how she had been adored by the man
the waters of the Brisbane river took so swiftly out of
her life that made the old lady so brave . . . precious
to herself, because her life had been worth fine jewels
for a little season to a man was who married to some-
one else.
Just now she was not thinking of anything in parti-
cular. She had always possessed the great gift of being
able to “rest” her mind, stop the wheels from racing
round and round in wearying speculation, the gift that
makes not only Napoleons, but the rulers who succeed
in the mastery of their own souls, as well as of the lives
of the other man. It was enough for her to smell the
scent of the sea, the sun on the grass, to see the shifting
blues and emeralds and pearl-whites of Sydney Harbour.
... A red buoy tossing, a sea-gull dipping. Her eyes
were keen, and so were her ears. She heard the slow
uneasy step of a discontented woman on the path
coming down from the high road that ran along
Cremorne Point.
Olga Arnold had more than once noticed the little
old lady sitting in the sun below the shifting shadows
of the ornamental trees that followed the path above


the rocks and the tangle of grass and wild flowers look-
ing out over the harbour when she was going to catch
a ferry and had time to spare along the lower road.
To-day an impulse took her to speak to the diminutive,
and, to her, pathetic-looking figure, that always had a
clean handkerchief spread on her lap and small hands
in grey cotton gloves folded upon it. Her feet in shabby
tan shoes barely touched the ground ; she was such a
tiny old lady and shrunken with the years, mere skin
and bone. But the alert eyes had unquenchable youth
in them, and she smiled response to Olga. Olga in a
handsome silk velvet coat with yards of fringe attached
and lined with magenta, and a velour hat with a
magenta choux and diamond buckle, carrying an
ebony stick with a silver mount; the price of whose
high-heeled shoes alone would have bought the old
lady’s whole wardrobe twice over. The old lady looked
her up and down appreciatively as she answered her
greeting.
"Good morning. Yes, it’s a lovely day,” she
murmured. “Not that all days are not lovely in some
way, provided one’s alive. Rainy days are lovely, even
westerly wind days have so much ‘go’ in them : I
like all kinds of weather myself . . . it’s—it’s a
reminder one isn’t shut away, blind, in a box in the
ground. I don’t want to be shut away in the dark
whilst other people are eating and sleeping and
listening and seeing. No, I don't.”
Olga was interested. "But do you really think life
worth living ? Would you have been born if you could
have prevented it ?”
“That I would,’’mumbled the old lady. She laughed
an eldritch chuckle. "I know what’s the matter with
you, my dear—you’re not young, of course, I can see


that by your neck ; a woman’s neck always gives her
away in profile, no matter how she’s massaged. You’re
a pretty woman still, I’m not. I’m just an old crone,
but I get a lot of fun out of life thinking, watching.
One of my granddaughters comes down from the bush
sometimes and takes me to pictures. I like the comics.
The romances are comical, too, unintentiona’ly Ending
everything with a kiss, as if it wasn’t a kiss that began
things.”
“ ‘A lot of fun out of life’, ” Olga commented, leaning
on her stick. Then she sat down abruptly beside the
old woman.
“I wish you would tell me . . . how.”
"The matter with you,” said the old witch, glancing
sideways out of eyes extraordinarily keen in her parch-
ment-like, wrinkled face, “is that all your life you’ve
had too many gowns to wear, too much choice in jewel-
lery, too much to eat—fed up your body, for what ?
I’ll wager you’ve never gone cold and hungry for love
of a man : you’ve never stood in the rain outside
another woman’s door to make sure that he is not
in there ; you’ve never burned with jealousy or been
frozen with hate and shame, you’ve got an old, old
heart compared to mine, my dear, though you’re well
preserved compared to me, especially when I leave my
teeth at home. You’ve lost most of your life. I suppose
you’ve never had a child ?”
Olga flushed; "How should you know that ?”
“I think a mother always knows. . . mine did not turn
out very well. They either married foolishly and I
hadn’t the heart to say‘l told you so’—l never can hit
below the belt, somehow—or they married what the
world calls ‘well’ and forgot me, or were ashamed
because I’m an old age pensioner. I’m lucky, aren’t I?


Money coming in regularly till I die and nothing to
worry about. No taxes to pay because I’ve no property.
No one waiting for dead men’s shoes because I’ve no
shoes to leave. One of my great-granddaughters buys
me peppermint chips when she takes me out because
she won’t spend the money on chocolates for an old
woman. I don’t care. I can’t bite, but I can suck ’em.
Take a leaf out of my book. You’ve got beautiful
clothes and a miserable heart; you know life is slipping
away from you, yet you can’t bank your capital by
living in every minute of it. I’ve never missed anything,
my dear, neither laughter nor tears, nor passion nor
hate: I’ve lived, every inch of the way, and now I
can sit by and smile over other fools’ mistakes, with a
storehouse of memories no one can rob me of. Can
you say that when you come to the end of the
road ?”
Olga’s head in the expensive hat was bowed. “I
can’t,” said Olga. ‘T’ve never had anything
because ”
“Because you’ve always been a moral coward,”
said the old lady. Her brown eyes were unblinking ;
she looked out to sea. A sailing ship from an Argentine
port, filled to the decks with golden grain, was coming
slowly into Sydney town. She drew a deep breath of
thorough enjoyment. Her eyes softened. She seemed
almost to purr as a cat does from sheer delight of warmth
and sun and body’s ease.
“The things I’ve seen . . . the thing’s I’ve felt
... I remember when one went up from Brisbane to
Ipswich in the old sternwheelers ; I remember the day
before railroads, travelling in bullock days in Queens-
land, camping out under the stars . . . having my
husband shoot a black-fellow over my body in the


night . . . the powder scorched my hair, ” she chuckled.
“My great-granddaughter wants me to write my
reminiscences, dictate them, rather, to someone who
could put them into shape. She thinks there will be
money in them some day. Sydney people are keen
on Australian reminiscences, but it’s the things I can’t
tell for print that would make the reading, ’ ’ she chuckled
wickedly, deep down in her stringy throat, which
was encircled by a bit of spotless crochet lace fastened
with a large cameo brooch.
“When you’ve lived every step of the way as I have,
you’ve a book in your soul” —she touched her flat bosom
with one skinny gloved hand—“no one could translate.
My word, it will take God a long time on the Judge-
ment Day if he’s going to reveal the secrets of my
heart !”
Olga tried to look shocked. She couldn’t. Something
ice-bound seemed to have melted in her : the breaking
ice hurt, it groaned in movement, but she, too, became
keenly aware of the blueness of the sky, the soft
greens, the flirt of a gull’s wing, the eternal beauty
that is in living things. To stand still is to die, to
stagnate.
She would, perhaps, never see this old lady again.
For all her horror of being “shut away in a box” in
the dark earth, that day could not be very distant—
God send the end was peaceful, a slipping away in sleep.
Perhaps after one of those jolly evenings at a comic
picture when the great-granddaughter had bought her
peppermints she could suck . . .
She had a letter in her bag she meant to post to
Synfye when she went into the city. She withdrew it
now and tore it into tiny shreds. What had she been,
after all, but a selfish old lady ? Synfye, who, like this


old witch on the sunny seat, wanted to “live every
inch” of the way, she had tried to keep chained by her
side with a tether of roses that were to the girl as thorns.
No : she would let the girl gang her ain gate. After all,
if it meant suffering for them both, what had the
stultifying of her own emotions led to in the end ?
A cul-de-sac ; Death peering over the wall jeering at
her . . . the woman who was now too old for passion,
too petrified in the conventional ways to ever add one
page to the book of impulsive actions, which in her
case God could read to the world if He would, without
expurgation. The unconfessed yearnings had been
pressed down till they had become as a cold solid weight
about her impulses. She was too old to change.
Yet, as she went down the path to the wharf where
the sea sent ultramarine ripples against the tide-wet
pontoon, she left not only a flutter of torn paper on
the path behind her, but something of her discontent.
A lesson had come to her from that shabby, insigni-
ficant, wrinkled, and yet so vital figure on the sunny
seat —too late, perhaps, to be applied in full measure,
but nevertheless a salutary one.
Yes, the sea was beautiful to-day; all sapphires
and glittering emerald-greens : Kirribilli Point was a
picture-book with quaint red roofs like those in a
German fairy-tale, argosies of romance rocking against
steps of adventure.
Live every minute—shut away in a box. Live every
minute. Yes, she would get a grip of herself again.
Music—she loved music, there was a new picture in
the Art Gallery. There were the theatres. She had
heard of a sale of curios. It was so long since she had
bought anything for her home. Something vivid-
red lacquer or a piece of amber, or a jade bowl,


something to surprise Synfye when she came back.
Too soon the nodding plumes would pass. Life was a
gift to be enjoyed, even with occasional twinges of
rheumatism . . . with ungrateful adopted daughters.
No, Synfye wasn’t that. She merely wanted, like the
old witch on the Cremorne Point seat, to live her life,
suck her peppermints if she couldn’t bite them. Olga
smiled. What a funny wonderful old witch it was !
Grateful for the careless cheap favours of selfish
youth, left her teeth at home ! Lived into indifference
as to what anyone thought when they looked at her,
rather a happy state when one’s brain was so clear,
one’s sense of beauty and gratitude for the beauty God
spread about the earth still so keen.
Gratitude ? For being cast into this Vale of Tears ?
Alas, that she, dressed in the latest fashion and ready
to spend what to the little old witch would seem a
fortune on a whim, should find envy in her soul
for the shabby figure in the brown shoes on the loafer’s
seat by the sea! Then she smiled again determinedly:
she must tell Synfye about it when she wrote, how the
old lady had explained that, having no boot-polish,
she had cleaned those selfsame little shoes with some
camphor ice she had got from the chemist for sore lips
last winter. Then she had polished them with a ragged
handkerchief. “I have half a dozen good ones,” she
had added with pride, ‘‘and the shoes look quite nice,
don’t they ?”
“Indeed they do,” said Olga, and when she came
back from the sale of curios, pleasantly elated with a
bargain and with an appetite for lunch, she wrote
another letter to Synfye, telling her to stay in the bush
as long as she liked, if she was happy there; she would
possess her soul in patience.


And the letter found Synfye blind with tears, face
down in her skillion room at Tregurtha’s, stuffing
the end of the pillow into her mouth lest Mrs. Tre-
gurtha should hear her miserable sobbings.
For Synfye, having grasped at life’s experiences
with both hands, was now paying the piper with the
coin of her useless regrets.


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
I am one with those who flung themselves
Face downward on the earth to greet the sun,
And worshipped that gold disc that in the East
First kissed them —and then burned them with its rays!
—“Sun-worship”
And when the moon lifts over the gums.
Wonderful gums, all mauve and grey,
A witch thing out of the basalt comes,
With the furtive yellows of Yesterday.
“The Inky Pool”
Mrs. Tregurtha had pushed the letter under the door,
thinking the girl was asleep, for the mailman was late
to-night. It was dawn before Synfye opened it. Swollen
eyelids, eyes that smarted, and outside in the timber
a butcher bird singing.
So nobody wanted her. Mrs. Arnold did not want her
now. Liam would never want her again as long as the
world was. Reg Powis did not want her either.
The South American woman he had met had money ;
he was compromised with her ; he must do the right
thing : he must marry her. “She has money,” sneered
Synfye, sitting on the edge of the bed in her thin night-
dress, her bare feet on the dyed wool mat. She hated
the mat. It was magenta and hideous. “Get in first
and divorce me,” ran the letter she had carried up here
to show to Tom Tregurtha. “Get in first with your
writ for divorce, we won’t defend it. After all, a registry
office marriage, false names ; the girl swearing she was
over age, when she was only in her ’teens. I can’t see
it’s binding, anyway. It was just an experiment, you
know that. We thought we loved each other, but


damn sight you cared when the smash came : all your
idea then to keep it dark ; how did you think it could
end ?”
Ah, how had she thought at all ? Looking back now
it did seem incredible- —an experiment, a playing with
lire —yes, that was it —but she had thought she cared,
and Reg had said melodramatically they must keep it
secret or his father might "cut him out of the will.”
Some day he would make a queen of her, take her
abroad —he would have pots of money.
What had he in the end ? A blackened family
name, not two sixpences to rub against one another,
and her brief leap of passion by then gone down to
ashes. Both were to blame, but she was only a school-
girl—how much had she known ? And after that night—
she shuddered and burned—after that night she knew
then she did not love him. She had tasted of the tree
of knowledge and found it bitter. As he flamed she
had grown cold : sick, physical distaste—what was it ?
Other women submitted in marriage to men whom
one wondered . . .
Pah ! In the light of her new love for Liam, how
shaming, how vile, it was! And this woman whom
Reg now wanted to marry; whom he had “com-
promised”, perhaps deliberately —what was she ? A
Mexican picture-actress with a lot of money, apparently,
who had been married quite a lot before. Fascinating
. . . Synfye believed she had seen her pictures some-
where in an illustrated paper.
Was she jealous of her ? Oh, no. What did it matter
what Reg did now, since they were both out of love
and both nauseated the memory of that brief and
irritating union ? She with her fledgeling experience,
he with his warm sensual nature thwarted. . . .


She shuddered again. . . . The sun came through
the uncurtained window in a warm golden splash
on the pine-board floor.
On one of her sleek white arms was an ugly bruise.
She fingered this thoughtfully, considering this letter
from Olga, breathing a kind of renewal of life's spirit
in the older woman : an independence of feeling she
had previously lacked. If she had only known sooner
that her adopted mother could be like this ; she had so
much dreaded the hysterical weeping, the bitter
reproaches for her treacheries, “betraying my trust
under my own roof”, the ever-active jealousy in Olga
Arnold’s heart finding vent in words that seared,
the knowledge that it was all deserved . . . not making
the anticipations any easier . . . tortuous, crooked
had been Synfye’s ways while she stayed with her
benefactress, but was not the woman with her violent
envies of all who caught and held the girl’s interest
somewhat to blame ? She had, in a sense, cowed
Synfye’s confidence, that otherwise might have been
bold enough to tap at the doors of her understanding,
asking for the so sorely needed counsel. It was to rough,
kindly old Tom Tregurtha she had carried her problem
in the end, or rather had meant, and still meant, to
do so, if such a stupid thing as Tom’s catarrhal deafness
had not intervened, and one could hear from one end
of Tregurtha’s house to the other. . . . All these
drawbacks so complicated life.
Miraculously removed —in novels, where things
occurred in order and in fitting surroundings, Life
always staged things badly. Even whilst Liam was
tearing her to pieces with his Irish fury of words
(how eloquent he became when he was angry, so angry
that sometimes what he said was mercifully slurred).


What a worm she had appeared in her own eyes when
he had finished with her ; and somehow she couldn’t
flame in anger in her own defence when he was unjust,
as one of the most kindly and at the same time most
unforgiving race in the world must always be. Whatever
virtues a typical Irishman has, logic is not included.
She was somehow . . . broken. Even when he thrust
her from him and hurt her arm she could not be angry,
in the backbone-stiffening way she meant to be.
She was noticing all the time that there was a button
sewn on his soft faded blue shirt with black cotton,
mark of the bachelor with no one to look after him—
black cotton, a white pearl button ; the others stitched
with white thread. He had done this himself. She
could imagine him, brows frowning over blue intent
eyes, his tongue protruding a little between his firm
lips with his anxiety over the task, the bad light from
the oil lamp catching here and there the glimmer of
the needle, the waves of his crisp dark hair. She
believed he had said he had sat up late "mending”
when they first met—tidying his wardrobe, to be neat
in her eyes
She was fascinated by that shirt button sewn with
black cotton, and he was branding her with names not
usually bandied in polite society—and she bowed her
head to the tempest and let him rave. When he finally
thrust her from him—perhaps she had tried to put
her arms round his neck, she couldn’t remember now :
perhaps she had only stumbled, suddenly—seeing
nothing through her tears, but his quick backward
fling of her had sent her headlong to the ground. He
had not paused to help her up ... he had rushed
away into the timber.
She had staggered to her feet, caught her horse,


commenced to ride back to Tregurtha’s, then abruptly
turned in her tracks and ridden back as the sun made
a ripe cornfield of the western heavens, poppies blood-
red amongst the corn where the orb hid behind the
darkening trees —ridden back to plead, to explain,
abase herself still further —Synfye, who was so proud.
He was not in the clearing by White Witches ;
his horse pawed the ground anxiously, whinnying,
it seemed uneasy at the long delay of its beloved
master.
She tethered her hack again and crept into the closer
timber. He could not be far away : she must find him
lest some other and more dreadful deed had been done
where White Witches cast their strange spell upon a
gloaming world. Like wraiths of departed happiness
they stood, their crests murmurous with unseen and
threatening wings.
Then beyond their shadow she heard a sound, low
and terrible.
And when she saw what caused it, she retreated as
might one who has come into a temple, forgetting to
remove the shoes from his feet. For Liam M’Pheris
was down upon his face on the brown leaf-strewn
breast of mother earth, weeping like a little child over
the shattered shards of his dream.
She did not know how she mounted her hack again
and rode to Tregurtha’s, how she explained to Mrs. Tom
and Tom, now on the highroad to hearing explanations,
that she had been bushed ; had a sun headache;
wanted to go to bed st aight away : no, did not care
for tea. How sick the tray of toast and the nice brown
egg that was thrust round her half-open door made
her feel!
The catch of the door was insecure ; it never would


shut properly, and if you did succeed in closing it, it
was bound to blow open when wind or footsteps rever-
berated in the verandah. She tied it up with stout string
before she got into bed ; threw egg and toast out of
the window for the goannas and early birds ; and
pushed the empty china and tray into the verandah
before she fastened herself in from kindly prying eyes,
for one of the saddest and longest nights of her life.
She had meant to taste and try of the fruit of Good
and Evil and to escape all ill effects. What had she
really meant to do ? How had she expected it to end ?
Little use to ask this now. She had tasted : she
had not found it good and she would carry perhaps
a life-long indigestion because of her foolish sampling.
As is so often the case, when unsupported youthful
passion dies, hatred takes its place. She hated Reg
Powis with a vast unreason now. He had been little
worse than herself ; she had tempted, he had taken ;
even if she tempted unguessing the forces with which
she played. . . . Tickling a lion through the bars of
his cage with a straw ; Fate, the keeper, in a careless
moment left the door unbarred.
Young things don’t always know how to deal with
lions uncaged which they have, in ignorance, tickled
with a straw, feeling so safe outside the bars.
I did not know—l did not know ! She could at least
truthfully say that. In some ways her youth had been
too much defended, kept in ignorance. Reg was to
blame there. He was not innocent; he had tricked
and cajoled her into playing with lions; wild beasts
were loosed. Men’s passions were not to be bound by
muslin scarfs, deterred by silken threads.
Well, he would say she was his wife. That gave him
licence. Wife ? How much ? She had almost forgotten.


Had there not been a streak of deceitfulness in her
make-up, she could not have done this thing under
Mrs. Arnold’s roof, to trick her.
It had seemed so romantic —“The boy husband—
the girl wife.”
Ugh, she was sick with the recollection ! But surely
a thing so fleeting could not destroy a whole life ?
She must be free, there must be ways . . . there were
clever lawyers in the city ; she must ask Tom Tre-
gurtha. How should she get him alone to-day. Ask
him to go for a walk with her as far as the bungalows ?
Ask him to drive her in the buckboard somewhere ?
She must manage it. In the meantime she would go
to her bath. One bathed, though kingdoms reeled.
The cold bath braced her. She would not give in, she
meant to have Liam yet. Damn him !
She rubbed herself rosy all over with one of Tom
Tregurtha’s roughest bath towels. How dare he push
her over like that ? How dare he bruise her pretty
arm, even if she was legally another man’s wife ? Liam
had no right to go on like that.
She sat on the edge of the high tub ; as perfect an
olive-skinned Venus as ever sat for Praxilites in the
old days of primal loveliness, and then her courage
melted within her; the tears smarted again on her
tired lids.
Oh, Liam ! Liam ! The shirt button sewn on with
black thread; the dear dark head of him pressed to
the dry brown unheeding earth when it should have
been couched on her breast—her aching Artemis-firm
bosoms that longed to base his dear dark crinkled
head ! Liam ! Liam ! crying like a little boy who wants
his mother’s lap, his mother’s ever tender hands, to
comfort him.


Oh ! she could not bear this parting ! She must
go to Liam, must tell him if she couldn’t marry him
she would stay with him anyway, his mistress, his
slave.
"Oh, Liam, I want to —to sew your buttons on
with w-white cotton-n !” she sobbed to the badly-
fitted slabs of the rough bathroom through which the
sun and wind came merrily, the wind full of the scents
of gum leaves, and little bitter-sweet bush flowers.
Liam, face down on the earth ! Liam, calling her
“Harlot!“
Tom Tregurtha advised patience and a lawyer.
He would go down to Sydney with her himself, since
he trusted no lawyers and believed in “being on the
spot”. Couldn't she tell Mrs. Arnold about it now ?
“Mrs Arnold will be that glad to see you again, it
might be easier.”
“She doesn’t want me, either,” said Synfye bitterly.
They were sitting on a newly-felled tree about half a
mile from the house. Some timber-getters had been
here ; Tom had had a row with them about encroach-
ing on his property. His mind was half on their enor-
mities now, as he considered Synfye’s case. He had
made no special comment on her story ; had expressed
no overweening surprise; perhaps he was still a little
deaf and missed some of the points. What was clear
to him, however, was all that really mattered. Synfye
Jackson had somehow got herself married; Synfye
had always had what she wanted from babyhood as
far as Tom was concerned, and he thought her entitled
to everything she did want, and certainly also entitled
to escape the consequences of any of her actions when
the desired prize turned out to be something she did
not want, as one might pick an innocent-looking green


gum-leaf cocoon from a bough and find it full of ants
that stung. Anyone, of course, might do that. . . .
Synfye had got herself married to a man she did not
want to be married to at any time, nor any longer.
He was connected with a father who had disgraced
himself and caused the widow and orphan to lose their
hard-earned savings. That was enough in itself.
Stuart Jackson’s daughter must not be allied to these
sort of people. Tom himself was unbreakably honest.
He would rather have impaled himself on one of his
own kangaroo fences than have cheated anyone in the
world ; especially, of course, widows and orphans.
Synfye had got herself married; now she must get
herself unmarried. If there were difficulties, they must
be swept away. “Swept away,’’ repeated Tom with a
fine gesture. There was a mosquito on the back of his
hand. He swatted it furiously. Mosquitoes found Tom
wherever he went.
“I think we’ll get back to the house,” he said,
dwelling on the comfort of his mosquito-proof leggings
—his ankles were being attacked. Being still a semi-
invalid, he had come out in slippers. “The lawyers,
of course, must do something,” said Tom again as he
flip-flopped back to the homestead, followed by a cloud
of gnats. ‘They will, you know, if they’re paid enough. ”
Yes. There was hope the lawyers would do something
—snap those chains that galled them both now.
She remembered vaguely some talk about “collu-
sion” she had overheard on a ferry boat in connection
with a divorce case. It had been explained to her as
husband and wife agreeing to part and “framing a
case.” No need to frame anything ; there was Reg’s
letter.
But Liam ? Would he consider her whitewashed,


when she was free, by the letter of the law ? That was
a different matter. Unforgiving, she had seen loathing
in his eyes.
But he had loved her, her nearness, her touch.
Could she not melt his icy scorn : could she not find
the rent in his armour with those soft hands of hers,
those passionate eyes, that tender mouth, and the little
rounded chin he loved so well ? Could she not make
him see its adorableness again ? She would leave
no lure untried to win him back, and if he did not
want to marry her now, well—there were other ways.
For, despite her lesson, Synfye was holding out her
desiring hands to life and laughter and colour and glow,
holding them out, forgetting they were already marked
with unhealed scars.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
Forsworn and weary and weak are you;
You have shattered the trust that held you true;
And your word has been but a wind-blown thing.
A bribe for peace at a chance to fling.
You have hated yourself, for the blot that mars
The brave white soul that came near the stars.
“The Song of Stars’’
The pictures fade, the music falls asleep,
The tapping heels have fled the wax-ed floor;
Only my heartache seems to fill the world.
“Heartache'
Pigs. He had a good mind to chuck it all, pigs and
profits, and the garden he had been making : not
because he was much good in gardens, but because
she might like it when she came to live there.
He had so long made up his mind she was going to
live there. In the innocence of his vainglorious soul he
had believed he could content her, a girl who had
“had a good time” in Sydney ; been feted and flattered.
Well, hadn’t she come back to the bush of her own free
will ? If Liam wasn’t the attraction, who was ?
Hadn’t she let him kiss her, kissed back ? And all
the time she had been another man’s wife. Damaged
goods.
He kicked the Tamworth sow. It was quite unfair ;
she expostulated, grunting and squealing her grievances.
Why kicked ? Not enough to really hurt her, of course,
but enough to show the state of his feelings towards
female th ngs. He would go to the highways and by-
ways again, happy as he had been when he only owned
two shirts, and no coat to speak of.


He would fare forth with his flute again, trilling to
the small green hills that were like an inland sea con-
gealed by a touch of magic, to dawns palely pink as
Dutch bulbs, to sunsets red with storm. Rot ! He
still had a certain pride in his pigs, his renovated home-
stead, the way he had made good. The “property
sense’’ was awake. It would not sleep easily. Why
should he go vagabond again ? Because another man’s
wife had tricked him ? Had she got some fun out of it ?
She did not seem very glad when he saw her last.
Why should she be glad ? She was losing a fine
man.
You are not going to get an Irishman to belittle
himself : indade and you’re not.
There were plenty of other girls. But they would
not be like Synfye Jackson. Synfye Jackson. . . .
No, not Jackson. What had she said her real name
was ? Had she told him ? He had forgotten ; much
of that last meeting with Synfye was recalled only as a
red blur on the fairness of the day, red like blood.
But he wouldn’t question her. No. He would just
never see her again. She would go back to the city,
perhaps make it up with the invisible husband.
Could it be after joking she was ? Synfye was such
a tease sometimes, like himself. Could she have made
the whole thing up just to try him ?
He shook his head at the Tam worth sow, guzzling
skimmed milk in her trough.
No. He might not be logical but he could see when a
thing was true. It was true, though why he should
have been flayed to appease her craving for admiration,
experiment, adventure, he couldn’t conceive, because
even now he did not doubt she cared for him. Of course
she cared ! And that gave him a weapon to strike back


with. He had a long memory, like all the sons of his
race, for an injury.
He believed, in a sense, in his star; opportunity
would be given him to retaliate on Synfye. He would
take it. . . . He went slowly back to his house. How
desolate it looked in the warm flood of sunshine to-day!
He would make some tea, he would play his flute.
But when he had boiled his kettle and made his tea
and seated himself on the chintz seat by the window
and taken up his flute to set it against his obstinate
lips, he found the deed refused to follow the will.
He could not play, his blue eyes grew wide, terrified.
Was it going to be as bad as that ? The singing soul
of him seemed to be stricken dumb. He would
forget her, of course he would ; wanton wife, cruel
mistress.
He, Liam MTheris, had the blood of Ireland’s Kings ;
he would think it a shame to himself could he not
forget her.
He would forget. But perhaps he would never play
upon his flute any more. Where had the harper soul
of him gone ? The harper soul that had left a music
in the flower heads as he passed ? The harper soul
that drew near to warm camp-fires of old, where shaggy
men and dusky women consorted, coming down through
the daffodils with his harp of applewood, the far-off
forbear of Liam MTheris, the Dublin lad ?
He was an empty temple now, a temple that had
housed a song.
Away at Tregurtha’s Synfye was writing to Olga
Arnold, with difficulty unbosoming herself, feeling as
she wrote the edged comments of the woman to whom
the letter would go, feeling her own smallness, hypo-
crisies, till the writing of that letter became her


crucifixion, and a tear dropped on the sheets ; a tear
that somehow purged her soul of its self-love.
Perhaps Olga would tear the letter across and refuse
to answer it. Perhaps she would become ill with grief.
Perhaps she would even die of the shock, and the thing
she had wrought would haunt Synfye to the grave.
An old couplet had been jangling in her brain all
day : the couplet drummed into little children in the
prim day of the young Queen Victoria.
. . . What a tangled web we weave
When first we practice to deceive
She remembered she had quoted it once in fun to
Liam —when they were together at the pink and cream
house amongst the fern. A tangled web, a web wherein
she would die herself, perhaps, while Fate the bloated
spider watched her final agonies.
Practice to deceive
Tennyson had written something like that, too.
The sin that practice burns into the blood
Will brand us after of whose fold we be .
Dear old Tennyson, who had spoiled so many fine
things by being too mid-Victorian, too much of an eye
on Mrs. Grundy all the time! Hadn’t he inserted
“Marriage morn” in one poem for fear that anyone
should believe when he spoke of "happy night” that
his lovers had not enjoyed the benefit of clergy ! Dear,
funny old Tennyson.
How she had loved "The Lady of Shallot”, "The
Brook”, and "The Idylls of the King”. The books
had been her father’s.


She doubted if he read them much, but she had
devoured them at the top of the wild apple tree.
Down she came and found a boat
Beneath the willows left afloat,
And round about the prow she wrote
The Lady of Shallot.
And Lancelot mused a little space;
He said she has a lovely face:
God in His mercy, lend her grace,
The Lady of Shallot.
Would Liam have prayed that for her, had he found
her dead, in a boat ? One couldn’t be that here, because
there were no boats. No, in any case Liam would much
more readily have consigned her to the Devil.
She sighed, took up her pen again ; she wished she
was dead, and went on with her letter.
She could hear something grunting and groaning
in the dining-room near the mantelshelf where the
purple cakes were. Tom Tregurtha was also writing
a letter, wrestling with catarrh, sweat and agony.
It was so long since he had written to his lawyers.
Riding up to the gate, grey with dust and yearning
for a long draught from the tin pannikin that hung
by the canvas water-bag on the verandah, the mailman
was ignorant what a figure of Fate he presented to at
least two pairs of eyes.
Ignorant still, as he rode away towards the township
and the railway, that he carried the futures of three
lives in his leathern mailbag from Tregurtha’s. It
was only a light bag, but as dangerous as a Bolshevik
bomb of a later period.
He called at Liam M’Pheris’s as he went through,
had a snack and a yarn. Thought the young Irishman
had a grouch about something, but the mailman having


Scotch-Australian breeding, never could quite under-
stand the “likes of they Irishers”. He believed they
always had a grievance of some kind “if you ask me,
by gum” ; however, he certainly found they never
grudged a cove a feed : that was a dispensation for
their other failings. Liam supplied little to assuage
his curiosity at any time. He never wrote or received
letters. There must be something queer about a fellow
who added nothing to the postage-stamp revenue.
The mailman jogged on through the growing shadows.
Yet, when Olga Arnold received Synfye’s letter of
confession, although her surface feeling was surprise
as well as chagrin, her greater surprise was to discover
something stirring in the subconsciousness of her mind, a
spiritual voice, as it were, expressing itself very for-
cibly as being in no way taken aback. “I knew it all
the time: something like this,” cried that suddenly
active tongue.
Uncommon, yet not so very unique, this experience
in the inner life of human beings. Something lying
dormant till the message from the outer world reached
it through the physical ear; something that “knew
all the time.”
Whether it was the conversation of the little old-age
pensioner pointing a gate towards the philosophy that
accepts each thing as it comes, and wastes no minute
of the precious piled seconds between this world and
eternity, the one world of which the old age pension
at least felt sure, Olga could not define. Sufficient it
was that she realized a new strength in herself to meet
hitherto untoward happenings. Synfye had yielded to
an impulse of adventure at Reg Powis’s suggestion,
akin to that in the old story of the young couple


walking in English fields, seeing a church, and exclaim-
ing "Here’s a church; let’s get married.” There
seemed no more rhyme or reason in the action of these
two, which they were subsequently to so feverishly
regret.
Both wished to keep it secret : Synfye because it
was “more romantic and exciting,” rushing into such
a serious business as matrimony with about as much
idea of all it really entailed as a bridal wax doll in a
toy-shop window; Reg because he was afraid of his
father’s cutting his allowance (having married young
himself, Powis Senior was firmly set against such a
step for his children) and also because he, too, felt he
could pluck his fruit and yet "have a good time”
without the openly restricting trammels of marriage.
He liked to eat his cake and have it, did Reg.
And now that both were soul-sick from the effects
of trying to achieve that impossible combination in
life—for loss somehow automatically accompanies
every gain, and no human being keeping the Tribal
law can have “things both ways”, as the old age
pensioner would have expressed it-—Olga would be no
whit behind Tom Tregurtha in helping her adopted
daughter to wipe out the past and gain her freedom.
Olga knew some men of influence in the newspaper
world : she thought she could manage to suppress
their slogan “Publicity (for things that are no real
concern of a decent public) to do our duty to our
readers”. The slogan that makes such alarming and
lurid headlines on domestic matters in Sunday news-
papers and so helps and swells circulation.
Olga set her wits to work as she moved about the
house, galvanized into activity by her own astonish-
ment at her lack of astonishment induced by Synfye’s


long self-accusing and self-excusing letter. It was a
very affectionate letter, too. She clung to Olga as a
drowning man to a straw, really believing when she
wrote her letter that Olga would be naught but a straw
and Tom Tregurtha the only solid raft within view.
Synfye was to be pleasantly and gratefully dis-
appointed in her doleful expectations. Olga would
stand shoulder to shoulder with Tom, and Olga’s first
step was to go to her own lawyers and then to her bank.
One action naturally follows the other in polite society.
Also, Olga decided she would not be accused of
complicity if she saw Reg Powis. She would take
precautions, anyway, and go deeply veiled. It was all
rather interesting when one came to think it over.
Reg would need some tracing possibly. She would
trace him. There might be ways of buying him off
if he showed fight, but with the gist of his letter to
Synfye before her she hardly thought he would do that.
She ran him to earth one morning in a frowsy lodging-
house in a once well-known city square. The tall steep
stairs belonged to a period as far back as the ’sixties.
In this part of Sydney the houses had been built
verandah-less, like illustrations in older editions of
Dickens. There was a smell of cockroaches and other
less reputable beasts ; a reek of cabbage from some
dark and beetle-haunted kitchen below stairs; a
faint aroma of stale beer and somebody’s washing.
She knocked at the door indicated, a door badly in
need of a scrub, and a morose voice answered some-
thing. She did not know if it was “Come in’’, so knocked
again with the handle of her ivory-headed umbrella,
a handle bought in China by Basil.
The door was opened stealthily a few inches, a fair
tousled head which she wouldn’t have recognized as


Reg’s peered suspiciously round. His eyes were heavy
with sleep: she noticed the looseness of his lips, the
general seediness of his appearance, and swiftly won-
dered if the story of the film actress could be a lie
after all. Surely no attractive, sought-after woman,
particularly one with money, as he had said, would
risk much for this loose-lipped man whose linen was
not over-clean and whose chin was covered with fair
stubble. How Reg Powis had gone to pieces in the last
few years ! Who would have believed this the dapper
boy who had escorted Synfye to dances and sent
Olga flowers to pave the way to the duenna’s heart.
Suddenly she was sorry.
“Can I come in ?”
Surlily he nodded, drew forward the least unsafe of
the cane bottomed chairs, hastily pulled a battered
screen with a stork on it before an unmade bed, and a
blind over a grimy window.
With a touch of his old jaunty manner ;
“Not a very delightful reception-room, Mrs. Arnold ?
But I’m down and out, as no doubt you know.’’
He began to abuse his father as the author of his ill-
luck, but she stopped him abruptly.
“No, I did not come here to talk about your luck
or your poor father,” she said evenly, “but about-
Synfye.”
He flushed. “You know, then ?”
“Yes, I know ; and it seems to me a hard thing that
you should have taken advantage of her unsophisticated
girlhood.”
He looked sheepish, fidgeted his ragged carpet
slippers on the patchwork mat that appeared as though
a dog had worried it
“We were both mad, in a way. I know all you would


say, Mrs. Arnold; believe me, I only want her to get
clear now—l realize I’m a rotter—l don’t want to
accuse Synfye.”
Olga felt a new respect for him. She wondered how
he had thought of the film actress notion ; she believed
he was trying to do the decent thing : he realized
what he had made of Synfye’s future as things now
were : he was showing a manly spark. He was ready
to further blacken himself that Synfye might go free.
“I hope he won’t see Synfye,” said the worldly-
wise voice of experience, for Synfye was far more
alluring now than she had been in the more callow
months when she was still at finishing-school. Some
spark of the old passion might set alight the fuel
piled in every man’s heart. Desire might strip him again :
he might not be so ready, then, to do the manly thing.
‘Yes,” warned sophistication: "He must not see
Synfye. ” For where a man has once possessed may come
the longing to possess again. It is always a difficult
thing to predict in absence how much of old love is
cold ashes, how much holds a live coal to be fanned
to existence again by the presence of the once beloved.
And legally, she was still his wife.
Yes : he must not see Synfye. Then Olga became as
wily as a serpent, with the smell of cabbage creeping
under the badly fitting door and the added aroma of
burning toast half-way up the dark staircase.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
Lolita, when the kissing is done
And we come at last to the long Good-bye,
I shall not forget how the dimples moved
In those cheeks where only the wrinkles lie;
I shall hold you dear—when you’re cold—and grey
For those madcap moments of yesterday.
“Lolita”
To-day I go faring for clover blooms, nutty and sweet and clean.
The breath of a green September wind that is blown over
Tambourine.
—' ‘Chemeia’ ’
But the goddess of Chance is a tricky jade who loves
to complicate still further a complicated situation.
She hates, in fact—and I'm sure this deity is not
masculine —to see anything neatly finished off. On
occasion she will herself decide that a happy ending is
the thing in a play set for tragedy: she manipulates, and
shamelessly does she pull strings, push forward marion-
ettes and strangle flesh and blood with broidered arrases.
In the case of Synfye she decided to checkmate Olga
Arnold, who went about in her silk velvet coat lined
with fuchsia, looking years younger and thinking herself
a perfect Machiavelli.
Synfye, having returned to Sydney at the lawyer’s
wish, felt more keenly her swift recurring need of soli-
tude amongst birds and trees and the things of her
untroubled babyhood. The dearest to her was her
beloved White Witches whose grove she meant to buy
as soon as the few acres they stood on were thrown
open for selection, even if she had to sell her old home
to enable her to make the purchase. She told Olga


Arnold her one desire now was “to retire from the
world, build herself a slab hut near White Witches, and
grow enough for her own support.”
“Pigs, I suppose,” Olga laughed. Indeed her adopted
mother’s newly found sang-froid and acute sense of
humour was one of the puzzles Synfye discovered
awaiting her in Sydney; rather discomposing to a
young woman who was, just now, keyed for high
tragedy followed by a sojourn “far from the madding
crowd.”
“No ! not pigs : I hate them.”
Surely Mrs. Arnold did not think her idea of buying
White Witches as a residential site, in the language of
town planners, was due to the fact that it was in the
ambit of Liam MTheris ?
Of course, she would never see Liam again ; she
couldn’t explain this to Mrs. Arnold without running
the risk of having the French proverb “qui s excuse,
s’accuse” flung at her by this kindly, but annoying lady.
Her irritation with her dear adopted parent only
increased her wish for a day to herself amongst trees
and things that “did not speculate about one’s soul-
processes.”
She took a ticket down the Illawarra line : she went
to National Park. Olga demurred at her running away
alone again, then abruptly agreed. “But don’t wander
about the bush alone,” she admonished . . . "and
remember your appointment with Mr. Horne, of
Jackson & Dellaware, is for ten to-morrow.”
“I’m not staying all night.”
Synfye was drawing on her glove preparatory to
rushing down-hill to the ferry-boat.
Olga smiled and went on making point lace. Some-
how she appeared determined to occupy every minute


of her life in work or play. Her periods of idleness were
over : she said once, whimsically, she would have a
long sleep some day—under a tombstone—and Synfye
had accused her of being morbid, and quite mistakenly.
For the first time in her life the philosopher’s stone
was hers.
There is a little glade which Sydney lovers know and
where tethered boats at the water’s edge prove they
like it well, along Kangaroo creek. You can hire a
boat and go there tele d tete. You can watch the black
and white shags drying their wings on half-submerged
logs ; you can wander amongst the bracken if you so
wish ; you may, if you are lucky, see a lyre bird pecking
in the underbrush or running with amazing swiftness
up perpendicular banks. You can push your boat up-
stream under a hanging arras of green ; you can see
red waratahs amongst grey rocks, a wide road, a stone
trough where the water of a crystal spring tastes like
fairy wine.
You can have a glorious untroubled day on Nature’s
breast not twenty miles from a vast city, but if you
are sad at heart, your trouble goes with you and the
sun and air and leafy green shadow cannot quite dispel,
though it may alleviate, since there is no sedative in
the world like a day in the open.
Chance, the tricksy jade, did not mean Synfye’s to
be a sedative day. By no means !
Synfye was picking flowers. She had left her boat at
the cool green sedge : she knew it was against the rules
to pick wild flowers here, but she yet had to learn to
respect men’s laws. One so often got out of things with
a smile and the excuse of ignorance. She could look
peculiarly innocent when she chose.
She was a little alarmed when she heard a man’s


steps coming through the bracken; of course, she knew
she had no right to leave the waterway, where there
were other boats and other trippers to lend an ear.
She was not very far from the creek ; she could
see it flashing between the boughs, but could she make
herself heard in a hearty scream if she were frightened
by a tramp ?
She began to make her path through the wiry ferns
to where her boat lay, guarded by olive and emerald
branches and swinging in the ripples, and then she
stopped, transfixed to the spot, the fern to her waist,
a big upreared root of a fallen tree half-hiding her from
the intruder; only the glimpse of her rose-pink
cotton frock to be seen amidst the nut-brown stripes
and glossy fronds. It must be Liam ! Liam whom the
good Gods had brought to her again as they brought
him to the mountain retreat; he had come to the city
ready to forgive, to help her to find that open door to a
garden of roses wherein he could lead her before the
world. Liam, with his sea-blue eyes and his dark
crinkled hair, and his mouth all laughter and tender-
ness, not stern any more
He had found out from Mrs. Arnold where she had
gone : he had followed where love led. . . .
But it wasn’t Liam.
Reg Powis, in a cheap ready-made suit and a jaunty
straw hat looking a good deal more like his old self
than when Olga Arnold had found him in his lodgings ;
Reg, shaved and clear-eyed, here with a picnic party —a
rather attractive girl from a tobacconist’s had persuaded
him to come : he might as well pass the time pleasantly
while the lawyers were preparing the writs for the
case he did not mean to defend, and which he knew
from Mrs. Arnold would at most make but a bald


appearance in print. After that he would take the offer
of an old friend of his father’s and go wheat-growing in
the Riverina. He had gleaned a little practical know-
ledge in the Argentine. He did not think he would
settle down again in the sense of taking another wife,
but a fellow could have a pretty fair time.
The bronze-haired little girl from the tobacconist’s
promised to make life pleasanter, and every man likes
feminine appreciation, especially when it has a pursed-
up red mouth and bronze hair, and once the divorce
suit was over and done with he could feel he had
done a noble thing, even though there was no particular
self-denial involved : he did not care a bit for Synfye
now ; in fact, he did not feel sure he would know her
if they met; Reg Powis was quite confident about his
future. In the main he was really a kind-hearted chap,
only his father had mucked up his life for him, by—•!
Oh, well, he wouldn’t think about that now. Perhaps
Mrs. Arnold, good old sport, was right about the old
man ; one shouldn’t slang one’s begetter—and as for
Synfye . . .
And there was a woman before him now amongst
the rust of copper and dull golds of the bracken with
the great-boled sighing gum trees behind her, and the
flick of a lyre bird’s tail disappearing amongst the grass,
a woman who had just a vague look of Synfye—the
Synfye Jackson he had not, after all, forgotten.
This was a very lovely woman. She knew him : he
had not altered so much. Olga Arnold had gone to
him with prejudiced eyes. He was still Reg, round-
faced, fair, more or less sleek, Reg, of whom she
remembered other things, now hateful to her.
“Reg !” she said, and shivered.
“Synfye !” he almost shouted, and turned brick-red


to his fair hair and new straw hat. “Synfye ! ” and then
came another thought ; “My wife.”
His wife ! How she outshone the little fluffy berib-
boned girl from the tobacconist’s. Was her hair natural,
after all ? Synfye’s, he knew, was ; had he not felt its
warm softness about his burning face in the night
watches : had he not twisted it into little rings round
his lover’s fingers : had he not ?
Synfye, now rosy red, now pale as death before
him, with anger and outraged feeling in her dark
eyes . . . Synfye, how she kept the salt of life with
her ! How vapid were other women when Synfye
was there!
And she was still legally his ; the word had not been
spoken to part them—no decree had been made
absolute, and if he defended the case, would it ever
be ? He could prove his lie, the lie he had meant to
be the key to the unlocking of the door—anything
that might have made the lie more like truth was
safely hidden amongst the poisonous scented hovels of
the earth where men can sin secretly and creep secretly
away.
And, after all, had Synfye lived the blameless life of a
married woman, separated by many thousands of miles
from her husband, since he saw her last ? The shoe
might be on the other foot if he began to make inquiries.
He could bluff, anyway.
She said nothing, staring at him with wide eyes like
a cornered creature at bay, a creature that means to
die standing.
She was much prettier than he had ever dreamed
and she was his to have, to hold, till death did them
divide. To have, especially to hold.
He took a step forward, "You're—" He stopped;


she seemed to cast some spell upon him, as though she,
like Briinhilde, was in her ring of flame.
“I am going—to divorce you,” she said. Her voice
seemed very small to her ; to him it was a clarion.
Divorce him ? Why ? How ?
It came to him that he did not know if he really
wanted to be divorced from Synfye. He had not
properly thought it out ; he had not quite realized it.
After all, the parsons might be right—once married,
you were one for all time.
It would be rather . . . pleasant to be . . . one
for all time, with this beautiful, palpitating being in
the pink cotton frock before him . . . one . . . for
all time.
"Howareyou, Mrs. Powis?” he said loudly. If he
called her Mrs. Powis, it would make things more real.
She shuddered. “Don't,” she said. “I’m not . . .
I won’t. . . . Oh, Reg, you know you wish to be free,
just as much as I do.”
“I’m not so sure, I’m not sure now,” muttered Reg.
She still remembered his eyes ; Little, red, like an
animal’s looking out of a cave. They were like that now,
his mouth was wet and scarlet. She hated his mouth :
she hated him altogether, but she hated his wet lips
most of all.
The fern and flowers she had gathered fell at her
feet. If she had a weapon—
Her brown eyes blazed in her set white face,
If she only—had—a weapon !
He was keeping a grip on himself, though she saw how
his hands shook. She knew now what that signified.
“You must be sure,” she breathed wildly. “You
must be sure, because I’ll never come back to you
alive—never, never !”


"I’m not such a bad sort of bloke, Synfye. We might
start afresh. I’ve a chance in the country. I’ve learned
my lesson. I ... I would treat you . . . just as
you wanted to be treated —and you did like me once,
do you remember ?”
If he reminded her of any tenderness she had shown
to him she would sink to the ground with shame, or
fly at him like a wild cat.
He did not, he could not, understand that when
you really loved you became all virgin again ;to
really care was to make you automatically faithful
to the one you adored.
Liam she might never see again, but as she felt to
Liam now. she would rather have flung herself into
Kangaroo Creek to drown amongst the water-lilies,
refusing to allow herself even to float, than to suffer
the close embracing of this man before her.
No marriage laws could bind her to a corpse of dead
passions.
She swore that silently, as his eyes lingered over her
body and her young face, her dimpled chin, her dark
curls showing beneath her saffron straw hat—lingered
as do the eyes of a slave-buyer, or some husbands.
“You are . . . still my wife,” he said thickly.
“I'll kill you if you come near me,” she whispered.
“Kill me ? I like that; you forget, darling, I was
something of an athlete—am still. I can take what is
mine if I choose: your dear little fists could not keep
me off. And if the lawyers know we met here to-day,
alone in lovers’ nook —I don’t think you’ll find it so
easy to prove how much we hate each other, our
rights to breaking our bonds, do you ? Law is a funny
thing, you know.”
“I don’t care what the law does,” she panted. She


looked round, stooped swiftly, and caught a stout
knobbed stick, part of the branch of a blue gum some
picnicker had made into a waddy and then discarded
or forgotten, from among the grasses at her feet.
‘‘lf you dare come an inch nearer ”
He laughed, took his straw hat from his bright
smooth hair, and flung it into the bushes.
"I like your spirit. I was always one who would
like a kiss best after a tussle for it. Come on —wife.”
He came, his wet red mouth, his small fierce amorous
eyes, his clutching powerful hands and, as he lowered
his head and rushed toward her like a footballer
entering a scrum, all boy for a moment in his mingled
amusement and ardour, she closed her small hands
with their slight steel-like wrists about the waddy,
and brought it with full force down on his sleek
brilliantined head.


CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
High she dwelt in her magic tower
Over forest and open land.
And the web she wove with her patient hand
Was a screed that a child could understand.
Blossom and bud and tree and flower.
Only the birds remembered her,
Prinking plumes on her airy sill.
As she matched a thread to a glowing bill,
For they came to sing to her at her will,
When the spring tides were astir.
“Vision Tower’
One side of the sapling hut was composed of two of
the White Witches sawn off some fourteen feet from
the ground; they had sprouted and added their
fresh green foliage to the shelter given by the bark roof
of the hut. Three sides of the little building were of
horizontally-placed saplings, carefully planed and
nailed to the log uprights which were set firmly in the
earth. The floor of the hut, also made of saplings,
smoothed and mortised, was some six feet from the
ground. Underneath, and between the strong four
corner posts, sheltered on three sides by bark wired
together, stood a spring cart, a carpenter’s bench, and
a couple of wooden stools, and in the corner a kind of
peaked trestle where was a saddle, and on the bark
wall attached to a sapling nailed from post to post
hung an assortment of cart harness and a bridle or two.
In and out half a dozen speckled hens and a Spanish
cockerel pecked and passed to and fro from excusions
in the surrounding bush.
Some three yards from the base of the little staircase


that ran from the ground to the upper room, which was
partitioned into two, and had a long wooden shuttered
window, almost invariably open to the winds of
Heaven, on the side farthest from the stairway —a
kind of glorified ladder dignified by its title of staircase
—was a square of garden enclosed because of the
incursions of paddy melons and kangaroo, by a w're-
netting fence, and entered by a rustic gate made of
gum saplings with the bark adhering. Over this wire
fence in season sweet pea in pale creams and pink and
crimsons straggled and made vivid plot of colour against
the grey-greens of the lesser timbers surrounding White
Witches; the surviving white gum trees, five in number,
flanked the sapling hut, keeping guard in their “circle
close’’ as had the nine White Witches of those many
years ago when the old rover quoted Horne and passed
on to leave them to Synfye, thus labelled for all
their years. They were sturdy trees despite the toll
wind and white ants had taken of their brethren.
Indeed, since she came to live here, Synfye Jackson
said she had spoken to them with woven spells and set a
charm about them just as of old. She believed they had
marked a magic upon her as a babe, a prenatal influence
Maeve had absorbed on the evening of Synfye’s birth.
The story of her mother’s meeting with her father,
of the finding of Maeve under the trees, was more or
less familiar to Synfye now. By chance she had met in
the township a daughter of the old bush Gamp who
w r as with Maeve the night when Synfye was born, and
the woman, now married to the postmaster of the
township, had told Synfye how her old mother used to
retail to her, then a romantic girl in service at a neigh-
bouring station, all Maeve had confided to her during
her convalescence, under the promise of secrecy,


which promise the old woman had kept until after
Maeve died, but which had been rung from her in her
grief and excitement over that tragic end of an idyll.
“Such a goot young frau she was,” the toothless old
midwife had muttered. She, too, slept now, with her
gnarled empty hands folded for all time, in the little
unevenly railed God’s acre of the town where the goats
were always breaking through the fences to eat of the
long well-nourished grasses, and which was made
hideous with inverted glass over white artificial
wreaths, and fancy scroll-work rails, brought up at
great expense from the city.
Synfye had been glad to know the story, for it gave
to her an added feeling that White Witches and her
life were inextricably mixed ; that near her beloved
satin-boled trees she must wait her great hour, and if it
never came . . . Well, the land was hers now : she
had sold the property where Stuart Jackson had toiled
and died. The allotment where her dear dead lay, she
reserved for her occasional pilgrimages to see that all
was in order there, and the family of new-chum English
who had bought it were kindly, reverent souls, and
looked upon the care of the graves as almost a religious
duty. They thought Synfye lovely, and romantic to
live in a sapling hut in a tree for six months of the year
comparatively alone, with only her rifle and some oblig-
ing natives in the camp beyond the spur to lend her a
hand when she needed them. The other six months
she stayed with Mrs. Arnold on North Shore, going to
balls, parties, and theatres, “brushing off the gum
leaves,” as she phrased it, and entering the life she had
left for the other half-year with renewed zest. It
was three years now since her divorce ; it had taken
just twenty minutes to obtain, so well had the wires


been pulled, so mum had both she and Olga kept over
that chance meeting with Reg Powis in National Park,
so more than decently had Reg behaved.
She wondered now, as she sat in her upper room
looking out on a green and grey and brown world
of rustling bough and slim, ragged sapling and smooth
white blue-shaded and mighty trunk, where every now
and then the green and grey was broken by the flirt
of a gaudy wing or a bird cry, sharp and clear ;
wondered what had become of Reg Powis; if his head
still bore a scar where she had felled him. What an
awful moment that had been, when she stood among
the trampled fern and saw him with blood on his fair
hair, apparently dead at her feet!
How plucky the little cigar-shop girl had been when
she came through the fern in answer to Synfye’s cry ;
how she had run for water and dabbed his brow while
his eyes slowly opened and he began to explain that
he had fallen and struck his head against a log and this
lady had—indicating Synfye—just “happened along.”
How much did the little cigar girl believe ? She had
shown herself a brick, anyway : Synfye could see her
now, devotedly trying to help Reg to the picnickers’
boats, for he was sick and shaky ; then, when he
collapsed on the log, his head in his hands, she had run
away again on such high tottering impossible heels for
“a drop of whisky from one of her boy friends,” and
Reg hurriedly outlined the best plans of defence
for Synfye.
“I admire you in a way, old girl, more than ever.
Spitfire, you know what you don’t want, anyway ! I
expect you’re keen on some other chap, all right.
Synfye, you’ve let out my hot blood, I’m going to
set you free,”


She did not think she had ever liked him better,
certainly she had never respected him so well. How
queer it was in life that people so often played the hero
just when one was branding them all knave! It seemed
after all there was gold deep down where one had never
bothered really to go to look for it. Reg wasn’t such a
bad sort. He was ready to take the blame from her
shoulders. She must never let him see her again ;
possibly, when the result of the blood-letting was over,
the flame she hated might return to his eyes, the longing
to his flesh. No, she must get away as quickly as she
could, leave him to the cigar girl, who was such a silly,
painted, fluffy-looking thing, and yet such a staunch
little woman at heart. Better, perhaps, than Synfye—
easily that —Synfye had not felt very noble as she left
Reg with his charmer and crept back to untie the
painter of her own boat and row with shaking hands
into the weed-laced stream where the discs of water-
lilies were like cups of ivory.
No, somehow she had felt she was slinking away.
She might have killed the man.
Olga took her sharply to task when she confessed, with
her bowed head against the older woman’s knees, the
happenings of her ‘ 'peaceful day among birds and trees. ’ ’
"Synfye, you can’t go on like this —marrying men
haphazard, and then trying to kill them; your craze
for experiments will land you in goal yet —under some
accusation for which I can’t bail you out. Where on
earth is it going to end ? If the lawyers hear of this
it’s going to complicate things horribly. How do you
know he won’t defend the case now, swear he’s ready
to keep you ? You’ll be in an awful hole. I suppose
you haven’t really a spark of love left for him —you
couldn’t


This, after all, seemed an easy, infinitely respectable,
way out. One could have a re-marriage—pretend it
had happened for the first time; use influence, get
Reg Powis a job in the city ; keep an eye on him.
Synfye leapt to her feet. The penitent was merged
in the fury.
"No ! No ! No ! I —I couldn’t, never, never ! The
very thought—oh, no, no !”
Mrs. Arnold nodded her head decidedly, once,
twice. "It’s as I thought,” she murmured.
But nobody spoke the name in both their minds—
the name of a blue-eyed Dublin lad who was hating
Synfye more than anything on earth as, at that moment,
he reached down a bottle of whisky from the top shelf
of his storeroom and handed it through the window
to Mack, who had a cow down with milk fever and had
come to borrow the best remedy.
"Don’t you be after drinking it yourself now, Mack,”
joked Liam M’Pheris. Behind Mack’s bent head on
its thick neck, he could see a star trembling like a tear
on a sky of Nile green and gloaming blue, with just one
orange rag left—-from sunset’s golden cloak twitched
over the edge of Day.
The wind seemed to bring the scent of pine-trees on a
sandy ridge ; he did not hear what Mack said as he
went gloomily off. He was so attached to the red cow,
and the calf was a weakling.
Liam M’Pheris found something else on the shelf
when he reached up for the whisky bottle. It was his
flute, gathering dust and cobweb. He took it down,
looked at it, put it to his lips, then flung it far from
him into the tangle of weeds that had meant to be a
garden.
“Damn all female things,” said Liam,


But Synfye had not known this. Later she had heard
that the Dublin boy had left Mack and the State
orphan in charge at the pig farm : had gone, some said,
to Ireland, for a trip; had disappeared from the district,
communicating with none but Mack, growing more
gloomy and more grizzled day by day, but with two
other helpers, now making a fair thing out of pigs.
Some day Synfye thought she would ride over there,
have a talk to Mack, recall old tender memories that
still stung. Would she ever quite forget ? She was
happy enough. She had widened in sympathy and
understanding.
Olga told her she was a fine woman now ; the old
experimental flair that led her so often into danger
not so easy to extricate her from, seemed to be quies-
cent.
“May break out again yet, you know,” mocked
Synfye when her adopted mother spoke to her on this
subject. “It’s bred in the bone; even my sapling hut is
an experiment I may tire of . . . but the antidote is,
of course, my six respectable months with you.”
“Aren’t you respectable in the sapling hut at White
Witches ?”
“Oh, as the world counts it. I’m not living with a
man, you know, or having wild week-ends, or anything
like that, and the world reckons a woman is respectabe
whatever she does, if it isn’t drinking, or men. You can
back-bite and slander, and destroy the happiness of
those about you, but that’s all within the law. Men
and drink aren’t, you know.”
Olga laughed. She was learning marquetry work;
she was making a salad bowl, brown, with great sulphur
and red nasturtiums rioting on it, for Synfye to take
back to “Sapling Hut.”


"The paddy melons will see that I don’t grow lettuce
without blood and sweat,” said Synfye. "But you can
make me a salad bowl if you like.”
Olga looked at her.
"Perhaps, some day, you’ll marry again,” she said.
It was hard to realize, even now, that marriage of
Synfye’s. It seemed all blotted out as though it had
never been, though no doubt the Supreme Court had
records.
“You, for one, don’t believe I’ve ended my experi-
ments, then,” said Synfye.
Suddenly she, with her full-bosomed beauty, her
splendid health, her dancing eyes, seemed to have
grown pale and worn. Such a weary soul looked out of
the brown eyes ; the dimpled chin was defiantly tilted.
Olga leaned forward and kissed her swiftly.
"Forgive an old woman,” she murmured.
Synfye smiled again. “You may be old, but you
always smell so sweet of nice powder and expensive
soap.” Then, with a quick, caressing glance, “you did
not marry again yourself; touchee, my dear.”
"No,” said Olga. Her hands were idle for a moment.
"No ; I sometimes wonder if I should have done ;
that is why I should hate to see you wasted.”
“Wasted !” Synfye jumped up and began to dance
about the room. “Wasted, my dear ! I’m the toast of
the clubs ! When I come to Sydney there are triumphal
arches erected—haven’t you noticed it! Illuminated
addresses meet me at the railway station.”
“I have not noticed exactly that, but I do observe
that boxes from the florist’s are more frequent in my
hall, and young men’s voices on my telephone—and
as for cigarette-butts in the front garden . . .”
Synfye was demure. "Where are those tickets for


the concert ?” she asked, "I think I left them behind
the clock.”
There were no concerts here at White Witches, only
the chorus of birds at dawn, and in wet weather the
call of the fairies’ watch-dogs—the big green frogs.
Synfye kept one as a pet in her house. It ate cock-
roaches—not that many of those city pests were ever
to be found here, but mosquitoes were. She had brought
a box of incense up with her from Sydney : its aroma
hung faintly about her room now as she sat by the
window watching the gossiping of the trees, the move-
ments of the birds, the noontide drowse of Nature
otherwise employed.
She always carried a quantity of books across country
with her when she came here —cartridges for her rifle ;
it would not do even in these quiet and settled districts
to be without a gun for self-protection, and also for an
occasional shot at duck on the lagoon three miles away.
She was scrupulous as Stuart Jackson had been about
"pot-shots” at a sitting bird; always on the wing
for Synfye, so she frequently missed her quarry and
came home minus her bag.
But this had been a lesson of youth most firmly
instilled. The Anglican clergyman, who was a bachelor
and vowed to celibacy, sometimes wondered if he was
doing the right thing by thus holding to his vows,
when he paid his monthly visit to the district and stayed
to lunch with Synfye, climbing the stairway that
smelled of dripping gum, and box leaves into the room
that had a mingled aroma of the forest and Chinese
incense, and of scented soap and woman’s face powder.
That the district dubbed the girl eccentric, if not worse,
for living "like a black-fellow”, as they most mistakenly


expressed it, for half the year, he knew, but she was so
pretty, one quite forgot in her presence that she did
many, or any,"of the things a nice woman was not
supposed to do. Synfye Jackson, as a child, had been
a law to herself—hadn’t she often been slapped for it ?
—and as woman quite untrammelled, she was hardly
likely to be different. But she was well read as well as
pretty, and though she did not often go to church,
she subscribed royally to its funds.
Yesterday he had climbed her stairs and she had
fed him corned beef and tinned salmon, and had made
a tomato salad in the marquetry bowl: and as he
stood hat in hand at the foot of her stair to say good-
bye, and she looked down mischievously to him from
the top, he had said ; “If ever you need my ministra-
tions, always send Coo-yar” (Coo-yar was the black-boy
who came every day to see if there was anything Synfye
wanted done, and incidentally for odd pickings)
“to Grass Tree Flats. Miss Sarah is completely bed-
ridden now, and I will stay to administer the Sacrament
on Sunday.”
“And why should I need your ministrations ? Do
you think I’m going to die ?” laughed Synfye, looking
like a young witch herself with the boles of her old
guardian trees behind her.
Confused, the clergyman glanced uneasily down,
then up again. “You might want me to marry you,”
he was going to say, but there were two interpre-
tations to that sentence. One must avoid misunder-
standing : his Bishop was such a firm believer in
celibacy for his priests—“To perform a wedding
ceremony !”
Synfye brought the palms of her hands together with
a resounding smack. “Done, your Reverence,” she


said pertly, and then moved across the room and was
able to wave good-bye to him from the wooden
shuttered window where a red lacquer jar of gum
tips stood, as he rode away.
From speculations as to what had happened to
Reg Powis in these last three years, her thoughts now
strayed to Liam. Would he ever come back to pig-farm ?
Perhaps he had married a Dublin girl. A man had
once told her he had travelled the world and considered
the Irish girls the most beautiful; their milk-and-
roses skin, their deep-blue eyes. Oh, she knew
al labout those deep-blue eyes wherein a heart
drowns !
She got up and began to walk restlessly about her
little room. Her brown hack was somewhere out there
in the greens and ripplings and wing sounds ; would
come if she called. Her dog—a devoted blue and white
mongrel cattle-dog- —was asleep under the house;
now and then she could hear him turning restlessly,
scratching. There were fleas in that sandy so 1. She
must give him a carbolic-soap bath to-morrow. Why
not now, since she was restless and did not feel inclined
to read ? She went to a little cupboard that stood
beside the window —her own work, for she was quite
a good bush carpenter —and took out a large hessian
apron. In the galley where she kept her kerosene
for boiling her washing, the fire, banked with ashes,
smouldered. She would put some water on to boil
for Blue Peter’s bath; he loved his water hot,
though the day was warm enough. A yellow, cloudless
day.
She tied her untrimmed wide straw hat over her
dark hair, and with half a bar of carbolic soap under
her arm, negotiated the ladder; then started back


in alarm, dropping the soap from the top of the ladder-
way to the bottom, causing Blue Peter to awake with
a yelp as the report of a gun close at hand was almost
simultaneous with the impact of a bullet striking and
splintering the hand-rail upon which her fingers had
a moment before rested.


CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
What a scarlet mouth she has.
But her eyes I cannot see,
Neither here nor there, because
In the dark they hide from me.
"Yvonne’
To old Romance, within a Saxon wood
That rind-brown gown Maid Marion unfolds,
That leaf-green jerkin cases Robin Hood.
"October’
Blue Peter had backed, barking furiously, under the
tilted spring cart. Synfye herself felt like a rapid
retreat, and a barred panel for her front door was
fitted with a stout wooden pole that dropped into
place and made effectual barrier if necessary.
Had the old bush-ranging days revived in the dis-
trict ? Was the Afghan hawker running amok, as one
had done last Christmas, on excitement and the town-
ship rum ? Perhaps it was some new chum after game,
but it was well to be on the safe side.
Curiosity got the better of her caution. She peered
out in the direction from which she thought the bullet
had come, her skin turning to goose-flesh, her feet
and hands cold; she would like to know before she
ran away what she was running from. Now she could
hear a horse’s hoofs hurrying through the flutter of
light and shadow of the overarching boughs—it was
not arriving from the mountainside but from the level
in front of her hut.
A horse and rider came at a quick pace into view.
The man was hatless, the horse, a bright chestnut.


picked its way daintily, shaking its glossy head. She
had a moment’s admiration, as she paused with hand
on the door, ready to fly to shelter in a second, for the
beautiful creature. A Starlight might have ridden just
such a horse, or a noble highwayman of George the
First’s day. The man’s dark head was uncovered.
Oh, surely she knew the ripple of that blue-black
hair, the blue eyes, half-alarmed, half-defiant!
“I do hope nothing is hit,” he called out. "Didn’t
pot your dog, did I, madam ? I was trying my new
rifle at a black and yellow goanna—would make a
fine skin for a belt —but he dodged me up a blue gum.
Did not break any windows, did I ? I think the bullet
went wide.”
He got off his horse and, linking bridle on his arm,
came striding towards the staircase.
She let the catch of the door slip from her fingers and
descended a few steps.
“You only hit . . . my ladder,” she said, angry
with herself for the tremor in her voice. "You don’t
seem to have mended your ways in three years, Mr.
M’Pheris.”
Then he recognized her. Till that moment he had
thought her some selector’s wife. He had been back
too short a time in his old haunts—even if Mack was
inclined to be communicative—to have heard that
Synfye Jackson had bought the vacant land at White
Witches, and, in the place of her old "cubby house”,
erected a sapling hut for a summer residence : he grew
pale, visibly stiffened, then flushed angrily, his eyes
ablaze.
“What an unfortunate accident! I’ll be after asking
you a thousand pardons. I had no idea anyone had
been building here. Why”—looking round —"it’s


old White Witches, and I was not after recognizing
it for the moment.”
“You were never much good at locality, were you ?”
she said coolly. She was recovering her aplomb. He,
at least, should not realize that his sudden appearance
had upset her far more than had the ping of the bullet
so close to her. Random bullets either killed, made
clean flesh wounds, or went clear, but some wounds
rankled always, and refused to heal.
Liam M’Pheris should never know she could carry a
wound like that.
He quite evidently had recovered from old hurts.
He looked well, hard and brown, but thinner, older,
than when she remembered him.
"You are alone here ?” he asked sharply.
“Quite,” she answered calmly. "Unless you count
Coo-yar the black-boy, and Peter my dog—one can’t
have everything, you know. To make me thoroughly
happy my draught of life must have a sting in it, but
somehow, I like being alone now.”
“You used not to- —” He was standing close to the
foot of the stairway, the chestnut stamping an
impatient hoof.
“Did I not ? One changes, even in three years.”
He wanted to ask her many things, but pride forbade.
He could not forget his rancours, and he told himself
with irritation, that, since he had quite ceased to love
her, it would be more seemly to refrain from putting
questions to her at all . . . to mount his horse and ride
away again, the only manly course open. What
a fool he was to have forgotten he was so near this old
lodestone, to the girl; yet, how could he possibly
have guessed he would find her here, erecting a new
play-house—“ Sanctuary”, she had called it, had she


not—on the ruins of the old ? The Past had him by the
throat now, shaking him into renewed consciousness
of her beauty, the warmth of her lips, the adorable
dimple of her round chin. Her eyes, too—their gaze
was steadier than of old. She seemed a finer, more
wholesome, woman; gave one confidence somehow.
Yet, how she had deceived him ! Let him love her,
thinking there were no insoluble barriers between.
Had she thought ? Had there not been a certain reluc-
tance in those days in the mountain aerie, in that
time of laughter and evasion in Sydney ? Perhaps it
was he who had been the fool not to suspect, he had
forced her hand. He could hate her well, could vow
himself indifferent, hundreds of miles from her brown
eyes, her dark unruly curls, the shining shape of her.
It was not so easy when she looked down, and he
looked up, with only the wooden steps of her stairway
between.
Blue Peter had come fawning and cringing to his
feet, spreading himself all over the ground, leaping up,
licking his hand. A hen scuttled across the clearing,
the chestnut renewed its fretful pawing of the dry
earth.
“You might hand me my soap,” said Synfye.
He stooped for the yellow bar and reached up an
arm.
“I was just going to wash the dog,” she added. "I
shall have water on the boil soon ; would you like some
tea ?”
He stared at her. He seemed as fidgety as the chesnut
now.
“I’ve lost my hat somewhere,” he looked round.
“Oh, yes. I remember a branch twitched it off when
I came to see what damage I had done here.”


“I used to like your hair,” said Synfye. There was
laughter in her eyes above her demure mouth. "But
I asked you if you would care for a cup of tea ? I
always make it for the parson.”
Liam frowned. "No doubt you have plenty of men
visitors. —No, I don’t think I would care for —tea,
thank you.”
"You mean, you won’t be . . . one of a crowd ? ”
He felt she was mocking him. He was at a loss for a
moment as to how to deal with her. If he rode away
tealess, she would think he was afraid, afraid of her
blandishments, afraid of yielding to them if he came
into her castle.
It was the truth, too, but he must not let her see
there was any joint left in his armour weak enough
for that.
"Yes, thanks,” he said briskly. "I’ll hang up the
neddy somewhere and come in presently.”
She nodded, turned and went into her living-room,
now full of sunshine yellow as wine, drawing the sappy
smell from the wood. On the roof she could hear the
rustle of bird-wings. Airy denizens of the forest loved
her green-shaded bark roof; it was a kind of pigeon
cote for the feathered fairies, and sometimes at night
she could hear a ’possum’s claws scraping along the
bark. One could scarcely be lonely with these many
small and lovely lives so near. It supplied the contrast
to the hectic days of balls and parties, of crowded
pavements and bright shop windows that filled one
half of her year. A loneliness she had, that no furred
or feathered thing could assuage, nor man, nor woman
either, but that loneliness waited the clasp of only one
pair of hands that the whole world held to thrust it
away for ever.


As she carried the kettle down to the galley fire she
wondered whether it was worth putting it to the touch
to win or lose it all, as that old-time poet advised for
the faint heart.
She had surely waited long enough. Where had
Liam been all these years ? What had he been doing ?
Perhaps he had married another woman, and no one
had told her.
Before he left her to-day she would know this.
Whatever she was, Synfye was not a coward. Would
he not realize that the fire of humiliation through which
she had been obliged to walk barefoot three years ago
had scorched the black drop from her heart, that she
was striving to be the woman Stuart Jackson’s daughter
should have been ?
Learn if you can
That the eyes of such woman as I am
Are clean as the hands of a man.
Yes : she did not mean to coquet, to try to attract
this man if he did come to tea with her. She would
play the game. A suspicious dimple appeared at the
corner of her momentarily austere mouth.
Perhaps she was making mental reservations. After
all, one couldn’t help one’s temperament, and somehow
it came natural ... to try ... to attract. But,
she would—play fair.
Liam evidently intended she should. He had hitched
his horse’s bridle to a low hanging bow ; had he meant
to stay long he would have unsaddled. It was rather
cruel to leave the poor chestnut sweating under the
saddle on such a hot day ; but she dared not expostu-
late. He might think it a ruse to detain him.
When she had filled the enamel teapot, preceded


him up the stairway with the steaming vessel, and
rummaged in her cupboard for currant brownie—"l
bake in the camp oven ; I think everything is so much
nicer cooked with wood fires, don’t you ?” —she seated
herself on the settle near the window, heaped with red
turkey-twill cushions, and drawing the small table
whose top had once been a gin case towards her, poured
him out a cup of tea. Her china was deep yellow and
thin as biscuits. He could not but admire it.
“Yes, I like to be a little different to other people,
I suspect; an enamel teapot and expensive china.
My adopted mother-—you remember Mrs. Arnold, or
have you forgotten everybody ?—gave me these last
Christmas. She’s such a darling, and so jolly compared
to what she used to be. Says we should spend every
minute of the coin of life in being as happy and busy
as we can —not fling it out of the window with grumb-
lings and idleness, and discontent. I often think if
the clergy preached those kind of sermons instead
of trying to define the Holy Ghost, or the uses of the
Sacrament, we’d get much forrader along the right
lines.”
“Sure,” said Liam. He looked out of the wide, long
window that was like a frame to a picture of pale greens
and dusky olives and madder browns and tan, with
the slopes of the mountain behind it, and the stir of
unseen life revealed occasionally in a swift flash of
scarlet or a dusky flitting shape. “I don’t wonder you
like this,” he said. His eyes grew dreamy. “I could
just imagine resting here at the end of the day.”
“With your flute ?” she added softly. She had
dropped her eyes, she sat very still in the window
seat. Only the sough of the rising breeze in the boughs,
only the faint far call of a bird,


“No.” He was stiffly erect on his wooden stool,
his eyes dark, angry. “No, I can’t be after imagining
myself here at all, at all, I mean for yourself, Synfye !”
“Yes : it’s delicious, being always by one’s self,”
she answered wilfully, but he knew she did not intend
him to believe she meant it.
He was determined to be civil and detached. He
helped himself to sugar.
“I wonder you don’t marry again.”
"The parson said the same thing to me to-day,”
she laughed back, all animation again, “and I said I
would send for him when I wanted his official services.”
“I think it would be a wise thing,” said Liam,
fishing a tea-leaf from the surface of his cup. "It is
not good for woman to live alone, and you’re young,
and attractive.”
"I’m so glad you think so.” He suspected her of
secret mirth, but her face was expressionless. “It’s
so nice to know you don’t find I have gone old—and
ugly—in three years, Liam.”
He reddened. “You know I couldn’t be after think-
ing that; you’re sure beautiful, Synfye, and no doubt
your mirror tells you that often.”
“And what about you ; have you married ?”
He shook his head. “No : I was after courting a girl
on the boat—l have been in Malaya since we met last —
but somehow, in the end neither of us found we really cared
enough. She was quite different to you—very fair.”
“She would be,” said Synfye calmly. “One must get
contrasts. Now, I have been, as Aunt Arnold’s house-
maid calls it, ‘going’ with a red-haired Scotsman since
I saw you last.”
He did not know if she was teasing, but he found it
hard not to give her smile for smile,


My girl was very clever,” he said.
“Fancywork ?” inquired Synfye reaching for the
teapot.
“No, she reads. What the deuce did she read ?”
"Greek in the original, of course, Liam—they always
do, in books.”
He choked suddenly over his yellow cup.
“And my red-haired Scotsman,” continued Synfye,
“he was a conjuror; amateur, of course, that gave
him cachet. He could bring a rabbit out of dinner
napkins and eggs from a hat.”
“How handy in the back-blocks !” murmured Liam.
"But the squatters would draw the line at the rabbit—
hound him out of the district.”
"Yes ; if he had been able to rear pigs in a work-
basket—that would be splendid, wouldn’t it ? One
would not have to consider the merits of Tamworth
sows for breeding. By the way, how are the
pigs ?”
“The pigs”—he was preternaturally grave—“are
blooming. Mack has been a first-rate steward of my
property. I’m putting it on the market next month
. . . lock, stock, and barrel. Think I shall go back to
Malaya.”
“And the fair girl who reads Greek ?”
"I did not say she read Greek.
Then abruptly they looked straight at one another
and broke into peals of laughter. Blue Peter, scratching
in the sun, replied with a joyous bark. This was better
than sudden explosions and stray bullets.
Coo-yar, coming with a boomerang and sidelong
movement into the shadow at the side of the sapling
hut, heard the laughter in the upper room, and then
silence.


Then somebody dropped a tea-cup, fine yellow china
shattering in a dozen pieces on the wooden floor.
Coo-yar practised with his boomerang on the outraged
speckled hens, took a shot at the canvas water-bag
swinging under the house, and sent its contents flying
over Blue Peter, quenching his brief hilarity of barks.
Then he came round to inspect the chestnut, for Coo-yar
loved a horse and had ambitions to riding in the grass-
bed hacks’ race at the township meeting. He ran his
thin black hands with their pinkish palms over the
glossy shoulder, murmuring tender-sounding aboriginal
words. He wondered if he dared get into the saddle
and take an amble round the sapling hut. Perhaps
the hack belonging to the "debble-debble hunter”
from the township.
Presently he padded away to make other arrange-
ments for his amusement and the shadows grew longer
and the crests of the White Witches waved, mysterious
and murmurous with wind. Sunset wrote its crimson
signature along the deep blue edges of the world,
twilight gathered his monk-like followers in dusky
ways; the kookaburras, laughing at the death of the
day as they laugh at the birth of dawn, were quiet now.
The big grey kangaroos began to thud slowly by, mak-
ing for their lush feeding-grounds.
Something lithe and clawed and silky crackled gently
through a stunted scramble of shrubs on its tremulous
way up to the mountain. The speckled hens were
bunches of drowsy feathers on the lower boughs of a
wild apple tree, the Spanish cockerel keeping scornfully
aloof on a higher branch.
Low down a star flashed a suddenly unshrouded
lamp, a fire-scorched tree was a black obelisk on the
toneless horizon.


A light sprang in sapling hut, shining through the
interstices like tiny threads of orange on its apple-
tinted sepias.
Then the door opened and Liam M’Pheris came down
the stairway of Synfye Jackson’s house. He frowned,
but he moved with a certain swagger, tradition and
temperament evidently still at war.
He unsaddled the sulky and insulted chestnut, gave
him a hearty and decisive slap on his burnished flank,
and told him he could go a-roaming for an hour or so.
The chestnut, the sweat caked on its annoyed back,
thought it about time.
“But don’t be after going too far away, old chap,”
said Liam, “for it’s riding home by moonlight, I am—
to fetch my flute.”


CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
The rain is old: its hair is grey
It sweeps that grey hair o’er the sea
Just as it swept the barren hills
When all the earth was mystery.
Just as it swept that mystery,
When hills were vales and vales were sea,
And low it sang by Pharaoh’s bed.
It mingled with the yellow Nile.
It splashed the red pomegranate’s mouth,
It saw the wily Serpent smile,
As she went drifting lazily,
Her eyes caressing Anthony.
"The Rain”
Mrs. Tregurtha had cut out a long-skirted coat from
several yards of unbleached calico and had run it up
with the most tailor-like seams on her old sewing-
machine, and Tom had soaked it in the drum of boiled
oil till he thought it had obtained and retained the
requisite amount of that commodity to render it
weatherproof, and then with great pride had he worn
it in the district, leaving the imprint of his broad
buttocks wherever he sat, and soaking the seat of his
saddle to a beautiful dark mahogany. The coat was
certainly an oil coat : like the widow’s cruse, it yielded
constant measure and was somewhat of a joke in the
neighbourhood of Tregurtha’s, but the old couple
between them had been so proud of their home-made
product that they manfully refused to see its oleaginous
drawback, and on rainy days Tom sallied forth con-
sidering, with amazing optimism, that he was suffi-
ciently guarded against the elements,


It was on such a day of steady, soaking, and warm
rain he rode to White Witches to see how Synfye
fared. This was some days after the moony night when
Liam M’Pheris so dramatically re-entered Synfye’s
life.
Synfye had been deeply considering both Liam and
her own future in those intervening days. She had not
seen the young Irishman again, but she knew assuredly
as the magnet draws the flint, he would, ere long, be
mounting her rustic stairway. Proud she should have
been ; happy she scarcely was. For though she felt he
yielded to the spell of her, she knew it still but a
grudging yielding. He was not pleased with himself
for the weakness that made him love the hands and lips
and eyes of her above his reason and his old grudge
against her for past treacheries ; the silence kept when
she should have spoken. Because he had loved so
much, the greater had been the disillusion. And
Synfye knew. Stuart Jackson’s daughter was no
fool; she knew 7 that Liam seeking her, yet felt himself
in toils he would fain have been strong enough to
break.
Did she want him, like that ? Did she want h'm,
knowing it was the radiant envelope of the woman’s
soul he alone adored ?
He would be kissing her, figuratively speaking, and
shutting his eyes, deafening deliberately his ears to
the warning voice that cried—-“ Where a foot has
faltered once it may falter again,” the while he kissed.
He had so worshipped that it was hard for him to set
up his fallen idol on a pedestal a little lower than the
one it had previously occupied.
Liam would marry her, and she desired it still, but
he would be as one who compromises with a lesser


thing, lacking the possession of the perfection he had
originally aimed at.
What should she do ? Accept the compromise, or
bid him begone, and take her companionless way again
—her yet more isolated way' —having found him once
more ? The rain made small lisping sounds running
down the slabs.
In the timber the tiny shrubs waved with the ecstasy
of small growing things delighting in the abundant
moisture after dry days, drunken a little perhaps with
the joy of those soft, tepid showers. Cups of little bush
flowers had a diamond at heart, the blossoming vines
hung rich, lemon-sweet fragrances on the heavy air,
the birds were still. When the rain cleared they would
make up for their silences in wild bursts of rapturous
music, but now only the antiphone of the rain was the
voice of the forest. Big drops splashed on Synfye’s
roof; her window showed a grey world ; the bright
green blurred to deep olives ; the ashen hue or bluish-
pale tree boles dark with damp; hurrying ants
swarmed the trunks, carrying their white rice-grain eggs
to higher quarters ; snakes kept to the dark dry places
in the underbush and in hollow logs, for the reptile
loves the sun. There were no darting mouse-coloured
lizards on the paths to-day. Trickle of rain from the
eaves; Blue Peter asleep under the spring cart;
Synfye, by the window trying to sew, bored and sad
at heart (restless between her desire to satisfy that
heart and her pride at one and the same time) was glad
to see Tom Tregurtha and the yellow oil-coat come
riding between the trees to dismount at her doorway.
His pockets bulged with a jar of Mrs. Tregurtha’s
me’on jam.
“And the missus says be sure to keep the pot for


her ; she is always short,” said Tom seating himself
heavily on the white pine milking stool and leaving an
indelible impression.
'T am so glad you came,” answered the girl heartily,
“it’s a dreary kind of day, and I want to hear the news
while I make you some tea.”
She drew a small galvanized iron tray from the cup-
board and placed a circular brass methylated spirit
stove on it.
“It’s wet to be running down to the galley to-day,”
she said as she adjusted the little tin kettle and measured
the tea in the enamelled teapot.
Tom set his dripping felt on the floor and
ruffled his iron-grey hair with his broad freckled
hand.
“News ? Oh, yes, that young Irish fella is back at
the pig farm. Been somewhere Singapore way, I
believe. Carl Koch is a bit sore about the way his pigs
have been topping the market; Carl, I think, agrees
with the chap who said feed your pigs up one day and
starve them the next and you’ll get a streak of lean and
streak of fat in your bacon. Anyway, he’s been accused
of selling “scrubber” pigs to the dealers. Don’t know
if it’s true, but M’Pheris’s pork is getting quite a name.
Mack has been looking after things tidily for him while
he’s been away. Then there’s so much water on the
farm . . . nothing keeps up the weight of the pig
like long drinks of cold water. Mack, being Scotch,
won’t overfeed the beggars, either. I’ve never been
keen on pigs myself, but the missus’s father used to
grow them. Got to know a lot about ’em when I was
courting ; used to pretend to be fearfully interested,
and the old man would talk for hours leaning over the
stys and my girl looking out of the window and laughing


at me. She was a trick, was the missus—not pretty,
no, did not marry her exactly as a “looker”, but that's
why I’ve never changed to her, she says. P’raps there’s
something in it.”
“Don’t you think men who marry women only for
their looks keep on caring?” said Synfye, putting a
lace doily on the platter that was to receive the
brownie.
“Well, a fella marries for so many other reasons.
I dunno; we’re all different, I suppose.” Tom sighed
and fidgeted on his stool; the coat, growing warm,
stuck and expostulated noisily. “Depend on it, though,
when a fella only wants a girl because of kissing her,
it doesn’t last. Such a lot besides kissing goes to
married life.”
“Such a lot besides kissing goes to married life—a
happy marriage.” Synfye repeated the words softly,
staring at Tom and beyond him at the grisly thought
that had haunted her ever since she last saw Liam
and heard the notes of his recovered flute hovering on
the moony air long after he had ridden away down the
echoing midnight tunnels of the trees. She remembered
how he had told her of his flinging his flute amongst
the bushes at Deep Well, how he had gone out at dawn
and found it and packed it away on that top shelf
with perhaps an irrepressible hope somewhere that his
harper soul might again find expression through its
music, but that, until his throbbing hour with her
under the roof of White Witches the hope had not been
realized—somehow Synfye and his music now seemed
one. But . . .
Ah, why were there these irritating “buts” when
happiness was for the taking, though the fire amongst
old ashes might have but a brief renewal ? Oh, no 1


Once hers, she could surely hold Liam, who loved so
well. Yes, loved . . . what ?
Synfye, the woman of the beautiful body and warm
mouth and clinging arms, or Synfye the human soul, to
be reckoned with ? Synfye the mate, the help-meet,
the woman who had those “other things that went to
a happy marriage?”
Could she marry Liam while his reason argued
against it, and his hot blood smothered his reason with
sophistries ? Did she want to be the witch who charmed
his blood, or the woman he loved as a man best loves,
loved and respected ?
Perhaps she was unfair to herself in her passion of
fear at ultimately losing the love of a lover, love that
can only be held one way ?
She poured out tea in the yellow china for Tom.
One of the set of cups was missing : impetuous Liam,
reckless in his ardour, was responsible for that breakage.
“You don’t think, then,” she said, “that if a man
loves a woman for her prettiness, for kisses, alone, he
can make that love last in marriage ?”
Tom took three teaspoons of sugar. He liked his
tea a syrup. He was very thirsty, seldom did he talk
so long at one time. He gulped two cups noisily with
thorough enjoyment before he answered.
“You’re always putting posers to me, my dear,”
he said finally, ripping adhesions of oilcoat from the
milking stool, and readjusting himself oblivious to the
impression on the wood, while Synfye hoped he was
not going to change his seat, unless he removed his
coat first, though she would not for the world have
mentioned the spoilation of her furniture. She knew
how Tom felt about his raincoat.
“I suppose, as the missus says, circumstances always


alter cases, but I’d rather see a chap marry a girl
because she was a good comrade, pally-like with him,
than because he found her good to kiss, and wished
he didn’t. I’m not denying that its fine to have both
qualities; one hears a lot about the growing freedom of
women now; but a man’s the same at heart; he must
build his lasting affections on respect, else it is a fire
made of straw—blazing to hell, and dead and black
and cold in a year. Is there another drop in the
teapot ?”
He thought Synfye looked tired. It was too lonely
here ; the girl should have someone to live with her,
but he supposed she would soon be going back to
Sydney. Perhaps she would spend that promised week
at Tregurtha’s soon. They would love to have her,
and he’d ask the young Irish fella over to brighten
things.
"The missus and I are getting very creaky in the
joints and a bit dull, I think, for you,’’ he added after
his fourth cup and half the sugar tin.
“Indeed you’re not. You’re both darlings, and always
will be !” But he felt her attention wandered.
"Well, I must be going on. I hear Miss Sarah is not
too well, an’ the parson there. Think she’ll take religion
at the last ?”
Tom had removed himself from the damaged pine
stool and was staring out of the window.
A thin shaft of light like a fairy lance pierced the gum
trees ; the clouds were rolling back from the mountain.
“It’s clearing,” he said cheerfully, “though I don’t
notice the rain much since the missus ran this coat up
for me.” He looked down at the sticky skirts of Mrs.
Tregurtha’s supreme effort.
“Indeed, it’s a fine coat,” said Synfye gravely.


“Oh, Lord, my pine stool!” she sighed in her heart,
and was thankful—fond as she was of Tom—that he
did not seat himself on the table, a habit of his (for his
legs were long) in his own home.
He stamped away down the wooden stairway into a
world beginning to glitter with light. A bird called
sharp and clear from the dripping forest; another, and
another. A patch of blue between the boughs over-
head, a lizard darting across the brown-pooled road.
Nature knew the rainy day was passing in sun and
wind. A stiff breeze from the west to harry the cloud
away. Squelch, suck, went the unshod hoofs of Tom
Tregurtha’s hack out of earshot, away on one of those
desultory rides about the Run he loved, and which he
imagined as a day’s work, leaving Synfye to wash up
tea-things and reconsider the old problem.
“I’d rather see a chap marry a girl because she was a
good comrade—pally-like, than because he found her
good to kiss.” Then Tom did not believe that physical
attraction held in married life, but surely without it
what would marriage be ?
“He must build his lasting affections on respect.”
Yes: she did believe that; the logical part of her
insisted on a solid truth there ; and Liam ? What had
she done to merit his respect ? Love made her humble ;
she could not pretend not to realize her own physical
allure, nor that she had unsparingly used it to subjugate
Liam, and her sex instinct had shown her so surely the
hold her beauty had over his imagination ... his
blood.
White Witches’ child ? A thing of light and shadow
and ripple and glow, near to Nature, changeable as
the seasons, loving power.
Suppose she married Liam? After the honeymoon


days, would the dream hold ? Would he not some day,
with inevitably cooling passion, remember the shatter-
ing of that other dream ; here, where he had lain face
down on Mother Earth and sobbed out his shamed
love ? Should she put it to the touch to win or lose it
all ? Give Liam the chance, away from the drug of her
presence that so confused his clearer reasoning—find
out by banishing herself from him, exactly what her
presence was really worth—do the “decent thing” ?
Not hold him bound till she felt he came to her as a
man comes to the woman whom he has once more raised
to her holy niche, to whom he feels he can bend the
knee as well as desire to kiss the lips ?
Who had said that when a woman lets a man rise
up from his kneeling attitude before her —he walks
away ? Would the day not come when Liam, the hus-
band, would want to walk away and thus come to hate
the bonds that held him ?
Synfye carefully wiped the yellow cups and set
them in a shining bow on the shelf. Sunlight was
streaming on to the smoking roof; the glade was full
of bird-song; the world gleamed like spun
glass; leaves were polished platters whereon fairies
might choose to dine. Blue Peter was barking an
invitation for her to come out and see the things that
were revealed by the passing of the cloud—he was
half-way up the steps, fawning, his red tongue glisten-
ing, his clumsy feet beating a kind of estatic dance :
“Come out, come out, and be glad with the gladness
or the returning sun,” signalled Blue Peter.
Yes : she would fastened her door, go out and
decide this matter under the wet and gleaming boughs
of the trees.
Then she would do what she considered the “most


decent thing”, the thing that Stuart Jackson, similarly-
placed, would have considered “the only way”—
tell him she would not marry him yet. She would
go back to Sydney, let him think it out too, in silence,
unprejudiced by her propinquity, and then if he still
wanted her ... Ah . . . if. . . .


CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
Only half of you went out! Can that half march on alone?
On my chiselled windowledge clings the ivy to the stone; —
Shall a bird rise from the earth —where it drags a broken wing?
Take the ivy’s root away, will it see another Spring?
—'' The O uarreT ’
The air seemed full of musky delights, stars trembled
in the pale beryls of evening skies ; the atmosphere
was all washed clean by the day’s rain. A sheaf of bush
blossoms she carried for the adorning of her home,
made her almost faint with their delicious honey.
She had walked far; she had come to her decision,
and if it was a sadder woman who returned to White
Witches than the restless, doubting girl who had set
forth through the drenched and sparkling forest, it
was a steadfast woman who had come to a firm attitude
of mind. She would be quite frank with Liam when he
came again, as come he would as surely as dawn followed
night, to the slab hut in the loom of her guardian trees.
She would wring from him the truth ; she would paint
herself in no friendly light; she would tell him she
would not marry him.
Their love should be no “fire of straw blazing to
hell.” Her pride, her loyal heart, where Liam was
concerned, would not suffer this.
Through the starlit night he came riding to her,
bringing his flute.
They cooked chops over the coals of the galley fire
■ —Grass Tree Flats had sent her half a sheep that
day and she wondered how she and Blue Peter would


dispose of it whilst it “kept”, though there was a cool
place behind the spring cart for the meat safe : unless
one salted the mutton down, it would not possibly
keep good in summer weather.
Behind them the forest murmured and the little
creatures of night passed by the glow of the fire.
The faces of Liam and Synfye were rosy in the reflection
of the red coals and spurts of flames that followed the
application of salt on the gridiron made of wire by
Coo-yar for “Missie White Mary”. They looked like
gipsies round a camp-fire,and then they bore the tin
dish of still sizzling meat up the stairs and lighted the
kerosene lamp with the red shade, and prepared to make
merry over their meal.
Liam, all ardour for the hands and lips so near to
him, found Synfye aloof, a little disconcerting, evading
him until he fell silent; and when they had pushed
their plates aside, Synfye cleared the dishes to the top
of the cupboard, saying she would wash up to-morrow,
and turning out the light, sat in the window-seat, her
profile silhouetted against the clear evening skies
where the planets were so brilliant now. The moon
would be late, Liam could ride home by its light if he
cared to stay so long. He sat on the floor at her feet,
leaned his dark head against her knee, closing his eyes.
He was content now as he always was in her presence,
with the subtle charm of her body close to him. It
was only when he got back to the farm amongst his
pigs and his too bitter memories, now more alert than
they had been when the seas divided him from the girl
for, as his passion for Synfye grew, his doubts of her
seemed to increase, to make a seesaw of his deliberate
intentions. It was only when she was not within touch
that he fretted against the cha : ns his love was forging


for him. Near Synfye he wanted nothing else but that
the hour should for ever last.
Gently she stroked his hair, but when he lifted his
face for her kiss, she shook her head.
“I have so much to say to you,” she whispered
softly.
‘Say then, my sweet. I’ll listen. I am at your feet.”
‘That’s just it,” she said, ‘‘are you ?”
‘What do you mean, accushla ? ’
"That—nothing else. Tell me, Liam, if I were
ugly . . •”
“You couldn’t be, you wouldn’t be Synfye then.”
“Ah, but if I were; suppose I got smallpox now,
suppose I ”
“Oh, don’t suppose—what a girl it is, and what are
you after driving at! Suppose I broke my nose, my
beautiful Grecian nose, eh, Synfye ?”
Outside a mopoke owl cried hoarsely, a bat flew
past the window, swooping low.
“What I mean, Liam, is: Are you quite sure—that
if I was not pretty, that if you did not like me to kiss
so much, that, well, that you really believe, apart from
my prettiness, I am the kind of girl—woman-after
all that has happened, that you would want to have
always with you ? Are you certain that you feel for me
now as you did in the beginning, before you knew I
was married to Reg Powis, before you realized I could
trick and lie ?”
He shrugged his shoulders impatiently, moved rest-
lessly away from her caressing hand.
“Why be after supposing ? I’m content, if you are.
What’s the use of remembering—let’s forget.”
"But if you can’t forget, Liam ? Tell me now,
honest, are you not a little sorry you love me ?”


Silence : the bat returning across the sweep of star-
strewn heaven, the wind pattering the husks of dead
blossoms on the roof.
He leapt to his feet, stood beside the window, looking
out. She could guess he was frowning.
“Why all this cross-questioning ? Nobody is—
perfect—are they ? I’ve done rotten things, too.
I just don’t want to remember, to-night, Synfye,
that you were ever married to that fellow, or anything
disagreeable.”
“You mean—you’re afraid to . . . look it in the
face ? No, Liam. I faulted, and you want to push the
memory aside because you have not really forgiven.
You don’t care in the same way.”
“Is there some other chap now ?”
His words gave her the answer she needed : the
thing she wished and yet dreaded to know. He would
never trust her ; he would always suspect “another
fellow.” “There are so many things beside kissing that
go to marriage. . . .”
She looked across to the pine milking-stool which
Tom Tregurtha, earlier in the day, had stamped with
his ineradicable personality. Dear old Tom. “There
were so many things beside kissing.”
She, too, rose, and stood the other side of the window.
Dark, mysterious under the starshine, lay the
mountain and the timber. Yes ; she would go back
to Sydney. If Liam cared in her absence, he would
follow. She must put it to the touch to win or lose it
all, because —“When a fella only wants a girl for
kissing, it doesn’t last.”
For a moment she did not reply to his question.
Then she shook her head.
“No, Liam.”


He crossed quickly to her. “Don’t—let us talk about
that, then,” he said irritably. “You’re so quare
to-night; sure, it’s love-making is a better way to
pass the time.”
She drew back. “No, it clouds one’s reason, Liam,
makes one lose oneself in the moment. I don’t fancy
you ever stop to think, while you can touch me ;
it’s when you get away.”
He was rigid now; she felt his eyes keen in the
dark. How had she guessed ?
“Tell me, Liam, when you leave me, when you are
riding away through the night, when you get home—
to the pigs and practical things, don’t you feel different
then ? I want the truth now—no flatteries. Your
attitude is anything but the kneeling one then ?”
He was very quiet for a space, then he nodded
abruptly.
“Yes. I suppose so. You did give a fellow a nasty
shake-up, Synfye. It was hard—to forgive ”
They could hear Blue Peter scratching at the foot
of a tree in the shadows : he had started a ’possum
and followed it to its tower of escape. Now he pranced
round the tree uttering short, annoyed yelps.
Had he forgiven ? He shifted from one foot to
the other. . . . Damn it ail, why couldn’t Synfye
let the dead past be. It would be easy enough to
“smiling put the question by”, to say he had forgotten
and forgiven, if that was all she wanted. But it was
a lie. He had not. Perhaps he never would.
“There are a lot of everydays in marriage, Liam- —
a going on and on, with the torn wedding garment.”
Why would she probe and torture, drag from their
hiding-place the thoughts that had harried him so
in his bachelor room at the farm ? “Deep Dell” knew


his sleepless wandering too and fro, the many pipes
smoked, the many angry oaths. Why should Synfye,
to whom he had looked as an opium-smoker looks to
the black treacle of his favourite vice, to be the opiate
and submerge those harrowing thoughts and memories,
why should Synfye drag them forth even here in the
temple of his love ? He was angry now. Well, if she
must have it, she must.
“I love you, Synfye, leave it at that. That I cannot
be quite the same is my own fault. A chap idealizes
a girl in the way —he does not a woman like you —
it was, I say, my own fault. I looked for the impossible.
You are lovely, and darling, and——”
“That is not enough.”
It was hard to do the decent thing, but she must
have him without qualms, without compromise—
yes, if she died for it. Liam must come to her trusting,
revering, as he had once revered, or he need not come
at all. Angry chagrin, wounded pride, all were helping
her now, and his next words did not improve things.
He caught her in his arms, pressed her against him.
“When will you marry me, Synfye ? Let’s get it over.
I don’t think I can live without you much longer.”
“I am afraid you will have to,” said Synfye.
He was gone now. She did not know how long she
had lain, her head buried in the red cushions on the
window-seat. She was not crying, she was extra-
ordinarily still. It seemed to her the world did not
move at all on its axis ; that it would always be
somewhere about nine o’clock on a warm summer’s
evening when Liam left her in a darkened room. She
thought she would be here when she was old and grey,
a princess in a haunted tower, The Lady of Shallott,


whose magic web had floated wide, whose mirror
cracked from side to side. Yet, in a curious way,
she was glad, glad she had done the "decent thing”,
not allowed herself to be married as a man takes a
mistress instead of as a man takes a wife ; married
because she was "good to kiss”, because she was
beautiful, a fact time would assuredly discount,
knowing that her power over Liam was one of actual
physical juxtaposition only—that he, too severe in
his standards, probably continued against his will
to love where he had everlastingly ceased to respect.
It was hurting—surely, had she cried, her tears
would have been tinged with blood —it was hurting.
But it would only hurt for a certain number of days,
months ; not for a lifetime, as would the union of the
two one in flesh, at war in spirit. Liam would not
really forgive her, she would never really forgive
herself if she went to him as women go to men who
desire only their bodies.
"So many things go to marriage . . . happy
marriage.” And now, Liam was gone ; she had heard
his spurred heels on the steps, his saddle creaking,
the clash of a buckle, the beat of the horse’s hoofs.
There was something hard under her breast where
she lay in the window-seat—Liam had forgotten his
flute. Time stood still. How far had he ridden in a
world that was under a spell to-night ? "The curse
has come upon me, cried the Lady of Shallott.”
Yet, when she raised her eyes she found the whole
earth bathed in silver moonshine, outlining the dark
trunks of the trees, washing the crests of the five
White Witches till they seemed to be softly moving
through silver waters —like spilled snow on the garden,
peering in and glinting on the wheels of the spring


cart and on Blue Peter’s empty collar and chain.
She nearly fell over the dog as she turned. Liam
must have left the door open, and Blue Peter had
crept up here to forbidden ground. He was asleep on
the rag mat, but he woke and whimpered as she
touched him, then crawled for forgiveness to her
feet. She sat on the floor beside him, took his head
in her lap.
"You and I, Peter, all alone,” she said. She was
glad of the warmth of the dog’s body, his wet
affectionate tongue on her hands.
“To do the decent thing” left one feeling very
lonely. Then, to the loneliness, was added a sharp
terror. Someone was coming towards the slab hut
through the moon-lightened timbers. She darted
to the door as Blue Peter started towards it growling,
shot the bar into its slot, and turned to where her
rifle hung in her bedroom beyond. Men did not come
stealthily by night to a lonely woman’s dwelling
with good intent.
Feet on the stairs, the moon like day outside.
How late it must be! Was she, at this moment of
regaining her self-respect, in the hour of self-
abnegation when Stuart Jackson well might have been
proud of his girl, was she to be murdered by some
vicious tramp, some demented sunstruck wanderer
in the desolate by-ways of life ? Fool, fool that she
was, to have insisted on keeping her solitary,
ungarrisoned castle here !
A hand on the door : a voice, low, persuasive.
"Synfye, my dear, open the door. It is I, Liam,
come back for my flute.”
She was sobbing now. She leaned the rifle against
the wall—he must not know what a coward she was


Blue Peter ceased growling : he began to leap joyously,
begging her to give entrance to a friend.
“Wait a minute, I will get it for you,” she said.
“Open the door a little way, just enough to let a
word through, mavourneen, for there is a word I
must be after telling.”
She set ajar the door some three inches.
Liam, hatless, his shoulders erect like those of a
man who has just succeeded in casting off a galling
load and sees his way clear before him, his eyes
dancing, looked at her.
“You have not gone to bed ? I will not come in,
Synfye. It’s late hours you keep, my dear.”
“What do you want to say to me, Liam ?”
“My brave, my beautiful, I will not touch you.
I will not ask you to kiss me ever again till you be
so minded. I will ride away as I came—it’s only to
kneel at your feet I ask, mavourneen!”
But Synfye opened wide the door.
the end


Messrs. HUTCHINSON & Co.
have pleasure in giving the following brief notices of many important
new books of serious interest for the Spring, 1929.
Messrs. Hutchinson’s list of NEW NOVELS includes the most recent
works of nearly all the leading authors of to-day.
FRANCES, COUNTESS OF
WARWICK
SIR PHILIP GIBBS
MICHAEL ARLEN
The Hon. HERBERT ASQUITH
ETHEL M. DELL
E. F. BENSON
MABEL BARNES-GRUNDY
ROBERT HICHENS
MARGARET
BAILLIE-SAUNDERS
ANDREW SOUTAR
G. B. BURGIN
LEWIS MELVILLE
J. D. GREGORY
ROY BRIDGES
HARRY SINCLAIR DRAGO
AELFRIDA TILLYARD
JOAN A. COWDROY
E. TICKNER EDWARDES
ALBERT PAYSON TERHUNE
MICHAEL MAURICE
EMART KINSBURN
CHRISTOPHER B. BOOTH
LAURENCE KIRK
THE MARQUIS OF HUNTLY
HANNEN SWAFFER
EDEN PHILLPOTTS
H. A. VACHELL
EDGAR WALLACE
REBECCA WEST
OWEN RUTTER
EMMELINE MORRISON
MICHAEL JOSEPH
WINIFRED JAMES
REX BEACH
URSULA BLOOM
E. W. SAVI
ISABEL C, CLARKE
VAHDAH JEANNE BORDEUX
HILDA ORCHARDSON GRAY
BRUCE GRAEME
ANTHONY WYNNE
I. B. KERSHAW
LYON MEARSON
HENRY CONNOLLY
SEWELL STOKES
ARTHUR SALCROFT
DOUGLAS WALSHE
London :
HUTCHINSON & CO. (Publishers), Ltd.
34, 35 & 36 Paternoster Row, E.C.4


Spring 1929
Important New Books
\Biography
Life’s Ebb and Flow Being the Memoirs and
Reminiscences of FRANCES, COUNTESS OF WARWICK
In one large handsome volume, with numerous illustrations, 245. net.
"I am descended on one side from Nell Gwynn; the other from Oliver Cromwell.
The Nell in me is all discretion, the Noll would fain be heard.” Thus charac-
teristically Frances, Countess of Warwick, whose world-famed beauty is only
matched by her charm, courage and brains, opens her long-expected book of
reminiscences and reflections. These memoirs portray intimately and vividly
eminent personages of three reigns ; in some parts they reveal, in others they
throw a new and almost blinding light on social and political events ; events in
which she took an active part and of which she has inside information possessed
by no other living man or woman. For a quarter of a century, Lady Warwick
counted among her intimate friends men and women of distinction in every
rank of life, not only in this country, but in France and Germany. This remark-
able reconstruction of society in the late Victorian and Edwardian eras is
illustrated by many photographs of exceptional interest.
On the Edge of Diplomacy by J. D. GREGORY
In one large handsome volume, profusely illustrated, 21 S. net.
A highly important and revealing volume in which a diplomat, who has
made his mark on politics, discusses grave issues of the day in the light of an
unrivalled experience. But the humorous aspects of modern diplomatic
existence are not forgotten, and a concise description of the present Foreign
Office and of its workings is given.
Twenty-Five Years of Flying
HARRY HARPER
In one large handsome volume, with numerous illustrations. 12s. Bd, net.
This well-known writer upon aeronautics furnishes us with something very
much more than a mere chronological record of air events from that history-
making day in 1903, when Orville Wright achieved the world’s first aeroplane
flight of twelve seconds’ duration. Mr. Harper has seen with his own eyes great
pioneer flights from the dawn of aviation : for 25 years he has done nothing
but study and write about this one subject of aeronautics. His book is a living
document, enriched throughout with individual impressions.
HUTCHINSON


Auld Acquaintance;
Further Reminiscences by The MARQUIS OF HUNTLY
Author of " Milestones ” (3rd edition).
In one large handsome volume, with numerous illustrations, 245. net.
Lord Huntly has had a most varied circle of friends —political, social, literary
and sporting—and he tells interesting and amusing things about all of them,
for his memory is prodigious.
Hannen Swaffer’s Who’s Who
HANNEN SWAFFER
In one large handsome volume, with numerous illustrations, 21s. net.
Limited Edition of 250 copies, 425. net.
The most piquant study of celebrities ever published. In this entertaining
and revealing volume Mr. Hannen Swaffer, the provocative journalist and
powerful dramatic critic, has written in his usual pungent and witty style
character-sketches of about one hundred celebrities in all walks of life. Politicians,
Artists, Ecclesiastics, Actors and Actresses, Sportsmen, Authors —all are the
target of his genial humour.
The Life of Sir William Quiller-Orchardson,
R.A. by HILDA ORCHARDSON GRAY
In one large handsome volume, profusely illustrated, 21*. net.
This " life ” deals in detail with Sir William Quiller-Orchardson’s early days
in Edinburgh and London, his struggles for recognition, and the brilliant success
which he finally attained. We are also told of the making of his pictures ; his
methods of painting ; his friendships ; his hopes; and of the great happiness of
his married life.
Elizabeth Barrett Browning : A Portrait
by ISABEL C. CLARKE
Author of " Haworth Parsonage ; A Picture of the Bronte Family,” etc.
In one large handsome volume, illustrated, 12s . 6d, net.
This biographical narrative of Elizabeth Barrett, afterwards Mrs. Browning,
traces her life from her childhood at Hope End to her death in Florence. The
famous love-story is related in detail, and the inevitable comparison between
the wealthy, austere and tyrannical conditions that prevailed at 50, Wimpole
Street with the sunny indulgent atmosphere of Robert Browning's home at
Hatcham. Miss Clarke has written the Italian chapters with first-hand know-
ledge of the various places where the Brownings sojourned in that country.
HUTCHINSON


The Fakir Dr. Tahra Bey: His Life, Work and
Philosophy by VAHDAH JEANNE BORDEUX
Author of " Benito Mussolini : The Man,” etc.
{ln collaboration with Dr. TAHRA BEY).
In one large handsome volume, illustrated, 16s. net.
In this book the secrets of Fakirisra are revealed by Dr. Tahra Bey, head of
the Institute of Tahraism at Cairo, who sets out to prove to the world that fakirs
are a race apart; that while their power is not supernatural, it is theirs alone, a
part of the Orient; and that though apostles may, from time to time, come to the
Western world to teach their philosophy to the Occidentals an occult philosophy
of control and right living, no man who has not the tradition in his blood can
ever become irrevocably one with them. Besides practical explanations of
fakir; sm. Dr. Tahra Bey has worked out a personal philosophy and certain psychic
experiments which, when disclosed, should be of benefit to humanity.
The Autobiography of a Journalist
edited by MICHAEL JOSEPH
Author of " Short Story Writing for Profit ” (yth edition), etc. 7f. fid. net.
Mr. Michael Joseph has induced a prominent Fleet Street editor to describe
“ how he got there ” for the benefit of the many who are to-day seeking fortune
with their pens. “If I put my name to this document,” he wrote, “ I could not
tell half my story. And I want to tell it all—to leave no detail of my fight for
recognition and a living wage untold.” And Mr. Michael Joseph, who edits
the volume, and who contributes an introductory chapter, guarantees the
authenticity of the book. This book reveals how success with the pen can
actually be won. It will also interest the general reader as a human life-story
of more than usual interest and novelty.
History
Memoirs of Napoleon i : Compiled from Us own
writings by F. M. KIRCHEISEE
In one large handsome volume, with 15 illustrations, 21S. net.
This book is unique inasmuch as the author, who is one of the foremos
authorities of his subject, has extracted, from the enormous bulk of Napoleon!
literature, sufficient material to make a personal narrative —in Napoleon's owi
words from start to finish —of his career. Written in the first person as it is, Mr
Kircheisen’s compilation has an intimate touch necessarily absent from the bes
biographies.
HUTCHINSON


More Stage Favourites of the Eighteenth
Century by LEWIS MELVILLE
Author of “ Stage Favourites of the Eighteenth Century,” etc.
In one large handsome volume, with coloured frontispiece by BLANCH and x 6
other illustrations, 21 s. net.
Following the successful publication of Stage Favourites of the Eighteenth
Century, Mr. Lewis Melville has written this companion volume in which he
discourses on those actresses who were famous during the latter half of the
eighteenth century. Biographies are included of Frances Abington, Sarah
Siddons, “ Perdita ” Robinson, writer of verses and friend of George IV ; Eliza-
beth Farren, who married the Earl of Derby ; Dorothy Jordan, a favourite of the
indefatigable George IV, and mother of the Fitz Clarence family; and Harriet
Mellon, who married firstly, Coutts the millionaire banker, and secondly, the
Duke of St. Albans.
The Guillotine and its Servants
G. LENOTRE
Author of “ Robespierre’s Rise and Fall,” etc.
In one large handsome volume, illustrated, 21 S. net.
In this study, Mr. Lenotre turns his eyes away for the moment from the
great actors and great victims of the French Revolution, to inquire into the
obscure life of “ the necessary man,” as the executioner was called. An out-
standing feature of the book is the long chapter on the family of Sanson, the
world’s most famous executioner, whose sombre tragic figure, though dimly
seen, is very real, and in Mr. Lenotre’s hands becomes nearly human : other
interesting chapters give an account of “the too famous philanthropist,” Dr.
Guillotine, and many curious details in the history of the guillotine itself.
The Mysterious Baromie de Feucheres
by LOUIS ANDRE
In one large handsome volume, 18s. net.
The intriguing account of the mysterious Baroness (in reality, Sophie Dawes,
or Daw, daughter of a fisherman), who, whilst living in London with a British
officer in 1804, made the acquaintance of the exile Duke of Bourbon (last of the
famous and glorious line of Cond£) and the greatest of French subjects after
royalty itself. How she plotted, and where her schemings landed her, is told in
a book replete with incident and many hitherto unpublished historical details.
Their Several Necessities
by the Anonymous Author of “ Ihe Pomp of Power,” e tc.
In one large handsome volume, 21s. net.
A revealing volume in which the author discusses the political and economic
situation in Europe to-day. He reviews, in particular, the internal problems of
Italy, Jugo-Slavia, Austria, Hungary, Roumania, and Bulgaria, and his opinions
on men and systems will doubtless stimulate no little controversy.
HUTCHINSON


Travel
The Pagans of North Borneo
Owen Rutter, F.R.G.S., F.R.A.I,
Author of " British North Borneo,” etc.
With an introduction by Dr. C. G. Seligman, F.R.S.
In one large handsome volume, profusely illustrated with photographs, diagrams
and maps, 30s. net.
An account of an interesting and little-known people, by the author of the
standard work on British North Borneo. It has been warmly praised by
Mr. E. P. Gueritz, formerly Governor of North Borneo, who has had thirty
years’ experience of the island. It portrays, in an exact yet readable form,
every phase of the North Borneo pagan's life from the cradle to the grave : his
social organisation, his occupations in field and jungle, his unwritten legal code,
his methods of head-hunting, his superstitions and ceremonies, and his folklo e,
and it should be welcomed not only by the scientist as a valuable contribution
to descriptive anthropology, but by every one who is interested in the life of
primitive peoples.
From Leipzig to Cabul : An account of my motor-
cycle ride to Afghanistan and my nine months’ imprisonment
in that Country by G. STRAFIL-SAUER
Translated by Frederick Whyte.
In one large handsome volume, fully illustrated, 18s. net.
In this interesting and unusual travel book, the author relates the experiences
which befell him when, in 1924, he travelled by motor-cycle from Leipzig to
Afghanistan via Asia Minor, Armenia, and Persia. Vivid descriptions of his
journey make thrilling reading indeed, but when the author was thrown into
prison, he was afforded an all too realistic opportunity of studying the judicial
methods of Afghanistan. Descriptions of the trial, his fellow prisoners, criminal
methods, etc., are accordingly detailed. The subject matter of this book, to-
gether with the author’s attractive style, make it both unique and engrossing.
Among the Forest Dwarfs of Malaya
by PAUL SCHEBESTA
In one large handsome volume, with about X4O illustrations and a map, 21S. net.
The account of an expedition of investigation made by the author among
the Semang—the dwarf tribes which are fast dying out, and which inhabit the
forest-covered interior of the Malay peninsula. Accompanied only by a native
servant, the author wandered in the forests, sharing the life of these nomadic
peoples. He gives a vivid impression of life in the depths of the overwhelming
jungle, and speaks authoritatively of the customs, religious beliefs and general
mode of life of its almost unknown inhabitants with whom, after overcoming
their peculiar shyness, he became upon most intimate terms.
HUTCHINSON


How to Keep Slim and Fit
by LEONARD HENSLOWE
Author of " Quite Well Thanks,” etc.
With 33 illustrations, 2s. Gd. net.
This book embraces Mr. Leonard Henslowe’s latest views on how to keep
well in modern civilisation, together with a fifteen-minute system of thirty-two
physical exercises that can be followed by everybody from the clear instructions
printed under each photograph. These exercises are aimed particularly at the
abdominal muscles.
Can You Solve It? by ARTHUR HIRSCHBERG
Handsomely hound in cloth, with numerous diagrams, 4s. 6d. net.
This is a collection of puzzles and problems which requires familiarity with
etymology, geography, literature, history, mathematics and science.
Buying a Car ? 1939 by LEONARD HENSLOWE
Fully illustrated. Is. 6d. net.
An annual now in its seventh year, brought out in the interest of the vast
army of motorists, new and old, by one of the most experienced writers
in the motoring world.
Qeneral J{oL>els 7/6
The Strategy of Suzanne
by MABEL BARNES-GRUNDT
Author of " The Mating of Marcus,” etc.
Suzanne, the heroine of this popular writer’s delightful new novel, does not
hold or besiege a city, nor a man’s heart —it is a case of a man besieging hers.
Her strategy is directed along much more unusual lines, to wit, the holding-up
of the sale of an old house and garden. Why she does this, and how she achieves
it, the reader will find out for himself by perusing this amusing story.
A New Novel by REBECCA WEST
Author of " The Judge,” etc.
A new long story by this famous writer.
Three Births in the Hemingway Family
WINIFRED JAMES
Author of " Saturday’s Children,” etc.
An unusual tale dealing with the material and the supernatural; in which
we are introduced to three generations of a wealthy merchant family. In this
thoughtful piece of writing, Miss J ames gives us something more than a story
in her attempt to solve the eternal problem of death and its relationship to life.
HUTCHINSON


General Diovels 7/6
Darkened Rooms by SIR PHILIP GIBBS
Author of " The Middle of the Road ” (97th thous.), " The Age of Reason "
(30th thous.), etc.
This new novel is entirely different from anything which Sir Philip Gibbs
has previously written. Strange as it may seem, Darkened Rooms does not
deal with war, youth, politics, or social problems ; it is, in fact, an adventure in
a very strange No-Man’s-Land.
A New Novel by EDEN PHILLPOTTS
Author of " The Ring Fence," etc.
The story of Tryphena Groom : her babyhood, childhood, and her growth
to womanhood. We sympathise with her failings and her triumphs, and above
all, her passionate love of life. The author has, in his latest novel, captured
to the full the proud, simple and beautiful spirit that makes his beloved West
Country so entrancing.
Eve the Enemy by E. TICKNER EDWARDES
Author of " The Sunset Bride,” etc.
Mr. Edwardes, who has lived for many years in the quiet villages of Sussex,
is a shrewd yet kindly observer, and in Eve the Enemy he recounts the story
of South Down village life —its joys, disappointments and sorrows, its aspira-
tions and loves, with deft touches of humour and pathos. Mr. Edwardes weaves
a story which, for originality and charm, is quite the best he has given us.
Tarnish by URSULA BLOOM
Author of "An April After," etc.
This is the story of Monica and of what she made of life, or rather what life
made of her. In her youth she had her joys, her aspirations and her loves—•
and then came Dicky. Sophisticated was Dicky, unsophisticated was Monica—
and she married him and lost her happiness. The manner in which Monica
solved her problems is told with sympathy.
We That Are Left by ISABEL C. CLARKE
Author of " Strangers of Rome,” etc.
A post-war story of a family whose two brilliant elder sons have been killed
in the war. Two daughters survive, and a younger son whose nervous system
has been shattered by an air-raid in childhood. Neglected by his somewhat
thriftless parents, his one friend is his sister Allison, the heroine of the book.
The reactions of the brother and sister to the stern domination of the latter’;
husband and the gradual disciplining of Aubrey are graphically related.
HUTCHINSON


Qeneral 7 j 6
Lily Christine by MICHAEL ARLEN
Author of " Young Men in Love,” " The Green Hat,” etc.
A brilliant picture of everyday life, shorn of its glistening tinsel and specious
counterfeit. In a series of brilliant etchings are shown Lily Christine, Rupert,
Muriel, Ivor, Ambatriadi and the rest, fighting out their battles to the bitter
end. ... It is quiet, this story of Lily Christine, yet enlivened by masterly
flashes of wit and epigram ; in very truth a tale which will achieve the impossible
—namely, that of enhancing Michael Aden's already great reputation.
Slirimpton-ln-Space by OWEN RUTTER
Author of “ Chandu ” (9th thousand), etc.
Owen Rutter’s latest novel is a wild and joyous extravaganza concerning the
astonishing fate that overtook the village of Upper Shrimpton, which, by a mys-
terious convulsion of nature, became a tiny world of its own. The story of its
adventures is told in a vein half of fantasy, half of satire, and through it moves
the figure of Mr. Harold Drake, the little postmaster with the soul of an explorer,
to whom Upper Shrimpton came to turn in the time of its extremity.
A New Novel
E. W. SAFI
Author of " A Man’s A Man,” etc.
Mariette’s Lovers by G. B. BURGIN
Author of “ Allandale’s Daughters,” etc.
Beautiful Mariette Delorme, daughter of the Sheriff of Four Comers, has
three lovers, and we have the action and reaction on themselves and the beautiful
Mariette, one of the most delightful heroines of the many to whom this author
has introduced us. We follow the course of this tale of true love with its laughter
and tears, its incident and pathos, and lay down the book with regret.
White Witches by M. FORREST
Author of " Hibiscus Heart,” etc.
An unusual story with an Australian setting, showing how strange
influences are exerted upon a group of people by the trees which grow near
their dwellings.
One More River by LAURENCE KIRK
Author of " Dangerous Cross Roads,” etc.
This story of Geoffrey Doune’s life is one of the most sympathetic studies of
post-war youth that has yet been written. This is undoubtedly a book to read,
because it reveals the spirit of youth with unusual understanding.
HUTCHINSON


Qeneral 7/6
Roon by The Hon. HERBERT ASQUITH
Author of " Young Orland ” (15th impression), etc.
The main theme of this story is the conflict in a woman’s character between
her sense of duty and her sense of romance, each pulling in different directions
and each having their victories, sometimes humorous, sometimes tragic in their
effect. The book contains more than one love story, a wide and various gallery
of characters, and a vivid picture of the life and society of our own time.
The Lighted Caravan
by MARGARET BAI ELI E-SAUNDERS
Author of “ Herself M.P.” etc.
A vivid venture of faith —plus love —which travels indiscriminately over
the russet byways and lonely salt-marshes of Norfolk broadlands, the crude
life of society London, and the wharves and shipping of sea-port havens, in a
house on wheels. The theme of this story is the modern problem of neo-
Christianity, and its lapse into nature-worship—the creed of the week-ender.
Where the Loon Calls
HARRY SINCLAIR DRAGO
This well-known author pioneers among the French Canadians who dwell on
the marsh-lands which lie along the western shore of Lake Erie between Toledo
and Detroit. This was the land of Mr. Drago’s boyhood, and with amazing
realism and delightful characterisation he spins a tale that leaves one
wondering where fiction begins and history ends.
In Chains by JOSEPH DELMONT
This striking novel gives a realistic portrayal of a handful of men and women
belonging to a Jewish community in a South Russian village. We follow the
tragedies and comedies of their oppressed and melancholy lives, and observe
how they react to their difficult circumstances. Brilliantly-drawn characters,
together with graphic pen-pictures of the grim struggle for existence, make this
one of the most forceful and moving pieces of fiction of recent times.
Autumn Woman by SEWELL STOKES
This story deals with the love of a young man for an elderly woman, and,
contrary to custom, one is able to regard the woman with liking. In her young
days, Lois Atherton had been a beautiful and talented actress, and age had done
little to mar her beauty. To her villa at Grasse came Lucian Nickson, who
gradually succumbed to Lois’ intriguing charms. . . .
HUTCHINSON


Qeneral Novels 7/6
The Altar of Honour by ETHEL M. DELL
Author of “ The Unknown Quantity,” " Bars of Iron ” (721 st Thous.), etc.
A lonely girl who, in order to escape from the cruel domination of her
half-sister, accepts in marriage the heir to an ancient and honoured title.
On the eve of her wedding, the adored hero of her younger days returns, yet her
complete submission to the will of others renders it impossible for her to avoid
the overwhelming consequences. It is only when a human sacrifice is laid upon
the Altar of Honour that there comes to her at last the blessings of Peace.
The Young Milliner by AELFRIDA TILLTARD
A daintily-wrought tale of Cambridge more than a hundred years ago, The
Young Milliner is a witty, yet pensive story written in the style of the period,
concerning Mrs. Foxton and her four charming daughters. How town and gown
rags were fought near the ladies’ front door, how a noble undergraduate’s tame
bear escaped from its master, how an air-balloon ascended, how the end of the
world did not come when it was expected, and how the four sisters were finally
settled in life, the reader must find out for himself.
Water ! by ALBERT PAT SON TERHUNE
Author of " Gray Dawn,” etc.
Another magnificent dog story wherein is related the titanic struggle for
water-rights on the outskirts of a great city. Heather, a courageous golden
collie, proves to be Gavin Cole’s best friend. The remarkable courage and
sagacity displayed by Heather will prove an inspiration to all lovers of
" man’s best friend.”
And All That Beauty by ROT BRIDGES
Author of " Through Another Gate " (3rd thousand), etc.
How the uncontrolled passions of a man can turn that which is beautiful
into devastating tragedy, is the central theme of Roy Bridges’ powerful new story.
And All That Beauty is a novel to stir the emotions. Because of her inherent
goodness and the manner in which she reacts to circumstances, Rose Waltham,
that plaything of the gods, is a character all readers will long remember.
This Love Business by JOHN FEARN
This Australian novel, in which the social side of life in New Guinea as well
as that of the mainland combine to make an interesting and fascinating story,
is more than a piece of superficial fiction. The treatment of its theme, the
eternal question, is keenly analytical, deeply introspective and clearly philosophic.
HUTCHINSON


Qeneral fj\[oyels 7/6
Don Careless by REX BEACH
Author of " The Mating Call,” etc.
This volume consists of two long complete stories by one of the greatest
exponents of forceful and dramatic writing of the day. The scene of Don
Careless is the South American Republic of Bolivar, whilst Birds of Prey, the
second tale, concerns the mysterious death of Stuyvesant Ballard, a wealthy
stockbroker. These two stories of such widely divergent themes are full of that
characterisation and sense of drama which make Rex Beach's work so popular.
A New Novel by EMMELINE MORRISON
Author of " Red Poppies,” etc.
Blind Vision by MICHAEL MAURICE
Author of “ But in Ourselves,” etc.
This powerful book narrates the spiritual pilgrimage of Luther Wing;
The journeyings of his soul through the perils of youth, the loftiness of his
aspirations, and the call he felt to the mission fields of Africa, are faithfully
recorded in language that never falls into raiigious sentimentality.
The Tapestry of Dreams
JOAN A. COWDROY
Author of “Mask,” etc.
A quietly-written story woven around the lives of the middle-class, in which
Miss Cowdroy mainly concerns herself with an investigation of the development
of her heroine’s soul. In this interesting psychological study are revealed the
author’s penetrating insight and sympathetic understanding of her characters.
Lady, Take Care ! by I. B. KERSHAW
Author of " Tarnished Virtue,” etc.
Jane, dowdy and motherless, living with an impoverished, neglectful father
on a Devonshire farm, goes to a smart county ball. The unaccustomed
wine dulls her wits, and turns her into an unwilling eavesdropper of a
married man’s intrigue with a young girl. Thence after many travels, which
cut across the tangled skein of romances other than her own, leading her through
the vicious underworld of Paris, she finds the solution of many things, and an
answer to a question.
HUTCHINSON


Qeneral s{oyels 7/6
Into the Land of Nod
HORACE ANNESLET VACHELL
Author of " The Yard," “ Quinneys," etc.
The story of a young man of parts, who transmits a " taint ” in his blood from
which he himself is free, and is one which should challenge the interest and
attention of all parents. Mr. Vachell explains briefly in a preface what led to his
writing the story, which is founded on fact, and his reasons for using the title which,
so he tells us, would otherwise never have occurred to him.
Paying Guests by E. F. BENSON
A new novel by the famous author of " Dodo," etc.
The House of Corbeen by ANDREW SOUTAR
Author of " An Island for Two," etc.
It is the simple mistakes we make in life that devastate our happiness. Here
was a woman who, as a young romantic girl, surrendered herself to the blandish-
ments of an artiste who believed that his art entitled him to snap his fingers at
the laws which govern morals. There are dramatic situations which hold one
in suspense. There is comedy aiising out of the impecunious "rich.” The
whole story is a commentary on the life of the generation : deceit, vanity, fear
of the truth.
An Island for Two by ANDREW SOUTAR
Author of " The Phantom In the House,” etc.
When they were boy and girl lovers they had their dreams, Moira and Michael.
And the dream they loved better than all the others was that of an island made
just for the two of them. The day came when that dream was realised, but not
in the circumstances which their romantic minds had conceived in the beginning.
The Judge of Jerusalem by URSULA BLOOM
Author of “ The Great Beginning,” “ Vagabond Harvest,” etc. 3s. 6 d. net
A vivid picture of the author’s conception of England plunged within the
next few years into the bloodshed of revolution. Intensely human, and written
with modern realism.
HUTCHINSON


Qeneral ■‘Hotels 7/6
Out of the Pit by A. M. BATES
It is a pity that there are not more Elizabeth Suddens in real life. To
possess a friend whose chief idiosyncrasy is to help young men of no means
but of gentle birth is an asset, and when John St. John, the hero of this
calc, met Elizabeth, it was determined that his life was to be filled with
romance and adventure. . . . This is a first novel of unusual promise.
«!"Mystery d\o~vels 7/6
A New Novel by EDGAR WALLACE
Author of “The Twister,” etc.
A long thrilling novel by this master of dramatic situations. No story-
teller of to-day enjoys a greater popularity than does Edgar Wallace, and readers
may rest assured that his new story contains, in full degree, those qualities
which have earned him such a world-wide reputation.
The Fourth Finger by ANTHONY WYNNE
Author of " The Dagger,” " Red Scar,” etc.
The fourth finger of the left hand was missing ; it had been hacked off at a
blow. As he gazed at the skeleton, Dr. Hailey realised that insight had been
given him into the darkest recess of a mind essentially criminal. But the
criminal remained free among his fellows, unsuspected and unfeared. And there
were others, against whom his hate turned as fiercely as it had burned against
this, his earliest victim.
The Catspaws by COLLIN BROOKS
Author of "The Body Snatchers,” etc.
An account of a conspiracy to make a monarchy of Matvia, one of the
new republics on the borders of Russia. The little Princess, who is the
claimant, disappears from l aris; the search for her and the plot to make
her y ueen, takes General Wetherby into the thick of a difficult situation. . . .
Romance, plot and counterplot, hair-breadth escapes, and sinister intrigues
form the ingredients of this rattling good yarn, which is set in three Capitals.
Fraser Butts In by HUGH CLEVELY
Author of " The Gang Smasher,” etc.
lan Fraser was a young man whose mild and unassuming manner hid a talent
for quiet, thoughtful devilment, and whose sense of humour was considered by
some people to be perverted. It was his sense of humour which made him
accompany Mr. Horace Minton to The Golden Centipede Club, but it was his
talent for devilment which led him to make his spectacular escape with beautiful
Christine Stevens when the club was raided. ... A story of humour, mystery,
and thrilling adventure, with a fascinating and unusual love interest running
through it.
HUTCHINSON


t Mystery 7 j 6
Doctor Artz by ROBERT HICHENS
Author of “ The Streets and Other Stories ” (6th thousand), etc.
A powerful story by this famous author built around the life and actions of
the sinister Doctor Artz, an Italian-Swiss ; ugly, with a body almost sug-
gesting deformity, who possesses a strange power of attraction for young and
beautiful girls. Three times he has married, and when the story opens, one of
these wives is dead ; the other two he has got rid of by divorce, having grown
tired of them. Artz is famous for his mysterious methods of rejuvenation,
which bring him many patients from foreign countries. A compelling tale in
the best Hichens’ vein.
A New Novel by BRUCE GRAEME
Author of “ Hate Ship,” etc.
There is not a chapter in this book which is not replete with drama, not a
character which does not seem to live. Moreover, with regard to the plot, we
can only say that the ending will hold a surprise for the astutest reader.
The Nine Club by A. M. BLUNDELL
" The Nine Club ” was a most select and exclusive gathering. Its nine members
were of world-wide reputation and esteem ; but the world did not know the
conditions of membership. The manner in which the gang was eventually ex-
terminated makes a yarn that will keep the sleepiest reader from his bed until
the last page is turned.
The Finger of Death by HENRT CONNOLLT
Author of “ Money for Something,” etc.
A postcard with " You will be convicted of murder ” written on it, is not
going to deter any right-minded young lady from playing in a tennis tournament
—especially with an agreeable partner. At any rate, Ann Black—the charming
ward of Ben Holt—refused to be put off her stroke by such a message. Neverthe-
less Ben Holt is found murdered, and the only person who can benefit by his
death is the dauntless Ann. . . .
Criminal Square by HARRINGTON HASTINGS
A stirring story of love, hatred and adventure, describing how " The Inner
Circle,” a powerful organisation of international crooks, attempts to obtain
possession of the formula of a new poison-gas discovered by an unknown
scientist in the dark days of the War ; and telling how four friends, unaided by
the police, eventually save the papers and place them in the safe keeping of the
Government.
HUTCHINSON


»!Mystery Novels 7jb
Phantom Fingers hy LYON MEARSON
Author of " Footsteps in the Dark,” etc.
Before the horror-filled eyes of a terrified audience, Augustin Arnold, the
matinee idol, is strangled to death on the stage of the Grand Theatre, by invisible
hands. The understudy, who takes up the murdered man’s part, is throttled in
the same mysterious manner and comes within an ace of losing his life. With
thrilling intensity the author projects the denouement of this murder-mystery.
The Twisted Grin hy ARTHUR SALCROFT
Author of " The Mystery of the Walled Garden," etc.
Had Professor Braille, whilst in the employ of Sir Hubert Wayne, not been
clever enough to discover a mysterious ray, this tale could never have been told.
And doubtless, if the Professor had lived to witness the sinister uses to which
his ray was put, he would have cursed his ingenuity. Plot and counter-plot,
hair-raising thrills and a surprising denouement make a superlative story.
Squatter’s Treasure by EM ART KINSBURN
Author of “ The Boss of Camp Four,” etc.
This well-known author again introduces us to the life of the Western
construction camps and the curious characters who work in them. It is a
phase of Western life which few writers know as thoroughly as Mr. Kinsbum.
The girl construction-camp foreman, who is the leading character in this story, has
some thrilling adventures in her quest for hidden treasure.
The Fatal Record hy CHRISTOPHER B. BOOTH
Author of " The House of Rogues," etc.
A gramophone plays an important part in the structure of mystery and crime
in this story. Caleb Ballinger's weak heart failed him, and he fell dead, when
he heard the blaring music sounding from his gramophone downstairs. . . .
Who started the gramophone playing the fatal record ? That was the problem
Detective Jim Bliss was called upon to solve.
The Mae behind the Curtain
DOUGLAS WALSHE
Author of " The Smoke Screen," etc.
When the authorities dismissed her uncle’s death as being due to heart
failure, Hester Wade was far from satisfied. Accordingly she sought some one
to undertake investigations, and eventually selected Tony Sutton, who was
certainly the complete amateur detective. The story of his thrilling six months’
furlough will leave the reader breathless.
HUTCHINSON
