

WHITER THAM SNOW.
A SERMYN BY THE
11SV. ANDREW G A RBI M SR,
M.A.,
MINISTER OF THE <IL3BS PSKSSYTSBIAN
CHCJIGH, SY JjfMISr.
JOSEPH PAXTON,. HAG TO" ARTS STiCSSr,
SY'DN EY.




Vj3SS'/r<?S93/'2
BY THE REV. ANDREW GARDINER. M.A.
“ Whiter than snmv." —Psalm li. 7.
Tiir other day a little hoy and I were
looking over a volume of the Children's
Friend. It was the beautiful pictures that
mainly attracted our attention, and called
forth our admiration. And well they
might, for in them the most fastidious
could have found much to charm. Indeed,
1 do not know a better illustration of the
advance of this age over the last than that
which a page of a child’s magazine ] re-
sents. Well, as my little friend and I
looked over the pictures, we came to one
whose subject was a snow-storm. All
were whiter —road and trees and traveller
and. still the snow was falling, for'the page*”
■was covered with innumerable white
spots. Pointing to them I asked the little
lad what they were, but he could not tell
me, and I had to explain to him that that
was snow. Still he did not seem to under-
stand, and his mother said that she had
great difficulty in giving her children a


true idea of the nature and appearance of
the snow which they had never seen. To-
night, my sermon being about the snow,
that is my first difficulty. No doubt there
are some of us who have often seen and
who know well nature’s white dress. We
have felt the joy of looking out in the
morning and discovering that it has been
a fall oi snow; we have made snow men
and snow houses ; we have fought snow
battles, and it may be some of us have had
the misfortune of being snowed-up. But
others here, perhaps the most, have had no
such experiences, and of these some have
never seen snow ; now I find it very diffi-
cult to tell you what it is, and what it is
like.
1 might endeavour to do so by gathering
together a few scientific particulars about
it. ‘ ‘ Snow is the frozen moisture which
falls from the atmosphere when the tem-
perature is 3*2° or lower. It is composed
of crystals usually in the form of six
pointed stars. Of these crystals about a
thousand different kinds have been ob-
served. Snow-flakes vary in size and are
largest when the temperature is nearest
32 , and smallest when the temperature is
very low. In colour snow is white, because
of the combination of the different pm-


matic rays issuing from the minute
crystals, and also because of the air con-
tained within it. So loose is it in its
texture, that it is ten to twelve times
lighter than its equal bulk iii water.” But
lam not succeeding. The snow must be
seen. And he who has seen it in a genuine
snow-storm will always be able to tell
himself, if he cannot tell another, what is
snow. Of all nature’s varied aspects that
is the most striking in which we behold
her fields arrayed in the purest white.
Still more impressive is such a scene ever,
because of the peculiar freshness with
which it always comes. Oh ! all the year
round there is nothing like the snow.
As one would expect in countries where
snow falls, it is frequently described and
alluded to. Over the literature of our
Fatherland and of Northern Europe the
white snow-flakes lie. 3 In the Bible, too,
there is many a reference to snow. For
though it falls only in the highlands of
Palestine, yet Mount Hermon, well nigh
10,000 feet high, situated on the northern
boundary, is visible nearly over all the
land ; and its summit perpetually white
was always teaching the people the lessons
of tha snow. Sometimes the allusion is
to its coldness. You remember that in


Proverbs, “As the cold of snow in the
time of harvest, so is a faithful messenger
to them that send him, for he refresheth
the soul of his masters.” In these words
reference is made to the custom of bring-
ing snow down from the mountains in the
h jat of harvest with which to cool the
drink of the reapers; thus it was used
exactly as we use ice. Job again refers to
the snow’s peculiar cleaning properties
when he says, “If I wash myself with
snow-water, and make my hands never
so clean.” Very frequently the reference
is to th; whiteness of the snow. To some
of your minds must come that beautiful
instance in the Psalms, “ When the
Almighty scattered kings in it, it was
white as snow in Salmon. ” Spiritually and
morally the laud of Canaan under heathen
rule had been dark; but when God
brought His own people, then, with His
simple worship and His holy laws the
moral and spiritual darkness were chased
away—“ When the Almighty scattered
kings in it, it was white as snow in
Salmon. ”
In our text also the allusion is to the
whiteness of snow. The Psalm in which
it occurs is the cry of a good man who has
fallen into fearful and shameful sin.


David, the man of God, has broken the
sixth and seventh commandments. Biting
remorse has set in. Everything about him
seems to point and say “Murderer,”
“Adulterer,” “ Thou art the man. ” And
hear the words he utters of himscdf in his
agony. £ ‘ My transgressions, mine iniquity,
my sin ; they are ever before me. Against
Thee, Thee only have I sinned. Thou
desirest holiness in the inward parts but I
am sin, all sin, without and within. Oh
God ! God ! whither can I turn ? To Thee
only. Have mercy upon me according to
Thy loving kindness; purge me with
hyssop, and even I shall be clean ; wash
me, and I shall be whiter than snow.”
Our text thus you see is an illustration of
that righteousness which God and God
only can give to a poor sinner. Our text
describes not a man’s goodness, but the
goodness which God gives a man. It is
the robe which Christ with His own hand
puts on all His own which is “whiter
than snow. ”
I. Now the first thought these words
suggest to me is that of Purity.
White is always the symbol of holiness
—of purity in the Bible. There we are
enjoined to let our garments always be
white. There we are commanded to buy


of Christ gold and white raiment. Yon
remember the question of the Revelation,
“ Who are these that are arrayed in white
robes?” and you remember the answer,.
“ These are they which have washed their
robes and made them white in the blood
of the Lamb.” And because the snow
is the whitest thing on earth, it is
used to typify that which is the
whitest thing in heaven—the righteous-
ness which Christ has to bestow. Yes,
when I think of the snow I think of
purity. Shakespeare did so when he
wrote the line—
“Pe thou as chaste as ic r >, as pure as snow, thou
sha.lt not escape calumny.”
What purity is in the phrase “the virgin
snow.” As pure as the snow—the white
untrodden snow. How that covers all
that is black and foul and makes all like
itself clean ! ’Tis night in a great city.
Silence and darkness reign over all that
kingdom of good and evil. Black night
a winter night. But now the snow'
begins to fall from the heavy sky above.
Cently, noiselessly, it falls over all the
sleeping city, and when the day dawns
the black is white, the foul is clean.
Stand now on this lofty steeple and look
around on the strange fairy scene. Dirty


streets and dirtier alleys, smoke begrimed
houses and factories, poor man’s hut and
rich man’s lordly mansion, temple of God
and den of sin all as white as snow. A
city in white. Say does not the spectacle
speak to you of purity, and as you look
upon it do you not utter the fervent wish
that that fair city with its teeming thou-
sands were what it seems, white as snow.
I invite you to look to that of which all
this is but the illustration. Turn to the
text. It is not a city but a man to which
it refers. Look on him as he is in the
dark night of sin. Foul, foul, through
and through, without and within. I know
of no city more wicked than the city of
man-soul. There, there is evil in every
stage ; there, there is evil of every kind.
Oh, what inhabitants there are in that
dark place called sinful man. 11 was one of
the Popes who said, laying his hand on
his heart, “Here is Noah’s ark,” and this
was the explanation of his saying—“ln
Noah’s ark were few men and many
beasts. ” The saying is still true of the heart
of man. Oh, it is filled from corner to corner
with evil thoughts, feelings, and desires.
But see ! on that dark place, on that foul
city falls the mercy of God like the snow
from heaven. Oil it falls gently; and


soon the guilty heart, and the guilty
hand, and all the guilty past are covered.
All is now white and pure for Christ’s
sake. For Chr'st’s sake the sinner is for-
given. Though afterwards a man may
often stain himself with sin, blessed be
God he can never, never stain the white
robe of Christ's o impute righteousness
wh’ch God has given him to wear. That
makes him w 1 i e at tir t and white for
ever. Thus it is that you have in the
Christian a living paradox : one who will
tell you that he is free from sin, but who
will with the same breath confess that he
is the chief of sinners. So it is ever. In
himself sinful, but striving to be holy ;
in Chris*-, perfectly go id, whit°, pure.
11. The words “whiter than snow”
suggest the thought of Beauty.
What is pure is beautiful; and he who.
has seen a white snow-flake or a white
laud scape has seen a thing of beauty. It
has the first condition of beauty, for like
every work of God it is in every respect
perfect. As it fads from heaven, and as
it lies on earth, you feel that it is whole,
with no deformity and with nothing lack-
ing. Oh the’ snow, the beautiful snow !
When we spoke of its purity we endeav-
oured to describe a snowfall in a city ; but


we must go to the country to see the
snow in its beauty. Gaze around on this
fairest of scenes! What mag'cian has
been here, in a night turning the world
into white. It is the snow—the beautiful
snow that covers all. See it on the
mountain top and see it on the sloping
hills. See the long rows of hedges all
warmly clad in their white dress, and
every tree, beautiful, beautiful.
“ ’Tis brightness all save where the new snow melts
Along the lazy current.”
No Arabian story tells of a fairer scene.
Well does Eliza Cook sing its song of
X>raise :
A cheer for the snow —the drifting snow,
Smoother and purer than beauty's brow :
The creature of thought scarce likes to tread
On the delicate carpet so richly spread
With feathery wreaths the frost is bound.
And the hills are with glittering diadems
crowned;
’Tis the fairest scene wo can have below.
Sing welcome then to the drifting snow.”
And there is a something more in the
beauty of the snow-scene which is almost
indescribable. There is, when the snow
comes, in the air and everywhere, a
strange softness which is most cha -ming.
All is so gentle and so still. Oh it is
beautiful. It is like God.


Like God ? Yes. Like God, for we
must not let our admiration of the snow
carry us away from that of which it is
oxdy the illustration. Beautiful like the
snow is the righteousness which God pos-
sesses, and which in Christ, and for
Christ’s sake he bestows on men. That
righteousness is a perfect thing, for it is
from God, and therefore, like the snow it
is beautiful. Oh, the perfect obedience of
Christ, which by faith a sinner makes his,
is a fair garment, and makes the plainest
lovely. N > matter how deformed or ugly
a man or v iman may have been spiritually,
on him, on her, God can confer this beauty
of holiness. Ah, below that spotless robe
of Christ’s obedience there may be many a
deformity in the Christian’s own obed-
ience, or rather disobedience ; but in His
beloved there is none. It should be the
Christian’s aim to make his righteousness
more and more like Christ’s with which he
is covered. And the more like they be-
come, the more beautiful he, and the more
fit for entering into the eternal presence of
the K ing in his beauty. Oh, Christ!
Christ! let thy obedience for us—thy righ-
teousness -thy goodness which, like the
snow, is soft and beautiful, fall on us all.
Not beauty of -bo ’y, but beauty of


soul we seek. Thy beauty ! The beauty
of the Lord our Cod be upon us !
111. When I think of the snow, another
thought arises, which for want of a better
word I shall call Promise.
The snow-storm, though a winter scene,
speaks not to me of desolation or death.
It is a scene of promise. The cold snow is
a warm covering for the earth ; and be-
neath the soil is preparing, and the seeds
are kept for the coming seasons. Indeed
in many lands the snow clad hills are wells
for summer drought. Yes, in the snow I
see promise of herb, and fruit, and flower,
and Autumn’s golden grain. Oh, the
snow promises Spring, and Summer, and
warm sunshine. “It will be warmer
after,” said a poor man lying on a door
stone one night in a great city, when the
snow was falling, as he drew his rags to-
gether and crouched in the corner to escape
from the cold north-east wind. “ It will
be warmer after the snow.” “ Yes,” said
a passer by, “it will be warmer after.”
And the Christian’s snow white robe is
aho a covering of promise. Oh, how much
it promises ! It piomises freedom from
sin and from sorrow. It promises heaven,
and happiness and life eternal. Oh, Lhris-
tian, all those will bo years. Poor


Christian in a cold world, suffering
much, forgotten by men, all these things
will be yours. More than these —more
than you can think or I can tell. There
is a true sentence in “ David Elginbrod ”
which I like much. “ Doubtless the
warld to come ’ill be a’ the warmer to them
’at hadna ower muckle happin here. ” Oh,
poor Christian, your snow white robe is in-
deed a garment of promise.
“ Winter than snow.” What a wealth
of meaning there is in that word “whiter”
—hoW much more than we can penetrate.
The snow is not white enough to tell of
the righteousness of him whom Christ has
made righteous. “ Whiter,” truly a word
of promise. Oh God, how white thou
canst make poor sinners, whiter than any-
thing in nature ; by thy grace' thou canst
make us “ whiter than snow.” What a
promise. We wonder at it, but we be-
lieve. Thou canst fulfil it. Thou wilt
fulfil it. Oh, in thy mercy make good thy
word of promise, and make us all “whiter
thou snow.”
Thus, my friends, has the snow spoken
to us of Purity, and Beauty, and Pro-
mise. In conclusion I think I hear from
one anxious spirit an earnest question,
“ How can. I be made whiter than


snow ? Oh, my sin, my sin ; what can
make me white?” Listen. ‘‘The blood
of Jesus Christ the Son of God ckanseth
us from all sin.” That oan make you
white and clean—even you, sinner, re-
jector, delayer though you have been.
*• What though your sirs be black as night.
Or glowing as the crime on mom,
Immanuel’s blood can make them white
As snow through the pure ether borne.’
His blood can make the foulest clean. On
earth often did Jesus say with the author-
ity, of God “Be thou clean.” He is still
the mighty Saviour, and that word he ut-
ters still. Oh, if you have a humble,
earnest faith in the Christ who obeyed the
law for you, and died for yon, you will
not he punished for breaking the law, and
you will not die. He will free you from
sin and from death. Now and for ever he
will make you whiter than snow. He
will say “Be thou clean.” Oh think,
“Clean.”- For ever clean. Oh anxious
one ! here is thy prayer in the song which
Mr. Sankey has been singing in England
during the weeks of the long snow storm
of last winter ;—■
‘' Lord Jesus! 1 long to be perfectly whole,
I want thee for ever to live in my soul,
Break down every idol, oast out every foe,
How wash me and I shall be whiter tuau snow.


‘ ‘ Lord Jesua, let nothing unholy remain,
Apply thine own blood and extract every stain,
To get this best cleansing 1 all things forego
Now wash me and i shall be whiter than snow.
“ Lord Jesus, thou seest I patiently wait,
Come now and within me a new heart create;
To those who have sougut Thee, Thou never saidst,
No;
Now wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
Whiter than snow, yes whiter than snow,
Now wash me and 1 shall be whiter than snow.”
He will. Ah, be sure he will if these
words are the cry of your heart. He
does not respect persons. His mercy is
like his snow. It is impartial. It falls
on all poor sinners who turn penitently to
Him. If you turn to Him it will fall on
you, endowing you with that Purity and
Beauty and eternal Promise of which we
have spoken. Oh, hear a voice from
heaven to you, “ Come now, and let us
reason together, saith the Lord : though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like
crimson, they shall be as wool.” Oh,
Spirit of God seal thy promise and bring
sinners to Christ.
May God give his own blessing. Amen.


Though the following beautiful and
touching lines are familiar to many, yet I
put them here as they were read after the
sermon. They were found in the posses-
sion of a young woman -a poor uufprt.i-
nate—who died in an hospital in an
American city one winter night when the
snow was on the ground.
THE BEAUTIFUL SNOW.
Oh, the snow, the beautiful snow!
Filling the sky and the earth below;
Over the housetops, over the street,
Over the heads of the people you meet,
Dancing, flirting, skimming along,
Beautiful snow! it can do nothing wrong.
Flying to kiss a fair lady’s cheek,
Clinging to lips in frolicsome freak,
Beautiful snow! from the heavens above —
Pure as an angel—gentle as love!
Once I was pure as the snow, but I fell—
Fell, like the snowflakes from heaven to hell,
Fell to be trampled as filth in the street;
Fell to be scotied, to be spit on, and beat.
Pleading, cursing, dreading to die—
Selling my soul to whoever would buy;
Dealing in shame for a morsel of bread—
Hating the living and fearing the dead;
Merciful God! have I fallen so low —
And yet I was once like the beautiful snow.
Once I was fair as the beautiful snow,
With an eye like its crystal and heart like its glow,
Once I was loved for my innocent grace,
Flattered and sought for the charms of my face;


father, mother, sister, and all —'
God and myself I have lost by my fall,
file veriest wretch that goes shivering by
Will make a wide swoop lest I wander too nigh
For ad that is on or about me I know
Tuere is nothing so pure as the beautiful snow.
How strange it should be tl at this beautiful snow
Should fail on a sinner with nowhere to go !
How strange it would be, when night comes again,
11 the snow' and the ice struck my desperate brain I
Fainting, freezing, dying alone ;
Too wicKcd for prayer, too weak for a moan
To be hoard in the streets of the crazy town,
Gone mad in the joy of the snow coming down;
To lie and to die in my tenible w'oe,
With a bed and a shroud of the beautiful snow;
Helpless and foul as the trampled snow r ,
Sinner, despair not, Christ stoopeth low
To rescue the soul from its sin and its pain,
And laise it to life and enjoyment again;
Groaning, bleeding, dying for thee,
The Crucified being on the accursed tree;
His accents of mercy fall soft on thine ear —
Is there mercy for me ! —Will He heed my prayer ?
O God! in the stream that for sinners doth flow,
“ Wash me and I shall be whiter than snow.”




3
%.•
A/1-:
