

U A riIRRAWOUC, LHILUKEKUiUOJi




WHITESPOT
The Dingo Puppy who would
not eat meat
f
A Story for Children


CHAPTER 1. WHITESPOT LEAVES HOME.
In a quiet part of the bush, near a great stringy bark tree,
lay a large hollow log.
At one end of the log the ground was hard and smooth, the
pattering of Dingo feet had made it bare, for in this log lived
a family of Dingoes.
The father was lean and cunning, the mother fierce; they
were always busy looking for food for the three puppies. One of
these puppies was very strange.
He was as soft and fluffy as the others, his eyes were just as
bright. The white patch on his forehead made him look as if he
should have belonged to a little boy.
Whitespot was different from his brother and his sister. He
was different from all other dingoes.
He could not bear to see or to eat meat. Berries, grass and
fern roots he ate, but never meat.
When the parents brought in a rabbit, or a wallaby, or
something they had killed, Whitespot would keep away, letting
the others have his share.
The old father would growl and cuff him with a big, hard
paw. His mother would snap and snarl at him, trying the only
way she to look after and feed her children.


I 7t)Qo
HOME
WHITESPOT LEAVES
Whitespot would creep away to the end of the log, lying
there miserably, whimpering softly, until he went to sleep.
When the puppies grew older they would go out at night
to learn how to kill for their dinner. Led by the lean old father,
followed by the cautious mother, with the two puppies trotting
behind, the white tips of their tails trying to stay upright.
Whitespot would watch them out of sight, then go to sleep.
He would have nightmares, dreaming of frightened rabbits,
hearing the bleats of calves, or the whimpers of baby wallabies.
His mother was worried. She went to the wisest thing in
the bush, old Mother Goanna, and asked her advice.
Wise as she was, there was nothing she knew that would
cure Whitespot. Old Mother Goanna had no advice to give.
Soon Whitespot?s brother and sister would not play with
him, snarling and snapping if he so much as brushed past them.
His mother no longer let him cuddle into her warm side.
The loneliness became more than he could bear. One
evening, while the family were out hunting, he left the hollow
log that had been his home, and wandered into the great wild
bush.
He crept along a little track. The possums in the tall trees


chattered, the flying squirrels visited each other, the tiny honey-
eating possum mice looked for flowers.
Every living thing in the bush was active on the business of
getting food, each having a place to live, a family to live with.
No dweller in the bush would be friends with a dingo; even
his own kind did not want him.
He walked and walked. His little feet began to get tired,
his pads were sore; worn out he sank down to rest, but a frog
croaked loudly and startled him.
Dragging himself a little further he laid down again.
The tired little head sank between his front paws then turned
round into his fluffy side. The bushy tail curled to meet his head;
sleep came and took away the loneliness and the ache of heart
and body.
No one cared where he was. No one cared what he was
doing.
CHAPTER 2 TAIL-IN-A-KNOT
Something was tapping him gently. He opened his eyes to
the bright morning. Something was tapping him on the back. He
twisted his head to see what it was, and there behind him, swaying
slightly, he saw the head and neck of a big carpet snake.


Instantly he jumped up. frightened; he tensed his body to
rush away.
"I wouldn?t hurt any-
said the snake
?Don?t be afraid
thing.?
Fascinated by the soft voice, Whitespot stood still.
?1 wondered what you were doing there all by yourself;
thought you might be ill.
The snake slowly sank his head and rested on the coils of
his body.
The tenseness of the puppy ebbed away.
?My name is Tail-in-a-knot because it?s always getting tied
in a knot.? ,
The carpet snake twisted its head and looked carefully down
to the ground behind him.
?There you are,? he said. Tt?s in a knot now. I wonder if
you would be kind enough to untie it for me??
Whitespot slowly moved forward and looked at the snake s
tail There near the end was a knot. The puppy had never
untied a knot before. With his soft paws that were hard to
manage, he clumsily tried to push the end of the tail through the
P At last, with much struggling and writhing, the snake


managed by himself. Whitespot watched the interesting move-
ments of the snake; he had quite forgotten to be afraid.
?Thank you for helping me
by the way, what is your
name ? *
?Whitespot.*
?And what are you doing, and where are you going?
Whitespot told Tail-in-a-knot all his troubles. It seemed
quite natural that he should. The carpet snake was very interested.
He said soothingly:
?I?m wandering about the world myself. It s the price
you have to pay for being different. Not long ago I lived with
an old miner; he would talk and read to me in the evenings. I
became educated, got learning, you know. Now I m restless.
The old miner left suddenly, went out one day and didn t come
back.?
?What?s a miner?? asked Whitespot.
"A miner is a man who?s always looking for something that s
buried in the earth, but when they find what they?re looking for,
they become unhappy and start looking all over again.?
?What?s a man?" asked the puppy.
"A man is just a different kind of animal; they talk a lot


and dream and wonder; sometimes they fight, although 1 could
never understand why.
?It must be for food! said
"Yes,? said the snake, ?it might be; anyway, I'm travelling
about looking for another man who 11 talk to me. We might as
well travel together.
Whitespot felt a glow of happiness. He?d always wondered
what was in the places he could not see here was this kind
carpet snake who would show him and tell him all about the world.
Together they set off, going where they fancied. The day
was hot, the bush was friendly: they both felt happy.
CHAPTER 3 DRAGGLE-TAIL
Waves of bush scents, made free by the sunshine, drifted past
them.
Summer wild flowers grew close to the ground; on low bushes
and shrubs. Some were like tiny apple blossoms that grew in
clusters. Pink and yellow flowers grew close to the ground. There
were Christmas bells too impatient to wait for Christmas, waving
in a stately way over tiny blue flowers. It seemed that no matter
how bright the flowers, a little further on grew brighter, more
vivid flowers.


After a while they rested. The snake lay out full length,
letting the sunshine seep through his body. Whitespot watched
red- and blue-winged dragon flies hovering and dancing in the
air.
The slight wind was moving gently a spider?s web. The spider,
motionless in the centre, was like a cluster of jewels.
On his back were glistening clusters of white dots, around
the edge of his back were six bright blue spikes. His underside
was red and yellow.
All around were tiny insects that all knew how to get food,
and how to raise families.
A rapid tump-tump-tump-tump made the puppy prick his
ears
An emu checked her easy stride and called out.
?I say I Isn't it hot, or do you like the heat? Have you seen
any of my people about here? That?s a funny white spot on your
nose I*
By this lime the emu was alongside the two friends.
Tail-in-a-knot roused himself. He said dryly:
?You seem to talk quite a lot!
The emu hung her head; she sighed.


OK dear, dear; that?s what everyone says. I haven t any
friends, and I?I?1 m so lonely.
The emu burst into tears. Whitespot was upset. The kind
carpet snake soothed her down and consoled her a little. The emu
flopped heavily and stifled her sobs.
Whitespot tenderly asked her name.
?Draggle-tail. You see when I was first hatched
?Don t tell us if it upsets you,? Tail-in-a-knot spoke firmly
he was getting tired of so much emotion.
?Just sit quietly for a while,? said Whitespot.
The emu opened and closed her beak several times. White-
spot told her all about himself and how kind the carpet snake had
been.
Several times Draggle-tail began to speak, but checked her-
self nervously, as she saw Tail-in-a-knot s unwinking eyes upon her.
The grasses and bushes ruffled and waved as the slight breeze
came and moved on. Grasshoppers shirred and winged noisily
on the ground, while in the trees the cicadas that the children call
locusts, shrilled their high songs.
The emu went to sleep. WTiitespot, his head down between
his front paws, his tongue out, was panting with the heat.


As if appearing from nowhere a small wallaby hopped near
the group.
?Hope Fm not disturbing you,? he said cheerfully.
The emu awoke, and immediately said?
?Not at all?do sit down?where have you come from?
Oh, I*d forgotten?of course Fm a stranger here, like yourself.?
At that moment she caught sight of Tail-in-a-knot looking at
her. This made her stop talking, she just made a few nervous
noises.
?Do you know where I can get a drink of water?? asked
Whitespot.
?There?s a creek not far away,? said the Wallaby. ?I*ll show
you if you like.?
CHAPTER 4 SANDY
The Wallaby led the way, followed by Whitespot and the
others.
They had only gone a little way, when, without warning, the
Wallaby leapt into the air and turned a somersault.
All stopped in amazement.
The Wallaby looked hopelessly at them.
?1 can?t help it. I just have to do it when I feel happy.?
With this he leapt again and turned another loop in the air.


SANDY 1
When he came to ground, his large, soft eyes begged them
not to be angry with his little failing.
Tail-in-a-knot spoke for the party.
?Well, we?ve all something that seems strange. Whitespot,
the puppy here, doesn t eat meat. Draggle-tail, the emu, can t
stop talking. 1 myself am always getting my tail in knots, and so
I?m called Tail-in-a-knot.?
This put the Wallaby at his ease.
?My name is Sandy,? he said shyly.
?That?s strange.? Draggle-tail looked carefully at the Wal-
laby, ?You?re black and brown, but I can t see anything Sandy
about you.?
?I made it up myself. I didn?t have a name, so I call myself
Sandy.?
?You have a perfect right to do that,? said the carpet snake.
Quite naturally, Sandy was now accepted as one of the band
of friends. He was eager to be friendly. He jumped into the
air and turned a double somersault.
?Oh, my goodness! You make me feel dizzy besides you
might hurt yourself,? gasped Draggle-tail.
Just then Sandy stopped, for they had come to the top of
the bank of the creek.


CHAPTER 5 WHITESPOT IN DANGER
The creek was swift and broad. In the north it had been
raining and the creek was swollen. On the sides of the bank were
sharp rocks that jutted out in places least expected. The banks
were steep and deep; they twisted sharply in curves; the swirling
waters foamed as they hit the bend.
Whitespot was very thirsty. He eagerly ran down the sides
and scrambled over the rocks. He reached the water, but trod
on a loose stone. All in a moment he stumbled and pitched into
the creek.
Draggle-tail was still on the top of the bank. She clucked
with shock. Tail-in-a-knot was slithering round a large rock.
Sandy, with a bound, was away, leaping alongside the water and
after Whitespot.
Whitespot had lost his breath with surprise. He frantically
tried to paddle, but the water was too swift. Suddenly he was
swept away round the bend.
Draggle-tail lost her head. Running on the top of the bank,
flapping her funny stunted wings calling out:
?Save him! Quick I Save him! He?ll drown, he?ll drown!??
Tail-in-a knot furiously wriggled over the rocks. He seemed
to move as quick as lightning.
Sandy was hopping alongside he seemed to know exactly


where to put his feet. He never stumbled, never made a mistake.
Draggle-tail hadn?t the least idea what to do. Tail-in-a-knot
could swim, but could not hope to catch up to \Vhitespot. Besides,
what was there for the puppy to cling to on the snake s body?
Sandy put on speed. His leaps were quicker, longer. He
twisted and turned along the creek bank. Soon he was abreast
of Whitespot; then he was ahead.
He continued to leap ahead, then with a bound he was in the
water.
Whitespot was being carried along towards him. The puppy,
frantic with fear, had used up all his strength. He had ceased to
struggle against the water.
Sandy had leapt into a shallow part, but the bed was muddy
his toes could not grip. He slid towards a deep hole. By thrash-
ing the water he recovered. Then, as Whitespot was being flung
past him, Sandy leapt out, and with his short forepaws grabbed
at the puppy; at the same time, exerting all his strength, threw
himself to the bank.
Whitespot managed to get a grip on to the bank and pulled
himself to safety.
Sandy strove to reach the bank as well, but it seemed as if he,
too, would be swept aside by the water. He leapt, and by forcing


his powerful back legs against the bed of the creek, managed to
grasp the bank with his forepaws.
Draggle-tail and Tail-in-a-knot reached the exhausted pair
together. The emu danced up and down and round them.
Sandy lay weakly on the grass; Whitespot was slowly
recovering.
Tail -in-a-knot reared up, swaying his head from side to side
in anxious excitement.
In a short time they had all recovered, except it was found
that the carpet snake's tail was tied in several knots.
?It was the excitement,? he explained.
This seemed so funny that they all laughed, and so recovered
from their fright, and all walked together in the bush.
CHAPTER 6 THEY CAMP FOR THE NIGHT
Soon afterwards the strenuous time that they had endured
made them sink down in the middle of a cleared patch to rest.
Sandy asked Whitespot how he felt.
?Well Whitespot should have learnt the lesson of not
rushing at things, no matter how much you need ?em??Tail-in-a-
knot was showing off some of his wisdom.


Sandy laughed. ?Whitespot looked so surprised to find
himself in the water.
Draggle-tail tittered?"l shall never forget Tail-in-a-knot s
expression when he found he had three knots in his tail.?
?And you looked funny, too. with your beak opening and
shutting, not knowing what to do.? Tail-in-a-knot was a little
acid.
?It was not only brave, but clever of you. Sandy.? White-
spot was humble.
-It just came naturally,? said Sandy. ?You see, when dogs
chase my people, we get into a creek or a river; we stand in a
shallow part and wait for the dogs to come, then we hold them
under water.*
Whitespot shivered.
?Well it?s the only means of defence a Kangaroo or a
Wallaby has,? explained Tail-in-a-knot. ?And Sandy used his
means of defence to save you. Whitespot.?
"Don?t please think I?m not grateful,? said Whitespot. 1 11
never, never forget it ? , ,
?Now don?t think you have to be my faithful friend for
life,? Sandy said seriously. ?No one does anything unless they
want to.


Draggle-tail said very quickly: ?I?m sure I don?t wish to
be rude, but she giggled ??1 just caught a glimpse of Tail-
in-a-knot s face when he saw Sandy take a violent leap for no
reason he could see he was too low to the ground to see
Whitespot had fallen in.??
Even the carpet snake caught the infectious merriment, and
Draggle-tail was so pleased with her little success that she screamed
with laughter, and very undignified, rolled about on the ground
with her feet in the air. Then she sat up and said:
?Oh, I feel weak. I?m thirsty
Go back to the creek then,*? said the carpet snake coldly.
But she was not that thirsty.
The sun was slipping down; it turned orange. The friends
looked for food and fed upon what food they could find. Before
dusk had come they had settled for the night.
Draggle-tail was the biggest, so Sandy rested close to her.
Whitespot cuddled into Sandy.
The carpet snake coiled himself into tidy circles
Soon they all slept; the sad curlews called, and later
Dingo howled.


CHAPTER 7 MOON-MADNESS
Animals in the bush become active at night. The friends
were tired out after their day, but were not disturbed by the little
creatures of the bush.
The moon rose. Whitespot began to move in his sleep. At
last he aroused himself, instantly becoming wide awake.
The moon was like a great yellow pearl. The outlines of
trees were etched in black against the sky. Where there was a
clearing, the luminous moon clothed the bushes and grasses with
a transparent cloudy beauty.
The puppy gently eased himself away from the others. He
stood up and looked towards the moon. A few paces and he
was separated from his friends.
There was a strange excitement running through him; his
ears tried to prick upright. The calm, vast silence, the gentle
diffused light made him want to call out.
Tail-in-a-knot*s quiet voice said:
?Whitespot, where are you going??
The puppy slowly turned round and looked at the carpet
snake.
?I don?t know! Nowhere!
Then came a far-away howl of a Dingo


Whitespot bristled, looked in the direction whence it came;
he tensed his body to trot off into the night.
?Whitespot! ??
The puppy quivered.
?It?s the call of your own kind ?if you go back to them you
will have lost the fight.?
Whitespot did not understand; he trotted off. The howl
came again; the puppy stood still, a queer, quavering howl rose
in his throat. It seemed to have nothing to do with his wants;
the far-away call was forcing him back to his own kind.
?If you go back your people will not want you. If you go
back you will still be different; keep with us, we are not your
people we are better, we are your friends.?
The puppy?s tail was straight-out, the hair was standing up.
his head was towards the moon. The carpet snake?s voice had a
quiet compulsion. Slowly the fever left, he became conscious
of the dully gleaming form of his friend the carpet snake.
?Perhaps 1 should not have left my home??? he asked Tail-
in-a-knot.
?Why not? You did what everyone should do. You took
charge of your own life but since you are not like other


dingoes you have to pay the price by not howling at the moon,
or meeting your own kind in the moonlight.*
Then a heavy cloud covered the moon. The magic was gone.
Whitespot returned with the carpet snake and settled into an easy
sleep.
CHAPTER 8 THE STORM
Before dawn the clouds, heavily burdened with rain, had
covered the sky.
The ants knew that rain was coming and had been busy
making preparations days before.
A few drops of rain, then the rumble-rumble of thunder. A
flash of lightning, then more surly threats of thunder.
The friends awoke to the grey world.
Draggle-tail stretched her long legs.
?Well, I think it will rain. Yesterday I thought it too hot to
last. I always know when it s going to rain ?my tail doesn?t
draggle so much, and last night 1 dreamt all the time of water.?
Tail-in-a-knot uncoiled himself and shivered.
With common consent the friends started to look for a cleared
space. The clouds were low and heavy. A vivid blue flash warned
them of a coming thunder-clap. The rain started pitter patter,
then quicker and quicker, until it was a soft roar of rain.


Instinct warned them to avoid the shelter of trees. They
hurried towards a cleared space, then huddled close to each other.
The lightning flashed and ripped the morning with jagged
blue. The violet light stunned the senses. The thunder shattered
the hearing.
All the little animals who had spent the night in food-
gathering were kept nervously awake.
The storm moved round, yet the lightning remained overhead
for a long while. When it moved to the West, the rain settled
down to a steady pour.
Then it was over. The storm had passed away, leaving a
washed, blue sky, and a sun that lifted the rain into the air again
steam.
The friends were wet, but soon forgot their condition in
looking for food. Without being aware of it they changed their
direction and moved towards some thick bush.
CHAPTER 9. THE BADLANDS
The country they were moving towards was a large piece of
bush with thick, tall trees. Blackbutts and stringy bark, ironbark


and water gurn. Beautiful as it was, to all the animals it was
terrible country.
For here ruled the great Dingo, Limpy.
For miles around this old Dingo was feared. Every Wallaby
family put fear into their children by stories of Dingo Limpy s
cruelty. Wide-eyed, whispering rabbits tumbled together in their
warrens when another of their race had disappeared.
Dingo Limpy was long in the body, powerful, rippling
muscles, short thick legs, wide jaws, eyes as quick as an eagle s,
ears sensitive to the slightest sound.
Years ago he had been caught in a trap. By great and patient
effort he had freed himself, but he limped when he trotted,
although it did not seem to affect him when he loped or ran.
Fie knew his country; every tree he knew, every gully, every
little hillock, every outcrop of rock. Fie had a great knowledge
of the habits and homes of the bush animals. He knew how to
entice them from safety.
His body was designed by habit to live on meat. He did not
know there was food in roots, in berries, in grasses, in plants.
He believed in his sole right to hunt in this country.
And Dingo Limpy could fight as well as he could hunt ?he
was cruel and terrible.


The chattering of poor Draggle-tail attracted Dingo Limpy?s
attention.
He had been up all night hunting; he had not even caught a
baby rabbit. He was hungry.
The friends were some distance away. He dodged from tree
to tree, taking cover all the time, until he was close to them and
could feast his eyes on a fat young Wallaby.
The sight of Sandy made his eyes gleam. A fat Wallaby was
his just for the taking. The emu was harmless; he?d never had
any trouble with emus. He?d once tried to eat a young emu, but
it had been tough, tasteless and dry.
As for the carpet snake a snarl would send it whipping
away under cover or up a tree. The puppy would be finished with
one good snap.
He crept along and round them until he was well in front,
then keeping still near a low shrub, he watched them as they came
near and passed him by.
Stealthily, at about ten yards, he followed them, waiting to
be sure they would be off their guard.
In front of them was a small, rocky gully that they must
cross. Let them get into this gully, then attack. The Wallaby
would not have a chance, Dingo Limpy would spring on top of


him. Even if Sandy did jump, the rocky sides and bottom of
the gully would make it hard for the leaps to be sure.
Draggle-tail did not like the scrub country, she liked open
spaces.
?I wish there weren?t so many trees about, and I?m hot. I
wish you?d all move a little quicker.*?
?We ll soon have a rest,*? said Whitespot.
?I?d like a drink,? Sandy grunted.
Dingo Limpy knew that Sandy would never realise his wish.
The dingo crept near to the party.
CHAPTER 10 THE ATTACK
The gully the friends had come to was wide, but not very
deep. It was very rocky.
Whitespot sat down; Draggle-tail sat down. Tail-in-a-knot
started to coil round and round. Sandy started to look for some
sweet grass that should be growing near.
Tail-in-a-knot could not get comfortable; he discovered a
large sharp stone underneath him. He uncoiled and grumbled,
and lay full length on the bush plants.
Dingo Limpy could not stand it any longer. He crept up


until he was only eight feet away, crouching beneath the last
shrub left under which he could take cover.
Whitespot pricked his ears; he sensed there was someone
near.
?What?s that??? he said nervously.
?I didn?t hear anything,?? said Draggle-tail. ?Of course,
Whitespot, you may have water in your ears from the rain.*
Whitespot was sure he hadn?t.
Tail-in-a-knot was slightly deaf, so he hadn?t heard anything.
Sandy was busy cropping grass.
Dingo Limpy crept nearer.
Whitespot stood up. He was sure there was something wrong.
His hair bristled.
The Dingo leapt at Sandy. His great jaws snapped at Sandy?s
throat. The weight and force of the spring bore the Wallaby to
the ground.
Whitespot had no clear idea of what it was. Sandy was
attacked. The puppy streaked forward like lightning, his mouth
snapping. He sank his teeth into the Dingo s hind leg. Limpy,
caught by surprise, and having missed Sandy?s throat, turned his
head and bit cruelly at Whitespot.
Draggle-tail was flabbergasted. She danced, hopped on one


leg, then ran away. She realised her friends were in trouble. She
had taken a few strides, then wheeled about; with her neck out-
stretched, her head down, she rushed at the big Dingo on top of
Sandy.
Limp was trying to bite Whitespot and still keep his weight
on Sandy. Whitespot was in a fury. Snapping, snarling, he dashed
in again. Limpy bit him in the side. didn t heed this,
but rushed in, getting clean bites into the big Dingo.
The carpet snake streaked forward. Sandy managed to get
away, he bounded away in terror.
Limpy decided to finish off Whitespot. He waited, with jaws
open, for the puppy to rush in again; he didn t see the carpet
snake.
Draggle-tail, with her beak snapping and feet striding in
great lengths, over-carried. It served to distract Limpy from
Whitespot.
Tail-in-a-knot gathered into a mass of coils. He flashed out
and well on to the back of Limpy; the rest of his length he coiled
round the Dingo?s body.
Then Draggle-tail turned round, and with her huge claw
kicked with all her force at the wild dog?s head.


Whitespot ran forward at the same time and sank his teeth
into Limpy?s throat.
Stunned with the mighty kick, amazed at the tight pressure
round his body, Limpy sank to the ground.
Then carefully, Draggle-tail kicked again.
With a great thrashing and heaving Limpy stilled into a mass
of wild dog, carpet snake, and furious puppy.
It was all over Dingo Limpy was left for dead.
CHAPTER 1 1 MAN
Sandy returned to find his friends exhausted. When he saw
what they had done for him, his large, soft eyes clouded over.
After they had recovered from the great shock, they pro-
ceeded across the gully.
It was in the afternoon when they heard a sound of a tree
being chopped. The regular sound of an axe was not new to
Draggle-tail or to Tail-in-a-knot.
?Must be a man about.*
The carpet snake stopped and listened.
?Very queer people indeed,** said the emu.
?No queerer than we are;?* the carpet snake was thoughtful.


MAN
?One of us must go ahead and see what kind of man it is. 1 m
the least likely to be seen, so 1 will go.
There was no question about Xail-in-a-knot s wisdom the
rest were silent.
Xail-in-a-knot slipped off. The others sat quiet, even
Draggle-tail did not speak.
The sun was getting ready to say good-bye. The cicadas were
giving way to the crickets.
It seemed a long time waiting for Tail-in-a-knot.
He suddenly returned, but could not wait until he reached
them before giving his news.
?Well, I?ve found him; I?ve found him! he sang
?It?s a man; he has a wooden hut, with a bark roof. And
who do you thing he is my old miner, the one that read books
to me.?
?Well!? said Draggle-tail.
?I suppose you?ll be leaving us,? said Sandy sadly.
Whitespot knew nothing of man. He was bewildered
Tail-in-a-knot was thinking.
The others were miserable. They had all been lonely until
they had met one another. Now the band of friends would break
up. The carpet snake, although a serious kind of person, was


their leader. In him they had found a kind of father and mother.
?This old miner,? said the carpet snake, is a strange old
man. He doesn?t believe in harming anything. He said to me
many times that only savage things killed; there was all the food
he wanted growing in the ground. See here, suppose you all come
along with me and visit him?
The others were not so confident; except Whitespot.
The helpless feeling that had come with the thought of
losing Tail-in-a-knot was the reason for them at last agreeing to
go with him.
CHAPTER 12 REUNION
The shack was strongly built of hardwood, roughly hewn out
and nailed together. The roof was of bark slabs. At one end the
fireplace or chimney-stack was attached as if it had been put on
after the hut had been finished. It was made from flattened-out
kerosene tins.
The hut was not fenced round. The ground in front and at
the sides had been dug up and planted with vegetables and flowers.
A stringybark tree stood nearby, and at a little distance around
the hut the bush was thick with creeper vine and shrub. The old
man was dressed in blue dungaree trousers, and a grey flannel


shirt. His face was nut brown with grey short whiskers. On his
grey hair sat an old green felt hat with a hole in the top.
He sat on a box in the doorway. He was talking to himself.
?It?s quiet, but it s lonely. What s the good of reading books
and papers if there?s no one to talk to about them. I wish 1 hadn t
left my old humpy; used to be such a friendly place, with that
funny old carpet snake wonder where it is now.
Then Tail-in-a-knot slithered right in front of the old man.
He reared up and swayed from side to side.
The old miner was amazed.
?If that doesn?t look like Tail-in-a-knot!
Then the carpet snake, in sheer pleasure and excitement tied
his tail in a knot.
The emu, the wallaby and the puppy were watching under
cover of the trees.
The delighted old man shouted.
?My old mate!? He eagerly bent forward and stroked the
carpet snake?s head, then carefully untied the tail, for he knew
Tail-in-a-knot had difficulty in untying his tail.
The friends saw that the old man was as kind as the carpet
snake had promised.


First Whitespot slowly went forward; Draggle-tail followed;
Sandy came last.
Whitespot was showing the marks of his fight with Dingo
Limpy. Some of his hair was gone; his side was still open.
Draggle-tail stalked nervously up; Sandy knelt on his short
forepaws, pretending to be interested in some grass by sniffing
the ground.
Tail-in-a -knot anxiously went from the old man to Whitespot.
From Whitespot he wriggled to Draggle-tail, and from her to
Sandy.
?Brought some friends along, hey?well, you re all welcome
here.**
The old man held out his hand to Whitespot. ?You?ve been
in the wars, I?ll have to patch you up.?
Draggle-tail stood foolishly looking at the old man, but
Sandy whinneyed, came up and sniffed at the new friend.
So the cobbers had found a home. The old man had people
to talk with. There they all lived, and what fun they had together!
Why, it would take another book to tell about that.
THE END


? Il
/ V






*
A Currawong Publication
?THE HARBOUR? PRESS, SYDNEY.
iiiWlill
3 1508 01932539 3
