

I
■
f|i® . < ''' -" t * & s J ‘‘ ' 'W' • ■• ■“■■.■-
*. y -\.u .• ‘ •■row m maw■ j#m
I
BMP . ' jp* - i-' ,*»ftf ipffl *
Pi H wJZiuSS^^^BI
■ffl


C\.c'
((f( s|










WHO’S WHO IN
ADELAIDE
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
1921-22
Published by
THE ASSOCIATED PUBLISHING SERVICE (Aust.)
Widows’ Fund Buildings, Grenfell Street, Adelaide
Printed by
Publishers Limited, 75-79 Grote Street, Adelaide


% oWEALTH of Au
24 OCT 1923
Of the PARUf^


49887
PREFACE
THIS little book might be called “The Car-
toonist's Who's Who in Adelaide.” The
plan of it’s publishers was to issue a booklet
that would be a valued souvenir. They
have tried to pick out representative citizens
in political, professional, financial, commercial,
and sporting circles; obtain good portraits of
them and reproduce with suitable embellish-
ments by pen and ink artists, in such a style
as to remind the subjects and their friends,
now and in the future, of what they are, and
what are their occupations —and idiosyn-
cracies.
To make this booklet still more interesting
and valuable, it was decided to print a number
of views of Adelaide, and include the bio-
graphies of leading citizens throughout the
State.
The publishers wish to thank the numerous
subscribers for their assistance, financially
and otherwise, and hope as the years roll by
this booklet will be at least one happy link
with the past, and as a souvenir ever increase
in value.




INDEX TO CARTOONS
Page
His Excellency (Sir Archibald
Weigall, K.C.M.G.) . . 29
Lady Weigall 30
Alford, William Matthew 84
Auld, William George, J.P 82
Badcock, Ernest Alfred 56
Barwell, Sir Henry Newman,
K.C.M.G 37
Black, Henry Ash 99
Blackburn, Arthur Seaforth, V.C. . . 44
Bonython, Sir Langdon, K.C.M.G. .. 31
Boucaut, George Hiles 50
Boucaut, Hilary 49
Butler Sir Richard—The Speaker . . 33
Butler, Richard Layton, M.P 70
Cain, Jonathan Robert 80
Carter, William Welch .. 57
Chapman, John Hedley, M.P 68
Cleiand, Edward Erskine, K.C 38
Cleveland, Norman Garfield 77
Cooke, John Herbert, M.L.C. . . . . 69
Counsell, Prank Hedley, F.S.A.I.A. . . 61
Dancker, Eric Phillips, F.S.A.I.A. . . 62
Downer, Frank Hagger 40
Earle, William John, M.C., J.P 53
Edmunds, Charles Augustus, L.L.B. 42
Goode, Matthew Albert 63
Goodes, Albert John 76
Gosse, James Hay 64
Grote, W. F. 0 96
Hackett-Moulden, Deborah Vernon . 36
Heaney, George Edward 94
Hicks, Francis Gibson 48
Holden, Edward Wheewall, B.S.c. . . 67
Hollis, Frederick . . . 98
Hunter, Oswald, L.L.B 47
Illingworth, George W 91
Isaacs, Isaac 79
Page
Jackett, Thomas Herbert 90
Jessop, Charles Lewis, L.L.B. . . . . 43
Kidman, Sir Sydney S4
Kitson, Mary Cecil 52
Lipman, Hyam John . 95
McDermott, Herbert Guilford . . ... 97
McDonald, James Malcolm, J.P. ... 55
McLachlan, Hug’h Patterson . . . . 87
Milne, Prank Kenneth 60
Mitchell, Robert 59
Moore, Kenneth George Carty .... 73
Moulden, Sir Prank Beaumont, K. 8.,
J.P 35
Myers, Herbert Percy Henry, J.P. .. 71
Nairn, George Walter SG
Nelligan, Joseph William, L.L.B. .. 100
Nesbit, Paris, K.C. 39
Norman, William Ashley, L.L.B. . . 41
O’Grady, Michael John Kjl
Phelps, Thomas 54
Pittman, Harold Hercules 75
Rankin, Harry 45
Reid, John Marshall 85
Rose, Frank William 89
Shannon, John Wallace 58
Shierlaw, H. A. . 45
Smith, Campbell 72
Smith, Prank 65
Smith, Walter Grandy 66
Springhall, George .. . . 81
Solomon, Herbert 5i
Sowden, Sir William John, J.P 22
Thompson, Robert Simpson 74
Tolley, Albion Everard 83
Tuckett, Ambrose Reid 88
Tulloch, Frederick James 92
Turner, Walter 78
Walkley, A. Ross 93
BIOGRAPHIES (alphabetically arranged), pages 103-127.




ABBREVIATIONS
A.A.M.C Australian Army Medical
Corps.
A.A.S.C. . . Australian Army Service
Corps.
A.F.A Australian Field Artillery.
A.G.A Australian Garrison Artil-
lery
A.I.F Australian Imperial Force.
A.I.M.E. .. .. .. Australian Institute of Min-
ing Engineers.
A.I.R Australian Infantry Regi-
ment.
A.L.H Australian Light Horse.
A.M.F Australian Military Forces.
A.M.I.C.E. . . Associate Member of the j
Institution of Civil En-
gineers.
A.M.I.E.E Associate Member of the
Institute of Electrical j
Engineers.
A. Army Service Corps.
b born.
B. Bachelor of Arts.
Bart Baronet.
B.C.E. .. .. .. .. Bachelor of Civil Engineer-
ing.
B.C.L Bachelor of Civil Law.
B.D Bachelor of Divinity.
8.5., B.Ch., or
Ch.B Bachelor of Surgery.
B. . . .. ■ . Bachelor of Science.
C. Companion of the Bath.
C.B.E Commander of the Order of j
the British Empire.
C.E Civil Engineer.
q j g Companion of the Order of j
the Indian Empire.
C. or Ch.M. . . Master in Surgery.
C M P Commonwealth Military J
Forces. )
C m.G Companion of the Order of
St. Michael and St.
George.
c j daughter.
C 1 died.
D. Deputy Assistant Adjutant-
General.
Q C Doctor of Civil Law.
p D Doctor of Divinity.
Q Litt • • Doctor of Literature.
q p pj Diploma in Public Health.
j3 g c Doctor of Science.
PSO Companion of the Dis-
tinguished Service Order.
educated.
j Elder or eldest daughter.
e s Elder or eldest son.
P CS .. .. .. Fellow of the Chemical
Society.
P L g Fellow of the Linnaean
Society.
F R A S Fellow of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society,
p R q p Fellow of the Royal Col-
lege of Physicians.
F.R.C.S Fellow of the Royal Col
lege of Surgeons.
F.R.C.S.I. .. .. Fellow of the Royal Col-
lege of Surgeons, Ireland
F.R.C.S Fellow of the Royal Geo
graphical Society.
F.R.H.S Fellow of the Royal Horti-
cultural Society.
F.R.M.S Fellow of the Royal Meteo-
rological Society.
F.R.S Fellow of the Royal Society
F. Fellow of the Royal Statis-
tical Society.
G. Knight Grand Cross of the
Bath.
G.C.I.E Knight Grand Commander
of the Indian Empire.
G.C.M.G Knight Grand Cross of St.
Michael and St. George
Q.C.S.I Knight Grand Commander
of the Star of India.
G.C.V.O Knight Grand Cross of the
Royal Victorian Order
j g.d Granddaughter.
g.s Grandson.
l. Companion of the Imperial
Service Order.
K.C King’s Counsel.
K.C.B Knight Commander of the
Bath.
K. . . . . Knight Commander of St.
Michael and St. George
| Knt. Bach Knight Bachelor.
L. Light Horse.
Litt.D Doctor of Literature.
! LL.B. . . . . Bachelor of Laws.
! LL.D Doctor of Laws.
j LL.M Master of Laws.
) L.R.C.P Licentiate of the Royal
College of Physicians.
L.R.C.P.E Licentiate of the Royal
College of Physicians,
Edinburgh.
L.R.C.S Licentiate of the Royal
College of Surgeons.
L. . . Licentiate of the Royal
College of Surgeons,
Edinburgh.
m. married.
M. Master of Arts.
M.A.I.M.E Member of the Australasian
Institute of Mining En-
gineers.
M.Am.I.M.E Member of the American
Institute of Mining En-
gineers.
M.E. . . . . Bachelor of Medicine.
M.C Military Cross..
M.C.E Master of Civil Engineering
M.D Doctor of Medicine.
M.H.A. , Member of the House of
Assembly.
M.H.R Member of the House of
Representatives.
M.I.M. and M. . . Member of the Institute of
Mining and Metallurgy,


M.lnst.C.E., or
MEE - E Member of the Institution
of Civil Engineers.
M Inst.M.E Member of the Institution
of Mining Engineers.
M.l.Mech.E. . . .. Member of the Institution
of Mechanical Engineers.
M - L A Member of the Legislative
Assembly.
Member of the Legislative
Council.
M -M Military Medal.
M -P . • • • . Member of Parliament (of-
ficial designation of a
member of the Federal
House of Representa-
tives) ; and of the South
Australian House of As-
sembly.
M.R.C.P Member of the Royal Col-
lege of Physicians.
M.R.C.S Member of the Royal Col-
lege of Surgeons.
M. Master of Surgery.
Mus. Bach Bachelor of Music.
Mus. Doc Doctor of Music.
N. New South Wales.
N-Z . . . New Zealand,
OBE Officer of the Order of the
British Empire.
P-C Privy Councillor.
Ph.D . .. Doctor of Philosophy.
P-M.O Principal Medical Officer.
Q-C Queen’s Council.
Q . .. Queensland.
R-A Royal Artillery.
R-A.A Royal Australian Artillery.
R.A.F _ .. Royal Air Force.
R.A.M.C Royal Army Medical Corps.
R-A.N Royal Australian Navy.
R-A.S Royal Astronomical
Society.
R-C. .. Roman Catholic.
R-F-A Royal Field Artillery.
R-G.A Royal Gar rison Artillery.
R-N Royal Navy.
R. . . . . . . Royal Navy Reserve.
R-0.1 Royal Institute of Oil
Painters.
Rt. Hon Right Honorable.
Rt. Rev Right Reverend.
s son.
S. . . . South Australia.
V.C. Victoria Cross.
V. Volunteer Officers’ Decora-
tion.
Vic. . . . . . . . . . Victoria.
W. Western Australia.


BIRDSEYE VIEW OF THE CITY OF ADELAIDE (taken from North Adelaide).


f
THE HEART OF ADELAIDE.
Showing the Post Office, Town Hall, Government Offices, Educational Building and
Victoria Square.


\
GOVERNMENT HOUSE
THE EASTERN CORNER OF ADELAIDE (Hindmarsh Square in the Foreground)


I . - *
•• f‘
GRENFELL STREET
Looking East from King William Street.
CURRIE STREET looking West,


-v.
SOUTH-WEST VIEW OF ADELAIDE (taken from Grand Central Hotel).
BEAUTIFUL NORTH ADELAIDE (taken from Montefiore Hill)


CRESWELL GARDENS
ADELAIDE’S BOULEVARD.


1
ST. PETER’S CATHEDRAL
As seen from Creswell Gardens.
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, NORTH ADELAIDE.
Viewed from one of the Gardens.


13
-
•'■—nmmf. - wSSR ■s ~.«h'M
DELIGHTFUL WALKS.
Approaching l\orth Adelaide
Approach to Botanic Park.


A pretty spot on the Banks of the
Torrens.


& **
■:% - . **
BEAUTIFUL ADELAIDE
THE BOTANIC GARDENS.
The Main Entrance Gates, North Terrace.
A Pretty Walk in the Adelaide Gardens.


THREE PRETTY
SCENES


%, 'j*.-
-T" *
' &
\
% \ V*
m. ‘ |
> .
- w
‘irttfrirri
A PAIR OF BEAUTIFUL
STATUES


'JW* >s
V ■
I ■
W"
'
MAIN WALK,
ADELAIDE GARDENS


A ,.
MAIN PATH
A PRETTY GARDEN SCENE,
FRONT VIEW, PALM HOUSE


PLAY GROUND
SILENT POOLS


THE SPRAY.
THE LILY POND.


y ''' ''
THE PALM HOUSE (an end view).
THE ROSERY.
PORTION OF GARDEN LAKE.




EXGEOENCY 0
i g! [ TRIANGULAR BOVINEs)
p"**?
_Ciwu
HIS EXCELLENCY.
Sir Archibald Weigall, K.C.M.G., son of Henry Weigall of St.
Lawrence, Kent, and Lady Rose Fane, daughter of John, 11th Earl of
Westmorland.
Born Bth December, 1874; educated at Wellington College and
the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester (Honors diploma, Gold
Medallist); Major late Northants Regiment; served in South African
War 1902; in France with Lincolnshire Yeomanry and on staff 1914-
1918 (dispatches); retired as Lieutenant-Colonel 1918; M.P. (Unionist)
for Homcastle Division of Lincolnshire 1911-1920; Surveyor of Food
Consumption Ministry of Food 1918; member of all representative ag
ricultural organisations; J.P. of Kent and Lancashire; Governor of the
State of South Australia from April, 1920, to April, 1922.
Residences—B2 Eaton Square S-W.L. Petwood, Woodhall Spa,
Lincolnshire: Government House, Adelaide.
Clubs—Carlton; Beefsteak; St. Stephens.
Hobbies —Agriculture.
Recreation —Shooting and cricket.


«««H@|* ‘'V »* “J
A^MM^jf *W® HHIHH^r
** , * .«B , M
LADY WEIGALL.
Wife of Sir Archibald Weigall, and only daughter of the late
Sir Blundell Maple. Lady Weigall has a most attractive personality,
and during her sojourn in South Australia made many intimate friends
She very ably assisted Sir Archibald in carrying out many duties
that fall to the lot of a Governor. With a friendly word and a plea-
sant smile, Lady Weigall will ever be remembered by all those who
had the pleasure of her acquaintance. She is a dashing horsewoman
and a great lover of outdoor sport.
Residences—32 Eaton Square 5.W.1., Petwood, Woodhall Spa,
Lincolnshire. Government House, Adelaide.


HON. SIR (JOHN) LANGDON BONYTHON, K.C.M.G.
South Australia, public benefactor. Born London, October 15,
1848. Son of George Langdon Bonython. Descended from one of
the oldest Cornish families. Joined the literary staff of “The Ad-
vertiser.” Adelaide, of which he became part proprietor in 1879, and
subsequently editor and sole proprietor, as well as of “The Chronicle”
and “The Express.” President since 1889 of the Council of the S.A.
School of Mines and Industries (whose welfare has claimed his de-
voted attention, and to which institution he made a munificent gift
in 1919); member of the Council of Adelaide University; Deputy
Chairman of the Advisory Council of Education; President of the
Advisory Board connected with Adelaide Observatory; one of 14
Trustees appointed by the Federal Parliament to administer the Aus-
tralian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund under the Act of 1916, and when
that measure was repealed he became one of the seven Commissioners
appointed under the Repatriation Act of 1917; Chairman of the Com-
monwealth Literary Fund; Vice-President of the Royal Institution of
Cornwall and of the Devon and Cornwall Record Society; formerly
President of the S.A. Branch of the Royal Geographical Society,
Literary Societies Union, S.A. Teachers’ Association, and S.A. Cor-
nish Association; member of the first and second Commonwealth
Parliaments 1901-6; Knt.-Bach. 1898, C.M.G. 1908. K.C.M.G. 1919
(knighted in the first instance for services in connection with public
education, he and the late Sir James Fairfax, of Sydney, being the
first Australian newspaper proprietors to be created Knights; Sir
Langdon was made K.C.M.G. for services rendered to the Common-
wealth of Australia, and is the only Australian newspaper proprietor
to receive this distinction); in Jan., 1921, he announced his gift of
£40,000 to the University of Adelaide for the erection of a Great
Hall. Married 1870, Marie Louise Frederica Balthasar.
Address—Carclew. Montefiore, North Adelaide, S.A.; Carminow,
Mount Lofty, S.A.


JvCCl
SIR WILLIAM JOHN SOWDEN, J.P.
Newspaper Proprietor and Editor “The Register,” Adelaide. Born
at Castlemaine, Victoria. April 26, 1858; son of Thomas Sowden, min-
ing manager. The first Australian-bom editor to receive an Imperial
title. Family seat has been situated in Cornwall for many generations.
Author of “The Northern Territory as it is”; “Echoes from the
Smoking-room”; “Prison Reform”; “The Children of the
Rising Sun”; “Chips from China”; “With the Nor’-West
Mail”; “In Warm Waters and Elsewhere”; “An Australian
Native’s Standpoint”; “The Roving Editors”; “The Encyclo-
paedia Americana”; etc., etc.
Has organised Poor Relief, Soup Kitchens, Christmas Dinners for
the Poor. Founder of the Adelaide Sick and Poor Fund.
Ex-President of the A.N.A, President of the Public Library
Board; The Boy Scouts’ Association; Cheer-up Society; Ade-
laide Branch of the Royal Society of St. George; and the
Wattle Day League. Prominent Freemason. Member of
The Belgian Fund Committee, Royal Colonial Institute, Bri-
tish Science Guild, King Edward Statue Committee, Lothian
and Cornish Societies, Parkside Bowling Club, Council of the
Royal Geographical Society, Australian Section Executive of
Soldiers’ Fund.
Hobbies.—Bowling, motoring, photography.


; -
THE SPEAKER—SIR RICHARD BUTLER.
Business—Farmer and grazier.
Sir Richard was born at Oxford, England, in the year 1850, and
is the son of Richard Butler, who came to Australia in 1854. He
holds the unique record of having been a Member of Parliament for
thirty-two (32) years continuously, and during that period has been
a Minister of the Crown for 13. He has held the position of Pre-
mier, Treasurer, Commissioner of Crown Lands. Commissioner of
Public Works, also Minister of Mines and Agriculture. Could any-
one issue a better record of public service?
Recreations —Change of work.
Private address —“Haywood,” Medindie.


pT is ny j&t*
/ PuRE*iR Ea \Br
RflNronCFB CONCr?£TEj« % ;: -H
*> — _ 1 * ->
,■ rr'p ■;
k . Osw*u> Pkyof^
1 ■—
SIR SIDNEY KIDMAN.
Business or profession—A public spirited citizen known as the
Australian Cattle King.
Private address—Adelaide, South Australia.
Born near Adelaide, South Australia, in the year 1857. Left
home at the age of 13 to seek his fortune; was a cowboy at Mount
Gepps (near the present Broken Hill Proprietary Mine) at 10/ week,
and carted wood and drove bullocks on the Darling; one of the first
at the Cobar rush; with his brother, Sackville, established an exten-
sive business in horse and cattle dealing; in partnership with others
had mail contracts in four States, and for many years conducted an
extensive trade in cattle and horses at Kapunda and other Australian
markets. Owns numerous station properties in Australia, and for
years has been the largest horse breeder and cattle owner in the
Commonwealth; visited Europe twice, and in 1919 America, where
his vast enterprise was spoken of with bated breath by “ranchers”
of the New World. During the European War he presented the
Empire with a number of armored battleplanes, and with Lady Kid-
man was an enthusiastic war worker. In 1921 he and Lady Kidman
presented their country mansion. Eringa, near Kapunda. to the Edu-
cation Department to serve as a High School. Knight Bachelor
June, 1921.


ALDERMAN Ui
SPEAKING A SECOND
SIR FRANK BEAUMONT MOULDEN, K. 8., J.P.
Born at Norwood, South Australia, in 1876.
Was educated at St. Peter’s College, and University of Adelaide
Is a member of the firm of Moulden & Sons, Solicitors, of Ade-
laide.
Sir Frank has been associated with the Adelaide City Council for
the past 18 years, and has identified himself with practically every
phase of civic life, and is widely known in public affairs.
He was Lord Mayor of Adelaide from 1919 to 1921, and on re-
tiring was re-elected Alderman.
In 1919 he was appointed Consular Agent for France in South
Australia.
Sir Frank received the Imperial Title (Knight Bachelor) on Janu-
ary Ist, 1922.
He married in 1918, Deborah Vernon Hackett, widow of the late
Sir Winthrop Hackett, K.C.M.G., of Perth, W.A.
Club.—Adelaide.
Recreations. —Golf, motoring, racing.
Private address—“Lordello,” Palmer Place, North Adelaide.


' S| £$j&
DEBORAH VERNON HACKETT-MOULDEN.
Born at Guildford, Western Australia, and is a daughter of the
late Frederick Slade Drake-Brockman and Mrs. Drake-Brockman,
formerly Grace Bussell (known as the “Grace Darling” of Australia).
Has been a resident of Adelaide for four years, and Lady Mayoress
of Adelaide from December, 1919, to December, 1921. Appointed
Life Governor of the Adelaide Children’s Hospital in recognition of
her splendid services in raising £20,000 for new nurses’ quarters and
out patients' department. Lady Hackett-Moulden is also State Com-
missioner of the Girl Guides in South Australia; President of the
National Council of Women; Life Member of Minda Home for Weak
Minded Children; member of Executive of Red Cross Society; League
of Loyal Women; School for Mothers; Kindergarten Union; and
several other philanthropic institutions. Lady Hackett-Moulden took
a prominent part in entertaining H.R.H. the Prince of Wales during
his visit to this State.
Private address—“Lordello,*’ Palmer Place, North Adelaide.


SIR HENRY NEWMAN HARWELL, K.C.M.G.
Born at Adelaide on February 26, 1877. Attended the Whinham
College, St. Peters and subsequently the Adelaide University (1894-
1898). Took his Degree of Bachelor of Laws. In 1899 he practised
at Clare, went to Port Pirie taking into partnership Mr. P. Hague.
His professional life was a very busy one, but he also became a live-
wire in the welfare of the community, being actively connected with
the Port Pirie School of Mines as President for 15 years, President
of the Local Institute, Vice-President of the Y.M.C.A.
He was returned for the District of Stanley in the Liberal inter-
ests, and in 1917 accepted the portfolios of Attorney-General and
Minister of Industry, and six weeks later retired, when three Nation-
alists were taken into the Ministry. After the 1918 elections, he
joined the Peake Coalition Ministry, and upon the death of Mr. Peake,
1920, he became Premier. He led the- Liberals to victory at the last
elections, and since then has proved himself a fearless debater.
Recreation —Bowls and tennis.
Business address—Messrs. Harwell, Kelly & Hague, Pirie Street.
Home- address —Dequetteville Terrace, Kent Town.


EDWARD ERSKINE CLELAND, K.C.
Born April 7, 1869, at Beaumont, South Australia. Youngest
son of John Fullerton and Elizabeth Cleland. Called to the Bar
1890; appointed King’s Counsel April 26, 1912; senior member of
Cleland, Holland & Teesdale Smith, Victoria Square, Adelaide.
Home address—Church Terrace, Walkerville.
Recreations—Tennis and shooting.


... ■■■■■• ,
JUDCMENT -
PARIS NESBIT, K.C.
Born at Angaston in 1852, and is a son of Edward Planta Nesbit.
Mi, Nesbit was articled in the office of the late Mr. Rupert Ingleby
in 1868, was admitted a practitioner of Supreme Court in August, 1873,
and was appointed Queen’s Counsel in 1893.
For about 10 years Mr. Nesbit drafted nearly all the principal Acts
of Parliament now on the South Australian Statute Book.
He has published a book of translations from German poets and a
pamphlet entitled “The Better Side” Ist Edition 1900; 2nd Edition 1911,
and 3rd Edition 1921.
Recreations—Theatre, Bridge, Motoring.


O x,.
' I $ o b nr\ i F c» ttv
FRANK HAGGER DOWNER.
Admitted to the Bar of South Australia as a Solicitor and Barris-
ter in 1888. The elder son of the late Henry Edward Downer and
Maria Martin Downer, was born at Hilltop, Campbelltown, South
Australia, on October 19, 1863. Was admitted a partner in the old-
established firm of G. & J. Downer, which was one of the oldest firms
of solicitors in Adelaide, and as surviving partner now carries on the
old-established practice.
Director of Wallaroo and Moonta Mining and Smelting Company
Limited, Norwich Union Fire Insurance Co., and other companies.
Recreation—Hunting, polo and golf. The oldest hunting member
and polo player taking part in these sports.
Home address—“HundaleeMarryatville.
Club—The Adelaide Club.


|_glM^ r
|
S
WILLIAM ASHLEY NORMAN, L.L.B.
Commissioner for New South Wales, Victoria and Wes-
tern Australia. Born 1883 at Glenelg, South Australia;
son of William Norman, importer, grandson of the late
Thomas Magarey, member of the Legislative Council in
the early history of the State.
Admitted to the Bar April, 1912. Late member of the
firm of Bakewell, Stow & Piper, now Wadey, Norman
and Waterhouse. District Councillor.
Club —Law Society.
Recreation—Motoring.
Home Address—“Helenholm,” Mitcham.


CW. n ° t '| . h. ...
CHARLES AUGUSTUS EDMUNDS, L.L B.
Born at Northfield, S.A., January, 1883.
Son of Robert Henry Edmunds, 1.5.0. Civil servant Called
to the Bar June, 1905, Has been Hon. Secretary of the Law Society
of South Australia since 1909, and acted as Hon. Secretary of the
Red Cross Enquiry and Information Bureau during the war.
Club —Stock Exchange.
Recreations—Rowing, lacrosse, football and tennis.
Home address—“ St. Margarets,” Aldgate.


"it’s a toss-) /
|i
OSMIft f«yOR.y .'" V '~
CHARLES LEWIS JESSOP. LL.B.
Business or profession—Barrister and solicitor.
Private address—Dutton Terrace, Medindie.
Business address—National Mutual Buildings, King William
Street.
Born at Adelaide in the year 1880, and son of the late L. A. Jes-
sop. Partner in the firm of Shierlaw & Jessop. President North
Adelaide Football Club. Member of Walkerville District Council.
Life member of Adelaide University Sports Association. Repre-
sented South Australia in Interstate football matches against Vic-
toria.
Recreation —Tennis.
Hobby—Gardening.


ARTHUR SEAFORTH BLACKBURN, V.C.
Member of the firm of Messrs. Povey, Blackburn & Waterhouse,
Solicitors, etc., of Torrens Chambers. Victoria Square, Adelaide.
Born at Woodville, South Australia, in the year 1892, son of Rev.
Canon Blackburn, and educated at St. Peter’s College.
He is a Bachelor of Laws, University of Adelaide, admitted to the
Bar 1913.
During August, 1914, enlisted. Captain 10th Inf. Brigade. Won
Victoria Cross at Pozieres, 23rd July, 1916.
Hobby—Bridge.
Recreations—Tennis and golf.
Home address—s9 Northcote Terrace, Medindie.


HARRY RANKIN.
Profession—Solicitor.
Business address—Scottish House, Waymouth Street, Adelaide.
Mr. Harry Rankin was born at Glenelg in the year 1888, and is
the son of the late Oliver Janies Rankin, one time works manager at
Islington. He received his education ot the Prince Alfred College,
and was articled to Mr. R. G. Nesbit (Nesbit, Webb and Nesbit).
Being admitted to the bar in 1911, for eight years he practised at
Peterborough, and is at the present time a partner in the firm of
Messrs. Nelligan & Rankin.
Private address —Mary Street, Unley.
Recreations —Cricket.
Hobby—Gardening.


_ ih»«faO >> -
HOWARD ALISON SHIERLAW, LL.B.
Business or Profession—Solicitor.
Business address—c/o Shierlaw & Jessop, National Mutual
Buildings, King William Street, Adelaide.
Born at North Adelaide, South Australia, in the year 1879, and
son of Joseph Craig Shierlaw. Ex Crown Prosecutor for South Aus-
tralia. Solicitor to the Automobile Association of S.A.
Private address—Victoria Avenue, Medindie.


~ »im " i„ij;!"— 1 .;.n i ,
C ' W a J SSi PTr ‘ - ' ~ gq|] 3 - /|j
[Vh FOND~0TT tfX frHEN
BOWLS, BUT IT / r\ t\ GIVE UP
SOMETIMES • //jS<f / % \ s/ BUSINESS
INTERFERES \ |/W 4 /s\ MI ™ R |*
M STER '
OSWALD HUNTER, LL.B.
Was bom at Port Augusta. South Australia, and is a son of Mr.
Thomas Hunter, of Flora Terrace, Prospect.
Mr. Hunter is a member of the firm of Fleming, Boucaut, Ashton
and Hunter, Solicitors, of Adelaide and Jamestown.
He was admitted to the Bar in April, 1903.
Recreations —Bowls and gardening.
Private address —“Glenburn,” Penong Street, Hyde Park.


FRANCIS GIBSON HICKS.
Barrister and solicitor. Bom at Adelaide in 1893. In 1906 won
an Exhibition to the Adelaide High School, and in 1909 won a Burs-
ary carrying a law course at the Adelaide University. In his younger
days took a keen interest in tennis, cricket and football, and was the
first High School old scholar to be elected President of the Ade-
laide High School Old Scholars’ Association. For several years was
a prominent and active member of the Union Parliament. Was ad-
mitted to the Bar in December, 1915, and was subsequently a mem-
ber of the Crown Law Department. In 1917 started in private prac-
tice. Is a member of the firm of Badger & Hicks, Barristers and
Solicitors, Grenfell Street. Mr. Hicks is a trustee of the S.A. Lawn
Tennis Association, and an active player.
Recreations—Tennis and yachting.
Hobby—Boat building.
Private address—Claremont Avenue, Netherby.


r
|\\ /'%S% iSfilMMP
w^ ' I '/fsv (c ViKo^
i
OVkavO fkywy , ‘"* t^, >, ’ c *. **■ «•
HILARY BOUCAUT.
Born at Saltash, England, in 1840, and is a son of Captain Ray
Boucaut, and a brother of the late Sir James Penn Boucaut who was
Premier of South Australia for many years and was afterwards a Judge
of the Supreme Court.
Mr. Boucaut came to Australia in 1846, and spent 14 years in the
far North on sheep runs, but was ruined by the disastrous drought of
1864-66. He then came to Adelaide and became articled to Boucaut,
Bruce & Stuart, Solicitors, and was admitted to the Bar in 1876. He
then went to Jamestown where he resided for 43 years, serving that
town on four occasions as Mayor.
Mr. Boucaut is an active partner in the firm of Fleming, Boucaut,
Ashton & Hunter, practising at Waymouth Street, Adelaide, and
Jamestown.
Recreations—Gardening and carpentering.
Hobbies—Reading of all descriptions.


GEORGE RILES BOUCAUT.
Barrister and solicitor. Son of Hillary Boucaut, and a member
of the firm of Fleming, Boucaut. Ashton & Hunter, Solicitors, of
Adelaide and Jamestown.
Grandson of the late George Hiles, of Petherton, Hallett, and
nephew of Sir J. P. Boucaut, late Judge of the Supreme Court.
Adelaide.
Was admitted to the Bar in April, 1907.
Practised at Balaklava and Jamestown for two years and ten
years respectively.
As a young man took a keen interest in Lacrosse and Cricket.
Mr. Boucaut is an ardent church worker, and has for many years
been a Lay Reader.
Recreations —Tennis and gardening.
Private address—l 3 Arthur Street, Medindie.


1 ■— '• -■ T1TT-T" n
f. r '• ■
''' f*ft9f'
tamemusjm n i^^—*
HERBERT SOLOMON.
Barrister and Solicitor.
Business address—Ware Chambers, King William Street.
Mr. Herbert Solomon was born at Rundle Street, Kent Town, in
1876, and he has resided in this State ever since. As a student he
was very successful, winning several scholarships at the Prince Alfred
College and the University of Adelaide. He is aB A. with first class
honors in 1895, and LL.B. in 1898. He has been President of the
Friendly Societies’ Association and Justices’ Association; also Chief
President of the A.N.A. (S.A.). For two years he occupied the posi-
tion of President of the Marryatville Bowling Club, is a Past Presi-
dent of the South Australian Literary Societies Union.
Recreations —Bowls, tennis, also a follower of cricket, football and
racing.
Hobbies—Gardening and poultry.
Home address—26 Alexandra Avenue, Rose Park.


*m ... JjMHF
4 M
MARY CECIL KITSON.
First lady lawyer in South Australia. Educated at Convent of
Mercy, Angas Street, and subsequently at University of Adelaide,
where she obtained the LL.B. degree in 1916. Served articles with
Mr. T. Slaney Poole (now His Honor Mr. Justice Poole) of the firm
of Poole & Johnstone. Called to the bar in 1917. Is at present a
member of the firm of Johnstone, Ronald & Kitson, of Steamship
Buildings, Currie Street.
Private address—37 Commercial Road, Hyde Park.


: k YES,WE USE THIS
« instrument for
l-AYING out towns
» SEEWHY
WILLIAM JOHN EARLE, M.C., J.P.
Member of the Institute of Municipal and County Engineers (Lond.), Associate
FI A. Institute of Surveyors, Incorporated (South Aust.), Associate Member Town
Planning Institute (Great Britain), Late Government Town Planner to the South
Australian State Government.
Business address—Chamber of Manufactures Buildings, Pirie
Street, Adelaide.
Profession—Consulting Civil Engineer and Town Planner.
Born at Gloucester, England, and is the son of Albert George
Earle, Senr, of the same place. He came to Australia in 1909, and is
a partner of the firm of Messrs. Beresford, Calder & Earle, Consulting
Civil Engineers, Licensed Surveyors and Town Planning advisers.
He was for some time Town Planner to the South Australian Govern-
ment, and Chairman of the Central Advisory Board of Town Plan-
ning. and resigned to enter private practice in June, 1922. He is
the commanding officer of the 3rd Double Field Co., Australian En-
gineers and A.M.F.; President of the Engineer Rifle and Sports As-
sociations, member of the Council United Service Institution. 1914
“Anzac” enlisted as Sapper Aust. Engineers, Sydney, promoted to
Captain from the ranks and awarded the Military Cross, Passchen-
daele, and mentioned in despatches three times.
Recreation—Shooting, riding, motoring, bowls and tennis.
Clubs—Naval and Military, Adelaide


ewi KN OW GOOD \
:beef?, guess ,
THOMAS PHELPS.
Born at Hindmarsh, South Australia, in 1881, and is a son of
George Phelps.
Mr. Phelps was educated at Hindmarsh Public School, and on
leaving entered employ of Wilkinson & Co., Wholesale Grocers, after-
wards learning meat trade at W. Kither’s Quality Shop. He accepted
position on clerical staff and rose from ledger clerk to accountant,
and in 1914 was appointed manager. In 1918 he became General
Manager of Adelaide Meat Stores, which position he now occupies.
Meat trade nominee for Ugly Man Competition, and secured ap-
proximately 162,429 votes.
Recreation —Cricket and motoring.


JAMES MALCOLM McDONALD, J.P.
Business address—S.A. Farmers’ Co-operative Union Limited
Franklin Street.
Born at Leighton, South Australia, in the year 1874, being the
son of Donald McDonald. He is a Director of the S.A. Farmers’
Co-operative Union Ltd., and the Co-operative Insurance Company
of Australia Ltd., also the Farmers’ Co-operative Executors and Trus-
tees Ltd. Since the commencement of the S.A. Voluntary Wheat
Pool, he has filled the position of Chairman. It was in 1918 that Mr.
McDonald sold part of his farming land around Kooringa and
came to the city. Much might be written if his political opinion was
expressed, but one can only say that it is not of a party limit. He
is an independent, with a courteous manner and genial disposition.
Recreations —Shooting and motoring.
Private address—27 Gloucester Street. Prospect.


r — MAY I DO SOME j
LONG AS YOuR PADDOCK, 'p? '« y\
SHEEP * / ‘* r * Vv \
ERNEST ALFRED BADCOCK.
Business address—S.A. Farmers' Co-operative Union Ltd.
Born at Gawler South July 16th in the year 1877, and is the son
of A. G. Badcock. He is the General Manager of the S.A. Farmers’
Co-operative Union Ltd., and on the Committee of the Port Adelaide
Industrial Co-operative Society. During the whole of his commercial
career he has been associated with the wheat trade, and is one of
South Australia’s most experienced men in that direction. Takes a
keen interest in all things connected with primary production, and is
a Director of the Australian Producers’ Wholesale Co-operative
Federation Pty., Ltd., besides being a member of the Corn Trade
Section of the Chamber of Commerce.
Recreation—Boating.
Hobbies—Shooting.
Home address—Alberton.


/" ~0: ■■ s •)
/ ) ' YES, THE VERY
( BEST IN THE
; r ; \ garden'.
WILLIAM WELCH CARTER.
Born at Teatree Gully in 1861. Has been associated with the
Executor, Trustee and Agency Company of S.A. Ltd. since the com-
pany’s inception, and is the Assistant Manager theieof. He was foi
many years a Director of the Adelaide Y.M.C.A. and Secretaiy of
the Kent Town Methodist Circuit Quarterly Meeting. Has held
various positions in sporting and philanthropic clubs. Is of a very
retiring disposition, and will say little about himself.
Recreations —Horses, bowls.
Hobby—Gardening.
Address—Toorak Gardens.


JOHN WALLACE SHANNON.
Business address—Auctioneer, Gilles Arcade, Currie Street, Ade-
laide.
For many years Mr. Shannon has been knocking things down
for people in Australia. He is one of South Australia’s leading auc-
tioneers, and is typical of the country. He was born in Moculta, in the
year 1862, being the son of the late Abraham Shannon. He has beer,
a Directoi of the South Australian Farmers’ Union for upwards of
fifteen years, and at present is Chairman. Fie is also a Director of
the Farmers’ Co-operative Executor and Trustee Company. He was
a Councillor in the City of Unley. Represented the Yorke’s Peninsula
District in the State Parliament, and for some years was a Senator
in the Federal Parliament, Chairman of Committees for three years
in the Senate.
Home address—4 High Street, Unley Park.
Recreations—Hard work.
Hobbies —Caponizing.


■ GHOwr YOU
OS«l«U> Pn.yav3y.
ROBERT MITCHELL.
Business address —S.A. Farmers’ Co-operative Union Ltd., Frank-
lin Street, Adelaide.
Born at Canowie,, South Australia, in the year 1876, and is the
son of the late Thomas Mitchell, one of the founders of the S.A,
Farmers’ Co-operative Union Limited. For upwards of forty years
he resided at Jamestown, and became recognised as one of the most
successful farmers in the North. He is a Director of the S.A.
Farmers’ Co-operative Union, and the Producers’ and Citizens’ Co-
operative Assurance Company of Australia Ltd. He has recently
retired to the city, and is a resident of Dulwich.
Recreations —-Shooting.
Hobbies—Gardening.
Private address—s3 Victoria Avenue, Dulwich.


FRANK KENNETH MILNE.
Private address—“Sunnyside,” Kensington Gardens.
Business address—Grenfell Buildings, Grenfell Street.
Mr. Kenneth Milne was born at Tusmore, in South Australia in
1885.
School Education.—Public school and private tuition.
Architectural Education. —Served articles of apprenticeship with
Mr. Alfred Wells, F.5.A.1.A., of Adelaide, then proceeded to Sydney
as draughtsman to Messrs. Robertson & Marks, architects. Started
practising profession under own name in Adelaide in 1909. Took
Mr. J. R. S. Evans into partnership in 1920, the firm now practising
under the name of F. Kenneth Milne & Evans, F. & A S.A.I.A.
Sports.—Rowing. Acted as coxswain to Adelaide Rowing Club
for number of years, from 1896. Acted as stroke to Club for short
period. Swimming, diving, football (both Australian rules and Rug-
by), cricket, tennis and boxing.
Club.—Adelaide Club.
Hobby.—His home.


4 l{ \ ?\ § *iii t 1
| ' | ’ ' V,lU ■ | |
■r \\ M
j j
FRANK HEDLEY COUNSELL, F.S.A.I.A.
Architect. Member of the Council of South Australian Institute
of Architects.
He was bom in S.A. on 14th May, 1864, and is the son of the late
James Counsell, merchant, Adelaide.
He studied architecture with Messrs. Gumming & Davies, and
has worked with a number of private architects, also Railway Depart-
ments in Melbourne, Perth and Adelaide. Specialises in Ecclesiastical
and Hospital Architecture and Fire resisting construction. Mr.
Counsell was the first architect to introduce Re-inforced Concrete con-
struction to Adelaide (in 1904).
Club—“ The Eucalypts.”
Recreation—Bowls.
Home address —“Avarua,” Beach Road, Brighton, S.A.


JbE5IGh5? 1
ERIC PHILLIPPS DANCKER, F.S.A.I.A.
Profession—Architect.
Business address—Cavendish Chambers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
Born at Rose Park, South Australia, in the year 1890, and is a
son of F. W. Dancker. He is the Hon. Vice-Consul for Spain.
Educated at St. Peter’s College, he entered his fathers office in 1906.
and became partner in 1914. Mr. Dancker is an acknowledged auth-
ority upon design and domestic architecture, especially of the English
and Latin styles, many interesting examples of which he has carried
out.
Recreations—Motoring, golf, etc.
Hobbies—Books, applied art, antique collector.
Private address—Giles Street, Rose Park East.


MATTHEW ALBERT GOODE.
Private address—St. Albans, Prospect Road, Prospect.
Business address —Stephens Place, Adelaide.
Born at Adelaide, South Australia, in the year 1872, and son
Matthew Goode. Director of Matthew Goode & Co. Ltd.
Clubs Naval and Military. Tattersalls, Commercial Traveller
Recreations —Golf and racing.


' -^s S r x>
(a - v
THIS IS THE )
JAMES HAY GOSSE.
Born at Kent Town, South Australia, in 1876, and is the second son of
William Christie Gosse.
Was educated at St. Peter’s College.
Is the Managing Director of George Wills & Co., Ltd., Shipping Agents,
of Grenfell Street, Adelaide. (The original firm was established in 1849, but
was converted into a Limited Liability Company in 1913).
From 1900 to 1905 Mr. Gosse took part in the Interstate Rowing and
Football matches.
Recreations—Rowing and Tennis.
Private address—9 Park Terrace, Parkside.


FRANK SMITH.
Born in Sydney, New South Wales, in 1880, and is a Son of
Jonathan Smith, of Manchester, England.
Has been a resident of South Australia for about 17 years.
Mr. Smith is a well-known business man, and is associated with
the good old firm of Elder. Smith & Co., Limited, of Currie Street,
Adelaide.
Recreation —Motoring.
Private address— “Ormond House,” Third Avenue, St. Peters.


WALTER GR ANDY SMITH.
Vigneron. Born at Angaston in the year 1867. Mr. Smith and
his brother, Mr. P. S. Smith, own the well-known Yalumba Vine-
yards which were founded in 1847 by Mr. Samuel Smith. Mr. Sidney
Smith (now of the fourth generation and son of W. G. Smith) is
now actively engaged in carrying on the industry. He is greatly
interested in Indian curios and has a large collection of mounted
specimens of big game, such as tigers, bears, leopard, deer, etc.
Recreations—Big game shooting and quail and duck shooting.
Private address—“Yalumba,” Angaston, S.A.


EDWARD WHEEWALL HOLDEN, B.Sc.
Business—Business manager.
Address—Holden’s Limited, Adelaide.
Bom at Norwood, South Australia, in the year of 1885, and is
the son of Henry J. Holden, who is one of Adelaide’s best known
commercial men. At the present time he is occupying the following
positions:—Managing Director Holden’s Motor Body Builders Ltd.,
Director Holden & Frost Ltd., President Australian Coachbuilders’
Federation, Director Guardian Assurance Co. S.A, Branch.
Recreations—Golf, tennis.
Hobby—Gardening.
Private address—Kensington Gardens,? : ;


JOHN HEDLEY CHAPMAN, M.P.
WHIP OF THE COUNTRY PARTY.
The Farmers’ Representative.
Bom 1879, and is the son of the late John Chapman, of James-
town. Educated at Prince Alfred College.
In early life was with the National Bank of Australasia, but later
on resigned and went for a trip through Europe and England. After-
wards bought Cooyamoolta Station, near Port Lincoln. Owner of
some fine stud sheep. Was returned for the District of Flinders to the
House of Assembly in 1918 in the interests of the Country Party,
and is Secretary and Whip.
Chairman of Directors of new company which will shortly issue
a weekly paper styled “Country Journal.”
Recreations—Tennis, music, motoring.
Hobbies—Discounting the infallibility of Billy Hughes.
Private address—“Halsbury,” High Street, Unley Park.


HON. JOHN HERBERT COOKE, M.L.C.
Profession—Consulting Engineer and Patent Attorney.
Business address—7s King William Street, Adelaide.
Born at Payneham in the year 1867, and is the son of the late
Ebenezer Cooke, Commissioner of Audit for many years and formerly
a member of Parliament. Mr. Cooke has represented the Central
District No. 2 in the Legislative Council of S.A. since 1915, and is
a member of the Railway Standing Committee. For fifteen years he
served the citizens of Unley in the Municipal Council, and has the
unique distinction of being the last Mayor of that town and the first
Mayor of the City of Unley. Was closely associated with the work
of literary societies and in friendly society circles was Grand Master
of the 1.0.0. F. in 1896. In Freemasonry is a P.M. of United Trades-
men's Lodge and P.M. of Holdfast Mark Lodge and P.J.G.D. of the
Grand Lodge of S.A., Past President of the Australasian Institute of
Patent Attorneys and concurrently a member of the Federal Board
of Examiners. One of the promoters of the Sturt Rifle Club and
President of same, and was one of the originators of the Soldiers’
Home League, Myrtlebank, and has continuously held office as Pre-
sident since its inception. President of Unley Branch of District
Trained Nursing Society for seven years, Chairman of Unley Board
of Health, and represented Municipal Corporations of the Fire Bri-
gade Board.
Recreations—Bowls, motoring.
Hobbies—Photography.
Private address—6s Edmund Avenue, Unley.


! “' jA
RICHARD LAYTON BUTLER. M.P.
Managing Director Farmers’ Bulk Grain Co-operative Co.
Address—A.M.P. Chambers, King William Street.
Mr, Butler was bom at Gawler in 1885, and is the son of Sir
Richard Butler. He is a member of the House of Assembly, repre-
senting the District of Wooroora. Was first elected in 1914, de-
feated in 1917, and re-elected in 1920. He is considered one of the
ablest of the young men in politics, and is noted for his speeches on
financial matters. For many years he was engaged in farming pur-
suits, and is now Managing Director of the Farmers' Bulk Grain
Co-operative Co., a company formed with the object of installing the
system of bulk handling of grain in South Australia.
Recreations'—Cricket and billiards.
Hobby—Reading.
Private address —Trevelyan Street, Wayville.


[ fj \, t
ML iT'ij
v ) LIGHTLY \
m
HERBERT PERCY HENRY MYERS, J.P.
Business—Theatre manager, lessee and proprietor.
Address—Theatre Royal, Hindley Street, Adelaide.
Born at Mudgee, N.S.W.. Oct. 31st. 1879, and is the son of the
late Mr. N. P. Myers. He is a Director of the Gresham Fire and
Accident Insurance Society, Managing Director of The Adelaide and
Suburban Advertising Co. and the S.A. Advertising Co. Ltd., Lessee
of the Garden Theatre, also Manager and Proprietor of the Theatre
Royal and Adelaide representative for J. & N. Tait, and Adelaide
Attorney and General Manager for J. C. Williamson Ltd.
Recreations—Shooting, swimming, cricket, motoring and racing.
Hobbies—Photography and gardening.
Private address—“Mudgee,” Payneham.


TO THE
MR. CAMPBELL SMITH.
Business address—Charles Moore & Co., Victoria Square.
Mr. Campbell Smith is a well-known identity in Adelaide. He
was born at Perth, Scotland, in the year 1886, and is the son of Peter
Smith. It was in 1888 he came to South Australia, but returned to
Scotland some seven years later. He was educated at the Glasgow
High School, and returned to Adelaide in 1906. For many years he
has been connected with the firm of Charles Moore & Co., whose
premises are recognised as one of the finest buildings in Australia.
He is at the present time general manager of that firm. As Vice-
President of the Central Traders’ Association he has done some good
work, and is also Vice-President of the British Football Association.
Recreation—Motoring and bowls.
Hobbies—Gardening.
Private address—l4a Clark Street. Wayville.


rYE;S ITS TOO FAR T(T\
' 1 f j WAl* FOR THE BALL
j j AFTER SOME OF MY
KENNETH GEORGE CARTY MOORE.
Business address—Charles Moore & Co. (Gouger Street), Victoria
Square.
Born at “Sarnia,'’ South Terrace, Adelaide, in the year 1899, and
is the son of the late Mr. Charles Moore, who arrived in Australia
in 1878. Four times he has travelled to the Old Country and a tour
round the world is as familiar to him as a walk round Victoria Square,
where one of the finest department stores is to be found. Education
was received at the Leys School, Cambridge, and Church of England
Grammar School, Melbourne. For some time he was under training
as an air cadet at Point Cook. After the Armistice he made an ex-
tensive tour, staying for some time in England and America, making
a special study of their business and manufacturing methods. He has
now settled down in Adelaide as one of our youngest leaders of com-
merce and the assistant manager of Messrs. Charles Moore & Co.
Recreations—Golf, tennis, motoring, swimming, music, racing.
Hobbies—Poultry and bee-keeping.
Private address —No. 12 Ruthven Mansions, City.


i : ;
(IT IS THE TRUMP
— \ CARD AND YOU
I CANT DODC£ IT
k*wa .
ROBERT SIMPSON THOMSON.
Business—Director Waymouth Motor Company Limited.
Address—42 Waymouth Street, Adelaide.
Bom at Prospect, South Australia, in the year 1887, and is the
son of James Simpson Thomson. Educated at Queen’s School and
St. Peter’s College, and for eleven years was a member of the staff
of Executor Trustee and Agency Co. of South Australia, looking
after dead men’s affairs. During that time was also successful in
obtaining the Associateship of the Federal Institute of Accountants.
Since the advent of Dodge Brothers cars to South Australia seven
years ago, has been connected with the Company controlling the
agency, whose name has recently been changed to Waymouth Motor
Company Limited. He is a Director of that Company in charge of
the financial end of the business.
Recreations —Tennis and motoring.
Hobby—Bridge.
Private address—46 Myall Avenue, Kensington Gardens.


11 it's hard to
: poDG£ A
GOOD CAR
Jg it
HAROLD HERCULES PITTMAN.
Business—Company Director.
Address—c/o Waymouth Motor Co. Ltd., Waymouth Street.
Mr. Pittman was bom at Beulah Road, Norwood, in the year
1889, and is the son of Mr. A. E, Pittman, J.P. He is Director of
Sales of the Waymouth Motor Co. Ltd., the South Australian agents
for Dodge Brothers motor cars, and has been selling Dodge Brothers
cars ever since they arrived in S.A. He believes they are the only
cars in the universe.
Recreations—Cricket, tennis, motoring.
Hobby—Gardening.
Private address—l 9 Portrush Road, Toorak.


ALBERT JOHN GOODES.
Business—Merchant.
Business address —42 Waymouth Street, City.
Born at Keyneton, South Australia, in the year 1877. and is the
son of George Goodes, one of South Australia’s well-known farmers.
Strange to say, Mr. Goodes’ grandfather and great grandfather were
also farmers, and the son would probably have followed in their
footsteps but for the fact that the first three years on the farm after
leaving school were dry seasons, and that decided him to try his
luck in the city. For nearly 20 years he was employed amongst
paints and hardware in the employ of Clarkson Limited. It was in
1916 that the possibilities of the motor trade attracted him, and he
joined the most progressive motor firm in S.A. who were selling
Dodge Brothers’ cars. He is now a Director of the Waymouth
Motor Company Limited, and his time is fully occupied in selling
service to the rapidly increasing number of Dodge owners.
Private address—Glenelg.
Recreations —Tennis, motoring and cricket.
Hobbies—Gardening and shooting.


0tw*a
NORMAN GARFIELD CLEVELAND.
Born at Adelaide, South Australia, in the year 1891, and son of
A. B. Cleveland.
Business address—s3 V/akefield Street and 1/5 Hutt Stieet.
Member of the Commercial Travellers’ Association, and has been
connected with the motor trade in S.A. for many years. Has had
appointments with Messrs. Duncan & Fraser Limited. Cheney Motor
Co. Limited, late Manager of the Motor Department of Messrs. Bagot,
Shakes & Lewis, Ltd., now Manager of N. G. Cleveland & Co., Se-
condhand and New Car Salesmen, and General Motor Engineers.
Club —Commercial Travellers.
Recreation—Shooting, motoring.
Home address —Bevington Road, Glenunga.


WALTER TURNER.
Born at North Adelaide in the year 1879. Son of William Turner
who arrived in Australia in 1842, in the barque Caleb Angas, with his
father. A well known commercial traveller throughout South Aus-
tralia, now recognised as the Motor Tyre Specialist. Started the
Flinders Street business in 1912, and in 1919 moved to larger premises
in Hindmarsh Square.
Recreations—Motoring, shooting, boating.
Hobbies—Work,
Home address—36 LeFevre Terrace, North Adelaide.
Business address—Hindmarsh Square.


NcARlY THREE YQy
Mb minutes without
, m * being called i {m T™ • —
;v, .V TO ORDER MV | VERY FAS
j-
(K*&u> IfepeR*.
ISAAC ISAACS.
Business address—Land and Estate Agent and Insurance Adjuster,
Davenport Chambers, 26 Currie Street.
Mr. Isaac Isaacs, better known as Alderman Isaacs, was born at
Melbourne, Victoria, in the year 1858. He has resided in South Aus-
tralia some twenty-three years. He is an ex Mayor of Adelaide, and
at present in the City Council as Alderman. For some time was a
member of the Metropolitan Tramway Trust, Metropolitan Abattoirs
Board, Metropolitan County Board, Past Master St. Andrew’s and
Southern Cross Lodges of Freemasons, Past President of the Justices’
Association, and now a Vice-President, Past Chief President of the
A.N.A. of South Australia and Past President of the Adelaide Branch,
member of the Central Board of Health, and a Past Grand President
of the U.A.O.D. of Victoria.
Home address—No. 2 Main North Road, Thorngate.


'it's VERY NICE I ffilj
\ / \ stay * ihaveto AA ’
| I MEETING.
JONATHAN ROBERT CAIN.
Head of the Firm of A. Cain & Co., Milliners, of Adelaide.
Born at Leamington, Warwickshire. England, in 1869, and is a
son of John Cain, Isle of Man.
Was connected with several Ministries of the Union Parliament
of South Australia, in which he took a keen interest.
Is President of the Pirie Street Literary Society and South Park
Bowling Club, and a prominent member of the Liberal Union.
Is also a member of the Adelaide City Council. Fire Brigade
Board, and Chairman of the Markets and Parks Committee. 1918-1922.
Mr. Cain is a patron of all sports, and a prominent and enthusias-
tic bowler.
Private address—69 Park Terrace, Wayville.


’•turn - win ——i»' 1 1 ■
rr wwwr* a «B«*8SKW*»i P^-aMWwwjj«8JKs«<i^(i«iauw , i,^«««iass«*^i ! rf«SP«!SWftQ^^
GEORGE SPRINGHALL.
Born at Petersham, New South Wales, in 1886.
Was educated at Fort Street Public School, Sydney.
Mr. Springhall started with the Remington Typewriter Organisa-
tion at Sydney in July, 1906, and two years later was sent to Ade-
laide to open up a South Australian branch of the Remington Agency
Ltd., which he did with great success; and in 1913 was appointed
General Manager.
He is Honorary Treasurer to the Toorak Bowling Club; a Fellow
of the Australian Institute of Secretaries; and a Justice of the Peace.
Recreations —'Bowls and Motoring.
Club—Commercial Travellers.
Private address —“Kuring-Gai,” Giles Street. Toorak.


Mi " ml 7
r— JW^l
WILLIAM GEORGE AULD, J.P.
Born 1868 at Auldana, Magill; son of William Patrick Auld, who
accompanied J. McDouall Stuart on his tap across the continent in
1862. For many years engaged in mercantile business in the office
of late Henry Scott. At present manager of the W(ine and Spirit
Department of the Walkerville Co-operative Brewing Co., Ltd.
Alderman on Norwood and Kensington Council. President South
Australian Vinegrowers’ Association for nine years. Secretary of
Phylloxera Board since its foundation in 1899. Has been a judge at
Wine Shows for some years. President S.A. Rowing Association
and Adelaide Rowing Club.
Recreation: Rowing and tennis. Was also very keen on cricket
when young, and was manager for many interstate lacrosse teams.
Also followed hounds.
Home address: 80 Edward Street, Norwood.


ALBION EVERARD TOLLEY.
Born June 6, 1849, County Middlesex, England. Sole founder of
Adelaide business A. E. & F. Tolley, wine, spirit and general mer-
chants, founded 1876. He arrived in Australia in 1853, and returned
to England in 1865, came back to South Australia 1871. Opened a
business in Western Australia as shipping and general merchants,
known as Tolley & Co., Ltd., in 1884. One of the foundation mem-
bers of St. Peter’s Collegiate Masonic Lodge, No. 53.
Hobby—Yachting. Brought from England the yacht known as
“The Tub” in 1908, this boat was built of Spanish Mahogany and
previously owned by the proprietors of “The Financial Times,”
London. He won the Silver Cup with “The Tub,” the event being
competed for on the Port River. He is Vice-Commodore of the
Holdfast Bay Yachting Club, having been elected six years ago.
Clubs—Tattersall’s, S.A. Commercial Travellers.
Home address—Unley Park.


WILLIAM MATTHEW ALFORD.
Born at Yongala, South Australia, in the year 1881, and is a son
of Matthew, and the late Mary Anne Alford.
Mr. Alford is General Manager in South Australia for Louis
Dreyfus & Co. (the world’s largest grain exporting organization).
He has an unusually wide experience in the handling and market-
ing of wheat. He gained his commercial experience with leading
Australian firms, and in 1912 organized the opening of Louis Dreyfus
and Co., in this State.
During the war Mr. Alford was appointed advisory member of
two separate Boards in connection with the Wheat Pooling Scheme,
and rendered services to the Government as the commercial repre-
sentative on a Royal Commission that reported on the reorganization
of the Wheat Scheme.
He is also local Director of the Western Australian Insurance
Co., Ltd.
Recreations—Cricket, Football, Bowls.
Private address— l 6 Gumey Road, Rose Park.


JOHN MARSHALL REID.
Governing Director of John Reid & Sons, Ltd., tanners. Bom
at Windsor, Victoria, in 1858. Second son of John Reid, the founder
of the firm (1873). Educated at Whinham College, North Adelaide.
Ex-President of Federated Chambers of Manufacturers. Director
Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Co. Honorary Commissioner to the
Christchurch International Exhibition, and also Franco-British Exhibi-
tion.
Donator of J. M. Reid’s Children’s Playground at Hindmarsh.
Member of Leopold Lodge of Freemasons and United Ancient
Order of Druids.
Hobbies—Bowls and gardening.
Recreation—Reading and writing.
Home address —“Tarrangower,” Victoria Avenue, Unley Park.


A BAD ATTACK |fT\
imag?n ms"
Hff ■ !^j\
, -rl J^iJB9 |T\
jg~) I||-| ■ | I \\ .
& 1.
GEORGE WALTER NAIRN.
Secretary of the Adelaide Lodge No. I, Manchester Unity of
Oddfellows, the oldest and richest Friendly Society in South Aus-
tralia.
Was born at Adelaide in 1878, and is the eldest son of the late
John Nairn. He was resident in the Parkside District. S.A., for up-
wards of 40 years, and connected himself with many of its Associa-
tions. A foundation scholar of the Parkside School, and for many
years cricket and football were his principal sports.
Mr. Nairn is a prominent Freemason, and a Past Master of Park-
side Lodge.
Recreations—Bowls, Rifle Shooting, Swimming.
Private address—“Loen,” Dunlace Avenue, Brighton.


■ ' ■ . , • . v „. *
U \ mmvi <<How oo 1 l,ke ' ;
"" ""• '
HUGH PATTERSON McLACHLAN.
Chairman of Tattersalls Club. Was born in Victoria in 1864. and
is a son of the late Alexander McLachlan, of “Pine Hall,” Mount
Gambler, who came from Argylshire, Scotland, to Australia in 1859,
and settled down in the Mount Gambier district as a Pastoralist.
Mr. McLachlan (Junr.) was educated at the “Western District
College,” Hamilton, Victoria, under Head Master James Begg.
At the age of 24 went to the North of South Australia to follov
up pastoralistic pursuits, and still retains interests in the North-East
and Lower North.
As a young man took an active interest in all athletic sports, and
in later years turned his attention to horse racing, to which sport he
now devotes most of his time.
Clubs.—Tattersalls, Naval and Military, North Adelaide Cycling
Private address.—“Kyrene,” Partridge Street, Glenelg.


I • ■ . .. ' v • .
AMBROSE REID TUCKETT.
Business—Land and Estate Agent, Auctioneer, etc., etc., 8 Base-
ment, Grenfell Building.
Bom at Middle Bridge. Victoria, in the year 1868, and is the son
of George Richard Tuckett, who arrived in Australia 1839, is still a
resident of Maryborough, Victoria, where he has lived for the past
85 years. Mr. Tuckett spent 4 years of his life in N.S.W., six in
Victoria, and four in South Australia. He has made two attempts to
serve his country in the halls of Legislature, but did not just at the
time belong to the right party.
Recreations—Motoring, cricket, shooting, gardening and fishing.
Private address—“Laauecorrie,” Payneham Road, Royston Park.


j I SHOULD
FRANK WILLIAM ROSE.
Private address—“Gulnare.” Church Terrace, Walkerville.
Business address—Selborne Chambers, Pirie Street, Adelaide.
Born at Darling-ton, Victoria, in the year 1867, and son of John
Rose. Managing Director Land and Income Tax Agency Co. Ltd.
For many years an officer of the Victorian Public Service. Joined
Federal Service when Federal Land Tax became law in year 1910.
Appointed Acting Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation, Ade-
laide, 1st December, 1918. Resigned from service 1st March, 1920,
to accept present position.
Recreations—Golf and tennis.
Hobby—Garden.


V ,
JL.JBt - •
YES. I KEEP Tr'
. • SO THAT ! CAN
. 1 I GET DOWN TO
A v : -'*m -'Hw the bowling
R I AS QUICK
■ |"i sthat
na > x "
THOMAS HERBERT JACKETT.
Business—Miller.
Address—Victoria Square. Adelaide.
Thomas Heibeit Jackett is the son of John Jackett, Esq., of
Wayville, and is a partner of Messrs. Jackett Brothers, the well-
known millers of Adelaide, Sydney and Brisbane. He was born at
Quorn in the year 1884. For many years he has been a Director of
The River Murray Milling Company Limited, of Currie Street, Ade-
laide. He is a member on the Committee of the South Park Bowline
Club.
Recreations—Tennis and bowls.
Hobby—Motoring.
Private address—Thomber Street, Unley Park,


GEORGE W. ILLINGWORTH.
Born Shipley, Yorkshire, England, 1877.
Arrived in Sydney in 1893. Came to Adelaide in 1898 as Secre-
tary to “The Critic” Proprietary Limited, and has been connected with
it ever since. Now General Manager of Publishers Limited.
Was a Candidate for State Parliament, as an Independent, for
Sturt, also at the last Federal Elections as an Independent for
Boothby. Councillor in the City of Unley representing Goodwood
Ward for the past five years.
President of the Master Process Engravers’ Association of South
Australia. President of the Yorkshire Society. Fellow of the Aus-
tralian Institute of Secretaries.
Recreations —Domestic Duties.
Club—Home.
Private Address—6 Nichol Street, Forestville (where Summonses
may be served).


OSwmj) Fkyor^
FREDERICK JAMES TULLOCH.
Business address—Distillers Co., Ltd., 85 Currie Street, Adelaide.
Born at Armadale, Victoria, in 1893, and educated in Melbourne,
where he resided for upwards of 26 years. He commenced business
with Distillers Limited in the Melbourne Office. In 1916 he enlisted
in the 58th Battalion, and served for three years. On his return he
was transferred to the Adelaide Branch, where he worked under the
well-known Mr. J. Rankin. In November, 1921, Mr. Rankin was
appointed manager for the Company in N.S.W., and Mr. Tulloch
took charge of the Adelaide Office. He is connected with the South
Park and Adelaide Drive Bowling Clubs, Treasurer of the Commercial
Travellers’ Club and a member of Tattersalls.
Recreations—Golf.
Hobbies—Gardening and motoring.
Club—Commercial Travellers’.
Home address—Tynte Street, North Adelaide.


\
/looks like. m&¥mBaL \
H AR| WORH^
0Swiftu* PR/trf^
A. ROSS WALKLEY.
Business address —45a Rundle Street, Adelaide,
Bom at Adelaide in the year 1889, and is the son of Mr. A. W.
Walkley. Completed his education at the A.T. and B.T. Academy.
He has resided in Adelaide for 33 years, excepting the five years he
spent abroad, gaining experience with the A.1.F., one of the finest
companies anyone could wish to be associated with, now he is “just
a business man.”
Recreations —Motoring and gardening.
Hobbies—Work.
Private address—Thomas Avenue, Newstead.


the old sergeant
GEORGE EDWARD HEANEY.
Business or profession—Chemist.
Private address—24 Ethel Street, Forestville.
Business address—King William Street, Adelaide.
Born at Kooringa, South Australia, in the year 1865. and son
of Major G. H. Heaney, V.D. Member of the firm of Wastell and
Co. Manager A. M. Bickford & Sons Drug Department, being with
them 28 years. Member of the Pharmaceutical Society of S A Had
business at Yorketown 10 years, sold and returned to the city Has
had a wide experience in military matters extending over 40 years.
Recreation—Gardening,
p J H °. l Sl> MuSi , C ' F ° r years sol ° cornet P‘ a > rer in ‘he Old Brigade
Band, 10th Battalion (popularly known as “the old Sergeant”)


HYAM JOHN LIPMAN.
Bom at Kent Town, South Australia, January 12th, 1889, and is
a son of Judah Lipman.
Educated at Prince Alfred College.
Studied dentistry and graduated with honors at the age of 21
years. Of later years his professional duties have claimed most of
his time specialising in the latest methods of modem dentistry. He
is at present writing a book on the care of the teeth in childhood.
Mr. Lipman is a great dog fancier, and has won a number of
trophies.
Recreations—Motoring, tennis, and racing.
Private Address—“Sylviaholme,” Harrow Road, St. Peters.
95


* I \ \ j'THE KANCAROol
/ I I \ GOES AHEAD
\ 3/ H like your
• ' X'n o (21 P- / BUSINESS SIR,
i\ I \ /•>. — BY LEAPS
W. F. O. GROTE.
Bom at Sedan, September 14th, 1882. Only son of Mr. Otto
Grote, formerly school teacher at Lobethal.
Educated at his father’s school. At fifteen was articled to Mr.
C. B. H. Wolf as a student of dentistry.
Was Lieutenant in Infantry Regiment and, selected to visit Syd-
ney at the proclamation of the Commonwealth, also attended oening
of the first Federal Parliament.


HERBERT GUILFORD McDERMOTT.
Born at North Adelaide in 1884, and is a son of the late Martin
McDermott.
Educated at Christian Brothers’ College, Adelaide.
Served 4 years abroad with Australian Imperial Forces, and on
returning from France to England was attached to the Dental Section
at Queens (Facial and Jaw) Hospital, Sydcup, Kent. After being
discharged spent several months in America and Canada visiting all
principal cities in connection with his profession. Returned to Aus-
tralia, and was appointed as specialist dentist to the facial and jaw
patients at Keswick Hospital.
Mr. McDermott has recently become associated in partnership
with Mr. H. J. Lipman.
Recreations —Horse Racing and Music.
Hobbies—Gardening and Poultry breeding.
Private address —55 Fourth Avenue, St. Peters.


FREDERICK HOLLIS.
Secretary of the South Australian Trotting Association. Takes a
keen interest in racing and horses-in-action shows. Son of W. G.
Hollis. He was born at Wallaroo in the year 1902, but for 9$ years
has resided in Adelaide.
Recreation—Trotting, hunting.
Home address—4o Dequetteville Terrace, Kent Town.
Business address—ls Salisbury Chambers, King William Street,
Adelaide.


HENRY ASH BLACK.
Business address—ss Rundle Street. “At the Sign of the Golden
Boot.”
Mr. Black was born at Port Lincoln in the year of 1889, and is
a son of the late Frederick Black and nephew of Thomas Black, the
well-known and esteemed poet. He is a prominent Freemason and
supporter of the Y.M.C.A. His business interests are conserved in
the firms of The C. J. Young Shoe Co. Limited, and Blacks Limited,
of Gouger Street, and other branches. He is the Managing Director
of both firms.
Recreations—Motoring in the country on pleasure.
Hobbies—Wprk.
Home address —59 Cremorne Street, New Parkside.


wl
JOSEPH WILLIAM NELLIGAN, LL.B.
Profession—Barrister and solicitor.
Business address—Scottish House, King William Street.
Born at Port Wakefield in the year 1900, and is the son of John
James Nelligan, of Hyde Park. He took the degree of Bachelor of
Laws at the Adelaide University just twelve months ago, and was
admitted to the bar in December, 1921. For some months he prac-
tised with Mr. Paris Nesbit, K.C., in the firm of Nesbit, Rankin and
Nelligan, and is now a partner in the firm of Nelligan & Rankin,
carrying on their practice at the above address.
Recreations—Sailing.
Hobby—Art study.


/ 'j I
“ -V / » /this is a~bock1 ;
■*» / / J i amvery fond i
MICHAEL JOHN O’GRADY.
Business address —Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
Well known to many, Mr. Michael John O’Grady was born at
Thebarton, South Australia, in the year 1875. He is recognised as
a leading commission agent, his field being both town and country.
A consistent backer of his own horses, whilst he likes his friends
to back both his and the “other fellow’s’’ gees-gees.
Recreations—Horseracing and billiards.
Hobby—Turf prognostications.
Club—T attersall’s.
Private address—Lymington Street, Glenelg.




WHO’S WHO IN ADELAIDE
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
ALLNUTT, Earnest (South Austra-
lia), merchant; b. Hamilton, Victoria,
1865; s. of late Samuel Lea Allnutt, Vic-
toria, pastoralist; eel Scotch Colleges at
Melbourne and Geelong. President of
Adelaide Chamber of Commerce 1916-17
and 1917-18; and is Managing Director of
D. & J. Fowler, Ltd., Chairman of Direc-
tors of Rolfe & Co. Ltd., Melbourne,
Chairman of Directors of News Limited,
and a Director of South Australian Brew-
ing Co., Castle Salt Co., A. Walton & Co.,
Adelaide Milling Co., and Executor. Trus-
tee and Agency Co., member of Council
of Adelaide Branch of Royal Society of
St. George. M. 1893, Marion Anderson,
e. d. of late George Swan Fowler. Ad-
dress—Woodlawn, Walkerville, S.A.
ANDERSON, James Miller (South
Australia, merchant; b. Leslie, Scoland,
1829. Came to S.A. in 1849 to join his
uncle, the late Robert Miller, who at that
time was in partnership with Mr. Luck-
ing; became a partner in the business
with his uncle in 1854 and later bought
out Mr. Miller and conducted the busi-
ness (drapery, Hindley St., Adelaide);
has been a liberal and unostentatious
contributor to religious, charitable, and
natriotic objects all his life; a member of
the old Volunteer Regiment in Adelaide
at the time of the Russian War. Address
—Medindie, S.A.
ANGAS, Charles Howard (South Aus-
ralia). pastoralist; b. London. 21 Apr.
1861; s. of late John Howard Angas, and
gs. of George Fife Angas (founder of
S.A.). Ed. St. Peter’s College. Adelaide,
and at Plymouth and Caversham (Eng-
land. Owns Collingrove, one of the finest
estates in S.A.; Chairman of the S.A.
Portland Cement Co., and of Willowie
Land and Pastoral Association, Presi-
dent of Adelaide Children’s Hospital. M.
1885, Eliza Etty. d. of William Dean, of
Adelaide; sons—Ronald Fife Angas,
Lieutenant R.F.A. in France for 2 years,
afterwards Wireless Instructor in Royal
Air Force till end of War (despatches
three times); Dudley Theyer Angas,
joined armored cars as Lieutenant Royal
Naval Air Service from Cambridge Uni-
versity 1914, went through German S.W.
African Campaign as Adjutant, after-
wards Engineer Officer at Yarmouth in
R.N.A.S. until invalided back to Australia;
Tohn Keith Angas; daughter—Dorothv
Beryl, m. Major the Hon. R. N. D.
Ryder, Bth Hussars, who was killed in
action in France 1918 (she was engaged
in War work in London throughout the
War). Address-—Lindsav Park, Angas-
ton, and Brougham Place, North Ade-
-laide, S.A.
ANSTEY. Edward Alfred (South Aus-
tralia); b. Port Elliot, 6 Julv. 1858; s. of
Charles John Anstey. Past President of
the United Labour Part ,r of S.A. and
member of the L.P. Federal Executive
for some time prior to the Conscription
split; M.P. 1908-21; Commissioner of
Crown Lands and Minister of Rcnatria-
tion in the Coalition Government (E. H.
Peake, Premier) from Apr. 1918 to Apr
1920; an ex-Councillor of the Kensing-
ton and Norwood Corporation; was also
for manv years a Councillor in the Burn-
side D.C. M. 1884, Marv Ann Glenie.
Address—Flora Terrace, Prospect, S.A.
ASHTON, James (South Australia),
artist and teacher; b. Isle of Man, 1860.
Arrived in Australia 1884; elected mem-
ber of Royal Society of Arts in 1885. and
full member of the Royal Drawing So-
ciety in 1896; exhibited at Paris Salon
and several art exhibitions in England;
President of S.A. Society in Arts for four
vears. Gallery pictures: Adelaide —
Where Reeds and Rushes Grow. Sunset
on the Gulf, and The Moon Enchanted
Sea; Perth —Moonrise: Bendigo—The
Song of the Surf and A Passing Shower;
•md several paintings in Broken Hill gal-
lery. Address—Academy of Arts, Gren-
fell St., Adelaide, S,A,


BAILEY, John Frederick (South
Australia); b. Brisbane, 1866; s. of late
Frederick Manson Bailey, C.M.G. (Col-
onial Botanist of Queensland); ed. Nor-
mal School, and Divinity Hall Train-
ing College, Brisbane. Soon after
the formation of Queensland Agri-
cultural Department in 1889 was
appointed to the Botanical Branch
as assistant to his father; became
Director of Brisbane Botanic Gardens
1905, and in addition Government Botan-
ist on his father’s death in 1915; Hon.
Secretary for twelve years of Royal So-
ciety of Queensland and elected Presi-
dent 1909; Hon. Secretary for ten years
of Horticultural Society of Queensland,
of which he has been President; Director
of Botanic Garden of Adelaide, since 1
Apr. 1917. His field work embraced an
investigation of the timbers of North
Queensland, and he was Botanist to the
Expedition to Gulf of Carpentaria with
Dr. W. E. Roth 1901. Author of numer-
ous articles on botanical and horticul-
tural subjects. Address—Botanic Gar-
den, Adelaide, S.A.
BAKEWELL, Edward Howard (South
Australia, pastoralist; b. North Adelaide,
1859. Managing director of Yalkuri Pas-
toral Co., Ltd., Lake Alexandrina, Man-
aging Director of the S.A. Portland Cem-
ent Co, Ltd., Brighton, director of Com-
mercial Linion Assurance Co., President
of Employers’ Federation of S.A., and
Pastoralists’ Representative on State
Wool Committee. Address—Victoria
Avenue, Unley Park, Adelaide, S.A.
BARKER, John (South Australia),
pastoralist; b. Yankalilla, S.A., 21 Mar.
1847; s. of late Alfred Barker; ed. Ade-
laide Educational Institution. Chairman
of S.A. Jockey Club since 1908, a Direc-
tor of Adelaide Steamship Co.. Dalgety
and Co., and Executor Trustee and
Agency Co., Chairman of Finance Com-
mittee of S.A. Soldiers’ Fund. Address—
Prospect, S.A.
BAYLY, William Reynolds, 8.A.,
B.Sc., (South Australia); b. Port Ade-
laide, 1867; ed. Prince Alfred College and
University of Adelaide (B.A. 1896, B.Sc.
1898. For many years a Master at
Prince Alfred College, Adelaide; Princi-
pal of Geelong College 1910-14; and
Headmaster of Prince Alfred College
since the beginning of 1915. Address—
Prince Alfred College, Kent Town, Ade-
laide. S.A.
BEAVER, Horace Percy (South Aus-
tralia); b. London, 11 Mar. 1868. Town
Clerk of Adelaide since 1915, formerly
City Accountant. M. 1898, Maime Sturt,
e.d. of late William Rogers, of Adelaide
Address—Town Hall, Adelaide. S.A
BENNY, Benjamin (South Australia);
b. Aldinga, S.A., 21 Oct. 1869; s. of Rev.
George Benny, Free Presbyterian Minis-
ter at Aldinga; ed. Morphett Vale Public
School, and Caterer’s School, Norwood.
Is a solicitor; elected Commonwealth
Senator for S.A. (head of the poll) 13
Dec. 1919; four years in Brighton Town
Council (three years as Mayor); Vice-
President of Council of S.A. Law Society,
Grand Registrar in the Grand Lodge of
Freemasons, a Director of S.A. Cale-
donian Society, m. 1896, Susan Grace, d.
of ePter Anderson, of West Mitcham,
S.A.; Mrs. Benny was elected to Brigh-
ton Town Council Dec. 1919, being the
first woman municipal councillor in S.A.
Recreations— Yachting and golf. Ad-
dress—Stonywood, Scaclff, S.A.
BEVAN, Frederick (South Australia):
b. London, 3 July, 1856; ed. All Saints’,
London W. Appointed Gentleman of
H.M. Chapel Royal, Whitehall 1878, and
to St. James’ Chapel Royal 1888; came
to Australia under engagement to Uni-
versity of Adelaide June 1898, since when
he has been Professor of Singing at the
Elder Conservatorium; Conductor of the
University Choral Society since its for-
mation in 1899, Organist and Choir Mas-
ter of North Adelaide Congregational
C hurch since 1909. Composer of more
than 100 popular songs, part songs and
anthems, including “The Flight of Ages,"
“The Admiral’s Broom,” and “Peg-
away.” Address—The Universitv, Ade-
laide, S.A.
BICE, Hon. John George (South Aus-
tralia); b. Callington, Cornwall, Eng-
land, 1853. Came to Australia 1864;
sometime Mayor of Port Augusta, in
which town he conducted a large machi-
nery business; M.L.C. for Northern Dis-
trict since 1894; Minister controlling
Northern Territory and Minister of Wa-
ter Supply 1908-9; Chief Secretary 1909-
10 and 1912-14 and since May 1919; Com-
missioner of Public Works 1917-19. Ad-
dress-Bishop’s Place, Kensington, near
Adelaide, S.A.
BLACK, John McConnell (South Aus-
tralia), botanist; b. Wigtown, Scotland,
28 Apr. 1855; s. of George C. Black, Pro-
curator-Fiscal of Wigtown, and bro. of
late Helen Black, who married R. D’Oyly
Carte, of the Savoy Theatre, London; ed.
\\ igtown Grammar School, Edinburgh
Academy. Taunton College School, and
Dresdener Handelsschule. On the staffs
of the British Linen Company’s Bank,
Edinburgh, and the Oriental Bank, Lon-
don; arrived in S.A. in 1877, and farmed
m the Hundred of Baroota for five years-
on the literary staffs of the Adelaide
daily newspapers 1883-1902; took up bot-
any after leaving the press and is now a
leading authority on the botany of his


State; Fellow of the Royal Society of
S.A., and an ex-Chairman of the Field
Naturalists Section of the same. Author
of “Naturalistd Flora of South Australia.”
Son—Captain ustace Couper Black, M.B.
Adel., R.A.M.C., served with the Imperial
Force in France for two years from Oct.
1914, and then till the end of the War in
ex-German and Portuguese East Africa.
Address-—1 Brougham Place, North Ade-
laide, S.A.
BRACKET, Rev. John (South Austra-
lia); b. Kent Town, Adelaide, 1856.
Entered Methodist Ministry 1881. Au-
thor of “A South Australian Romance:
How a Colony was Founded and a Me-
thodist Church formed” (London), “So-
cial Diseases and Suggested Remedies”
(with an account of some Australian
Socialistic Experiments, London), “The
History of South Australia” (Adelaide),
and other works. Address —Methodist
Book Depot, Adelaide, S.A.
BLINMAN, Harry, M.V.O. (South
Australia); b. Adelaide, 30 Dec. 1861; s.
of William Blinman. Entered the Public
Service in 1878; Under Secretary and
Clerk of Executive Council since July
1 pi 6; South Australian Organizer for the
Royal Visit 1920; M.V.O. Aug. 1920; for-
interstate matches. Address —Chief Sec-
merly well-known cricketer playing in
retary’s Office, Adelaide, S.A.
BLUNDELL, Reginald Pole (South
Australia ; b. Norwood, S.A., 4 Feb. 1872;
s. of John Blundell, an early Adelaide
pioneer. M.P. for Adelaide 1907-18; Min-
ister of Industry, Mines and Mamie in
Vaughan Government 1915-17; Minister
of Industry, Repatriation and Agriculture
in Peake Ministry 1917-18; elected to
House of Representatives for Adelaide
Dec. 1919 (Nationalist). Address—Par-
liament House, Adelaide, S.A.
BOWMAN, Arthur Percy (South Aus-
tralia), pastoralist; b. Crystal Brook Sta-
tion; s. of late W. C. Bowman, a pioneer
and S.A. pastoralist; ed. High School,
Hobart. Owns Campbell House Station,
Lake Albert, where he has resided lor
nearly 20 } r ears; formerly of Tasmania
and Victoria, always residing on and
managing his own stations; breeder of
shorthorn cattle, crossbred sheep and
horses; owner of racehorses. M. d. ot
Edmund Johnson Lonsdale, Tasmania.
Recreation —Horse racing. Address —
Campbell Park, Lake Albert, Milang,
S.A,
BREWSTER-JONES, Hooper Josse
(South Australia) - b. Black Rock, S.A.,
1887. Mentioned in England “Musical
Herald” as a prodigy; studied piano at
Elder Conservatorium, Adelaide, under
Bryceson Treharne; won Elder Scholar-
ship in 1906; spent three years with Sir
Charles Stanford (composition), Sir Fre-
derick Bridge (counterpoint and fugue),
Franklin Taylor (piano), and G. H.
Clutsam (orchestration); performed and
taught extensively in London after leav-
ing the Royal College; President of Ade-
laide Chamber Music Society; founder
and conductor of first “Symphony Or-
chestra” in Adelaide; organized patriotic
concerts during the Great War; has
composed 100 songs, three music dramas
—“Deirdre,” “Undine,” and “Jesus of
Nazareth”—and several piano, chamber
and orchestral works. M. 1910, Gcrta,
d. of late Mr. Justice Homburg. Ad-
dress—Alexandra Avenue, Rose Park,
Adelaide, S.A.
BROOKMAN, Sir George, K.B.E.
(South Australia); b. Glasgow, 15 Apr.
1850; s. of late B. Brookman, arrived in
Australia 1852; ed. late James Bath’s
School, North Adelaide. After a com-
mercial career engaged in mining and
financial pursuits, and organized the
syndicate which discovered the Golden
Mile in W.A. in 1893, and was largely in-
terested in the development of the W.A.
Goldfields; gave £15,000 to found the
Adelaide School of Mines, and donations
to other public institutions; a public-
spirited citzen who rendered great ser-
vee to his State during the European
War, being Chairman of the State Re-
patriation Board, member of the State
War Council, Deputy Chairman of the
Soldiers’ Fund and actively associated
with the Red Cross Society, the War
Savings Committee, Anzac Hospitality
Committee and the Australia Day Fund
and other patriotic movements; M.L.C.
for Central District 1901-10; Chairman of
Adelaide Electric Lightting Co., a Direc-
tor of Bank of Adelaide, member of the
University Council, was for many years
Chairman of Adelaide Hospital Board
and a Life Governor of Adelaide Chil-
ren’s Hospital; a patron of art; K.B.E.
Oct. 1920. M. 1878, E. M. Marshall, St.
Kilda: son—Norman Brookman, served
in the European War. Address—Ade-
laide. S.A.
BROOKS, Edmund Albert Charles
(South Australia), pastoralist; b. Inker-
man, S.A., 26 June 1877; s. of George
Brooks; ed. Way College, Adelaide.
Owns Orrie Cowie Station, Yorke’s Pen-
insula, and Pine Villa, Loxton, half-
owner in Buckland Park, Clifton Hills,
and Kanowna Stations, is a partner of
the firm of Brooks Bros, (stud sheep
breeders), Director of the Brght Hope
Gold Mining Co., White Prince Gold
Mining Co., and Revelation Consols Gold
Mining Co. (all of W.A.), is Governing
Director of G. & E. A. Brooks Ltd., and
a Director of Southern Cross Feature
Film Co. Ltd., member of Council of


Stockowners* Association of S.A. and of
Executive Committee. Recreations—
Rifle and gun shooting, boating, fishing.
Address —Buckland Park, Two Wells,
S.A.
BROWN, Henry Yorke Lyell (South
Australia); b. Nova Ccotia, 1844. Field
Geologist on the geologcal survey of
Victoria 1865-9; Government Geologist
of W.A. 1870-2; on the geological survey
of Canada 1874-5, and of N.S.W. 1881-2;
Government Geologist of S.A. 1882-1911;
during his 29 years under the S.A, Gov-
ernment, rendered valuable scientific ser-
vice, greatly enriching the geologcal
knowledge of the State and Northern
cTrrtory; prepared the invaluable Geo-
logical Map of S.A. 1899 (.scale 16 miles
to the inch), and the Geological Map
of the Northern Territory 1898 scale 20
miles to the inch 3; holds a commission
dated 2. Jan. 1912 as Honorary Consult-
ng Geologist in and for the State of S.A.
M. 1911, Hannah Alargaret, d. of John
Thompson of Lawrence, N.Z. Address—
-286 Ward St., North Adelaide, S.A.
BROWN, William Jethro, LL.D.,
Litt.D. (South Australia; b. Mintaro,
S.A., 29 Mar. 1868; s. of late James
Biown; ed. Stanley Grammar School,
Watervale, S.A., and St. ojhn’s College,
Cambridge late scholar and prizeman and
graduate with double first-class honors
in the Law Tripos. Called to the Bar
at the Middle Temple 1891; Professor of
Law and Modern History in University
of Tasmania 1893-1900; Professor of Con-
stitutional Law and History n University
College, London 1900-1901, and of Com-
parative Law in University College of
Wales 1901-6; Examiner for Cambridge
Law Tripos 1902-5, and Examiner for
University of London 1905-6; Professor
of Law at Adelaide University 1906-16;
President of Industrial Arbitration Court
since Jan. 1916; Chairman of Common-
wealth Royal Commission on the Sugar
Industry in succession to Sir ojhn Gor-
don 1912; took his LL.D. at Cambridge
1898, and Dublin University conferred on
him the degree of Litt.D. in 1900 in re-
cognition of his literary work —The New
Democracy. Author of several other j
works, ncluding Why Federate? The
Study of the Law, The Austinian Theory
of Law, The Underlying Principles of
Modern Legislation, and The Control of
Monopolies. Recreations —Golf, tennis.
M. 1900, Aimee Loth, e.d. of Madame
Loth, Southsea. Address—sB Strangways
Terrace, North Adelaide, S.A.
BROWNELL. Herbert Percivall,
D.S.O. (South Australia); b. Newtown,
Tasmania, 12 Nov. 1889; e.s. of W. P.
Brownell of Hobart; ed. Leslie House
School, Hobart, Scotch College, Mel- I
bourne, and Ormond College, Melbourne
University (MB., 8.5.). Left Australia
with 7th Field Ambulance A.I.F, 1915,
and served in Egypt and Gallipoli
(wounded but continued to the evacua-
tion), subsequently attached to 27th Bat-
talion in France and Belgium, serving
with them as Regimental Medical Olfi
cer; D.S.O. for services at Bullccourt
1917. Address—lo2 The Parade, Nor-
wood, S.A.
BURGESS, Rev. Henry Thomas,
LL.D. (Middletown), Methodist minis-
ter; b. Cheshire, England, 1839. Three
times President of the S.A. Conference,
and also President of the General Con-
ference of the Australasian Methodist
Church; retired from active work of the
ministry in 1902, and became Secretary
of the Adelaide Children’s Hospital, a
position he resigned in 1913; has written
extensively for the daily press. Ad-
dress—Charles St., Norwood, S.A.
CHAMPION de CRESPIGNY,
Colonel Constantine Trent, D.5.0., M.D.
(Adel, and Melb.). A.A.M.C. European
War. Address—Strangways Terrace,
North Adelaide, S.A.
CHAPMAN, Robert William, M.A.,
B.C.E. (South Australia); b. Stony Strat-
ford, Bucks, England, 27 Dec. 1866; s. of
Charles Chapman, Melbourne, arrived in
Australia 1876; ed. Wesley College, and
Melbourne University (Scholarship from
State Schools, several exhibitions in ma-
thematics at University and Trinity Col-
lege, M.A., and B.C.E. With final first-
class honours and Scholarship in ma-
thematics and physics). After leaving
the University was engaged on engineer-
ing works in Victoria; appointed Lec-
turer on Mathematics and Physics at the
University of Adelaide 1889, and for sev-
eral years was also Lecturer on Applied
Mechanics at the School of Mines; Lec-
turer in Engineering in Adelaide Univer-
sity 1900-7, then became the first Profes-
sor of Engineering, a position he held
until 1910, when, upon the departure of
Professor Bragg to Leeds, he was ap-
pointed to his present chair of Mathema-
tics and Mechanics; President of Astro-
nomical Society of S.A., elected F.R.A.S.
1902, member of the Council of the Aus-
tralasian Institute of Mining Engineers
since 1902, President of the S.A Insti-
tute of Surveyors from 1917, President
of the S.A. Institute of Engineers 1918,
and President for 1920 of the Australa-
sian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy,
member of the Councils of Adelaide Uni-
versity and School of Mines. Author of
“Astronomy for Surveyors” (London),
of papers containing investigations into
the causes of peculiarities of tides along
the Australian coast, and of technical
papers on engineering subjects. M. 1889,
Eva Maud, d. of George Hall, Williams-
town, Victoria; sons served in European


War—Captain R. H. Chapman, R.E.
(twice mentioned in despatches); Lieu-
tenant C. G. Chapman, R.E. (mentioned
in despatches), killed in Mesopotamia 17
Apr. 1916; and Trooper W. H. Chapman,
9th Light Horse Regiment Machine-Gun
Section. Address —The University, Ade-
laide, S.A.
CHAPPLE, Frederic, C.M.G. (South
Australia); b. London, 12 Oct. 1845; ed.
London University (B.A. and B.Sc. both
of first-class and also honours in logic,
moral philosophy and physiology).
Headmaster of Prince Alfred College,
Adelaide, from 1876 to 1914; Warden of
the Senate of Adelaide University since
1883; has been a member of the Univer-
sity Council since 1897; thrice President
of the Council of Churches; President of
Adelaide Y.M.C.A. for seven years in-
cluding the War year (Vice-President
for 27 years); Hon. Treasurer of
Y.M.C.A. Army Department Committee
from its formation; President of Our
Boys’ Institute for five years. Daughter
—Marion Broadbent (nee Chappie), B.A.
(Adel.), was officer in command of a de-
tachment of the V.A.D.’s in S.A.; y.d.—
Dr. Phoebe Chappie, B.Sc., M.8., B.S.
(Adel.), medical officer of one of the
battalions of the Q.M.A.A.C.’s in Flan-
ders, received the M.M. “for bravery un-
der fire”; all four sons offered for active
service—eldest, Frederic John Chappie,
B. (Adel.), M.8., Ch.B, Melb.), was
not allowed to proceed beyond Keswick
Hospital, where he was given important
curative work and was raised to the rank
of Major; Ernest Chappie, B.Sc. (Adel,
and Cantab.), an engineer now of Bang-
kok, Siam, was not allowed to leave there
for the seat of war, but received a cer-
tificate from His Majesty’s Government
thanking him for “patriotically waiving
his personal desire and assuring him that
he had been more valuable to the nation
in Siam”; Alfred Chappie, B.Sc. (Adel.),
M.A. (Cantab.), Lecturer and coach in
the engineering school at Cambridge
University, with the rank of Lieutenant
in Royal Air Force, was equipment of-
ficer in charge of Engine Modifications
at the aerodrome in Regent’s Park;
Harold Chappie, B.Sc. (Adel.), F.R.C.S.
(London), M.A., M.B. and M.S. of
Camb. Was Surgeon Captain in various
Casualty Clearing Stations and Hospi-
tals in France and elsewhere. Address
—Parade, Norwood, Adelaide, S.A.
CLARE, Chapman James, C.M.G.
J.P., Captain R.A. Navy (retired); b. at
sea 23 June, 1853; s. of Lieut. J. C. Clare
R.N.R.; ed. Edmonton, London. Cap
lain in Royal Australian Navy from 1
[an. 1901; District Naval Officer, W.A.
1911-18; District Naval Officer, S.A.
Sept 1918 to 31 July, 1919; Commando
of H.M.S. “Pro lector” commissioned b;
Admiralty for service in China 1900;
C. 1901; Japanese Order of “The
Rising Sun” 1920. M. 1885, at Serna
phore, Ellen Minnie, d. of late Lieutenant
H. G. Forbes Cotgravc, Indian Navy.
Address—Naval and Military Club, Ade-
laide.
CLAYTON, Lieutenant-Colonel Arthur
Ross, D.S.O. (South Australia); b. Yan
kalilla, S.A., 14 May 1876; s. of late J.
Woods Clayton and Mrs. Clayton of Me-
dindie, Adelaide; ed. St. Peter’s College,
and Adelaide University (M.8., 8.5.),
M. England, L.R.C.P. London.
House Surgeon Adelaide Hospital 1903;
Surgeon to Wallaroo and Moonta Min-
ing Company 1908 and Medical Officer
of Health of Moonta 1909. Was four
years on active service with A.I.F. in
Egypt and France. Lieutenant-Colonel
in command Bth Australian Field Ambu-
lance for 18 months, made Brevet-Major
in C.M.F. for meritorious services (men-
tioned in despatches); D.S.O. 1918. Re-
creations—Golf, cricket, tennis. Address
—Robert St., Moonta, S.A.
COHEN, Lewis. (South Australia),
Lord Mayor of Adelaide; b. Liverpool
England, 23 Dec., 1849; s. of late Henry
Cohen, of Sydney, N.S.W.; ed. Jewish
College, Edmonton; came to Australia
nearly 72 years ago; first elected to City
Council 1886; M.P. for North Adelaide
1887-93 and for Adelaide 1902-6; elected
Mayor of Adelaide Dec., 1889, and held
this position for seven years at different
periods; declined portfolio in Cockburn
Government and also Agent-General-
ship; delegated in 1911 by Government
and City Council to proceed to London
to urge the Imperial Government
to grant a Lord Mayoralty for Ade-
laide; and represented the Adelaide Cor-
poration at the Coronation of King
George V.; has held many public posi-
tions; Chairman of Federal Campaign in
Liberal interests 1917; Chairman of
State Elections Campaign 1918, and of
United Federal Campaign 1919; and
Chairman of the King Edward Statue
Fund. Recreations—Varied. Address
—’Town Hall. Private address—Bird-
wood, Barnard Street, North Adelaide,
S.A.
CONEYBEER, Frederick William
(South Australia); b. Clifton, Bristol,
England, 27 Sept. 1859. Came to Orange,
N. in boyhood with his parents;
elected M.P. for East Torrens, S.A., 15
Apr. 1893, and represented the district
till Apr. 1921, being the last of the first
elected Labour members to retain his
seat in the State Parliament; Minister
of Education 1908-9, 1910-12; Speaker of
House of Assembly July 1915-Apr. 1921.
Sons served in European War—E. H.
Coneybeer, 14th A.S.C. of 4th Division,
over four years; Staff-Sergeant F. R.
Coneybeer, 6th Field Ambulance, over
four years. Address —Fouth Avenue, St,
Peters, Adelaide, S.A.


DAVIES, Edward Harold, Mus. Doc.
(South Australia); b. Oswestry, Eng-
land, 18 July 1867; 4th s. of John Whit-
ridge Davies of that town, and brother
to Dr. Walford Davies (organist and
choirmaster of the 'Temple Church, Lon-
don, and now Professor of Music in the
University of Wales); ed. Oswestry
Grammar School, and studied music un-
der Dr. Joseph Bridge, of Chester Ca-
thedral. Arrived in Australia 1887;
graduated Bachelor of Music at Univer-
sity of Adelaide 1896 (first class in each
year), and Doctor of Music in 1902, be-
ing the first student to obtain this de-
gree in the Commonwealth; appointed
1919 Elder Professor of Music in Uni-
versity of Adelaide, and Director of
Musiic at the Elder Conservatorium;
bounder and Conductor of Adelaide
Bach Society; Past Grand Organist in
the Grand Lodge of Freemasons of S.A.;
Organist at Kent Town Methodist
Church since 1897; formerly Organist
and Choirmaster at Christ Church Ka-
punda, St. Peter’s Glenelg, Chapel Royal,
Windsor Park, and St. Paul’s Adelaide.
M. 1893, Ina, e.d. of B. E. Deland, of
Gawler, S.A.; sons on active service—
Captain Harold Whitridge Davies, M.8.,
8.5., A.A.M.C., served in France; George
Campbell Davies, 27th Battalion A.1.F.,
received Military Medal for gallantry in
the field (fell near Ypres 1916); Edward
Walford Davies, volunteered for active
service and was engaged in training for -
Australian Flying Corps when the armis-
tice was declared. Address—The Uni-
versity, Adelaide, S.A.
DEAN, Brigadier-General George
Henry, V.D. (South Australia); b. Camp-
bclltown, S.A., 29 May 1859; s. of Wil-
liam Dean; ed. St. Peter’s College, Ade-
laide (Farrell Scholar). Is a Trustee of
State Bank of S.A.; commissioned as
Lieutenant in S.A. Mounted Rifles in
1880, late commanding Bth Light Horse
Brigade; inaugurated S.A. National Rifle
Association 1884; Chairman of Com-
monwealth Council of Rifle Associations
from 1903; Commandant Australian Rifle
Team to Bisley 1913, when the team won
the Mackinnon Cup and were 2nd for
Kolapore Cup. Served in European War j
—Egypt and Gallipoli 1915-16, and in sea
transport service 1916-18; retired from
active list with rank of Brigadier-General
1920. M. 1882, Florence Ida, only d. of
late Sir Edwin Smith, K.C.M.G., of Ade-
laide. Sons served in the War-—-Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Edwin Theyer Dean,
D.5.0., Chevalier de Legion d’Honneur,
commanding Ist Brigade, Ist Division
Field Artiller}' A.T.F.; Captain George
Lancelot Dean, Croix de Guerre, 13th
Battery 6th Brigade A.F.A.; Staff Cap-
tain Alan Ernest Dean, 9th Light Horse
A.I.F. and Ist D.Y. Lancers Indian
Army; Lieutenant Leslie Bernard Dean,
18th Battery A.F.A.; Lieutenant William
Sydney Dean, Home Service; dan. Gert-
rude, m. Captain J. G. Dnncan-Hughes,
M.V.0., M.C., Croix de Guerre, R.F.A.,
formerly A.U.C. to His Excellency the
I Governor-General. Adrcss —Glen Tur-
ret!, Truro; Adelaide Club, Adelaide,
S.A.
DENNY, Captain William Joseph,
M.C. (South Australia); b, Adelaide, 6
Dec. 1872; s. of Thomas Denny; cd.
j Christian Brothers’ College, and Ade-
laide University (passed the Law
Course). Called to Bar 1908; M.P. for
W. Adelaide 1900-2, and for Adelaide
1902-5, and since 1906; Attorney-General
June 1910 to Oct. 1912. Served in Euro-
pean War with A.1.F., leaving Australia
as Lieutenant 9th Light Horse Regiment
1916, and subsequently transferred to sth
Division Artillery, being in the first ac-
tion fought on French soil (Fromelles)
by the Australians (wounded near Ypres
Sept. 1917), awarded M.C. and promoted
Captain. Author of “The Diggers’’
(1919) and other publications. M. 1920,
Winefride, d. of 1. J. Leahy of Adelaide.
Address—Parliament House, Adelaide,
S.A. i|
DODWELL, George Frederick, 8.A.,
F.R.A.S. (South Australia); b. Leighton
Buzzard, Bedfordshire, England, 1879; s.
of Edwin Dodwell; ed. Prince Alfred
College, Adelaide, and Adelaide Univer-
sity (B.A. 1905). Entered Adelaide Ob-
servatory Mar. 1899; appointed Di-
visional Officer, Meteorological Bureau
Jan. 1908 ,and Government Astronomer
since 1 June 1909; is a member of the
Societe Astronomique de France, and
Fellow of Royal Astronomical Society.
Address—Observatory, Adelaide, S.A.
DOWNEY, Colonel Michael Henry,
D.S.O (South Australia); b. Mount
Pleasant, Victoria, 20 Oct. 1877; s. of
William Downey; ed. Melbourne Uni-
versity (M.8., 8.5.), and Edinburgh Uni
versity (L.R.C.P. & S.). Went to
France in 1916 with 3rd Australian Di-
vision as Commanding Officer 11th Aus-
tralian Field Ambulance; promoted
Colonel and A.D.M.S. of sth Australian
Division 1917; returned to Austra-
lia May 1919 - Superintendent of Park-
side Mental Hospital since Jan. 1916.
Address—Parkside, S.A.
DUNCAN-HUGHES, Captain John
Grant, M.V.0., M.C. (South Australia);
b. Hughes Park, near Watervalc, S.A. 1
Sept. 1882; s. of late Sir John Tames
Duncan, M.L.C.; cd. St. Peter’s College
Ad elaide, Cheltenham College (Eng.),
Adelaide University, and Trinity Col-
lege, Cambridge (M.A., LL.B.), Called
to the Bar Inner Temple Jan. 1907, and
subsequently admitted to S.A. Bar; prac-
tised as barrister at Adelaide 1909-14.
Served in Royal Field Artillery (Special
Reserve) in France, Belgium and else


where, from Nov. 1915 to Feb. 1919, ris-
ing to rank of Acting Major and retiring
with rank of Captain; M.C. 1918; M.V.O.
1920; Belgian Croix dc Guerre; Aidc-de-
Canip to the Governor-General (Rt
Hon. Sir R. Munro-Ferguson) Jan. 1920,
and Private Secretary from Aug. 1920;
attached to the Staff of H.R.H. the
Prince of Wales throughout his Austra-
lian visit 1920. M. 1910, Gertrude Ro-
salie, e.d. of Brigadier-General G. H.
Dean, V.D. (q.v.). Address —20 Robe
Terrace, Mcdindie, S.A.
FENNER. Charles Edward, D.Sc.,
F.G.S. (South Australia): b. Dunach,
Victoria, 18 May 1884; s. of John Fen-
ner; ed. Melbourne University (D.Sc.,
Diploma of Education, Kcrnot Research
Scholar, Exhibitioner in Biology and
Geology). Originally a compositor;
later a teacher in the Victorian Educa-
tion Department; Principal of Ballarat
School of Mines 1910-10; Superintendent
of Technical Education, South Austra-
lian Education Department, since 1916;
Chairman of Apprentices’ Advisory
Board, S. Australia: Chairman State \ o-
cational Committee, Repatriation De
partment; President Adelaide Dual Club:
President of S. Australian hicld Natural-
ists; Sachse gold medallist (Royal Geo
graphical Society of Australasia, \ic
toria). Author of scientific papers or
geological and geographical subjects,
also contributor of popular science
cles to Australian press. Published “ Flic
Bakes and Craters of Mount Gambler
1921. M. Emma Louise Flirt, of Balla-
rat. Address—42 Alexandra Avenue,
Rose Park, S.A.
FIELD, Edgar John (South Austra-
lia); b. Naracoorte. S.A., 22 Apr. 1874; s.
of late John Field, Inspector of Police; ed.
Public Schools and Christian Brothers’
College, Adelaide (Dux of College 1890).
Entered Survey Department Jan. 1891;
appointed Clerk in Office of Commis-
sioner of Crown Lands 1892, Cjiief Cleik
and Accountant 1909, and Chief Immi-
gration Officer 1911; Secretary for
Lands, Chairman of Advances to Set-
tlers Board and Receiver of Rents since
2 Apr. 1917. Address —Clcveleys, Haw-
thorn, Adelaide, S.A.
FOSTER, Hon. Richard Witty (South
Australia); b. Goodmanham, Yorkshire,
England, 20 Aug. 1856; s. of William
Foster, farmer; ed. Prospect House,
Tockwith, Yorkshire; came to Australia
]S7 f i MP for Newcastle, S.A., 1893-
1 no 2 and for Flinders 1902-6; Commis-
sioner of Public Works Dec. 1899 to
Tulv 1904, and Mar. to July 1905; elected
to House of Representatives for \\ akc-
c. P \ ( \ ai Aug 1909. in succession to late
Sir Frederick Holder, and has. sat for
that district since; Federal t Minister foi
Works and Railways, Dec. L»-l. M-
Miss Lees of Quorn. Address—W m-
chester St., St. Peters, S.A.
FOWLER, James Richard (South
Australia), merchant; b. Mitcham, near
Adelaide, 25 May, 1865; s, of late George
Swan Fowler; ed. Prince Alfred College,
Adelaide, Amersham Hall School, Caver-
sham, England, and St. John s College,
Cambridge University (M.A., honours
Historical Tripos, 1886)- C hairman of
Directors of D. and J. Fowler Ltd., Ade-
laide; member of the Council of Adelaide
University and Chairman of the Board of
Commercial Studies at the University, a
Director of the Bank of Adelaide, a Lo-
cal Director of the A.M.P. Society,
Chairman of Directors of Adelaide Mill-
ing Co. Ltd., and a Director of the
Westralia Timber and Firewood Co.
Ltd. M. Esther Tinlinc, y.d. of late Wil-
liam Murray, Glen Osmond, S.A.; sons
on active service—Major William Mur-
ray Fowler, M.C-., 50th Battalion A.1.F.;
Private Richard Murray Fowler, in camp
when the armistice was signed. Address
—Bl Osmond Terrace, Norwood, S.A.
GARDINER, John, 1.5.0. (South Aus-
tralia); b. 1852. Entered the S.A.
Government Service 186(5; Common-
wealth Public Service Inspector in S.A.
since 1902; 1.5.0. 1907. Address —Port
rush Rd., Toorak, Adelaide, S.A.
GARTRELL, James (South Austra-
lia), merchant; b. Goldsithncy, Corn-
wall, England, 1 Dec. 1846; s. of John
and Elizabeth Gartrell. Brought to Aus-
) tralia in Jan. 1849; partner since 1866 in
j G. Wood, Son and Co., wholesale gro-
cers and importers; President of the
Adelaide Chamber of Commerce 1900-1
and 1905-6, and is on the governing-
bodies of a number of philantropic in-
stitutions, a Governor of the Methodist
Ladies’ College, member of Prince Al-
fred College Committee, and a liberal
supporter of commercial and higher edu-
cation. M. 1868, Sarah Lawrence. Ad-
dress—Fcrnilee, Burnside, near Adelaide,
S.A.
GILL, Thomas, C.M.G., 1.5.0. (South
Australia); b. Glen Osmond, S.A., 23
Feb. 1849; s. of late Thomas Gill. En-
tered the civil service in 1865 and served
in the Departments of the Volunteer
Military Force, Destitute Board, Audit,
Treasury, and Agent-General; on his re-
turn from England re-entered the Audit
Office in 1881 and the Treasury in 188:5;
Under Treasurer May 1894 to 30 June
1920; one of the Government represen-
tatives on the Public Library Board, and
the Tramways Trust, and a much-con-
sulted authority on early Australian his-
tory and exploration; appointed a Trus-
tee of the Savings Bank 1920. Author
of “Bibliography of South Australia,
“The History of Glen Osmond," and of
“Colonel William Light” (a biography
of the founder of Adelaide); life mcmbei
of the South Australian branch of the
Royal Geographical Society in which he


lias always taken a deep interest; I.S.O.
1<J03 J C.M.G. 1918. M. 1876, Louisa
jane, d. of John Bristow, Port Wake-
hold. Address—Willalar, Glen Osmond
S.A.
GILL, Walter, F.L.S., F.P.H.S. (South
Australia); b. Wolford, Northampton-
shire, 18 Oct. 1851; s. of late Rev. Wal-
ter Gill, Independent Minister, Park-
stone, Dorset, England. In the service
ot the Wilts and Dorset Bank 1869-76;
arrived in S.A. Dec. 1876; entered the
public service in Aug. 1884, as Sub-In-
spector of Credit Selections, appointed
Chief Forester at Wirrabara in 1886;
t onservator of Forests since July 1890;
the first in South Australia to success-
fully utilise the Remarkable pine (pinus
insignis) for commercial purposes; an
ardent botanist for close on half a cen-
tury. Address—Dover St., Malvern,
Adelaide, S.A.
GLOVER, Charles Richmond John
(South Australia); b. Richmond, Surrey,
England, 3 May 1870; s. of late Charles
Peter and Hannah Glover; ed. Prince Al-
fred College, Adelaide. Qualified as a
pharmaceutical chemist, serving appren-
ticeship with Faulding and Co.; City
C ouncillor, Adelaide 1906, Alderman
from 1909, Mayor of Adelaide 1917-19,
and first Lord Mayor; presented Chil-
dren’s Playgrounds to the City; now
Councillor; Grand Secretary of the
Grand Lodge of Freemasons of S.A. since
1909, and Past Deputy Grand Master;
President of the S.A. branch of the Navy
League, and on the governing bodies of
a number of public institutions. Com-
piled “History of Freemasonry in South
Australia 1834-84,” and a Brief History
of the Church of St. John the Evangelist
1839-1909. M. Elizabeth Maud, d. of late
T. J. Hannam. Address—St. Andrew’s,
Kingston Terrace, North Adelaide, S.A.
GLYNN, Hon. Patrick McMahon,
K.C. (South Australia); b. Gort. Co.
Galway, Ireland, 25 Aug. 1855; ed. Trini-
ty College, Dublin (B.A. Honours in
Logic, LL.B., a medallist for oratory in
the Law Students’ Debating Society for
Ireland 1880). Arrived in Australia 1880;
for about 10 years leader writer to “Ka-
pnnda Herald” and contributed to other
papers; M.P. for Light 1887-9; elected
M.P. for North Adelaide in 1895 (the
first representative returned in Australia
under adult suffrage), and again in 1897;
Attorney-General Dec. 1899; took a pro-
minent part in the movement for Aus-
tralian Federal Union; was a member of
the Convention which framed the Com-
monwealth Constitution in 1897-8, and
was elected a representative of South
Australia in the first Federal Parliament
in 1901 and in Dec. 1903 for the District
of Angas, sat for Angas until the Gene-
ral Elections Dec. 1919, and was the last
of the Federal Conventionists elected to
the Commonwealth Parliament to retain
a seal in the Federal Legislature; Fede-
ral Attorney-General in Dcakin-Cook
Ministry June 1909 to Apr. 1910, Minis-
ter for External Affairs June 1913 to
Sept. 1914; Minister for Home and Ter-
ritories Feb. 1917-20; has made a special
study of Constitutional Law; is a mem-
ber of the American Academy of Politi-
cal and Social Science, and written ex-
tensively on political and literary sub-
jects all reflecting his erudite mind; ap-
pointed K.C. in 1913; one of the Counsel
for South Australia on the Murray
Waters question in 1905; visited England
at the invitation of the Empire Parlia-
mentary Association 191(5. During the
sitting of the first Federal Parliament
there were some special dissertations
upon the leading members at the time,
private as well as Ministerial. The fol-
lowing is an extract; —“In Mr. Patrick
McMahon Glynn, the student of our
statesmen finds one of the most reflec-
tive, rational and cultured intellects in all
the legislative bodies occupied at this
pregnant period in the new germination
of Australian nationality. Endowed with
high mental qualities, well trained by
by sound educational aids, a keen logical
precision of thought, a faculty of com-
prehensive dissection and searching scru-
tiny of a subject, a pitiless love of cautious
accuracy, accompanied by consideration
for accountable error, a faculty of forc-
ible appeal to other minds, which he first
attracts by a tolerant tone, and primarily
subdues to patience by the persuasion of
■x tactful temperateness and frank concilia-
tion of demeanor; a polished address,
favored by a complete command of cop-
ious, choice and scholarly language, at-
taining at times the highest oratorical
plane. In the volume of his language and
charm of expression it may be said that
he has no equal in any assembly. Indeed,
at his best, it would not be any exaggera-
tion to compare him with ‘the golden-
mouthed Chrysostom.’ ’’ Among his
publications are “The Irish State Trials
1844-1880," “The Manifesto of the South
Australian Land Nationalisation Society”
(1884), “Great Britain and Its Colonies”
(1893), “Imperial Union and Fiscal Re-
ciprocity” (1904), in respect of which he
had a letter from a Secretary expressing
approval of 270 members of the House of
Commons; “Dominions and Imperial
I nion ' (1919), “The Case against a
State _ Bank” (1889), “Federation, its
1 rmciple and Application” (1889), “The
Working of Federation,” “The Federal
1 onstitution Proposed Amendments,”
“Caw and Equity,” “Secession,” ‘A Re-
view of the River Murray Question”
(1891), “Some Thoughts 'on Shake-
speare,” “The Disposition of Shake-
speare,” “Some of Shakespeare’s Wo-
men,” “Facts, Dreams, and Shams,”
“Sincerity in Literature,” “Taste and


Time,” “Poetry,” “Around and About,"
“The Pleasures of Literature,” “Scottish
Life and Lays,” Notes on War
Visit of Dominion Delegates”
(1916), and “Dante” (Sept., 1921).
M. Abbie Dynon of Melbourne;
brother of Sir Joseph Glynn, Chairman
of National Insurance Commission,
Ireland. Address—Glynneath, Mill Ter-
race, North Adelaide, S.A.
GORDON, Hon. David John, M.L.C.
(South Australia); b. Riverton, S.A., 4
May I860; ed. Stanley Grammar School,
Watervale. Spent his youth in farming;
was for a few years in commercial life,
chiefly in the grain trade and shipping;
Manager of Port Adelaide branch of the
“Register” newspaper office for five
years, and later for 15 years successively
commercial and financial editor and
chief of the reporting staff of the jour-
nal; M.H.R. for Boothby Nov. 1911 to
May 1913; M.L.C. for Midland District
since Nov. 1913, Leader of the Liberal
Party in Legislative Council since 1918,
Ex-President of the Australian Liberal
Union, President of Adelaide Chamber
of Commerce 1919-21, Chairman of Army
and Navy Department, Adelaide
Y.M.C.A., and President of Sailors’ and
Soldiers’ leathers’ Association of S.A.
Author of a number of publications re-
lating to S.A., including “The Central
State: Its History, Progress and Re-
sources,” and “The Nile of Australia,
and edited the “Official Handbook” and
“Official Year Book of S.A. ’ M. 1888,
Anna L., e.d. of Henry Peel, Semaphore,
S.A.; sons served in European War—
Flight-Lieutenant John Rutherford Gor-
don, M.C., Australian Flying Corps,
served as Sergeant 10th Battalion Infan-
try at Gallipoli landing, promoted Lieu-
tenant, subsequently transferred to Fly-
ing Corps, served in France 1918, award-
ed Military Cross; Driver Douglas Peel
Gordon, A.A.S.C., Egypt 1914, and Gal-
lipoli 1915;; Sister Doris Gordon, Base
Hospital Australia 1915-16, France and
Italy 1917-19. Address—Victoria Avenue,
Unlcy Park, S.A.
GORDON, Hon. Sir John Hannah.
Knt. (South Australia); b. Kilmalcolm,
Scotland, 26 July 1850; s. of late Rev.
James Gordon, who was I resbyteiian
Minister at Gawler, S.A., for many
years. Called to the Bar 1876; M.L.C.
for 15 years; a distinguished Parliamen-
tarian associated in Ministries with Si 1
John Cockburn, the late Rt. Hon.
Charles Cameron Kingston, and the late
Sir Frederick Holder; an ardent Fede-
ralist he was one of the framers of the
Commonwealth Constitution in J897-8,
sitting in the National Convention in
which he was chosen a member of the
Constitutional Committee, and was a
prominent figure in debate; appointedla
Judge of the Supreme Court Dec. 1903,
and knighted in June lt»08 for his public
and judicial services; a lover of litera-
ture, particularly of the Elizabethan pe-
riod, in which he is widely read. M.
1876, Ann Wright, d. of the late William
Rogers, of Sandcrgrovc, S.A. Address —
Supreme Court, Adelaide, S.A.
GRUNDY, Eustace Beardoe, K.C.
(South Australia); b. Chcetham Hill,
Manchester, England, 30 Dec. 1849; s.
of Frederick Grundy (for many years «
solicitor practising in Manchester); ed.
Cheltenham College. Admitted in Eng-
land 1873, and in South Australia 1875;
Q.C. 1900; Chancellor of the Diocese of
Adelaide from 1906; Grand Master ol
the Grand Lodge of Freemasons ol
South Australia 1916-18 formerly I’ro-
Grand Master, Deputy Grand Master,
and Grand Lecturer; President in 1904
of S.A. Literary Societies' Union; first
President of Adelaide Park Lands I ie-
servation League, and first 1 icsident ol
S.A. branch of the Navy League; Presi-
dent of S.A. Law Society 1919. M. e.d.
of late Sir Richard Davies Hanson,
Chief Justice of S.A. Address —Ande-
ver Flats, North Adelaide. Business ad-
dress —27 Grenfell St., Adelaide, S.A.
Club —Adelaide Club.
HANCOCK, Henry Lipson (South
Australia); b. Moonta Mines, S.A., 5
Mar. 1867; s. of late Henry Richard
Hancock (Superintendent of the Moonta
Mines for 34 years, and concurrently ol
Wallaroo Mines for 22 years); ed. Prince
Alfred College, Adelaide, and Ballarat
School of Mines (Associate); General
Manager Wallaroo and Moonta Mining
and Smelting Company Limited from
1903 to 1923; now Consulting Engineer
to the Company; Assoc. M. Inst. C.E.,
M. Inst. M.M., M. Inst. Met., M. Amer.
Inst. M.M.E., M. Amer. Electro-Chcm.
Soc., M. Aust. Inst. M.M., Assoc.
Baliarat S.M., M. Aust. Chem. Inst..
F R.S of S. Aust., Member of S. Aust.
I Advisory Council of Education; Mining
and Metallurgical Engineer. Career-In
association with his father, H. R. Han
cock, developed the Hancock jig, now
| greatly used in America and elscwhcie,
they were the first to successfully concen-
trate Broken Hill Sulphide Ores; for
about 12 years Instructor at the Moonta
School of Mines in Mining and Eng Sur-
veying and Machine Drawing and De-
sign. M. 1893, Ada M„ d. of Jacob
Roach, Moonta. Address —Gawler Pari .
i Angaston, S.A.
HARGREAVES, William Arthur,
M.A., D.Sc., 8.C.E., F.I.C. (South Aus-
tralia); b. Ipswich, Queensland; s. of E.
W. Hargreaves; ed. Ipswich Grammer
School and Melbourne University (M.A.
and 8.C.E.). Doctor of Science ( Adel.);
. Fellow of Institute of Chemistry of
, Great Britain and Ireland, and bellow


ol C hcmlcal Society; Scholar in Natural
Science (first-class honours) of Mel-
bourne University, and Scholar of
Ormonde ( ollcgc; Lecturer at Working
Mens College, Melbourne, 1889; Direc-
tor ol Gordon Technical College, Gcc-
long, 1891; hirst Lecturer in University
Lxtension Queensland 1893, and First
Assistant Government Analyst of Queens-
land 1897; Chief Inspector of Explosives
and Government Analyst South Austra-
lia from Mar. 1899, now Director of the
Department of Chemistry in S.A. Ad-
dress—Marumba, Giles St., Rose Park.
S.A.
HARPER, Joseph Anthony (South
Australia); b. Woodstock, Oxfordshire,
England, 23 Nov. 1807; s. of Richard and
Charlotte Harper (now of Ipswich, Q.);
cd. Slate School, Ipswich. Has been
Chairman of Burnside District Council
for several years; elected M.P. for East
Ilorrens Apr. 1921, formerly President of
S.A. C hamber of Manufactures, Presi-
dent of the Associated Chambers of
Manufactures of Australia, and member
of Adelaide Municipal Tramways Trust,
is Director of National Clothing Co.
Ltd,, and of Hicks, Southgate and Co
Ltd., owns Hillyficlds Estate, Dash-
woods Gully. M. 1893, Amy Gertrude
Aland of Toowoomba, Queensland. Ad-
dress—Warrawee, Glen Osmond, S.A.
HARVEY, Hon. William Humphrey
(South Australia); b. Moonta, South
Australia, 1869. Secretary of Moonta
Miners Association for 18 years; Past
Grand Master of Manchester Unity
Oddfellows; M.L.C. for Central No. 2
District since Aug. 1915; Minister of
Education in Coalition Government Apr.
1918 to Apr. 1920. Address—'Parliament
House, Adelaide, S.A.
HAWKER, Edward William, M A
LL.M., F.G.S., M.A.M.I.M.E. (South’
Australia), pastoralist; b, Bungaree
Clare, S.A., 14 Jan. 1850; e.s. of late Hon!
George Charles Hawker, M.A. (owner
of Bungaree, Carriewerloo and Paralana
Stations); ed. St. Peter’s College, Ade-
laide, Harrow, and University of Cam-
bridge (M.A. and LL.M.). ' Called to
English Bar; M.P. for Stanley (S.A.)
1884-9 and 1893-6; member of Council of
School of Mines 1893-6; member of Pub-
lic Library Board from 1894; member of
State Children’s Council from 1898;
Lecturer on Mining at S.A. School of
Mines 1896-1903; for some time Presi-
dent of Australasian National League;
owner of East Bungaree Station. M.
Mary Letitia, 2nd d. of late Sir William
Stawell, ( hief Justice of Victoria; son—
Lieutenant George Stanley Hawker,
M.C., Royal Field Artillery, European
War. Recreations—Billiards, shooting.
Address—East Bungaree, Clare, S.A.
HAWKER, Richard MacDonnell
(South Australia), pastoralist; s. of late
Hon. G. C. Hawker, M.A. (2nd s. of
Hear Admiral Hawker, and g!s. of Cap-
lain Janies Hawker, R.N.). Owner of
dungaree Station which he took over on
his father’s death in 189 a; a racehorse
owner and notable gun shot. M. d. of
late Andrew Tennant. Address—Bun-
garee, S.A.
HAWKER, Walter (South Australia),
pastoralist; b. Ihe Briars, Walkcrvillc
S.A., 8 Oct. 1861; s. of late Hon. G. C.’
Hawker, M.A., of Bungaree, Clare; ed.
St. Peter’s College, Adelaide, and Trinity
Hall, ( ambridge. Owns Anania, Coo-
ama, Paradise, Kalabity, Booborowie
Stations. M. 1888, Mary, d. of William
Carey Faulkner, Charlton House, Wor-
cestershire, England; sons—Captain Tre-
vor McD. Hawker, Koval Irish Fusiliers,
and later of Royal Flying Corps and
Royal Air Force, served in Egypt, Meso-
potamia and Persia 1914 to the end of
the War; John Carey Hawker, Trinity
Hall, Cambridge; daughters—Mrs. Gor-
don Macfarlane, Mrs. Kyle Gault. Re-
creation—Fly fishing. Address—Anama
Clare, S.A.
HAWKES, Waldemar Gaskell (South
Australia), pastoralist; b. London, 8
Api. 1863; s. of Sydney Milnes Hawkes
8.A., LL.B.; ed. North Bridge St. Aca-
demy, Sunderland. Entered into pas-
toral pursuits on Koonoona, S.A., 1879;
on the River Darling during the eighties,
and has been at Koonoona since 1892;
partner in firm of Hawkes and Daskein’
Wonnaminta and Mount Arrowsmith,
N.S.W.; part owner and Managing Di-
lector of Koonoona Proprietors, Burra,
S.A., and Director of Modern Proprie-
tors, N.S.W. M. 1887, Isabel, 3rd d. of
J- M. Mcßride, Burra; son—Lieutenant
Waldemar Robert, 21st Machine Gun
Co., enlisted 9th Light Horse Regiment,
Sept. 1914 (wounded Gallipoli 1915,
wounded on the Somme 1916, killed in’
action Passchendaele 1917) Address
Koonoona, Kooringa, S.A. '
, HAYWARD, Colonel William Thorn-
borough C.M.G., LL.D. (South Austra-
,)’ b. Readmg, England, 26 June 1854;
ed. St. John’s C ollege, Hurstpierpoint
and Liverpool School of Medicine. Came
a°i 1878; Hon. Physician of
Adelaide Hospital 1884-1914; Hon. Medi-
cal Officer Adelaide Children’s Hospital
ISSh-ij) 01 ; Lecturer on Therapeutics and
Materia Medica m Adelaide University
member of Council of Adelaide Univer-
sity, member of Medical Board of S A
member of Board of Management' of
Adelaide Hospital, Hon. Consulting Phv-
sician to Adelaide Hospital and Adelaide
Children s Hospital, President of Perma-
nent Medical Referee Board AAMC
4th Military District, elected Vice-Presi-
dent of British Medical Association at


Aberdeen lt> 14, Hon, LL.D. Aberdeen
and Adelaide 1914, President of S.A.
Branch of British Medical Association
188.1-1910, first Chairman of Federal
Committee of Australian Branches of
British Medical Association 1912. Serv-
ed with A.I.F. 1915-18, in charge of Aus-
tralian Auxiliary Hospital at Harcfield
(despatches); C.M.G. 1919. M. Florence,
d. of late P. H, Burden, Adelaide; son
Private Harold Hayward, 10th Battalion
A.I.F. Address—Ruthven Mansions,
Adelaide, S.A.
HEATON, Herbert, M.A., M.Com. D.
Litt. (South Australia); b. Silsden, York-
shire, 6 June 1890; s. of Fred and Eva
Heaton; ed. Batley Grammar School,
Morley Secondary School, Leeds Uni-
versity, London School of Economics,
King’s Scholar Leeds 1908-11, first-class
Honours in History B.A. 1911, Ruston
Research Scholar 1911, M.A. and Fellow
of Leeds 1912, M.Com. (Birmingham)
1914, D. Litt. (Leeds), 1921. Assist-
ant Lecturer in Economics at Bir-
mingham University 1912-14; Lecturer
in History and Economics in Uni-
versity of Tasmania 1914-17; Lecturer in
Economics and Director of I utorial
Classes Adelaide University since 1917,
President of Federal Council of Work-
ers’ Educational Associations of Austra-
lia 1920, and President of Co-operative
Union of S.A. 1920. Author of “History
of Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted In-
dustries” (Oxford 1920), and of “Modern
Economic History, with Special Refer-
ence to Australia” (Adelaide 1921). M.
1914, E. I. Houghton, Cheltenham. Re-
creations—Tennis, golf, lecturing, author
of community singing idea in Australia.
Address—The University, Adelaide, S.A.
HENDERSON, George Cockburn,
M. (South Australia); b. Hamilton,
N. 1 May .1870; s. of Richard and
Anne Henderson of Newcastle, England.
For seven years a teacher under the De-
partment of Public Insti uction in
N.S.W., and winning a scholarship en-
tered Sydney University where he com-
pleted his course by taking a further
scholarship (8.A., Gold Medal in I 1 1 i 1o•
sophv, Eraser Scholarship in History,
and James King of Trrawang Travelling
Scholarship); proceeded to Balliol Col-
lege Oxford, 1894, and obtained Braken-
burv Scholarship in History and his
M.A. degree; Lecturer under Otcford
University Extension Delegacy, and
after one year’s service was raised to
the rank of Eirst-class Lecturer; Acting
Professor of History and Philosophy in
Sydney University 1899-1900, returned to
England in 1901 and was ofifered the po-
sition of Staff Lecturer under Oxford
Delegacy, but accepted the Chair of His-
tory in Adelaide University instead; I ro-
fessor of Modern History and English
Language and Literature in University
of Adelaide since June 1902. Author of
“The Life of Sir George Grey’’ (London
1907). Address —The University, Ade-
laide, S.A.
HENLEY, Lieutenant-Colonel Frank
Le Leu, D.5.0., 0.8. E. (South Austra-
lia); b. Dandenong, Victoria, 7 Dec.
1888; s. of James Robert Henley; ed.
Pulteney Street School, Adelaide. Sec-
retary of W. C. Harrison and Co. Ltd.,
Adelaide. Served with A.l.F.—Left
Australia Oct. 1914 with rank of Lieu-
tenant, promoted Captain in Egypt,
Major on Gallipoli, Lieutenant-Colonel
in France (mentioned in despatches five
times); D.S.O. Jan. 1917; 0.8. E. Jan.
1919; discharged on cessation of hostili-
ties Mar. 1919. M. Elizabeth Elder Wis-
dom. Recreations —Rowing, cricket,
football. Address—Ralph St., Large,
S.A.
HEYSEN, Hans (South Australia),
landscape painter, noted for his water-
colours; b. Hamburg, Germany, 1876, ar-
rived in S.A. at the age of seven with
his parents. Started art studies at Ade-
laide under late H. P. Gill, spent four
years in Europe, first under Jean Paul
Laurens, Benjamin Constant, and Bon-
not in Paris, and afterwards in the art
schools of Italy; returned to Australia in
1903; thrice winner of Wynne prize at
Sydney, and is represented in our lead-
ing galleries; he interprets the bushlland
through the medium of a highly sensi-
tive, poetic and ideal temperament; in-
comparable painter of the gum trees.
Principal gallery pictures—Melbourne;
“Sunshine and Shadow” and “Lord of
the Bush,” and water-colour “Midsum-
mer Morning”; Sydney Gallery: “Haul-
ing Timber,” “The Coming Home,” and
water-colour “Summer”; Adelaide Gal-
lery: “A Pastoral,” “Mystic Morn," and
two monotypes; Perth Gallery: “Passing
Showers” (oil); and Hobart Gallery:
Landscape in water-colour. Sec “Art ol
Hans Heysen” (1920). Address—The
Cedars, Ambleside, S.A.
HODGE, Charles Reynolds (South
Australia); b. Geelong, Victoria. 1857;
e.s. of late Rev. Charles Hodge, Congre-
gational minister. Appointed Registrar’s
Clerk at Adelaide University Aug. 1884,
and has been Registrar of the Univer-
sity since Feb. 1892; took an active part
in literary societies for many years.
Author of “That Codicil” (novel), and
numerous short stories. Address— The
University, Adelaide, S.A.
HOLDEN, Henry J. (South Austra-
lia); b. in S.A. 1852. Head of Holden
and Frost Ltd. and of Holden’s Motor
Body Builders Ltd., Adelaide; prominent
for many years in municipal govern-
ment, for some years Mayor of Ken-
sington and Norwood, and prominent
layman of the Baptist C hurch. Address
—Osmond Terrace, Norwood, S.A,


HOWCHIN, Walter. F.G.S. (South
Australia): b. Norwich, England, 12 Jan
184;>; s. of Rev. Richard Howchin; ed.
Ihe Academy, King’s Lynn. Fellow of
Geological Society London 1878; Fellow
of Royal Society of S.A. 1883, member
of the Council from 1884, President in
1895 and 1896, Editor of the Transac-
tions and Proceedings (with two inter-
vals) from 1884; Governor of the Public
I ibrary, Museum and Art Gallery 1901;
Chairman of the Aluseum Committee
from Feb. 1908; local Secretary of the
Australasian Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science from 1904; Secre-
tary of the Adelaide Children’s Hospital
1886-1901- Lecturer on Mineralogy at the
School of Mines. Adelaide. 1899 to 1904.
and on Geology at Gawler School of
Mines; Lecturer in Geology and Palae-
ontology in the University of Adelaide
from Jan. 1902, and Honorary Professor
from 1918 to Dec. 1920. when he resigned
and was permitted to retain the title of
Honorary Professor. Awarded Clarke
Memorial Medal “for Researches in
Natural Science” (Royal Society of
N.S.W.) 1907, the Ferdinand von Mueller
Medal “for Researches in Natima l
Science” (Australasian Association fo’-
the Advancement of Science) 1913 and
Moiety of the "Lyell Geological Fund”
(Geological Society of London) 1914 •
Author of more than fifty papers on ;
nalaeontology and geology including
“The Geology of the Mount Loft’--
Ranges,” “Glacial Beds of Cambrian Age
in the Mount Loftv and Flinders
Ganges,” “Permo-Carboniferous Glacia-
tion of the Inman Valiev,” “Cape lervis
Peninsula,” “Kangaroo Island,” “Yorke
Peninsula,” “The Finniss Valiev.” etc
“Evolution of the Phvsiographical Fea
tures of South Australia.” “The Carbon -
iferous Foraminifera of the North o r
England,” “The Fossil Foraminifera of
Australia of Various Ages.” etc., also a
“Geographv of South Australia and the ;
Northern Territory” (1909 new edition
1917) Q nd “The Geology of South Aus-
tralia” fl9iB). Address—The University.
Adelaide, S.A.
HUDD. Cantain HerbeU Svdnev. M C
fSouth Australia): b. Adelaide. 25 Feb
1881: s. of William Hudd; ed. Grote j
Street Public School. M.P. for Torrens !
1912-15. and for Alexandra siince June
1920 (Liberal). Enlisted in A.I.F. Sept.
1915, embarked with 43rd Battalion 9
June 1916. appointed to commissioned
rank Aug. 1916, promoted Captain Jan.
1918, served continuously with 43rd Bat-
talion in France until the Armistice;
M.C, for services on he Somme June
1918. M. in London, Mabel Law Smith,
d. of late Richard Smith of Woodlands,
Glenelg. Recreations—Tennis and golf.
Address —Glenelg, S.A.
i INWOOD, Sergeant Reginald ftoy,
V.C. (South Australia); b Adelaide
1890; s. of E. and M. A. Tnwood, Rail-
way Town, Broken Hill. 24 when en-
listed with 10th Battalion A.T.F.; award-
ed Victoria Cross during operations, at
Polygon Wood, Belgium, 19-22 Sept.
1917, when he took a machine gun post,
killed nine of the enemy and brought
the machine gun with him. M. 1918,
widow of G. H. Collins, late 27th Bat-
talion.
ISBISTER, William James, K.C.,
M.B.E. (South Australia): b. North
Adelaide, 7 July 1866; s. of late William
Tsbister; ed. St. Peter’s Collegiate
School, and the University of Adelaide
(LL.B. 1887. first class and Stow Prize).
Called to S.A. Bar 1888, and English Bar
1893; holder of an Inner Temple Com-
mon Law Scholarship 1891; awarded the
first Common Law Prize of the Coun-
cil of Legal Education 1892; practised in
W.A., and since 1901 in S.A.; K.C. 1916;
member of the Council of the University
of Adelaide- M.B.E. 1918 for Red Cross
service in Epwdl. Address—l 6 Pirie St.,
Adelaide, S.A.
JACOBS, Samuel Joshua (South Aus-
tralia), merchant; b. Adelaide, 28 Mar.
• 1853; s. of late Charles Jacobs, who
founded the business of Charles Jacobs
and Sons; ed. Adelaide Educational In-
stitution, Geelong College, and Mel-
bourne University. Called to Victorian
and S.A, Bars 1876. and after practising
his profession fol eight years entered the
firm of Charles Jacobs and Sons, with
whom he is still Connected; President of
the Adelaide Chamber of Commerce
1901-3. and of the General Council of
Chambers of the Commonwealth 1903-4-
Chairman of Directors of the S.A. Brew
ing Co., and of the Castle Salt Co., Pre-
sident of the S.A. Rowling Association,
and a member of the Committee of the
S.A. Jockey Club. M. Caroline, d. of
Louis Ellis, formerly Sheriff of Central
Bailiwick, Victoria. Address Currie
St., Adelaide, S.A.
JEFFRIES, Lieutenant-Colonel Lewis
Wibmer, D.5.0., 0.8. E. (South Austra-
lia); b. Derby, England, 1884; s. of Rev,
William Jeffries, Methodist Minister of
Adelaide, formerly of England and
Queensland; ed. Prince Alfred College,
and Adelaide University (M.8., 8.5.)!
Enlisted with A.T.F. 1914, served in
Egypt, on Gallipoli (wounded) and in
France, where he won the D.S.O. 1917,
and was placed on the staff of A.I.F.
1918; 0.8. E. 1919. M. 1917, Shirley
Frances, cl. of C. W. Singleton; his sis-
ter E. W. Jeffries, R.R.C, Ist class, en-
listed in 1914, nursed in Egypt, on hos-
pital ship, in England, and in France,
Address—Goodwood Rd., Unley, S.A,


JOHNSTON, Walter Lindsay ’(South
Australia): b. Kadina 15 Sept. 1859. En-
tered Government service Nov. 1884;
Government Statist since 1 July 1916.
Address—Government Statist’s Office
Adelaide, S.A.
JOSE, Canon George Herbert (South
Australia); b. Clifton, Bristol, England,
15 Dec. 1868; s. of late Wilberforce Jose;
ed. Clifton College, Monkton Combe
School, and Worcester College, Oxford
(Davis Chinese Scholar of University,
B. 1903, 2nd class Theological Scholar,
M.A. 1906), ad eund. M.A. Adelaide 1906.
Arrived in Australia 1888 surveying;
went to China in 1891 as lav missionary,
ordained by Bishop of Mid-China 1893:
C. Missionary at Taichow 1893-9;
Priest in charge St. Cyprian’s, North
Adelaide with Enfield, 1903-5; Rector of
All Souls, St. Peters, 1905-6, and of
Christ Church, North Adelaide, since
1907; Hon. Chaplain to Bishop of Ade-
laide 1910-18. Examining Chaplain 1906-
Canon of St. Peter’s Cathedral, and
member of Dean and Chapter 1918;
Chaplain (4th class) A.M.F. 1915. De-
puty Senior Chaplain 1916; Hon. Organ-
izing Director of Church of England
Australian Fund for Soldiers Overseas
1917; Chairman of 10th and 50th Bat-
talions Trench Comforts Fund 1915-19;
Past Grand Chaplain of Lodge of Free-
masons, S.A. M. 1890, Clara Ellen, d.
of late T, J. Sturt. M.D. (T.ond.).
F.R C.S.- sons served in European War
—Surgeon Major Jvan Bede lose, M.8..
BS (Adel.), 14th Field Ambulance,
M.C. ■ Li eutenant Wilfrid Oswald Jose.
AnP'as Engineering Exhibitioner 1913,
10th and 50th Battalions (killed in ac-
tion at Noreuil 2 Apr. 1917); Private Gil-
bert Edgar Jose enlisted but did not
leave Australia. Recreations —Gardening
and motor cycling. Address—Christ
Church Rectory, Palmer Place, North
Adelaide, S.A.
KIRKPATRICK, Hon. Andrew Alex-
ander, M.L.C. (South Australia): b
London 4 Jan. 1848. JTis mother accom-
panied Florence Nightingale to the Cri-
mea: arrived in S.A. 1861. spent several
years at the printing trade, was Chair-
man of United Labour Partv the Trades
and Labour Council and Eight Hours
Celebration Union: M.L.C. for Southern
District 1891-7, and for Central District
-1900-9; Chief Secretary 1905-9; Agent-
General in London from 27 Mar, 1909
to 27 Mar. 1914; M.P. for Newcastle
1915-18- M.L.C. for Central (No. 1)l Dis-
trict since 1918. M. 1878, Catherine Maria
Cooper, Address—Parliament House,
Adelaide, S.A.
T AFFER Hon. George Richards
("South Australia), M.P. for Alexandra,
engaged in the fruit-growing industry,
sometime Chairman of Committees,
Commissioner of Crown Lands and Im-
migration and Minister of Repatriation
since 8 Apr. 1920. Address—Parliament
House, Adelaide, S.A.
LENDON, Alfred Austin, M.D. (South
Australia); b. Maidstone, Kent, 23 Sept.
1856; s. of late Edwin Lendon; ed. Maid-
stone Grammar School, King’s College
School, London, and University College
London; M.D. Lond., M.R.C.S. Fne.,
1..5.A. London. Arrived in Australia
1883; Lecturer in Forensic Medicine in
Adelaide University 1887-1901, and some
years member of the Council, Lecturer
on Obstetrics and Diseases of Infancy
in the University since 1901; Consulting
Surgeon and Vice-President of Adelaide
Children’s Hospital, formerly Hon. Phy-
sician of Adelaide Hospital, Consulting
Obstetrician to Queen’s Home; Presi-
dent of District Trained Nursing Society
of S.A. since 1898: President of S.A.
Branch of British Medical Asssociation
1 896-1905, and of Section of Medicine at
Intercolonial Medical Congress Dunedin
I 1896. Published “Clinical Lectures on
Hvdatid Disease of the Lungs” (19021
1 and “Nodal Fever” (1905) M. 1889,
T.ucv Tsobel, 0.8. F. (1920). d. of Henrv
Rvmill, of Adelaide. Address—North
Terrace, Adelaide, S.A.
LEWIS, Essington (South Australia):
b Burra, South Australia, 12 Jan. 1881,
s of Hon. John Lewis, M.L.C.; ed. Bur-
ra Public School, St. Peter’s College,
School of Mines, and Adelaide Univer-
sitv; received Diploma of of
School of Mines, Adelaide, in Mining
1905. After completing his mining
course, he went for experience to Bro-
ken Hill and to Mount Lyell, and was
on the staff of the Broken Hill Proprie-
tary Co. at Broken Hill, Port Pirie, and
Melbourne; joined the service of the
Broken Hill Proprietary Co, about 16
years ago, and in Feb, 1921 succeeded
G D. Delprat as General Manager of the
Company. In sport he represented his
College in intercollegiate cricket and
football and athletic sports, and subse-
quently was a representative of South
Australia in interstate football: played
polo and for several years was Northern
tennis champion. M. 1910. Gladys, d. of
late Tames Cowan. M.P. Address—Rox-
burgh, Glenferrie Rd., Malvern, Vic.
LINDSAY, David, F.R.G.S. (South
Australia), explorer; b. Goolwa, S.A., 20
June 1856; s. of John Scott Lindsay, mas-
ter mariner of Dundee. Tn the S.A.
Government service as surveyor 1873-82;
explored Arnheim’s T>and, N.T., for the
Government in 1883; explored and pros-
pected in Central Australia and claimed
to have discovered the first pavable mica
in Australia; J.eader of the Elder Ex-
ploration and Scientific Expedition in
1891.


LIVINGTON, John (South Austra-
lia); b. Mount Gambicr, 24 Mar. 1856; s.
of late John Livingston, a pioneer squat-
ter. Elected M.P. for Victoria District
Apr. 1899, and sat for Victoria and Al-
bert May 1902 to Nov. 1906, member of
House of Representatives for Barker
since 1906; interested in pastoral pur-
suits and was among the first to send
stock from S.A. to the London market.
M. 1885, d. of late William Paltridgc,
formerly M.P. for District of Victoria.
Address—Mount Gambier, S.A.
LUCAS, Hon. Sir Edward (South
Australia); b. Galonetra, Co. Cavan,
Ireland, 14 Feb. 1857; s. of Adams Lu-
cas, and nephew of Leonard Lucas,
M.D., R.N., Deputy Inspector General
of Hospitals and Fleets. Came to Aus-
tralia Nov. 1878 and was for many years
in business at Gawler, of which Town
he was Mayor for two years (1894-5),
and M.L.C. for North Eastern (after-
wards Midland) District 1905-18; Agent-
General for S.A. since 1918, his term be-
ing extended in 1921; the prestige of
South Australia and its advancement in
London have been in excellent keeping
during his occupancy of the office, Sir
Edward bringing to the position a fine
business equipment and the advantage of
long and useful Parliamentary service;
Knt.Bach. 1 Jan, 1921. M. Ist, 1885, F.
L. (d. 1887), d. of late Thomas Johnson,
North Adelaide; 2nd, 1890, Mabel, d. of
John Brock, Rcdbanks, Tanunda. Ad-
dress—Australia House, Strand, London,
W.C. 2.
McBRIDE, J. M. (South Australia),
pastoralist; b.'Newry, Ireland, 1831. Was
on Victorian goldfields in 1852, came to
S.A. in 1856; after contract work on sta-
tions in the Burra district engaged in
pastoral pursuits in 1859 and was very
successful, acquiring a number of pro-
perties; was largely interested in Bro-
ken Hill and Western Australian mining
in their early years; a generous contri-
butor to charities and to War funds.
Address—Burra, S.A.
McCOY, William Taylor, B.A. (South
Australia); b. Sydney, 13 Oct. 1866; ed.
Sydney Ufiivcrsity (8.A.). Received his
professional training as a teacher at
Sydney Training College, and served as
a pupil teacher of all grades from teacher
to headmaster. Inspector of Schools
N.S.W. 1904-9; Director of Education in
Tasmania 1 Jan. 1910 to 1919, when he
was appointed Director of Education in
S.A. Address—Education Department,
Flinders St., Adelaide, S.A.
McGREGOR, James Wigham (South
Australia), wool merchant; b. Hawick,
Scotland, 31 Aug. 1861; s. of Robert Mc-
Gregor; ed. Peebles. Wool merchant
and manufacturer of Adelaide, Freman-
tle, Sydney and Brisbane; part owner of
Mellon and Tarella pastoral properties;
President of Chamber of Manufactures
since Oct. 1920 (previously Vice-Presi-
'lent from 1912); member of Council of
Adelaide Chamber of Commerce, and of
Executive of S.A. Soldiers’ Fund, and
Chairman of Citizens’ Final Appeal for
Cheer Up Fund. M. 1884, Mary Wad-
dell; four sons ed. at Prince Alfred Col-
lege now in business with their father;
sons served in European War—Alan W.
McGregor, Trooper King Edward’s
Horse; and Harold W. McGregor, flight
cadet. Recreations—Golf and bowls.
Address—Neidpath, Strangways Terrace,
North Adelaide, S.A.
McGUIRE, James (South Australia);
b. North Adelaide, Id July 1850; s. of
John McGuire. Appointed station mas-
ter at Port Pirie 1870, Traffic and Loco-
motive Superintendent on South-Eastern
Division Aug. 1888, Traffic Superinten-
dent of Western Division Aug. 1889,
Traffic Superintendent of Northern Di-
vision June 1895, Superintendent of Sta-
tion Service July 1910 with charge of the
whole of the broad gauge lines, Acting
General Traffic Manager July 1915, Act-
ing Railways Commissioner July 1910,
and Railways Commissioner since 1 July
1917. M. I*BB2, Mary O’Sullivan; 8 sons
and 2 daughters; sons served in Euro-
pean War—Private F. X. R. McGuire,
10th Battalion A.I.F. at Gallipoli landing
25 Apr. 1915 (died of wounds 29 Apr.
1915); Sergeant S. G. McGuire, 12th
Battalion at Gallipoli landing (wounded
at Lone Pine), served on the Somme
(killed at Pozieres 21 Aug. 1910); Pri-
vate E. J. McGuire left Australia with
original 27di Battalion and returned
home in May 1919 after four years’ ac-
tive service; Private J. E. McGuire, 4th
Field Ambulance, saw service on Galh-
poli and in France (died of wounds at
the 41st Casualty Clearing Station 20
Aug. 1918). Address—-Railway Commis-
sioner’s Office, Victoria Square, Ade-
laide, S.A.
MARTEN, Robert Humphrey, M.D.
(South Australia); b. Penn, Stafford-
shire, England, 3 Aug. 1800; s. of late
Henry Marten, C.E., of Great George
St,, Westminster, and the Birches Cod-
sail, Staffordshire; ed. Mill Hill School,
University College and Hospital, Lon-
don, and Gonville and Cains College
Cambridge (M.D., 8.5.), M.R.C.S. Eng.]
L.R.C.P. Loud., Medallist in University
College London in Surgery, Obstetrics
and Forensic Medicine, House .Surgeon
to University College Hospital, London;
Resident Medical Officer of Adden-
hooke’s Hospital, Cambridge; and House
Surgeon to Staffordshire General Hospi-
tal. Arrived in S.A. in 1888, was some-
time on the surgical staff of Adelaide
Hospital, and is Medical Officer to the
Queen’s Home, Adelaide. Author of
paper on “Some of the Effects of Migra-
tion from the Northern to the Southern
Hemisphere,” read before the Anthropo-
logical Society of Cambridge, and of nu-
merous medical and surgical papers in


various medical publications. Fellow of
the Royal Anthropological Society of
Great Britain and Ireland, and Fellow
of the Royal Society of Medicine, Lon-
don. M. A. F., d. of the late T. F.
Monteith of Adelaide. Address—l 2
North Terrace, Adelaide, S.A.
MARTIN, George Gozzard, 1.5.0.
(South Australia); b. Walkerville, Ade-
laide, 18.15; s. of Edwin Martin; ed. St.
Peter’s College, Adelaide. Entered the
Audit Office Mar. 1873, served in Ma-
rine Board, Chief Secretary’s, Lands Ti-
tles, and Crown Law Departments; Sec-
retary to the Attorney-General since
1905; 1.5.0. June 1921. Address—De-
partment of Attorney-General, Adelaide,
S.A.
MAWSON, Professor Sir Douglas,
Knt., D.Sc., 8.E., 0.8. E. (South Aus-
tralia); b. Bradford, Yorkshire, 1882.
Entered Sydney University at 16; gradu-
ated Bachelor of Mining Engineering at
19, and B.Sc. in 1904 following upon
scientific explorations in the New Heb-
rides Islands; appointed in 1905 Lecturer
in Mineralogy and Petrology at Adelaide
University where he obtained his D.Sc.
degree in 1909 for a thesis on the Geo-
logy of the Barrier Ranges. Accom-
panied Sir Ernest Shackleton’s Expedi-
tion to the Antarctic in 1907, and was
one of the party to reach the summit of
Ml. Erebus and to sledge to the South
Magnetic Pole; awarded the Roy. Geog.
Society’s Antarctic Medal 1909, and the
King’s Polar Medal; organised and led
the Australian Antarctic Expedition of
1911-14; Knt. Bach. June 1914, and a
second bar to the King’s Polar Medal
awarded the Founder’s Gold Medal of
the Royal Geographical Society and the
Gold Medals of the American Geog. Soc.
and the Chicago Geog. Soc. 1915; Cap-
tain Embarkation Staff Officer in Britain
1916; Temp. Hon. Major Ministry of
Munitions, Allies Section, 1918-19; re-
sumed work at Adelaide University 1919,
and appointed a member of the Austra-
lian National Research Council; 0.8. E.
and Order of Ss. Maurice and Lazarus
(of Italy) 1920; appointed as the first
occupant of the Chair of Geology and
Mineralogy at the Adelaide University,
created 1 Jan. 1921. Author of various
scientific publications and “The Home
of the Blizzard,” 2 vols. (London 1915).
M. 1914, Paquita, d. of G. D. Delprat,
C.B.E. Address—The University, Ade-
laide, S.A.
MELROSE, Robert Thomson (South
Australia), pastoralist; b. 21 Apr. 1862;
s. of George Melrose; ed. Prince Alfred
College, Adelaide. Part owner of Rose-
bank Estate; ex-President of Royal
Agricultural Society of S.A., and Pre-
sident of the Pastoralists’ Association of
S.A.; a Governor of the National Park,
and of Adelaide Botanic Gardens. Ad.
( l ress _Rosebank, Mount Pleasant, S.A.
MITCHELL, Samuel James (South
Australia); b. Mount Barker, S.A., 11
May, 1852; s. of John Mitchell; ed. Mit-
on’s School and Adelaide University
(LL.B, 1890). Called to Bar 1890; M.P.
for Northern Territory 1901-10, Attor-
ney-General June-Dee. 1909, Govern-
ment Resident and Judge of Northern
Territory under State of S.A. 29 Jan.
1910, Administrator and Judge of the
Supreme Court of Northern Territory
Jan, 1911 under the Commonwealth; then
Special Magistrate at Port Pirie, after-
wards Police Magistrate at Adelaide;
Commissioner of Insolvency since 7 Feb.
1918. M. Eliza, born in India, d. of John
Gardener, formerly of E.I. Service; one
of his sons —Harold Flinders Mitchell,
barrister, 12th Field Ambulance, Lieu-
tenant 45th Battalion A.I.F. (killed in
action in France 5 Apr. 1918). Recrea-
tions—Literature and music. Address—
Court of Insolvency, Adelaide, S.A.
MITCHELL, William, M.A., D.Sc.
(South Australia); b. Inveravon, Banff-
shire, Scotland, 27 Mar. 1861; s. of Peter
Mitchell, farmer; ed. Elgin, and Edin-
burgh University (M.A. and D.Sc. in
Philosophy). Sometime Lecturer on
Ethics at Edinburgh University, and on
Education, University College, London,
and Examiner in Philosophy Edinburgh
University, and Theory, of Education,
Cambridge University; Hughes Professor
of Philosophy and Economics in Ade-
laide University since 1894; is also Vice-
Chancellor. Author of “The Structure
and Growth of the Mind” (Macmillan
1907). M. Marjory Erlistoun, d. of late
R. Barr Smith (wife deceased). Address
—The University, Adelaide, S.A.
MONCRIEFF, Alexander Bain,
C.M.G., C.E., M.I.C.E. (South Austra-
lia); b. Dublin, 1845. Railways Commis-
sioner for many years, formerly En-
gineer-in-Chief; C.M.G. 1909. Address—
Alexandra Avenue, Rose Park, Adelaide,
S.
MOORE, Henry Percival (South Aus-
tralia); b. Adelaide, 1860; s. of late
Robert Waters Moore, M.R.C.S., F.L.S.;
ed. St. Peter’s College, Adelaide. En-
gaged in banking service extending over
20 years, Manager of the South Austra-
lian Company, Adelaide, since 1 Feb.
1901, has been on the Board of Gover-
nors of St. Peter’s College, member of
the Committee of St. Peter’s Old Col-
legians’ Association since 1902, and is on
the Council of the S.A, Branch of the
Royal Geographical Society, and Hon.
Treasurer of S.A. Branch of the Navy
League. M. 1885, Eleanor, e.d. of late
William Harper Formby; sons served
with A.I.F. —Captain H. F. Moore,
M.8.E.; and Captain B. F. Moore,
A.A.M.C. Address—Buxton St., North
Adelaide, S.A.


MORPHETT, John Cummins (South
Australia); b. Cummins, Morphettville,
near Glenelg, S.A., 16 Sept. 1844; s. of
late Sir John Morphett (first Speaker
and afterwards President of the Legis-
lative Council of S.A., and after whom
Morphettville was named); ed. St. Pe-
ter’s College, Adelaide, and Oxford. En-
tered the Public Service Apr. 1873; Clerk
of House of Assembly 1901-18; Clerk of
the Legislative Council and Clerk of the
Parliaments 1918-30; son —Arthur Hurtle
Morphett (b. 1877), Lance-Corporal A.
Co. 32nd Battalion A.I.F. (killed in ac-
tion Fleurbaix, France, 20 July 1916).
Address —Cummins, Morphettville, S.A.
MORRIS, Bedlington Howel (South
Australia); b. North Wales, 32 Apr. 1868;
graduated M.B. Durham University with
first-class honours in 1893, won Arm-
strong Scholarship at Newcastle-on-
Tyne where he was sometime Medical
Officer at the Royal Infirmary, subse-
quently Resident Medical Officer of Dur-
ham County Hospital, and also of De-
bighshirc and Flintshire Infirmary and
Dispensary; studied mental diseases at
Gosforth and Morpeth Lunatic Asylums;
was Transport Medical Officer with the
Netherlands India Service to Java and
Malay States; entered S.A. Public Ser-
vice in 1896, and has been Inspector-
General of Hospitals since Aug. 1914.
Served on H.M.A.S. “Protector” in the
China War, Fleet Surgeon in the Aus-
tralian Navy. Address—Pembroke St.,
College Park, Adelaide, S.A.
MUIRHEAD, John Robb, D.5.0.,
M.8., 8.5.; b. 1883. Temp. Lieut.-Col.
A.A.M.C. European War, sth Field Am-
bulance. Address—Verco Bldgs., North
Terrace, Adelaide, S.A.
MURRAY, Hon. Sir George John
Robert, K.C.M.G. (South Australia); b.
Murray Park, Magill, S.A., 27 Sept. 1863;
s. of late A. B. Murray, a pioneer South
Australian pastoralist; ed. at late J. L.
Young's School Parkside, the High
School Edinburgh, St. Peter's Collegiate
School Adelaide (Prankerd, Westmin-
ster, Wyatt, and Farrell Scholarships),
and University of Adelaide (University,
John Howard Clark, and South Austra-
lian Scholarships, B.A. 1883). The
South Australian Scholarship took him
to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he
was bracketed senior in the Law Tripos
in 1887, and was admitted to the B.A.
and LL.B. degrees; held an Inns of
Court Studentship in 1886, and called to
the Bar of the Inner Temple in 1888, to
South Australian Bar in 1889, and to
the New South Wales and Victorian
Bars in 1890; during 1889-1890 was As-
sociate to Sir Samuel Way, Chief Jus-
tice; apppointed K.C. in 1906 (being the
first graduate of the Adelaide University
to receive this distinction), and pioceed-
ed to the LL.M. degree at Cambridge in
1909; appointed a Judge of the Supreme
Court May 1912, and Chief Justice of
South Australia 20 Jan. 1916, in succes-
sion to the late Rt. Hon. Sir Samuel
Way, Bart., and Lieutenant-Governor 14
Apr. 1916; Vice-Chancellor of Adelaide
University 1915, and Chancellor 35 Feb.
1916; has been since 1891 a member of
the Council of Adelaide University
where in 1907, in memory of the family
of his mother, he founded the Tinline
Scholarship for historical research;
K.C.M.G. 1 Jan. 1917. Address—Murray
Park, Magill, S.A.
NAYLOR, Henry Darnley (South
Australia); b. Scarborough, England, 21
Feb. 1872; s. of John Naylor, Mus. Doc.
Oxon. (Organist of York Minister); ed.
St. Peter’s School York, and Trinity
College Cambridge (first-class in Classi-
cal Tripos in 1894, Walker Prize in
Classics, M.A.). Lecturer and Tutor at
Ormond College University of Mel-
bourne 1895-1906; Vice-Master of
Ormond 1903-6; Professor of Classics at
Adelaide University since Feb. 1907;
Chairman of the Council of Governors
of the Scotch College, Adelaide; has done
considerable original work in classical
literature; contributor to the Classical
Review and Classical Quarterly, and' to
Winer’s New Test Grammar. Author of
“English and Latin Idiom" (Cambridge
University Press, 1909), “Short Parallel
Syntax” (1910), and “More English ami
Latin Idiom” (Cambridge University
Press, 1915). M. Ist, 1899, Jessie Cairns,
e.d. of late John C. Lloyd of Melbourne,
and g.d. of late Rev. Dr. Adam Cairns
(d. 1913); 2nd, 1916, Ethel Richman, e.d.
of late A. M. Wilson. Recreations—
Cricket, football, bridge. Address—The
University, Adelaide, S.A.
NEWLAND, John, C.B.E. (South
Australia); b. near Cawdor, Nairnshire,
Scotland, 4 Aug. 1864; ed. Croy Public
School; arrived in S.A. 1883. Employed
on State railways until 1906; M.P. for
Burra Burra (first Labour representa-
tive) 1906-12; Chairman of Committees
1911; Commonwealth Senator since May
1913; Member (Vice-Chairman) of
Standing Committee on Public Works
from 1917; did splendid work as Chair-
man of the S.A. State Recruiting Com-
mittee during the W 7 ar; C.B.E. Oct. 1920.
Chairman and Leader of Sectional Com-
mittee of Commonwealth Public Works',
who travelled nearly 6,000 miles over
Northern Territory enquiring into route,
etc., for proposed North-South Railway,
upon which they reported favourably
1921-32. Sons —Captain Allan J. New-
land, M.C., from commencement of
War, joined as Private, promoted Cap-
tain on Field, awarded Military Cross
for distinguished services; Donald James
Newland, 2nd Air Mechanic, joined on
attaining military age transferred
to Flying Corps, demobilised on signing
of Armistice. Address —70 The Mall,
Glenelg, S.A.


NEWLAND, Lieutenant-Colonel Hen-
ry Simpson, C.B.E. (South Australia);
b. Kensington, S.A., 24 Nov. 1873; c.s.
of Simpson Newland (q.v.); ed. St. Pe-
ter’s College and Adelaide University
(M.8., 8.5., Everard Scholar, M.S.), and
London Hospital, F.R.C.S., England. A
leading Surgeon of Adelaide when the
European War broke out, served
throughout the campaign in Egypt, Lem-
nos, Gallipoli and France; a wonder
worker in face making at Sidcup; D.S.O.
fan. 1018. Senior Surgeon of Children’s
Hospital, Adelaide, and Surgeon of Ade-
laide Hospital; President of S.A. branch
of British Medical Association. M. 1910,
Ellen Mary Lindon. Address—Strang-
ways Terrace, North Adelaide, S.A.
NEWLAND, Simpson (South Aus-
tralia); b. Hanley, Staffordshire, Eng-
land, 2 Nov. 1835; s. of late Rev. Ridg-
way William Newland (Congregational
minister who brought from England a
party of immigrants and settled at En-
counter Bay in 1839), and Martha New-
land (nee Keling); arrived at Holdfast
Bay from England, 7 June 1839. M.P.
for Encounter Bay 1881-7; Treasurer
Tune 1885 to Tune 1880, President of the
S.A. Branch of the Royal Geographical
Society 1895 to 1900, and since 1920:
President of the River Murray League
1904, and of the Zoological and
tisation Society of S.A since 1907, am
Chairman of Wyatt Benevolent Fund
Estate; has vigorously advocated the de-
velopment of the Northern Territory
and the proper utilisation of the waters
of the River Murray. Author of “Pav-
ing the Way” (five editions), “Blood
Tracks in the Bush,” “A Band of Pio-
neers,” of a publication on “The Land
Grant Railway Across Central Austra-
lia,” numerous short stories, and politi-
cal pamphlets. A pioneer who was for
many vears engaged in pastoral pursuits
on the Darling. C.M.G. 1922. M. 1872.
fane Isabella Layton; sons —Lieutenant-
Colonel Henry Simpson Newland, M.S.
(Adel.), F.R.C.S. Eng. (q.v.) and Major
Victor Marra Newland (q.v.). Address
—Hill St., North Adelaide. S.A.
NORTON, Rt. Rev. John Henry.
D.D. (South Australia); b. Ballarat, 31
Dec. 1855; ed. private schools and col-
leges at Ballarat, Jesuit College, Mel-
bourne, St. Kieran’s College, Kdkenny,
Ireland, and College of the Propaganda
in Rome. Ordained Priest 1882; arrived
in the Diocese of Adelaide 1883; ap-
pointed the first Resident Parish Priest
of Peterborough in 1884; Diocesan Con
suitor and Vicar-General in 1896, and
Administrator of the Diocese in 1905:
Bishop of Port Augusta since 1906. Re-
sidence-Bishop’s House. Peterborough,
OSBORN, Theodore George Bentley,
M.Sc. (South Australia); b, Clacton-on-
Sea, Essex, 2 Oct. 1887; ed. Burnle\
Grammar School, and Victoria Univer-
sity, Manchester (B.Sc. first-class
honours in Botany, and Graduate Scho-
larship 1908, M.Sc.). Sometime Lec-
turer in Economic Botany at Manchester
L T niversity, Professor of Botany in Ade-
laide University, and Consulting Gov-
ernment Botanist since 1912. M. 1912,
Edith May, e.d. of W. H. Kershaw. Ad-
dress—Palmer Place, North Adelaide,
S.A.
PARSONS (Mr. Justice) Hon. Her-
bert Angas (South Australia); b. North
Adelaide, 23 May 1872; s. of late Hon.
John Langdon Parsons, and g.g.s. ot
George Fife Angas (a founder of South
Australia); ed. Prince Alfred College
Adelaide, Agricultural College Rosewor-
thy, and Adelaide University (LL.B.).
Called to the S.A. Bar 1897, K.C. 1916;
M.P. for Torrens 1912-15, and for Mur-
rav Apr. 1918 to Jan. 1921 ; Attorney-
Genera! and Minister of Education in
Peake Government Jan. -Apr. 1915: ap-
pointed a Judge of the Supreme Court
Tan. 1921, is a Member of the Council of
the University of Adelaide; Commis-
sioner for S.A. to the Franco-British
Exhibition London 1908. M. 1900, Mary
Elsie, d. of the Hon. Sir Langdom Bony-
thon, K.C.M.G. Address—Keverel, East
Terrace, Adelaide, S.A.
PARSONS, Lieutenant-Colonel John
William, D.S.O. (South Australia); b.
Victor Harbour, 12 Oct, 1878; s. of Tho-
mas Parsons; grazier and farmer. Served
in South African War with Ist South
Australian Contingent and was with the
Contingent from the State to King Ed-
ward’s coronation. Joined A.T.F. for
European War Mar. 1915, Major 11th
Light Horse Regiment Gallipoli, Sinai,
Palestine and Syria, promoted Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Aug. 1917; D.S.O. June
1917 (despatches). M. Ethel Ann Roads.
Address —Jetty Rd., Largs Bay, S.A.
PASCOE, Hon. Thomas (South Aus-
tralia) ; b. White Hut, Clare, 1859.
M.L.C. since May 1900; Minister of
Agriculture Dec. 1909 to June 1910, Feb.
1912 to Apr. 1915, and Minister of Agri-
culture, Irrigation, and Mines since 8
Apr. 1920. Engaged in farming pursuits
for many years. Address —Parliament
House, Adelaide, S.A.
PEACOCK. Henry Furneaux (South
Australia); b. Adelaide, 25 Oct. 1850;
s. of late Wiles Peacock; ed. J. L.
Young’s Adelaide Educational Institu-
tion. Controller of Treasury Accounts
I July 1902 to 1 July 1920, when he was
appointed Under Treasurer and also
Controller of Imperial Pensions; Execu-
tive Officer to the S.A. Public Service
Superannuation Fund, and Registrar of


Inscribed Stock. M. 1879, Adelaide
Mary, d. of late William Dixon Allott,
formerly Mayor of Adelaide. Address—
Ivnightsbridge, S.A.
PHILLIPPS, William Herbert (South
Australia); b. Adelaide, 1847. Joined in
1881 the late Geo. Wills in founding the
commercial house of Geo. Wills & Co.
of which he was resident Australian
partner till 1901, when he retired from
the firm; has been twice President of
Adelaide Chamber of Commerce, and for
some years President of the Federated
Employers’ Council, in behalf of which
bodies he has performed splendid ser-
vice; is Consul for Belgium; Chairman
of Trustees of the State Savings Bank,
and member of the Board of Commer-
cial Studies at the University, and on a
large number of company directorates
and Boards of charitable institutions; an
ex-Chairman of the Congregational
Union, and was two years President of
the Adelaide Y.M.C.A. Orders confer-
red— Belgian: Chevalier of the Order of
Leopold 1906, Officer of the Order of the
Crown 1920, Medaille Civiquc de ler
Classe 1922; British: Hon. Associate of
the Grand Priory of the Order of the
Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem in
England 1922. Address Brockman’s
Building, Adelaide, S.A.
PHILLIPSON, Coleman, M.A.,
LL.D., Litt.D. (South Australia); b.
Leeds, England, 25 Apr. 1877; s. of S.
Phillipson of Leeds (formerly Professor
of Eastern Languages); ed. Central
High School Leeds, Yorkshire College
Leeds, Victoria University of Manches-
ter, University College London (M.A.,
LL.D., Litt.D.). Barrister-at-law (of the
Inner Temple, London), Quain Prize-
man (Ist) in Comparative Law at Uni-
versity College for three years in suc-
cession; practised as a barrister in Lon-
don for about twelve years, and on sev-
eral occasions appeared for the Crown
in cases involving important questions
of International Law. Went to the
Paris Peace Conference as a member of
the British Delegation in the capacity of
counsel in International Law, and for his
special work a record of the thanks and
appreciation of one of the International
Commissions was inscribed on the docu-
ments of the Peace Conference. Before
proceeding to Paris he did confidential
work of an advisory character for the
British War Cabinet, the Admiralty, the
Ministry of Shipping, and the Foreign
Office, and during the War his authority
on various matters of Internationa 1 Law
was cited by statesmen in England,
France, and the United States. Profes-
sor of Law in the University of Adelaide
since Jan. 1920. Author of “Studies in
ternational Law” (1908), “Effect of War
on Contracts, etc.” (1909), “Interna-
tional Law and Custom of Ancient
Greece and Rome” (2 vols. 1911), 4th
Edition of “Foote’s Private International
Jurisprudence” (1913), “Great Jurists of
the World” (co-author 1913), “Interna-
tional Law and the Great War” (1915),
sth Edition of “Wheaton’s International
Law” (1916), “Termination of War and
Treaties of Peace” (1916), “The, Ques-
tion of the Bosphorus and Dardanelles”
(1917) "Alsace-Lorraine” (1918), sth
Edition of Sir Frederick Smith’s
(Lord Chancellor’s) “International Law”
(1918) Bth Edition of “Taswell-Lang-
mead’s Constitutional History” (1919),
9th Edition of “Mayne’s Law of
Damages” (1920) —all these books were
issued in London —and of “Three Crimi-
nal Law Reformers”; a comparative
study in Criminal Law Reform (not yet
published), and of numerous contribu-
tions to periodicals. M. 1903, Evelyn
Helen Gottheil, d. of Mrs. Gottheil of
Somersetshire and London (a descend-
ant of John Pym). Address—The Uni-
versity, Adelaide, S.A.
PIPER, Arthur William, K.C. (South
Australia); b. Faversham, Kent, Eng-
K.C. Apr. 1911; President of S.A. Branch
land, 5 July, 1865; e.s. of Rev. Thomas
Piper. Called to S.A. Bar July 1886;
of Royal Geographical Society of Aus-
tralasia 1910-13; President of the Liberal
Union 1916-19; President of S.A. Lit-
erary Societies’ Union 1907-9; Grand
Master of the Grand Lodge of Freema-
sons of S.A. since Apr. 1919. M. 1889,
Edna Elizabeth, d. of John Counter of
Oakland Grange, Middleton, S.A.; sons
served in European War—Harold
Bayard Piper, LL.B., three and a half
years in Egypt, France, and Belgium,
A.A.S.C. and Field Artillery; Roderick
Arthur Piper enlisted 1916 on attaining
18th year, served in France with 48th
Battalion; Lewis Juno. Address—
Cowra Chambers, Grenfell St., Adelaide;
Arden, Fullarton, S.A.
POOLE (Mr. Justice) Hon. Thomas
Slaney (South Australia); b. Strathal-
byn, S.A., 1873; s. of Rev. Canon F.
Slaney Poole, M.A. (q.v.); ed. St. Peter’s
College, Adelaide University, and Trinity
College, Melbourne University (B.A,
1894, M.A. 1896, LL.B. 1897 with
honours). Called to Victorian Bar 1897;
Associate to Mr. Justice Bundey, S.A.,
1897; practised in Adelaide for many
years; K.C., 1919; raised to the Bench
as fourth Judge of the Supreme Court
Sept. 1919; sometime Chancellor of the
Diocese of Adelaide. M. 1903, Dora
Frances, 2nd d. of late Rev. Francis Wil-
liams, M.A., sometime Headmaster of
St. Peter’s College, Adelaide. Address—
Supreme Court, Adelaide, S.A.
POWELL, Colonel Henry Arthur,
C.M.G. (South Australia); b. Kadina,
S.A., 31 Jan. 1868; s. of Charles B.
Powell, Malvern, and g.s. of C. B.
Powell (who arrived in S.A. 27 July
1836); ed. Glenelg Grammar School, and


Adelaide University (M.8., Ch.B., Elder
Prizeman 1887). Surgeon of Adelaide
Hospital 1892, and Adelaide Children’s
Hospital 1893-4; engaged in general
medical practice at Angaston 1895-6, at
Kadina 1896-1913, and Adelaide from
1914. Major A.A.M.C. till proceeded on
active service Nov. 1914, 2nd in com-
mand of No. 1 Australian Stationary
Hospital till July 1915, commanding till
Sept. 1915, command of No. 3 Australian
Auxiliary Hospital, Hartford, from Oct.
1916, in England till June 1917, com-
manding No. 2 Austraban General Hos-
pital Boulogne June 1917 to Oct. 1918
(mentioned in despatches three times);
C.M.G. May 1917. M. 1897, Katie
Frances, d. of late Sidney Smith, Yalum-
ba, Angaston. Address —Brougham
Place, North Adelaide, S.A.
READE, Charles Compton (South
Australia), town planner; b. Invercar-
gill, N.Z., 4 May 1880; s. of late Law-
rence E. Reade, grand nephew of Charles
Reade, English novelist, and of Win-
wood Reade (author of “The Martyr-
dom of Man”); cd. Wellington College
and studied in London and abroad. Con-
tributed to London press; became As-
sistant Secretary and Lecturer for the
Garden Cities and Town Planning As-
sociation of Great Britain, came to Aus-
tralia in 1914 as Hon. Organizer and
Lecturer of the Australasian Town Plan-
ning Tour; Town Planner under the
S.A. Government since 1916 (official!}
appointed 1918), the first Town Planning
Department established in Australia:
organized in 1917 the first Australian
Town Planning Conference and Exhibi-
tion in Adelaide; prepared the draft of
the S.A. Town Planning and Develop-
ment Bill 1919. M. Marjorie, d. of late
W. Pratt Strcetley, Staffs., England.
Address—Department of Town Plan-
ning, Adelaide, S.A.
RENNIE, Edward Henry, D.Sc., F.I.C.
(South Australia); b. Sydney, 19 Aug.
1853; s. of E. A. Rennie, late Auditor-
General of N.S.W.; ed. Model Public
School, Fort Street, Sydney, Sydney
Grammar School and Sydney University
(B.A. 1870, M.A. 1876). Master in Syd-
ney Grammar School 1870-5, and in Bris-
bane Grammar School 1876-7, proceeded
to London in 1877 to study science, and
graduated D.Sc. at London University
1881; assistant for two years to Dr. C. R.
Alder Wright in Chemical Department
of St. Mary’s Hospital Medical School,
and taught occasionally in the Royal
College of Science, South Kensington;
on his return to Australia was connected
with the Government Analyst’s Depart
merit at Sydney; Elder Professor of
Chemistry in Adelaide University since
1885. M. Agnes Alison, d. of Dr. J. J.
Cadell of Raymond Terrace; sons —Ed-
ward James Cadell Rennie, M.E. (Mas-
ter of Engineering, Adelaide University),
is Lecturer in Engineering and Applied
Mechanics in Melbourne University;
Henry Charles Cadcll Rennie, M.R., B.A.
(Adel). Address —The University, Ade-
laide, S.A,
RICHARDS, Frederick William,
LL.D. (South Australia); b. Gawler,
S.A., 1809; s. of late Rev. W. Richards,
Bible Christian Minister; ed. Shebbear
College North Devon, and London Uni-
versity (LL.D.). Admitted a Solicitor
in England 1890, and to S.A. Bar the
same year; Chief Justice’s Associate
1901-8; Chief Clerk of Supreme Court
1903-8; Parliamentary Draftsman and
Assistant Crown Solicitor 1908-10;
Crown Solicitor and Solicitor to Rail-
ways and to Lands Titles Office since 1
Sept. 1910. M. 1899, Ida Jane, d. of late
lohn Drayton of Exeter, England. Ad-
dress—Malvern, S.A.
RILEY, Joseph Albert, 0.8. E. (South
Australia); b. Bilston, Staffordshire,
England, 13 July 1809; s. of Joseph
Riley: cd. Springfield Academy Bilston,
and Pulteney Street School Adelaide.
Secretary of Adelaide Chamber of Com-
merce, Stockowners’ Association of S.A.,
Royal Agrictultural anti Horticultural
Society of S.A., the S.A. C ricket Asso-
ciation, S.A. Vinegrowers’ Association,
Queensland Pine Co., and National In-
surance Co. of N.Z. Was Hon. Secre-
tary and Treasurer of Belgian Relief
Fund and of French Red Cross, and also
assisted with general Red t ross and
other patriotic work during the War;
0.8. E. 1918. M. 1892, Agnes Davidson
Sketheway; son William Norman
Riley, Corporal sth Division Signallers
A.T.F. 1910. Recreations —Cricket and
bowls. Address —Sunnybrac, Park Ter-
race, Wayville, S.A.
RITCHIE, Hon. George (South Aus-
tralia); b. Goolwa, S.A., 14 Dec. 1864;
s. of Captain James Ritchie; ed. Goolwa,
and Grammar School Echuca, Victoria.
Spent many years trading on the River
Murray; M.P. for Alexandra since 1902:
Commissioner of Public Works and
Minister for Water Supply Nov. 1914 to
Apr. 1915; Commissioner of Crown
Lands July-Aug. 1917; Commissioner of
Public Works and Minister of Railways
, Mav 1919-Apr. 1920; Treasurer since 8
Apr. 1920. M. 1899, Charlotte A., d. of
j William Knapman, Port Adelaide. Ad-
dress—Flinders St., Kent Town, Ade-
laide, S.A.
ROACH, Bertie S. (South Australia);
b. Pcnwortham (the South Australian
village where Horrocks the explorer
j lived), 12 Dec. 1864. Editor of “The
Children’s Hour” (popular school paper);
Inspector of Schools; Member of the
Board of Governors of the Public Lib-
rary, Art Gallery and Museum; Member
; of the Council of the Institutes’ Associa-
tion; Treasurer of the Royal Society of


S.A. An authority on Australian history.
Sons on active service—Sergeant Victor
Eyre Roach, Army Service Corps A.1.F.,
served in France 1916 till the close of
the War; Kelvin Roach, 9th Australian
Light Horse Regiment, enlisted Sept.
1914, served in Egypt, Gallipoli, and Pa-
lestine (fell at Gaza Apr. 1917). Address
—Education Department, Adelaide, S -
ROBERTS, Alfred Jabez, 0.8. E.
(South Australia); b. 7 Apr. 1863; s. of
William Henry Roberts of Norwood,
S.A.; ed. Norwood Grammar School and
Wesley College Melbourne. Accountant,
stock and share broker; ex-President of
Stock Exchange of Adelaide; Mayor of
Glenelg for five years, formerly Council-
lor of Adelaide City Corporation; is a
Director of Cowell Bros, and Co. Ltd.,
South British Insurance Co., Miller’s
Lime Ltd., Mararoa G.M. Co., Muturoo
Copper Co. ano Fiji Fibre Co. Active
in recruiting campaigns for four years;
Chairman of Citizens ’ Committee of
Y.M.C.A. War Work, and organized Red
Cross Badge drive; 0.8. E. 1918. M,
Isabel, d. of Dr. J. F. Joyce, Victoria;
sons—Sergeant, Kingsley Roberts, 3rd
Light Horse Regiment A.1.F.; Private
Clive Roberts, 3rd Light Horse Regi-
ment A.I.F. (killed in action at Rofa,
Egypt). Address—The Olives, High
St,, Glenelg, S.A.
ROBERTSON, Frederick Thomas
(South Australia); b. Adelaide, 28 May
1858. On the editorial staff of “The Ad-
vertiser,” Adelaide, since 1884, and has
been for many years Associate Editor.
Address —“The Advertiser” Office, Ade-
laide, S.A.
ROBYNS, William Arthur (South
Australia); b. Newcastle, N.S.W., 15
Tune 1876. Chorister at St. John’s
Church of England, Sydney, at 12, voice
subsequently developed to deep bass,
toured with Marie Narelle, Tone Lem-
mone and other well-known Australian
artists and was sent by the citizens of
Sydnev to Europe to complete his musi-
cal education, studied under D’Orson
and Signor Hazon (Milan), and Melba
took an interest in his career obtaining
for him the good offices of Maestro Al-
berto Raudegger; for some time with
George Edwardes’ management at
Daly’s Theatre; after some years return-
ed to Australia touring as basso to vari-
ous concert parties and has • appeared
throughout the Commonwealth in ora-
torio, classic and ballad concerts and as
vocal recitalist; now engaged in pub-
licity work. Address—South St., Hen-
ley Beach, S.A.
ROUNSEVELL, Hon. William Ben-
iamin (South Australia); b. Adelaide, 23
Sept, 1842; s. of late William Rounse-
vell, coach proprietor, originally from an
old Cornish family of Boscastle. Was
largely interested in stock for many
years, owning Moolooloo sheep station
and Cowarie cattle run, resided for a
considerable time at Corryton Park,
where lie bred stud sheep and cattle;
M.P. for Burra 1875-1890, for Port Ade-
laide 1890-3, for Burra 1899-1902, and for
Burra Burra 1902-6. Treasurer in Mor-
gan Ministry 1881, in Colton Ministry
1884-5, in Playford Government 1892,
and Downer Ministry 1892-3, and Com-
missioner of Public Works in Playford
Government 1890-2, and Solomon Minis-
try 1899, Chairman of Directors of Col-
ton, Palmer and Preston Ltd., Adelaide.
Address—Glenelg, S.A.
ROWELL, Colonel James, C.B.
(South Australia); b. Cambridge, Eng-
land, 20 Jan. 1851. Joined military
forces 1878, when he was one of the first
to become attached to Adelaide Cavalry
Regiment; in command of contingent
from S.A. to London at Queen Victoria's
Diamond Jubilee celebrations 1897. Serv-
ed in South African War 1900-1 in com-
mand of S.A. Imperial Bushmen’s Con-
tingent (despatches, C.8., Queen’s Medal
with four clasps, received full colonelcy
while on active service); in charge of
transports A.I.F. to Egypt and England
Apr. 1915-Mar. 1917, sometime A.D.C. to
the Governor-General, Acting Com-
mandant S.A. 1916. Commonwealth
Senator for S.A. since the general elec-
tions of 1917; engaged in horticultural
pursuits for many years. Sons—Charles
Frederick Rowell served in Bushmen’s
Corps, South African War; S. F. Rowell,
served Gallipoli with A.I.F. 1915; L. FT
Rowell served Gallipoli with A.I.F. 1915.
Address—Cottenham, Lockleys, S.A.
RUSSELL, Lieutenant-Colonel Her-
bert Henry Ernest, 0.8. E., M.D. (South
Australia). Principal Medical Officer in
S.A. during nearly the whole period of
the War; 0.8. E. 1920. Address—Unlev
S.A.
SANDO, Lieutenant-Colonel Leslie
Cyril, D.S.O. (South Australia); b. St.
Peters, S.A., 1888; s. of John Anthony
Sando; ed. North Adelaide Public
School, Adelaide School of Design, and
School of Mines. Served in European
War; Assistant Director of Supply and
Transport S.A. from Aug. 1914 until ap-
pointed Officer Commanding 4th Light
Horse Brigade Train A.I.F. Mar 1915.
later Officer Commanding Headquarters
Company 2nd Australian Divisional
Train; returned to France May 1916 and
appointed Officer Commanding 4th Aus-
tralian Divisional Train with rank of
Lieutenant-Colonel Sept. 1918. M. 1912,
Dorothy Kent Newman, Address—Na-
val and Military Club, Adelaide, S.A.
SCAMMELL, Luther Robert, F.C.S.
(South Australia); b. Hindmars’h SA
20 Mar. 1858; 2nd s. of late Luther
Scammell (one of the members for the
( ity of Adelaide in the first Parliament
under responsible Government); ed late


J. L. Young’s School, Adelaide, and in
1877 went to England, studied under Dr.
John Muter, Kennington, London, pass-
ed Apothecaries’ Hall Examination and
the Pharmaceutical Examination as a
chemist and druggist of England, subse-
quently obtained Fellowship of the Che-
mical Society. In conjunction with his
brother, W. J. Scammell, became in 1889
proprietor of F. H. Faulding and Co.,
wholesale druggists; interested in chemi-
cal research, and discovered the pharma-
copoeia test for estimating the eucalyptol
contents of eucalyptus oil. Address—
F. H, Faulding and Co., Adelaide, S.A.
SEARCY, Alfred (South Australia)'
b. Mount Barker, S.A., 1854; s. of late
William Searcy, Chief Inspector of Po-
lice. Was in the Northern Territory in
charge of the Customs Department
1882-96; Clerk Assistant House of As-
sembly 1896-1918; Clerk of House of As-
sembly since Mar. 1918, and Clerk of
Parliaments 1920. Author of “In Aus-
tralian Tropics” and of “By Flood and
Field.” Address—Walkerville Terrace,
Gilberton, S.A.
SEARCY, Arthur (South Australia):
b. Mount Barker, S.A., 6 Jan. 1852; s.
of late William Searcy, Chief Inspector
of Police, and Charlotte E. Roffe. En-
tered the Customs service Oct. 1873 and
served in various Departments, including
Deputy Commissioner of Taxes and
Stamps from 1891, and President of the
Marine Board, now Chairman of the
Harbours Board. Address—Trinity St.,
College Park, S.A.
SENIOR, William (South Australia):
b. Holmfirth, Yorkshire, England, 9
Feb. 1850; ed. Mount Gambier Public
School. M.P. for District of Victoria
and Albert 1904-12, Commonwealth Se-
nator for S.A. since 31 Mav 1913. Ad-
dress— Henry St., Croydon, S.A.
SHEPHERD, Colonel Arthur Ed-
mond, C.8.E., D.S.O. (South Australia):
b. Norwood, S.A., 19 Oct. 1807; s. of E
Shepherd; ed. Edinburgh, L.R.C.P. and
S. Edin. and Glasgow, first-class honours.
Consulting Surgeon Adelaide Hospital.
Served in European War—Acting
D.G.M.S. Aug.-Dee. 1915, P.M.O. S.A.
1915, C.O. 8 Australian Field Ambulance
Aug. 1915 till Sept. 1917, A.D.M.S. 2nd
Australian Division Sept. 1917 to June
1919; D.S.O. June 1918; C.B.E, June
1919. M. Emma T. A. Shepherd; sons
served in European War—Private Claude
Arthur Shepherd, 3rd Light Horse
A.1.F.; Private Reginald George Shep-
herd, 3rd Light Horse A.I.F. Address—
-4 Prescott Terrace, Rose Park, Ade-
laide, S.A.
SHOLL, Lionel Henry, C.M.G., 1.5.0.
(South Australia); b. Perth, W.A., 15
Sept. 1844; s. of William Horatio Shell,
M.R.C.S. Under-Secretary, S.A., 1890-
1916; 1.5.0. 1903; C.M.G. 1911; a Gover-
nor of the Public Library. M. 1870,
Clare Luxmoore, 2nd d. or late Dr. H.
B. Hinton, H.M. Bengal Army. Address
—Tvybank, George St., Norwood, S.A.
SIMPSON, Alfred Allen, C.M.G
(South Australia); b. Kent Town, near
Adelaide, 15 Apr. 1875; s. of late Andrew
Mueller Simpson; ed. Prince Alfred Col-
lege, Entered Adelaide City Council
1901, Mayor Adelaide 1913-15, initiated
after the outbreak of the European War
the Mayor’s Patriotic Fund, which was
converted into the South Australian Sol-
diers’ Fund, of which he remained the
President; C.M.G. 1919. M. 1910, Janet
Doris, cl. of late Captain S. G. Hubbc,
who commanded the S.A. Bushmen’s
Contingent in the South African War.
Address—Lockwood Rd., Burnside, S.A
SIMPSON, Alfred Edward (South
Australia); b. Woodville, S.A., 29 June
1868; s. of late Edward Robert Simpson;
ed. Prince Alfred College and Adelaide
University. Fellow of S.A. Institute of
Architects, served articles as architect
with D. Garlick and Son, entered Gov-
ernment service Mar. 1890, appointed
Deputy Superintendent of Public Build-
ings Nov. 1917, acting Superintendent of
Public Buildings Jan, 1920, now Archi-
tect-in-Chief. M. Frances Isabelle, d. of
late Lewes Kell of L T nley Park, S.A.;
only son—Brian Kell Simpson served
with 27th Battalion A.I.F. Address—
Napier Terrace, L T nlcy Park, S.A.
SMITH, Edwin Mitchell, 1.5.0. (South
Australia); b. Ipswich, Suffolk, England,
18 Mar. 1847; s. of late Edwin Smith; ed.
Private Schools in S.A. Joined the Sur-
vey Office at Adelaide 1862, and held the
positions of Surveyor, Draftsman, Stew-
ard of Educational Lands, Deputy Sur-
veyor-General, Chairman of Land Board,
Chairman of Advances to Settlers Board,
and Chairman of Drainage Assessment
Board; Surveyor-General 1911-17; 1.5.0
1916. M. Frances Lettice, d. of late J.
B. Porter,. Superintendent of Public
Works, S.A. Address—Verco Buildings,
North Terrace, Adelaide, S.A.
SMITH, Francis Villeneuve, K.C.
(South Australia); b. Adelaide, 27 July
1884; s. of late W. Villeneuve Smith, a
well-known Adelaide lawyer, and
j nephew of late Sir Francis Villeneuve
Smith, Chief Justice of Tasmania 1870-85;
ed. Christian Brothers’ College, Ade-
laide,’and Adelaide University (final cer-
tificate in law). Called to S.A. Bar Dec.
1906; K.C. Sept. 1919. M. 1906, May
Winifred Wickham. Recreation—Horse
racing. Address—Halsbury, High St.,
Unley Park, S.A.


SMITH, Lieutenant Sir Keith Ma.
pherson, K.B.E. (South Australia); b
Adelaide, 20 Dec. 1890; s. of Mr. and
Mrs. Andrew Smith of Gilberton, near
Adelaide, childhood spent at Mutooroo
Station of which his father is Manager;
ed. Queen’s College, North Adelaide, and
Warriston School, Scotland. Sometime
on the staff of Elder, Smith and Co..
Adelaide. Rejected in S.A. for service
with A.1.F., he proceeded to England
where he enlisted in July 1917 in the
Royal Flying Corps, and received his
commission as Lieutenant at Christ-
church, Oxford, going thence to Cram-
Hngton, and afterwards to Gosport
where he received his second star; was
engaged as flying instructor and aerial
gunnery officer (mentioned in despatches
1918). Accompanied his brother Captain
Sir Ross Smith (q.v.) on the 28 days
flight by aeroplane from England to
Australia Nov.-Dec. 1919, and was
created a Knight Commander of the
Order of the British Empire in recog-
nition of the remarkable achievevment;
returned to England in 1920. Recrea-
tions—Motoring, photography, flying.
Address—Aviemore, Stephen Terrace,
Gilberton, S.A.
SMITH, Captain Sir Ross Macpher-
son, K.B.E. (South Australia); b. Sema-
phore, S.A., 4 Dec. 1892; 2nd s. of Mr.
and Mrs. Andrew Smith of Gilberton,
father Manager of Mutooroo Station; ed.
Queen’s School, North Adelaide, and
Warriston School, Moffat, Scotland, his
parents’ native land. Gained experience
in the warehouse of G. P. Harris, Scarfe
and Co., Adelaide. Enlisted for active
service 10 Aug. 1914. left Australia with
3rd Light Horse Regiment 22 Oct. 1914,
served on Gallipoli for 4j months, inva-
lided to England, returned to Egvpt
Apr. 1916, transferred to Machine Gun
Scpiadron attached to the Light Horse
and went through several battles includ-
ing Romani, received a commission
joined the Australian Flying Corps at
Cairo in Oct. 1916 and gazetted an officer
in the Australian Flying Corps Nov.
1917; distinguished for his skill and
courage, being promoted Captain and
decorated with the M.C. and bar, the
Distinguished Flying- Cross with two
bars and Air Force Cross; carried out a
remarkable scries of photographs in one
flight completely covering an important
area of 45 square miles; his bombino
work was characterised by most con-
spicuous gallantry; the first aiman to flv
over the Holv Land and to pilot an aero-
plane from Egvpt to India. With his
brother, Sir Keith (q.v.), and Sergeant'
Shiers and Bennett, was the first to fb
from England to Australia, accomplish-
in<y the journey in 28 days Nov.-Dee.
1919- for this unparalleled achievement
which brought the party world fame hr
was created a Knight Commander of the
Order of llic British Empire. Address-
Aviemore, Stephen Terrace, Gilbcrtor.
S.A.
SMITH, Sydney Talbot (South Aus-
tralia); b. Kensington Gardens, S.A., 21
Apr. 1861; only s. of late Sir Edwin
Smith, K.C.M.G.; ed. in England and
Trinity College, Cambridge (M.A.,
LL.B.). Barrister of Middle Temple;
was a leader writer on Adelaide “Ad-
vertiser” for 11 years, and has been lite-
rary critic of Adelaide “Register” for
many years; Member of Council of Ade-
laide University since 1903, of Council
of Institutes Association of S.A. from
its foundation; Chairman of Repertory
Theatre of Adelaide; President of Lite-
rary Societies’ Union and of Amateur
Athletic Association 1906; made about
4,000 honorary wills during the War for
soldiers and nurses. Publications—Many
essays, leaders, and reviews, and a little
verse. M. 1887, Florence, d. of Rev. W.
W. Chettle, Vicar of Bradley, England;
4 sons, of whom Lieutenant Eric Talbot
Smith and Private Donald Smith were
in the Anzac landing; the former an
original Duntroon cadet, was mortallv
wounded while in charge of the Scouts
of 10th Battalion A.1.F., and was said
bv one of his men, a V.C., to have “earn-
ed the V.C. several times.” Address —
Kensington Park, S.A.
SMITH, Tom Elder Barr (South
Australia), pastoralist; b. Woodville,
S.A., 8 Dec. 1863; c.s. of late Robert Ban-
Smith (merchant and philanthropist,
who died at Adela : de 20 Nov. 1915); ed.
St. Peter’s College Adelaide, and Trinity
Hall Cambridge (8.A.). Chairman of
Elder, Smith and Co. Ltd., a Director of
Adelaide Steamship Co. Ltd.. South Aus-
tralian Co., Beltana Pastoral Co. Ltd.,
Mutooroo Pastoral Co. Ltd., Ned’s Cor-
ner Proprietors and Milo and Welford
Downs Pastoral Co. Ltd. M. Mary Tso-
bel, sth d. of Alexander Mitchell. Ayr-
shire, Scotland; Mrs. Barr Smith was
created C.B.E. 1918. Son—Lieutenant
R. Barr Smith saw service in European
War years. Address—Birksgate, Glen
Osmond, S.A.
SMITH, William Ramsay, D.Sc. Adel.,
M.D. Edin. (South Australia): b. King
Edward, Aberdeenshire, 27 Nov. 1859;
ed. Moray House Training College Edin-
burgh and Edinburgh University (Vans
Dunlop Scholar in Medicine 1884, for
first place for 1883-4, Prizeman and
Lfonoursman in Arts, Science, and Medi-
cal classes, and took Natural Science
honours for M.A. degree). Assistant
Professor of Natural History and Senior
Demonstrator of Zoology at Edinburgh
University 1885-90, and Examiner for the
Royal College of Physicians Edinburgh;
Phvsician to Adelaide Hospital 1896-1903,
and Pathologist, City Coroner, Chair-
man of the Central Board of Health and


Permanent Head of the Health Depart
merit of S.A. since 1899. Lieutenant
Colonel Australian Army Medical Corps,
sometime Principal Medical Officer o:
Commonwealth Military Forces in S.A
served in the Boer War. Went to Egypl
as Officer commanding First Australian
General Hospital Ist Division A.I.F.
Author of “Medical Jurisprudence from
the Judicial Standpoint,” several text
books and other works on science and
medicine, and of numerous original con-
tributions. M. 1889, Margaret, d. of
James Mackenzie, of Alness, Ross-shire,
Address—Adelaide, S.A.
SMYTH, Charles Edward Owen,
C.M.G., 1.5.0. (South Australia); b. Fer-
rybank, Co. Kilkenny, Ireland, 1 Jan.
1851; s. of Stephen Smyth of Ferrybank
and his wife Emma Gaynor; g.d. of Wil-
liam Lewys Owen of Egryn Abbey am
Caerbelleran, Co. Merioneth, Wales; ed
Erasmus Smith School, Dublin. En-
tered the public service of S.A. in 1876
when he was appointed to the staff of
Architect’s Office, Council of Educa-
tion; Professional Clerk to the Archi
tect-in-Chief 3rd class professional di
vision 1878, promoted to Ist class pro
fessional division 1882, and on the aboli
tion of the office of Architect-in-Chu
in 1886 was given charge of the new
Department under the title of Superin
tendent of Public Buildings, a position
he held until Jan. 1920, when he retired
from the public service and proceeded to
England; founded in 1908 the Adelaide
branch of the Royal Society of St
George of which he remained Hon. Sec-
retary till Jan. 1920. M. 1889, Bess'u
Sanderson, d. of late John Davidson o r
Galashiels, N.B. and London; sons —Tre-
vor Owen Smyth, Lieutenant 10th Bai
talion A.T.F. (killed at Gallipoli, 11 Ma v
1915): Arthur Gaynor Owen Smyth
iolned Roval Artillery Apr. 1916 direct
from St. Peter’s Collegiate School, saw
service on the Somme the same year
was sent to Mesopotamia. Captain o' 1
Staff 1917, with 13th British Division ir
the 5 davs’ fighting final rout of Turks
North of Bagdad. Address—Office r
Agent-General for S.A., Australia House
Strand, W.C. 2.
SOUTER, Charles Henry (South Aus-
tralia) ; h. Aberdeen, Scotland, 11 Oct.
1864; s. of John Clement Souter, M.D.,
F.S.A.; ed. University College School,
Gower Street, London, and Aberdeen
University (M.B. and M.Ch.). Left
school at 14 and came with family to
Sydney in 1879, spent three years in the
bush on the head waters of the Castle-
reagh, and proceeded to Aberdeen in
1882 to study medicine, returning to Aus-
tralia in 1887 after graduating; was three
years in the Australian bush in charge
of -a hospital, then ship’s surgeon to
China. Author of “Irish Lords and
Other Verses” (1912), and “To Many
Ladies” (1917). M. Ist, 1887; 2nd, 1899,
Lucy de N. Lucas, Adelaide; dau.—Sis-
ter Souter, Royal Red Cross, served in
India and Salonica for three years. Ad-
dress—Annandale, Prospect, near Ade-
laide, S.A.
SPENCE, Most Rev. Robert William,
0.P., D.D. (South Australia); b. City of
Cork, Ireland, 13 Jan., 1860: s. of Robert
Spence; ed. St. Mary’s Tallaght, Dublin,
and College of Corps Santo, Lisbon.
First Superior of the first house of the
Dominican Order established in Austra-
lia; ordained priest Dec. 1882; worked as
a missionary priest in Ireland and also
in Lisbon; came to Australia Sept. 1898,
and resided at North Adelaide from that
date until 16 Aug., 1914, when he was
consecrated Coadjutor Archbishop to
the late Dr. O’Reily, and on the death
of that illustrious prelate succeeded to
the Archbishopric of Adelaide 6 July,
1915. Residence —Glen Osmond, S.A.
STIRLING, Sir (John) Lancelot.
K.C.M.G. (South Australia); b. The
Lodge, Strathalbyn, 5 Nov. 1849; 2nd s.
of late Hon. Edward Stirling, M.L.C.,
and Harriet Stirling; ed. St. Peter’s Col-
lege Adelaide, and Trinity College Cam-
bridge (8.A., LL.B.). Called to the Bar
at the Inner Temple 1871; won the ama-
teur championship at hurdle-racing in
England in 1870 and 1872, and represent-
ed Cambridge in the same event in 1870;
elected Member for Mount Barker in the
House of Assembly 1881, and for Gumer-
acha 1888, and has represented the
Southern district in the Legislative
Council since 1891; President of Legis-
lative Council since 18 July 1901; is in-
terested in pastoral pursuits; a Director
of a number of companies; Member of
the Council of University and of the
Royal Agricultural Society: and ex-Pre-
sident of the Pastoralists’ Association
and of the Royal Agricultural Society;
Master of the Adelaide Hunt Club for
five years, and Captain of the Adelaide
Polo Team; Knt.Bach. 1902; K.C.M.G
1909; 0.8. E. 1918. M. Florence Marian,
d. of late Sir William Milne. Sons serv-
ed in European War —Lieutenant Ed-
ward Guy Stirling, Grenadier Guards
(wounded in France); Lieutenant Eric
Lancelot Stirling, Australian Remount
Service in Egypt; Captain Archibald
Keith Stirling from 1914 in Egypt and
Gallipoli in 3rd Light Horse A.1.F., a,f-
terwards in France in Royal Field Artil-
lery and promoted Captain; sons-in-law
—K. L. Colley, served in Army Service
Corps in France; Lieutenant H. D.
Proctor, served as Lieutenant in A.T.F.
in France. Address—The Lodge,
Strathalbyn, S.A.; Adelaide Club, Ade-
laide, S.A.


STORY, William Harrison (South
Australia): b. Mitcham, S.A., 31 May
1857; s. of late’George Story (Clerk of
East Torrens District Council). Mayor
of Kensington, and Norwood 1902-3;
elected to Commonwealth Senate Dec.
1903 and remained Senator till Apr. 1917,
when he resigned and was returned to
House of Representatives for Boothby
at the general election 1917; re-elected
for Boothby Dec. 1919 (Nationalist);
Government Whip from Apr. 1918. Ad-
dress—Parliament House, Adelaide, S.A.
STUART, Walter Leslie, S.M. (South
Australia); b. 2 June 1875; s. of late
James Martin Stuart, K.C., Crown Soli-
citor; ed. Adelaide University. Called
to Bar Nov. 1900; Master of Supreme
Court (with its numerous associated of-
fices) since 1913. Joined S.A. Militia
Forces as a private in 1900, Major in
command of S.A. Field Artillery 1906,
placed on Reserve of Officers, volun-
teered for active service Aug. 1914, re-
jected as medically unfit and appointed
Military Censor; appointed Commandant
at Mitcham A.I.F. Camp 1915, in which
capacity he served for nearly two years
during which period 20,000 men and 500
officers were trained, disciplined and
equipped for active service; President of
the Rejected Volunteers’ Association;
Chairman of Solicitors’ Welfare Com-
mittee; twice a Royal Commissioner ap-
pointed to hold enquiries on behalf of
the Government. M. 1902, Kathleen
Molly, d. of S. G. Kingston. Recrea-
tion Yachting. Address Supreme
Court, Adelaide, S.A.
SYMON, Hon. Sir Josiah Henry,
K.C.M.G., K.C. (South Australia), emi-
nent barrister; b. Wick, Scotland, 27
Sept. 1846; s. of late James Symon, of
Albert Place, Stirling, N. 8.; ed. High
School, Stirling (Dux ISG2) and Free
Church Training College, Edinburgh.
Called to S.A. Bar Nov. 1871; Q.C. Apr.
1881 ; has been Leader of the Bar in S.A.
for many years; M.P. for Sturt 1881-7,
Attorney-General 1881, one of the fore-
most leaders in the Australian Federal
movement, President of the Federation
League and Commonwealth League in
S.A.; a member of the National Conven-
tion which framed the Commonwealth
Constitution 1897-98, and Chairman of the
Judiciary Committee of the Convention; a
member of the Commonwealth Senate
from the inception of the Federal Parlia-
ment until June 1913, and topped the poll
for the State at the first two Senate elec-
tions; led the Opposition in the first
Senate, Attorney-General in Reid-Mc-
Lcan Ministry 1904-5; during nearly 13
vears in the Commonwealth Legislature
he rendered great national service; for
his services in connection with the Free
Trade League in S.A. was elected an
Hon. Member of the Cobden Club, and
is also Hon. Member of the Anglo-
Saxon Club and a member of the Coun-
cil of the Distinguished Society of Com-
parative Legislation; has written and
published largely on federation and con-
stitutional subjects, and also studies in
Shakespeare, poetry, etc. At the Coro-
nation Naval Review at Spithead in
1911 he represented the people of Aus-
tralia on the occasion of the ceremony
of their patriotic presentation of a chal-
lenge shield and centre piece of plate to
the battleship “Commonwealth”; created
K.C.M.G. Jan. 1901 in recognition of his
services to Australian Federal Union.
During the War founded the Enquiry
and Information Bureau in connection
with the Red Cross, and took a con-
spicuous part in advocating conscription
and recruiting throughout the State. M.
1881, Mary Eleanor, d. of late C. T.
Cowle, Manager of English, Scottish and
Australian Chartered Bank; sons served
in European War —Lieutenant Charles
James Ballarat Symon, M.C., for some
time Acting-Adjutant 2nd Battalion
Coldstream Guards, won the Military
Cross at Bourlon Wood and Cambrai
1917 (severely wounded 27 Sept. 1918);
Lieutenant Oscar Sturt Symon, 271h
Battalion A.1.F., afterwards in Austra-
lian Cycling Battalion and Chief Instruc-
tor of Lewis Gunnery, served in Egypt
and France; Carril Hector Nicholson
Symon, served throughout the War from
Aug. 1914, enlisted from Brascnose Col-
lege, Oxford, and served nine months as
a private in the Royal Fusiliers, after
wards Lieutenant South Lancashire
Regiment (severely gassed at end of
1916); Lieutenant Oliver J. L. Svmon,
Royal Navy, after passing as a cadet
through the Royal Naval Colleges of Os-
borne and Dartmouth, served in H.M.S.
battle-cruiser “New Zealand” in the ac-
tions of Heligoland Bight and Dogger
Bank, afterwards in destroyers in North
Sea, and later in H.M.S. light cruiser
“Dartmouth” in Mediterranean and Ad-
riatic, lent by Admiralty with other
Royal Navy officers to bring Australian
destroyer flotilla out after the Armistice,
now temporarily serving with the R.A.N.;
dan.—Eleanor Dorothy Jean Symon,
torpedoed in P. and O. S.S. “Arabia”
in the Mediterranean, and served as
a V.A.D. until early in 1919 in various
hospitals in the London District; dau.—
Lesley Kilmeny Symon, served through
out the War, for months in its earL
stages in charge of Belgian Refugees,
and later as Secretary and Executive
Head of the famous Camps Library
under the War Office, which kept the
prisoners of War supplied with literature
until their repatriation after the Armis-
tice (mentioned in the non-combatant
War Office despatches and her services
otherwise acknowledged), and received
the distinction of M.8.E.; Angel Symon,
actively assisted in the Red Cross work
at the headquarters in Adelaide and at


the Depots; Elizabeth Margaret Syinon
and Mary Arden Syinon were through-
out the War engaged in land and other
work in furthering South Australia’s
contribution to tbe War; and Lady Sy-
raon received the Medal of Queen Eliza-
beth of Belgium in recognition with Bel-
gian Relief. Address—Manoah, Upper
Sturt.
THOMAS, Rt. Rev. Arthur Nutter,
D.D. (South Australia); b. London, 11
Dec., 1869, s. of Charles Tames Thomas,
of Blackheat.h (member of the Corpora-
tion of the City of London); ed. Oundle
School 1884-8, and Pembroke College,
Cambridge (Scholar, 8.A., first-class
Classical Tripos 1891, second-class Theo-
logical Tripos, Part IT., 1898, Jeremie
Septuagint Prize 1893, Cams Greek Tes-
tament Prize, 1893), and Wells Theo-
logical College 1894-5. Ordained Deacon
bv William Walsham How, Bishop of
Wakefield 1 §94, and priest 1895; Domes-
tic Chaplain to Archbishop of York
1895-9; Rector of Guisborough, York-
shire, 1901-6, and Hon. Chaplain to the
Archbishop of York 1905-6; consecrated
4th Bishop of Adelaide at Westminster
Abbey 3 Feb. 1906, and enthroned at
St. Peter’s Cathedral, Adelaide, 4 Apr.
1906. M. 1904, Mary Theodora, 4th d.
of the Rev. W. A. H. Lewis, Vicar of
Upper Gonial. Residence—Bishop’s
Court, North Adelaide, S.A.
THOMAS, Evan Kyffin (South Aus-
tralia); b. Adelaide, 1866; y.s. of late
William Kyffin Thomas, a proprietor of
the “Register,” and grandson of the late
Robert Thomas, who was a founder of
the “Register” in 1836. A proprietor and
General Manager of the “Register,” Ade-
laide, and its associated journals. Ad-
dress—The “Register” Office, Adelaide
S.A.
VARDON, Edward Charles (South
Australia); b. Hindmarsh, S.A., 10 Nov.
1866; s. qf late Hon. Joseph Vardon,
sometime Commonwealth Senator; ed
North Adelaide Grammar School (Whin-
ham’s), Chairman of Directors of Var
don and Sons Ltd. Printers: Director of
Mile End Cold Stores Ltd., and of Ade
laide Fruit and Produce Exchange Co
Ltd.; President of S.A. Chamber of
Manufactures 1910-13; Member of the
House of Assembly for Sturt 1918-31; ap-
pointed Commonwealth Senator for S.A.
Feb. 1931, to fill the vacancy caued by
the death of Senator R. S. Guthrie. M.
1888, Ellen, d. of late Henry Peel. Re-
creations—Tennis and bowls. Address—-
Avenue St., Millswood, S.A.
VAUGHAN, Hon. Crawford (South
Australia); b. Adelaide. 14 Tulv 1874:
of Alfred Vaughan, Government Photo-
lithographer. M.P. for Torrens 1905-
1915, and for Sturt 1915-18; Treasurer
and Commissioner of Crown Lands June
1910-Feb. 1913; Premier, Treasurer, and
Minister of Education Apr. 1915-July.
1917.
VERCO, Sir Joseph Cooke, M.D.,
Loud,, F.R.C.S. Eng. (South Australia);
b. Fullarton, Adelaide, 1 Aug. 1851; s. of
James Crabb Verco; ed. Adelaide Educa-
tional Institution, St. Peter’s Col-
lege, Adelaide (Young Exhibition),
and London University (M.B. 1875
with Scholarship and Gold Medal
in Forensic Medicine and Gold
Medal in Medicine, M.D. 1876 with
Gold Medal, B.S. 1877 with Scho-
larship and Gold Medal in Surgery),
M.R.S.C. Eng. 1874, F.R.C.S. Eng. 1877,
L.R.C.P. London 1875. Studied' at St.
Bartholomew’s Hospital, where he was
House Physician 1875-76, and Midwiferv
Asssistant 1877; Hon. Consulting Phvsi-
cian Adelaide Hospital since 1909; has
been Lecturer on Medicine in Adelaide
University, Hon. Physician to Adelaide
Hospital and the Children’s Hospital,
President of S.A. Branch of British Med-
ical Association 1886-87 and 1915-19,
President of first Intercolonial Medical’
Congress held at Adelaide 1887, Presi-
dent of Royal Society of S.A. 1903 to
1931, Hon. Lecturer in Medicine and
Member of Council Adelaide University
since 1915.
WAITE, Edgar Ravenswood, F.L.S
(South Australia); b. Leeds, England, 5
May, 1866. Curator of Leeds Museum
1888-92; sometime member of the Coun-
cils of the Leeds Naturalists’ Club,
Leeds Geographical Association, and the
Conchological Society of Great Britain
and Ireland; Co-Secretary of Yorkshire
Naturalists’ Union, Joint Editor of the
“Naturalist”; elected a Fellow of the
Linnean Society of London in 1890;
travelled extensively on the Continent,
ind visited the principal museums of Eu-
rope; appointed Zoologist to the Aus-
tralian Museum at Sydney in 1893, and
Curator of Canterbury Museum, Christ-
church 1906-14; Director of the National
Museum at Adelaide since 1914, Author
of papers on the Natural History of his
lative country (Yorkshire) and of many
on the Australian Fauna, particularly
mammals, reptiles, and fishes. Author of
‘Australian Snakes,” “Catalogue of the
Fishes of N.5.W.,” and papers on the
Fauna of Funafuti. Address—The Mu
seum, North Terrace, Adelaide, S.A.
WAITE, Peter (South Australia), pas-
toralist and public benefactor; b. near
Kirkcaldy, Scotland, 1834. Spent some
years in commercial pursuits in Edin-
burgh and Aberdeen; came in 1859 to
S.A. to Pandappa, a sheep station held
by bis brother James in conjunction with
Elder, Stirling and Co,, subsequently as-
sociated with the late Sir Thomas Elder
in extensive pastoral properties, and did


much to develop the northern country;
Chairman of Directors of Elder, Smith
and Co. Ltd. for more than 37 years, re-
signing this position in Feb. 1921, but
retaining his seat on the Board of Direc-
tors. Set an example to pastcralists In
fencing and other improvements; pre-
sented to the State in 1913 his Urrbrae
house and grounds at Mitcham, near
Adelaide, embracing 134 acres, half of
the land to be available to the University
for agricultural and kindrod studies, and
the balance as a public park under the
University control; the same year he
gave £lO,OOO to Elder, Smith and Co. as
a nucleus of an Officers’ Provident Fund.
Address—Glen Osmond, S.A.
WAITE, Lieutenant-Colonel William
Charles Nightingale, D.5.0., M.C. (South
Australia), live stock agent; b. Adelaide,
8 Sept. 1880; s. of late W. N. Waite; ed.
Prince Alfred College, Adelaide. Served
in Boer War two and a half years (men-
tioned in despatches); joined A.I.F. Aug.
1914 as Lieutenant and embarker with
Ist Australian Divisional Artillery Oct.
1914, commanded 3rd 8.A.C., served on
Gallipoli from the landing, commanded
7th Battery during Lone Pine operations
and Bth Battery during evacuation,
awarded M.C., appointed Brigade Major
4th Divisional Artillery Feb. 1916, and
promoted Lieutenant-Colonel, and to
command 24th Brigade Field Artillery
Mar. 1914, subsequently commanded 11th
Brigade Field Artillery, awarded D.S.O.
(mentioned in despatches three times),
returned to Australia on long leave Oct.
1918. M. 1907, F. A. Thomas of Ger-
miston Transvaal. Address—Westonia,
46 Park Rd., Kensington Park, S.A.
WARD, Leonard Keith, 8.A., B.E.
fSouth Australia); b. Sydney, 1879; s. of
Dr. F. W. Ward (q.v.); ed. Sydney and
Brisbane Grammar Schools. Entered
Sydney University 1897 as Queensland
Government Exhibitioner and graduated
B.A. 1900, and B.E. (departments of
mining and metallurgy) 1903; in service
of Broken Hill Proprietary Co. till Oct.
1903; Lecturer at Kalgoorlie School of
Mines 1903-7; Assistant Government
Geologist and Inspector of Mines Tas-
mania 1907-11, Government Geologist
S.A. since Nov. 1911, also Director of
the Department of Mines. Address—
Department of Mines, Adelaide, S.A.
WATSON, Major Stanley Holme,
D.5.0., M.C. (South Australia); b. Ade-
laide. 24 Oct. 1887; s. of Harry Watson;
ed. Adelaide School of Mines and Uni-
versity. Is a railway engineering drafts-
man, had two years pre-war experience
with C.M.F. (Lieutenant Corps Austra-
lian Engineers). Served with Ist Divi-
sion A.I.F. Engineers, Aug. 1914-July
1915, and 2nd Division A.I.F. Engineers
to Tan. 1917; Major O.C. 2nd Division
Signalling Company to Jan. 1919 (rncil
tioned in despatches three times),
awarded White Eagle, Serbia, Gallipoli
evacuation; M.C. 1917; D.S.O. 1919. M
1911, Leila Mcßride. Address—Bay
Road, Plympton, S.A.
WEBB, Noel Augustin (South Aus-
tralia); b. Maitland, N.S.W., 13 Dec.
1865; s. of late Rev. Allan Walter Webb
(Baptist minister who held pastorates
in Sydney, Auckland, Adelaide, Mel-
bourne and Geelong); ed. Auckland Col-
lege and Grammar School, Prince Alfred
College Adelaide, and Adelaide Univer-
sity (LL.B.). Called to the Bar Dec.
1886; practised at Port Augusta for ten
years; was Mayor of that town, and for
many years in partnership with Paris
Nesbit, K.C., at Adelaide; drafted seve-
ral important Acts, including the Local
Option Act of 1905; sometime Special
Magistrate, appointed Deputy President
of Industrial Arbitration Court, S.A., 26
Oct. 1916; Royal Commissioner on the
Wheat Scheme, and on Vaughan Gov-
ernment Land Transactions; formerly
prominent in rifle club movement. Ad-
dress—Stratford, Unley Park, S.A.
WEIR, Colonel Stanley Price, D.S.O.
(South Australia); b. Norwood, S.A., 23
Apr. 1866; s. of Alfred Weir; ed. Moore's
School and Norwood Public School. En-
tered Militia Force Mar. 1885, received
first commission 1890, commanded 10th
Battalion C.M.F. for 5 years with rank
of Lieutenant-Colonel, and from 1 Jan.
1912 until the outbreak of War com-
manded 19th Infantry Brigade, promoted
full Colonel Sept. 1913; first officer in
S.A. to receive a commission in the
A.I.F. and commanded 10th Battalion
from 17 Aug. 1914 till 17 Sept. 1916,
leading the Battalion at Gallipoli land-
ing 25 Apr. 1915, and saw service with
it in Egypt, Asia Minor, France and Bel-
gium; D.5.0.; Commander of Russian
Order of St. Anne; Public Service Com-
missioner since Jan. ltd 7. Address—
Second Avenue, St. Peters, Adelaide,
S.A.
WHITE, Rt. Rev. Gilbert, D.D.
(South Australia); b. Rondebosch, Cape
Colony, 9 June 1859; s. of Rev. Gilbert
White, g.g. nephew of the naturalist of
Selborne; ed. Oriel College, Oxford
(B.A. 1881, M.A. 1885). Fellow of Aus-
tralian College of Theology; ordained
1883; successively Vicar of St. Paul’s,
Charters Towers, Herberton, North
Queensland ,and Ravenswood; Incum-
bent of Queenton; Rector of St. Tho-
mas’s, Hughenden; Canon of St. James’s
Cathedral, Townsville; Examining Chap-
lain to the Bishop of North Queensland
and Archdeacon of North Queensland;
first Bishop of Carpentaria 1900-15; first
Bishop of Woolochra since Tan. 1915.
Author of “The Church and Modern
Life” (1898), “The Intellectual Develop


tnent of the Ministerial Life," “Round
About the Torres Straits,’’ and “Thirty
Years in Tropical Australia.’ Residence
—Gladstone, S.A.
WHITE, Captain Samuel Albert
(South Australia), notable ornithologist;
b. Adelaide, 20 Dec. 1870; s. of Samuel
White (a pioneer scientist, and g.s. of
John White, S.A. pioneer who arrived in
the Province before the proclamation in
1836); ed. Christian Brothers’ College,
and St. Peter’s College, Adelaide. Foun-
dation member and Past President of
S.A. Ornithological Association, Corres-
ponding Fellow of the American Orni-
thologists' Union, Hon. Associate mem-
ber of the Royal Australasian Ornitho-
logists’ Union and Past President, is a
Colonial member of the British Ornitho-
logical Union, a distinction held by only
ten men living; Chairman of the Fauna
and Flora Protection Committee; to him
is given the credit for the ornithological
exploration of Central Australia. The
Austral Avian Record Vol. TIL 1919,
says, “The ornithological survey of
South Australia has been fairly com-
pleted to the furthest detail, a fact that
is inapplicable to an}' other State, and
the survey has been carried out by Cap-
tain White and his wife. This achieve-
ment places their work quite at the head
of ornithological enterprise, and is one
almost impossible to surpass.” Author
of several booklets dealing with his ex-
peditions. Served in South African cam-
paign 1900-2—left with 4th Contingent o.
Ist Imperial Bushmen as Lieutenant,
promoted Captain on the field, some-
time Officer Commanding Colonial
Troops Nos. 11 and 12 Areas, later ad
ministrator (Queen’s Medal, three bars,
King’s Medal, two bars). M. 1906, Ethel
Rosina, d. of late Samuel Toms. Ad
dress—Wetunga, Fulham, S.A.
WILSON, Reginald Victor (South
Australia), Commonwealth Senator,
elected 13 Dec. 1919. Address—Parlia-
ment House, Adelaide, S.A.
WILSON, Thomas George, M.D.
Syd., F.R.C.S. Edin. (South Australia),
notable surgeon; b. Armidalc, N.SW.,
1876; s. or C. G. Wilson; ed. New Eng-
land Grammar School, and St. Paul’s
College Sydney University (M.D.,
Ch.M.); F.R.C.S. Edin. Senior Gynaeco-
logical Surgeon Adelaide Hospital since
1908; Tutor in Obstetrics and Member
of Faculty of Medicine of University of
Adelaide. On active service for 4\ years
with A.I.F. in various theatres of the
War; Lieutenant-Colonel. Recreations
—Tennis, golf. Address —North Ter-
race, Adelaide, S.A.
WINSER, Legh Cyril, M.V.O. (South
Australia): b. High Legh, Cheshire,
England; s. of Rev. C. J. Winser. Pri-
vate Secretary to Governor of S.A. (to
Sir Henry Galway, May 1915 to Pel).
1919; to Sir George Murray and to Sir
Archibald Weigall); M.V.O. Oct. 1930.
Recreations—Cricket, golf. Address—
Government House, Adelaide, S.A.
WOOD, Peter (South Australia), mer-
chant; b. Adelaide, 22 June 1855; s. of
late Gilbert Wood (who founded in 1853
the business of G. Wood, Son and Co.);
ed. Adelaide Educational Institution
(conducted by J. L. Young), Norwood
Grammar School, and Prince Alfred
College. Chairman of Directors G,
Wood, Son and Co. Ltd., and of A.
\Yalton and Co,, for many years Chair-
man of Wholesole Grocers’ Association,
formerly President of Our Boys’ Insti-
tute, is President of Boys’ Brigade and
of Adelaide City Mission, and on the
Board of Aborigines Friends’ Associa-
tion; was for more than 20 years mem-
ber of Burnside District Council and
Chairman for five years, and Chairman
of the Citizens’ Bo} r s’ Scout Endowment
Fund 1920; interested in breeding of Jer-
sey cattle and possesses the finest herd
in S.A., engaged in farming pursuits on
the River Light, and has done good
work in promoting and developing the
dried fruit industry on the River Mur-
ray. M. 1882, Alice Maude Johnson of
Brighton, Victoria; son—Lieutenant
Robert K. Wood, Croix dc Guerre, who
served in the Great War, remaining in
France till the Armistice was signed.
Address —Linden Park, Burnside, near
Adelaide, S.A.
YOUNG, Very Rev. George Edward
(South Australia). Ordained 1886; In-
cumbent of Port Pirie 1888-91, and of
Christ Church, Kapunda, 1891-4; Rector
of Mount Gambier 1894-1906, of St.
Paul’s, Port Adelaide, 1906-8, and of S'.
Augustine ’s, Unley, 1908-17; Dean of
Adelaide since 1906. Address—Childers
St., North Adelaide, S.A.
YOUNG, Walter James, C.B.E. (South
Australia); b. Moonta, S.A., 2 Apr. 1873;
s. of John Young, Mount Templeton,
S.A.; brother of Sir Frederick Young
(q.v.); cd. Whinham College and matri-
culated Adelaide University 1886. En-
tered 1 June, 1887, the service of Elder,
Smith and Co. Limited, of which busi-
ness he has been General Manager since
1913; Vice-Chairman of the Common-
wealth Central Wool Committee, and ex-
member of the Commonwealth Shipping
Board, from which he resigned Jan. 1919;
visited U.S.A. 1917 on a special mission
for the Commonwealth Government, and
in 1920 he was Chairman of the London
Executive appointed to negotiate with
the British Government in connection
with the carry-over wool, which finally
resulted in the formation of B.A.W.R.A.
C.B.E. 1918. Address—Elder, Smith and
Co. Limited, Adelaide, S.A.






Publishers Ltd., 75-79 Grote
Street, Adelaide.




jjf|
national'
Date Due uiuii»i“»
2 5 DEC ?013 XZZZHI—I—
C U V
1


\
: '
I 1508 00551946 2


Wm x Wm *3
i Jr
u a l*111 im
I. u
Bj
i s
I a8WB m
■
■
