

Who are the Quacks?
By WILLIAM HOWARD HAY, M.D.
Reprinted by courtesy from the Book,
"Food or Drugs."
WHAT IS A "QUACK?" Medically speaking a quack is
everyone but us, the regular school of medicine. No one, not a
graduate of modern medical school is free from odium of quackery,
from the regular classical, orthodox standpoint. Isn't this true?
Let us put the definition of “quacks" a little more broadly, not
limiting it to outlaw cults. From the broader viewpoint a quack
is anyone who pretends to be something which he is not, or one
who is not able to do what he claims to do, especially if he
takes money for this purpose.
From the broader view how many of us are there who can
escape the suspicion of quackery?
If we should tell the absolute truth as we see it how often
would we be compelled to say to a patient; "I do not know what
is the matter with you, and not knowing this, I am in no position
to treat you intelligently!"
If we were honest how many patients would we have? They
would all leave us for quacks, and we would be left holding the
bag, as it were. We know this, and all unconsciously we are
compelled to assume an air of wisdom and pronounce judgment
on maladies for which we are consulted, well knowing, that if the
case escapes us and goes to someone else our opinion is in
danger, for it is a well known fact that if a case is not perfectly
plain (and most cases are NOT plain), should such case go to a
hundred different regular, well informed physicians he would get
nearly as many different diagnosis, and still more different plans
of treatment.
We know this, I say, and we unconsciously protect ourselves
by assuring the patient positively that we understand his condition
very well, in order to make sure of this unfailing confidence in our
enlightened judgment.




ARE WE QUACKS FOR THIS DECEPTION? How can we
escape the imputation? Who is to blame for this position in which
we find ourselves? Is it our fault or that of human nature as
expressed in the patient? No doubt both, for while we are to
blame for allowing ourselves to be placed in the position of arbiters
on disease, about which WE DO NOT KNOW VERY MUCH, yet
so also is the public to blame for being so silly as to think that
the mysterious thing we call disease can be reduced to exact
formulas.
The fathers of medicine made what they were pleased to call
discoveries, which were generally discoveries that certain drugs
produced certain symptoms if taken into the interior of the human,
and with these discoveries they proposed to combat the symptoms
of disease.
This was originally a theory, always has been a theory, and
in the very nature of things NEVER CAN BE ANYTHING BUT A
THEORY, for the internal processes of the body in health or disease,
are not and never will be fully understood, the vital processes not
being subject to exact analysis; and while we may learn much of
the internal chemistry of the body, and discover experimentally
many things of interest in the functions of the various organs, yet
we never can analyse the vital machinery in action, and the sooner
we drop this pretence of exact knowledge the better it will be for
our prestige.
Fully a third of the population of the U.S. has ceased to depend
on regular physicians for advice or treatment of their various
diseases, perhaps because they are beginning dimly to realise
through many disappointments the fallibility of classical medicine.
Who can tell?
A QUESTIONNAIRE issued to seven thousand people recently
disclosed the fact that less than ten per cent, of them were
unqualifiedly loyal to medicine, more than ninety per cent,
admitted their allegiance, partially or wholly, to Christian Science,
Chiropractic, Osteopathy, Naturopathy, Mechanotherapy, or other
cult.
"QUACKS," we sneer, yet we must admit the falling off in our
former supremacy in the treatment of disease. THIS IS A BITTER
ADMISSION, yet if we are honest enough to face the truth, we
should look this thing fairly in the eye and demand to know why
this defection.
A few years ago, surely not more than three, Sir James
McKenzie, of St. Andrews, Scotland, quoted in the London Times,


from the London Lancet, said in effect that to diagnose a gastric
ulcer, gall-stones, appendicitis, tumor, is not diagnosis in the strict
sense of the word, but merely naming a prominent symptom,
denoted the point of convergence of the cause of the diseased
condition, but to say why this man is sick, to tell how and why he
has departed from health, is not possible to him, in this wonderful
clinic in more than ten per cent, of the cases examined.
Dr. Cabot, of the Harvard Medical School, says of the post
mortem findings, of the Massachusetts General Hospital, where
precision is carried to the nth degree, that these have proven the
diagnosis to be wrong in over fifty per cent, of the cases, and this
means that they have missed the principle trouble in more than
half of the cases, and Dr. McKenzie says that even this is not
diagnosis at all.
Sir William Osier, late Regius professor of medicine in Oxford,
quoted the immortal Voltaire as saying: "WE PUT DRUGS OF
WHICH WE KNOW LITTLE, INTO BODIES WHICH WE KNOW
LESS, TO CURE DISEASE, OF WHICH WE KNOW NOTHING AT
ALL."
QUACK, just plain quacks, whether we are willing to admit
it or not, for are we not doing the very things for which we
condemn those whom we are pleased to call by this opprobrious
name?
In 1857-63 Antonie Bechamp announced his microzymian theory
of fermentation, which he was pleased to say was also the theory
of the beginning of disease, recognising germs as metarmorphoses
of the mycrozyma for biochemic purposes.
Pasteur, a contemporary of Bechamp, not a physician, but a
chemist, or rather an apothecary, attributed to the germs, those
micro-organisms developed from the microzyma of Bechamp, the
role of invader, believing that because they were ever present in
disease, certain germs being supposedly always present in.
certain diseases, that therefore they cause these diseases.
Bechamp was a scientist, Pasteur an advertiser. Bechamp was
so absorbed in his researches that he contented himself with
occasional reports to the Academy of Sciences while Pasteur went
to the public with everything he discovered, creating a popular
following that acclaimed him a scientific genius.
Much of his work was plainly cribbed from Bechamp without
credit, and interpreted to suit his purpose, which waj>- r te-»build up
a huge market for germ destroyers.


Bechamp died poor and unknown, outside the Academy,
Pasteur in almost affluent circumstances, acclaimed by the scientific
world as a great benefactor, and mourned yearly since his demise.
This theory of germs as a cause of disease was analysed by
Prof. Robert Koch, who formulated a dictum, accepted by the
scientists of his time, that must be met in order to fix on the germ
as a cause of disease.
According to this dictum if the germ caused the disease it
must be present in every case of this disease; it must not be
present except in conjunction with the disease. It must be
susceptible of separate cultivation in proper media outside the
body, where it must infallibly produce the same disease.
The germ theory does not meet a single one of these conditions
infallibly, the germ frequently being absent from diseased condi-
tions which are attributed to it; being generally present in bodies
in which the disease attributed to it is most conspicuous by its
absence! And while germs are susceptible to cultivation outside
the body, in suitable media, yet they are subject to mutation as
the medium is changed in character, and if again introduced into
the body they do not always infallibly cause the disease they are
supposed to cause, generally not causing disease of any kind
whatsoever.
Pasteur has already set us back over sixty years by this
advertisement of the germ theory, and if we go back to the
teachings of Bechamp, recognising the microzyma as the prima
cause, and the germ as a development of the biochemic nature,
result of the condition of the body, transformed into a necessary
scavenger to remove from the body objectionable matter, we will
perhaps regain the ground lost for over sixty years, and be able
to concentrate our attention on the soil conditions in the body, not
on the harmless germ scavenger.
If the bacillus of tuberculosis was the cause of tuberculosis
how could any of us escape infection?
The same is true of typhoid fever, pneumonia, and infectious
disease, for the germs accompanying those diseases are
übiquitous.
We are spending valuable time, oodles of money, splendid
brain power, in studying the life history of germs, when they are
but biochemic scavengers, friendly things whose function is the
often urgent one of ridding the body on short notice of accumula


tions that have become intolerable, embarrassing to functions, so
that we are thus missing the real object of our search for the
cause of disease.
The soil conditions that make necessary the presence of the
germ are our real field of search, but we have lost sight of this
field entirely in our frantic hunt for germs, and we can lay the
blame for this wrong steer at the door of Louis Pasteur.
We have no real proof of the boasted affectiveness of any
form of anti-toxin or vaccine or serum.
After one is vaccinated or serumised, immunised, we have
destroyed the only proof that counts, for we have no way of
knowing whether or not the vaccinated or serumised person would
have contracted disease in the absence of this so-called protection;
not all do so.
If such vaccinated or serumised person contracts the disease
against which he is supposed to be protected it is pretty good
evidence that such "protection'' is valueless, isn't it? Surely people
do contract disease against which they are supposed to be
immunised, as we all know.
Were not our boys in the army thoroughly “protected"? They
were physically fit on admission to the army, else they could not
have got by the examining boards; they were thoroughly, very
thoroughly immunised against typhoid fever, meningitis,
pneumonia, influenza, yet they died like flies, not on the firing
line, but right here at home, in the concentration camps, where
they were surrounded by the finest sanitary precautions that
science could devise, and not only did they die, but they died of
the very disease against which they were supposed to have been
rendered immune.
Do you doubt this statement? Look up the records of every
cantonment in the country during the concentration of the army,
and see for yourself whether or not this is true. The death rate
from pneumonia, complicating influenza, was simply staggering,
in some camps reaching four or five times the rates among
civilians, these weak ones who were not able to go to war, who
did not have the blessings of immunisation.
How much good did the serum treatment do these boys? Ask
Louis Pasteur, if you can conjure up his disembodied spirit.
QUACKS, all of us, doing the things we do not know how
to do, promising things we cannot perform.


Is it any wonder that the public is getting a little suspicious
of us and our vaunted "discoveries"? The wonder to me is that
there are still seventy millions of them willing to submit to
vaccination and serum treatment.
The true figures on vaccination for smallpox have never got
before the public, though they can be seen in the files of the
various departments of the army as well as the government, if
one cares to ask for them. If the record of vaccination in the
Philippines alone were ever a matter of general knowledge it
would finish vaccination in the whole country, at least among those
who are able to read and think for themselves. After three years
of the most rigid vaccination, when almost every little brown man
has been vaccinated from one to six times, there occurred the
severest epidemic of smallpox that the islands had ever seen,
with a death rate running in places to almost sixty per cent., and
in all well over sixty thousand deaths. Did you ever know
this before? Assuredly not. Yet it is found in the government
records in just this form.
Manila and the surrounding province were vaccinated most
thoroughly, also they showed the highest case record and death
record of the whole archipelago, while some of the outlying country
had proportionately less disease.
How much good did we do these poor fellows? Ask Edward
Jennerl He knows now, if so be that we know after death, and 1
am willing to believe that he would gladly spend a part of his
eternity in purgatory if he could undo the wrong he did the world
by vaccination.
The only epidemic of smallpox it was my misfortune to attend
comprised thirty-three cases, with twenty-nine vaccination histories,
some recent, and the unvaccinated cases did not have the disease
in any more severe form than did those with the vaccination
history, even those of recent history, and the same proportion holds
pretty well over the vaccinated world, for vaccination does NOT
protect against smallpox, though it does much harm aside from
its uselessness.
Well, are you satisfied that WE ARE QUACKS? In the eyes of
those who are willing to forget the present prestige of medicine,
such as it is, with all its dignity, its scientific jargon, its pratings
of altruism, its great endowment, its well heralded "achievements,"
we are most assuredly quacks, professing to do things we cannot
do, and—yes, taking money under this pretence.


We may excuse ourselves by accusing others, and believing
that no one can do better than we, but we are clearly in the
wrong when we attempt to secure favorable legislation for selfish
ends or try to strangle legislation that may prove undesirable to
us in our position as arbiters in matters of disease.
When we attempt to compel by legislation the obedience of
an unwilling public we are exceeding the bounds of fairness, to
say the least.
The public pays its own bills, IT HAS A PERFECT RIGHT TO
SAY WHO SHALL AND WHO SHALL NOT ENJOY THE PATRON-
AGE, and for this reason, as well as those stated before, the writer
is wholly out of sympathy with all efforts to coerce a willing and
generous people in the matter of medical care, even as in the
matter of religious belief.
We are continually urging the legislatures of state and nation
bills to give us more power, MORE RIGHT TO COMPEL THE
UNWILLING OBEDIENCE OF A LONG SUFFERING PUBLIC TO
OUR EVERY WHIM AND WISH, all "in the interest of public
health."
Suppose we do succeed in so militarising the whole country
that we have the right to go into any private home and tell them
what's what.
Can we do better than the medical section of the army did?
We have been seeking legislation to compel every child in school
to be "stacked," then if reaction occurs we want the power to
IMMUNISE such suspicious child.
If we had the power to immunise under compulsion every
man, woman and child against influenza would the results be
better than they were among the selected risks of the army?
What proof have we that they would be any different? Would
death rates of twelve or thirteen per cent., which seems very high
to us even in so fatal an epidemic as that of 1918-19, fall under
general immunisation? If they fell to twenty-six per cent., as we
witnessed in some of the army cantonments, it would be hard to
convince them that we were benefactors.
No, we are far, very far, from knowing what to do to prevent
disease, and even in great epidemic diseases, such as yellow
fever, we have had to take off our hats to the entomologist and the
sanitary engineer, and it was an entomologist that pointed out the
anopheles as the carrier of malarial infection, and it was the


sanitary engineer that found how to get rid of the pesky things,
while we stood by and applauded to the echo—and then took all
credit, as one of the great medical achievements!
The fact is, we are occupying a false position, and if we are
honest we will retreat as rapidly and gracefully as possible from
it, and we will give credit to whom credit is due, and we will
be willing to stand on our achievements and be judged by them.
We will allow the public to select its physician without the
compulsion of government, not forgetting that this is distinctly the
public's general, and that the public pays the bill.
Until we drop all thought of compulsory medicine we should be
consistent and compel our particular brand of religion and politics
on our neighbours, as well as our particular brand of medicine.
We have to show that our particular brand of healing is the
best and only, so let us have a little more charity for other
schools, for the public which has a perfect right to decide its own
brand of medicine. If we wish to escape suspicion of quackery
let us be sure our backyard is clean before we seek to make our
neighbours clean up theirs.
For more detailed information read "Food or Drugs," a sensational
exposure of drugs and operations from the mouth of medical
men themselves. By Dr. P. M. Eoonin. Price 10/G.
Issued by the Sydney Anti-Vivisection Society
President and Acting Hon. Secretary, Saratoga, New South Wales.
HARRY COY, PRINTER, SYDNEY
3
