

WHO ARE IHE REAL "CLIfIIT?
Pass Resolutions of Protest!
Elect Easter Delegates who will keep the Movement Straight!!
Artist George Finey, Australia’s greatest cartoonist,
whose wonderful cartoons in the “Labor Daily” have assisted
to win thonsands of votes for Labor in its many election
fights, has, like many other fair-minded people, decided to
express, in his own artistic way, a strong protest against the
continued misuse for reactionary factional purposes of our
official organ, the “Labor Daily.”
He refuses, by silence, to condone the crime against
itself that the Labor Party is permitting, in continuing to allow
the campaign of misrepresentation, suppression, and innuendo
to be maintained by Norman McCauley, present editor of the
Labor Daily.”
George Finey voluntarily threw away £3O a week on
another paper to come to the “Labor Daily,” never dreaming
that it would be used against men who have given their time,
their money and their health for Labor’s Objective.
REAL POSITION DRIVEN HOME
His courageous expression of opinion will bring the
real position home to all in the Labor Party.
It will make them realise that there is more to be said
on recent matters than has been allowed to be said in the
‘Labor Daily.”
OTHERS MUST DO SAME.
It will give courage to others, who feel the cruel in-
justice of the present abuse of the Party organ, to come out
openly and agitate for the replacement of the present editor
by one who will not continue to tarnish the pages of what we
must all endeavour to build, ever more strongly, into a clean
and fair mouthpiece of Labor.
Since our first leaflet, “An Appeal to All,” exposed
the flimsiness of the grounds of attack on the majority of
Conference delegates, the Editor of the “Labor Daily” has
(I )Withheld reports from dozens of Branches, Coun-
cils, and Unions condemning his attitude, and con-
taining votes of confidence in Kilburn, McNamara
and others whom he attacked.
(7) Twisted proceedings at Conference, to the detri-
ment of the Party, by falsely inferring that Social-
isation advocates in the Party were in favor of
admitting Communists.
(3) Unfairly used headlines, leading articles, conference
reports, and Branch reports to convey other than
a fair statement of the real position, WHICH IS
ONE OF GROWING RESENTMENT THROUGH-
OUT THE LENGTH AND BREADTH OF THE
PARTY, AGAINST THIS MISUSE OF LABOR’S
PRESS BY ONE MAN.
PASS PROTEST-RESOLUTION AT NEXT
MEETING!
We ask you to express this resentment in your
Branches, in your Councils, in your Unions. If, in ignorance
of the real facts, you have already come to a wrong decision,
rescind it at your next meeting!
Pass resolutions of protest against the misuse of the
"Labor Daily” for political murder! Send such protests to
your local member, to the manager “Labor Daily” direct,
to J. Kilburn, Trades Hall!
The Real "Clique” Look! Look! Our Enemy!
A.L.P. -- Unionist No! No! You mean YOUR Enemy!
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE WANTED.
Send financial assistance c/o J. Kilburn, Trades Hall,
to permit the real facts to be put before you.
Realise that the campaign of misrepresentation is art-
fully intended to prejudice your votes in the present ballots
for Easter Conference delegates!
BEWARE OF THEIR TRAPS!
Realise that loyalty to the leader of our Party, J. T.
Lang, is being cunningly used as a snare to trap you and
warp your judgment! DON’T “FALL FOR” IT!
If we must differ let us differ like reasonable men and
women, who are in the same Party for the same Objective.
In conclusion, we ask you to stand up for—tolerance
among Party members, truthfulness in the Party Press, and the
right of a majority of duly-credentialled Conference dele-
gates to have their decisions respected!
On behalf of the falsely maligned and abused majority
of delegates to the Metropolitan Conference, and in the best
interests of the Pary.
(Signed) J. KILBURN.
(Signed) W. McNAMARA.
Trades Hall, Sydney.
Wednesday,, 22/2/33-
RS.—Paste this cartoon up in your Branch and Union
Meeting, and “on the Job!”
Chapman &. Willoughby Ltd.. Print.
