



MANU SCRIPT ONLY
TITLE; WHO ARE THEY?
SUB-TITLE; A booklet to tell you something
about the background and ways of
the migrants corning to Australia
in the current immigration drive.
CREDIT LINE: Issued by the
Departmont o f Irnmigra ti on
DATE: CANBERRA, January, 1953


This booklet has been prepared by the Department of
Immigration to help Australians know something of the countries
from which our new settlers from Europe have come.
It is not, of course, a detailed treatment of each of these
lands but it alms at answering the questions that the average
Australian would ask about any foreign land ’’Where is it?
How big is it? What sort of a country is it?’ 1 and so on.
In presenting the main facts about these countries, com-
parisons have been made with Australia, This comparative treat-
ment is not intended to reflect adversely on any country but
rather to enable the reader more easily to form a true picture
of the particular country under discussion,
Australians are familiar with the backgrounds of the British
migrants reaching Australia who comprise the largest single com-
ponent of the migration stream. No attempt is made, therefore,
to discuss the countries of England, Ireland, Scotland and 'Tales,
The lands we will deal with are the Baltic States of Latvia,
Estonia and Lithuania, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, the Ukraine,
Poland, the Netherlands, Germany, Malta, Hungary and Italy.
To know the people reaching Australia from these countries,
it is helpful to know something about their background. In
this way we can better understand their ideas and ideals, their
manner s and cus t eras ,
The Department of Immigration offers this booklet as a new
aid to assimilation and in the belief that the ability of
Australians to show an intelligent interest in the newcomers’
homeland will help foster friendly attitudes between new
Australians and old.
It will indicate to the newcomers that Australians harbour
no prejudices against the newcomers’ former homelands and will
inspire in them that extra feeling of well-being and confidence
in their Australian friends which will accelerate their happy
assimilation into the Australian community.


NOTE
Factual Information for this booklet has been taken from
Whitaker’s Almanacks of the years 1938 and 1952, the
Australian Year Book and demographic reviews of the Common-
wealth Bureau of Census and Statistics, and from A.G.Haddon's
"The Races of Man,"
With some countries it has been necessary to describe
them both prior to and subsequent to World ’War Two and the
ensuing peace, Germany is a case in point since a knowledge
of the post-war break up of Western and Eastern Germany is
nedessary to obtain a picture of Germany today.
With others as with the Central European countries = —
they are described as they v/ere before World War Two changed
their boundaries and., in some cases, even their identities.
For instance, Latvia today is a part of the Soviet Union but
we describe it as it was in 1938 when it was an independent
State. Wo do this because the Central European countries prior
to 1938 are those which are remembered by the refugees from those
lands who have found haven in Australia.


INDEX
Introduction .... p n ge k
Pacts about;
Estonia .... ”5
Latvia .... "7
Lithuania .... "8
Czechoslovakia .... ”10
Germany .. • • 11 12
Hungary .... ”15
Italy .... 16
Malta G.C. .... ”18
Netherlands (Holland) .... "20
Poland .... "21
Ukraine .... "23
Yugoslavia .... "25


INTRODUCTION
It was rather strange for Anna that first day at school In
Australia. She was very young, only nine, and liked to talk.
But nobody seemed to understand what she said.
She tried speaking her own native tongue which was Latvian,
then Russian, then German but it didn’t help. Then she tried
the few words of English she knew and that started the ball
rolling.
Children all over the world are friendly creatures and they
love anything new. Before long Anna was in all the games and
her English wont ahead by leaps and bounds. It was amazing, too,
how interested her new playmates wore in her country where
it was, how big it was, what the people did there, what her house
was like and s o on.
But Anna's parents were not sofortunate. The adult
Australians obviously liked them and tried to help them in the
stiff way adults have. Adults are not as inquisitive as
children. They don’t ask the same sort of direct questions.
Often they feel it would be impolite to do so. And so the
Australian friends of Anna's parents did not like to ask them
about their country or what they did before they come to
Australia, They just grouped them —■ not unkindly as "new
Austral ians."
In the early days of the postwar migration flow, our lack
of knowledge of the backgrounds of the newcomers was often
distressing to them. The best example of this was the case of
the "Balts."
The first party of former displaced persons to reach
Australia in had all come originally from the Baltic States
of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia. To Australians they became
known as Balts, a terra which was much more friendly than
foreigners or aliens or DPs, and a tern which was accurate
enough at the' time.
But later migrant vessels brought the former citizens of
other European countries, Poles and Czechs and Yugoslavs and
others. They, too, were known for a time as Balts although the
description was as inaccurate as describing a New Zealander as
an Australian or an Australian as a Fijian.
In short, the origins of our European migrants are as
diverse as their languages, their geographic locations, their%
®oans of livelihood and their modes of cultural expression.
To know that and. to know something about the backgrounds of the
newcomers is to have taken the first step to understanding their
outlooks.
For instance, should an Australian feel somewhat superior
to a migrant because he fumbles haltingly Y/ith the English
language, it is well to remember that the migrant possibly
speaks four other languages fluently and is now busily learning
his fifth. Mary of the European migrants have this gift of
tongues.


A story is told of an Australian trying to make con-
versation with a Czech migrant on a Sydney tram. As they
passed the Sydney University, the Australian pointed it out
and mentloned, proudly, that it had just celebrated its
hundredth birthday.
"Did you have universities in Czechoslovakia?" he in-
quired kindly of the migrant,
"Yes" replied the Czech simply. He hesitated to embarrass
his newly found Australian friend by tolling him that one of
the Czech universities, the University of Prague, had been
founded in 1348 more than 4-00 years before Australia was
discovered.
Did you know that? How much do you know about the home-
lands of our newcomers? Try yourself out at answering the
following quiz;
A Yugoslavia makes common frontiers with
seven other countries. Can you name
four of them?
A What is the capital city of Estonia?
A What is the population of The Netherlands
4,250,000, 23,500,000, 14,750,000, 10,250,000?
A The University of Wageningen is in what country
Yugoslavia, Poland, The Netherlands, Hungary,
Czechoslovakia?
You will find the answers to these questions (and a lot
of other information) in the pages that follow. It will help
make a new Australian feel much happier if we let him see
that we already know something about his country. It will
help his assimilation into the Australian community.
The first three countries to be reviewed will be the
Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Formerly
independent Baltic States, they are now forcibly held as
members of the Soviet Union of socialist republics.
ESTONIA
Where is it?
Estonia is the northernmost of the three Baltic States
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
It is bounded in the north by the Gulf of Finland, in
the west by the Baltic Sea, in the South by Latvia and in
the east by Lake Peipus and the U.S.S.R. beyond.
In addition to its mainland territory, the former re-
public also embraced the islands of Dago, Osel and some 800
smaller islands in the Baltic.
How big is it?
Estonia has an area of about 18,600 square miles
(Tasmania = 26,215 sq. mis.) Before it came under Russian
domination its population (in 1939) was 1,122,000 which is
a little less than the population of Melbourne,


The capital city is Tallinn (formerly known as Reval)
which had a population in 1939 of 1146,338 which is about half
the population of Perth.
'.(ho t sort of country?
Estonia is an extremely flat land with many lakes and with
forests covering about one-fifth of its area. No part of the
country is higher than lt-50 feet above sea level.
Agriculture and dairying arc the chief industries and be-
tween them engage more than half of the population. The chief
crops are rye, oats, barley, flax and. potatoes. Chief dairy
products are bacon, butter and eggs.
Important manufactures in the pre-war Estonia were cotton,
v/oollens, paper, matches and distilling.
Under Russian control, Estonia remains principally a
primary producing country although there has been some develop-
ment of secondary industry during the oast few years,
Estonia has good worts which remain free frern ice block-
ades all round the year. Export goods are carried across the
land along 2+51 miles of broad gauge railways linking Tallinn
with Latvia in the South and Russia, in the oast,
Educat ion and culture
In 1938 Estonia had 1,221+ elementary schools, 39 State
and 19 private secondary schools. The Tartu University,
founded in 1632, had over 3»O0O students in that year. There
is an excellent Technical Institute at Tallinn,
Hi s t ory
The history of Estonia is one of foreign domination.
For nearly 600 years beginning in 1221+, the Estonians
lived in a state of almost complete serfdom to the German land-
owners. Sweden later dominated the country until Russia took
control under Peter fee Great.
Prom 1881 to 1918, when Estonia was a Baltic province
of the Russian Empire, the Russians used every moans to
’'russify 11 the inhabitants without success. Estonia worked
slowly towards self-government and in 1918 the Estonian Diet
declared its independence.
Great Britain, France and Italy recognised Estonia’s new
status but Russia refused to do so and invaded the country again.
It was not until February, 1920, that the full independence of
Estonia was achieved.
The Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939 forced S'etonia to grant
Russia some naval and air bases. By 192+0 Soviet troops
occupied the whole country and in August of that year Estonia
was forcibly incorporated into the Soviet.
Then war flooded across the land as the Germans entered
Estonia from the west to drive the Russians out and bring the
land under German domination. This lasted from 19J+1 until
192+2+ when the tide of war again turned and Soviet troops re-
captured the country. Today Estonia has been forcibly in-
corporated into the U.S.S.R.


LA TVTA
Where Is it?
Latvia is a northern European country lying east and south
of the Gulf of Riga. It is hounded in the north hy Estonia,
in the west by the Baltic Sea, in the south by Lithuania and in
the east by the U.B.S.R,
How big is it?
Latvia, with an area of 25-000 square miles, is nearly as
big as Tasmania (26,000 sq.mls.) Its population in 1939 was
about 2,000,000 (Victoria = 2,335,^75),
The capital city is Riga, In 1939 it had a population of
UOO,OOO which is slightly less than that of Brisbane,
What sort of country?
Latvia is mainly low-lying, marshy country with many lakes.
There are occasional chains of hills but the highest point above
sea level is only 1,000 feet. About one fifth of the land is
covered by forests of pines.
Temperatures are low in winter and the Gulf of Riga is
usually ice-bound from December t o March ,
Nearly two-thirds of the Latvian people live in rural
areas and most of them are engaged in agriculture and dairy
farming. Main crops are rye, barley, oats and wheat. Fisheries
are also important,
Latvian industry was well developed and Included ship-
building, engineering, chemicals, textiles, wood-working and
dairy products. Chief exports were flax, timber, butter, paper
and glass.
Education and culture
The Latvians (or Letts) speak the most archaic of the
Aryan languages. It closely resembles Hindustanee. But prox-
imity to other foreign lands resulted in the average educated
Latvian being able to speak Latvian, Russian, German and fair
English.
Under the Latvian Republic attendance at school was com-
pulsory. In 1938 there were 1,895 state primary schools, I+lU
secondary schools, commercial colleges, technical schools,
several language institutes, a musical academy, an academy
of art and an excellent University of Riga founded in 1919»
For every 100,000 of the population, 300 attended university.
In Australia 390 out of every 100,000 attend University,
There are beautiful opera houses at Riga and Libau.


His tory
Latvia’s history Is a long story of foreign domination
and a short span of independence.
Between 1158 and 1562 was a period of Gorman rule. Then
followed domination first by the Poles, then by the Swedes and
finally by the Russians,
In 1918 Latvia entered on a period of independence under a
Republican form of government. It maintained its independence
and developed the country until 194-0 when the land was annexed
to Russia,
In 1941 the Germans ovor-ran the Baltic States and Latvia
became part of the German :, Ostland :! . When Russia re-conquered
the country in 1944-, Latvia once again became part of the Soviet
Union as it remains today.
It was during those invasions that a great part of the
Latvian population lost their homes and possessions. Many were
forced to flee and many were forcibly deported by the Russians
to Siberia,
LITHUANIA
Where Is It?
Lithuania is the southernmost of the three Baltic States
in northern Europe. It is bounded, by Latvia in the north,
Germany and the Baltic Sea in the west, Poland in the south
and south-east and Russia in the east.
How big is it?
Lithuania is about 20,000 square miles in area, that is
about 3,000 square miles larger than Tasmania. Its population
in 1941 was 2,4-00,000 (Victoria = 2,335,475).
Lithuania Is closely settled and has more than 125 people
per square miles of territory, Australia has a population den-
sity of about two and a half people to the square mile.
Vilna, the capital city, has the biggest urban population.
In 1940 it had just over 200,000 people (Perth = 309,000),
Second biggest town was Kaunas with 125,000 Inhabitants
(Newcastle = 134,580). Other big towns were Memel with 50,000
people (Launceston = 44,000) and Shavll with 17,000 (Goulburn,
N.S.W. 17,390).
What sort of c cun try?
There is a great deal of marsh, swamp and lake country.
Nearly 2,000 lakes and swamps are dotted over the countryside.
On the western side, sand dunes extend along the shores of the
Baltic, Highest point in the generally flat country is less
than 1,000 feet above sea level.


Main river in the country is the Niemen with its
trihutar ies.
In 1939? nearly half the country was capable of being
used for agriculture, a quarter consisted of meadows and pastures,
17 percent was forested, eight percent consisted of turf pits,
marshes and swamps and one percent of rivers and lakes.
The climate is maritime along the coast and continental
in the interior.
The country is rich in fauna. There are more than 200 kinds
of birds and 35 kinds of native animals. These include foxes,
wolves, badgers, squirrels, deer, wild hogs and otters. In the
fresh water streams are more than I+o species of fish including
brill, trout, whiting, sole and herring.
Lithuania is mainly a primary producing country and its
population is mainly rural. Chief industries are agriculture,
stock raising and forestry. Chief products are rye, oats, wheat,
flax, barley, sugar beet, potatoes, livestock, bacon, dairy
produce, cellulose and timber. The most important trees are fir.
Education and culture
In 1939, Lithuania had 2,335 primary schools, (New South
Wales, with a similar population, had 2,850). There were 27
secondary schools, 56 gymnasia, five teachers’ training
colleges (N.S.W. =2), 21 special advanced training schools and
126 special craft schools.
In conformity with the economic pattern of the country,
agricultural education was a part of the usual curriculum as
in Tasmania’s area schools.
In 1938 the University of Vytautas the Great at Kaunas had
292 professors and lecturers and 3,141 students. (Adelaide
University has a teaching staff of about 260 and a student en-
rolment of about 5,000).
At the outbreak of World War 11 there was an Academy of
Agriculture in Dotnuva near Kaunas, a Veterinary Academy and
a school of Arts at Kaunas, and an Institute of Education in
Klaipeda,
History
The his tory of Lithuania can be traced back to the years B.C.
In more recent times the country was under Polish control
from 1385 until 1795* Then followed 123 years of Russian
rule continuing up until 1918, During that time every effort
was made to russify the country. Russian was made the official
language and the use of Lithuanian in any printed fb rm was
forbidden.
But the seeds of Lithuanian nationalism remained alive
and flowered in the era of independence from 1918 to 1939.
In March, 1939, Germany seized Klaipeda, the nerve centre
of Lithuanian trade. Friendship with Russia was found ex-
pedient and a friendship pact was signed. But on August 3, 1940,
Lithuania was farced to join the Soviet Union,
Then Germany attacked Russia and invaded Lithuania. On


July 17, 1941* Hitler announced the creation of his "Ostland”
which included Lithuania,
Again the tide of war changed and Russia over-ran the land.
The country was razed, its industries exploited or smashed, a
great portion of its population killed or forced to floe.
Lithuania was a crippled land when the war ended and it was
absorbed by Russia as a Soviet Republic.
The section that follows deals with other European countries
from which Australia has received migrants. Some of the new-
comers, like the Dutch and the Maltose, have cane from free
countries of Western Europe. Others, like the Poles and the
Czechs, include persons who were displaced from their homes and
countries by war and its aftermaths.
The countries reviewed in this section have been arranged
in alphabetical order.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Where is it?
The Republic of Czechoslovakia occupies a strategic
position in the heart of Europe, It lies among some of
Europe's busiest communication routes and forms a zone of
contact between the Germanic and Slav worlds.
To the north and north-west lies Germany, in the south
are Austria and Hungary, to the east is the Ukraine and Poland
extending up to the north-east.
How big is it?
Czechoslovakia has an area of 54*230 square miles which
makes it about twice as big as Tasmania (26,215 square miles).
In 1930 it had a population of a little more than 14*729,000
(Australia's population is about 8,600,000),
The capital city is Prague which had a population in 1935
of 92 0,0 00 (Melbourne = 1,326,400). Other large cities with
populations ranging from 120,000 to 2 80,000 are Morava, Ostrava,
Brunn, Bratislava and Pilsen.
Czechoslovakia has a high density of population 243
to the square mile but the main body of the population does
not concentrate Itself in urban areas.
What sort of country?
Czechoslovakia is made up of two different types of land.
Thewrstern part is ri«h in mineral wealth and has advanced
agriculture and industry. It has a dense population and its
outlook is western, progressive and democratic.
The eastern or Carpathian area is somewhat backward duo
largely to its mountain isolation. It has a sparse
population relying mainly on primitive living methods.
The climate ranges from maritime to continental.
The whole country is well framed and agricultural
production is high. In foods, the country is almost self-
supporting.


Principal crops arc rye, wheat, barley and oats. Extensive
sugar beet crops provide the raw material for an important
sugar industry.
The beer brewing industry has won a world-wide reputation.
In 1935 there were over 5-00 breweries in operation. A typo of
beer famous the world over, the pllsencr beer, takes its name
from the town of Pilsen.
Mountain country and climate combine t o make the country
rich in forests. One third of the land is covered with forests
whoso quantity and quality makes the timber wealth of the
c ountry enormous,
Mineral wealth is great. Goal, radium, gold, silver, iron,
graphite and lead are mined. The whole country is rich in
thermal and mineral springs. Bohemia has rich deposits of
kaolin, clay and sand.
Industry is well developed. Jn Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia,
two-fifths of the population are engaged in industry. The var-
ious industries are well organised both in machinery and
techniques and equal the best in Europe.
Czechoslovakia has no direct acc ss to the sea but has a
right of access over the Elbe and Oder rivers to Hamburg and
Stett in.
Education and culture
Before the Nazi invasion in 1939, Czechoslovakia had about
16,000 elementary schools with 1,800,000 students and about iqOO
secondary and technical schools with 160,000 students.
The deep roots of Czechoslovakian education and culture are
exemplified in the University of Prague which was founded in
135-8 more than 5-00 years before Australia was discovered.
In 1938 there were ibout 11,000 students at the University
of Prague, (Melbourne University has a student enrolment of
about 9,300).
There are also universities at Brunn and Bratislava.
On October 21, 195-7, President Be nos opened a now university
at Olomounec. Previously there had been a university there in
the 16th century. This was closed by the Hapsburgs,
In addition to schools, colleges, and universities, Czecho-
slovakia has veterinary academies, a mining academy, faculties
of theology and an academy of arts.
There have been seme outstanding writers in the history of
Czechoslovakian novel, drama and verse. Home d~te from the
middle of the 15-th century, Czechoslovakian literature
flourished until the end of the l?thcentury, stagnated during a
century of Austrian repression and received a new impetus during
the 19th century. ’-Then independence was violated in 1939, the
freedom of the press was abolished. It was restored temporarily
after the war but has now been "curtailed' 1 by the ruling
Communist Party,
History
Czechoslovakia was formerly part of the Aus tro-Hungarian
monarchy. It declared its independence in October, 1918,
Czechoslovakia included the forma Austrian provinces of


Bohemia and Moravia and part of the province of Silesia;
also northern Hungary from the Danube to the Carpathians,
On October 28, 1918, the Czech National Council took
control of Czech lands. On November lit- that year, the Slovak
nation united politically with the Czechs and a single,
sovereign, independent state of Czechoslovakia was formed.
This republic lasted as a happy and prosperous land till 1939*
For 17 years of that time it v/as under the leadership of Pro-
fessor T.G.Masaryk. On his retirement because of ill health.
Dr, Edward Benes was elected president.
In September 1938, Hitler demanded cession of the Sudetan
districts of Czechoslovakia t o the German Retch, At their
Munich meeting on September 29, 1938, the four Powers (Great
Britain, Prance, Germany and Italy) agreed to let Hitler
have his demands.
Despite his protestations of "no more territorial demands"
after receiving the cession of Sudetenland, Hitler invaded
Czechoslovakia on March LLj., 1939 and declared that the re-
public had "ceased to exist" and was now a protectorate of
the German Reich under the name of Bohemia and Moravia.
Great Britain, Prance, America and Russia would not admit
Hitler’s claim and Dr. Benes established a Czechoslovakian
Provisional Government in London in July, 19U0.
When the country v/as liberated, lands taken by Germany,
Poland and Hungary in 1938 were restored to Ocsechoslovak
sovereignity, Dr. Benes was re-established as president of the
republic and continued in that office until February, 19U8,
when the all-party government which he led v/as forced out of
office under Communist pressure.
The new government in Czechoslovakia is essentially
Communis t.
GERMANY in 1938
Where is it?
Germany is In central Europe with access to both the North
and Baltic Seas in the north. Commencing in the north and
running around clockwise, borders of Germany were Denmark, the
Baltic Sea, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Austria in the south,
Switzerland in the south-west; in the west were Prance, Belgium,
the Netherlands and the North Sea.
Hoy/ big is it?
The Germany of 1938 occupied 182,000 square miles (New
South ' r ales = 310,000) as against 208,800 in 191 U. By the
Treaty of Versailles, portions were ceded to other lands e.g.
the Saar coal basin to Prance, part of West Prussia to
Poland and north Schleswig to Denmark.
The population in 1936 v/as estimated at 67,105,000.


Germany comprised the federated States of Prussia, Bavaria,
Saxony, Wurttemberg and a number of minor States. The Republic
of Prussia comprised the larger part of Germany with Its
capital city, Berlin, the capital of the country.
The Republic of Prussia occupied 113,750 square miles in
192 - (Victoria = 87,88 b-). The Republic of Bavaria occupied
29,486 square miles (Tasmania = 26,215) with its capital city
Munich, Saxony had an area of 5,856 square miles and its
capital city 'was Dresden. Wurttemberg had an area of 7,s3b-
square miles and its capital was Stuttgart,
What sort of country?
Forests of coniferous trees cover much of the land and are
the basts of a flourishing wood and wood-products Industry.
Although much of north Germany is sandy and infertile,
natural conditions in general favour agriculture. Crops include
rye, wheat, spelt, oats, barley, buckwheat, maize, potatoes,
beans, leguminous and root plants including sugar beet, hops,
vegetables, fruits, vines, flax, hemp, rape and tobacco.
The livestock and dairying industries attained a high
degree of development.
Mineral wealth Included coal, iron, manganese, copper,
lead, zinc, tin, nickel, quicksilver, gold, silver, sulphur,
antimony, cobalt, arsenic, bismuth, wolfram, uranium, graphite,
alum, boracite, pyrites, petroleum, potash, amber, semi-precious
stones and china clay.
Agriculture was the main occupation but industry was highly
developed in all the leading German states, Prussia lead in
coalmining, iron and steel. Cotton works were extensive
and there were many factories making fabrics, carpets and woollens.
Bavaria produced machinery, jewelry, scientific instruments,
pottery, wood products, papers, leather textiles and beer,
Saxony specialised in machinery, yarns and cloth, knitted
goods, hosiery, furs, pottery, glass and musical instruments,
Wurttemberg had manufactures of textiles, paper, leather,
firearms, clocks and tobacco. The toy industry of Thuringia
was important.
History
The history of Germany from 1863-19b5 Is one of agression.
In 186 b, Prussia and Austria attacked Denmark and annexed
Schleswig-Holstein,
In 1866, after the Seven Weeks’ War, Prussia obtained from
her former ally, Austria, leadership of the North Germanic Con-
federat ion.
In 1870, following the Pranco-Prussian war, Prussia took
Alsace-Lorraine from Prance.
The North Germanic Confederation and the three South German
States became the Germanic Confederation and the King of Prussia
was proclaimed German Emperor at Versailles in 1871,
At the outbreak of World War 1, Germany was a Confederate
League bearing the name Gorman Empire under the leadership of
the King of Prussia who held the title of German emperor.


Two days before the armistice of November 11, 1918, the
German Emperor abdicated. Government of the country was taken
over by the Council of tho People’s Commissioners in Berlin,
In January, 1919, elections were held to a National
Assembly on the basis of universal adult suffrage. Tho
Assembly met at Weimar and elected Friedrich E vert president
of the republic. On his death in 1921+, Field Marshal Paul von
Hindenburg' was elected.
Von Hindenburg was rc-elected in 1932 when his closest
rival was Adolf Hitler who received 13,1+17,1+60 votes to von
Hindenburg's 19,359,61+2.
A general election in 1933 gave Hitler's party (National
Socialist German Workers' party or, better known, Nazis) an
absolute majority in the legislature (tho Reichstag) and Hitler
became Prime Minister (Chancellor). The position became fused
with President on the death of von Hindenburg in 1931+ and Adolf
Hitler exercised supreme and uncontrolled authority in the Reich
as dictator (Fuehrer).
After concluding a non-aggression pact with Russia in
August 1939, Hitler invaded Poland on September 1, 1939, and
World War 11 began. After six years of bitter war,-Germany
surrendered on May 8, 191+5, and Adolf Hitler was presumed to
have died, probably as a suicide, on April 30, 191+5.
GERMANY TODAY
Following tho surrender of Germany, representatives of the
Supremo Commands of the United Kingdom, the U.S.A., tho U.S.S.R.,
and tho Provisional Government of the French Republlc assumed
control over Germany.
Tho four occupation powers agreed to divide Germany Into
four zones. Those were;
British Zone (in the
north-west) of 39,700 sq.mls* and a population of
2ii,215,700
American Zone (in the
south-west) " U 1 ,506 11 " " 51 18,001+,500
French Zone (in tho
west) " 15,527 " w i! " 5,61+0,000
Russian Zone (in the
cast) !! i+1,390 " ;i ;; ;; 17,313,731+
The area of Greater Berlin Is occupied by forces of each
of the Four Powers,
States which fall into the various zones of occupation are;
British Zone; North Rhlne-Westphalia,Lower Saxony, Schleswig-
Holstein and Hamburg
American Zone; Bavaria, Hesse, Wurttemborg-Baden, Bremen
Rhinoland-Palatinate, South Baden, Wurrttemberg-
Hohenzollcrn, Saar
Russian Zone; Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia, Brandenburg,
Mecklenburg


Today Germany is divided into Western .and Eastern Germany,
Western Germany includes the British, .American and French zones.
Eastern Germany is the Russian zone.
Western Germany is a Federal Republic with an area of
96,733 square miles. Its population in 1950 was 1+7,861,100.
Capital city is Bonn in North Rhine Westphalia on the left bank
of the Rhine, 15 miles from Cologne. Population of Bonn is
111,287. Bonn is a cathedral and university town, the
university buildings being the seat of the legislature.
Head of the Government is the President who has a cabinet
of Ministers, There are I+o2 members of the Federal Assembly
which hold elections in 191+9 according to the Basic Law, the
name given to the provincial constitution for Western Germany
agreed on by the three Western Powers.
HUNGARY
Whore is It?
The Republic of Hungary is a central European land without
access to the sea. It is surrounded by Czechoslovakia in the
north, Rumania in the east, Yugoslavia in the south and south-
west and Austria in the west.
How big is it?
The area of Hung-ry is 36,000 square miles (Tasmania =
26,215 square miles). In 191+9 it had a population of 9,207,000
(Australia's = about 8,600,000).
Capital city is Budapest with a population in 191+9 of
1,058,300 (Melbourne = 1,326,1+00) . Other big cities are Szeged
with 132,600 people and Debrecen with 119,600 (Newcastle,
N.S.W, = 134,580). Budapest is situated on the Danc.be.
What sort of country?
The greater part of Hungary embraces the Alfoldmer Great
Plain, parts of which are considered to be among the most fertile
for agricultural products in the world and producing grain of
excellent quantity and supporting horses, cattle and swine.
Crops of bread grain, maize, potatoes, sugar beet, and food
beet are grown. Irrigation is being introduced and rice product-
ion is being encouraged.
The mountain area of the country has deposits of coal and
bauxite. The bauxite deposits supply a growing aluminium in-
dustry, There are oil wells in western Hungary which food local
refineries for consumption at home and for export. Crude oil is
also exported.
No part of Hungary touches the sea but it has 687 miles of
navigable rivers. Fisheries are maintained in the Danube.
Education and culture
The Hungarians speak the Magyar language which is one of
the Pinn-Hgrian Languages and which has retained its purity since
its introduction into Western Europe in the ninth century.


Education in Hungary is compulsory for children between
the ages of six and 15. While Magyar (Hungarian) is the
language in general use, the teaching of Russian in schools is
compulsory for children aged 13 to 18.
In $950 Hungary had 130,000 infants in more than I,l+oo in-
fant schools and over 1,000,000 children in 8,000 elementary
schools. In addition there are middle and continuation classes
and six State universities with over 8,000 students.
In 1951> Hungary had five daily newspapers and a number of
provincial papers but the latter wore merely echoes of the Buda-
pest party papers.
His tory
Hungary became an Independent kingdom in 1001 when the
Magyars were recognised by the pope. Tfccy remained until 1301
when the House of Anjou took over the crown.
During the 16th and 17th century the land was dominated
by the Turks. At the end of that period Hungary was joined with
Austria into the Austro-Hungarian Empire,
In 1918 it was declared a republic but the kingdom was
reconstituted in 1920.
Hungary entered World War 11 on the side of Germany. In
March 19UU, German forces occupied the land and set up a Quisling
government. By April 19k5t the Russian forces had cleared the
Germans from the land.
In 1914J+ a provisional government of liberation had been set
up and in 19k5 Hungary signed an armistice with the United Nations,
Under land reform acts introduced by the government of the
republic, landowners were dispossessed and their holdings shared
among the peasants in small holdings. Inflation and destruction
of the currency broke the economic status of the middle-class
and a progressive programme of rationalisation was started.
This began with the rationalisation of the mines and heavy
industry and moved on to embrace banks, schools and industry
generally.
In 19U8 began a scheme to force peasants into co-operatives
and to establish collective farming.
In 1949 elections were held but no opposition to the
Communist party was allowed to stand and the Communists re-
ceived the almost unanimous vote of the electors.
ITALY
Where Is it?
Italy is a Republic in the s oath of Europe, It consists of
a peninsula, the large islands of Sicily and Sardinia, the island
of Elba and about 70 smaller islands,
er
It is bounded on the north by Switzland and Austria,
on the east by the Adriatic Sea and Yugoslavia, .on the south by
the Mediterranean .and on the west by Prance and the Ligurian and
Tyrrhenian Seas,


How big Is it?
The total area is 131,000 square miles (Victoria = 87*881+
square miles and New South Wales = 310*372 square miles). Its
population in 1951 was 1+6,1+52,000,
Sicily (then known as Trinacria) was the first province
gained by the Romans beyond the peninsula. Sardinia was added
soon afterwards at the close of the second Punic War in 202 B.C.
Rome, the capital city, was founded in 753 B.C. according
to legend. It had a population in 1951 of 1,687*000 (Sydney =
1,581+, 830.) Other towns with populations exceeding a million
are Milan with 1,295,700 (Melbourne = 1,326,1+00) and Naples with
1,01+1,000.
What sort of country?
To the north of Italy lie the Alps divising the country
from Prance, Austria, Switzerland and Yugoslavia.
Down the east coast of the peninsula, like a backbone, run
the Apennines close to an inhospitable coast. Only harbours
along the coast are Brindisi and Otranto,
The western part of the peninsula has wide fertile plains
with ample streams and sheltered seaports.
Chief rivers are the Po (220 miles) and Adige in the north,
and the Arno and Tiber, (Australia's River Murray = 1,609 miles.)
Agriculture including the growing of grapes, olives, chest-
nuts and r ice is the main industry, Italian wines are celebrated.
Olives and olive oil are produced in the south. Much fruit is
grown for export. Wheat production was stimulated under the
Fascist regime. Cultivation of silkworms is an important in-
dustry,
Italy is poor in metallic mineral resources. Production of
sulphur is important and other metals produced include iron
pyrites, mercury, load, zinc, aluminium, potassic salts and iron
ores. Marble is quarriedin large quantities. Salt and tobac«o
are Government monopolies.
Chief manufactures are woollens, cotton, silk, rayon, hemp
and linen] iron and steel and their products; shipbuilding,
gloves, motor vehicles, rubber tyres and tubes, leathers, straw
and felt hats, furniture, chemical products, paper, agriculture
and other machinery, prepared meats, art works like mosaics,
pottery, glass and alabaster.
Education and culture
Italian is a Romance language derived from Latin,
Italian literature (in addition to Latin literature which
is the common inheritance of the civilised world) is one of
the richest in Europe. Prominent names during its golden age
were Dante (1265-1321), Petrarch (130U-137U) and Boccaccio
(1313-1375); in its renaissance period were Ariosto (ll+7l+-1533)*
Machiavolli (11+69-1527)* Tasso (15^4-1595).
Modern Italian literature has prominent names including
Carducci and Gabriele d’Annunzto,
Primary education in Italy is free and compulsory. Evening
classes are compulsory for military recruits. Education is
financed by taxation and local grants, Secondary education is


mainly State-controlled and schools are increasing in number.
Several of the 25 universities are of very ancient
f ■ undat i<n Bologna - , Genoa, Macerta, Naples, Padua and
Perugia in the 13th century; Siena, Rome, Pisa, Pavla and
Ferrara in the 14th; Catania and Turin in the 15th and Parma,
Messina and Urbino in the 16th.
His tory
Students will be familiar with the legends and history
of the ancient Romans Remulus and Remus who were suckled
by a wolf and founded R.mo on its seven hills, Romulus who slow
his brother for daring t, j jump over the earthen wall he was
building around Rome, Julius Caesar the celebrated soldier.
In more modern times, Italian unity was won under the
House of Savoy in 1870 after a struggle in which the groat
patriots Mass ini, Garibaldi and Cavour were prominent.
In 1873 'the King of Italy entered Rome and proclaimed the
city as capital.
The government was that of a constitutional monarch with a
legislature of two houses the Senate of 385 life members
appointed by the King and the Chamber of 536 mcmibers elected by
adult manhood suffrage.
Under Mussolini, who was continuously in office from 1925
until his death in 1943, a now form of Government was built
up the Fascist syndical-corporative State. Candidates for
election to the Chamber of Deputies were offered to voters
on bloc. Voters could either accept or reject all of those
offered, £he list of candidates drawn up by the Fascist
Grand Council had roughly equal representation of capital and
labour.
The Fascist regime was abolished on July 25,1943, On
Mussolini's death, Marshal Badoglio came to office, A general
election and a referendum were held in 1946 when Italians re-
corded 12,700,000 votes in favour of making their country a
Republic as against 10,700,000 votes in favour of restoring it
to a monarchy.
The Royal Family left the country and Signor Alctde do
Gaspori became Prime Minister. In 1947 a new constitution was
approved laying the foundations of the Italian Republic. Article
1 of the constitution states ’’ltaly is a Democratic Republic
founded on work. Sovereignity belongs to the people who exercise
it in the forms and within the limits of the Constitution,
MALTA, G.G.
Where is it?
Malta GG is an island in the Modltterranean, 58 miles from
Sicily and about 180 miles from the African coast.
How big is it?
The island is about 17 miles long and nine miles wide with
an area of 94.9 square miles. The colony of Malta includes also
the adjoining Island of Gozo (25 square miles), Comino and some
islets.


What sort of country?
The climate is hot.
The Islands are intensively cultivated. Wheat, barley,
clover and t oraatoos are grown extensively on dry lands and
temperate and sub-tropical vegetables are grown on irrigated
land. Chief export crops are potatoes, onions and cumin seed.
The livestock industry was developing before the war*
Most of the population are engaged in agriculture or
fishing.
Notable was the f ormer capital but it has dwindled in
importance. The modern capital is Valetta which was founded
in 1566. It had a population in 1948 of 18,666 (Cairns, Qld» =
18,000.)
Malta is the halfway point between Suez and Gibraltar and
is an important port of call for vessels. It has an important
dockyard and is the Mediterranean headquarters for the PH’s
Mediterranean Fleet,
Education and culture
English is the official language of administration and the
Maltese language is the official tongue used in all courts of
law and in general use,
Malta has a university of about 300 students and a Lyceum
of about 1,030,120 Government primary schools, six secondary
schools and two technical schools.
There are many private elementary and secondary schools.
History
The island is said to have been converted to Christianity
on the occasion of the s hipwreck of Saint Paul in the year 58.
It was conquered by the Moors in the dark ages when its
commerce was destroyed and the island was used as a pirate base.
In 1090 it was again brought to Christianity by Norman
Count Roger of Normandy, It was ruled successively by the
Angevins and Aragonese and in 1530 was handed to the Knights of
St. John who made it a str nghold for Christianity,
In 1565 H* withstood the famous siege of the Turks when
the leader of the knights was Grand Master La Valette,
In 1798 the island was stormed again when Napoleon drove
out the Knights. But the islanders rose against the French
garrison and compelled the French to surrender in 1800, The
islands were then, at their own request, admitted into the
British Empire in 1814.
In World ’far 11, the island again withstood sieges when
432 members of the garrison and 1,540 civilians were killed by
enemy aircraft and about 35»000 houses were destroyed or damaged.
In recognition of the island's stand, the Parliament of
the United Kingdom made a free grant of £10,000,000 for restoring
war damaged buildings and the King awarded the George Cross
bravery to the entire island.


NETHERLANDS (HOLLAND)
Where Is it?
The Kingdom of Holland is a maritime country of western
Europe on the North Sea. It consists of 11 provinces and re-
claimed part of the Zuider Zee.
East of the Netherlands lies Germany and south lies
Belgium. The North Sea is to the north and west,
H n -- big is it?
It has an area os 13,511+ square miles (Tasmania = 26,215)
and a population in 1951 of 10,199,000,
The capital city is Amsterdam with a 1950 population of
&k5>077 (Brisbane = i+i+i+,6so and Melbourne = 1,326,1+00). Seat
of the Government is The Hague with a 1951 population of
571,320.
Other big cities are Rotterdam with 681+,297 and Eindhoven,
Groningen, Tilburg, Nijmegen, Enschede and Arnhem all with a
population of over 100,000 (Newcastle, N.S.W. = 134*580).
What sort of country?
The land is generally flat and low, intersected by many
canals and connecting rivers. The country is, in fact, a net-
work of water courses including l+,l+oo miles of navigable rivers
and canals.
Principal rivers are the Rhine, Maas and Yssel with the
mouths of the Schelde,
The highest land level is about 600 feet above sea level
but about half the country is below mean sea level.
The country has 1,800 miles of main roads and 1,920
miles of railway. It owns 1,086 ships of a total of 2,953,000
tons.
Chief agricultural products are wheat, rye, barley, oats,
beans, peas, flax seed, potatoes, sugar beet, cattle, horses,
swine, butter, cheese, poultry, eggs, vegetables, fruit and flower
bulbs and important fishing industries.
Among principal industries are engineering, motors, ship-
building, iron and steel, incandescent lamps, radio, electrical
and telecommunication equipment, cotton, woollen, linen, rayon
spinning and weaving, earthenware, glass, leather goods, oils,
paper, cigars, liquors, beer and clothing.
Goal production in 1950 was 12,21+0,000 metric tons (1 ton =
1.016 metric tons.) Diamond cutting is still Important but de-
clining.
Education and culture
Dutch is a Teutonic language of Saxon origin. It is
closely akin to Old English, It is spoken not only in the
Netherlands but in northern Belgium, by many people in In-
donesia and by the Netherlands West Indies,
Private State-aided primary education is encouraged rather
than public education although the latter is provided, if re-
quired, by local taxation. All teachers’ salaries are paid by
the Ministry of Education, The average attendance at secondary


schools is 93 percent.
There are many secondary schools which are well equipped
and well attended. The principal universities are at
Amsterdam, Groningen, Leiden, Nijmegen and Utrecht, There
are technical universities at Delft (polytechnic), Rotterdam
(economics), Wageningen (agriculture) and Tilburg (commercial).
History
The Royal House of Orange descends from a German Count
Walrara who lived during the 11th century. By marriage, the
family obtained Baroncy of Breda and settled in the Netherlands.
Members of the family gained great influence in the United
Provinces of the Netherlands under the title of Governors, This
dignity was confirmed in and the title was conferred on
Willem IV and his successors.
His successor, as Governor, was Willem V who had to take
refuge in England in 1795 when the French amy invaded the
country. The family returned in November 1813 when French
domination had ended.
After diplomatic negotiations, the Belgian provinces who
had been subject to the House of Austria before the French
Revolution, wore ordered by the Congress of Vienna to bo
joined to the Northern Netherlands thus making it one kingdom.
Willem was then declared King Willem 1 at The Hague on
March 16, 1815»
The union between northern and the southern Netherlands
was dissolved by the Belgian revolution in 1830 and was con-
firmed by the Treaty "of London in 1839 which constituted Bel-
gium as an independent Kingdom.
The present monarch of the Netherlands is Queen Juliana
who was inaugurated in 19U8 as successor to Queen Wilhelmina,
her mother. Queen Wilhelmina had a happy reign for 50 years
before abdicating to her daughter.
POLAND
Where is it?
Poland lies south of the Baltic States adjoining Lithuania
and the Baltic Sea. It is a north central position with the
Baltic and Lithuania to the north, the U.S.S.R. to the east,
Czechoslovakia to the south and Germany to the west.
How big is it?
Poland in 1950 had an area of about 120,200 square miles
(New South Wales = 310,372). Its population was 21+,000,000.
It is a closely settled population with 200 persons living to
the square mile.
The capital city is Warsaw, In 1950 this city had a
population of 650,000 (Brisbane = UhUf 6so), Other large cities
are Lodz with a population of 619,000 people, Cracow (the
capital of mediaeval Poland) with 330,000 (Perth = 309,000),
Breslau with 289,000 Danzig with 193,000 and Lublin with 116,000,


What sort of country?
Undulating plains form the main part of the territory of
Poland. Those are rich and fertile, broken by a network of
lakes and rivers. The productivity of the soil has been re-
sponsible for the main part of Poland's wealth but the vast
mineral wealth of the southern uplands has also played a great
part in the country's economy.
The climate varies according to proximity to the Baltin
Sea or the Carpathian Mountains, There is a good annual rain-
fall of about 23 inches (Victoria = 2 14 inches). Rivers are
generally ice-bound for the greater part of the winter.
Before World War 11, Poland was largely agricultural.
Today it is also heavily industrial and all branches of in-
dustry have been placed on a planned economic basis.
The main agricultural crops are potatoes, wheat, rye,
oats, barley and sugar beet. Live stock include cattle, horses,
sheep and pigs. Chief manufactures are textiles, machinery,
metal works, chemicals and leather.
There are valuable coal mines in Upper Silesia, iron,
zinc, lead ore, mineral and potassium salts and oil fields in
Galicia. Output of coal in was 59,000,000 tons.
Educat ion and culture
In the pre-World War 11 Poland, education was free and
compulsory. In 19U9 there were over pupils in
elementary schools, 200,000 in secondary schools, professional
schools and trade schools.
In the same year there were 12 universities and 21 other
institutions of university status* These employed a teaching
staff of 6,237 training 77,52 U students nearly half of whom
were women, (in Australia which has a population about one-third
of that in Poland there are 2,168 members of the teaching staff
for about 32,000 students.)
There wore universities at Cracow, (a scientific institu-
tion established in 1361+), at Warsaw and Lwow (polytechnics in-
stitutions) at Poznan, Lublin and Wilno, Throughout the
country there were many libraries of a very high class',
museums and an Academy of Literature at Warsaw,
Polish literature developed rapidly after the foundation
of the University of Cracow a printing press was set up
there in lUlk and Copernicus died at that university in
15U3.
In 1939 there were 70 daily newspapers publishing in
Poland and 21 in Warsaw,
History
The history of Poland has been long and troubled. There
is no certain record of its history until the end of the 10th
century and from then onward there has been a succession of
foreign rules.
Students will be familiar with the Polish Partitions of
1772, 1793 and 1795 in which Prussia, Russia and Austria share*..
During the Napoleonic Wars the Grand Duchy of Warsaw
was created and later dissolved. The Tsar of Russia assume*
the title of King of Poland. In 1831 and 18U8 Russia and


Austria annexed portions of Polish territory and Poland ceased
to exist as an independent state until the war of 191 U-18,
Then she became independent again after 150 years of foreign
rule.
In 1921 Prance entered into an agreement with Poland
guaranteeing Poland's territory against aggression. In 1939
Britain entered into a similar agreement.
When Hitler invaded Poland, Prance and Britain honoured
their guarantees.
In 1939, Poland had an area of 150,572 square miles and
a population of about 35,000,000. On September 17, 1939,
Russia invaded eastern Poland and Germany and Russia divided the
country between themselves and declared that Poland had ieased
to exist.
Under this fourth partition, Russia received 77,000 square
miles with 13,000,000 people and Germany 73,000 square miles
with 22,000,000 people,
polish fighting men who were ovcrwholmed on their own
soil by the German blitzkrieg, fought on in Prance and Britain.
Polish airmen fought with the R.A.P. Polish sailors fought
with the R.N, Polos fought at Narvik, in northern Africa where
they shared the hardships with Australian and other troops
penned in at Tobruk, in the Italian campaign and in the final
liberation of Europe.
War casualties and victims of aggression amounted to nearly
7,000,000.
It was the Russian army which drove the Germans largely
from Poland and liberation of the country by Russia meant
almost automatic subjection of the country to the U.S.S.R,
In a general election was held in Poland and a Govern-
ment formed. But Great Britain and the U.S.A. did not regard
it as having been democratically elected and their represent-
atives did not attend the opening of the Governments on
February i+, 19U7.
In December, I9l+B, the Polish ’Workers' Party and the Polish
Socialist Party fused to form the United Workers Party which is
communist and which controls every branch of State activity.
UKRAINE
Where is It?
The Ukraine is situated east of Czechoslovakia and Poland.
To its north lies White Russia. Its eastern frontier is the
U.S.S.R, In the south are Rumania, the Black Sea, the Crimean
and the Sea of Azov,
How big is it?
The Ukraine comprises 25 provinces and has an area of
225,000 square miles (New South Wales = 310,372 square miles.)
Its population is 1+1,200,000 and the population density is 18i+
persons to the square mile.


The Ukraine obtains about 20 percent of the total popu-
lation of the U.S.S.R. Kiev, the capital city, had a population
in 1939 of (Melbourne = 1,326,400.)
Other main towns are the former capital, Kharkov, with a
population of 833,000 and Odessa with a population of 604,000
(Brisbane = 444,650.)
What sort of country?
The greater part of the Ukraine is a plain with small
elevations. The climate is moderate with relatively mild
winters and hot summers.
The main rivers are the Dnieper, Dniester, Bug and Donetz
which is a tributary of the Don.
The main feature of the Ukraine's physical features is
Its steppeland running generally south-weat to north-east.
Another distinctive physical feature in the south-west is
the highland area of the Carpathian Mountains.
Informer times, the Ukraine had extensive forests, mainly
conifers, and oaks. Intensification of settlement and
agriculture greatly reduced the forest area so that by the end
of last century, only about eight percent of the country re-
mained under timber.
The land is ideally suited for cereal growing which is
extensive.
The main centre of the Soviet coal mining and iron and
steel industry is in the southern part of the Ukraine, Before
the last war, the Ukraine was providing more than half of the
total supply of coal for the Soviet, over 60 percent of its
iron, 17 percent of its metal goods.
The central steppe region is the greatest sugar producing
area in the U.S.S.R. Prom this region the Ukrainians provided
64 percent of the Soviet's sugar supply. The Ukraine also
provided 22 percent of the Soviet’s wheat.
Education and culture
In 1947 there were 791 elementary schools with 113,000
pupils, 31 secondary schools, 14 technical schools and four
schools of music.
Kiev is world famous for its ancient culture, its uni-
versity, art galleries and museum.
There are other universities at Kharkov and Odessa.
History
The story of the Ukraine during this century is one of
tragedy. When the Russian Empire collapsed in 1917, the
Ukrainians established a republic. Two years later the Germans
and Austrians occupied the land because they claimed that a
trade agreement had not been honoured.
Two Ukrainian leaders arose to overthrow the occupiers
and re-establish the republic with themselves as dictators.
When they sought to unite their republic with the republic of ■
west Ukraine set up by the Galician Ruthenes, Poland opened
hostilities because Galicia had been previously assigned to her
by the allied powers.


One of the Ukrainian dictators, Potliura, was driven from
his country by an uprising of Ukrainian Bolshevists. He re-
treated to Galicia and joined forces with the Poles. Russia
now intervened, smashed the polish forces and re-established
the independence of the Ukraine,
On July 6, 1923, the constitution of the U.S.S.R, was
adopted and the Ukraine becamea constituent member.
In 19b-l the Ukraine again felt the horrors of war.
The republic was over-run by the Germans and the Russians,
in retreat, smashed and. destroyed everything as they were
forced back. The land was left a smouldering, ruined wilder-
ness .
In 19b-3 the Germans were driven out and the republic re-
stored. Loss of human life was estimated at 2,300,000. Most
coal mines were flooded, power stations, mills and factories
wore blown up. Only b-2 percent of cattle, 22 percent of horses,
18 percent of sheep and 10 percent of pigs lived.
YUGOSLAVIA
Where 13 it?
Yugoslavia lies along the eastern coast of the Adriatic
Sea opposite the coast of Italy.. Its frontiers touch on
seven countries if you start at the north of the Adriatic
and move around clockwise you will find the border touches
Italy, Austria and Hungary in the north, Rumania and Bulgaria in
the east and Greece and Albania in the south,.
How big is it?
The republic has an area of 96,000 square miles
(Victoria = 87,88 - square miles.) It had a population in 193b-
0f lb-,730,000 people.
The capital city is Belgrade, It had a population in 19b-8
of 388,000 (Adelaide = 382, b-sb-)* Other important towns are
Zagreb, Latbarh and Sarajevo.
Yugoslavia is really made up of seven areas the
Serbia bt 1913, the Montenegro of 1912, Bosnia and Hersegovina,
part of Dalmatia, part of Groatia-Slovania, Slovenia and Voyvodina.
In other words, Yugoslavia is a convenient name for the Serb,
Croat and Slovene State,
What sort of country?
Geographicaly Yugoslavia is rather complicated.
There is an area known as the Pannonian Basin, a great
depress ion b etween the Rips on the west and the Transylvian
Mountains on the east. This region, including the plains,
river valleys and hill country, constitutes economically the
most important part of the state. Here there is great pro-
duction of maize, wheat, barley, oats, tobacco, grapes, flax,
sheep, cattle and pigs.
In the Slovene Alps region is a well developed dairying
industry which produces enough for substantial exports.
There are also extensive forests in this region including
conifers and the hardwoods beech, oak and chestnut.


The Morava-Vardar Depression stretches south to the G-reek
frontier and is made up of a series of fertile basins alter-
nating with great mountain masses. The arable plains and basins
produce a great variety of crops. The mountain areas carry
large sheep runs and are rich in mineral resources Including
coal, lignite, copper, silver load, chrome ore, zinc, pyrites,
bauxite and iron.
There is fishing along the coast particularly about the
coastal islands where there is a canning industry.
In the mountain region tobacco, maize, wheat and barley
are grown and some wine is produced.
On the whole, Yugoslavia is mainly agricultural. Seventy
five percent of the people arc engaged in primary production
livestock, cereals, timber and minerals,
Educati on and jcultjire
Education is compulsory and, at the elementary level, is
free. In 1939 there were nearly 9,000 elementary schools
catering for about 1,500,000 pupils. Some 43,000 attended
continuation schools and •■’bout twice that number were receiving
instruction at technical and commercial colleges.
There were 205 secondary schools and 34 teachers' colleges.
There are universities at Belgrade, Zagreb and Ljubljana.
In 1939 there wore 1,270 professors and teachers and 18,000
students. (in 1943 Australia had 2,168 members of the teaching
staff in universities and 31,672 students.)
The government of Marshal Tito (1945) did much to en-
courage literature by offering money prizes for outstanding
literary work and by efforts to reduce illiteracy in some of
the more backward areas of the country.
Hist ory
The history of Yugoslovt% is not a happy one. Because of
its geographical sprawl, it has come under the influence of many
countries.
Serbia came under the influence of the Orthodox Church and
was subject to the Turkish Empire for 500 years. In Bosnia,
an outpost of the Turkish Empire, many of the population were
forced into Mohammedanism. Croatia and Slovenia came under
the influence of the Catholic Church and later under the
influence of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Early in the 19th century began a movement for union into
a single nation of southern Slavs.
The kingdom of Sorbs, Croats and Slovenes (Yugoslavia)
was proclaimed on December 1, 1918, under King Alexander who
was murdered in Marseilles in 1934 when on a visit to Prance.
He was succeeded by his young son, Peter. At the end of the
last war, the monarchy was replaced by a republic under the
leadership of Marshal Tito,
In 1945, the Royal Yugoslav Government in London confirmed
an agreement signed in the previous year ’y the Yugoslav Prime
Minister -and. the leader of the National Liberal ion Committee,
Marshal Tito, and. proposing a provisional government.


Following the- confirmation of the agreement, a
provisional government was sot up in Belgrade, The Constituent
Assembly, at a joint association of the two houses, resolved that
Yugoslavia should be a republic under the name of the Federal
Peoples' Republic of Yugoslavia and that the monarchy bo
abolished.
