

AUSTRALIA NEEDS YOU
THE
“Who’s for Australia?”
League
Founded Armistice Day
1929
General Secretary
Mr. A. E. BENNETT. 29 Bligh Street, Sydney.
’Phone: B 4952.
YOU NEED AUSTRALIA


LEAGUE PUBLICATIONS.
LITERATURE
1 . Objects.
2 . Australia: The Vision.
3 . Australians for Australia.
4 . Wake up! Australia.
5 . To the Youth of Australia.
6. “Who’s For Australia?”
The Official Journal of the League. Fortnightly,
three shillings per year, post free.
7. Four Songs in Australia’s Praise (words only), 6d.,
postage Id.
MUSIC
1. “Who’s For Australia?” A National Anthem. 2/6,
postage Id.
2. “We are the Youth of Australia,” a song for Young
Australians. 6d., postage Id.
3. “Your Country Needs You.” 2/-, postage Id.
4. “The Australian Way.” 2/-, postage Id.
Liberal Discount for Quantities.


THE LEAGUE’S PLATFORM: PATRIOTISM
WHO’S FOR AUSTRALIA?
During the World War of Arms our soldiers suffered untold
agonies, 60,000 Australians made the supreme sacrifice, while
20,000 more have since died as a result of their war injuries.
And to what end—for nothing all this suffering, or for a great
ideal? For what did our 80,000 Australians lay down their
lives? Did they not determine to pay any price that we and
future generations might live in peace, in prosperity, in con-
tentment, in happiness, freed from the spectre of war abroad,
freed from strife at home? They paid the price. Are we
throwing away the gift?
On this solemn Day of Remembrance, the price they paid in
suffering comes home to us once more. And as we look
around Australia, their Australia, the Australia they thought
of as they let go of life for her, the challenge hurls itself at us:
Is there peace in our time, or has the glorious sacrifice of the
dead been wasted by the indifferent selfishness of the living?
What do we see? Australia, a house divided against herself.
Men lack employment, industry suffers, production languishes,
her leaders know not how to lead nor whither, but grope
blindly, as in a fog, lacking vision, lost in the pettiness of
party strife. Tariff walls, arbitration courts, and other totter-
ing makeshifts fail to give Australia that prosperous vitality
that all long for and that is so essential. Why?
Why? Because these expedients fail to strike at the root of the
problem. Because so many of us pay our dead patriots hom-
age with our lips and not with our hearts, ignoring them in
our lives. Australia is not at peace. Australia is not happy.
Citizens of Australia are not AUSTRALIAN citizens, are
PATRIOTISM MEANS: AUSTRALIA FIRST


PATRIOTISM MEANS THE CO-OPERATION OF ONE AND ALL FOR THE COMMON WEAL
Australian in name and not in heart, Australia should be our
great Motherland to be loved and served, but because we are
merely inhabitants of Australia she bleeds and 80,000 men
died in vain. To make Australia great, happy, vigorous, pros-
perous, it needs not only that 60,000 should have died on the
field of battle, but that 6,000,000 shall love Australia and
live for her, shall be Australian through and through.
To that end, on Armistice Day, 1929, a small band of lovers
of Australia, remembering her glorious dead and her many
living, formed themselves into a League, so that all citizens
of our Motherland, who feel with them, might be drawn
together in a common love for common action. And this
League sounds out the challenge: “WHO’S FOR AUS-
TRALIA?”
If you answer I AM, the League asks not words, but deeds,
not talk, but life; in every phase of life be Australian in heart,
not only in name. Read the objects of the League, join the
League, get others to join, be an active worker for its aims,
and remember:—
Australian Food for Australian Folk.
Australian Clothes for Australian Citizens.
Australian Pleasures for Australian Leisure.
Australian Furnishings for Australian Homes.
And Empire Goods rather than Foreign Goods.
In everything you purchase for use in your home, outside your
home, create employment, content, happiness and so peace in
Australian industry by demanding Australian made. That is
the only remedy for unemployment, and if unemployment
diminishes industrial strife and other evils will lessen.
Economic patriotism is the cure.
WHO’S FOR AUSTRALIA?
OBJECTS.
1. To draw into common comradeship, wherever possible for
common action, all Australians and lovers of Australia
who ardently believe in Australia’s great future, and who
place her service above all party, class, individual and
other interests.
2. To advance Australia’s interests in every department of
Australian life: religious, educational, industrial, political,
aesthetic and cultural.
In all departments by stimulating love of country as the
dominant note.
In the religious department by working for mutual good-
will and respect among the various denominations.
In the educational department by working to make
“education for civic duty” the main objective of the
educational course.
In the industrial department by working to foster in all
possible ways Australia’s home industries—primary and
secondary—and by working to the end of happy co-
operation between the workers who employ and the
workers who are employed.
In the political department by working for:—
(a) The entry of the best men and women into the
Legislatures irrespective of party.
(b) The predominance of Australia’s interests over
party interests.
(c) Inter-party co-operation wherever possible.
(d) Dignity, honour, courtesy and selflessness as
the essentials of political life.
In the aesthetic and cultural department by working:—
(a) To foster in all possible ways a distinctive Aus-
tralian culture in the arts and sciences.
(b) To cleanse amusement of vulgarity.
(c) To promote creative leisure.
3. To help to ensure for Australia an honoured place within
the Empire, and for the Empire an honoured place among
the nations of the world.
PATRIOTISM: DIVERSITIES OF OPINIONS AND METHODS. AUSTRALIA THE COMMON GOAL




TRUE PATRIOTISM IS NON-AGGRESSIVE
SOME METHODS OF WORK.
Each member of the League is requested to:—
1. Occupy himself actively with one or another of the objects, and to
gather round him those who are prepared to co-operate with him in
such activity.
2. Give the widest possible publicity to the League and its objects.
3. Invite others to co-operate with you, form a branch, elect a secre-
tary, notify headquarters, and get to work.
4. Invite prominent men and women to become members of the League.
5. Invite subscriptions and donations for the furtherance of the work
of the League.
6. Survey his immediate surroundings to discover where the objects
of the League might be definitely promoted or where they are being
hindered. Work to promote an Australian as against an un-
Australian outlook. Fight lethargy and indifference.
7. When he has occasion to vote, to vote for men and women who
pledge themselves to support the objects of the League. Make
adherence to the objects of the League, in writing, the condition
of support. The Objects of the League are Patriotism expressed
in every department of Australian life, and the joining together of
citizens of Australia in the service of the Motherland. The individual
is left free to express and interpret his patriotism in his own way.
8. Report at intervals to headquarters as to the work he is doing.
Suggest any special help headquarters could give. Send into
headquarters any information he considers may be of use to the
general propaganda work of the League. Make special report of
any outstanding activity in which he may be engaged as a member
of the League, and notify at once any condition which comes to
his notice affecting the objects of the League,
ABOVE ALL
Cherish and maintain Australia's honour in himself, in his home, in
his town, country, in the Empire and abroad.
MEMBERSHIP.
The League has no official principles save those set forth in the Objects,
and each member is free to hold and express such opinions and to take
part in such activities as he considers conducive to the furtherance of
its objects. The League owes allegiance to no political party or religious
denomination and is dependent on no financial interests.
All who are for Australia first and who are in keen sympathy with the
objects as above stated are welcome to membership.
Membership is open to all persons. Children under 16 years of age
will belong to the junior section.
Annual subscription, 1/-; Badge, 1/-; Annual subscription to official
organ, 3/-.
The Headquarters of the League are in Sydney.
General Secretary: Mr. A. E. Bennett, 29 Bligh Street, Sydney.
TRUE PATRIOTISM IS DEEDS, NOT WORDS


APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP
Secretary, “Who’s for Australia?” League,
29 Bligh Street, Sydney.
Sir,
I hereby apply to be enrolled as a member of the
“Who's for Australia?” League, and promise to actively
support its objects.
I enclose herewith £ : : in payment of the
following:
Annual Subscription for one year . . . . 1/
Membership Badge . . . . • • • • 1/“
Subscription to Official Organ, per annum . . 37-
Donation to League . . . . . . £ : :
(Cross out whichever not required. Subscription: 1/- only, compulsory.)
I can help to further the objects of the League in the
following ways:—
Name in full
(Please write whether Mr., Mrs. or Miss and write name in block letters.)
Address iijii lii i iii iiii


THE LEAGUE IS THE SERVANT OF
AUSTRALIA.
Australia needs you. Australia needs the loving service of every Austra-
lian man, woman and child.
Australia needs the goodwill of every Australian if she is to recover her
happiness and her prosperity.
Australia needs the active co-operation of every Australian if she is to
regain her health and youth.
There is no Australian living who cannot serve her, who does not owe
her a service.
There is no Australian living who cannot serve her in the course of
his daily life. He can think of her. He can feel for her. He can speak
for her. He can work for her. He can stand up for her peace, for her
honour and for her prosperity. He can believe in her.
He can help to maintain her peace by discouraging violence and ill-will.
He can help to guard her honour by living honourably and by opposing
those who would besmirch it.
He can help to make her prosperous by supporting her industries and
manufactures.
He can make himself Australian, his home Australian, his family
Australian, his town or city his State Australian, his country
Australian. And if he begins with himself and goes on with his home
and family, then the town, the city, the State and the country will follow.
THE LEAGUE HELPS EVERY AUSTRALIAN MAN, WOMAN AND
CHILD TO DO ALL THIS.
JOIN THE LEAGUE AND BE AUSTRALIAN THROUGH AND
THROUGH.
NATIONALISM AND INTERNATIONALISM.
Let every Australian remember that true internationalism is impossible
without true nationalism, just as true nationalism is impossible without
true home life. As are the cells so is the body. As are the nations so
is the world. As are the homes so are the nations. As are the individuals
so are the homes.
Be a true Australian and the home will be happy. If the home be happy
the nation will tend to be happy. If the nation is happy the world will
tend to be happy. Therefore Patriotism first. Therefore love of country
first. These will make you happy, your home happy, your country
happy, and the world happy.
People who do not believe in Patriotism do not believe in Brotherhood.
True love of country never means hatred of other countries. True love
and hatred cannot exist together. Love your home. Love your family.
Love your town or city. Love your country. And so learn to love the
world.
