

IZCTtwia 101/& PA»HS
£ 00,4 M
WHO AEE THESE
NEW CHURCH PEOPLE?
The Event which, is this day being celebrated, will no
doubt lead many persons to inquire as to the peculiar views
which are entertained by that body of religionists who have
engaged in the erection of a church, in which to conduct
the services of their faith. In view of meeting this very
reasonable inquiry, the following pages have been printed
from a pamphlet already in circulation in England, and it
is trusted that by this means such information may be put
into circulation, as will have the effect of enlightening
many minds, and of removing prejudices which at present
may exist.
PRESENTED TO ALL INQUIRERS
TUB
MELBOURNE NEW CHURCH SOCIETY.


“ JEHOVAH JESUS, THE SAVIOUR OF MEN, AND
THE HEAD OF THE CHURCH.”
“ ALL EELIGION HAS DELATION TO LIFE ; AND THE LIFE OP
EELIGION IS TO DO GOOD.”


WHO AEE THESE NEW CHUECH PEOPLE?
The frequency with which the sentiments unfolded in the writings of
Swedenborg, and others in illustration of them, are met with from time to
time, impels many inquiring minds to ask the question above recorded, and
has induced the information to be given which is afforded in the following
dialogue:—
Q. Who are these New Church people ?
A. They are Christians who believe that the higher culture and greater
progress of the world towards light, charity, and peace, depend upon a
closer communion with the Lord Jesus Christ, as the all in all to His
Church, God over all, in Whom dwells all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily.
Q. But why do they call themselves Swedenborgians ?
A. They do not call themselves Swedenborgians ; but New Churchmen,
or Christians of the New Jerusalem Church. They esteem very highly the
writings of Swedenborg, who was an illustrious servant of the Lord Jesus.
By the truths in his writings they have been greatly profited ; they find
themselves assisted to draw nearer to the Saviour, to understand the Scrip-
tures more thoroughly, and perceive their wondrous Divinity. These
writings also contain much concerning the laws and circumstances of the
eternal world.
Q. But what is this about the New Jerusalem 7 Do they think a great
golden city is to come down to the earth through the clouds 7
A . Not in the least. These outward wonders and spectacles in the skies
they leave to others. They understand that sentiments golden and clear are
to enter men's minds. They only expect the world to become nearer like
heaven, as new principles of light, love, and justice, become more fully
received, and extensively spread among men. They believe thoroughly the
words of the Lord Jesus, “ The kingdom of God cometh not by outward
observation ; neither shall men say lo here I nor lo there I But the king-
dom of God is within you ” (Luke xvii. 21). We can make our little world
happier to-day if we will. And the whole world must learn to become wiser,
and will and strive to become better, and so the Lord will become king over
all the earth (Zech. xiv. 9).
Q, But why do they talk of anything new on such subjects 7 How can
there be anything new in religion 7 Christianity is old enough, and if they
are Christian how can they be new ; New Church , or anything of that kind 7
A. Religion, though always pure at first, when revealed from the Lord,
has a great tendency to become corrupt in time, by the self-seeking disposi-


tions of worldly Christians, who hope to acquire pelf and power by making
religion popular, and debasing it by popular errors and human traditions,
rather than by elevating the people to justice, judgment, and the love of
God. So the Jews made the commandments of God of none effect by their
traditions. So Christianity, by corruptions commencing in the time of Con-
stantine, became a mass of mysteries and superstitions. The first great
error was a God said to be of three separate Divine persons, and then the
worship of Mary as a semi-divine person. Next came praying to a host of
dead men, and caring more for their bones and relics than for keeping the
commandments of God. The Scriptures were shut up away from the people
until the time of the Reformation, and though in this country and America
we have the Scriptures fully now, many of the leading corruptions of dark
times remain. These perversions and evils which unite with, and others
which arise out of them, make religion old and bring it to an end; then the
Lord Jesus reveals eternal truths afresh and calls them new : they are new
to us. It is written in relation to these times, He who sat upon the throne
said, Behold I make all things new (Rev. xix. 5).
Q. What are these new principles you speak of ? Tell me first.
A. It is new ; yet it is truly old. It is that Jehovah, the eternal God,
our Creator, is absolutely one, and He became our Saviour Jesus Christ. So
that in Jesus Christ is the first and the last, the human and the Divine, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the eternal Trinity. He is all in all
to us, the Father is in Him as the soul is in the body.
Q. Yet Christ prayed to the Father ?
A. That was while He was in the world in times of temptation, while
He had our nature, with its infirmities and imperfections, and He had to
teach us how to suffer and to pray. The human prayed to the Divine, as our
lower nature appeals for succour to our better nature in times of dis-
tress. It seems to us, in deep trials, as if there were two persons in
us; but they are not two persons, and when the trial is over and per-
fection attained, then there is entire unity. So when Christ’s trials
were over and His humanity was glorified, there was no praying to the
Father, but He was manifestly the Father in the Son (John xiv. 13). He
who sees Him sees the Father (John xiv. 7,8, 9). He is the everlasting
Father and the Prince of Peace (Isa. ix. 6). He is the root and the offspring
of David, the bright and the morning Star (Rev. xxii. 16). He is the Sun
of righteousness (Mai. iv. 2). The Bread of Life (John vi. 48). The Light
of the world (John ix. 5). The King of kings and Lord of lords (Rev. xix.
16). Come to Him, pray to Him, follow Him, serve Him.
Q But how about the Atonement ?
A. Christians of the New Jerusalem believe in the Atonement as the
Apostle Paul expresses it, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
Himself (2 Cor. v. 1). He reconciled it to Himself first in his own Humanity
(John xvii. 19 ; Eph. ii. 15). He has been reconciling it ever since by His
Gospel, and He will reconcile it to Himself in us if we will repent, turn to
Him, and become new men.
Q. Is there not something peculiar about the way of viewing the Bible ?
A. We have precisely the same Bible that you have, but the New Church
declares the Bible to have a spiritual meaning over and above the literal
meaning ; not denying the literal meaning, but using it for history, for doc-
trine, and for edification, as other Christians do. The spiritual meaning
constitutes a Bible within the Bible, always treating of the Church, the
regeneration of the soul, of the battles we wage against our sins, and of the


things of heaven. But this is only what the Saviour said, My words, they
are spirit and they are life (John vi. 63); the apostles declared the same
thing. The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life (2 Cor. iii. 6).
Q. But how about the early chapters of Genesis ?
A. Up to the history of Abraham, they are Divine allegories, full of
spiritual wisdom, clothed in the language of parable, in the manner of that
most ancient literature that was the origin of the Egyptian Hieroglyphics,
and the beautiful fables of the Greeks. Hence there is no contradiction
between this part of the Bible and geology. Natural creation is the emble-
matical account of moral and spiritual creation.
Q. Is a man, according to these views, saved by FAITH ALONE in the
merits of his Saviour ?
A. He must have faith in the merits of his Saviour, and he has no merits
of his own. But he must also believe, love, and do his Saviour's will, or
he cannot be prepared for heaven. In religion, love is the great principle,
the root of all the rest (Rom. xiii. 8-10; Matt. xxii. 37-40). The Apostle
Paul said, Now abideth these three, faith, hope, and charity (or love), and
the greatest of these is charity (or love) (Cor. xiii. 13).
He who loves the Lord Jesus, will believe His words, and DO His
commandments. Faith alone is dead, the apostle said (James ii. 26) ;
whether it is in the merits of our Saviour, which are truly infinite, or any-
thing else. The faith which loves and works is the only faith which saves.
Q. How is a heavenly character formed ?
A. First, by a conviction of our sinfulness, then by repentance and
prayer. Next, by perseverance in well-doing, by confident faith in the Lord
Jesus, faithfulness in the times of trial and temptation ; by daily reading of
the Word of God and prayer, and by the diligent use of the means of grace.
Thus the tastes and aims of life become entirely altered, and the soul
delights in heavenly things as its chief joy.
Q. What then is the New Churchman’s rule of life ?
A. Precisely that taught in the Old and in the New Testament; by the
Lord Jesus and His apostles : namely, in humility, faith, and love, to keep
the Ten Commandments. What doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but
to do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God 1 (Micah vi. 8).
Jesus said, If ye love me keep my commandments (John xiv. 15). The
Apostle Paul wrote, Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing,
but keeping the commandments of God (1 Cor. vii. 19); and John
declared, This is the love of God, that we keep His commandments, and
His commandments are not grievous (1 Johnv. 3.)
We must keep the Divine precepts in all the employments, engagements,
habits, and acts, of daily life ; without that, our belief is vain, and our
religion self-deception.
Q. Can this be done by a man’s own strength and merit 1
A. No man has any strength or any merit, but what comes from God, every
moment of his life. But God our Saviour does give strength to every one
who truly seeks Him. He also gives His angels charge to aid us from our
birth to our grave. And they lovingly receive us and welcome us when we die.
Q. Are all children who die taken to heaven 1
A. Oh, certainly. Angels of love, who have been their guardian angels,
take them into their blessed care in heaven, train them in love and wisdom,
and thus lead them to enjoy the full bliss of their heavenly home.
Q. Do people know each other after death, who have known each other
in the world 1


A. Certainly, and they will continue together, if their states agree and
will permit 7
Q. Is there any other especial feature of the principles of this New
Church 7
A. Yes; the very high and sacred character it attributes to marriage.
This holy institution is regarded as one for which the Creator has formed the
sexes in mind and body, and should be entered upon only with those who are
constantly striving to overcome self, to live for heaven as well as for earth,
and who shun sins against purity, as the deadliest of sins.
Q. How does this Church regard the Resurrection ?
A. Every person has a spiritual body as well as a natural body (1 Cor.
xv. 44). This spiritual body becomes more beautiful by regeneration, or
more ugly by sin. Flesh and blood, as the Apostle says, cannot inherit the
kingdom of God (1 Cor. xv. 60). The body thou sowest is not the body that
shall be (v. 37). But the angelic Christian mind has a heavenly body, for
God giveth it a body as it hath pleased Him, and to every seed his own
body (v. 38). Absent from the earthly body, he is present with the Lord
(2 Cor. v. 8). Evil persons have a spiritual body as ugly as they are vicious.
Both are fitted at death for the worlds to which they go : and the dust re-
turns to the dust whence it was. All the parts of the Gospel which treat of
the resurrection of man, mean the resurrection of the soul from the death of
sin, and the grave of corruption, to the life of righteousness and spiritual
health (John v. 24, 25 ; Eph. v. 2,5). Is not this scriptural view far more
sensible than to imagine that all who have died are without bodies, until
the scattered dust of bodies which had every hour been changing during life ,
and had been taking new forms in the vegetable world, been eaten by
animals, and then become parts of other human bodies for no one knows
how many thousands of years, is brought together again ?
Q. But cannot God’s omnipotence do this 7
A. God never uses His omnipotence to do what is foolish and wrong.
We have no warrant to call in God’s power to justify our blunders. What-
ever God does is the best thing, done in the wisest way.
Q. When and where does judgment take place 7
A. The true Christian judges himself from day to day. But, after death,
he appears before the judgment seat of Christ in the spirit world, which is
an intermediate state between heaven and hell. After death the judgment
(Heb. ix. 27).
Q. Is there much said in Scripture about this intermediate state, or
world of judgment and instruction?
A. Very much. It is the world the prophets saw in vision, or when
their spiritual eyes were opened (Numb. xxiv. 4 ; 2 Kings vi. 7). John in
the Revelations describes what he saw in that world through all its
chapters ; heaven was above him—the bottomless pit below him.
Q. But what, then, is meant by the judgment at the end of the world 7
A. The end of the world, in the original Greek of the Scriptures, is the end
of the age or dispensation; and when a Church has been for ages corrupt, the
bulk of the people have been cherishing mistaken principles, and in many
things doing wrong the greater part of their lives, as in disliking and hating
others that were not of their own Church, and supposing that it was right all
the while. These cannot be so soon introduced as in purer times, either to
heaven or to hell, and great numbers gather and remain in the spirit world,
the world of judgment. But, at the end of the age, all are judged, and a
new age or new dispensation is begun in the world. Tne end of the world


means the end of a dispensation, not the end of the universe (Ps. Ixxv. 3 ;
Isa. xxiv. 6,8, 19).
Q. Then is not the natural world to come to an end at all.
A. Certainly not. According to Scripture, the world and the universe
will endure for ever (See Eccles. i. 4 ; Ps. Ixxii. 5, 17 ; Ixxviii. 69 ; civ. 5 ;
cxlviii. 6; xciii. 1 ; xcvi. 10). *
Q. What, then, do you understand by the second coming of our Lord in
the clouds of heaven ?
A . He has been banished from His Church by grievous errors and evil
practices. He comes nearer when men receive His truth in love and obey
Him. He comes nearer in the fuller opening of His Word, He comes in
truer principles into the hearts and minds of men. He comes by the exten-
sion of His truth into all the ways and works of men. Light is like the
inward glory of the Bible ; the clouds mean the outward language of the
Bible, through which an inner glory shines. He comes in clouds when He
makes Himself known to men in the language of His Word, which is plainly
there revealing the true character of Himself, His will, and His kingdom,
though they had forgotten or ignored it. All the writers of the Bible are
called a cloud of witnesses (Heb. xii. 1). Those who take the letter without
the spirit are said to be clouds without water (Jude 12). The Lord comes in
the clouds of heaven when He applies His Word to the hearts and minds of
men ; —in power and great glory, when He reveals the power of His Word
and the great glory of His kingdom. Behold, I stand at the door and knock:
if any man will open the door, I will come into him, and sup with him, and
be with Me. The kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our
Lord and of His Christ, and He, as One Divine Person, shall reign for ever
and ever (Eev. xi. 15).
Q. What is taught as to heaven and hell ?
A. Very much, so that the laws of both may now be fully understood.
Heaven is formed of the heavenly-minded, who have been made such
by regeneration, more or less perfectly done on earth. The heavenly ones
are arranged in most perfect order, by the laws of divine love and wisdom,
for in our Father’s house there are many mansions (John xiv. 2). Hell is
composed of those who have made hell upon earth ; they take themselves,
their passions, and their lusts with them into pain and sorrow. The rage,
the hate, the torment, the misery they excite and inflict upon one another is
the hell-fire in which they live. The never-dying worm is the symbol of
their low, grovelling selfishness ; it is their worm (Mark ix. 14), not God’s.
The wicked create their fire, they keep it alive themselves (Isa. ix. 18 ;
li. 11); the false and insane thoughts of every kind which they conceive,
and in which they live, make the utter darkness of their abode, of which the
Saviour speaks (Matt. xxii. 13).
Q. Do you use the two sacraments instituted by our Lord, of Baptism and
the Holy Supper ?
A. Oh certainly, and we see a sacred and most edifying meaning in
each of them. Baptism we administer in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, as a dedication of the person baptized to the service of the
Lord Jesus, and the water is a symbol of that living truth which is the
Water of Life, and by which the soul is to be purified. The Bread and the
Wine in the Holy Supper, are the symbols of the goodness which our Lord
calls the Bread of Life, and the Wisdom which He calls the “ New
Wine op the Kingdom.” When we sincerely receive these, we receive
Him. We eat His flesh and drink His blood, and have eternal life.


Q. But do you think that other Christians have not truth as well as you,
and that no one can be saved but those who join your communion ?
A. Certainly not. There is much truth in every denomination of Chris-
tians, especially among those who possess and read the Word of God with
diligence and prayer. We believe, moreover, that every one will be saved
who loves God, and strives to do His will in shunning evil and doing good
according to what in his heart he believes to be true, whether he be of the
Church of England, whose pious and learned clergy, notwithstanding many
exceptions, we revere and admire, whose Prayer Book, with serious doctrinal
defects, has many excellences, and whose reverence for the Word of God is
her chief glory ; or worthy zealous Protestant Dissenters, or good Roman
Catholics, good Jews, or Gentiles. Those who love God and work righteous-
ness according to the best of their knowledge, will be relieved of their
errors after death, and form part of the sublime fold in heaven, of which
our Saviour spealii. Other sheep have I that are not of this fold, them also
must I bring, that there may be one fold and one shepherd (John x. 16).
The Apostle Peter spoke very clearly on the same point when he said, “ Of
a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons : but in every nation
he that feareth God and worketh righteousness, is accepted of Him”
(Acts x. 34, 35).
Q. Is it, then, of no importance whether we belong to a true religion or a
false one ; whether we believe truth or error ?
A. It is only truth, in any system, that does a person good, but there is
much truth attached to every religion. Error is always a hindrance and a
detriment. Truth is clear and full of comfort. Error is obscure, perplex-
ing, and leads to distress. Truth is daylight. Error is a fog. It is because
we believe the Lord has given at this time abundance of truths, which are
far from being generally acknowledged, which are edifying, delightful, and
strengthening to us, that we wish all around us, both men and Churches, to
accept them, and be strengthened and blessed also, so that the will of God
may more perfectly be done upon earth, as it is done in heaven.
Dear reader, would you possess a scriptural, spiritual, rational, saving
religion to aid you in your walk towards heaven, come and hear these Chris-
tians of the New Jerusalem, let them be called Swedenborgians, or what
you like. Do you wish to see mankind issuing out of superstition, sec-
tarianism, rationalism, narrowness, and darkness, into the glorious liberty of
the children of light, then come and hear. Do you wish to see goodness and
truth extending their sacred influence, and sin and folly shown to be the
disorderly, brutal, coarse, and worthless things they are, then come and
hear.
We address you in the language of Moses to Jethro, We are journeying
unto the place of which the Lord said, I will give it you : come with us,
and we will do you good; for the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel.
And it shall be, if you go with us, yea, it shall be, that what goodness the
Lord shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee (Numb. x. 29, 32).
Walker, May & Co., Printers, 99 Bourke-street West, Melbourne.
