

[?]
WHO WAS THE
ART ARCJIJTECT
OF THE
Honses of Parliament
A STATEMENT OF FACTS,
FOUNDED ON THE LETTERS OF
SIR CHARLES BAR RY
AND THE DIARIES OF
AUGUSTUS WELBY PUGIN,
BY
E. WELBY PUGIN.
MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE AND
HONOURABLE THE LORDS AND COMMONS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND.
PRICE TWO SHILLINGS.
LONDON:
LONGMANS, GREEN, & Co,, PATERNOSTER ROW.
1867.


RAMSGATE:
E . BLIGH. PRINTE, HARDEES STREET.








JOHN C. T WYMAN & SON, PHOTO.
“ST. MARIE'S COLLEGE,"
DESIGNED AND DRAWN BY A. WELBY PUGIN, IN 1834,
The year in which the old houses of parliament were burnt down.


DEDICATION.
TO THE EIGHT HONOURABLE AND HONOURABLE THE
LORDS AND COMMONS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
IRELAND.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
The true glory of a nation is not perpetuated
more hj its naval and military splendour, than hy the
encouragement bestowed on literature and art / and
a kingdom has no more lasting record of its great-
ness and civilisation than its Architecture.
Succeeding generations cherish with grateful
veneration the names of those who have fostered
genius , and under ivhose sanction works of rare
A 2


talent have been called into existence, works
which establish, ennoble, and transmit to posterity
the history of the aye in which they are produced.
Confident that the position in which you, my
Lords and Gentlemen., desire to be foundis not
only that of patrons of art , but also that of defenders
of right, I now most respectfully dedicate to you
these pages; and I earnestly solicit your aid in
obtaining for my father the share of fame due to
him, as the Art Architect of your Houses of
JPa 1 ) I lament, which has hitherto been unjustly assigned
to another.
1 have the honour to remain,
My Lords and Gentlemen,
Your most obedient and faithful servant,
Edwaed Welby Pugin, K.S.S., P.R.I.E.A.
The Grange, Ramsgate,
November 11th, 1867.
VI


EXPLANATIONS.
In advancing the present claim, I may be
asked why it was not made earlier, and why it
is brought forward now ? To these questions I
will answer without reserve, although in doing
so I am reluctantly compelled to refer to matters
of a personal and domestic nature.
When my father, at the beginning of the
year 1852, was at Hammersmith suffering from
the attack which preceded his death, the Queen,
at the first intimation of our affliction, gra-
ciously bestowed on my step-mother a pension,
to which Sir Charles Barry was asked to act as
trustee. He, however, declined this friendly
office, and called on Mrs. Pugin ; but not find-
ing her at home, had an interview with the
Hev. Mr. Glennie, who was staying in the
house; and begged, on various pretexts, to be
excused having his name in any way connected
with that of my father.
Respecting this interview, Mr. Glennie
thus writes:—
Deptford, August, 1867.
Dear Pugin,—l am tins moment leaving for France,
but I hasten to say that I distinctly remember Mrs. Pugin
requesting Sir Charles Barry to act as her Trustee for the


pension, while I was with your father at Hammersmith in
1852. Sir Charles never replied, but called some time
after. Mrs. Pugin being absent, I saw him. On various
pretexts he begged to be excused from having his name
connected with the matter, and suggested a relative or
some other friend.
My impression of the interview was one of great
disgust, both at the want of feeling shown and the reserved
and politic way in which he seemed to be acting; and
accordingly I advised Mrs. Pugin, whatever she might do,
on no account to communicate again with him as a friend;
and I believe she never did so.
Yours very faithfully,
J. M. GLENNIE.
E. Welby Pugin, Esq.
At my father’s death, amongst those who
came forward with offers of sympathy and
assistance, Sir Charles Barry was not to he
found. I was under eighteen years of age,
and the whole of my father’s professional busi-
ness fell into my hands. The man, to whom,
at a time of such difficulty and trial, I naturally
turned for advice and assistance, declined to
counsel or help me. Ho not only failed me in
this, hut even t refused my application for ad-
mission into his office; and his name did not
appear on the list of subscribers to the memorial
proposed in my father’s honour. He seemed
studiously desirous to sever, at once, all con-
nection with us; and, by ignoring my father’s
past services, he strove to remove even the
faintest suspicion of their real nature.
From the day of my father’s funeral, until Mr.
Ferrey’s “Biography” was publicly announced, I
never, except on one occasion, either saw or
VIII


heard from Sir Charles Barry. He who, in
one of his latest letters to my father, professed
himself to be in “an agony of suspense ” about
his life, never troubled himself, for eight
years after his death, so much as to enquire
after our interests. It was only after I had
written to Sir Charles, at Mr. Ferrey’s request,
for the loan of any letters or documents in his
possession, bearing on my father’s connection with
the Parliament Houses, that I found myself once
again in his presence. The result of my letter
was a visit from him. He assured me that it
was impossible to comply with my request, as he
had destroyed the whole of the correspondence;
and, at the same time, expressed an emphatic
hope that all his letters to my father had shared
the same fate. I shall never forget his agitation
when I informed him that, on the contrary, I was
in possession of avast number of his original letters.
His confusion and distress were painful to witness.
“ Good Heavens ,” he said, u I thought Pugin
destroyed all letters he received He was still
more agitated, however, when I gave him to
understand that I was perfectly aware of the
nature of the relations which had all along
existed between my father and himself, and that
I considered him to be the possessor of honours
to which my father had at least an equal right.
I further expressed to him my intention of
asserting my father’s just claims, now that I
felt myself in a position to do so; and to obtain
for him, as far as lay in my power, a public
recognition of his services. In a moment Sir
IX


Charles’s manner altered. He apparently ac-
quiesced in the justice of my representations ;
promised that my father’s status should no longer
remain unacknowledged; guaranteed that every
emolument which had been held out to him should,
as far as possible, be secured; undertook to
look into certain accounts then unsettled; and
finally begged me to entrust him with the letters
for perusal, on his positive assurance that they
should be returned to me.
My step-mother was present diming the
latter part of the interview, and taxed Sir
Charles with his want of consideration in re-
fusing to act as her trustee; hearing, with
much astonishment, his absolute denial of a fact
which took place in his interview with Mr.
Glennie, and which could never fade from her
recollection.
Before leaving the house he received the
letters from me, and invited me to dine with him
the next evening, when he requested more time
for their perusal, and promised to return them by
the hand of Lady Barry in a day or two. In the
fulfilment of this promise Sir Charles failed ; and
from that day to this the letters have never been
returned. I made several applications for them,
which were unnoticed ; Sir Charles made evasive
excuses when I called upon him for them; paid
me another visit, simply to renew these excuses;
and, in fine, broke his promise altogether.
To have parted with letters which contained
important evidence was, as the event proved, an


act of extreme imprudence; but I was inex-
perienced at the time, and in truth was so thrown
off my guard by Sir Charles’s graciousness of
manner, the apparent interest he evinced for us,
and the promises he held out to me, that I would
then have yielded to almost any proposition he
might have made. I forgot, in a moment, that
long interval of eight years, during which he had
broken off all intercourse with us, and divorced
my father’s name from his.
The following letter, which he sent to Mrs.
Pugin three days after his first visit, bears out
what I have said respecting his change of tone,
and the sudden renewal of his professions of
friendship for my family :
Clapham Common, 6tli February, 1860.
Dear Mrs. Pugin,—l am much concerned that you
should have been under the impression that I could be
indifferent to you and all connected with your late husband,
whose memory I shall ever cherish and respect, as a warm
friend and a man of genius of the highest order.
(It would have been difficult to arrive at
any other “ impression ” respecting the conduct of
one who, immediately after the death of the
friend by whose genius he had profited so long,,
withdrew himself, name and person, from the
family).
Be assured, my dear Mrs. Pugin, that you have been
entirely mistaken in supposing that I have ever shown any
reluctance to be on friendly terms with you and your
family; and that, as to my refusing to become a trustee
for your pension, your mention of such a breach of friend-
ship is the first I have ever heard on the subject. Believe
me when I say that I have never heard of any wish that I
should take upon myself that office, or I would gladly have
responded to it. lam glad, however, of this opportunity
XI


to assure you that all your suspicions to my disadvantage
are wholly groundless, and, at the same time, to beg of you
to believe that I shall always be ready to be of any service
in my power to you and yours whenever any opportunity
occurs. I have given orders for a statement of the sums
paid to Messrs. in each year consecutively, from
the commencement of their employment, and I will take
an early opportunity of calling upon you with it, and ascer-
tain precisely what your farther wishes may be with regard
to their connection with your late dear husband in respect
of the work supplied.
With kind regards to all your family, believe me,
My dear Mrs. Pugin,
Most truly yours,
CHARLES BARRY.
Shortly after this the death of Sir Charles
took place, and I felt that the opportunity of
vindicating my father’s claims had passed from
me for the time. I was thus forced to remain
content with simply putting on record his title
to be considered the Art Architect of the Houses
of Parliament, leaving the proof thereof to be
substantiated whenever the favourable moment
should come.
From that time to this, even in the midst of
the incessant engagements of my profession, I
have never relinquished the hope of doing what I
now propose; and I eagerly avail myself of the
challenge to a public investigation of my claims.
I would not now shrink even from the
difficult task of fighting single-handed, if need
be, against men whose possession of inherited
honour, position, and patronage is alone sufficient
to hold hack witnesses from my side; for I have
known from my earliest years, without a shadow
XII


of doubt, that my father really was the Art
Architect of the Houses of Parliament, and,
independent of other proof, I have heard these
words from his own mouth — u I made Barry's
designs for 400 guineas , and Graham gave me 300
guineas for his.
It has been said by some that had my father
lived u he would never have allowed the claims which
I note make for him to he advanced .” With this
opinion I entirely concur. Ho consideration, I
am certain, would have induced my father ever
to put forward a claim to that which, by a
voluntary transaction, had become the property
of another. To his engagement with Sir Charles
Barry he ever most faithfully and steadfastly
adhered ; but ho was, of course, fully alive to the
fact that his family had an inalienable right to
the benefit of the fame which he had earned, and
which was his due. Hone will gainsay this.
Possibly this was the reason why my father
preserved a considerable portion of the corres-
pondence dating from 1836. The letters which
had passed between him and Sir Charles Barry
previous to this date were either in the packet I
lent to Sir Charles, or they had been thrown aside
before their value was known. Irrespective,
however , of the evidence to he obtained therefrom,
the facts of which they were the proofs could not
cease to exist, any more than the absence of claim
on the part of my father coidd vitiate the fact of
his having made the designs which he sold to Sir
Charles Barry. Sooner or later, when the mist
which existed from the commencement had passed
XIII


away, together with those immediately interested,
others who followed would, by an inevitable
process of induction, arrive of themselves at the
conclusion of the “ Building News” viz., “that
the gulf between Sir Charles Barry's churches and
the Houses of Parliament was an impassable one.”
The question as to who was the originator of
any portion of the Houses might hereafter have
been a subject of dispute; but that the designer of
the Hoard of Trade buildings in Parliament-street
and Lord Carnarvon’s mansion at High Clere,
should have been equally the Architect of the
Parliament Houses is, on the face of it, an utter
impossibility. Hot so much an impossibility
because the styles are at variance, as because the
principles of the several buildings are diametrically
opposed. The Houses of Parliament, if weak in
parts, are always consistent and demonstrate
principle; while the others are simply an entire
negation of all principle.
The testimony given by my father's early
friends is important ; but it is by the letters of Sir
Charles Barry himself, which I still have in my
possession, that the true state of the case is
irrevocably revealed.
I may, perhaps, be blamed for allowing the
period from Sir Charles Barry’s death to
the present time to have elapsed before
bringing forward my evidence. Independently,
however, of being only partially in possession
of my facts and necessary corroborative evidence,
experience has more than verified my fears that
XIV


at no earlier period than the present should I
have had the least chance of obtaining a hearing l :
O 0 7
much less could I have had any hopes of success
against the adverse currents with which I have had
to contend at every stage of this arduous under-
taking.
In now asking for judgment at the bar of
public opinion, let me not be misunderstood as to
the extent of my claims. In the letters I have
written on this subject, I have ever borne testi-
mony to the genius and power displayed by Sir
Charles Barry in that portion of the work which
he actually performed. (“ The Ground Plan, I
believe, was solely Sir Charles Barry’s; the
Elevations and all Details wholly my father’s.”)
I have never sought to depreciate his manifold
labours and persevering efforts on behalf of the
u great work; ” for well enough I know that he
was ever most indefatigable. Sir Charles Barry
was no carpet knight. He did not seek the
assistance of my father in order that he himself
might enjoy immunity from labour ; but because
he knew that he possessed neither the knowledge
nor the feeling of Gothic art.
It is no disparagement to the greatness of his
undoubted abilities , and the extent of his actual
services to define accurately what those services were ,
and no longer permit him to usurp the credit
of work which another performed.
In my letter to the Times , of Sept. 17th,
I have touched on the merits and demerits of
the Building; and I will here only express a hope


that in spite of adverse criticisms, flatness of
style, inconveniences arising therefrom, and the
disfavour necessarily attendant on the partial
use of a perishable material—the time is not
far distant when our Ministers of Public Works
shall u feel it their duty” or shall see the neces-
sity, of taking means to preserve —instead of
allowing themselves to be cajoled into useless
expenditure which only tends to mar—our greatest
national work. When what has lately been per-
petrated is calcined for effecting that which
should have been done—when the new and
previously unforeseen requirements arc satisfied
—and when minor irritations are removed—then
will the nation learn fully to appreciate what she
has obtained, and to value those from whom she
obtained it.
My desire is that my father should
receive his fair share of that fame which is now
wholly accorded to one , wdio has hitherto
been regarded as the sole designer of that which
my father mainly originated. From my readers,
I ask only fair and impartial consideration. If
this is accorded me, I have little doubt that the
proofs I adduce will be found more than suffi-
cient to give my father the right of being con-
sidered at least the joint architect of the Houses
of Parliament.
XVI


NOTES.
The old Houses of Parliament ivere burnt down on October
16th, 1834.
The Commission appointed for the new Houses on July 11th, 1835,
having been directed to select neither less than three, nor more than
Jive, designs out of the total number sent in, submitted the four following
names: — Barry, Bailton, Buckler, Hamilton.
The total number of competitors teas 97.
The Commissioners issued their report on February 29th, 1836.
The Exhibition took place at the National Gallery, and was opened
in April, 1836. The four selected designs ivere not at that time
exhibited, but were added some time previous to the 2Gth of May in
the same year.




WHO WAS THE ART ARCHITECT OF
THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT ?
The present controversy arose from a remark
in an article on the Law Courts, which
appeared in the Westminster Gazette of the 2nd of
March. In speaking the present Houses of
Parliament, the reviewer said that the “ lament-
able gables on the North side of the Palace were
arranged after Sir C. Barry lost the vigorous
guiding hand of Pugin.” With reference to
these words, the Building News of June 14th
wrote thus :—“ . . The assistance the late Mr.
Pugin rendered the late Sir C. Barry in designing
the Houses of Parliament is dovetailed into the
review.” As I have never made a secret of, and
had no reason for concealing, a fact known to me
from my earliest years, I immediately addressed
the Building News / and my letter, from which
the following extract is taken, appeared in that
journal on June 28th;—
“ You allude in your article to the assistance which my
father rendered to the late Sir Charles Barry, in carrying
out the Houses of Parliament; and you mention it as
having been ‘ dovetailed into the review. I have no
objection to the allusion, but I have great objections to the
insinuation that advantage has been taken of the opportu-
B


nity by the Westminster Gazette critic to smuggle this
important fact edgeways into public notice. Dovetailing
is quite unnecessary when the fact exists that the art
architect of the most complete edifice in the world died in
my father. The plan of the Parliament Houses was
solely Sir Charles Barry’s; the elevation and all details
wholly my father’s. All that has been done since his
decease—viz., the wretched finish to the Victoria Tower,
the lamentable north wing, and the Vandalism now in
course of perpetration between Westminster Bridge and
the main building—demonstrate more clearly than words
that the master mind is gone. I knew Sir Charles Barry
intimately, and could not be otherwise than impressed with
the unsparing and conscientious pains with which he
examined and digested all that my father proposed, and I
always had the highest admiration for his knowledge of
Classic architecture ; but neither by education nor feeling
was he what I unwillingly term a Gothic architect. I have
no hesitation in asserting that all work done in the Houses
of Parliament apart from my father’s designs is as devoid
of feeling as the stone in which it is chiselled. You will be
pleased to understand that there is nothing equivocal about
any portion of this letter. It is intended to be explicit, and
I trust that it is so.”
The articles from the Westminster Gazette
and my correspondence with “ Philocalns ” in the
Standard , which arose out of them, were subse-
quently printed as a pamphlet, and the Pall Mall
Gazette , of August sth, in noticing them, proposed
the following question :
“ May we ask whether it really is true, as Mr. E. W.
Pugin says, that nothing but the Plan of the Houses of
Parliament was the work of the late Sir C. Barry, and that
the elevations and all the details were wholly the work of
the late Augustus Welby Pugin, the father of the writer of
this pamphlet ? That Pugin materially aided in the design-
ing and carrying out of the details was always notorious.
But what we are now told is something totally different,
and we should like to know whether his son has sufficient
grounds for his very sweeping statement.”
Glad as I am of the opportunity of answering
this question, it will be seen that circumstances
have forced me into my present position.
This, then, is the claim I make for my
father. I maintain that he actually originated
2


and designed the whole of the elevations of the
Palace —that ho made the sections and working
drawings for every portion of the building —and
that, generally, every detail, both externally and
internally, was his work. In admitting —as I fully
do —that the ground plan and general arrange-
ments of the building were Sir C. Barry’s, as my
father often assured me, it is impossible to suppose
that the details of the plan were not greatly
influenced and modified by the elevations. As a
matter of course I also cede to Sir C. Barry the
natural authority and advantages of his position
as the publicly appointed and recognised architect
of the Houses, whose decision was final in all
questions, and upon whom devolved an over-
whelming amount of forethought, labour, diffi-
culty, and responsibility.
In applying myself to the proofs of my
statement, let me first discuss the probability of
the designs being made by my father.
1. His powers at this time were very far
in advance of his contemporaries. He was
thoroughly competent to produce the designs.
In fact, there was not another man in England
who could take his place. Any one who
has beheld his scenes and _ decorations in
the Operas of Kenilworth (in London), or
La Juive and Count Ory (in Paris), will have
recognised a richness of powers of
delineation, and a knowledge of Oothic Architec-
ture and detail perfectly wonderful. I have also
in my possession several volumes of his oiiginal
compositions, exquisitely etched by himself in
1833, which, perhaps more forcibly than any
written evidence, confirm the probability that
the same mind which conceived them, conceived
also the Houses of Parliament. of these I
give as a frontispiece. In this particular com-
B 2


position, the outline, character, and cast of the
two buildings are precisely the same; but in
many of them the features and details are actual
prototypes or fac similes of those of West-
minster. One of them is literally the Victoria
Tower, a second the Clock Tower, in embryo.
In others are entire fagades, court yards, &c.,
identical with parts of the Houses of Parlia-
ment. The period of style is also the same—
the 3rd pointed or perpendicular Gothic. This
was the style in which my father, at that time,
literally revelled, and he did not disengage
himself from its trammels until after the build-
ing of St. Mary’s Church, Derby, about 1839.
2. On the other hand, what were the
style and character of Sir C. Barry’s designs and
buildings at this period ? Almost without ex-
ception, Classical. Whenever he did venture on
Gothic work the result was simply deplorable.
Of all his productions, is there one, which in
any degree evidences a probability that the man
who designed them had the mind to conceive
and the hand to delineate almost simulta-
neously with them—the Palace of Westminster ? I
cannot answer this enquiry better than by giving
a letter which appeared in the Building News of
September 20th, 1867, from a correspondent, a
total stranger to myself:—
To the Editor of the Building Neivs.
Sir, With the remark in the Building News of
September 6, that Mr. Pugin had not made out his case,
most people will agree. He certainly furnished a string
of probabilities, but no absolute proof. There were weak
points in lm statement which it was impossible to over-
look ; and his style of writing was more energetic than is
usually employed in advocating a thoroughly sound cause.
Having always entertained the highest admiration for the
Classical works of Sir Charles Barry, and never having
heard of his performances in the Gothic style in the
Pentonville and Islington districts, I was inclined to think


that Mr. Pugin’s claims on his father’s behalf were
excessive. When I saw his letter in the Times of Sept. 7,
where he says, “ Giants are not to he met with every clay,
and their youth and growth, as well as their middle age,
are generally known to those around them. The great
results achieved by my father were foretold in his early
childhood; and his drawings and his works all lead up
and point to the greatest of them all—the Palace of West-
minster. What, on the other hand, has Sir Charles Barry
got to show ? Where is there one executed work of his
which would induce the belief that he was, in very truth,
the art architect of that noble pile?” Now, I must
confess that my belief in Sir Charles Barry was not shaken
by learning that Pugin’s nurses predicted that he would
achieve greatness, because soothsaying of that nature is
neither rare nor reliable, but I was certainly struck by the
plain question, “ What, on the other hand, has Sir Charles
got to show ? ” When Mr. Pugin instances St. Peter’s
Church, Hatton-garden, and asks if it be possible that the
same man could have designed the Palace of Westminster,
he puts a question very much to the point, and one
which can be answered by any one who takes the trouble
to inspect the said church. I had previously noticed
from the Farringdon-road a very ugly church of the date
when most churches were ugly, but, until the appearance
of Mr. Pugin’s letter, was unaware that it was the work of
Sir Charles Barry. I, therefore, determined to pay it a
visit, and to inspect other of his earlier buildings, believ-
ing that the youth and growth of giants will be traced in
their works. St. Peter’s Church, Hatton-garden, was
consecrated in October, 1832, The style is Perpendicular,
of the worst kind, exhibiting all the faults that an utter
absence of Gothic feeling could crowd into one building.
That the reveals or splays are insufficient may be attri-
buted to the thinness of the walls, but no considerations
of economy can account for the form of the window labels,
which, as Euskin says, “ are like windlasses.” In utter
disgust I entered the church, in hopes that the interior
might present some redeeming feature. In this I was
disappointed. The very form of the arches of the nave,
and the pillars supporting them, is of the most debased
character; and, as to the woodwork, the roof, galleries,
pulpit, reredos, pinnacles, crockets, and panelling, are of
the rudest and most ignorant description. I left the
building satisfied that the man, who in 1830 or thereabouts
designed this church, could by no possibility have had
anything advantageous to do with the Palace of West-
minster. I thence proceeded to inspect Holy Trinity


Church, Cloudesley-square, finished early in 1829, at a
cost of £11,585, where the same hand was manifest.
Criticism upon these buildings is thrown away. They are
as good as the average of Gothic works of that date, hut
they do not show a particle of Gothic feeling. A tablet
hearing the name of the architect existed for many years
in this church, hut, owing to some alterations being made
in opposition to Sir Charles’s advice, he caused it to be
removed. For his fame’s sake it were well if everything
Gothic he ever did could be hidden from sight; certainly
the other Churches that I visited—St. John’s Church,
Holloway, consecrated July, 1828, cost Ti 1,890 7s. Bd.,
and St. Paul’s, Ball’s Pond, consecrated October, 1828,
cost £10,947 11s. Gd.- —can add to no architect’s reputa-
tion. The result of my inspections, which were not all
effected in one day, was a confirmation of the opinion
arrived at the moment 1 entered the first church, and the
latest in date,.namely, that the same hand could not have
designed buildings of such opposite character as Barry’s
Churches and the Westminster Palace. Knowledge of an
art is picked up frequently enough—feeling, rarely. I
was now thoroughly convinced of the justice of Mr. E.
W. Pugin’s claims, but I could not acknowledge that he
had proved his case. The ugly letter of September 6,
1845, was not satisfactorily explained away, but the
evidence of the Churches was so conclusive that my
faith was not for a moment shaken. When, however, Mr.
Mares’ letter appeared in the Times of the 16th, the
missing link in the chain of testimony was supplied, and
few will now be found to doubt who was the art
architect of the Palace of Westminster.
That the elder Pugin kept Sir Charles Barry’s secret
well is shown by the difficulty now experienced in abso-
lutely proving his title to the fame which is his due ; but
the secrecy which was binding on him could not justly
be transmitted to his son. Mr. E. W. Pugin has an
inalienable right, and he conceives it a duty, to obtain for
his father that fame of which, during his life, he was
deprived. The plea that an assistant is in honour bound,
for the sake of a most inadequate compensation, to conceal,
if not deny, his own share in his employer’s reputed work,
is scarcely decent. The position of an assistant would be
anomalous. He must be able to do the work as well as
his employer—in too many cases he does it much better—
and he must at the same time conceal from clients the
part he really plays. How, under these circumstances, is
he ever to rise ? And without the hope of rising, an
assistant will not be of much use. The architectural


profession will be elevated in proportion as the actual
authors of works are known. There are at present many
buildings which are known not to be the work of their
reputed authors, but which, nevertheless, have brought
them fame. Pugin’s case is not a solitary instance ; let us
hope it may be the last. I am, &c.,
J. A. H.
The following Editorial note appeared in
the same number :
“ The Pugin v. Barry controversy still goes on, and
at present Mr. Pugin appears to be getting tlie best of it.
Several letters have appeared in the Times and elsewhere,
which no doubt will be reproduced in the intended
pamphlet. The matter, at all events, is not to be
snuffed out so easily as the Pall Mall Gazette imagined.
The controversy, so far as it has gone, shows that Mr. E.
W. Pugin did not take up the gauntlet thoughtlessly, or
without a vast amount of data ; and no one can deny that
he exhibits remarkable ability in conducting his case. He
is determined that his father’s fame shall not, if possible,
suffer in his hands, and if he is unsuccessful in establish-
ing his position, it will not be for the want of ardour,
industry, and eloquence. In to-day’s impression of the
Building News will be found a letter from a correspondent,
who, in the first place, thought that Mr. Pugin failed to
prove his case, and that Sir Charles Barry was the
architect of the Houses of Parliament, but after a careful
examination of the Churches erected in London by Sir
Charles—when he had apparently every opportunity for
the display of his ability—our correspondent has altered
his opinion. He says there is an impassable gulf between
these Churches and the Houses of Parliament, and that it
is next to impossible for them to have proceeded from the
same architectural brain. We can only testify that our
correspondent, who is one of our regular contributors,
speaks disinterestedly and impartially in the matter.”
That this argument, drawn from the different
development of style in the hands ot the respective
architects, has also influenced others, appears
from the following letter, I have received from
an cx-Memhcr of Parliament: —
(Athenaeum Club,) London, Sept. 23rd, 1867.
Sir, —I have been travelling for some days, and have
not been able to follow the correspondence which the New
Houses of Parliament have given rise to; but, as X find


it still continues, I think it due to the memory of the
late Mr. Pugin to state what were the impressions of
myself, and many others, relative to the real authorship of
the works at the time of their erection.
I was in Parliament from the commencement to the
completion of the Buildings, and, being fond of Architec-
ture, took great interest in their progress. I certainly
was always under the impression that although the plan of
the work may have been designed by Sir C. Barry, yet,
that all its illustrations, and many at least of the devia-
tions from the original designs, were due to the late Mr.
Pugin.
I cannot offer you any direct evidence in justification
of this impression, but my recollection is, that it was
so generally accepted by every one who cared for such
matters, that it seemed almost a certainty, not requiring
investigation or proof.
Nor was the impression an unnatural one. Sir C.
Barry was only known as a Classic or Palladian Architect
—the studies of his early life were supposed to have been
exclusively devoted to this style, and if he latterly had, in
some unimportant works, deviated from it, it was thought
that, as an Architect, he had been obliged to adapt his
plans to the tastes of his employers—in fact, we believed
Sir C. Barry to be essentially a Classic Architect, and we
admired him as such. Mr. Pugin, on the other hand, was
as essentially a Mediaeval Architect; all his ideas (nay, even
his religion) were medieval his works, written or
executed, shew how deeply he was imbued with the spirit
and feelings of the Mediaeval Architect. We felt, too,
that no man, however great his talent, could “ per saltmri ’
transfer his mind from classicism to medievalism, so
opposite are all their ideas; but we knew that these two
men—both masters in their several styles—were friends
and in constant communication. What could be more
natural than the impression which I have described as
general ? I certainly felt surprised when I heard of the
very small remuneration which Mr. Pugin received for his
assistance- it might have shaken my belief in the amount
of aid which he had given, had I not known him to be so
sincere an enthusiast in mediaeval art that, I am convinced,
he would have worked for nothing—rather than have per-
mitted blunders to be made in so g'reat a work, with which,
no doubt, he expected his name would be closely connected
hereafter.
I .have written to you anonymously, because I have
no evidence in proof of that which I may have only sur-
mised, yet believed undoubtedly. My motive in writing


to yon, at all, is to assure you that there are many, like
myself, entirely unknown to you—who feel great anxiety
that justice should he done to Mr. Pugin’s memory, by its
being shown how much of the best details of the New
Houses, both in outline and ornament, were due to him,
how many errors in both he prevented,—and what altera-
tions and amendments of the general Architectural features
of the building owed their origin to him.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
E. Welby Pugin, Esq.
AN EX M.P.
3. A strong probability of my father being
the Art Architect of the Houses, it seems to me,
is established by the existence of the tradition
that such was the fact. That merely an u occa-
sional assistant,” called in after the Designs
were completed, should ever come to be con-
sidered the actual Architect of the structure,
is to the last degree improbable. Ho such
report was even so much as whispered of any
one else connected with Sir C. Barry. But of
my Father it existed from the very beginning, it
was then commonly received; it has been handed
down, with one slight disturbance, uninter-
ruptedly to the present hour; and is now
witnessed to by his contemporaries. I annex
a few out of several letters which have been
forwarded to me on the subject:—
(A.)
1, Palace Road, Lambeth, Aug. 20th, 18G7. .
Dear Sir, —Circumstances having postponed my in-
tended visit to Ramsgate, I reply to your questions without
further delay. I was very intimate with your father, when
he was making the drawings and designs for the Parlia-
ment Houses. He frequently stated to me (in confidence)
that he was the Designer of the Houses. I remember
that on one occasion he said :—“ Is not this a regular
joke’? Here are these two rivals competing for one prize,
and I am making the designs for both.”
It may be interesting to you to know that your
father, when quite a boy, left his father’s office and en-
treated to be employed by me, to which I consented. I
soon discovered his great value in drawing Gothic Archi


tecture. The rapidity and the excellence of his work was
the admiration of all. From first to last he rarely, if
ever, painted; but that was of no consequence to me, as all
I wanted was his designs. After he left me, he would
often come into my painting room, and in a few hours (if
there was anything Gothic going on) do a surprising
quantity of work.
Knowing that your grandfather was in a. good
position, I was astonished at his coming to me, and I
heard afterwards that, at the office, he could knock out
work at the rate of £lO a day.
Hear Sir, yours truly,
To E. W. Pugin, Esq.
THOS. GRIEVE.
(B.)
Harbour House, Ramsgate, August 31st, 1867.
_My dear Sir,—Agreeably with your wish respecting
the intimacy that existed between my valued and esteemed
friend, your deceased father, Augustus Welby Pugin, and
myself, I beg to inform you I knew him from very early
youth. . . . I was a great deal with him
when he first resided in the Plains of Waterloo, Ramsgate,
before he built St. Augustine’s, and afterwards, when he
built and resided there. Scarcely a week elapsed when
we were both in Ramsgate without my being with him
for several hours at a time. . . . I recollect
he was much engaged in preparing drawings for the
Houses of Parliament, commencing, as far as I recollect,
from the year 1844 to 1852. Various letters on this
subject, I was aware, passed between the late Sir Charles
Barry and your late father, which he frequently read to
me, from which, with his conversation respecting this
great work, and the sentiments contained in the corre-
spondence alluded to, I have every reason to believe my
late esteemed friend was chiefly the original designer and
adviser of all that referred to the architectural portion of
the building, and that it emanated, as far as I always
understood, from his conception.
I have on several occasions met the late Sir Charles
Barry at St. Augustine’s, during the time your late father
was engaged in the drawings.
I remain, my dear Sir, yours very truly,
E. W. Pugin, Esq.,
FRANCIS SHAW.
Tlie Grange, Eamsgate.
(C.)
Rectory, Lincolnshire, Sept. 9th, 1867.
Dear Sir, —I have just been reading with great
interest your letter to the Times, respecting your illustrious


father’s share in the designing the Westminster Palace,
twenty-five years ago. I knew your father intimately,
and was often at his house at Cheyne Walk. I well re-
member, amongst the many drawings he used to show me
and others, there were early ones, of designs for the
Houses of Parliament.
When asked why he let some one else get the credit of
what he really did, he used to say, “ Oh, never mind, so
long as we get a good thing done. The impression left
on my mind was so strong, that your lather’s 50 -horse
power really did the thing, that I have constantly said,
“ the Houses of Parliament are called Barry’s, but they are
really due to Pugin.”
I have a decided impression, too, that had your father’s
plans been more closely followed, the complaints of the
general inconvenience of the Houses would not have
arisen.
The last time I saw your father, he was at the
Government works, busily designing the details for the
ornaments of the House of Lords. 1 remember he said
that, after all, they could not do without employing him
publicly, but, said he, “I now work for the Government,
and Barry shall no longer get the credit of my plans.”
I am, my dear Sir, yours very truly, &c,,
(D : )
12, King St., Cheapside, London, 9th Sept, 1867.
Sir,— I have
been much struck with your recent letters in the
Thues. I refer particularly to yours in the number of
Saturday, the 7th inst. I always understood that your
father had a leading part in the design of Barry’s for the
Parliament Houses. I remember visiting him in Chelsea,
with H
The subject of the New Houses was mooted on more than
one occasion, and Pugin talked to us as confidential
friends, of the fact, as one not to be doubted, but plain and
almost self-evident, from the specialities of style, peculiar
to his knowledge of Gothic Art. .....
I am, Sir, yours obediently,
THOMAS BALDWIN WOOD.
(E.)
The Park, Nottingham, Sept. 10th.
Sir, —I have read with much interest the published
correspondence, as to who was the Architect of the Par-
liament Houses. During the building of St. Barnabas’s


Church at Nottingham, of which your father was the
Architect, I visited the works almost daily, and it may be
interesting to you to be informed that it was in the mouth
of every one connected with that building, that Pugin, and
not Barry, furnished the designs for the Parliament
Houses. Mr. Earp, the eminent carver, of London, was
there, I believe, an apprentice with Mr. Myers, the
builder of the Cathedral, and I have a distinct recollec-
tion of Mr. Earp s father, who was a Nottingham
man, telling me the fact above alluded to. At that period
it was the impression of all with whom I was acquainted,
who took an interest in Architecture, that Pugin, and not
Barry, furnished the designs for the Palace at Westminster.
Until this correspondence commenced, I had no idea
that any other opinion prevailed. This testimony may
not he of any value, but it will be satisfactory to you to
know that it was known in Nottingham, many years
ago, icho furnished the_ designs for the Parliament Houses.
I have written this very hastily, hut you may make
any use of it you think fit.
I am, Sir, yours faithfully,
E. Welby Pugin, Esq.
WM. CHAPMAN.
(F.)
96, Mount St., Grosvenor Sq., Sept. 20th, 1867.
My dear Sir,—l was so over-worked at the time the
drawings were going on for the Houses of Parliament com-
petition, that I had scarcely a moment to spare for any-
thing beyond my own occupation. I do know that your
father intended to enter into the competition, because he
told me so ; and when subsequently he spoke to me about
mounting Barry’s and Graham’s drawings at their own
houses, I asked him whether his own drawings would not
suffer by the assistance he was giving to those gentlemen ;
his reply was, “ that they would,” or words to that effect. *
Graham’s designs were revised by your father up to
five or six o’clock of the evening they were to be sent in;
and when he left, he was most anxious that I should follow
him to Mr. Barry’s as quickly as possible, which I did;
and it was past 11 before I had the drawings finished, and
the corrections were made in the office up to the last minute.
I am, dear Sir, yours truly,
To E. W. Pugin, Esq.
J. HOGARTH.
(G.)
1, Kenmngton Eoad, Lambeth, Sept. 25th, 1867.
r, ~ • • • • Ido not think any
one who knew yonr father can have any doubt as to who
was the Art-Architect of the Houses of Parliament, but of


course mere workmen employed on or in connection with
a building could never know to what extent your father’s
designing was carried, and the workmen I have about me
are all fresh on the scene, since I left Mr. Myers in 1852:
indeed there seem to be very few of the men about who
worked at the Houses previous to the ’6l Exhibition year.
There are some wood-carvers left, who know that as far
as their part of the work was concerned, it was all
designed by your father.
I am, Sir, your obedient Servant,
E. W. Pugin, Esq.
THOMAS EARP.
(H.)
Sturry, September 29th, 1867,
Dear Edward, —I wish my remembrances of conver-
sations in old times between your father and my husband
on this vexed question could be of use to you, but I am
afraid, being only remembrances, they would not. Yet,
from them, my own mind has been firmly impressed with
the idea that he was the Architect of the Houses of
Parliament, and not Sir C. Barry ; and nothing I have yet
seen in the papers has shaken my conviction. Surely
Miss Graves, who was so much at your father’s house at
that time, would be a reliable authority to refer to.
With best wishes, believe me, sincerely yours,
E. W. Pugin, Esq.
M. J. THORNTON.
(I.)
Salisbury, Oct. 2nd, ’67.
My dear Sir, —I have just returned home and, in
answer to your enquiries, beg to say the designs made
for Mr. Graham by your father, for the Houses of Parlia-
ment, were mostly done in my premises at Salisbury; and
whilst they were in progress Sir Charles (then Mr.) Barry
came to Salisbury and spent the evening at my house with
your father. He came again the following morning and
breakfasted with us : we then, all three, went and had a
thorough look at our Cathedral, after which Mr. Barry
went with your father to St, Mary’s Grange.
I believe that no drawings were made for Mr. Barry
in Salisbury, but at the Grange. I never heard your
father say, nor do I believe, that any design was made by
him for any one prior to the drawings he made here for
Mr. Graham. I quite recollect that wdien the whole series
of designs were exhibited in Westminster Hall, I and my
son went to London to see them, and believe we there
recognised several in Barry’s set of your father’s drawings.
I am, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
E. W. Pugin, Esq.
WM. OSMOND.


(J.)
Healaugli Parsonage, Tadcaster, Oct. 3rd, 18G7-
Sir, It may be interesting to yon to know, even if it
be of little use in your controversy with Mr. Barry, that,
as long ago as 1842 or 1843, it was considered an ac-
knowledged fact that Mr. Pugin was the real Architect of
the Houses of Parliament, and that bir Charles (then Mr.)
Barry was behaving shabbily to him in employing him as
designer and draughtsman, availing liimsell of Mi.
Pugin’s well-known supremacy in Gothic Architecture,
and at the same time reaping all the enormous credit of
the work, from which Mr. Pugin was debarred only and
solely by his religious belief. My brother was an Archi-
tect, and through him we learnt all that was being said on
this’matter at that time by the profession generally. The
fact of Mr. Pugin’s connection with Mr. Barry, as I have
described it, was a ‘'household word with us all, and X
was never more surprised in my life than when I read only
the other day in the / hiws that the fact had been called in
question. I think the Barrys will, in the end, alone have
to regret that the question has been raised.
I am. Sir, your obedient servant,
CHARLES VOYSEY.
Captain Pugin, The Grange, Eamsgate.
Before collating the letters winch have ap-
peared in the Times and other journals, I will at
once proceed to quote the entries from my
Father’s diary for 1835: which not only confirm
my own account, hnt disprove the statements of
those who assume a perfect ImoAvledge of “the
whole history of Sir C. Barry’s designs.”
Diary for 1835.
April I. —Sent (iinn/ Mr. Graham's drawings. (From Salis-
bury. )
~ 15.— Left Sarnm.
~ 18. — Dined -with Mr. Dairy.
~ 21.— Left for Hamsgate.
~ 28. —Began Mr. Harry's drawings.
May B. —Left Hamsgate.
~ 10. —Saw Mr. Harry.
~ 14.— Left for So ruin.
~ 15. —Began Mr. Barry's work.
„ 16. —Sent off Mr. Harry's drawings.
„ 20.— Sent Mr. Harry's drawings.


May 28. —Sent drawings to Mr. Barn/.
~ 80. Sent off Mr. Graham's drawings.
June 9. Sent drawings to Mr. Barry, Left Sarum,
jj 14. —Left London fur Sarum,
s) 16. —Sent off Mr. Barry's drawings.
~ 23. — Sent Mr. Graham's drawings.
?> 27. —Sent details to Mr. Graham.
■Aug. 4. Arrived in London. Saw Mr. Graham.
„ s.— Began 'drawings for Mr. G.
jj 6. Saw Mr. Barry. Working drawings.
3, 10. — Mr. Barry.
3, 11.— Ditto.
33 12. —Began large drawings
33 16. —Left London for Sarum.
33 24. —Began Mr. Barry's drawings,
~ 25. — 0 n ditto.
~ 26.— Ditto.
33 2 7. — Ditto, all day.
Sept. I.— Mr. Barry all day, composition.
~ 2. Sent off drawings of Dining Pioom to Mr. Barry.
33 11* Sent drawings to Mr. Barry.
h list drew at St. Marie's Grange, Mr. Bury began.
” Larry. Mr. Bury on G. G. (Gillespie
Graham.)
—Ditto
33 16. —0 n composition for Mr. Barn/.
„ n. —Ditto
3 3 18. —Ditto
33 19. —Sent off Mr. Barry's drawings.
„ 20. — Mr. Barry.
33 23.— Ditto.
33 24. — Mr. Barry came.
~ 25. — Sent off five drawings to Mr. Barry.
~ 26. — Worked all night.
~ 27. — Parliament H —,
j, 29. — Sent to Mr. Barry 14 drawings.
~ 30.—Central portion.
Oct. 2. —Sent to Mr. Barry 12 drawings
,3 8. —Paid Bury and he left.
Mr. Talbot Bury, in a letter to the Times
of Sept. 18th, writes as follows:
A. W. Pugin did not make any plan or design for
this building until I went to his house at Salisbury to
assist him in Mr. Graham’s drawings. He then put his
first ideas on paper respecting it, and I worked them out.


ISTow Mr. Talbot Bury went to Salisbury
on September 11th, and the diary proves that my
father had been working both for Sir Charles
Barry and Mr. Gillespie Graham ever since the
end of April; and Mr. Osmond’s letter (page 13)
says that Mr. Graham’s drawings were done whilst
my father was at his house in Salisbury. It is
plain therefore that so far from its being true that
my father made no plan or design before Mr. T.
Bury visited Salisbury, Mr. Graham’s design, or
rather the elevations and sections of it, were
finished before he arrived ; and I have no hesita-
tion in saying that he only coloured in the plans
and sections at the Grange. The supposition
that Mr. Talbot Bury “ worked out ” my father’s
u ideas ” after they had been committed to paper,
is rather too ridiculous, for my father never
allowed any one to work out an architectural idea
for him in his life; and in spite of his regard—
misplaced as events imply —for Mr. Talbot Bury,
I know that he held far too low an estimate
of that gentleman’s architectural powers to
entrust him with much beyond what he was
principally engaged to do, via., to bite in my
father’s copper plates. The part he performed
in the work was without doubt that of the
renowned bellows-blower, who claimed a share
of the applause bestowed on the player by
coming to the front to say, “We did that.”
Mr. Talbot Bury has been rather officious in
volunteering explanations which are not only
inconsistent with the 'truth, but with themselves
as well, as I shall show further on; and his testi-
mony about the drawings is perfectly valueless.
Again he says, in the same letter, —
A. W. Pugin was staying at my house after Mr. G.
Graham’s drawings were completed, when he first went to
see Mr. Barry’s plans and designs for the Houses of Par-
liament, and on his return he spoke to me of them, &c.


I have frequently asked Mr. Talbot Bury
for the date of this visit, and he has always
evaded compliance with my request. He now
inadvertently betrays it. Mr. T. Bury finished
Mr. Graham’s drawings on Oct. 3, and my father
did not leave Salisbury for London before Novem-
ber 19th. It must, therefore, have been at this
time that he was staying with Mr. Talbot Bury,
and paid the visit to Sir C. Barry during which
Mr. T. Bury says he first saw Sir Charles’s
designs. Here again Mr. T. Bury’s entire un-
consciousness of every transaction to which the
two principals only were a party, marks the
unworthiness of every tittle of evidence which
he gives. He seems to have known nothing of
Sir Charles’s visits to Salisbury, or of the designs
which my father had been engaged on for months
previously for both his clients, or in short of any
one single fact disconnected with his own work
during the three weeks he was there himself.
It was only a shade less probable that my
father would divulge Sir Charles Barry’s secret
to him, than that Sir Charles would betray it to
his clerks in London. Both ends of the line were
in darkness, and when my father returned from
Sir Charles’s house and spoke of the designs he
had seen, he was simply describing his oivn draw-
ings, on which he subsequently worked.
Oct. 6. — Mr. Barry, S.E. view.
~ * 7. — Ditto, 2 elevations.
~ B.— Ditto, ditto.
~ 9. —Sent off Mr. Barry's drawings.
„ 11. —Left for London.
„ 12 to 17. —Drew at Mr. B's.
~ 18. —Returned to Sarum.
„ 21. —Began Mr. G.'s elevations.
~ 22. —On ditto.
~ 28.— Ditto.
„ 24.— Ditto.
Nov. 2. — Mr. Barry arrived.
„ 8. —On Eiver Front, 5 compartments.
c


Nov. 9. — Mr. Barry left.
~ 17. — Mr. G. G. arrived.
~ 19. — Left Barum.
~ 21,— Began at Mr. Barry's.
~ 22. — At Mr. Barry's on working drawings.
~ 28.— Ditto , ditto.
~ 24.— Ditto, ditto.
~ 25.— Ditto
~ 26. — At Mr. Barry's on views.
~ 28.— Finished for Mr. Barry.
~ 29. — Ditto
Dec. 5. —Finished Mr. G.'s drawings. Left for Sarum.
~ 9. — Sent Chapel to Mr. Graham.
These entries, collected from one year’s
diary, turn and twist them as yon may, tell a
tale, which no amount of evidence given in
ignorance of the transactions recorded , can
destroy. They are consistent only with the
history I give, and can in no way fit in with
anything short of it. 'Whatever may be their
value by themselves —taken in connection with
the mass of after events which bear on them,
the letters printed above, the voluminous
correspondence which passed between Sir
Charles Barry and my father, Sir Charles’s
•destruction of letters, &c., the reports about my
father, and my own knowledge of facts received
from his mouth—these entries assume a grave
importance, and at the same time explain cir-
cumstances otherwise inexplicable. Let it be
observed also, that amongst the drawings named,
there is not a single entry of “ details,” such as
those to which my father’s labours are said to
have been confined. They are described as—
'i. e., drawings to scale or full size,
of every portion, feature, and detail
- of the building, from which it is
worked out by those engaged in its
, erection.
(i. e., the original cast or conception
t of the building.
Working Drawings,
Compositions,
18


li. e., geometrical delineations of the
building, raised from the plan and
drawn to scale, setting forth its
architectural features and mechani-
cal working.
(i. e., integral portions of the eleva-
tions drawn to a larger scale.
Elevations,
Compartments,
Large Drawings, Views, and (in another year’s diary we
read of)
li. e., drawings through various parts
of the building, showing the con-
struction, flooring, &c., and the
interior elevations.
Sections,
I am particular in giving these definitions,
and in directing attention to them, as they
indicate the nature and extent of my father’s
work.*
I now proceed to the diary for 1836. Sir
Charles Barry having become the successful com-
petitor, had further recourse to my father for the
production of all the working drawings and de-
tails of the building. By “ details,” let me
observe, are signified, not mere minute ornamental
adjuncts to the features of a design, hut th z full
size drawings of the features themselves , and of
each separate component part thereof with their
construction and application distinctly delineated.
My father commenced working again for Sir
C. Barry in August, 1836.
* An architect who does not prepare his own working drawings,
in fact transfers his professional claim to the person employed for the
purpose; for the very soul and spirit of a building depends on the
working drawings being not only well prepared, hut prepared with the
same feeling as the general conception. If, therefore, my father pre-
pared the working drawings for Sir C. Barry, and they present the
same feeling and expression as the general design, and a natural
fitness and affinity to it, the inductive argument leads to the conclusion
that he designed both. Any practised eye can detect at a glance whe-
ther the details of a building have been prepared by the same hand
which designed the building. I will undertake to go to Sir C. Barry’s
buildings and point out, moulding for moulding, line for line, which
have been carried out from my father’s designs.
c 2


Diary for 1836.
Aug. I. —Left Sarum for London.
„ 2.— Mr. Barry all day.
„ 6. —Returned to Sarum.
~ 20. —Left for London.
„ 22. —Saw Mr. Barry.
~ 28. —Finished for Mr. Barry.
~ 29. —Finished for Mr. Graham.
Sept. 2. —Left London for Sarum.
~ 9. — Mr. Barry's drawings.
~ 12. —Sent fireplaces to Mr. Barry. 44.
„ 14. —Sent working drawings of lamp to Mr. B.
~ 15. —Began drawings for Mr. Graham.
~ 24. —Sent box with 24 drawings to Mr. Graham.
~ 27. —Sent Mr. Barry's doors and framings.
~ 28. —Began East-end for Mr. Graham.
Oct. 6. —24 drawings of East-end for Mr. Graham.
~ 7. —Sent ditto.
~ 10. —Sent 8 drawings to Mr. Barry.
~ 20. —Sent 5 drawings to Mr. B. K. staircase, robing
room, lords, 2. Lobbies.
~ 26. —6 drawings of North door. 22 drawings of West
front. 5 drawings of interior West-end. A
large drawing of West front.
Nov. 6. —A1l week on Mr. Barry's drawings.
„ 7.— Mr. Barry came.
„ 12. —Sent 11 drawings to Mr. Barry. Porch, hall,
central lobby, stairs, witness rooms, King's (Vic-
toria) Tower 2. Entrance hall 2.
„ 19. —Sent 8 drawings. Stained glass. 6 drawings
stalls. 7 throne.
~ 26. —Left for London. 11 drawings for Mr. Barry
of ceilings. Compartments, land front. Ditto
water front. Upper part of ditto turrets. Upper
part of section of tower. Commons entrance.
Speaker's Court entrance.
Drawings done at Mr. Barry's.
1 and 2. Interior of library, 3 compartments. 3.
River front, second time. 4. Compartments,
land front, second time. 5. Upper part of
centres, second time. 6. Great oriels. 7. Upper
part above ditto. 8. End towers. 11. Lanterns
of ditto. 12. Angle turrets. 13. Gable. West-
minster Hall. 14. Lower part of great tower.
15. Middle story of ditto. 16. Upper part of
ditto. Drawing on vellum of King’s tower. 17.
Entrance hall from water. 18. Throne end of


House of Lords. 19. End of Speaker's chair ,
House of Commons. 20. Peers' entrance, hall,
and dining room.
Dec. 6. —Recommenced at Mr. Barry's.
~ 9. — Mr. Graham's drawings.
14.— Settled about Lodges.
„ 21. — Left London for Sarum.
„ 31.— Mr. Barry. Commons entrance hall. Blackrod’s.
Speaker's dining room. Ditto drawing room.
Morning ami drawing room. Ditto library. 5
drawings.
Diary for 1-837.
Jan. 1. —1 compartment of new river front. (The use of
the word new is noteworthy. It indicates
that my father also designed the “ important
changes ”in the building.) 2. 3. Centre and
5. Upper part of ditto.
~ 5. — Came up to London.
„ 31.— Finished at Mr. Barry's. Drawings sent.
Feb. 4. —Left London for Sarum.
~ 9.— Finished chapel for Mr. Barry.
~ 12.— Finished chapel for Mr. Wolfe.
15. — Mr. Barry's plate etched.
June 6. —Sent off chapel to Barry.
Aug. 14. —At Barry's.
It will be seen presently that some of fhe
dates of these entries correspond with those
of Sir C. Barry’s letters, which also ask for or
acknowledge the drawings named. In a letter
dated Sept. 23, 1836, Sir Charles asks for draw-
ings for the two Houses complete, King’s
Bobing Boom, Gallery, Staircase. On Oct.
20, 1836, my father sent off, from Salisbury,
some of these drawings. He subsequently
made at Salisbury drawings for porch, hall,
central lobby, stairs, witness room, King’s tower,
entrance hall, compartments of land and water
front, turrets, &c. These drawings are sent to
Mr. Barry on Hoy. 12th, 19th, and 26th. On
the 26th, my father goes to London, and u at
Mr. Barry’s ” (no date is given, but I imagine it
to have been on December 6th when he ure-com


menced at Mr. Barry’s ”) we find Mm at work on
the very subjects, previously sent up from Salis-
bury. He was, in fact, engaged in preparing
working drawings from his own designs, made
at Salisbury in 1835, and the following year.
Between Hov. 26th and December 6th there
was ample time for Sir C. Barry to produce
sketches from the designs, or to trace or re-draw
them. How often has my father assured me
that this was Sir Charles’s ordinary practice
with reference to the designs sent to him ! If
it were not, where are my father’s drawings?
Again, after making at Salisbury the designs
entered on Dec. 31, 1836, and Jan. 1, 1837, my
father goes to London on Jan. 5, and at Sir C.
Barry’s office carries them out as on the former
occasion. Thus it was that all designs were
made at Salisbury, and worked out in Foley
Place, ostensibly from Sir C. Barry’s sketches,
but in reality from my father’s general designs,
which he had sent to Sir Charles a few days
before arriving in town himself. This scheme
effectually blinded all but the principals.
It has already been related that a short time
before Sir C. Barry’s death, I deposited with him,
at his own request, seventy-six letters of his to
my father, receiving from him an undertaking to
return them. His promise was not redeemed,
and they are still in possession of his family.
The four letters annexed (one of which was then
in Mr. Ferrey’s hands) are, however, sufficiently
significant of the nature of the entire correspond-
ence to stamp its value and importance. I think
that no one can read them without being strongly
impressed by a conviction that they are not the
letters of a superior, who, originating and com-
pleting Ms own designs, employs the service of
an inferior “assistant” to “draw them out”


fairly “under his instructions;” but of one,
who, conscious of his own difficulties and re-
quirements, exults in the discovery of a source
from which he can supply them without anxiety.
The tone and phraseology indicate complete
dependence and unlimited confidence. He gives
my father perfect scope for the exercise of his
genius, praises him for his productions, expresses
entire satisfaction with them, and lauds his ex-
traordinary powers—not of delineation—but of
“ creation To say that such unusual expres-
sions are accounted for by the supposition that my
father was anything less than the Art Architect
of the building is a conclusion so irrational, that
nought but a partizan would maintain it. Art
Architect he was, or Sir C. Barry was indulging
in the most ridiculous flattery, for a purpose as
discreditable to himself as an Architect as it was
contemptible in him as a man.
Letter 1.
Foley Place, 23rd September, 1836.
Dear Sir, —As a measure of precaution for the safe
delivery of a parcel of tracings, forwarded by the Exeter
Mail tins evening to your address, I write by post in order
that if it should not be duly delivered, you may know
where and how to make enquiries for it. They will furnish
you with the necessary data (i. e., dimensions) for the pre-
paration of a large batch of internal details, including
the two Houses complete, the King’s Robing Room,
Gallery, and Staircase, and the Entrance Vestibule, all
of which I shall be obliged to you to set about immediately
and send them to me from time to time as each subject is
completed. The drawings that I should be glad to have
first, and as soon as possible, are a collection of doors,
archway openings to corridors, &c., and a series of designs
and details for wall framings. The door openings to the
smaller rooms need not exceed 2ft. lOins. in the clear, and
those to the Committee and other large rooms should not
for practical convenience exceed 3ft. Gin. The great folding
doors, wherever they occur, may have a clear opening
of sft. Sins.
The plans (which I should tell you are all prepared to
a scale of 10 feet to one inch) will furnish you with the


several thicknesses of walls for the door jambs. The
wall framings in the great rooms are to be 6ft. Gin, in
height, in the second class rooms 4ft. 9in., and in the
smaller or third class rooms 4 feet. All to have frieze
panels from 6 to 7 inches clear height, and long panels
beneath them, ranging from 12 to 13 inches clear width.
Eight different sorts of doors (all to be set in stone) and
double that number of jambs will suffice. The sections of
stone work may be tinted brown, brickwork red, and
plaster purple ; the scale may be half an inch to a foot,
excepting when doors, windows, turrets, &c., are drawn
out separately, when I agree with you that it will be desir-
able to adopt a scale of one inch to a foot. The sheet of
fireplaces came safely to hand, and will answer the purpose
exceedingly well, many of them are excellent. Perhaps it
would be as well to do one or two more rather richer for
Speaker’s House, but remember the motto “ simplex, &c.”
I shall be able very soon to send you the data for the
grand approach through the “ Noble Hall of Rufus,” by
St. Stephen’s Porch, St. Stephen’s Hall, Central Hall,
Committee Room, Staircase to the great waiting hall for
witnesses, but I think you will now have enough to do for
some little time to come, notwithstanding your 50 -horse
power of creation. Let me hear from you on the receipt
of the parcel, and believe me ever,
Yours very faithfully, &c.,
CHARLES BARRY.
The tracings comprise the whole of ground floor, prin-
cipal floor and second floor.
To understand the full value of this letter,
we must ascertain what was the nature of the
tracings alluded to in the first paragraph. The
postscript at once determines it. They comprised
certain floors, i. <?., they were floor plans.
“ The plans” writes Sir Charles Barry, “ are
all prepared on a scale of 10 feet to the inch,”
and “will furnish you with the thicknesses
ot the walls.” Now one of these very “ tracings ”
I have still in my possession the plan of
the principal floor j and it exactly answers
to the description given in every respect.
The self-same words are used. It cannot there


fore be pretended that these “ tracings ” were
tracings of Sir C. Barry’s own designs to which
my father was to apply a series of minute orna-
ments. They were simply “ floor plans ” with
the necessary dimensions; to which my father
was to work the designs required by Sir Charles.
The use of the word “ subject” also precludes
all idea of my father’s “ assistance ” being con-
fined to mere fractional parts of a complete
whole. It is the entire mass which is unreser-
vedly placed in my father’s hands to deal with as
he thinks fit, and as each “ subject ” is completed
Sir Charles will feel “obliged” by its transmis-
sion. There is no exceptional statement of any
kind; not a reservation, not a direction as to style,
or suggestion of a preference ; —still less is there a
syllable implying that my father was “ engaged
to make drawings to enlarged scales ” of the
“ smaller drawings of Sir C. Barry.” “ Designs
and details,” with “ sections,” are required ex-
ternally for turrets and windows; internally for
the whole of the Houses of Lords and Commons
complete , galleries, lobbies, staircases, rooms,
&c.; not one of which would be in existence for
many years. Let this be distinctly remembered.
The walls of these vast chambers were not
then erected, and yet with singular forecast and
forethought, Sir Charles was obtaining from my
father all these “internal details;” i. e. every
possible portion of the places named, except
the four bare walls in which they were com-
prised. Even the fire-places in the Speakers’
House, a comparatively recent erection, are not
forgotten. Those who know the Houses of
Parliament will now fully understand what is
signified by “ internal details.”
This vast body of designs being furnished,
it is not surprising that Sir C. Barry was able to


proceed with the work for some time, without
getting into a a regular fix.” This, however,
as we shall see, came at last, when he required
the working drawings of the u subjects ” thus
supplied.
Letter 2
Foley Place, 22nd Oct., 1836.
Dear Sir, —Being from home yesterday I could not
acknowledge, by return of post, the receipt of the
drawings of the House of Lords, King’s Stairs, &c.,
which came safely to hand last night, and afforded me a
rich treat. They will in all respects answer the purpose
most admirably. I can easily imagine the great labour
they must have cost you, and, knowing all the diffi-
culties, I cannot but wonder that you have been able
to accomplish so much in the time. I am not much
surprised‘to hear that your health suffers from excess
of application. Do not, however, I beseech you, carry
too great a press of sail, but take in a reef or two if
you find it necessary in due time. I send by this morn-
ing’s mail a packet containing tracings of the grand public
entrance and approach to the Houses and committee
rooms. They are most wretchedly made by a younker,
who is as dull and destitute of feeling as the board
upon which he draws. They will, nevertheless, I have
no doubt, afford you all the data you require. The
groining and interior generally of the King’s or Record
Tower Entrance you may make of any design you think
proper. You need not be shackled as to height, but the
groin should, I think, be concentric with the arch of
the opening to the vestibule at the foot of the King’s
stairs, which you already have. The design of this part
of the building should, I think, be of a simple and
massive character, and a pillar in the centre of the
tower must be avoided. lam much flattered by your
hearty commendation of the plan, and shall know where
to look for a champion if I should hereafter require
one. Truly it has cost me many an anxious thought
and an extraordinary degree of perseverance.
With many thanks for your glorious efforts in this
cause
Believe me, in haste, dear Sir,
Yours most truly, &c., &c.
CHARLES BARRY.
During the month which had elapsed since
Sir Charles’s letter of September 23rd, my father


evidently designed and sent off many of the
“ subjects ” asked for. Eeference to the diary
shows this, as well as the present letter acknow-
ledging the receipt of the drawings for the House
of Lords, &c. As' I determined the nature of
the u tracings” referred to in the last letter, so
now I will explain what are the “drawings”
acknowledged in this. They were not the full
size working drawings, for the instruction and
direction of the workmen in their various crafts,
but drawings to scale of sections of the walls and
ceilings, showing the appearance of the Houses
when completed, —in other words they were
u sectional drawings.”
I have in my possession one of these sectional
drawings—that for the Peers’ Library, showing
the frieze pannelling, bookcases, walls, cornices,
and ceiling for the entire room. This drawing
would subsequently require full size working
drawings of all the different parts of the
subjects, indicating the construction, &c., to
enable the workmen to carry it out. In like
manner the drawings for the House of Lords,
one of which is also in my possession, comprised
the entire fittings from floor to ceiling. Of such
drawings,—manipulated by my father, an em-
bodiment of his day-dreams for years, and the
touch-stone of his genius, Sir Charles Barry
might well say—“ they have afforded me a rich
treat. I can easily imagine the great labour
they must have cost you, and knowing all the
difficulties, I cannot but wonder that you have
been able to accomplish so much in the time ”
tc they answer their purpose admirably ”
il thanks for your glorious effortsbut to
indulge in such hyperbole for anything less than
original designs striking alike for their beauty
and their power, would be positively ridiculous.


It appears, also, from this letter, that Sir
Charles had forwarded more tracings of floor
plans for the Grand Public Entrance, &c., with
the requisite data. That they were of exactly
the same character as the others is sufficiently
evident from the complete liberty accorded to my
father in the composition of his designs. Sir
Charles merely suggests that a certain “ part of
the building should be of a simple and massive
character.” The expression, “this part of the
building,” certainly implies that my father also
designed other parts to the plans sent to him,
on which he bestowed the “hearty commenda-
tion” which “flattered” Sir Charles. In short,
it is impossible for any language to define
more precisely the respective positions of the two
architects. The one, with “anxious thought
and perseverance,” perfected his plans and
arrangements, the other conceived and applied to
them the elevations and various features of the
building, externally and internally, with a “50-
horse power of creation;” and his “inventive
genius ” and “ glorious efforts in the great
cause,” were without any doubt gloriously
appreciated by Sir Charles Barry. “ Hone
knew better than he,” writes a journalist,
“ the mine of architectural wealth which was
within his reach; nor was he slow to avail
himself of the tempting ore. He had in Webby
Pugin, a brain perfectly immeasureable in its
power of creation, and a pencil as quick as it
was versatile and inimitable.”
Letter 3.
November, 1836.
My dear Sir, —I am sorry yon have had to endure
a moment’s suspense concerning the safe arrival of the
box containing the last set of exquisite details, which,
on my arrival from the country where I have been for
the last three days, I have just received. I can only
vsay “ Go on as you have begun and prosper,” for nothing


can be more satisfactory than the result of your labours
hitherto. Ever yours most truly, &c., See.,
CHARLES BARRY.
Thus it appears that my father designed
u sets of exquisite details.”
Ex pede Herculem. From these three letters
we may pretty well judge of the rest of the
correspondence. I think that while all will be
disposed to admit that these diaries and letters
show the nature of the relations established
between Sir Charles Barry and my father ; there
are but few who will not consider that collectively
they prove the fact for which I am con-
tending— that my father was in very deed
strictly the Art Architect of the Houses of Parlia-
ment. And it may easily be conceived how
immensely this position would be strengthened,
were I in possession of the rest of the correspond-
ence and other documents of importance. The
diary for 1835 shows that my father was making
the competition drawings at Salisbury all through
that year, and singularly enough, of the four
letters—all that are left to me, of the early corre-
spondence,—one proves that my father designed
the “ elevations” of the Palace to Sir Charles’s plans
externally and internally —the second, that he
designed all the “ sectional drawings ” —the third
that he designed u sets of exquisite details ;” —
and elevations , sections , and details , make up the
entire building.
The Pall Mall Gazette , of August sth,
u wanted to know the extent of the work
bestowed on the Building by my father :
whether it meant that he merely carried out
in the details of mouldings, foliage, and
decoration, the general designs supplied to him
for that purpose by Mr. Barry.” This ques-
tion may be considered as fully answered..


I will however, at the risk of being tedious,
enumerate the different drawings made by
my father at this time—which few, I think,
will now dispute to have been original designs
—that it may appear at a glance how com-
pletely every portion of the Building, inside and
out, was the conception of his brain and the
production of his hand.
Previous to the competition he made composi-
tions, compartments, elevations, and views, of every
part of the building. After it he made sections,
working drawings, and details of Land front,
river front, centre portion, Victoria Tower, lower
part middle storey, upper part, end towers, en-
trance hall from water, peers’ entrance, Commons’
entrance, Speaker’s court, central lobby, gable,
Westminster Hall, porch, King’s staircase,
gallery, robing room, lobbies, halls, the grand
approach through u the noble hall of Eufus,”
St. Stephen’s porch, St. Stephen’s hall, central
octagon hall, waiting hall for witnesses, stair-
cases, turrets, great oriels, lanterns, dining and
drawing room for Speaker’s residence, libraries,
&c., also the whole of the internal details of the
two Houses of Lords and Commons, and the
other halls and chambers, stained-glass windows
in House of Lords and every other portion of the
House, doors, archway openings, windows, fire-
places, metal work, &c., &c. These are all men-
tioned, it will be perceived, by name, but they
bear after all but a small proportion to the
hundreds—nay, thousands—of drawings made by
my father through a long series of years for
every portion of the Building. And the man
who did all this, what could he have been, but
the Art Architect of the Palace of Westminster?


Letter 4.
Foley Place, 17tb April, 1837.
Dear Sir, —I have received the vanes and highly
approve of them. If, in conscience, you think the man
should he paid for them instanter, have the goodness to
advance the amount (which I know not how otherwise
to send to him) and I will repay you when I see you
next. I should have written to you in answer to your
letter respecting the amount of remuneration for the
drawings prepared for the great work, but have ever
since been in daily expectation of seeing you, supposing,
of course, that you would not have left town without
calling to take leave, or at least like other fashionable
people, to leave your card; for without some such in-
dication of your motions, who is to know in what part of
the world you are to be found? I am perfectly well
satisfied with your proposition, and I shall have great
pleasure in handing over to you the balance due, as
soon as I can get some settlement with the Govern-
ment for all the heavy expenses I have already incurred,
towards which I have not, as yet, received one farthing.
I am happy to say that the Board of Works people
have finished their examination of my detailed estimate,
and will report to their superiors to-morrow that they
are not only perfectly satisfied with its accuracy and
liberality, but are convinced that a deduction might
with great fairness, be made from any amount of above
£30,000. I expect, therefore, that the estimates will be
laid upon the table of the House before the end of the
week, and a notice of motion given by the Chancellor
of the Exchequer for a vote of £200,000, to commence
the work, which I hope will be granted before many
days are over. Your refutation of the calumnies in
Frazer is honest and straightforward, in which opinion
my old chum of the Alley I have no doubt will fully
coincide. He is coming here this evening, when he
shall have his copy. In haste, yours most truly, &c.,
CHARLES BARRY.
In connection with, this letter I will now
quote one received by my father from Sir Charles
Barry 14 years after:—
“ Yon are quite right. . . . You are really one of
the best, I may say the best and most agreeable fellow to
do business with I have ever known, to say nothing of
your extraordinary powers and good qualities. lam quit©
sure that we, with our sympathies, can never disagree.”


All the documents hitherto given refer to-
the period immediately before the competition,
and the two years which followed it, 1836 and
1837.
When the immense mass of drawings made
during this time by my father had passed into Sir
C. Barry’s possession, he called up from Birming-
ham the late Mr. J. Thomas, a man whose
practical education was due to his working from
my father’s drawings, and under his instructions,
at the Birmingham Grammar School. To him
was exclusively entrusted the execution of the
designs made by my father, who felt Sir Charles’s
ungenerous treatment so acutely, that for many
years he refused all intercourse with him, and
it was not until the year 1844 that my father
again consented to work for him. From this
year until my father’s illness in 1852, their
intercourse was uninterrupted.
I am now able to bring my own personal
knowledge to bear upon many of the transactions
of this period. I began worldng in my father’s
office when I was but seven years’ old, and I
have a distinct recollection of seeing and being
engaged on designs for the Houses of Parliament
from the year 1844. I can therefore state most
positively that every design for the internal
details and fittings of the whole Palace was my
father’s—every cartoon for stained glass, every
design for metal-work, wood-work, painted
decoration, pavements, furniture, &c., &c.
Several others (who can bear out my testi-
mony) were engaged with me on the drawings,
which literally might be numbered by hundreds,
and many of them were of immense size. In
addition to these many went direct to Sir C.
Barry and were not seen by us.


What became of these drawings after
reaching Sir C. Barry, it is of course impossible
for me to say; but there they were. Let no one
of those with whom I am disputing pretend to
deny this fact, for it is absolutely indisputable.
Independent of my own personal knowledge, I
have a thousand proofs, which no explanations,
based on ignorance of the real facts, can weaken or
upset. If these gentlemen never came in contact
with the drawings in question, they were not
on those terms of confidential intercourse with
Sir Charles, of which they boast, and knew not
his dearest secret: but if they did know of
them, lioav do they dare come forward and bear
false witness against me ?
Mr. E. M. Barry especially notes the time
from 1850 to his father’s death, as one of which
he u can state most positively that every design
emanated from his father alone, and tuas fully
worked out hj his oion hand.' 1 ' 1 Let these
latter words be carefully weighed. That all the
drawings were u carefully worked out ” by Sir
C. Barry’s “ own hand,” I can readily believe ;
for this is exactly what I have all along main-
tained on the authority of my father’s repeated
assertion. It was the most natural thing to do to
ensure concealment.
There are, however, still in existence
hundreds of my father’s original designs, in the
hands of various firms, which I shall be able to
produce at the proper moment. If it turns out
that all those sent to London were u worked out
by Sir Charles Barry’s own hand,” before being
seen by his sons and clerks, whilst those in the
country have suffered from no such treatment;
few will doubt that the motive for this system
was to keep up the delusion that Sir Charles
Barry was the author of all the designs which
appeared in the office or elsewhere.
D


But this conclusion of mine is easily tested.
Sir Charles, in one of his letters, says:—
“I thought I had acknowledged the receipt of the
drawing for the Terrace Gates, which I approved as soon
as I saw it, and placed in Bayne’s hands to prepare the
requisite wood models.”
Now, if this drawing is still in existence,
let it be produced. If it is my father’s, it will
afford a strong probability —if not sufficient
proof—that other designs were supplied by
him: if it was u fully worked out by Sir
Charles’s own hand,” it is copied from the
original ; and an equally strong probability is
established that this was his usual practice.
Other drawings will afford the same test.
As regards the year from which Mr. E. M.
Barry dates his “ personal knowledge,” viz: 1850,
he may certainly plead ignorance of what occurred
previous to that period, but it is unwarrantable
that he should state what is positively false with
reference to events which took place after it.
Thirty of the letters quoted below were written by
Sir C. Barry to my father during the years 1850-
1-2. How then can Mr, E. M. Barry’s statement
be correct ? His “ personal knowledge ” has ap-
parently failed to inform him that a correspondence
was going on at all, much less of the fact that
my father was continuously supplying Sir Charles
with every design he wrote for.
It would swell this pamphlet to too great a
size to give entire copies of the later letters of
Sir C. Barry. I must therefore content myself
with extracts, sufficiently copious, however, to
show their bearing ; the Eev. Alfred Barry
having reduced the discussion to the vulgarity of
a personal quarrel by accusing me of u mis-dating
and mis-quoting.”
The extracts are from some of Sir Charles’s
letters, after the renewal of his intercourse


with, my father in 1844. As far as they go,
it will he seen that they fully bear out what
I have just advanced : but since they form only
a fragmentary portion of one side of an immense
correspondence, they must be read in connection
with the letters of 1835-6-7; and when necessary
interpreted by them. They must also be illus-
trated by the drawings done at that period, and
explained, when explanation is needed, by the
personal knowledge of living witnesses :
Letter I.
8, Marine Parade, Brighton, 3rd Sept., 1844.
Dear Pugin,—l am in a regular fix respecting the
working drawings for the fittings and decorations of the
House of Lords, which it is of vital importance to me
should now be finished with the utmost possible despatch.
I know of no one who can
render me such valuable and efficient assistance or can
so thoroughly relieve me of my present troubles of mind
in respect of these said drawings as yourself
. . . &c., &c.
It will be remembered that my Father had
supplied Sir Charles Barry with the sectional
drawings for the House of Lords in 1836. Sir
Charles is now unable to carry them out, and
accordingly resorts to my father for the “working
drawings.” Although he doubtless recognized
the fact that my father was at that time about
the only man in England who could design and
work out the internal, as he had previously done
the external details ; yet he was about the very
last person in the world with whom Sir Charles
wished to come in contact, and I have good reason
to believe that it was not until previous applica-
tions to my father, and in other quarters had
failed, that Sir Charles had recourse to him. To
resort to him at all was a confession of the vast
extent not only of his own incompeteney, but
that of others; and great must have been the
necessity and deep the humiliation, which could
D 2


reconcile him to seek assistance from the very
man, who, from a sense of personal wrong had
refused his intercourse for several years.
Let me also direct particular attention to
the very striking fact, that as the first letter of
this second series asks for u working drawings”
for the House of Lords, so the last requires
“working drawings” for the Clock Tower, &c.
May it not reasonably be inferred from this—
independently of other proofs—that Sir Charles,
during the whole intermediate space of time
depended on my father for all drawings necessary
for the execution of the u great work?”
Letter 11.
Westminster, 25th November, 1845.
Dear Pugin,—l have ordered £lOO to be paid to your
account at the London and Westminster Bank, according
to your wish ; but verily you are a man of little faith.
Know you not that I am well aware that your remu-
neration hitherto has been altogether inadequate to your
deserts, and that the Fat is yet to come. You say lam
a reasonable man, and so I am, and it shall not be my
fault if your remuneration ultimately is not all that you
can wish ; but I will not do you the injustice to believe
that filthy lucre only is the main spring of all your efforts
on behalf of the great work, but that like myself you
are prepared to make a sacrifice for the glory of making
it the means of establishing for the future what you
believe the one and only true style of art. When, how-
ever, we meet again, we shall talk over this matter, and
I have no doubt I shall be able to appease your mind and
put it in a fit state to enable you to proceed with your
holy work at Eamsgate with fitting composure and Chris-
tian resignation.
The proportion and size of the figure, together with
the canopy and base, will do admirably, therefore let
Oljphant proceed. The details of the pannelling (with
the trifling exception of the form of the arched heads to
the principal pannel, which I have corrected in pencil),,
and also the proposed decoration of it will also do very
well, but I should like to see the detailed drawings of the
carvings before they are sent to Thames Bank. I have no
objection to the proposition of the common pannels at the
back of the Throne being sown with lions.


I have made application in the proper quarter for
the orders of the Queen, the Prince of Wales’s Arms, and
the badges appertaining to him as Duke of Cornwall, &c.
Be not sceptical but ever believe me, &c., &c.
Reference is constantly made in these letters
to the inadequacy of my father’s remuneration,
and Sir Charles Barry, whilst acknowledging this
fact, appeals to his love of art and devotion to
principle, as motives sufficiently powerful to urge
him on to renewed exertions in the “ great work.”
Those who knew my father need not he told that
such an appeal was totally superfluous; hut Sir
Charles Barry felt its value, and had long since
taken the measure of the man ho had to deal
with. His recognition of my father’s indifference
to u filthy lucre,” in comparison with the advance
of u true principles,” at a time when he was him-
self to u touch 5 per Cent, on three millions of
money,” (Letter YII) is a singular comment on
the complaint of his u pitiable condition.”
This question, however, is one which
demands a little attention. At one moment it is
admitted that my father received large sums of
money for his u valuable assistance,” and he is
reproached for betraying a spirit, quite at variance
with the disinterested and enthusiastic love of
art, to which I attribute his “ superhuman exer-
tions:” at another, his services are reduced to
such a common-place estimate that his actual
emoluments (small indeed in comparison with his
due) were an outrageous over-payment for them.
The inconsistency of these statements is made
more apparent by the fact that Sir C. Barry
recognised the justice of my father’s complaints of
inadequate remuneration ; and the complaints
themselves indicate that his services were rather
more valuable, and his work of a far higher
character than Mr. E. M. Barry and his witnesses
admit.


1. Let us see what, on their representa-
tions, this work amounted to. Mr. Wolfe
says that “after Sir C. Barry had originated, and
with his own hand drawn out the general design,
both in plan and elevation, my father, under
his instructions, and from his designs, drew some
perspective views, and drawings, mostly in pencil,
of details of the building.” He also informs us
that “ most of these drawings were set aside, and
some of the least important only were adopted.”
This was before the competition. On the other
hand, Mr. Talbot Bury, officious, as usual, in
volunteering information about Sir C. Barry (by
whom he was not engaged) and always confused,
if not contradictory in his statements, says it was
not till after Sir C. Barry’s original design had
been selected that my father “ prepared” some
u drawings of details: ” having previously in-
formed us that Sir Charles had completed his
competition drawings, including elevations and
sections, before my father was “called in.” What
he did at that critical moment we are not in-
formed : but it is not of much importance to
know, as most of his drawings were “ set aside,”
and Mr. Bumble believes they were only
u sketches of ornamental fittings for Trentham.”
Mr. T. Bury, after describing certain drawings
on August 22nd, as “ details extending very
much over the whole building,” on September
18th assures us that they were “ details of
the internal finishings of the rooms.” Mr. Banks
confirms wholesale every word of Mr. Wolfe.
Mr. Wright, however, affiirms that my father
merely copied “ parts of the buildings to enlarged
scales:” and Mr. Bichardson boldly describes
himself and my father as “ draughtsmen working
out the ornamental detail.” Mr. Charles Barry
asserts that from 1840 to 1848, the “ designs for
the great work were prepared by Sir Charles


alone,” and Mr. E. M. Barry testifies that after
1850 “ every design for the Westminster Palace
emanated from Sir C. Barry alone, and was fully
worked out by his own hand.” Prom this con-
flicting evidence, it is difficulty to discover what
the admissions really signify; hut after deducting
the points on which the witnesses differ from
those on which they agree, it is quite certain
that very little remains: and we are left in a
hazy uncertainty as to whether he drew more
dots than qnatrefoils, or an equal number of
both.
2. Such, we are told, was the extent of my
father’s work. Let ns examine the amount of his
remuneration. Mr. Wright’s off-hand assertion
that he was engaged in 1885-6, u at a better salary
than his own” is, from his own admission
positively untrue. In the first place, as he is
designated an u occasional assistant,” he could
not have been engaged at a fixed salary ; and
secondly, if ho were, the arrangement was only a
blind, as he was at the same time receiving
independent payments from Sir Charles Barry,
in addition to the 400 guineas for the original
designs. Mr. Wblfe indeed admits that he received
this sum, but he adds it was for the drawings
which were “ set aside,” and u some subsequently
made.” During 1836-7, Sir C. Barry paid my
father large sums. In 1844 he received a fixed
salary from his Government appointment at
Thames Bank : but it must be remembered that
this was solely for Jus superintendence of the
ivories there, and not for the drawings and de-
signs. These we are told all u emanated from ”
and “ were prepared by Sir Charles Barry him-
self,” and my father “was engaged to see.them
properly executed: ” in other words, according to
their representations, he was merely a foreman
of the works. At the same time, however, his


private emoluments from Sir Charles, for the
drawings and designs, which were supposed to he
Sir Charles’s, seem to have amounted to nearly
<£looo in the space of one year: and he was
receiving £B4 for the cartoons of each window in
the House of Lords, besides a commission on
metal-work, decorations, &c. ( Vide letter VIII.)
It must not, however, he supposed that my
father’s annual income from Sir Charles reached
this sum: for, from first to last, I make out
that he received only from £3,000 to £4,000.
He did seven year’s work in one, hut only re-
ceived one year’s pay.
Viewed with reference to the quantity and
quality of my father’s work, as described hy the
Messrs. Barry, &c., the amount of his emoluments
certainly seems not only adequate, hut excessive.
In fact it is so far in advance of the value of the
supposed manual labour performed, that one is
struck with amazement at the anomaly of a man
who is described as originating, preparing, and
working out all his drawings with his own hand,
making an engagement with an architect of
“ inventive genius,” and “ 50-horse power of crea-
tion,” to do what any ordinary clerk could have
done at a hundredth part of the cost.
But viewed in relation to the position,
which the letters of Sir C. Barry and others,
as well as my father’s diaries, prove him
to have occupied, the amount was indeed
ludicrously disproportionate. It was insufficient
even for the manual labour expended on the
drawings, and the designs themselves represent an
intelligence and brain-power, which I believe
scarcely a man in England could have brought
to bear on the work with such marvellous quick-
ness. Hot more rapidly did a composer ever
extemporize a theme, than did he delineate his
thoughts : and only those who have seen him


work can have any idea of the lightning-like
flash of his pencil. What wonder then that he
should have complained of the inadequacy of his
remuneration, knowing his own powers, the vast
extent of his work, and the emoluments of Sir
C. Barry, in which he had so insignificant a share ?
But that in doing so he betrayed no grasping
disposition, nor made too exacting a demand, is
plainly evidenced by Sir C. Barry’s repeated
acknowledgements of the justice of his claim
and ready promises of future recompense. He is
perpetually led to anticipate a rich reward, and
propitiated by a prospect 0 f “fat” after long
languishing on meagre fare. Thus it appears
from Sir Charles’s own testimony, conveyed in no
measured language, and the almost exaggerated
way in which he describes my father’s powers
and labours, that his work had quite as much to
do with his head as his hand, and was of a
character, not only different, but very far in ad-
vance of what is pretended by Messrs. Barry, &c.,
as well as superior, and not merely supple-
mentary, to that of Sir C. Barry himself.
On the other hand, failure of promises,
inadequate emolument, delusive anticipations,
ever-delayed glory—none of these things caused
him to slacken his exertions in the “ great work.”
This fact quite nullifies all insinuations of greed
and exaction. Sir Charles everywhere recognises
and appeals to this generous spirit. He refers
also to another motive, which urged my father
to those u superhuman exertions,” described in
the Builder as “ little short of marvellous ” : —his
absorbing desire to finish his Church, Hospital,
and Schools at Ramsgate. A spirit of enthusiam
coupled with this powerful incentive, and a
reliance on Sir Charles’s promise that he should
eventually be u well paid for all his services in
the great work,” materially diminish “the incre


dibility of his acting as he did,” and fully account
for the enormous disproportion between his work
and his pay. The following letter bears on this
consideration.
To the Editor of the Times.
Sir, —Without questioning the very impartial verdict,
as matters stand, which you have pronounced on the
relations which existed between Sir Charles Barry and
Mr. Pugin, in regard to the building of the Houses of
Parliament, will you allow me to suggest an explanation
of what, as you justly observe, seems so incredible, viz.,
that Pugin, in his lifetime should never have advanced his
claims, but, on the contrary, have quietly allowed Sir
Charles Barry to enjoy the credit of a work which belonged
exclusively to himself ?
The clue to this mystery, I am convinced, is given in
that letter of Sir Charles Barry’s—published in Mr. E.
Welby Pugin’s statement in The Times on Sept. 7th —in
which he speaks of Pugin’s indifference to “ filthy lucre,”
and of his readiness “to make a sacrifice for the glory of
making the Houses of Parliament the means of establish-
ing for the future what you believe,” he writes to Pugin,
“ the one and only true style of art.” In these words lies
the secret of Sir Charles Barry’s power over Pugin. He
knew his man, none better. He knew the one idea of
Pugin’s life, the dream of his youth, the aim of his man-
hood, was the revival of Gothic architecture in England.
To this passionate enthusiasm he was ready to sacrifice
hope of personal fame, position, and wealth. This disin-
terested enthusiasm w T as the key to his character. With
this key Sir Charles Barry unlocked the treasures of
Pugin’s creative and fertile mind and turned them to his
own account. They who knew Pugin well are not in the
least surprised at what to others seems simply incredible ;
on the contrary, they would have been far more surprised,
knowing the nature of the man, had he not, without hesi-
tation or regret sacrificed prospect of fame, of advance-
ment in life, ot wealth, to the glory of seeing revived in
England the art which he loved, “if not wisely, yet too
well.” This was the “glory” which Sir Charles Barry
held out before his eager eyes: this was the hope which
fired his imagination : this was the “ price ” offered and
taken for his services. Pugin was not a man to do things
by halves ; if he once put his hand to the plough, even
though another man’s, he would never draw it back.
Eascinated with the glory of reviving Gothic architecture


—a “ glory ” which Sir diaries Barry knew so well how
to appeal to—and having once offered up at this shrine
hope of fame, it was not in his nature to violate his under-
standing with Barry by afterwards putting forward claims to
personal credit or emolument, Pugin was a singularly un-
selfish man, and a man, also, as every one who has ever
known him intimately—and there must be many such men
still living—can confirm, of scrupulous and almost Quixotic
delicacy. He was just such a man as would serve Barry’s
purpose. His genius, his enthusiasm, his love for his art
for its own sake, his unworldliness, his singular considera-
tion for others, and unexampled generosity combined to
make him just the man whom Barry stood in need of.
There are many men, unfortunately, who would act as Sir
Charles Barry seems to have acted, but there are, perhaps,
none who would have acted as Pugin did. But then Pugin
was a genius, an enthusiast, an exceptional character, and
not to be judged of as other men, especially in business
transactions. What in ordinary men would be simply
incredible, was in Pugin, if not natural, yet highly probable.
This probability is the point lam seeking to prove. lam
not entering into an examination of the credibility of the
facts related and vouched for in Mr. E. Welby Pugin’s
clear and well-arranged statement, but am only arguing
against the a priori incredibility of the relations alleged
to have existed between Sir Charles Barry and Mr. Pugin;
and I do so by calling attention to the fact that Pugin’s
character and motives of action were quite exceptional,
and that, therefore, the ordinary rules of interpreting
men’s actions do not apply in his case. In his case it is
not just to draw inferences from “ generals ” to “ particu-
lars.” That Pugin, under the circumstances, to put the
case simply on the score of probability, was more likely
than not to have acted towards Mr. Barry in the manner
alleged, I appeal with confidence to the judgment of
those, not exclusively professional men, who knew him well,
who knew his disinterestedness, his enthusiasm, and the
passionate love he had for his art, and I trust to you, Sir,
to allow this appeal to be heard.
Yours, &c.,
EDMUND SHERIDAN PURCELL.
11, Wyndham Place, Bryanstone Square.
Letter 11, and the reference to the
cartoons for the House of Lords’ windows in
Letter IY., prove that my father designed all the
cartoons for them, receiving <£B4 for each window:


and it also shows the falsity of Mr. Talbot Bury’s
assertion that “ Sir Charles Barry prepared the
detail drawings ” at Thames Bank.
111.
Westminster, 7tli October, 1816.
My clear Pugin,—Your account of tlie circumstances
.attending the first arrangement respecting the gas fittings is
quite correct; and I only regret that I did not take your
advice ; hut my great desire to throw all I could into your
hands, and consequently into Hardman’s, prevailed over
my better judgment. When by the force of circum-
stances, which I will tell you of hereafter, I felt it to be
the only safe course for me to put the work into Faraday’s
hands, I really thought I was relieving Hardman of work
that he would be glad to get rid of, on account of its
bother and attendant responsibilites in case of the failure
of Faraday’s system. It certainly did not occur to me
that he had, as you say, agreeed to employ a body of gas-
fitters expressly for the work, and that I should in conse-
quence subject him to loss and inconvenience. This I
regret exceedingly, and I will do all in my power to make
reparation to him. Neither did the arrangement respecting
your own remuneration occur to me, for the fulfilment of
which, however, I shall consider myself responsible.
When you consider the extent of my responsibilites and
the manner in which I am constantly beset with difficulties
in acting with public authorities, and endeavouring to
oblige and conciliate all parties, you will not, I am sure,
be surprised that I sometimes come to hasty decisions,
without a full consideration of the consequences, but
whatever I may do inadvertently, I trust you will always
believe that I am ever most anxious to meet your views
and wishes in every respect, and to remain as ever,
Yours very sincerely, &c., &c.
I will take care that -all the hinges yet to make, for
which patterns are preparing at Thames Bank, shall be
put into Hardman’s hands.
IV.
Westminster, 4th January, 1848.
My dear Pugin,— .... You little
know or appreciate my consideration for you and my great
desire to accomplish all your wishes.


11l the first place I have secured for yon the sum of
£B4, instead of £6B, for the cartoons of each window of
the House of Lords, and have made arrangements with
Ballantyne for an immediate payment on account of them,
out of which I propose to send a remittance to your
hankers on your behalf.
Secondly, I have issued a certificate for your salary
up to Xmas, which will be paid in a day or two.
Ever your sincere friend, &c., &c.
Y.
Westminster, 23rd October, 1848.
My dear Pugin,—The most rigid and searching
economy is henceforth to he the order of the day at the
New Palace at Westminster. The Eoyal Commissioners
at a meeting on Saturday, resolved, nolens volens, that all
furniture, upholstery, metal work, and fittings required
for completing the Palace, should in future he put up for
select competition amongst the most competent and
respectable tradesmen of the Kingdom, upon drawings,
specifications, and samples, to he previously prepared and
exhibited for their inspection. We must therefore settle
at once upon the designs for the gas coronals, table candle-
sticks, pole screens, easy chairs, and portable steps
for the libraries and refreshment rooms, respecting which,
I shall be glad to receive sketches of your ideas at your
earliest convenience
Yours sincerely, &c., &c.
VI.
Westminster, 13th June, 1850.
My dear Pugin,—l am in a towering rage, and in the
right humour for throwing up my appointment at the New
Palace of Westminster, which I expect I shall be driven
to do before long. All the arrangements of the New
House of Commons, including the form, size, proportions,
taste, and everything else concerning it are in abeyance,
and awaiting the fiat of a Committee of the House of
Commons, of all tribunals the most unfit to decide. It is
premature therefore to think of stained glass, or of any
other decoration at present. Who would be an architect
engaged on public works ?
Ever sincerely yours, &c., &c.


Mr. Charles Barry, in a letter to the Fall
Mall Gazette , on August 30th, implies that Sir
C. Barry’s resignation was contemplated in 1845,
when it had a hearing on my father’s appoint-
ment under Government. From the present
letter it would seem that 1850 was the date of
that intention.
YII.
Westminster, 18th December, 1850.
My dear Pugin,—l have no fear of visions that will
only appear before me when I touch the 5 per cent,
upon the three millions in a lump. You forget that all
who are employed in the direction of the works of
the Houses by the Government are inadequately paid,
and the architect worst of all; and also that all the
salaries of Heads of Departments have been mercilessly
cut down, since the work has been reduced within narrower
compass; so that in that respect you fare no worse than
others. Talk of your poverty and ill-paid services. I will
undertake to show you if you wish it, and if it should be
any consolation t© you, that I am in a much more pitiable
state than yourself. However this may be, I wish I could
make you believe not only that it is my desire, but my
determination that you shall either in meal or in malt be
well paid for all your services in respect of the Great
Work; but pray do not ask for meal when I wish to satisfy
you with malt. When we next meet, I hope we shall
understand each other better,- and come to a definite
arrangement that will render unnecessary all further
allusion to this most disagreeable subject.
I do not like the effect of the trial decorations of the
pannels of the House of Commons ceiling, which are
rather compressed and ineffective. I enclose a sketch for
scroll work, to fill the centre of the pannel, which I have
desired Grace to try up. Tell me what you think of it,
and what better can be done upon the same principle,
which will not, I think, interefere with the oaken character
of the ceiling. I send also a templet of the shields in the
frieze all round the House, which should be filled with
heraldry, for which have the goodness to send Grace orders.
I should much like to see what you have done and are
doing for me before I see you on the 80th, in order that I
may have time for lucubration and arrange everything
with you finally when we meet on that day.
Ever yours sincerely, &c., &c.


YIIL
Kennington, 7th January, 1851.
My dear Pugin,—l was from home yesterday and did
not get your letter until to-day, at this place. I have
forwarded your power of attorney to receive the Govern-
ment salary on your behalf to your bankers, with my
attestation. You are quite right in now wishing to square
your accounts for the past year. All the charges men-
tioned in your letter I consider to be very moderate.
With respect to those which relate to Grace’s work, send to
me an account of them, and I will order him to pay to
you the amount of the bill, and authorize him to charge
them upon the several items of his account. Do the same
with respect to the extra work to which you allude for the
metal gates, and I will send a similar order and authority
to Hardman.
Nothing is yet settled with respect to the Peers box,
and therefore all idea of having it completed by the
opening must be given up. I intended to mention in my
last that the design for the candlesticks would do, and
cannot help thinking I did so. •
A little sketch for a hexagon pump in the cloisters will be
acceptable when you have time
I agree with you as to the design of the glass for the
cloisters in the Speaker’s House
Inkstands of a proper medieval character will undoubtedly
be wanted, therefore send to me, when you can, one or two
rough sketches for them. ....
Ever sincerely yours, &c., &c.
IX.
Westminster, 10th January, 1851.
My dear Pugin,— .... I like the
idea of the heraldic illustration of the history of the Black
Prince for the windows of the Polygonal Stairs, but I
should like to have a little time to think over the details.
I enclose a Diagram of the mere requirements of official
inkstands and paper holders, which you can lick into shape
in any way that occurs to you, and send me a sketch.
Ever yours sincerely, &c., &c.
X.
Westminster, 25th January, 1851.
Dear Pugin,—l enclose tracings of the windows of
the Central Hall, St. Stephen’s Hall, and Westminster
47


Hall, for the exercise of your inventive genius in repainted
glass. The place for a genealogical tree will he the West-
minster Hall window, where there will he space to make it
complete from the earliest times, and where it will appear
with the greatest propriety and effect. The other windows
might be filled with the shields of eminent historical
characters in classes ......
Think over this idea, and let me know what conclusion
you come to respecting it.
Ever sincerely yours, &c., &c.
XI.
West Hill, Wandsworth, 14th June, (1851.)
My dear Pugin,— I am
glad to hear so good an account as you give me of the
glass for the House of Commons Lobby, &c., which I hope
to receive and fix shortly,
I enclose a rough tracing of the flying buttresses of
the central tower, and shall be glad of your advice and
assistance respecting them at your earliest convenience.
A rough sketch of one or two of the animal terminals,
and of the mode of filling the niche panuels beneath them,
for consideration, will be all that is sufficient in the first
instance.
There will be no less than 24 animal terminals required,
each variety of which should, I think, be modelled before
they are executed in stone, and for which drawings of a
good size will be required. Should they all hold bannerets,
or labels, or shields, or what treatment of them would you
advise ?
Are you doing anything with reference to the pavement
of the cloisters ? .
XII.
West Hill, Wandsworth, 14th June, (1851.)
Dear Pugin,—ln my note of this morning, I forgot
to ask your opinion of the mode of filling up the pannels
flanking the open galleries between the windows of the
Victoria Tower. Ido not think that statues would do at
so great a height as that of the galleries, but it has struck
me that crowned shields and supporters below, as shown
in the enclosed tracing would be appropriate and have a
good effect. If you are of the same opinion, will you have
the goodness to send to me, in the quaint and knowing
way of which you are so great a maestro, a good-sized
sketch thereof, for a model. The crowns might project
boldly out and be cut throng to prevent heaviness.
&c., &c., &c.,
48


XIII.
Westminster, lltli August, 1851.
My dear Pugin,— . . . . lam very
very anxious to see all that Hardman has in hand for me,
I propose to pay him a visit, and have written him to
say so. Would it in any way he possible for you to
meet me there, for much good would, I think he the con-
sequence ?
I approve of your design and arrangement of the wall
tiles for the smoking room ; as well as of the arrangement
for the floor tiles, which must, I think he charged with
decorations to avoid meanness. Proceed therefore accord-
ingly
Ever sincerely yours, &c., &c.
XIY.
New Steyne Hotel, Brighton, 22nd Oct., 1851.
My dear Pugin,— .... I really
forgot the arrangement of the tiles in the angle spaces of
the Central Hall floor; but, if you are satisfied with it, I
have no doubt I shall he content with the design as it is.
Therefore, give your orders to Minton for the new tiles as
it seemeth best to you. .......
It would be a great comfort to me, if you could spare time
to send me, in my banishment, an account of your doings
for the New Palace, and the progress already made ; for I
am, asyou may suppose, rather anxious in the matter.
When is it likely all the rough patterns of chandeliers,
&c., will be ready to be tried up en place ?
Ever yours sincerely, &c,, &c.
XV.
Westminster, sth Nov., 1851.
Dear Pugin,— .... You are quite
wrong in supposing I did not admire your patterns for
stuffs. I could see with half an eye that they were the
true thing, although I may not have said so. .
With the exception of the cloak stand for Committee
Booms, which being intended for corners must be upon a
circular or octagonal plan, the rough sketches for the fur-
niture will do very well. I return them, therefore, with
the list, as you desire, for the working details, which
I shall be glad to have at your earliest convenience.
Ever yours sincerely, &c., &c.
E
49


XYI.
Westminster, 7th Nov., 1851.
Dear Pugin,—l approve of the principles of the rough
■sketches which you have sent to me, and which I return
enclosed without alteration. I have no doubt when they
are properly drawn out in detail full size, and the colours
judiciously arranged they will turn out well.
Ever yours sincerely, &c., &c.
XYIL
Westminster, Bth November, 1851.
Dear Pugin,—l am well aware of your former
objections to the repetition of the arms on the Speaker’s
chair and fully entered into them at the time; but, out of
affection for the style of the carved panel, which is as
good, if not better, than any other carving we have done;
and considering that it would not be conspicuous, owing to
the shadow that would always be thrown upon it from the
canopy; I then quieted my scruples about the repetition.
It is only owing to the criticism and hyper criticism, that
I find is in store for me, when the House opens, that I
am now induced to repent of my decision. I think there-
fore we must use the carved pannel in some other situa-
tion, and substitute another of regalia or symbols of the
dignity of the House, as you suggest, of which I should
be glad to have a rough sketch at your convenience.
Ever yours sincerely, &c., &c.
XYIII.
Westminster, 11th November, 1851.
Dear Pugin,—The details for the gates will do
capitally. The patterns are in hand.
Ever yours sincerely, &c., &c.
XIX.
Westminster, 17th Nov., 1851.
Dear Pugin,— l am again getting very anxious to see
you. ...... If you
should have any of the Working Drawings of the furniture
for the Official Residences ready, pray send them to me ;
as it it is high time that the orders were given for it. The
tile arrangement for the Division Corridor fireplaces will
do very well.
Yours very truly, &c., &c.
50


XX.
Westminster, 10th Dec., 1857.
My dear Pugin,—l am delighted to have the cheering
intelligence contained in your letter of this morning res-
pecting yourself. . . . Pray take care of yourself for
the sake of your friends, and, I may add, the country at
large. No. 1 Design for the railing, which I return, will
do for Westminster Hall.
You mention in your note the sending to me of a lot of
Badges, &c., for the Commons’ Shields, to be given to
Grace if I approve of them, but they were not enclosed
with the other sketches. I am anxious about them, and
should be glad of them at your convenenience. You have
quite satisfied me as to the progress of all other things.
Again, beware of tasking your energies too much, and
ever believe me,
Most truly yours, &c., &e.
XXI.
Westminster, 18th Dec., 1851.
My dear Pugin,— The
drawings for the Court Lamp Brackets will do very well,
and I have given Bayne orders to prepare patterns accord-
ingly With respect to the drawing sent to Quarm this
morning for the borderings of leather tops to tables, I
propose to have the rolls made by Hardman and supplied
to Gillows ready for use, and have sent orders for them to
Birmingham accordingly.
Fifteen boxes for letters are required for the Com-
mittee rooms. Send to me a sketch for them, with such
working details as Hardman will require for the metal
work, as soon as you are able. Some small interlaced
patterns for papers for small rooms are also much wanted,
as soon as you can conveniently send them to Grace.
The drawings for the Badges for the Commons Gallery
front will do very well, and Grace has orders to make use
of them. The arrangement of them which you propose
will, I have no doubt, answer. With some of them I am
unacquainted. I shall, therefore, require instructions
respecting them.
Ever most truly yours, &c., &c.
Eighteen umbrella stands, Bft. long, are required for
the Lower Cloisters. If anything of quaint design should
occur to you for them let me have a sketch of it when you
are able.
£ 2
51


XXII.
Westminster, Xmas Day, 1851.
My dear Pugin, —I return your drawings for the House
of Commons boxes. ..... I retain
the drawing for the Peer’s box, as a difficulty has been
started relative to the size of it, and it still remains with
the authorities to decide. You shall hear again about it
the moment anything is settled. The sketch for the
railing between the buttresses is satisfactory. .
I remain as ever, yours most sincerely, &c., &c.
XXIII.
Westminster, 27th December, 1851.
My dear Pugin,—l acquiesce with you in your reason-
ing respecting the Commons’ boxes, which pray have the
goodness to act upon in making out the working drawings.
Your shewy sketch for the Peer’s box, led me away from
the true faith, which I agree with you should he strictly
maintained; and more particularly as it has economy in
its favour as well as other advantages. I thought I had
acknowledged the receipt of the drawing for the Terrace
gates, which I approved as soon as I saw it, and placed in
Bayne’s hands to prepare the requisite wood models. The
drawings for the letter boxes were sent to Hardman as
soon as I received them. I have this moment given Grace
the drawings for the decoration of the blank lights, received
this morning, with orders to proceed. ....
I enclose a diagram which he has made of the pannels,
and a list of the data for their decoration; and should be
very glad, if it would not he bothering you too much, if
you would give the subject your deliberate attention, and
favour me with your ideas of the arrangement that would
be most satisfactory
Most truly yours, &c., &c.
XXIY.
Westminster, 30th Dec., 1851.
My dear Pugin,—l will adopt your proposed arrange-
ment for the Commons’ shields, because it can be defended
upon principle, and have given Grace orders accordingly.
I like your last patterns for papers, which I think very
good, and intend to have drawn out the full width, so as
to show the alternation of design.
I have given Bayne to understand all he has to do in
52


the patterns of the Terrace gates, bnt am glad you have
written to him on the subject to obviate the possibility of
any mistake on his part. I agree with you that all the
gates, wherever they occur in the interior of the Building,
should be very simple and inexpensive.
Ever yours very sincerely, &c., &c.
I thank and commend you greatly for the trouble you
have taken, and the successful result of your proposed
arrangement of the Commons’ shields.
XXY.
Westminster, Ist January, 1852,
My dear Pugin,—l am rejoiced to find that you are
all alive again. I admire the patterns for papers received
this morning, and have given Grace orders to have the
blocks cut immediately. Metal guards are required for
the Library and Committee Boom tires. ....
Let me have your notions on the subject as soon as you
can, and at the same time a sketch for blotting cases,
foolscap size, and simple candlesticks, not exceeding 10
inches high. &c., &c., &c.
XXYI.
Westminster, 9th January, 1852.
My dear Pugin,—Of the two sketches, received this
morning for the gates, I prefer the simplest; therefore be
so good as to make out the details accordingly. I will
make enquiry as to the kind of inkstands required, and
send you word as soon as I can. The inscriptions on the
Speaker’s Chair are now all right. .....
I approve entirely of the last design and details for the
fire-guards, which are in Bayne’s hands for making the
patterns.
&c., &c,, &c.
XXYII.
Westminster, 12th January, 1852.
My dear Pugin,— .......
I agree with you as to the the propriety of avoiding the
delay and cost of models for the gates, of which you have
just sent me the details; which, when I have carefully
looked over, shall be sent to Hardman direct. I can give
you no information as to the models for the Westminster
Hall railing, nor of the gates to the terrace archways,
except that I put the drawings into Bayne’s hands as soon
as I received them, with orders to prepare the requisite
models as soon as possible. ......
&c., &c., &c.


XXVIII.
Westminster, 13th January, 1852.
My dear Pugin,—Your idea of the Ink and Paper
stands is a good one, and may be acted upon, but I should
like to see the full-sized drawings before the work is put in
hand. . . . . . • • • •
The ink-holders should be of glass, on the fountain princi-
ple, cut on the exterior in a knowing manner. I send the
original sketch of the Peers’ Box, and agree with you that
its mountings should be on the same principle as that of
the Commons’ Boxes. Upon second thoughts, as lam not
yet certain as to the size of it, but will get this settled to-
morrow, if I can, and will then send to you your original
sketch with the information obtained. I have forwarded
the full size drawings and design for the gates of the ter-
race archways to Hardman, with orders to proceed with
them
&c., &c., &c.
XXIX.
Westminster, 15th January, 1852.
My dear Pugin,—l give you full credit for the details
and construction of the Ink and Paper Stands, which will
make an excellent job. . . . .
I have forwarded the drawings to Hardman, with orders to
make one immediately with the change alluded to, res-
pecting which I have told him you would write to him.
To enable you to do so, I enclose a tracing of the end as it
appears in your drawings. ......
A certain number of knowing rosaces, to be punched
through plate iron and tinned, are required for filling a
ventilation hole in the wall, in each of the bays of the
Cloister. They are 14in. in diameter, and will be let into
a rebated frame, of which the diagram below is the form,
full size.
&c., &c., &c.,
XXX.
Westminster, 17th January, 1852.
My dear Pugin,—l entirely approve of the principle
of your design and details for the umbrella stands. . .
Each bay of the Cloister will accommodate 24 cloaks, and
I propose to have an umbrella stand in each window oppo-
site to them, containing accommodation in each of them
for 20 cloaks, which I have indicated in a tracing returned
with your drawings enclosed. Have the goodness, there-
54


fore, to make out all the working details and forward them
direct to Hardman, with orders to put them in hand, and
get them done with all despatch. The number required
will be 20. I am glad you approve of my suggested
alteration in the designs of the Ink and Paper Stands, and
agree with you as to the modus operandi. ....
&c., &c., &c.
The rosaces will do.
XXXI.
Westminster, 19th January, 1852.
My dear Pugin,—
I shall be glad of other varieties of beasts or cognizances
that may be appropriate. There are 23 required. You
are right in your proposed alterations in the arrangement
of the rings for the umbrellas at the ends of the stands.
I absolve you from all blame in preparing the monster
stand drawing, and commend you for the wonderful
arrangement contained in it. .
&c., &c., &c.,
XXXII.
Westminster, 28th January, 1852.
My dear Pugin,— .... When the
present turmoil is over, and I can get away, I will cer-
tainly pay you a visit for a day or two, when I have no
doubt we shall be able to hatch together much more
mischief. &c., &c., &c.
XXXIII.
Westminster, 4th February, 1852.
My dear Pugin,—Everything passed off yesterday
d merveUle ; and the Queen herself announced to me
personally that the effect of the whole was “ most
beautiful.” So far so good. I am now anxious to add
farther to the glories already accomplished, and farther to
invoke your aid towards the attainment of that object.
Would it be perfectly convenient and agreeable to you to
give me bed and board if I was to be with you until
Monday or Tuesday ? I have no doubt we should find
enough to talk about and arrange, &c., &c.
XXXIY.
Westminster, 16th February, 1852.
My dear Pugin, —Your electric message on Saturday
gave me a shock that I shall not easily forget. All yester-
day I was in an agony of suspense about you, and you
may imagine, therefore, that the sight of your own hand


writing this morning was indeed an immense relief to my
mind. ..........
Do not, I beseech of you, think of anything you may have
ottered to do for me, except so far as it may afford you
amusement. .........
I have been very glad to shake hands with Hardman
this morning on his way to you. I have begged of him to
use his persuasive eloquence with you to take things
calmly and quietly for the future. You have really already
done enough for the world and 'for your own repose here
and hereafter. With kind regards, &c., &c.
XXXY.
Westminster, 23rd February, 1852,
My dear Pugin,—l have received your joyous letter of
this morning, and was rejoiced to find that you are restored
to health again
1 am much pressed respecting the Clock Tower and the new
front in Old Palace Yard, as the building is at a stand
m respect of those portions of it, for working drawings.
I cannot bear that you should be bothered upon the
subject, particularly as several new thoughts have occurred
to me respecting it,
&c., &c., &c.
The following letter to the Fall Mall Gazette ,
referring to the work done after 1844, may he
introduced here ;
Savile Eow, August 28, 1867.
Sir, —May I be allowed to say a few words with
reference to a particular statement in Mr. Talbot Bury’s
letter to your journal in reply to Mr. E. Welby Pugin ?
He leaves it to be inferred, although not positively saying
so, that the designs for the throne and fittings for the
House of Lords, and those for the Speaker (sic) and the
House of Commons, were made by the late Sir C. Barry.
I knew the late Mr. Pugin intimately, and was constantly
in the habit of seeing him in the years 1845-6, and I know
for a that his first sketch for the throne was made
when he lived at Chelsea, and that in 1845 he made no
less than three different designs. They were his sole work
in every respect—the conception, the plan, the elevations,
the sections, and the details down to the enamels and
embroidery ; and all the directions for the work were in his
hand-writing. The same may be said of the other
“fittings” of the Houses. The great metal gates, the


lofty candelabra, gas fittings, the brass railing round the
Peeresses’ gallery, the stained glass, &c., &c. Many of
these designs passed through my hands. I was present at
conversations respecting their execution, and I know from
my own personal knowledge that Sir C. Barry had nothing
whatever to do with them beyond giving his approval.
I am, Sir, yours obediently,
T. I. BURTON.
On the production of extracts from Sir
Charles Barry’s letters, attention was drawn
away from the cumulative evidence they afford
as to the vast extent of my father’s labours
and Sir C. Barry’s absolute dependence on
him for every kind of work, to the insignifi-
cant nature of some of the objects specified,
which some might imagine to comprise the whole
of the “ details,” the designing of which my
father is so readily credited with. This attempt
to fix the attention on minor objects taken
separately, however convenient to the Messrs.
Barry and their associates, must not be allowed
to pass, although the first pages of this pamphlet
render a reference to it almost superfluous. These
gentlemen have rung so many changes on the
word “ details ” that they seem chiefly anxious
to induce a belief that my father was usually
engaged in making dots and quatrefoils, and then
copying them to enlarged scales. By this time,
however, I think that my readers must be un-
deceived on this score. Placing out of sight for
a moment the whole of the previous facts, let
any one only make out a list of the u details ”
mentioned, and add to them the immense mass of
designs supplied to the metal-workers, glass
painters, carvers, decorators, &c., and see what a
huge amount of thought, intelligence, brain-
power, as well as bodily toil, they represent.
But when we find that even as late as 1852, Sir
Charles was writing to my father for u working


drawings ” for the completion of the Clock Tower ,
which he represents to he at a standstill until he
supplied them , it becomes pretty evident (indepen-
dent of other proofs), that my father had all
along been designing “ working drawings ” not
merely for furniture and internal fittings, but
also for the building itself, for Sir Charles. Had
it not been so, we may reasonably conclude that
the works would have come to a stand-still at a
previous period. And then, if behind all this we
mass those earlier productions of his genius and
his skill, about which I think there can now
exist no doubt, to what conclusion must an un-
prejudiced person arrive ?
It may here be asked perhaps how it was
that Sir Charles Barry, who was so absolutely
dependant on my father during his life was able
to proceed with the Houses after his death. This
question is to some extent answered by reminding
my readers of the existing works, which could be
and actually were modified to meet exigencies as
they arose, and also of the drawings and models
already in store. Other necessities succeeded for
which there were neither models nor drawings.
Should any authorized person ask me , I can at
once name the source from which they were derived.
That source, I need scarcely say, was not the
Architect of the corridor now being erected in
Palace Yard, which is as injurious to the use, as
it is destructive to the appearance of the main
building.
I now pass on to the consideration of my
father’s letter of 1845. Bearing in mind my
positive and unreserved statement that my father
was the sole art-architect of the Houses of Parlia-
ment, it seems incredible that the Messrs. Barry
should meet me with nothing more to the point
than a letter, which from beginning to end con-
58


tains not a single syllable in contradiction or
denial of so bold and absolute a claim. I, on
the one hand, affirm in the most unqualified
manner that my father, and not Sir Charles
Barry, was the Architect, and they reply that my
father himself denied the fact in a letter signed
by him ; which letter , on examination , is found to
contain no such denial , but a statement that at a
certain period he was u preparing working draw-
ings for wood-carvings and internal decorations
from Mr. Barry’s designs.” I insist that this
is not a denial of my original claim, and they
explain that it was intended to be so, even
though the words do not express it. I assert , in
fact , that my father did one thing in 1835, and
they attempt to disprove it by proving that he
did another thing in 1845.
Before producing the letter, let me preface
it by noticing the causes Avhich led to its produc-
tion. To my mind it is the most convincing and
conclusive evidence yet afforded me in confirma-
tion of the claim I have advanced. Long before
I could have had any influence on the question,
it was in many quarters spoken of as more than
probable, if not indeed self-evident, that my
father at least contributed very materially to per-
fect and carry out the original design. To those
who could rightly estimate the architecture and
architects of those days, it was never a matter of
doubt at all. At that time my father stood ab-
solutely alone. When even his touch was detected
in two sets of the competition designs , it was more
than probable that it would be recognised in the
features of the rising building itself My father
was then attracting considerable attention to
himself by the original compositions of his pencil,
by his publication on the u True principles of
Gothic Architecture,” and, more, especially by his


“ Contrastsand therefore the reports which
attributed to him the designs in question, would
be still further confirmed by the intimacy existing
between Sir Charles Barry and himself.
And this report remaining uncontradicted
would naturally ripen into conviction. Those
who came into contact with my father knew
his real position, as the letters I have re-
ceived show, and almost all had an impression,
founded on a knowledge of his powers as an
architect and an author, that he had much more
to do with the Houses than Sir Charles Barry him-
self. This impression, far from being weakened
as time wore on and the building progressed, grew
stronger and became more extended, until at last it
attained the dignity of a tradition, which even the
rupture between my father and Sir Charles did
not suffice to smother ; and on the renewal of
their intercouse it became so powerful and undis-
puted as to endanger the reputation of Sir Charles
Barry himself. This was the critical juncture
when the necessity arose of issuing the docu-
ment of which the Messrs. Barry have attempted
to make so much capital. But so far from its turn-
ing out to be the weapon with which Mr. E. M.
Barry thought to obtain an easy victory over me,
he has only wounded himself by the unskilful use
he has made of it. It was a sword in Sir Charles
Barry’s hand against my father : it shall be one in
mine to defend him. Here is the letter :
To the Editor of the Builder (Sept. 6,1845 k
Sir, —As it appears by an article in the last
number of tbe Builder, as well as in notices contained of
late in other periodicals, that a misconception prevails as
to the nature of my employment in the works of the new
Palace of Westminster, I think it incumbent on me, in
justice to Mr. Barry, to state that I am engaged by him,
and by him alone, with the approval of the Government, to
assist in preparing working drawings, and models from his
designs of all the wood carvings and of the internal decora


tions, and to procure models and drawings of the best
examples of ancient decorative art of the proper kind,
wherever they are to be found, as specimens for the
guidance of the workmen in respect of the taste and feel-
ing to be imitated ; to engage with artists and the most
skilful workmen that can be procured in every branch of
decorative art, and to superintend personally the practical
execution of the works upon the most economical terms
compatible with the nature of it, and its most perfect per-
formance. In fulfilling the duties of my office, I do not
do anything whatever on my own responsibility ; all models
and working drawings being prepared from Mr. Barry’s
designs, and submitted to him for his approval or alteration
previous to being carried into effect; in fine, my occupation
is simply to assist in carrying out practically Mr. Barry’s
own designs and views in all respects.
Trusting to your fairness in giving insertion to this
letter in your next number,
I am Sir, &c.,
London, Sept. 3, 1845.
A. WELBY PUGIN.
Yow will the Messrs. Barry have the good-
ness to point out a single syllable in this letter
which in the faintest way touches on, much less
denies , the fact that my father was the author
of the original designs for the Houses of Parlia-
ment ? From beginning to end there is not the
slightest allusion to the question , and I cannot
comprehend by what fatuitons impulse it was
that Mr. E. M. Barry dragged it from its
obscurity, and boldly declared that it was an un-
questionable denial of a fact, dating back ten
years, on which it is totally silent. Yet, in face
of all this, Mr. Charles Barry says:
“ The late Mr. Pugin’s own letter, of Sex>tember Gth,.
1845, most correctly states his position with my father.
lt was suggested to my father, by Mr. Pugin
himself, who .... shrunk from appropriating un-
merited credit for a share in the designs of the new Palace,
which had been ascribed to him The
wording of the letter was carefully thought over, and agreed
upon by the two friends, as their common object was to
explain to the public then, and for the future, the precise
relations in which they stood to each other.”


Mr. Wolfe says :
“ The letter was intended to put an end, once for all, to
.such claims as are now advanced, and it was written by
Pugin in concert with Sir Charles Barry, after consultation
with me, not only to refer to the past, but to explain
publicly the state of the case for the future.”
Mr. Talbot Bury says :
“ The letter was not written at the solicitation of Sir
Charles Barry, nor under any kind of pressure,” but
“ simply as an act of justice on Mr. Pugin’s part to remove
an unfair and false statement, which gave him credit for a
design made by another ” —and as “ a public repudiation of
his claim.”
It has been impressed upon ns that these
declarations are made by “ men of character and
reputation.” Such they say was the inten-
tion of the letter. We have seen how it was
fulfilled.
Whilst, however, I dispute that the intention
of the letter extended to any repudiation of the
truth of my father’s more important claim, I am
by no means unwilling to admit that it was in-
tended to neutralize the report about it. Let this
distinction be carefully marked. There is a wide
difference between the two objects. Sir Charles
Barry, wiser than his sons and confidential friends,
must have known perfectly well that not all the
denials in the world could affect the truth, and
that the testimony of 5,000 witnesses against the
fact could not make it as though it had never
been. This, I conclude, is the real cause of the
absolute silence of the letter respecting it j whereas,
to frame a letter, which, in correcting a minor
“ misconception,” should have the effect of re-
moving impressions prejudicial to Sir Charles
Barry’s professional reputation, was not only
possible, but it was the surest way of effecting
this object, if the services of my father were to
be retained. The most obvious course in so com


promising an emergency would have been for my
father to resign his appointment. It would have
been the bolder stroke likewise, and would have
done Sir Charles better service than this ambigu-
ous letter. But the truth of the report could not
be denied without falsehood, and my father’s
services were absolutely indispensable ; as Sir
Charles willingly admits in his letter from
Brighton. This, it seems to me, is the very
strongest thing that can be said about the inten-
tion of the letter ; for it is singularly unfortunate
for the Messrs. Barry and their friends, that
nothing can be more conspicuous than the absence
of everything which could correspond with their
representations. One of two conclusions, there-
fore, is inevitable. Either it was the intention of
the letter to deny the truth of the report, or it was
not. If it was, since the fact is not denied at all,
the silence is ominous, significant, and intentional,
and speaks more forcibly than any words that it
could not be denied without falsehood ; if such
was not the intention, the fact was tacitly ad-
mitted and all allusion to it was rendered un-
necessary.
But it is urged that my father himself,
suggested the letter to u put an end to such
claims as are now advanced,” because “ he shrunk
from appropriating a share in the designs of the
new Palace.”
I ask any unprejudiced person, does the
letter look like this ? Does any man in his senses,
who, on his own honest impulses, wants to write,
unsolicited a letter in defence of a friend, ever
carry out his intention in such a roundabout com-
plicated way ? What would have been the natural
course to adopt under the circumstances ? Surely to
have written himself a plain straightforward letter,
absolutely denying the truth of the report about


him, and repudiating all claims in favour of Sir
Charles Barry. This is what my father would
have done. Instead of shrinking from the thought
of performing such a duty, he would have rejoiced
at the opportunity and carried it out single
handed. But instead of treating so simple a
matter in a natural way, we arc gravely informed,
that the person who alone was to profit by the
transaction did not suggest it—that it required a
prolonged conference between two people to con-
coct a letter, so u carefully thought over,” and
“ carefully worded,” that it could not be “ agreed
upon ” or made “ clear” until “ after consulta-
tion with a third person —and that even then it
was necessary to go to the house of a fourth to
write a “fair copy,”—when half a dozen plain
words would have done the whole thing. And
then the result of all this labour and precaution
is a document, which never even touches upon,
far less decides, the important question for which
the conference was summoned. Credat Judoeus.
All doubt, however, on the subject is set
at rest by the letter of Mr. Mares, to the
Times of September 16th, as well as by my
own personal recollections of certain circumstances
connected with the transaction. Let me first give
the testimony of Mrs. Mares, a lady who had been
an intimate friend of my late mother, attended
her on her death-bed, and remained with us,
more or less, for nearly two years afterwards. It
is, however, 14 years since I had the pleasure of
seeing or hearing from her; and it was only the
recent publication of my father’s letter which
proved the cause of our acquaintance being
renewed.
Sir, —Finding that no one has hitherto come forward
to testify to the circumstances under which the late Mr.
Pugin wrote the letter of September 6, 1845, so often re-
ferred to hy the Messrs. Barry, I am requested by my wife


to communicate them to you. She was residing at St.
Augustine’s Grange when Mr. Pugin returned from
London, and she tells me it is impossible to describe the
state of prostration in which he entered the house. In
reply to her enquiries as to its cause he said, “ I have been
up all night. Barry is in an awful state respecting the
reports which have oozed out about my being the architect
of the Houses, and he wants me to write a letter to save
his reputation ; it is gone if I do not, and I have no
alternative.” These sentences, which are as fresh upon
her memory as on the very day he uttered them, were
spoken while explaining to her that, on the one hand, he
was committed to secrecy with regard to his relations to
Sir Charles Barry, and could not acknowledge that he was
the architect of the Houses; on the other, that he would
not lend himself to any denial of his own work in 1835;
and therefore his great anxiety was to write such a letter
as would save Sir Charles Barry and at the same time not
stultify himself.
This letter my wife knows from her own personal
knowledge was worded in such a way as to refer to noth-
ing more than his engagement in an official capacity under
Government, when it was perfectly true that he was work-
ing from the general designs which he had made for Sir
Charles Barry ten years previously, and which he con-
sidered by his contract to be the property of Sir Charles.
Any one reading the letter can see at a glance the circum-
stances under which it was written, and that it bears no
necessary reference to the transactions of 1835; and
indeed, although Sir Charles Barry intended that it should
at once smother the reports in question, and Mr. Pugin
felt it his duty to save Sir Charles, yet he was determined
that its phraseology should in no way convey a denial of
his claim to having been the original author of the designs
for the Houses, and this claim it in no way touches.
I am fortunately able myself to confirm this explana-
tion by a recollection of speaking to several gentlemen
connected with the House of Commons shortly after the
letter appeared, and they quite ridiculed the idea of its
throwing the least doubt on Mr. Pugin’s real position.
Trusting that you will kindly give this letter an early
insertion.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
JOHN MARES.
21, Lower Belgrave-street, Sept. 14, 1867.
My own personal recollections, although less
vivid than those of Mrs. Marcs, are of the same
F


■character as hers. I remember perfectly my
father’s return from London, and his mental
sufferings in consequence of some communica-
tion he had received from Sir Charles Larry,
although not then fully comprehending its
importance. My father was a most sensitive
man. Devoted to principle, a rebuff prostrated
him single-hearted and straightforward, the
shadow of double-dealing fell on him like a
blight—careful to give every one his due, acute
sensibility made him shrink from exacting his
own. “I could not be guilty,” he writes to
Lord Shrewsbury, “of the meanness of brain-
sucking, much less of building a reputation on
the labours of others.” The situation in which
he was placed, involving, as it did, an apparent
public repudiation of a claim —which, although
he had never advanced publicly, he never relin-
quished,—and the sacrifice (as he thought) either
of Sir Charles Barry or himself, was a sort of
martyrdom to him. As it had been all along, so
it was now. To secure the advance of “true prin-
ciples”—to carry out the “great work” in answer
to Sir Charles Barry’s repeated appeal—was the
dearest object of his life. His own words best
express and prove this. In the letter to Lord
Shrewsbury just quoted he says: “I never
sought employment, nor would I continue to hold
it one moment longer than I can do so con-
sistently with the true principles which I
profess.” And so the love of his art once more
triumphed over mere self-interest; and he yielded
to the necessity submitted to him. I remember
well his words, when subsequently explaining
the circumstances to me; “ Barry said , I must
write it , and if I hadn't the whole thing must have
teen given up —the Houses would have been ruined
and Barry's reputation gone."


lii my letter to the Times of Sept. 7th, I said that
I acquitted my opponents u of all intentional mis-
representation.” I can scarcely do so now, when
they are without the slightest ground trying to
hoodwink and persuade people into a belief, that
a certain document contains what, hy no perverse
ingenuity of distortion, can it he made to express
in any one single sentence. Apart from all this,
it is evident that, as was usually the case, they
were in total ignorance of all the important rela-
tions which existed between my father and Sir
Charles Barry. They are speaking without book,
and all they advance is nullified by my know-
ledge of the full truth. Even admitting, for a
moment, that the letter was produced under the
circumstances they detail; it is certain that my
father yielded to Sir Charles Barry’s solicita-
tions, came homo, weighed the matter, and
after a severe mental struggle, accepted the
alternative forced upon him.
With every willingness to give them the
benefit of their partial knowledge of facts, I am
indignant at seeing u professed friends” turn
this letter into an instrument wherewith to
dishonour my father in the eyes of the world.
Under the guise of friendship these vindicators of
my father’s honour insist that the letter contains
what it does not contain, and denies what it docs
not deny, and that had my father said anything
contrary to their unauthorised addition he would
have been a liar. They then accuse me of making
him a liar, because I advance a claim for him
inconsistent with their extraordinary interpretation
of the letter; and thereupon generously vindicate
the character of their friend from a charge of
falsehood against me. They thrust him into a
corner, write u liar ” on his forehead, and then
accuse me of the injustice. I therefore feel under
F 2


no obligation to any one of my antagonists for
their officious anxiety to uphold my father’s hon-
our against me. Like all Mr. Talbot Eury’s
“ explanations,” his attempted vindication of his
“old friend” is not only uncalled for, but its object
is painfully clear. My father’s honour is quite
as safe in my hands, as in those of his dear
professed friends, who use every energy to depre-
ciate his work, damn him by faint praise, and
force him into a dishonourable position, that they
may deceive people into a belief of their own
disinterestedness in rescuing him from it.
In conjunction with this letter, it is necessary
to notice the verbal disavowals attributed to my
father. It is asserted by several witnesses that
he “indignantly repudiated” the claim I now
advance for him.
In the first place let me insist that these
disavowals must be interpreted by the facts of the
case, not the facts by the disavowals. The ab-
sence of any public written denial of the claim is
strikingly suggestive, and if my proofs of the
fact are sufficient, it is evident that the disavowals
were not of the unqualified nature we are led to
suppose. That my father ever point-blank said
to any one—“ lam not, but Sir Charles Barry is
the architect of the Houses, and I can lay no claim
to that honour in any, the smallest degree,”—l
do not believe for one moment. For if he did,
how is it that when writing voluntarily a letter
for the very express purpose of letting the world
know this, he nevertheless preserved the most abso-
lute silence about it ? It is quite absurd to say that
he would allow a public opportunity, made for
the very purpose, pass by without repudiating the
claim in question, and yet should privately do so
in such very strong and unqualified terms. What
he actually said, is what I have myself heard him


say, when taxed with being the architect—“ My
dear sir, you may contradict it whenever you
hear it ! ”
Secondly, an evasive denial of this sort was
no more than consistent with his engagements
with Sir Charles Barry. lie was bound not only
to repudiate the claim for himself, but to uphold
the prerogatives of Sir Charles. This indeed
is what has been so peremptorily insisted on by
every one, as his bounden duty, in consequence
of his voluntary surrender of his rights to Sir
Charles. But his “ four friends ” will not even
give him the benefit of this bond of secrecy.
They turn round upon him for faithfully pre-
serving his contract, and accuse him of untruth
for doing so. They assert, in one breath, that he
had no right to make the claim at all ; would have
been wrong in making it if he had ; and was more
wrong still in not making it when he had the
opportunity !
The explanation of the language of the letter
(which I know to be the true one, and indeed
the only one consistent with the facts of the case)
is, that in conformity with the understanding with
Sir Charles Barry and himself, my father always
considered he had relinquished all right to the
authorship of designs which had once passed into
Sir Charles Barry’s hands. It was agreed that
my father should retire and consider them to be
no longer his own.
Once more, it is ridiculous in the face of
the circumstances detailed, to take all my father’s
words au pied de la lettre. To say, with an
influential journal:—That they are not to be taken
literally when he spoke of the assistance he did
render to Sir Charles Barry; but that, when he
spoke evasively about the original designs, he is


to he tied dozen to every letter of every word he
littered, —is surely as illogical as it is unfair.
In concluding my remarks about this letter
of 1845, I can only repeat with ten-fold emphasis,
that if it does not deny in word, what it is
alleged it was intended to deny in fact, it proves
that what it was intended to deny is beyond the
reach of denial ; and that the real object of the
letter was simply to smother the report about the
truth and not the truth itself, which could not
be touched or altered. If it was the truth that
my father designed the Houses, and parted with
his right to say so, every one can see that both
parties must conceal the fact : but if in spite of
every precaution, it oozed out in process of time,
it is equally apparent that both parties would do
their best to perpetuate the concealment, not that
the truth would be divulged to the benefit of
either.
In connection with this letter it may be well
to append one which appeared in the Building
News of September 27th :
Sir, —Whatever may be thought of the letters of Mr.
Pugin and Mr. Grace, quoted in the Builder of September
14, it is evident that at the time they were written they
did not affect the convictions of people generally. On
September 27, 1845, a correspondent wrote thus to that
journal.—“ The statements made in your columns of Mr.
Pugin and Mr. Grace were ingeniously framed so as to let
it be inferred that Mr. Barry makes the designs of all the
ornaments, both for the carved and painted decorations.
. . . . If Mr. Barry’s sketches were drawn out full
size by the hands of another, under Mr. Barry’s immediate
instructions, how could it be true that the painted
decorations of the House of Lords were executed by
Foreign and English artists from designs furnished hy Mr.
Fuyin and under his direction ? ” This statement appeared
in a number of the same journal in the same year, which
also details Sir Charles Barry’s answer to certain artists
who called on him for employment. He is described as
bowing them out with the remark, that Mr. Grace was
employed by Mr. Pugin, and he was not accountable for
Mr. Pugin’s acts.


These extracts, most people will think, very plainly
indicate Mr. Pugin’s real position as regards “the internal
fittings and decorations of the House,” and although they
in no way affect the question of the original competition
designs, they have; a measure of importance of their own
now that efforts are being made to deprive him even of
his comparatively poor merit. I never saw Mr. Pugin in
my life, and have no interest one way or the other in the
present discussion ; hut in common with many others I
am disgusted at the present attempts to generalize Mr.
Pugin’s artistic labours as “assistance,” as though he
were only a kind of superior foreman. It is rather too
absurd for belief that a man like Sir Charles Barry, who
was constantly writing—as we have seen in the l imes of
September 7—to Mr. Pugin for designs of every kind for
the internal fittings and decorations of the Houses, should
nevertheless at that very time be making “ large detail
drawings” himself for wood carvings, and sending sketches
for decorations to another person —not Mr. Pugin to be
drawn out full size, when Mr. Pugin was actually holding
an official appointment under Government for the very
purpose of doing what he is here denied ever to have done
at all. At the time of Mr. Pugin’s death, the more
important question of his claim to be considered, at least,
joint-architect with Sir Charles Barry, was then alluded to
in the Builder. “ From some statements which have been
made, it would be inferred that he should divide with the
ostensible architect the whole merit or otherwise of the
work; and one writer goes even further still.” Mr. Talbot
Bury also, in his notice of Mr. Pugin shortly after his
death, said, that “ Pugin rendered' assistance to two
who at this time were preparing designs fur the new Houses of
Parliament:’ But forgetting, I imagine, this statement, he
affirmed in the Pall Hall (fazette of Aug. 22nd last, that
“ Mr. Pugin’s drawings were not made till after the
original design had been selected. This same gentleman
also says that “ Mr. Pugin showed him, at the Millbank
Works, large detail drawings prepared by_ Sir Charles
Barry himself,” when the whole body of witnesses have
been impressing on us that Mr. Pugin was expressly
engaged to prepare “detail drawings only.
I take this means of calling Mr. Welby Pugin s atten-
tion to the above extracts, which bear upon much that he
has advanced, and at the same time explain the gaibled
quotations, and nullify the absurd conclusions, given us in
W. E. GAINE, C.E.
the Builder. —I am, &c.,
Bognor, September 24th, 18G7.


The following is the letter to the Times of
September 7th :
WHO WAS THE ART ARCHITECT OF THE PARLIAMENT HOUSES ?
Sir, —This question has now, I believe, become suffi-
ciently a matter of public interest to warrant a request
that you will give insertion to the following statements.
In February, 18C0, bearing that Mr. B. Ferrey was
preparing, unknown to me, a biography of my father, I
called upon him to protest against such a step being taken
previous to reference to myself. He represented that the
work was too far advanced to be suppressed, but promised
compliance with such minor alterations as I might suggest,
asking me in return to procure from Sir Charles Barry
some information regarding my father’s connection with
the Houses of Parliament. (My application to Sir Charles
and the events which followed it have already been detailed
in my introductory remarks.) I have referred to them in
order to show that I did take a step towards obtaining a
recognition of my father’s merits, but it was unhappily
rendered nugatory. Up to the present time my statements
have been simply met with counter-statements ; for to say
that the contradictory and partial assertions of Messrs.
Talbot Bury, Wolfe, &c., in any way prove themselves or
each other, is mere folly. They are but the shreds and
patches of a story which I and another alone know in its
entirety. I will now r to some extent complete the chapters,
very small portions of which have been communicated
rightly, and rectify the mistakes of these gentlemen.
Mr. Talbot Bury in his letter to the Fall Mall Gazette, of
August_ 22, says that Sir Charles Barry “ completed his
design in pencil." This statement may possibly be correct,
as my father’s competition drawings, I am informed, Avere in
pencil. And this fact gives great probability to Mr. Talbot
Bury’s revelation made to me on the 11th of August last,
that “ many of my father’s designs were re-draAvn by
Barry, so that the same touch should not be detected in his
and in Mr. Gillespie Graham’s designs.” In spite of this
precaution, however, the style was detected, and thus re-
ferred to at the time by the Morning Fast :
_ “ GillespHe Graham has given a plan in the genuine
spirit of Gothic architecture, defying symmetry and order,
but presenting combinations of com'enience and picturesque
grouping in perfect keeping with the character of the style,
which it is delightful to contemplate. The designs evince
the author’s intimate acquaintance with the style. The
drawings, by the same hand which appears to have assisted
No. G 4 (Mr. Barry’s) are masterly anct entirely peculiar.”


Tins peculiar touch recognised by a stranger in the
two sets of designs, upon which my father worked, was so
successfully mastered by Sir Charles Barry as to lead my
fathei to say to Mr. Talbot Bury that he “ sometimes
scarcely knew his own drawings.” This information I re-
ceived from Mr. Talbot Bury, at my interview with him
on August 11th, and it confirms what I have often heard
my father say, that “ Barry always copied his designs, or
caused them to be copied before they appeared in the
office.”
I have also ascertained that my father had prepared
designs for Trentham for Sir Charles Barry some time be-
fore lie began those for Westminster, and it is a fact
verified by Mr. Hogarth, who mounted the drawings, that
my father intended to be himself a competitor for the
Parliament Houses previous to his receiving the applica-
tions of Mr. Gillespie Graham and Mr. Barry. These
competition drawings of my father’s were lost sight of from
the day they were mounted, but there can be no doubt that
they were the designs for which Sir Charles Barry paid 400
guineas, and which were subsequently, as far as possible,
engrafted on Sir Charles’s ground plan. This is rather
curiously confirmed by a passage in a letter from Sir
Charles to my father :
“ I am much flattered by your hearty commendations of
the plan, and shall know where to look for a champion if I
should hereafter require one.”
Mr. Talbot Bury has been applied to, hitherto without
success, respecting the date of my father’s first visit to Mr.
Barry. Is it probable, when my father had been preparing
for Sir Charles Barry such designs as those for Trentham
and other buildings, when of course his intercourse Avith
Sir Charles must have been most frequent, that he Avould
never have heard of or seen a design of which he is alleged
to have spoken in such raptures to Mr. T. Bury ? Was the
weakness which availed itself of my father’s genius in the
less important Avorks of Trentham, &c., suddenly trans-
formed into a giant poAver of grappling Avith the far greater
difficulties of the Palace of Westminster ? Impossible. If
any one Avants to see Avhat Sir Charles Barry’s ideas of
Gothic architecture Avere at this period, let them look at St.
Peter’s Church, Saffron-hill. That building Avill satisfy any
one that he could then no more design anything at all re-
sembling the Houses of Parliament than he could have
engraved the plates of “ The Contrasts.” It is simply the
churchwardenish carpenter’s Gothic of the time. Whilst


Sir Charles Barry was at this period producing the most
hideous so-called Gothic churches in ludicrous contrast to
the Houses of Parliament, my father was portraying those
magnificent conceptions to which I have already alluded ;
and had become the teacher of his contemporaries. His
earliest churches also were designed about this time, and are
amongst the most successful of his entire works. We can
imagine the man who produced St. Marie’s, Derby, St,
Chad’s, Birmingham, Bilton Grange, Warwickshire, and
Scarishrick Hall, designing also the Palace of Westminster,
but scarcely the author of such churches as those named.
My father’s designs having proved successful, he was
called in to complete his work. His diary for 1835 shows
that he was designing during a considerable portion of that
year for Sir Charles Barry ; and circumstances lead me to
the conclusion that much of his work did not meet either
his owm or Sir Charles’s views. On the Ist of September
he was “ all day on compositions,” and continued thus en-
gaged up to the 19th. On the 2nd of November he worked
at the “ river front —five compartments.” This I imagine
to mean five different designs for the same compartment,
and conclude therefrom that Sir Charles Barry was in
those days what he was when I knew him—never satisfied
until he had seen ten different ways of doing one thing.
Another entry shows that my father was engaged on
“ sections.” Will my opponents inform me whether
“ compositions,” “compartments,” and “sections” mean
only details ? And will Mr. Talbot Bury, who is so earnest
in describing these and other drawings merely as “ drawings
for tenders ” (as though that fact made them of no import-
ance), reconcile this absurd depreciation with the fact that
“drawings for tenders” mean working drawings, elevations,
sections, full-sized details, &c. ? On his own confession,
then, my father actually made drawings, as his diaries
testify, for every portion of the Houses. In September,
1836, Sir Charles sent to my father a parcel of tracings taken
from my father’s drawings. That this was his practice
appears from a subsequent letter, in which he says : —“ I
enclose a tracing of the end as it appears in your drawings.”
In a former letter he writes ;
“ They (the tracings) will furnish you with the ne-
cessary data (dimensions) for the preparation of a large
batch of internal details, including the two Houses complete,
the King’s robing-room, gallery and staircase, entrance
and vestibule.”
He then goes on to state that he also wants a collection of
doors, archways, and openings to corridors, &c., and a


series of designs for wall framings. He wishes the designs
to be made to a scale of half an inch to the foot, “ except
where doors, windows, turrets, &c., are drawn out sepa-
rately, when I agree with you it will he desirable to adopt
a scale of one inch to a foot.” Similar references are made
to St. Stephen’s-hall, central hall, committee-rooms, &c.,
Further on the letter proceeds :
“ But I think you will now have enough to do for
some time to come, notwithstanding your fifty-horse
power of creation.”
These extracts go far to prove that Sir Charles on
many occasions did no more than supply the instructions
usually given to an architect hy his client, and confirm
my statement that, “although tire general drawings then
and subsequently supplied comprised every portion of the
building, Sir Charles was unable to proceed whenever
details were wanting.” Thus, with the general designs
for the different portions of the House of Lords in his
possession, he writes from Brighton in 1844 thus :
“ Dear Pugin,—l am in a regular fix respecting the
fittings and decorations for the House of Lords, which it
is of vital importance to me should be finished with the
utmost despatch. lam induced to write to you that you
may be both able and willing to pass a week or ten days
with me for the purpose of working out the drawings in
question, and of enabling me to consult you generally.”
From all this it may be plainly seen what Sir Charles
Barry meant by “ details,” —not some minute ornament
for one of his own designed features, but the “features ”
themselves—“not one of which,” Mr. Wolfe declares,
“was ever designed by Pugin.” On the 22nd of October,
1836, Sir Charles writes :—“ Being from home yesterday,
I could not acknowledge by return of post the receipt of
the drawings of the House of Lords, which came to hand
last night, and afforded me a rich treat.” (May I ask, by
the way, whether people generally have “ a rich treat ” in
seeing merely enlarged copies of their own designs ?) In
the same letter, speaking of the King’s and Record Tower
entrance :—“ This you may make of any design you think
proper;” and of the King’s stairs, “The design of this
part should, I think, be of a simple and massive character.”
If this is not an admission that my father actually designed
these portions of the building, what is it ? Perhaps it
may convince Messrs. Charles and Edward Barry that so
far from my father ever getting “ unmerited credit for his
share in the designs of the New Palace,” he never got a


tithe of what was due to him. There are a multitude of
other entries of the same character in his diaries, all
proving that he was constantly supplying Sir Charles
Barry with every kind of design.
When Sir Charles had obtained what he considered a
sufficient supply he cut the cable by which he rode so long,
and intrusted my father’s designs to Mr. Thomas. My
father acutely felt this ungenerous treatment, and for
many years refused all intercourse with Sir Charles Barry
—a tact quite contrary to the oft-repeated assertion that
“ their mutual friendship was continuous and uninter-
rupted.” When my father again consented to design for
Sir Charles, he did so—as he himself constantly assured
me—solely on condition of having an official appointment
under Government, over which Sir Charles should have
no control; “ for,” he said, “as soon as Barry has obtained
what he requires from me, he will repeat 1837.” The
letter of 1845 was simply the sequel to his having sold his
brains in 1835. In the latter year he became a Catholic,
and I have often heard him say, “ With that my chance for
the Houses vanished, and I made the best of the situation.”
The Messrs. Barry ridicule this statement, and speak of
“ an anonymous competition, the essence of which was
the concealment of the names of the competitors ; ” but,
independent of the consideration that his success, with an
almost absolute certainty, might 'not have been followed
by confirmation, I am compelled to remind these gen-
tlemen, while it is quite true that their own drawings
might pass without detection in the most limited
competition, my father’s touch was as conclusive as
his autograph, whether shown on the margin of a
note or on the magnificent designs, still existing,
which he prepared for the Houses, many of which I saw
on Monday, the 12th of August last, as well as drawings
made by Sir Charles Barry from my father’s designs.
These designs can be produced, as also a witness who saw
them prepared. But here again the secret understanding
between Sir C. Barry and my father blinded even those
who saw the drawings prepared : for they were under the
impression that Sir Charles was introducing into his office
tracings and sketches of his own, when in fact they were
taken from the actual original designs previously prepared
at Salisbury by my father.
In addition to the emoluments of his office, I find on
reference to his pass-book that in the space of one year,
from June, 1845, to June, 1846, my father received directly
from Sir Charles £'9o6 15s. 6d. This must have been for


work of some value, and surely not, as Mr. Talbot Bury
declares, lor taking charge of wood carving works, or for
showing his old friend large detail drawings prepared
by bir Charles Barry himsell, which he was engaged to
see properly executed.
Mr. Barry has told the whole story in one word. He
says that between 1840 and 1848 the whole of the designs
for the great work which passed through his father’s office
were “ finally ” prepared by bir Charles alone. This may
be tiue to the letter, lor as soon as he had obtained my
father’s designs he invariably had them redrawn for use in
Ins office. Mr. Barry does not, however, state by whom
the previous designs were made, which “ finally ” became
bir Charles’s own compositions. Now, I was myself
engaged loi many years together with another, whom X
will not at piesent name, in assisting to draw out designs
loi the Houses, which designs I know emanated from my
father alone, and were prepared by him. I have seen my
fathei on numberless occasions prepare every kind of
design while bir Charles himself stood by, but never on
one single occasion did bir Charles put pencil to paper,
and he generally left with large rolls of drawings! bir
Charles also in his letters constantly acknowledges the
receipt of designs and drawings. If, then, as my op-
ponents insinuate, none of them were ever seen in bir
Charles Barry’s office, what became of them ? Did bir
Charles pay large sums for their production and take them
away merely to destroy them ? Or, rather, does not the
very denial of their existence prove that I was correctly
informed by my father that bir Charles traced all his (my
father’s) designs privately before they were submitted to
“ fiual ” preparation ? borne of these tracings, and the
original sketch of the clock tower, I have now in my pos-
session. The above statements are somewhat confirmed
by Mr. Ferrey himself in his Biography, page 247.
“ Pugin drew, and Barry suggested aud digested the parts
in which the skill of Pugin was required.”
In further confirmation of what I have advanced, I
refer back to bir Charles Barry’s letters. These letters
declaie in actual words that from my father proceeded
sketches, ideas, drawings, proposals, instructions, explana-
tions, invention, arrangement, principles, advice, orders, —
and all for “ glory which another enjoyed. More than
this, bir Charles Barry was so completely at fault, even in
the smallest matters, that he applied for sketches and
designs for inkstands, blotting cases, umbrella stands, paper
holders, ventilating roses, tapestries, papers, stuffs, car


pets, &c., for some of which he asks for full-sized draw-
ings. I have myself a distinct recollection of hearing my
father constantly complain that without him everything
would come to a standstill.
Now, first, will any one deny that the above extracts
disprove the statements signed (but not written) by Mr.
W. Wright, upon whom Mr. Edward Barry called two
days before my lawyer saw him, when he bluntly refused
to give any evidence whatever ?
Secondly, do they not indicate in what sense my
father was subordinate to Sir Charles Barry ? The latter
was the appointed and publicly recognised architect of the
Houses, and his decision was final. He had the power of
selecting and of refusing all that my father submitted to
him; he had a great plan in his head, and to carry out
this plan he had to give instructions. What he wanted
he had to ask for, and my father designed and supplied it.
In what other way he was “ subordinate ” it would puzzle
any one to make out.
Thirdly, do they not fully explain the nature of the
“ details ”to which my father’s work was confined ? The
word “ detail ” has been so depreciated in the minds of
many people that it signifies to them no more than the
crockets of a canopy or the minutiae of a finial. Setting
aside, however, the above statements, which show that my
father worked out masses as well as parts, of what are the
Houses composed if not of “ details ? ” Why, they are all
“detail.” So that, by my opponents’ own showing, the
whole is the work of my father. Yet Mr. Edward Barry,
after saying, with Mr. Wolfe, &c., “ that my father’s share
in the work was confined entirely to details, ’ coolly indites
words tor the signature of Mr. Wright, declaring that “ no
one portion of the Houses at all accords with any details
prepared by my father; ” while Mr. Wolfe says that “ not
a single feature was designed by Pugin and Mr. T. Bury
writes that “ Mr. Barry did all the sections and eleva-
tions,” and that my father “ had nothing to do with the
competition designs.”
In the name of wonder, then, and common consistency,
for the sake of Sir Charles’s sanity, will they inform us
what was the work for which my father received from him
400 guineas and such comparatively large sums afterwards,
in addition to his salary from Government ? (Although,
indeed, he has often assured me that Barry had received
from him drawings paid for in hundreds when thousands


were not sufficient remuneration.) Does any one in his
senses pay on this scale for enlarged drawings, perspective
views, details that were “ set aside,” and other ordinary
employments of third-rate clerks ?
I acquit these gentlemen of all intentional misrepre-
sentation , but it is evident that there was something
going on of which they had no cognizance ; a head and a
hand they saw not were thinking and working on, day
after day, encircling the brow of another with glory, and
conceiving marvels of art, to he recompensed only by an
equal balance of flattery and depreciation.
Fourthly. If the nature of Sir Charles Barry’s cor-
respondence is so fully betrayed in the few letters from
which I have quoted the above extracts, what might not
have been proved from their entire number ? And what
wonder that Sir Charles destroyed my father’s letters, and
evinced such agitation when he found that I was in posses-
sion of his own, (the ownership of which forms no part of
the present question), and broke his faith with me in
regard to their restitution ? I expect even yet to confirm
the proofs I now advance by a further discovery of letters,
&c.; although I venture to think that no number of letters
could carry a deeper conviction than those already pro-
duced. And let me repeat that all the evidence I produce
must be weighed in connection with my father’s recognised
powers and executed works. It was his reputation which
hi ought him in contact with Sir Charles Barry j who
sought him not as an equal, far less as a subordinate, but
as the only man then in England, who towered above his
fellows, and who could grapple the difficulties of the vast
work then projected. Giants are not to be met with every
day, and their youth and growth, as well as their middle
age, are generally known to those around them. The great
results achieved by my father were foretold in his early
childhood; and his drawings and his works all lead up and
point to the greatest of them all, the Palace of West-
minster. W hat, on the other hand, has Sir Charles Barry
got to show ? Where is there one executed work of his
which would induce the belief that he was, in very truth,
the art architect of that noble pile ?
The foregoing are some of my facts ajid my evidence
for them, but should I again be met by the empty asser-
tions of Mr. E. M. Barry and his friends, although re-
luctant to call unwilling witnesses, I shall not hesitate to
produce men who can prove everything by word.
In conclusion, allow me to add, that from the emphatic
denials contained in Mr. E, M. Barry’s former letter, we


had a right to expect proofs that would have exhausted the
subject ; but his remarkable assertions have been followed
by no proof whatever. Had he any affirmatory evidence
beyond a few letters which nullify each other, he would at
once have met the question by the production of the
original drawings, which must yet be in existence. It
is not too much to demand that they should now be
brought forward, and that before the tribunal named by
Mr. Wolfe. —Your obedient servant,
21, Savile-row.
E. WELBY PUGIN.
The above letter will bo found to embody
the substance of the two letters I addressed, to
the Pall Mall Gazette, which it is, therefore, un-
necessary to reprint.
My case would be incomplete without an
examination of some of the letters, which have
been from time to time published in opposition to
my statements. To save space, I will only print
such extracts as apply consecutively to the story,
and require notice on my part. The letters
themselves can be found in the Times , Pall Mall
Gazette , Standard , and Building News .
Mr. E. M. Barry says, in a
letter to the Pall Mall Gazette,
Aug. 16th, “ that the circum-
stances connected with the
competition extend backwards
to a period beyond his personal
recollection,” and then imme-
diately afterwards he gives his
most emphatic personal denial
to my assertions.
He makes enquiries from :
Mr. Wolfe, who was engaged
with Sir C. Barry during the
preparation of the competition
designs, and consulted on
every stage of the work. Mr.
Banks, who was the head of
Sir C. Barry’s office imme-
diately after the period of the
competition. Mr. Wright,
lii other words, Mr. E.
M. Barry denies that of
which he declares himself
to know nothing—a won-
derful thing truly for a wit-
ness to undertake to close
a case, at the moment he
expresses his inability to
open it. He promises,
however, to make enquiries
of others.
I make enquiries from ;
Mr. Osmond, at whose
house my father lived,
before moving into his own
residence near Salisbury.
He also frequently saw my
father at St.Maries’Grange.
Mr. Grieves, with whom
my father was in constant
communication, and by
80


who was superior clerk of the
staff immediately after the
great work was entrusted to
him. Mr. Rumble, who gives
no date as to the time when
he was in Sir Charles Barry’s
office, but who saw my father
making sketches for orna-
mental fittings for Trentham.
Mr. Richardson, who was
employed by Sir Charles (no
date given) in a similar capa-
city to my father.
whom he was engaged to
design Gothic scenery for
Her Majesty’s Theatre.
Mr. Hogarth, who moun-
ted the competition draw-
ings. Mr. Earp, the carver,
who worked at the Houses.
Mrs. Mares, who stayed
with us for the space of
two years after my mo-
ther’s death. Mr. Herbert,
R.A., one of my father’s
most intimate friends, &c.,
&c., &c.
Mr. Talbot Bury likewise volunteers his “ explanations ”
of everything, although he was never employed by Sir
Charles Barry at all, but occasionally by my father.
Mr. Ferrey has also come forward, unsolicited, to
prevent my being “carried away by my feelings; ” con-
sidering it to be a duty not to remain silent.
Messrs. Charles and E. M. Barry have personal know-
ledge of nothing before 1840.
Of all these gentlemen, Mr. Wolfe is the only one
who was in Sir Charles Barry’s office before the competition;
and is alone, therefore, entitled to speak of Sir Charles
Barry’s proceedings at that time. Consequently, it is his
evidence which deserves the most attention.
He says : “I will explain,
as precisely as I can, the
nature and extent of the as-
sistance derived from Pugin
in designing the Westminster
Palace; and as it is well known
that I was almost daily and
nightly with Sir Charles Barry
during the preparation of the
competition designs, &c., and
that I was cognizant of,
and consulted upon, every
stage of the work; I trust I
may be accepted as a com-
petent witness to the facts I
have now to relate.”
supposition, viz ;—that he is <
transaction which took place at
Even admitting tliat Mr.
Wolfe’s evidence, as far as
it goes, may be trustworthy
and (making allowance for
lapse of time) dependent
on bis own personal know-
ledge ; it is clear, at the
outset, that ifican be but
supplementary to that of
Mr. Osmond, Mr. Grieves,
and Mr. Hogarth, who were
intimately connected with
myfatherin!B3s. Whether
it can be reconciled with
the testimony of these
latter gentlemen I have
grave doubts, except on one
entirely ignorant of every
; Salisbury, as well as of all
G
81


private relations established between Sir Charles Barry
and my father. It is on this ground alone that he can
be relieved from a charge of misrepresentation. Were his
evidence entirely free from inconsistency and incoherency,
which it is not, it is of value only to the extent of what he
actually saw and heard in Sir Charles Barry’s office, and
cannot be substituted for events and words of which he
knew nothing. His facts must be explained and inter-
preted by my prior facts; not mine by his, which are
later.
Mr. Talbot Bury being in
constant and intimate com-
munication with Mr. Pugin
during 1835, his recollections
must not be disregarded.
To test fairly the value
of Mr. T. Bury’s assertions,
it must be observed that
his intimacy with my
father did not extend to
any greater knowledge of
the transactions of 1835 than that possessed by Mr. Wolfe.
He seems to have known nothing about Sir Charles Barry’s
visits to Salisbury, nor of the work my father was
doing for Sir Charles throughout the entire year. And by
what right or on what ground, he volunteers so much, in-
formation about Sir Charles Barry and his designs, I
cannot imagine; as he was not Sir Charles’s clerk, neither
was he employed by him. The statements in his two
letters are so conflicting, his writing is so confused, and his
animus against myself so transparent, that but little
reliance can be placed on what he advances, even ostensibly
on his own personal knowledge.
He says {Times, Sept. 15):
“The statement that Mr. Pugin
had an idea of competing for
the Houses of Parliament is
without foundation ; it is an
invention and untrue.”
Mr. Hogarth says (p. 13):
“I do know that your
father intended to enter
into the competition, be-
cause he told me so; and
when subsequently he spoke
to me about mounting
Barry’s and Graham’s drawings, I asked him whether his
own designs would not suffer by the assistance he was
giving to these gentlemen; his reply was ‘ that they would,’
or words to that effect.” Is Mr. T. Bury, therefore, justified
in calling my statement “ an invention and untrue ?”
Again {Times, Sept. 15): “A.
W. Pugin did not make any
plan or design for the Houses
of Parliament until I went to
his house at Salisbury, to
assist him in Mr. G. Graham’s
Mr. Osmond says (p. 13);
“ The designs made for Mr.
Graham by your father for
the Houses of Parliament,
were mostly done on my
premises at Salisbury;”
82


set of drawings. He then put
his first ideas on paper, and I
before he went to St. Marie's
Grange. Mr. T. Bury did
worked them out.”
not go to Salisbury till
September 11th, 1835, when
my father was at the Grange; and with the exception of
three days, he (my father) was working for Sir Charles
Barry alone, from the time of Mr. T. Bury’s arrival until
November 19th. Mr. T. Bury’s statement is, therefore,
not in accordance with facts.
Mr. T. Bury also writes :
“ The assertion that the com-
petition drawings of Mr. G.
Graham were finished in pencil
evinces his(E. W. P.’s) utter
ignorance of facts, and is
likewise untrue and without
any foundation; as I worked
with A. W. Pugin on the
designs for Mr. G. Graham —
having made the plans and
sections—and I affirm that
they were made in Indian ink.
I saw Sir Charles Barry’s
drawings at the same time ;
and they were finished in
light Indian ink, in a style
peculiar to himself.”
In a letter to the Pall Mall
I said : “In order that my
father’s touch should not be
detected in two separate sets
of drawings, many of the
designs were re-drawn in
pencil by Sir Charles, as Mr,
Talbot Bury can testify.” Mr.
T. Bury rejoined, “ If that
has reference to Sir Charles’s
original drawings, I must give
it a most positive denial.”
If Mr. T. Bury will
examine my communica-
tions, he will find that I
have no where stated that
Mr. G. Graham’s drawings
were finished in pencil.
The fact of Sir Charles
Barry having completed
his design in pencil, I first
learnt from Mr. T. Bury on
August 11th, and subse-
quently in his letter to the
Pall Mall, on August 15th.
He now declares that they
were done in light Indian
ink. The information I
received, that my father’s
designs were done in pencil,
of course confirms Mr. T.
Bury’s first version of the
story.
Will Mr. T. Bury inform
me then what drawings he
did refer to ? If what he
most unmistakably told
me of was incorrect, it
would seem that my father
first copied Sir Charles’s
designs, and then that Sir
Charles copied my father’s
copies. For Mr. T. Bury’s
information enabled me to
discover, on the following
morning, these very copies
made by Sir Charles from my father’s drawings. I am not
authorized to name the gentleman in whose possession
they remain, but I do not imagine that there will be any
difficulty in their production, when necessary. As the
a 2
83


entire building was planned and arranged at Salisbury
throughout the year 1835, there can be little doubt that Mr.
T. Bury’s retracted statement was the correct one; and
that he knew that Sir Charles Barry took copies of my
father's drawings before introducing them into his office
as his own ; and when my father arrived in Foley Place,
he found his own general designs, redrawn or traced,
ready for him to work out the detail drawings.
Mr. Ferrey, paternally re-
buking my rashness, says ;
“ That Mr. Pugin rendered
considerable assistance to Sir
Charles Barry in carrying out
the details of his design no-
body has ever doubted, but
this does not warrant the
bold assertion to which I have
adverted .... on more than
one occasion I remember how
energetically he denied the
truth of the report that he
was in reality the architect,
&c.
Again, in his “Life of my
Father,” Mr. Ferrey writes:
“ When the Commissioners
made their report, no one
doubted that Pugin would in
any competition be at the
head of the list. It was,
therefore, generally expected
that he would furnish a design
immeasurably superior to
those of his professional
brethren.”
Before I can admit, in
answer to Mr. Ferrey’s
tender appeal, the “ mis-
take into which I have
fallen,” I must ask him
to reconcile his present
statements with those in
his “ Life of my Father.”
In that work he says:
“ The appreciation in which
Pugin’s knowledge of
Gothic art was held,
secured for him at a later
period, when Mr. Barry’s
design was adopted, a large
share in the execution of
the work: hut even of the
original design some portion
of its merit must be assigned
to Piiyin.”
This was exactly what
did happen. My father’s
uninterrupted communica-
tion with, and continuous
work for Sir Charles Barry
all through 1835, and the
subsequent selection of his
designs, which at the time
were considered “immea-
surably superior ” to those
of the other competitors,
speaks volumes as to the
justice of the expectations,
and the way in which they were fulfilled. Without my
father, where would Sir Charles Barry have been ? If
this design, which quite distanced the other competitors,
was entirely his own, for what did he go to my father
months before the competition, and pay him 400 guineas ?
84


Mr. Wolfe says : —“ It was
not till after Sir C. Barry had
originated and, with his own
hand, drawn out the general
design both in plan and ele-
vation, that Pugin’s assistance
was obtained.” Mr. Talbot
Bury says :—“ It was not
until Sir Charles Barry had
completed his design in pencil,
including elevations and sec-
tions, that Mr. Pugin had
anything to do with his work.”
“ Mr. Pugin had no notion of
the design of Sir C. Barry.”
Mr. Talbot Bury also decides
that my father first saw Sir
C. Barry’s design after Nov.
21st., 1835.
He also says :—“ I clearly
state, that my old friend, Mr.
Pugin, never worked on Sir C.
Barry's competition drawings."
The diary for 1885
shows that my father began
to work for Sir Charles, at
Salisbury, on April 28th.
Mr. Osmond says that
Sir Charles was down at
Salisbury to see my father
before Mr. Graham’s de-
signs were finished. The
diary shows that he was at
Salisbury in September,
during Mr. Talbot Bury’s
visit, (I imagine, unknown
to him,) and again in No-
vember. It also specifies
certain portions of the
building on which my father
worked ; the number of
days he was engaged ; and
the rolls of drawings sent
off to Sir C. Barry. Mr.
Grieves also writes, that my
father frequently stated to
him that he was the designer
of the Houses ; on one occasion saying:—“ls not this a
regular joke ? Here are these two rivals competing for one
prize, and I am making the designs for both ? ”
After all these unhesitating
declarations, Mr. Talbot has
the assurance to inform us,
that my father “ thought it
much wiser to make sure of
the amounts offered to him
by Mr. Graham and Sir C.
Barry, rather than risk the
loss of his own time and
money in so large and un-
certain a competition.”
In other words —my
father only having seen
Sir C. Barry’s competition
drawings about eight days
before they were sent in;
then and there, for the first
time, made up his mind not
to compete himself, but to
accept 400 guineas from
Sir C. Barry, rather than
risk the loss of his own
time. Nevertheless, adds
Mr. Talbot Bury, “lie never worked on Sir Charles’s com-
petition drawings at all! ” Mark the absurdities which
follow in the train of these “ infatuated ” statements.
1. My father never intended to compete at all; but
this determination was only arrived at about eight days
before the competition designs were sent in.
2. His decision was influenced by Sir C. Barry’s offer
of 400 guineas at that time.
85


3. Had he ever intended to compete he would certainly
have finished his own designs long before this.
4. So that a decision which he must have arrived at,
one way or the other, months before he saw Sir C. Barry
for the first time, was, according to Mr. T. Bury, influenced
by that event.
5. The reason of his not competing was, that he
thought it wiser to secure certain sums of money by assist-
ing other competitors,
G. Having received 800 guineas from Mr. Graham for
making his competition designs, Sir C. Barry paid him
400 guineas for a similar object: nevertheless he “ never
worked on Sir C. Barry’s competition designs at all.”
7. And Sir C. Barry, having completed his design,
sent for my father eight days before the competition, and
paid him 400 guineas for not doing anything, beyond
making a few drawings which were “ set aside,” and
passing “ amusing criticisms ” on his own “ ideas ! ”
When my father’s “ assis-
tance was obtained,” Mr.
Wolfe tells us, in opposi-
tion to Mr. Talbot Bury, that
“he made some perspective
views and drawings of details
before the competition.”
Mr. Talbot Bury declares, in
counter contradiction to this,
that my father’s assistance
was “ confined to details ex-
tending very much over the
whole building,” “after the
original design had been
selected;” although he subse-
quently contradicts himself as
well, by saying that they were
only “ details of the internal
finishings of the rooms.” Mr.
Wright describes my father
as being ‘ ‘ employed in making
parts of the building to en-
larged scales from the smaller
drawings of Sir C. Barry.”
This must have been after
the competition. Mr. Rich-
ardson describes the assis-
I leave these gentlemen
to reconcile their conflict-
ing statements about the
nature of my father’s assis-
tance, and the exact time
of its commencement. It
is singular that whilst they
all agree as to what my
father did not do, they
differ from each other as to
what his work really was ;
so much so, that the Eccle-
siologist (Oct. 1867) inter-
prets them to mean, that he
had nothing whatever to do
with the business until after
Sir Charles was appointed
architect of the Houses.
Some of them certainly
admit that he “ rendered
assistance in details ; ” but
what meaning to attach to
this phrase it is impossible
to decide. Mr. Wolfe’s
details are evidently not
Mr. Wright’s details, and
they both differ from Mr.
T. Bury’s. Now, consider-
86


tance as “ making working
drawings of ornamental de-
tail.”
ing that details are to a
building exactly what fea-
tures are to a countenance,
whose expression and beau-
ty entirely depend upon
them, “ doing details ” is about the most important part
of an architectural work. If my opponents will define
the word, and furthermore agree amongst themselves
whether they consider my father to have designed details,
or only to have copied them, or drawn them to enlarged
scales ; and will moreover condescend to tell me what on
earth the work was for which he received 400 guineas ; I
shall be better able to attach a value to their evidence.
But such vague, confused, and contradictory statements as
theirs, can only meet with the derision they deserve.
These drawings, however, are described by Sir C.
Barry, in his letter of Nov. 1836, as “ sets of exquisite
details ; ” and he desires my father to “go on as you have
begun, for nothing can be more satisfactory than tire result
of your labours hitherto.” Yet, ice are seriously informed, by
Mr. Wolfe, that these “ exquisite and satisfactory details ,”
which elicited such applause, and gave Sir Charles such a
rich treat, were “ set aside ; ” and that “ no one portion of the
Houses at all accords -with any detail prepared by my father!
The ignorance of Messrs. Wolfe and Wright as to the
private arrangements of the principals, must again be the
apology for their misrepresentations ; except indeed when
they advance statements as much at variance with proba-
bility as with truth. The story of Messrs. Wright and
Wolfe is simply incredible, and contrasts very unfavourably
with that of my witnesses, who, notwithstanding Mr.
Alfred Barry’s insinuations, at least have the advantage of
agreeing with each other.
Mr. Wolfe continues : “For
these perspective views, some
drawings of details, and some
others subsequently made, Mr.
Pugin received 400 guineas,”
But his “ideas” being op-
posed to Sir Charles Barry’s
“ ideas,” most of the draw-
ings were “ set aside ; ” and
“ though some of the least im-
portant of the competition
drawings were drawn by him,
This is positively won-
derful ! Are we really
expected to believe that
Sir Charles Barry paid
such a large sum for a
few drawings, most of
which were set aside ? And
if they were only drawn
from Sir Charles Barry's
designs, and did not ex-
hibit a single feature de-
signed by my father, how
87


they did not exhibit a single
feature designed by him. ”
Mr. Wright, in the letter-
signed by him, says : “ The
elevations and sections are
very different from the original
designs, and no one portion
at all accords with any detail
prepared by the late Mr. A.
W. Pugin.”
could they have been set
aside because my father’s
ideas, were opposed to Sir
C. Barry’s ? If they were
only copies of Sir C.
Barry’s drawings, they
could not embody my
father’s ideas.
We, therefore, arrive at
this alternative : either
Sir C. Barry was setting
aside his own designs, or
they were rejected because
they contained original
ideas of my father; and
if this was the case, as
every one must conclude,
they did exhibit features designed by my father. At the
same time, if most of them were “ set aside,” some were
adopted. And thus we may reasonably infer, on Mr.
T\ olfe’s own admissions, that my father did make original
drawings for the Houses of Parliament.
These details, Mr. Talbot
Bury, in his first letter, assures
us “ extended very much over
the whole building.”
The drawings for details
{vide definition p. 19) are
the most important of all
the drawings made for car-
rying out a building.
The Palace of Westminster is made up entirely of
details. From base to corner-stone, from one end of the
building to the other, it is nothing but an elaboration of
detail. Take away the details and what is left ? If then
my father’s detail designs extended over the whole build-
ing, they must constitute the building itself, which
would be a bare outline without them.
Mr. Wolfe, however, in-
forms ns that Sir C. Barry
was, of all men he has
known, the least likely to
adopt other peoples’ ideas of
art: hut there is no doubt
that Pugin’s valuable sugges-
tions and criticisms may have
helped to modify his views,
and contributed to the pro-
duction of new ideas.”
Then why in the name
of common sense did he
call in my father ? His
letters from first to last,
tell quite a different story:
for it is on my father’s
“ ideas ” that he relies for
everything. Yet Mr. Wolfe
tells us in one line that his
ideas were opposed to Sir
C. Barry’s ideas; and in
another, that he did not
conceive “ ideas,” but only made “ suggestions,” winch led
88


to “ new idecas ” in Sir Charles, who “ was of all men the
least likely, &c.” In other words, if one can disentangle the
meaning of all this, my father’s ideas led to Sir Charles
Barry’s ideas ; a very convenient arrangement for Sir C.
Barry; and commonly called “brain-sucking.” If, however,
Sir C. Barry’s four churches, alluded to at the commence-
ment of this pamphlet, embodied his “ ideas ” of art,
it cannot be disputed that the contrast between them
and the Houses of Parliament is rather startling and
conclusive.
Mr. Wolfe continues: “ The
building, as executed, bears
little resemblance to the com-
petition designs ; but the most
important changes in it, those
indeed which determined its
character, were made by Sir
C. Barry alone, while he was
with me in the country, and
not in communication with
Pugin.” Mr. E, M. Barry,
in contradiction to the latter
part of the above quotation,
says: “Knowing, as I do,
the intimate and friendly re-
lations, untroubled by the
semblance of a quarrel, which
existed between my father
and Mr. Pugin, and termi-
nated only by his death, &c.”
And Mr. Charles Barry says:
“ My father and the late Mr,
Pugin were always, till the
lamented death of the latter,
on the warmest terms of
friendship and mutual es-
teem.”
Contrary to the allega-
tions of the Messrs. Barry,
my father positively refused
all intercourse with Sir
Charles for several years,
and it was on Sir Charles’s
urgent solicitation that he
again consented to work
for him. In the mean time,
we are told by Mr. Wolfe,
all the important changes in
the building were made.
That may be. But where
did all the drawings for
these changes come from ?
Mr. T. Bury’s admission,
that my father's drawings
for details and tenders ex-
tended very much over the
whole building, must not
be forgotten; and the diaries
and letters prove the same
thing, not only as regards
detail, but in respect to
every other kind of draw-
ing required. It is an abso-
lutely incontrovertible fact
that the mass of drawings, prepared by my father for
this work, was something almost fabulous. So early as
October,' 1836, Sir Charles writes : “I cannot but wonder
that you have been able to accomplish so much in the
time. I am not much surprised to hear that your health
suffers from excess of application.” Now, what became
of all these drawings ? Some of them were for parts of
the building, which could not by any possibility be re-
quired for years : as, e.g., the upper storey of the
Victoria Tower. These drawings would only be gradually
required as the building progressed. It must also be
89


borne in mind that the working drawings of one com-
partment would he sufficient to carry on an immense
portion of a building, consisting of a long in
which so much repetition occurs. So that some years
would elapse before the workmen came to a standstill.
(This, indeed, happened when, as Sir Charles wrote, “they
wanted the working drawings for the Clock Tower, &c.”)
With this immense store of drawings in his possession, of
whose existence Mr. Wolfe and the other clerks were
entirely ignorant, Sir Charles could introduce many
“ important changes ” into the building. This fact will,
perhaps, explain the entries in the diary, which speak of
certain portions of the building as being designed a
second time. And it is universally admitted that the
high roofs, &c., — features which perhaps more than
any other “ determine the character of the building ”
were added by my father; whilst I myself saw him
make the original sketch of the upper part of the Clock
Tower. Now that this vast accumulation of drawings sup-
plied by my father should be “ set aside,” like those
seen by Mr. Wolfe, is simply incredible; for it is tanta-
mount to saying that Sir C. Barry continued to employ
a man for some years, whose ideas were constantly op-
posed to his own ; and as the drawings he made arrived, so
they were immediately rejected or destroyed. If Mr. Wolfe
never saw them, so much the worse for Sir Charles Barry,
for it proves almost unmistakably that Sir Charles copied,
or sketched, or adapted them in some way, before intro-
ducing them into his office. Few will now, perhaps,
hesitate to believe that all the important changes in the
Building were made from my father’s drawings.
After explaining that the
drawings entered in my
father’s diary were “ draw-
ings for tenders; ” Mr. Talbot
Bury remarks ‘ ‘ that the public
generally cannot understand
and care nothing about such
things, &c.”
Now, on tlie contrary, I
affirm that tins is exactly
the point which should he
most lucidly explained.
When I say that “draw-
ings for tenders” mean all
the full-size drawings
from which estimates are
made, and the building
erected, and without which
no workman could follow
his craft, the value and
importance of such draw-
ings will readily he under-
stood.
90


Mr. T. Bury, in proof of
his assertion that my father
had no share in Sir Charles
Barry’s competition designs,
says: “ In the design
on which ice were engaged
(Mr. G. Graham’s), A. W.
Pugin confined his plan to the
limits of the existing ground;
whereas Sir Charles Barry’s
encroached a long way into
the river, thereby gaining a
great additional space and
area. This great and essen-
tial difference in the designs
is conclusive evidence of
their being the work of two
minds.”
Referring to my father’s
Government appointment,Mr.
Wolfe says: “ The appoint-
ment was suggested and re-
commended by Sir Charles
Barry, with the view of secur-
ing to his friend a position
not likely to be affected by
any change .... &c.”
On the contrary, it seems-
to me that this difference
accounts for my father’s
admiration of Sir Charles
Barry’s ground plan ; and
establishes the probability
that an architect of any
power would, for different
sized pieces of ground,
make two distinct and dis-
similar designs. The two
designs made by my father
for St. George’s Church,
Southwark, for the same
piece of ground, were suffi-
ciently unlike each other to
make any one doubt whe-
ther they were the work
of the same architect.
Must I again remind Mr.
T. Bury of my father’s
“ power of creation ” and
“ inventive genius ? ”
In other words —My
father, on account of a
personal grievance, having
voluntarily renounced Sir
Charles Barry’s friendship.
Sir Charles is suddenly
seized with a desire to
secure his absent friend a
direct appointment under
government, out of pure
disinterestedness. The “ regular fix,” which had arrived at
last, of course had no influence on the determination.
My father, on the contrary, assured me that a Govern-
ment appointment was one condition, required by him,
before he would consent to work again for Sir Charles
Barry. The appointment which my father did subse-
quently obtain was, however, in no way commensurate
with his expectations ; yet Sir Charles was able to con-
vince him that it was the best at his disposal; and it
was also the only one which, whilst in some degree
satisfying my father’s request, would most effectually
serve Sir Charles’s purpose, and preserve the blind; since
the position of an official, paid an insignificant salary for
ostensibly seeing designs executed, and not for preparing
91


the designs themselves, enabled Sir Charles to have constant
communication with my father without suspicion.
The amount of the nominal emolument, Sir Charles
Barry remarked, “was of minor importance.” And this
was in some way verified, for during the first year of
this arrangement my father received almost £l,OOO pri-
vately from Sir Charles. What, then, may I ask, be-
comes of Mr. Wolfe’s statement; when the position which
Sir Charles Barry was desirous “of securing to his
friend ” as one “ not likely to be affected by any change
&c.,” would have been literally worthless, if it had been
unaccompanied by the private understanding which
existed between Sir Charles and my father ?
Mr. Talbot Bury, speaking
of a visit he paid to the
Government Works at Thames
Bank, says, that my father
“ on those occasions showed
him large detail drawings
prepared by Sir Charles
Barry himself.” “ I remem-
ber,” he adds, “ very distinctly
seeing the drawings of the
Throne, and fittings for the
House of Lords, and those
for the Speaker, (what, by the
way, are the fittings for the
Speaker ?) and the House of
Commons.”
Mr. Talbot Bury, more
pointedly, perhaps, than-the
other witnesses, having
insisted that my father was
expressly engaged to make
detail drawings, now seems
to imply that they were all
done by Sir Charles Barry
himself. His usual ignor-
ance, however, is no excuse
for thrusting himself for-
ward to state what is mani-
festly untrue. I do not
believe for one moment
that my father ever showed
him a single detail drawing
at Thames Bank, making
the declaration that it was prepared by Sir Charles Barry
himself. Sir Charles, in one of his earliest letters, asks
my father for designs for the internal details of both
Houses of Parliament; in another, he acknowdedges the
receipt of them; in a third he eulogizes his “ sets of ex-
quisite details later on he acknowledges himself to be in
“ a regular fix respecting the fittings of the House of
Lords,” and writes to my father, after many years’ disrup-
tion of intercourse,” “as the only man who can render him
the valuable and efficient assistance he requires ; or so
thoroughly relieve him of his troubles of mind in respect
of them.” All through the correspondence, since 1844,
Sir Charles is asking for and referring to working and
detail drawings. On November sth, 1851, he says: “ The
rough sketches for furniture will do very well; ” and he sub-
sequently asks for the working drawings for it.
92


In one letter, (25th November, 1845,) evidently speak-
ing of the Throne, he writes “ I should like to see the
detail drawings of the carvings before they are sent to
Thames Bank.” Mr. Earp says, (p. 13)“ There are
some wood-carvers left, who know that as far as their part
of the work is concerned, it was all designed by your
father.” A clergyman (p. 11) testifies that my father said
to him, at the Thames Bank Works :—“ I now work fer-
tile Government, and Barry shall no longer get the credit
of my plans.” And I have the authority of Mrs. Mares for
saying that my father, in allusion to this department
alone, remarked to her“ There are some 00 fellows
here, whom I am obliged to keep going—all depending on
me for every design they get.” The original drawings for the
Throne in the House of Lords were designed at Salisbury;
but other designs were subsequently made by my father!
The first of these I saw him make on board a Bamsgate
steamer, and he landed at Westminster Bridge to take it to
Sir C. Barry. Mr. Burton, who had every opportunity of
knowing the truth, confirms this statement (p. 56). Yet
Mr. Talbot Bury coolly tells us, as though he had the most
incontestable authority for his assertion, that Sir C. Barry
prepared all these drawings himself. Like all the rest of
of Mr. Talbot Bury’s information, this also is based on
pure assumption.
I have now done with Mr. Talbot Bury. At my
interview with him on August 11th, he distinctly affirmed
what he afterwards retracted, —later on he volunteered
explanations of letters he had never seen—gave in-
formation about transactions with which he had only
a partial acquaintance—contradicted in a second letter
what he had written in a previous one—refused to
give the date of an important circumstance, that I
might verify his statement —perverted my father’s letter
of 1845 by falsely describing it as a public repudia-
tion of a claim which it never even hinted at—pre-
tended to vindicate his friend from a charge of
falsehood, that he might grossly insult me by saying that
I disgraced my father’s memory—having previously accused
me of invention and untruth. Had Mr. Talbot Bury been
in a position to warrant his giving evidence, he would have
done wrong in withholding it; but since almost all he ad-
vances has no real foundation, the motive for his
eagerness in defending my father is too transparent to
deceive any one. His pretended zeal for my father’s
honour is simply a cloak under which to attack me. Of
such a man, Junius remarks, “ he was treacherous without
art, and a hypocrite without deceiving.”


Mr. Charles Barry says :
“ I was my late father’s con-
fidential assistant in his office
from 1840 to 1848, during
which period the designs for
the whole of his great work
were finally prepared by him
alone, and a large portion of
it carried out. I am able, of
my personal knowledge, to
speak of circumstances which
then occurred ; and to corro-
borate most fully the letter of
Mr. Wolfe ; and to deny, in the
most emphatic way possible,
the infatuated statement of
claim set up by Mr. E. W.
Pugin on behalf of his late
father,”
Mr. Edward Barry says :
“ I first became associated
with my father, in profes-
sional matters, in 1850 ; and
since that time I can state
most positively that every
design for the Westminster
Palace .... emanated
from himself alone, and was
fully worked out by his own
hand,”
Mr Charles Barry seems
to ignore the fact that my
“infatuated”claim extends
back to the transactions of
1835 ; and therefore how
his “ personal knowledge,”
which only came into force
in 1840, can enable him to
corroborate Mr. Wolfe’s
account of the former period,
I am at a loss to conceive.
Both he and Mr. Edward
Barry seem to be as much in
ignorance of the relations
existing between my father
and Sir Charles after 1844,
as the earlier witnesses of
1835 : or it is scarcely
probable that they would
affirm that from 1844 to
1852, every design ema-
nated from Sir C. Barry
alone. During the whole
of that time my father
was supplying Sir Charles
with every kind of design,
as the letters, which are
left to me, testify; and
they form but a fragmen-
tary portion of a very large
correspondence either lost
or destroyed. The last letter my father ever received from
Sir C. Barry, as we have seen, asks for working drawings for
the Clock Tower and facade of Old Palace Yard; and I
repeat, that the designs sent to Sir Charles during these
years might be literally numbered by hundreds. Here
again, if the Messrs. Barry are ignorant of this, it only
confirms my father’s statement that Sir Charles copied his
designs. I have seen Sir Charles at our house on many
occasions, but I never remember him to have done more
than suggest and explain to my father what he w T anted.
My father made numberless designs for him in his pre-
sence, and afterwards fully carried them out, with all the
necessary working drawings.
94


11l conclusion, I ask the Messrs. Barry
fairly to face the facts I have adduced, and to
reconcile them with their mutilated version of the
story. It is of no earthly use to multiply the
personal recollections of those who were not
principals in the transactions recorded; for their
evidence at best can be but partial and discon-
nected, even when not completely at variance
with the main facts of the case. Nothing proves
this more than the inconsistencies and contradic-
tions into which they are betrayed in describing
my father’s services. They stultify themselves
and destroy the value of their testimony, by re-
ducing these services to a scale extravagantly
and ridiculously low. They have no difficulty in
deciding what he did not do, simply because they
were all in ignorance of what he really effected
out of their sight; and they give conflicting
accounts of the work they saw him do, in a great
measure because it depended on what he had
previously done unknown to them.
u He thought it wiser not to compete himself”
says Mr. T. Bury, “ but to secure an amount
from Sir C. Barry f one would naturally conclude
for making Sir Charles’s competition designs, as
as he had done for Mr. G. Graham.
“Not at all,” says Mr. Wolfe, “for Sir
Charles had finished his designs before Mr. Pugin's
assistance teas obtained
“What did A. W. Pugin receive 400 guineas
for then?” asks Mr. T. Bury.
“For drawings afterwards set aside,” ex-
plains Mr. Wolfe.
“But,” says Mr. Ferrey, “you must admit
that some portion even of the original design must
be assigned to Pugin.”


“ I admit nothing of the kind,” retorts Mr.
T. Burj*, contradicting what he had previously
implied, “for he never worked on Sir C. Barry's
competition drawings at all.”
“ Indeed he did,” says Mr. Wolfe, “ he made
some perspective views and pencil draivings of
details
“But,” says Mr. T. Bury, “ they zvere details
of the internal finishings of the rooms.”
“Why,” growls Mr. Wolfe, “you said the
other day that they were details extending very
much over the tv hole building ; and what on earth
should he do details of internal finishings
for, when the rooms were not likely to he built
for years?”
“ I must have made a mistake,” we may
suppose Mr. T. Bury to say, “for Eichardson
bears me out that they were only drawings of
ornamental details.”
“Yes:” puts in Mr. Bumble, “but they
were not for the Parliament Houses at all, but
mere sketches for ornamental fittings for Trentham ;
and, I must be right, for I sat at the same
desk with this occasional assistant close to his side;
so this important information lets in a little
light upon the controversy.”
“But it really does not much matter, for
they were all done after Sir Charleses original
design had been selected ,” says Mr. Talbot Bury.
“Indeed,” protests Mr. Wolfe, “he made
them before the competition; though it comes
to the same thing, as most of them tv ere set aside.”
“Honscnsc,” insists Mr. T. Bury, “they
were done after, and were drawings for tenders.”
“And 1 confirm it all , whatever they
were,” emphatically adds Mr. Banks—“ why, I


gave the same valuable assistance myself, and
so did Mr. Thomas, and we might just as
well claim to he the Architects.”
“Perhaps with greater justice,” echoes Mr.
Wolfe, “for we were chief assistants and confi-
dential friends and advisers , and were always
consulted on every stage of the work; whereas
we do not even bracket ourselves with him, for
he was only an occasional assistant .”
“ With a salary ,” sighs Mr. Wright, “ better
than my own”
“ But then he was a valued friend , and
made amusing criticisms ,” insinuates Mr. Wolfe,
“and though he had no ideas himself, he made
suggestions ivhich led to Sir Charles Barnfs ideas
—however, we have all the greatest respect for his
genius , although he did not belong to the superior
clerks of the staff. ”
Of what value is such evidence as this ?
Thus weighing out to him an equal balance of
flattery and depreciation, they show their inability
to judge of such a man as my father. Some
of them think to exalt themselves by lowering
him. Was Sir Charles Barry a fool to connect
himself so intimately and so mysteriously with
a man who could do no more for him than they
could, or are they speaking without book ?
What is the meaning of the immense corres-
pondence, afterwards destroyed; the secret in-
tercourse ; the recognised superiority of my
father’s architectural and artistic powers; the
lists and rolls of drawings; my father’s in-
dignant withdrawal of himself from Sir Charles;
Sir Charles’s appeal that he should resume his
labours; the reports so prejudicial to the pro-
H


fessional reputation of Sir Charles? They are
all perfectly inexplicable, if my father was merely
the insignificant adapter of another mail’s drawings ,
or “an occasional assistant,” a little lower
than themselves. Every act of Sir Charles Barry,
every letter he wrote, every expression he used,
—all tell a different story to theirs. Every
thing, from first to last, from the most important
to the most insignificant circumstance, points to
but one conclusion— that my father teas the
superior , the source , the originator :—and with
this conclusion my facts alone are consistent.
There is nothing which indicates the slightest
inferiority, or that he was “ glad to sell his
assistance.” I had heard from my earliest
youth the fact for which I am now contending;
and every particle of evidence, I find, confirms
it. "What, then, to me are mere random re-
collections of words uttered years ago ? I care
nothing for scraps of hearsay in opposition to
a story, uniform, consistent, and supported by
evidence like mine. Let my opponents reconcile
their statements with existing facts, as I have
done—let them produce letters, documents, cir-
cumstances, traditions, in confirmation of their
denials, like those by which I have proved my
assertions. It is not a new question of what this
or that man has said, or even of what my father
is reported to have said himself. Here are two
opposite and contradictory stories:—with which
do the main facts produced fit in ?—with which
can they best be reconciled ? Minor discre-
pancies, even if they exist, cannot discredit the
truth of my narrative, supported as it is by
evidence which is indisputable,— the written
evidence of the principals themselves.
The following letter from Mr. Herbert, the
Boyal Academician, came too late for insertion


amongst those at the commencement of the
pamphlet. It is, however, so unhesitating and
conclusive, that I do not regret being able to call
particular attention to it as a final confirmation
of my narrative. The letter speaks for itself,
and coming as it does, from my father’s most
intimate friend, it has a weight possessed by
no other testimony I have produced.
7, Grove End Place, St. John’s Wood Eoad,
29tli October, 1867.
Dear Edward Pugin,—You ask me, “as the most
intimate friend of your father” from about his 23rd year
to the time of his death, to give you my impressions as to
what part he performed with regard to the erection of the
new Houses of Parliament.
Before answering this question, let me state to you,
that when Mrs. Pugin lately informed me of your intention
to insist on your statement—that your father, and not Sir
Charles Barry, was the architect of the new Houses of
Parliament—l expressed my regret on the ground of the
difficulty of making this clear, since Sir Charles Barry
had been regarded as such by the nation for so long a
course of years. He was known to have had the heavy
responsibility of their erection, the difficulties with various
contractors, committees, and commissions, &c.,a1l of which,
without taking into consideration the letter of 1845, tended
to give him the merit of the work.
On this account, therefore, it appeared to me to he a
case which, to maintain or to lose, would call you away
from very important works ; and that a train of evils must
follow this desire of adding something more to the already
fixed glory of your father’s name.
It was with these fears, then, that I disapproved of
your attempts, and gave my counsel to you through Mrs.
Pugin accordingly.
Now, without fear of breaking with any friends, I
shall fearlessly answer your questions, because I believe I
have the good fortune not to have among my friends one
who would desire that truth should be sacrificed at the
shrine of friendship.
Here, then, I state my indelible convictions that
many of the drawings for the Houses of Parliment were,
from beginning to end, the compositions of your father. I
h 2


know also that he designed interior and exterior elevations
with their details, together with working and sectional
drawings; indeed, many of them were made in my
presence.
These drawings were based upon that plan, which,
yonr father always told me, was furnished by Sir C. Barry;
and when I often joked and laughed at him tor this, lie
would reply—“ I was not sure, my dear fellow, how the
Judges would decide, but I was sure of the payment for
these drawings. Besides, I could not have made that
plan ; it was Barry’s own; he was good at such work —
excellent; but the various requirements conveyed by the
plan, which were not of art, and above all the Fine Art
Commissioners, would have been too much for me.”
I may here tell you, that although his mediaeval
carving works ended in his being unable to meet his engage-
ments, he most nobly refused the benefit of the Act. He gave
notes of hand to all creditors and paid them in full. Bolt,
the timber merchant, was so delighted with his just con-
duct that he returned him half his debt. I state this to
you, that you may know how very urgent it was that your
father should be sure of what was, at that time and under
such circumstances, an important sum.
You desire also that I should give you my analysis of
the letter of 1845.
It would have been more agreeable for me to have
confined myself to the facts I have stated ; but if I did
hazard a conjecture on that letter, whilst concurring in the
statements of Mr. W that it was a concerted one,
I might perhaps see in the first part of it somewhat of the
legal aspect which often characterised the statements of
Sir C. Barry ; and it would be only in the last paragraph
that I should perceive the pen of your father.
Soon after its publication I spoke to him about it,
when it w T as quite evident to me that it had cost him an
effort; and as he betrayed some impatience, I changed the
subject.
But to put the ease and its long history into a nut-
shell. Sir C. Barry and your father were both unfortunate
from the beginning; both were in false positions with
regard to each other, and the letter of 1845 failed, I con-
ceive, to set either right. But whether his signature were
appended to it or not, all who, with both eyes open, regard
the new Houses of Parliament, will recognise there the
multitudinous traces of your father’s genius, both inside
and out.


And if those who run do not read, it is of little
consequence, I presume no one denies that to your father
alone is due the merit of being, in this century, Europe’s
greatest Gothic architect, and the one who has left the
ladder which so many have used for their success.
I have been perhaps too brief in my answers ; but
really I dislike writing about his connection with the
the Houses of Parliament, for very well I know what an
enormous amount of labour, irritation, and anxiety that work
cost him; mainly leading, I verily believe, to that me-
lancholy barred dwelling at Kensington, where I left him in
the charge of strangers !
I for one shall not marvel, if your knowing this also
should enable you to place some points, hitherto obscure,
vividly before the public ; and you may take my word for
it, if it comes to be known how much is due to him in that
pile of buildings, the public will do ample justice to
his memory, although his tomb remains with no other
inscription than the simple words, “ lleqaiescat in Pace."
Believe me, dear Edward Pugin,
Yours with affectionate regards,
J. E. HERBERT.
To E. W. Pugin, Esq.
The following letter was written in answer
to the invitation of the Times of September 7th,
that u the present disputants . . . should
compromise their differences hy devising some
plan log which the Houses of Parliament may he
made to afford proper accommodation for the
Legislature l do not pretend to say that my
suggestions arc the best that can be offered,
because I have not had sufficient opportunities of
studying the question thoroughly: but I believe
that they will be found perfectly practical, and
easily effected.
To the Editor of the Times.
Sir, —Business engagements from home have prevented
my availing myself sooner of your invitation to assist in
“ devising some plan which should make the Houses of


Parliament worth the money which the nation has spent.”
Allow me now, therefore, to offer some explanations and
suggestions respecting them. While fully admitting that
you express no more than what is felt by four-fifths of the
House of Commons, it is but just that the grievances you
detail should be traced to their proper quarter. I always
understood from my father that Sir Charles Barry did his
utmost to persuade the Commissioners to make the two
Houses of equal size; but he was overruled on the con-
sideration that, as the attendance in the House of
Commons seldom exceeded 200, it was thought better to
endure an occasional crush than to be daily exposed to the
permanent annoyance of a comparatively vacant House,
with empty benches. In this respect it is unreasonable to
blame Sir Charles, than whom no man had a more com-
prehensive idea of what was necessary for uniting space
with convenience. Had Sir Charles Barry been absolute
master of the position, rather than a shuttlecock tossed
from post to pillar, the blame with which you now charge
him would have been justly merited, but he may fairly be
exonerated from much of the responsibility hitherto
attached to him. I have often heard my father say, that
the perplexing annoyances to which Sir Charles Barry
w T as a victim would have killed him in a twelve-month.
What, however, was considered at the time Sir Charles’s
great merit was, in reality, his greatest fault. The
attempt to form a successful combination of Grecian
symmetry with mediaßval features, of uniformity of plan
with Gothic elevations, was the fatal mistake which
fascinated but destroyed him. His ground plan, I must
maintain in opposition to yourself, displays a marvellous
amount of ingenuity and compactness of arrangement.
To bring together those huge chambers of audience in
close proximity with numberless rooms and offices, all
within reach of each other—to group that long succession
of “ spacious halls,” with their connecting galleries and
approaches—to pack, as it were, with such orderly method
that vast multitude of apartments—was surely an accom-
plishment involving no little thought and mental applica-
tion ; and is scarcely to be condemned in so unqualified a
manner on the score of incovenience. But at the same
time it must be admitted, if not deplored, that whatever
convenience may exist, it was obtained at the sacrifice of
light, air, propriety, and many desirable, if not essential,
characteristics. The somewhat prison-like aspect of a
portion of the rooms, and the general air of closeness, are
to be attributed to the classical exigencies of the plan,
and the idea that sash windows and other modern require


ment were inconsistent with the principles of Gothic
architecture. My father, however, while fully admitting
the great talent and ingenuity in Sir Charles’s general
plan, always maintained, not merely that the outline,
disposition, and proportions of the various parts of the
building were Grecian, but that the ground plan itself
partook of the same character, and was fitted only for a
Southern clime. This was, after all, the fatal mistake.
The small enclosed courts, in winter little better than
wells, fronted by a long, lofty pile of building facing south,
which, though basking in the sun itself, effectually
excluded both sun and air from every portion of the vast
mass behind it, my father almost prophetically announced
was not the right and proper treatment for a climate where
sun is a luxury, and not a superfluity. In advance of his
time, and gifted with practical instincts, which saved him
from being led away by the fascinating idea upon which
Sir Charles Barry stumbled, he saw without an effort that
we required courts open to the south, and detached
buildings so placed as to receive each its due share of sun,
the more important marked by the greater prominence, all
rising one behind the other to the north, and then backed
by a sturdy barrier of the loftiest and most massive
character. Yet, strange to say, a design of this very
character was rejected by the judges. He who wrought
the elaborate coat of the accepted design originated at the
same time a conception which was described in the Morning
Post of the period as “presenting combinations of con-
venience and picturesque grouping in perfect keeping with
the character of the style, which it is delightful to con-
template.” This treatment, embodied by my father in his
designs for Mr. Gillespie Graham, is now found by
experience to be the very treatment necessary for our
requirements in this country. But, unfortunately, we
were not at that time sufficiently advanced to appreciate
it; we were deceived by a phantom; the plastic nature of
Gothic art was trammelled by the exacting demands of
classical propriety; and we can now only regret that the
opportunity of 85 years back, which was actually available,
was lost through our own ignorance. Is it not most
lamentable, let me ask in passing, that unless a sharp
look-out be kept the very self-same false treatment will
render the new Law Courts as huge a blunder in this
respect as the Parliament Houses ? It is to the Quarterly
Beview that thanks are principally due for calling attention
to this particular danger.
We may, however, be grateful that at a time when little
was generally known of Gothic art, and nothing of Gothic


principles, the judges selected a design which w r as not only
far in advance of the others, hut which in course of erection
was the means of forming a school of men by whom
the best works of the present day are executed. The
momentum then given to true principles has not yet
stopped, although I fear there are many signs that its
force is weakening. Considerations like these make me
hesitate to accept your sweeping condemnation of the
Houses as “ so ingeniously ill-adapted to every purpose
for which they were intended as to he the greatest
architectural failure of the age.” Whatever may he men’s
judgment on the particular period of architecture adopted,
of its kind it is perfect from base to corner-stone —from
the most important feature to the smallest detail. Its
proportions are true and elegant; its forms are pleasing ;
it is not devoid of stateliness ; some of its parts are most
noble; all have a delicate grace which charms and satisfies
the eye. Its fitness for its purpose as a Boyal Palace of
debate, and the external manifestations of majesty, few will
question ; its internal magnificence produces a wholesome
awe; and so far from the ornamentation being a “ barren
and wearisome repetition of one idea,” I beg of you to
consider the vast space literally covered with detail of
marvellous variety, if not of great beauty. In saying this,
however, I am by no means inclined to dispute with you
the fact of its being excessive, and often misplaced; or that
propriety is not sacrificed thereby; and lam not blind, as
must appear from what I have said, to the faults and
partial failure of the entire building, whether in architecture
or in plan. In turning my attention to this, allow me to
correct a mistake into which you seem to have fallen with
regard to the material described by you as “ decaying 500
years too soon.” This estimate is only partially true.
The great mass of the material is as sound to-day as it
w T as when the stones were first placed one upon the other.
The stone chosen by the Commissioners was the Balsover
Bock or Mansfield Woodhouse ; and of this, in the greater
number of the courts, the work below the plinth and a
considerable portion of the south-east section of the
building are erected. Where the stone has been properly
selected the work remains as sharp as a razor. This
would have been uniformly the case throughout, I imagine,
had not the division of responsibility proved to the letter
that “ what was everybody’s business was nobody’s
business.” But one of the chief causes of the failure lay
in the difficulty of obtaining blocks of sufficient size. At
this juncture recourse was had to the Anstone quarries,
principally on account of their stone being very similar in


appearance to the Balsover, and I have no doubt whatever
that even this stone, although inferior to that first used,
would have been perfectly successful had care been taken
to select the blocks from proper beds. There is no quarry
in the world which in every part can boast of a perfect
uniformity of hard and durable material fit for external
work. In a gigantic building like that under consideration,
it was of the first and most essential importance to have
appointed a Government Inspector, whose position and
salary should have placed him beyond reach of temptation;
for be it remembered that the amount of time—varying
from a week to a fortnight—required for working stones
from the isame quarry, is regulated by the hardness or
softness of the material, and in a large work the profits
increase or decrease in proportion. Soft stone nets
pounds ; hard, perhaps, not even shillings. Had one of
the Yorkshire sandstones been selected this danger would
have been far less imminent, and the present symptoms of
decay considerably reduced, even had the decay appeared
at all. It is most erroneous, however, to infer that this is
the beginning of the end, and that the decay is likely to
increase. What stone has already gone is all that will
perish, and the remedy is within our reach at a com-
paratively small cost. There is no necessity for resorting
to Portland for material. The quarries originally selected
will yield abundance of stone, on which time will have a
beneficial rather than an injurious effect; and the remedy
I would suggest is at once to replace the decayed blocks by
sound stone from the same quarries.
2. Had a plan like my father’s been originally adopted,
the Houses would have been so naturally and conveniently
disposed as to admit either of enlargement or alteration
with comparative ease. But the very convenience of
juxtaposition, the long line in which the various buildings
stand, and the immediate proximity of the entourage create
serious difficulties. It is, however, unfair—nay, it is
unjust—to make the angry feelings of members (who, not
being 16th century cherubs, require seats) a ground of
complaint against the architect, who had no control over
the question of dimensions. A new House for the
Commons is, I assume, beyond all probability ; but I see
no difficulty in increasing the present House by a third of
its length. This could be accomplished without in-
convenience by somewhat curtailing the Speaker’s Boom
at one end and projecting it into the Commons’ Court at
the other, at the same time clearing away all that is now
contained between the wall of the House and the private
lobby beyond. The present rooms, staircases, and any


further accommodation could easily be constructed in the
Speaker’s Court. The House of Commons’ lobbies could
without any difficulty he made half as large again by
projecting them on arches into the Star Chamber and
Commons’ Courts. In order to relieve the pressure in the
corridors, I would suggest that galleries he projected all
round one or more of the courts ; these, especially in the
Eoyal Court, could be so planned as not to interfere with
any existing arrangements, and would more than double
the present accommodation. I would also mention that,
being almost always excluded from the sun, they could be
successfully treated in iron and glass. The centre of the
couH would be left open as at present.
3. With regard to the difficulty in being heard, I
would remark that a room is governed very much by the
same laws as a musical instrument. If you remove the
back from a violin, the sound obtained from it would
degenerate into a mild squeak. The House of Commons
has no floor, which remarkable peculiarity at once solves
the acoustic problem. The perforated gangways, covered
with drugget or kamptulicon, simply destroy vibration and
reduce the sound of the human voice to what it would be
if proceeding from a head speaking into a sack. The
loudest and most forcible words fall into the depth below
and are absorbed. On a newly-laid floor of yet unshrunken
timbers, the panel of the floor would increase the sound
tenfold. If, then, a parquet floor of good solid oak,
slightly arched so as to be always taut, were laid down in
place of the present perforations, the House would, lam
certain, from being one of the worst, become one of the
best chambers of debate in Europe. The very projections,
which are now imagined to cause the defect, would increase
the sound and make an exertion of lungs less necessary.
From the practical I pass on to the architectural
defects of the Houses, about which I will say a few brief
words.
I. I have before alluded to the present wretched
termination of the Victoria Tower. The design prepared
by my father, but a few weeks before his illness, contem-
plated a grand erection in stone, growing from and mount-
ing some 40ft. above the present angle pinnacles, and
terminating, as the Victoria Tower should do, in a Eoyal
crown ; thus supplying what all now feel is wanting—viz.,
elegance of proportion and pleasurable outline. From the
centre of the crown was to rise the flagstaff, supported by
the arcs of the crown itself. Here was reason, purpose,
and beauty combined, "What have we now in its place ?’


A poverty-stricken structure which forcibly reminds one of
the poop end of an old three-decker, on which an impro-
vised flag-pole has been set up and strutted. Its gilded
coat fails to hide its paltry and make-shift appearance. It
is in fact the greatest, as well as the highest architectural
anomaly of the day.
11. I need scarcely say how impossible it is to believe
that the same hand which designed the gas standards in
Westminster-hall had anything to do with those on the
bridge. The former were of the true design and con-
struction for metal work; the latter, mere deformities,
made more hideous by size, and, together with the
balustrades, are essentially designs for stone, worked in
iron.
111. It is less invidious to criticise the work of the
departed than of the living; but in a letter professing to
point out and remedy, as far as may be, the defects of the
Houses, it becomes impossible to omit all reference to the
works now in progress, which, I regret to say, are a
reproduction of old blunders and an embodiment of new
ones.
Of all their faults, not one grieved my father so much
as the sinking of the Houses to their present level. To
have been really imposing, the building should have been
raised on a bold massive basement, so that its elevations
might have stood up high above the bridge, instead of
being dwarfed beside it.
We must, as you intimate, make the best of a bad job.
This, however, is not likely to be accomplished by the
works now in progress. If we cannot imitate the Chicago
operation of raising the building 10ft., at all events there
can be no possible reason for practically reducing its
height by the same number of feet. I allude to the
cloister and iron fence now being set up in Palace Yard.
The railing, although beautiful in itself, effectually destroys
all proportion, and cannot possibly proceed from the same
hand which designed the stone piers supporting it. If
there could be an inappropriate treatment of this particular
spot it is that now being carried into execution. (Nothing
indeed can be more ugly than these piers. They have not
even the vigour of a common mile-stone.) Sections of
ironwork between lofty masses of masonry are precisely
what ought to have been avoided. A strong and com-
paratively simple railing, no higher than the absolute
exigencies of the position required, should have been
adopted, which would have neither screened nor dwarfed
the already too low buildings within the enclosure.


Precisely the same fault, although vastly exaggerated,
appears in the cloister leading from the underground rail-
way to the main building. In the first place, it literally
destroys the lower portion of the librarian’s and clerk’s
residences no less than the whole of the northern facade.
If this cloister was absolutely necessary above ground,
why on earth was it not made, in the language of Sir
Charles Barry himself, of a “ simple and massive charac-
ter,” so as to form a judicious contrast, and act as a kind
of base to the building above it ? But the present
structure is neither an appropriate adjunct to the main
building nor consistent in itself. A plinth about Bft. high,
which would be a due proportion of base for a building
some 60ft. high, can scarcely be the right application for
a cloister only 15ft, in height. Yet almost the whole of
this new addition is absolutely nothing but plinth, and
that plinth breaking round large buttresses capped with
gablets, destroying all repose and simplicity of outline.
The true spirit of what a work such as this should have
been is indeed so little manifested that even the details are
multiplied and crowded in without reason or meaning.
Crowns crowning nothing, angels which take neither an
architectural nor artistic line, niches, finials, even useless
gargoyles, are all confusedly grouped together. All this
might have been avoided, and the original building im-
mensely improved, had the cloister been continued at its
low level to the main building, its windows opening into a
sunk foss crossed by a bridge for carriages passing into
the courts. To surround a building, the greatest defect of
which is that it is 12ft. too low, with a barrier 12ft. high,
is manifestly absurd.
Since reading your article I have visited Lord Carnar-
von’s seat at High Clere ; and I can only say, that if the
nation has been saved by my father from possessing any-
thing bearing the slightest resemblance to that edifice, it
has indeed cause to be grateful. Occupying one of the
most lovely and elevated positions in England, the ugli-
ness of its style can only be equalled by the utter absence
of any principle whatever. Had it been built of timber,
held together by metal clips and bolts, and then petrified,
it would have been a natural curiosity. As it stands it is
simply an architectural monstrosity. However, even were
High Clere the fac-simile of Westminster, it can scarcely
be its type, as it was erected in 1842, seven years after the
designs for the Houses of Parliament had been accepted.
It would be an utter waste of time to reply again to
Mr, Edward M. Barry, for he has adduced nothing new
since he replied in the Pall Mall Gazette. One word, how


ever, is clue to Mr. Charles Barry in reply to his recent
letter. He complains of my carrying on the question of
my father’s claims in several journals at the same time. I
admit the crime, but it will he found that the various
roads all converge to a common centre. Ido not, how-
ever, admit the “ folly ” of referring to any of the gentle-
men he names as “ able to corroborate my statements.”
To Mr. Wright I alluded as a person who refused to give
my solicitor any evidence at all, either for or against me.
This fact throws suspicion on what he did say. Of Mr.
Talbot Bury I remarked that he “ can,” not that he will,
support me ; to Mr. Ferrey I made no reference whatever.
Mr. Richardson’s letter in your impression of to-day,
deserves just this notice—that he knows nothing about
the matter, and fires beside the mark. He, however, fully
confirms what Mr. Mares stated in his communication of
the 16th inst.
If Messrs. Charles and E. M. Barry, instead of throw-
ing discredit on my statements respecting my father’s
diaries, and the existence of the witnesses I have still too
surely in reserve, to be called at my discretion, would have
the manliness to come forward and specify what they con-
sider to have been the actual services of my father, instead
of generalizing and reducing him below the level of the
witnesses who have depreciated him, it would conduce
materially to a settlement of the question. If his services
were of the insignificant character they insinuate, they
were literally beneath their own. But it was not one of
these men who was ever named as associated with Sir
Charles Barry in the great work. It was not the name of
Mr. Wolfe, who boasts of being “ consulted on every stage
of the work it was not Mr. Banks, “for 15 years the
chief assistant of Sir Charles Barry;” it was not Mr.
Wright, “the superior clerk,” who seems to be alluded to
by Sir Charles in a letter of his (vide Ferrey's Life) as “ a
youngster as dull and destitute of feeling as the board
upon which he draws it was not Mr. Talbot Bury, who
volunteers information about transactions of which he
evidently knows nothing, and letters of the existence of
which he was ignorant—it was none of these names, but
it was the name of the “ occasional assistant,” with a
salary a little more than Mr. Wright’s, which was all along
associated with that of Sir Charles Barry in the great
work. This was the tradition established, and it passed
from mouth to mouth, from senator down to artisan, till it
grew to such magnitude as to endanger the reputation of
Sir Charles, which appears to have been saved only by the
noble devotion of my father himself. And who will main


tain that this tradition had grown up without foundation,
knowing the antecedents and the after career of the man
to whom it was attached ? None of those who parade
their intimate relations with Sir Charles were ever sus-
pected of the crime. But of my father, whose touch even
at that early period of life was detected in the competition
drawings—whose “powers of creation” and “inventive
genius” were the theme of Sir Charles Barry’s praise—it is
credible enough. Depend upon it, the tradition, true
itself, rested on a foundation of truth, and every effort to
kick the dead lion only reveals the character of those who
commit the outrage. Bather, in your own words with
reference to my father, “ Pugin is dead, —let usrememberto
his honour that if now there seems to be the dawn of a
better architecture—if our edifices seem to be more correct
in taste, more genuine in material, more honest in con-
struction, and more sure to last—it was he who first
showed us that our architecture offended not only against
the law of beauty, but also against the laws of morality.”
Your obedient servant,
E. WELBY PUGIN.
21, Savile Eow, September 17tli, 1867.


APPENDIX.
I have already detailed an account of my interview
with Sir Charles Barry, when I handed to him for perusal
76 letters written by himself to my father, on the under-
standing that he would return them to me, which he failed
to do. These letters are now, I believe, in the possession
of the Messrs. Barry, who justify their detention of them
thus—
“ Mr. E. Pugin does not seem to be aware that the copyright of
private letters rests with their writer, and that to publish them without
the writer’s consent is a gross abuse of confidence.” . . “ Mr. E.
Pugin, however, can perhaps understand that anyone may be reluctant
to see published his private letters to his most trusted coadjutor, even
if he felt full confidence in the discretion, taste, and good feeling of
those who proposed so to make use of them. This reluctance, how-
ever, would not be lessened if the letters were replies to others not
preserved, and treated frequently of current controversies, unfinished
works, and living persons.”
In other words, no matter how strong might he the
proofs of my father’s real position in reference to Sir
Charles Barry, contained in Sir Charles’s own letters, I
was to hold the claim in abeyance and make no use of the
proof without Sir Charles’s consent!
An influential journal goes beyond Mr. E. M. Barry,
and lays down that the “joint ownership of all letters rests
by law with the writer and the receiver,” and that even
had my father “ bequeathed to me his half of the owner-
ship of the letters, Sir Charles Barry would have been
equally entitled to their custody,” as the “letters were
not mine to lend.” This opinion was afterwards adopted
by the Eev. Alfred Barry, D.D.


The following letters bear on this point, and in one
of them (Letter D) the law respecting the ownership of
letters is given in correction of the singular opinions
advanced above; —
LETTER A.
To the Editor of “ The Building News."
Sir _I am reminded that I have not yet answered Mr. Charles
Barry’s ’challenge to refer my father’s claims to have been substantially
the designer of the Houses of Parliament to a Committee of the Royal
Institute of British Architects. I think it will be time enough to
answer any such challenge when Mr. Barry produces seventy-six
letters from his father to mine, which, as I stated in the Times, of the
7th inst., Sir Charles Barry got from me under a promise to return
them immediately, and he never did so. The Messrs. Barry have
quietly passed over this statement uncontradicted and unnoticed.
They know better than I can, whether these letters still exist or have
been destroyed. If they do exist, the Messrs. Barry know that they
are my property, and they are professing to challenge me to a reference
to arbitration while they are illegally withholding both my property
and mv evidence. If, on the other hand, the letteis have been
destroyed, I believe that I need not write another word on the subject,
but leave Sir Charles Barry’s reputation and my former statement to
the judgment of the public.
No proof that I am likely to discover now can be so decisive as
the destruction by Sir Charles or his family of all the letters on the
subject which could be got hold of —first, all my father s letters to him
(as Sir Charles confessed to me), and then, all his own letters to my
father which he could get out of my hands, under a promise—and a
repeated promise—to return them. —I am, &c.,
E. WELBY PUGIN.
Ramsgate, September 19.
LETTER B.
To the Editor of the “ Times."
Sir it is quite time that this controversy was brought to an
issue. This can be done only in one way—by reference to some
impartial and authoritative tribunal.
Correspondence in newspapers, where statements and evidence
cannot be tested and cross-examined at the time of their production,,
can lead to no satisfactory result, especially with an antagonist who,
when the controversy has been worked out in one newspaper, and the
newspaper has summed up against him, immediately opens ground m
another.
If you will grant me a short space I will show why such a reference
is absolutely necessary. Mr. Pugin rests his case as to the competitive
designs simply on a diary of his father’s. The only witness he ventured
to call (in his first letter to the Pall Mall Gazette), Mr Talbot Bury,,
has contradicted him so flatly and conclusively that, till that con-
tradiction be answered, it is absolutely fatal. I demand that this diary
be produced and scrutinized before it be admitted in evidence. 1


pledge myself to prove, before any proper tribunal, that, where dates
are all-important, he has either misdated or misquoted it; that he has
given in different letters dates for entries in it wholly inconsistent with
each other ; and that he has, on its authority, made statements as to
Sir C. Barry’s movements which can he proved, from documents in my
possession, to he absolutely incorrect.
He rests his case, as to the drawings subsequent to the competition,
on certain letters of my father’s to Mr. A. W. Pugin. I demand that
these letters be laid in their entirety, not in garbled quotations, (which
may he skilfully arranged to give colour to anything), before a proper
tribunal. Even as they stand they will not maintain his claim for a
moment; let them he read as a whole, and they will show exactly what
we have all along stated to be the case.
The witnesses brought forward on our side are men of character
and reputation. He has produced only one witness, unknown to fame.
It is necessary that her antecedents be examined, and her credibility
tested by cross-examination.
We are perfectly ready to submit all our evidence to the same
test —to give any date, and produce any document before the proper
tribunal.
Hitherto, I observe that Mr. E. Pugin has declared himself fully
able to prove his case. But his last letter shows that he feels the
insecurity of his ground, and prepares his retreat by reference to the
letters which he states that he lent Sir Charles in 1860, and that which
he chooses to suppose that they contain. On the main point I will
simply quote the editorial notice of the Fall Mall Gazette :—
“ Is Mr. Pugin not aware that the letters were not his own to lend,
and that the Joint ownership of all letters rests, by law, with the writer
and the receiver ? Pugin might, of course, have bequeathed his half of
the ownership of the letters to his son, but, even in this case, Sir C.
Barry would have been equally entitled to their custody.”
As to what passed at the interview, we have at present only Mr.
E. Pugin’s unsupported assertions. He said no word while my father
was alive and able to answer for himself; nor have we any memorandum
on the subject. But it happens that we have written evidence, which
we will produce, that in the month of February, 1860, Sir Charles
Barry had been appealed to for his testimony to bar an extraordinary
pecuniary claim of Mr. E. Pugin’s on one of the firms engaged in
ornamental work at the New Palace. This may possibly throw some
light on Mr. Pugin’s object in making application to Sir Charles at
that very time ; it will certainly show why Sir Charles was unwilling
that letters of the most confidential kind, referring to “current con-
troversies, unfinished works, and living persons,” should remain in Mr.
E. Pugin’s hands.
I therefore challenge him to do what has been already three times
suggested—to bring his charges before an impartial tribunal, such as
the Council of the Institute of British Architects, or (if a single arbiter
be preferred) the President of that distinguished body. If he declines
the challenge he will deserve no further notice ; but must be content to
sit down under the imputation of having brought a charge of a most
injurious nature, which he is unable to substantiate, and unwilling to
submit to the test of examination.
I think, Sir, that you will agree with me that, if the challenge be
not accepted, he must “ for ever hold his peace.”
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
ALFRED BARRY.
September 23rd, 1867.
I


THE PUGIN AND BARRY CONTROVERSY.
This controversy is assuming a definite shape. Mr. Pugin states
that he “ will accept Messrs. Barry's proposal to submit the matter to
any impartial and authoritative tribunal, provided they will at once
place in his hands the seventy-six letters which he delivered to Sir C.
Barry, under a promise that they should be returned at once." This
promise was never fulfilled, and its non-fulfilment has cast an ugly
shadow on the Messrs. Barry’s case. Mr. Alfred Barry, in his last
letter to the Times, and which is reproduced in another column of our
impression to-day, says—“We are perfectly willing to submit all our evi-
dence, to give any date, and to produce any document before a proper
tribunal.” Of course the seventy-six letters are included in this offer.
If not, any impartial and thorough investigation would be simply
impossible. But if they are to be included, why not have said so ? It
is very probable—in fact, almost certain—that these letters contain
much evidence in favour of one side or the other. If they be forth-
coming, we may expect that the dispute will be submitted to the
Council of the Institute of Architects, or some members of that body,
who may be appointed for the purpose. If, however, the letters are
not to be produced, the public will inevitably come to the conclusion
that they could not be without damaging the fame of Sir C. Barry.
The public will remember the manner in which they were obtained,
the general silence in which the Messrs. Barry have passed them over,
and will, in all probability, magnify the importance of any evidence they
may contain. Mr. Pugin says, “ give me the letters which were lent
under a solemn promise to be returned; keep copies of them if you
like." If, however, the Messrs. Barry refuse to surrender the letters,
and shelter themselves behind the extraordinary pretext borrowed from
the Pall Mall Gazette, which states that written letters belong as
much to the writer as the receiver, then judgment will lean to Augustus
Pugin’s side. People want the truth, and the whole truth, in a matter
of this kind. It is purely a question of historic truth, and will be
decided without consideration of personal friendship or partizan feeling.
We hope the next step in the controversy will be the institution of an
impartial tribunal, before which will be submitted all documents
necessary for an elimination of the truth.— Building News, Sept. 27 th^
LETTER C.
PUGIN v. BARRY.
To the Editor of the “ Building News."
Sir, —It appears to me that up to the present time the Messrs.
Barry have carefully evaded Mr. E. W. Pugin’s request that certain
letters, which were lent to Sir Charles in 1860, should be returned to
him, and also that he should be informed as to whether they are
destroyed or not. Mr. Alfred Barry now says that when the matter is
before tbe court of arbitration they will state what documents they
have and produce any paper, or answer any question which the court


may think fit. Mr. E. W. Pugin states that these letters contain the
main part of his evidence, and wants to know whether they are or are
not destroyed. It seems to me that the Messrs. Barry want to have it all
their own way and wish to drag Mr. Pugin into court, while they have
destroyed his main evidence —according to his showing. I cannot see
how this matter can be settled until the Messrs. Barry distinctly state
what has been done with these said letters. It is very certain that the
Messrs. Barry have each and all taken this matter very much to heart;
and whatever they may say to the contrary, some people will not be
satisfied until it is properly settled ; so I should advise them to remove
this only—as far as I can see—obstacle in the way of a final settlement.
—I am, &c.,
ADELPHI.
September 27th, 1807.
LETTER D,
WESTMINSTER PALACE.
To the Editor of the Building Neu's.
Sir, —As a third Barry has entered the lists against me, I trust
you will allow me a few final words to answer his extraordinary state-
ments and challenge.
He asks if I do not know, on the authority of an anonymous
writer in thg Pall Mall Gazette, that his father’s letters to mine
belonged by law as much to Sir C. Barry as to my father or me ; and
implies that he did quite right, Ist, to get them from me under any
pretext, and 2nd, to break his promise to return them.
I answer that I know nothing of the kind. On the contrary, I
am assured by those who have much more legal experience than either
Dr. Alfred Barry or myself that the receiver of letters has the entire
right to keep them, and has never been restrained by injunction from
making any bond fide use of them to defend a claim or to vindicate
his reputation, as is done every day, though he has not such a literary
ownership as will enable him to publish them if the sender or his
executors refuse to allow it, which, in this instance, would only be
equivalent to the Barry’s admitting that they are fatal to their case.
But suppose they were joint property, does the Rev. Alfred
Barry, D.D., mean to teach his pupils and the world the doctrine that
one joint owner may lawfully or honestly, not to say honourably, and
with any chance of ever being believed again, borrow the joint pro-
perty under a solemn and repeated promise to restore it immediately,
and "then either destroy or keep it for his own exclusive use ?
He says I did not venture to make this claim during his father’s
life. It suits him to forget that I showed the direct contrary in my
first letter in the Times of the 7th. I have said elsewhere that I do
not claim for my father the making of the ground plan of the building,
and therefore it is to no purpose to offer to disprove that.
Notwithstanding his ostentations demand that every document
should be referred to a committee of architects, and saying that he
writes because he has his father’s diaries, &c., Dr. Alfred Barry, like
his brother, carefully avoids either confessing or denying whether the
“ &c.” includes the 76 letters in question. And then he accuses me
of wanting to “garble ” the evidence ; a pretty accusation, truly, from


the son of the man who undoubtedly destroyed one-half of the corres-
pondence (which, according to the law of the Barrys was as much my
father’s property as his), and of whom it is not yet denied that he
broke the promise to restore it, and that his sons mean to do likewise,
if they can.
But in the midst of all this uncertainty, one thing is evident, viz.,
that if my father’s letters have been destroyed, the promised life of
Sir Charles Barry can never be produced, should it contain any other
correspondence whatsoever, without admitting that the letters between
my father and Sir Charles Barry, concerning the Houses of Parlia-
ment, had been destroyed for the express purpose of concealing the
actual facts.
Your obedient servant,
E. WELBY PUGIN.
The Grange, Ramsgate, October 2nd, 1867.
LETTER E.
To the Editor of the Building Neics.
Sir,—On September 23rd the Bev. Alfred Barry addressed the
Times , saying that he had been requested to write, because all Sir
Charles’s letters, diaries, &0., had been placed in his hands. I accord-
ingly applied to him through my solicitor for the Seventy-six Letters I
lent Sir Charles in February, 1860, and he referred me back to his
brother, Mr. E. M. Barry, because the papers are in his hands. My
solicitor then applied to Mr. E. M. Barry for the letters, and from him
he can obtain no reply. This evasive shuffling has been carried on for
the space of two months, and now Dr. Alfred Barry, after reducing
the discussion to the level of a personal squabble by accusing me of
giving garbled quotations, misdating, misquoting, and inventing, and
suggesting doubts as to the character of an irreproachable lady, finally
caps his extraordinary personalities by a communication of which this
is the sum and substance :—“ If gou can prove that you gave the
letters to Sir Charles Barry , ice will admit the fact ; if you cannot , we
will deny it." I think that few confessions have ever equalled the
effrontery of this. It has been reserved for a doctor of divinity to
defend a dishonourable act as a preparation for admitting or denying
it to have taken place according to the evidence on which it rests.
Now, why have not these gentlemen the manliness to come
forward and say at once, plainly and distinctly, whether they have
the letters in their possession or not ? Why this fencing and subter-
fuge ? Especially, why insinuate that I depend on these letters for
proof of my claim ? I state openly and fearlessly, in the most solemn
way possible, in the presence of God, that I did deliver those letters
into the hands of Sir Charles Barry, receiving from him an undertaking
to return them ; but if his sons imagine that I depend on them for
anything more than corroborative evidence of a narrative which I am
able to prove without them, they may undeceive themselves at once.
They may cease to draw attention away from the disgrace attaching
to their own reticence, no less than to their father’s violation of his
pledged word, to what they are pleased to call my “ uneasiness.” They
little know me or the unhesitating determination with which I am
pursuing my course. I neither falter nor fear, and to prove it—
although claiming the letters on the grounds of right and justice —l
willingly once again accept their challenge, without trailing for the
production of the letters ; and I give them the benefit of their unspeak-
able meanness and evasion. If they simply wished to discover the


truth, they would long ago have given a plain, straightforward answer,
and met me by a fearless confession or denial, instead of shifting their
ground and shirking the question by special pleading. The fact of
their having the letters can in no icay he changed by my possession
or leant of evidence, although they may possibly intend to use either
fact according to the result of the evidence produced. They might
have spared themselves the suspicion of this dishonour, had they the
manliness to speak the truth.—l am, &c.,
21, Savile-row, October 16th.
E. WELBY PUGIN.
LETTER F.
To the Editor of the “ Building News."
Sir, —With regard to the letters that Mr. Pugin asserts he gave to
Sir C. Barry, the Messrs. Barry decline to give information except
before a proper tribunal; but Mr. Pugin says that Sir C. Barry gave
him “an undertaking” to return them. It is desirable that he should
state whether this was a written undertaking, and, if so, he should
publish a copy of it. If not, he ought to explain how it was that with
the purpose of following up the matter, which he has evidently had
from the first, he parted with them without such a written undertaking,
and why he has suffered the matter to remain until after the decease
of the only man who could fairly be expected to be in a position to
answer his peremptory demands. It is easy to conceive that the sons,
after this lapse of time, should, under the circumstances, hesitate to be
cross-questioned in a newspaper correspondence, and should wish to
reserve the documents and evidence upon which they alone can depend
to establish their father’s reputation till all that exists can be laid
before a body capable of deciding what must now be a difficult question.
Mr. Pugin’s coarse and opprobrious language should in the interim be
dropped; and, Sir, I venture to think it should find no longer a place
in your journal. Why, in conclusion, I would ask, does not Mr. Pugin
state whether he will accept the Messrs. Barry’s challenge to lay the
matter before the Royal Institute of Architects ?—I am, &c.,
London, October 19th.
F.R.I.B.A.
(This last letter cannot be passed over without one
remark. After making insinuations against the character
of one of my witnesses, accusing me of misdating, mis-
quoting, garbling, inventing, &c., and now, after introducing
these personalities into the discussion, they have the
effrontery to charge me with using “coarse and opprobrious
language.”)
PUGIN v. BARRY.
We cannot insert any more letters on this subject. It is not a
question of nisi xwius or special pleading. Mr. E. W. Pugin solemnly
declares that he lent the late Sir Charles Barry seventy-six letters, under
the distinct promise that they should be returned. The Messrs. Barry do
not deny that the letters were lent, hut they virtually admit it, bv
pleading, as an excuse for their non-production, that written letters are
the joint property of the writer and the receiver. They as good as say
to Mr. Pugin, “ Yes, you lent the letters, but they were written by our
father to your father, and you have no more right to them than we
have.” Mr. Pugin says they contain important admissions on the


matter in dispute; that they should have been returned long since ;
and that their non-production is not only a violation of faith, hut a
tacit admission that, if brought into court, they would weaken the
architectural claims of Sir Charles Barry. When the Messrs. Barry
say they know nothing of the letters, then “ P.8.1.8.A.,” or any one
else, may doubt the solemn declaration of Mr. Pugin. We would
strongly advise the Messrs. Barry to say at once whether they have the
letters. And if they have them, either to give them up or copies of them.
No one can arbitrate without the letters, if they be in existence. Let
them be forthcoming, and we see no reason why three or five gentle-
men selected from the Institute of Architects may not without further
delay take the matter in hand, and give a decisive judgment.— Building
News, Oct. 25th.
Shortly after the above editorial note had appeared
in the Building Neus, the Messrs. Barry sent, through their
solicitor, the following letter :
5, Billiter Street, London, E.C., sth Nov., 18G7.
Sir,—l have received your letter of the 31st October, and am
glad to notice an absence of the tone of which I was obliged to com-
plain in my last.
My clients have been always ready to give Mr. Pugin any
information in their power if any proper application had been made
to them for it.
Your letter informs me of the date on which the loan of letters is
said to have taken place, but it does not name the place of the inter-
view, nor does it state whether the letters had been left to your client
by his father.
Waiving, however, all further reference to these points, the executors
of the late Sir Charles Barry desire me to inform you that they have
never seen the letters your client describes, they have never heard of
them, and know nothing about them, although two of their number
are sons of Sir Charles Barry, and they never heard him speak of any
such letters. A renewed search has been made among Sir Charles
Barry’s papers since your first letter to me, but no letters to the late
Mr. Pugin have been found, and the only evidence on the subject before
the executors consists of the statement of your client. If it had been
otherwise, the executors would have readily complied with your client’s
request, as they are convinced that the more the relations between
Sir Charles Barry and Mr. Pugin are examined the more they will
be found to redound to the fame and honour of both these dis-
tinguished men.
As regards my application for an opportunity of inspecting the
letters of the late Sir Charles Barry in your client’s possession, the
executors feel that it should be no matter of controversy, but that it
ought at once to be granted.—Mr. E. Pugin has quoted publicly from
these letters which my clients have never seen, with the avowed object
of injuring Sir Charles Barry’s reputation, but he has not published a
single entire letter. It is, therefore, only fair and reasonable that my
clients should have an opportunity of inspecting these letters, and
comparing Mr. Pugin’s quotations with their context, and with each
other.
I must therefore press for an immediate and definite answer to
my application on this subject.—l am, Sir, your obedient servant,
G. J. Durr ant, Esq.
JAMES COOPER.


Now, whilst making every allowance for their natural
desire to throw discredit on my statements, it certainly
seems amazing that men. with any regard for their own
reputation, should have allowed themselves to he driven
about from post to pillar, as they have been during the past
few months, rather than meet the question at once in a
straightforward manner. Up to the present time they have
neither admitted nor denied the existence or the possession
of the Seventy-six Letters; but they have resorted to all
kinds of evasions and makeshifts, and endeavoured to
defend the questionable conduct of Sir Charles Harry, (on a.
plea which, even had it boon perfectly indisputable, could
under no circumstances justify the violation of a. solemn
promise,) quoting and re-quoting fictitious legal decisions
on which they relied as the solo ground of their defence.
In doing this, however, they unfortunately made admis-
sions which were tantamount to an acknowledgment that
they had the letters ; and this position then becoming
untenable, they found it as difficult to withdraw as to
advance. At last they seize the straw held out to them
by the BuiUliny Xews : and in the hope of saving them-
selves by accepting preferred assistance, they now deny
that the letters exist or are in their possession.
If people are slow to receive this long postponed
denial, and have a diiliculty in throwing off the suspicions
which have been forced upon them, the Messrs. Harry
have only themselves to blame. Prom the very commence-
ment of this controversy they have certainly done their
utmost, both by their letters and their witnesses, to weaken
their position; hut they have hitherto put forward nothing
so prejudicial to their cause, or so injurious to themselves,
as this extorted denial of a half admitted fact.
It is not, of course, beyond the bounds of possibility
that Sir Charles Barry himself destroyed the letters which
I lent him, as he assured me he had previously done all
those -written to him by my father; hut this is hard to
believe. If the letters would disprove irhat /am determined
to estnldish, why should he nut lee away with them 1 If they
would hnce proved It, his rnolire for drloinlny thou in too
(flaring to admit of douht; and their destruction in oh fatal
to the caone which his sons seek to defend, as it was dishonour-
aide to himself. And yet Mr. Cooper’s clients “ are con-
vinced that the more the relations between Sir Charles
Barry and Mr. Pugin are examined, the more they will be
found to redound to the fame and honour of hath these
distinguished men.”


Had ; Sir C. Barry not been forgetful of every feeling
of gratitude, lie would gladly have shared the credit of
the great work with the man by whose genius and devotion
he had gained wealth, renown, distinction, and knighthood
But one word more. In the face of all the fencing
and evasion of the last few months the Messrs. Barry have
the assurance to declare that “ they have always been ready
to yive vie any information in their power if any proper
application had been made for it.”
In reply to this, I now beg to assure the Messrs. Barry
that their offer comes too late. I -want no information
of any sort from them ; and I ask them for nothing. I
seek no favour from them, and I will receive none. What
I claim, I demand as a right. If the course which the
Messrs. Barry have hitherto adopted with respect to the
Seventy-six Letters is a specimen of their readiness “to give
me any information, See.,” I cannot help observing that their
ideas are less practical than peculiar. I must altogether
decline such singular manifestations of courtesy, particu-
larly when accompanied by the vulgar personalities of the
Eev. Alfred Barry, D.D.
E. Blioh, Printer, Hardres Street, Ramsgate.




In one of my first letters I nyreed to refer the matter
of my claims to the 'judgment of the tribunal named bn Mr.
Wolfe.
This acceptance of Mr. Wolfes offer was, however,
unnoticed, and some days afterwards the Messrs. Barry charged
me, in the columns of the “ Times,” with not venturing to meet
them before a fair and impartial tribunal.
I then, for the second time, expressed myself ready to
accept their challenge ; but insisted on-the production of the
letters I lent to Sir Charles Barry.
No notice was taken of this, and on October 1 6th, I, for
the third time, offered to submit my case to the investigation and
decision of any competent jury, even without the letters in
question.
Up to the present dine this offer has likewise been dis-
regarded.
I now therefore absolutely withdraw my offer and refuse to
submit my case to any jury except that of the general public.
November 11th, 1867.
E. W. P.
