

WHOSE IS THE HAND?
——%
AN APPEAL TO DELEGATES
and
To All Labor Men and Women!
Fellow Delegates!
There come critical moments ip the lives of both
men and Partys; moments when they have to make
a choice that determines their whole future wel-
fare. Such a choice confronts you now. May you
decide aright!
You all know the events of the past few days.
Let us recapitulate.
On Saturday, by a big majority, you car-
ried the following resolution:
1 That the policy of socialisation of credit, as
enunciated by Mr. Lang at Goulburn, be adopted
as a constituent part of Labor’s next election
policy, in conformity with the A.C.T.U. deci-
sions and 1932 Conference decision that all fu-
ture elections be fought on the basis of Sociali-
sation, which is to be definitely interpreted as
including the social ownership and democratic
control as soon as possible of all monopolies, key
industries and public utilities as well as of bank-
ing and credit”
which defeated a motion that confined its attention
to credit and unification.
On Sunday following an address from the Leader
of the Party, subsequent to which he said that—
The Socialisation Committee was doing good
work, work that he believed in"
a resolution was moved by W. Carlton, which
was double-barrelled. It sought, under cover of a
pledge of loyalty to the leader in the latter part,
to traverse and water down your majority decision
of the day before.
An objection to this evidently wrong procedure
was immediately lodged by McNamara, Kilburn
and others who believed that the time had come to
assert the undoubted rights of Conference to have
its decisions respected until altered by a majority
vote in a constitutional way.
Their objection took the form, first of dissent
from the Chairman’s ruling, and then of the fol-
lowing amendment to Carlton’s motion (an amend-
ment suggested in the interests of unity by J. S.
Garden) :
That this conference has every confidence in
the leadership of Messrs. Lang and Beasley to
carry into effect the decisions of Easter Confer-
ence.”
This amendment, fully discussed in open Con-
ference without any pre-arrangement of any kind
(for who on earth dreamed that Carlton would
move such a double-barrelled motion contrary to
all previous Conference precedent?) was carried
by a substantial majority, 66-44.
WHAT WAS WRONG WITH IT?
What in the name of all that is intelligent is
wrong with that amendment? It contains:
(1 ) A pledge of loyalty to two men who have
been duly elected as Leaders of the Party;
(2) A declaration fof loyalty to the Party’s.
Constitution (which is supposed to govern
us all), and to decisions constitutionally
arrived at.
However, the mere fact that delegates had had
the courage and self-respect to maintain their con-
stitutionally-given rights under the rules was the
signal, apparently, for the most venomous and
brutal attack that has ever been launched against
loyal members of this Party.
THE ABUSE BEGINS.
The next morning (Monday), the official organ
of our Party, into which hard-working miners, union-
ists and Party members generally, had put their
money, sank to the lowest levels of the worst of
the enemy Press. Screaming headlines mendaciously
proclaimed “Cunning attempt to smash Lang”
(read again the amendment above!) “Clique, or-
ganised in name of Socialisation, launches attack”
(where is the attack in that amendment?) Among
other choice and misleading phrases, thrown like
mud at the heads of good Labor men, were the fol-
lowing: “The dastardly action”; “delegates trap-
ped ; “clique” (this is a variant of the favourite
Capitalist press term junta ) ; cowardly disguised
attack ; people who have ridden to places of im-
portance and trust on the back of Labor’s object-
ive (e.g., Kilburn, McNamara!) ; recent recruits
to Labour (applied to men who have been all
their political lives in the Labour Movement) ;
disapp j nted place-hunters (one knows scarcely
whether to laugh or weep at this).
This w-s the mud thrown with a reckless disre-
gard for truth, accuracy, or the unity of the Party.
DELEGATES TAKE ACTION.
Shocked and disgusted,, but anxious to avoid
injuring the very necessary organ of the Party, dele-
gates on Monday night carried the following tem-
perately and carefully-worded resolution:
That the statements made by the anonymous
writer in The Labor Daily of Monday, February
12, in which unjust and unfair attacks are made
against some of the oldest and best known workers
in the Party are unwarranted, mischievous, and cal-
culated to destroy the unity of the party, which
requires the fullest constructive thought and efforts
of all members.
Particularly do we object to the following state-
ment in reference to the delegates who voted for
the resolution referred to that ‘these men, who were
recent recruits to Labor, declaring by resolution that
Mr. Lang is no longer fitted to lead.’
“The resolution referred to reads as follows:
“ ‘That this conference has every confidence
in the leadership of Mr. Lang and Mr. Beasley
to carry into effect the decisions of the Easter
Conference.’
In the interests of the Party unity we request
that The Labor Daily publish, with as much pro-
minence as the statements made this morning, a
withdrawal of the charges made against Mr. W.
McNamara, J. Kidd, and inferentially Mr. J. Kil-
burn and others.”
You will note that the utmost attempt was made
to avoid censuring the “L.D.,” whilst at the same
time drawing attention to the abuse of privileges by
an anonymous writer.
Inasmuch as the “L.D.” articles, by implication,
attacked at least 66 of the delegates present (the
66 who had voted for the amendment previously
referred to), is it any wonder that delegates took
some action—as gentle as possible— to clear them-
selves of the slanderous and wrongful statements.
WHY NOT WITHDRAW?
Did the withdrawal referred to in the motion
above appear in the L.D- the next day?
All decent men and women expected that it
would, believing that the awful blunder of Mon-
day s attack would be seen and corrected in a
manly way by those responsible.
But those decent men and women reckoned
without a knowledge of the character of someone
connected with the L.D.,” and who, from the dark
and foul recesses of his unseen lair, was prepared
to manufacture and pour forth upon his supposed
helpless victims some of the most vile and slimy
filth that ever emanated from the mind of man.
Supposed helpless victims—aye, because at the
service of the unseen assassin was the instrument
that had been so painfully built ro by lie pence of
hard working men and women—and, * devilish
thought; this person could prevent his victims
from using it, and knew, also, that they would be
unable to find an equal means of reply, knowing
as he did in his heart of hearts, although he chose
to write otherwise, that his victims would scorn to
go to the Capitalist Press.
MORE VILE SLANDERS.
So, what did we find next. On Tuesday morn-
ing a more vindictive and filthy attack than ever
was allowed to pollute the pages of what is sup-
posed to be Labor s organ of expression against
the common Capitalist enemies, and surely not
“f al A S ” ltS own honored party members. Tuesday’s
L.D. contained, among other corruptions, a
photo, of a collection of villainous articles seeking
to create a split over socialisation that had appeared
in the Capitalist Press from time to time. This
photo, with a caption, “The Weight of Evidence,”
and leading (or rather misleading article) similarly
headed, were used to falsely and maliciously en-
deavour to link up the secretary of the Socialisation
Committee, W. McNamara, with these undoubtedly
vile attempts that had been made by the Press to
divide Labor, and against which McNamara had
with keen foresight warned Labor (both in the
Socialisation Call” and in letters to the “Labor
Daily,” some of which the “Labor Daily” editor
had either abbreviated or suppressed).
CAPITALIST PRESS TRICKS USED.
Not content with this vile and unfounded insinua-
tion, the editorial writer unpacks all the old tricks
of the Capitalist Press. “Can it be that everyone
is out of step except Mr. McNamara and his band
of intellectuals? he asks, overlooking the fact that
a majority of 66 out of 110 delegates voted for
the amendment originally objected to. This un-
known writer contends, “For what do these people
stand? Are they Communists without the courage
of Communism? He should know if he ever read
one issue of The Socialisation Call” that
McNamara (expressing the unanimous opinion of
the Central Socialisation Committee and himself)
has shown the reasons why the violent revolutionary
policy and tactics of the Communist Party must be
rejected. He should know that it was McNamara
who put up the burden of the fight in the ranks of
the active socialisation workers against the “Payne
(semi-Communist) Report.” But what are facts to
a vicious-minded man who skulks in the back-
ground and is determined to malign the character
of one who has committed the unpardonable crime
of having the courage to assert the rights of
majority rule within our party?
NEED WE REMIND YOU?
It is needless to repeat to you delegates the many
other vicious and unjust statements that appeared
in that issue; it is needless to remind you that in
the report of the previous night’s Conference pro-
ceedings this fair and honest journalist back-stabber
gives 221 lines of space to those who spoke against
McNamara and Kilburn, and 88 lines to the others,
although these latter speakers had actually most
of the speaking time; needless, too, to tell you that
this courageous journalist-assassin suppressed both
the names and utterances of the three miners’ dele-
gates who spoke in favour of McNamara and Kil-
burn. Suffice it to say, delegates, that your resolu-
tion, calling for a withdrawal, was spat upon and
treated as though it was the babbling of irrespon-
sibles instead of the considered verdict of a
majority of Labor’s credentialled delegates to Con-
ference.
“CLIQUE IS GIVEN STINGING REBUKE.”
The next development is on Tuesday night, when
the suspension of standing orders to discuss the
failure to withdraw was squeezed out merely be-
cause a prior suspension was sought for and obtained
to discuss a matter of urgency to Transport
Workers. This was malevolently construed by the
unknown mud-slinger to be a symptom of opposi-
tion to an attempt being made to secure
consideration of the non-appearance of the with-
drawal, as demanded by Conference. Nothing of
the kind. It was merely the understandable desire
of unionists in the transport industry, smarting
under obvious Capitalist oppression, to remind the
next Labor Government to do something. And
who would blame them for desiring thus to ven-
tilate their grievances? Least of all would Kilburn
and McNamara blame them. All they would say
would be, “Fellow-delegates, your matter is cer-
tainly urgent. We approve of it; we will help you
to our utmost to bring it forward to-morrow night.
But don’t you see that these scurrilous attempts to
crucify honest Labor men is so immediately vital
to the cleanness and welfare of our party that it
should receive immediate consideration?” Yes, that
is the attitude of Kilburn and McNamara which
this vicious, unknown writer seeks to twist into an
attempt to show that McNamara and Kilburn felt
“no concern” for “the plight” of the . “tramway
men.
COULD IT BE WORSE?
Could misrepresentation go further, comrades?
Can this catalogue of almost unbelievable crimes,
perpetrated by one who has been given Labor’s
mouthpiece to blow upon, be allowed to go unchal-
lenged? Bear in mind, comrades, that his attack
is not merely against individuals. As individuals
we are nothing, and would count his scurrilities as
less than nothing. But—and this is the crux of the
whole matter it is an attack against the true
socialisation impulse and spirit that fortunately has
been growing in our party since the Socialisation
Committee took on the job you gave it in 1930.
It is an attempt to kill that comradeship and fel-
lowship, that loyal co-operation in the best sense
of the term, of leader with colleagues, and col-
leagues with one another, that socialisation stands
for. It is an attempt to destroy at one and the same
time loyal Labor men and women, and also the
completely-understood and completely-experienced
Objective of our Party.
THE VITAL CHOICE BEFORE YOU.
Comrades, as we said at the beginning, you have
reached a critical moment in your own lives and
that of your Party, when you must make a choice
that will either send you back along the road of
Reaction and Ruin, or forward with clean and cour-
ageous hearts along the road that leads to your
declared Objective—the Socialisation of Produc-
tion, Distribution, as well as Credit.
WILL YOU CHOOSE ARIGHT?
Will you be men enough to make the choice
aright? Will you ask the “Labor Daily” Directors
to hold a full enquiry into this whole pitiable and
terrible abuse of the party’s official organ, which
must be maintained, but in clean hands, at all
costs?
We leave the choice to you; do not falter! Do
not wilt under the further venom that will
assuredly be directed at us by this same unseen
hand before decency stops it, but go back to your
Branches and Unions, tell them the full facts, and
assuredly Labor will emerge purified and strong.
Issued in the interests of those who have been
unjustly attacked, and in the interests of Labor’s
full Objective Socialisation
By W. McNAMARA.
Wednesday, 15/2/33.
Chapman & Willoughby Ltd.. Print.. 583 A George Street, Sydney.
