

Women's Federal political Association
OF VICTORIA.
Why Women should use the Vote.
Prize Leaflet (revised and brought up to date), by A. Lister, B.A.
WSHE fact that existing laws are unjust to women proves that women should use
the vote to protect themselves and their children. The following facts show
how women’s interests have suffered through their having been denied the
suffrage. Men can no more protect the interests of Women than Capital can
protect the interests of Labour, or the Manufacturer the interests of the Consumer,
or the Miner the interests of the Farmer. Men have not got a first-hand knowledge
of women’s needs, and so laws that do not adequately protect women’s interests
have been passed. Join the Women’s Federal Political Association, and help to
alter them.
DIVORCE.
A man can divorce his wife for one act of
infidelity.
A woman cannot divorce her husband for
one act so long as it takes place outside the
home.
CRUELTY.
Cruelty on the husband’s part must consist
of some ill-treatment which endangers the
life, person, or the health.
Habitual drunkenness, frequent abuse, and
occasional acts of violence, not of a grave
nature, do not constitute cruelty.
If the wife be the assailant, and uses such
violence as is likely to cause the husband to
retaliate, and to use violence in self-defence,
that is sufficient cruelty. (One act of cruelty
is sufficient).
CUSTODY OF LEGITIMATE CHILDREN.
The father is the sole legal guardian, and
can will away the children from their mother.
The mother has no legal right to her child-
ren, and may have their control taken from
her.
SOLICITATION.
No penalty applies to men committing this
offence
Women can be arrested and punished for
it.
JURIES.
Every man not being a felon nor uncertifi-
cated insolvent may be a juror.
Women cannot be jurors, and are thus de-
nied the right of being tried by their peers.
HEALTH ACT.
Men of immoral character cannot be
touched by clauses 142-152.
Women of the same class (infinitely less
numerous) can be deprived of liberty.
PROTECTION OF MINORS.
Boys’ and girls’ money is protected from
the dishonest until they are 21,
Girls’ persons are only protected from the
licentious till they are 16.
FRAUD.
To deprive a man of his money by fraud or To seduce a girl by false pretences or
false pretences is a punishable offence, what- fraudulent promise of marriage is not an
ever the age of the man. offence if the girl be 16.
STATE PUBLIC SERVICE.
In 1893 the salaries of the men teachers,
although they received from one-fifth to two-
fifths more than the women, were not reduced
more than 11 per cent.
Men teachers have not to give instruction
in any extraneous subjects with the exception
of drill, which is given during school hours.
The salaries of the women teachers were
reduced up to 36 per cent. Every act since
1883 has been to the disadvantage of the
woman teachers.
Women have to teach sewing in addition to
their ordinary duties. The work of cutting
out and preparing the sewing always keeps
them employed after school hours and
frequently on Sundays and for all this extra
work they receive less pay than the men.


In all the State Government Offices, women, for the same work, are paid
less than men. The traces of our Common Law, which gives a man the right
to chastise his wife, are still seen in the utterly inadequate penalties inflicted on
men for brutal assaults on their wives, as contrasted with the severe penalties for
assaults on men.
A man can will away his property, leaving wife and children destitute.
Wherever women and children are in subjection, supervision by women is
necessary, and women should vote to secure the appointment of women as inspectors
of asylums, boarded out children, hospitals, schools, and gaols. Police matrons
are urgently required in our watchouses, where young girls and women (often in
sickness and dire necessity), are locked up for the night in the sole charge of men.
You may not be affected individually by any of the above injustices, but that does
not free you from responsibility towards others who are less fortunate than yourself.
It may matter very little to you personally whether you use your vote or not, but it
is of vital importance to your fellow-women that you should vote on their behalf,
if not on your own ; that you should ally yourself with those who are trying to
remove these injustices, therefore join the Women’s Federal Political Association,
and help to alter them.
Entrance Fee, Is.; Annual Subscription, Is. Anyone subscribing 4s. or more
is entitled to membership, a free copy of Woman's Sphere, the official organ of
the Association for twelve months.
VIDA GOLDSTEIN, President.
G. RAPIER, Secretary.
Oxford Chambers,
473 Bourke Street, Melbourne.
Norman Bros., Printers, 52-58 Elizabeth St., Melbourne.
