

ONE PENNY.
No. 9.
Why It Became Necessary
to have an
ENEMY
CONTRACTS
ANNULMENT
BILL
IN AUSTRALIA.
3000/9/15.
Reprinted frcm
Statesman and Mining Standard.
Australia.
1915.


ENEMY CONTRACTS
ENEMY FIRMS.
List of names declared to be enemy firms
np to September 18, 1915, by the Attorney-
General for the Commonwealth: —
Kirchner and Co., Sydney.
Tudor Accumulator Co., Culwalla Chambers.
Castlereagh-st., Sydney.
Poldi Steel Works, Clarence-st., Sydney.
Falk, Stadelmann and Co. Ltd.; Agents,
David Blyth and Co., 366 Bourke-st.,
Melbourne, and 412 Kent-st., Sydney.
A. Berwin and Co. Ltd., York-st., Sydney.
The Export and Import Co. Pty. Ltd., Older-
fleet, Collins-st., Melbourne,
Continental C. and G. Rubber Co., Mel-
bourne.
Australian Metal Co., Melbourne.
Steffens and Noelle Ltd., Sydney.
August Blumenthal Ltd., Sydney.
Stevedoring and Shipping Co., Sydney.
Polack Tyre and Rubber Co., Sydney.
Norddeutscher Lloyd, Sydney.
German-Australian S.S. Company, Sydney.
Bolder Bros, and Co. Ltd., Melbourne.
Th. Goldschmidt Ltd., Sydney.
Welsbach 00. of Australasia Ltd,
The offence of trading with any of these
firms is punishable by fine up to £5OO or im-
prisonment for 12 months in the case of a
summary prosecution, or a fine of any
amount or imprisonment for as much as
seven years if the offence be prosecuted on
indictment.


IS IT BRITISH?
October 8, 1914
There are in circulation at the present
time certain rumours which impel us to ask
those who control the affairs of the Broken
Hill Proprietary Company —
(1) If the Company is under any
existing or suspended agreement, or has
made any promise or entered into any
undertaking to dispose of its lead or leady
products, or if it is free to sell to purely
British firms or their agents?
(2) If the firm with which the Com-
pany has any such agreement, or with
which any such undertaking has been en-
tered into, is a British company or a
German company or a British company
with German connections, and if there is
any objections to the name of that com-
pany being known ?
(3) If any offer has been received from
any British firm or the agent for any Bri-
tish firm, or with the object of selling to a
British buyer or buyers, and if such offer
has been declined?
ANNULMENT BILL


PATRIOTISM AND THE METAL
BUSINESS.
December 17, 1914
The statement made in the House of Re-
presentatives on Thursday by the Attorney-
General is subject for congratulation both
for that gentleman and for the Ministry of
which he forms so prominent a member —
indeed, we may say, both for the Common-
wealth and for the Empire of which it
forms a part. When he said, “A position of
affairs exists quite incompatible with our
attitude towards the vital interests at stake
during the present war, the commercial and
industrial supremacy of the Empire, and the
development of the resources of the Com-
monwealth,” he was saying what was abso-
lutely true. We have pointed out before
now that German capital and German in-
fluence control the world’s base-metal in-
dustry, and that competition with this
governing group is practically impossible;
and it is very satisfactory to us to find Mr.
Hughes taking similar ground. One of the
Melbourne dailies regards the results of
Mr. Hughes’ investigations as “startling in
the extreme”; but it is certainly not start-
ling to anyone in any sort of touch with
the mineral industry. If not startling, it
is, however, certainly exceedingly satisfac-
tory, for it shows that Mr. Hughes has gone
to the trouble to get a real grip of the
situation, and has had the honesty and the
courage to denounce it; and it is, above all,
pleasing to find him recognising that “it is
a humiliating but irrefutable fact that Aus-
ENEMY CONTRACTS


tralian capital, enterprise, and labour have
materially aided the enemy in this dreadful
conflict” by “strengthening Germany’s
position commercially, industrially, /and
nationally, enlarging the scope of her
operations in other directions and maintain-
ing and perfecting that terrific instrument
of destruction by which she now seeks to
batter all who dare to withstand her into
submission.”
The question is, what is to be done? Mr.
Hughes suggests action by the Imperial
Government. In view of the present con-
stitution of the Imperial Government, it
would, however, be better for the Common-
wealth Government to act. In a statement
which he made on Monday, Mr. Hughes
showed that he recognised the possibility
that the suggested contract between the
Broken Hill companies and an American
company may emanate from German
sources, just as the proposal to establish
zinc works in Great Britain earlier in the
war was also a German scheme. Mr.
Hughes also traversed certain remarks made
by Mr. Dickenson, the Secretary of the
Broken Hill Proprietary Company, remark-
ing very significantly that Mr, Dickenson’s
attitude did not altogether satisfy him. One
may ask whether Mr. Dickenson Avas speak-
ing with the full knowledge and consent of
his board. It Avould be more usual for the
views of the board to be put forward
through their chairman of directors, as was
invariably the custom in former days; but
it may be that the fact that the present
chairman of directors, Mr. Muecke, is a
German, and was indeed German Consul in
ANNULMENT BILL


Adelaide at the time of the outbreak of the
war, has made it seem advisable that the
mouthpiece of the company should be Mr.
Dickenson. Would such directors of the
company as William Knox, W. Wilson, and
W. McGregor, all now, alas, dead, have
waited for the Government to intervene,
and then left the defence of the company
to the secretary? No; the great name won
by the company was not won in that way.
And the defence is weak in the extreme.
Mr. Hughes will have the public with him
when he says that the company “is not en-
titled to sell in a regulated market, to ex-
clude all competitors from that market, and
to prevent competition in that market.
Under the terms of the Lead Convention, of
which the Broken Hill Proprietary is a
party, the price of lead is fixed by the con-
vention, and, for all practical purposes,
since the company has an arrangement to
sell through the chief party to the Lead
Convention—Merton and Co. —no lead can
be put upon the market, save at the price
and to the extent that the convention deter-
mines, and in the same way with zinc con-
centrates.”
Is all the action to be taken by the Go-
vernment and none by the companies them-
selves? These companies have been alto-
gether too slack, altogether too careless of
their good reputation. It was their duty,
when the war broke out, to ask the Govern-
ment to cancel their existing contracts with
enemy firms or to arrange for it to be done
by law, and then to offer the products of
their mines to the Government. Had they
done this, not only would their patriotism
ENEMY CONTRACTS


have been beyond dispute, but they would
have put the country under a lasting obli-
gation, which would have been bound to tell
in their favour. Even now they still show
an inclination to shelter behind these con-
tracts when by taking such action as we
have suggested they might secure the losing
of these contracts to Germany for good.
All their contracts should have been placed
in the hands of the Government at the com-
mencement of the war, but even now it is
not too late for such action to be taken.
The Government could then take the mat-
ter up and cancel all these contracts on its
own initiative; otherwise, the position will
be governed by the decision of the English
Courts that the zinc contracts will only re-
main in suspense until after the war. This
will mean producing and storing up all sorts
of raw material for the use of the enemy
immediately on the termination of hostili-
ties —storing up wealth to enable them to
pay the indemnity that it is hoped they
may be compelled to pay for all the wanton
and wicked damage they have wrought.
That may perhaps appeal to the manage-
ment of the Broken Hill Proprietary Co.,
and other companies, but will it appeal to
their shareholders?
ANNULMENT BILL


ENEMY CONTRACTS.
May 13th, 1915
Two very important measures have been
introduced in the Federal Parliament. One
is the Trading with the Enemy Bill; the
other is “A Bill for an Act Relating to Con-
tracts.” The two measures are quite distinct,
but they both touch upon the question of the
Broken Hill contracts, and consequently,
from that point of view, may be treated to-
gether. The “Trading with the Enemy” Bill
is a good measure and a much-needed mea-
sure, but it does not go nearly far enough.
What is wanted is an Act that will provide
against Germans holding shares in any com-
pany registered in this country, and this can
be most effectively accomplished by a Federal
Bill to be passed in conjunction with a Bill
in every one of the States, or it may perhaps
be effected by the forthcoming Common-
wealth Companies Act. Nothing will be sat-
isfactory that does not absolutely shut out
enemy subjects from interest in any Austra-
lian company, and we would go further and
say that nothing will be satisfactory that does
not shut out all Germans, even when they
have ceased to be enemies, until such time as
the Australian Parliaments may see fit to
remove the restriction upon them. The
advisability of action in such a direction
should be obvious; but, if an instance be
wanted of the damage that may be done by
enemy control of Australian companies, let
the metal industry be taken as an example.
An enemy holding a considerable number of
ENEMY CONTRACTS


shares in such a company can without much
difficulty influence the disposal of metal; and
then we have, as we have to-day, good Aus-
tralian metal used for the slaughtering of
British and Australian troops. As regards
the new company formed or being formed
here, it will have absolute control of the
metal output. The greatest care must, there-
fore, be taken to ascertain what are its inten-
tions, and, as Mr. W. S. Robinson will pro-
bably have the position of London director,
it is urgently necessary that he should be
asked what instructions have been given to
him in regard to dealing in London. At the
same time it may be advisable for the Gov-
ernment to ascertain what is the agreement
between the producing companies and the
Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary
Limited. And, above all, it will be well for
the Federal Government and its supporters,
and for members of the Opposition loyal
enough to put country above party, to under-
stand that metal sent to the company’s agents
in London, will, when it gets there, be out of
Australian jurisdiction and consequently not
affected by the Act. What is required is that
such metal shall not be consigned for sale
abroad, but shall be sold here, and that the
selling contract shall be approved by the
Government.
The speeches made by members of the
Opposition in criticism of the Attor-
ney-General’s Contracts Bill show a
most woeful ignorance of the position and a
most deplorable lack of appreciation of the
fact that we are at war with a most deadly
enemy. The fact is, and it would be well for
them to know it, that German concerns have
ANNULMENT BILL


even to-day a very tight grip on the metal
market of the world, that the British Gov-
ernment itself has to depend largely upon
firms that are mainly German in constitu-
tion, and that that Government will take no
action to deprive those firms of their mon-
opoly because many ardent supporters of the
Liberal Party are directly interested and
would be alienated if any such steps were
taken. If, then, the British Government be
not patriotic enough and not sufficiently free
from mercenary and partisan motives, all
the more 'credit is due to the Attorney-Gen-
eral of the Commonwealth for taking the ac-
tion that he has taken, and all the more dis-
credit will assuredly fall upon the Opposi-
tion if they endeavour to thwart his loyal
and righteous action and hide behind the
excuse afforded by the deplorable inaction of
the British Government. The “Enemy Con-
tracts Annulment Bill” will not offend any
patriot, nor will it prove a stumbling-block
to any company that is loyal in its inten-
tions. It will only stand in the way of com-
panies ready to sell their country for their
own pecuniary advantage.
ENEMY CONTRACTS


GERMANY AND THE METAL
BUSINESS.
July 29, 1915.
The Attorney-General of the Common-
wealth is to be congratulated on having taken
off his coat to the work of destroying the Ger-
man dominance over the Australian metal
trade. The statement he made in the House
of Representatives on Wednesday, the 21st
inst., was a bombshell flung into the camp of
certain of the metal-producing companies.
It has aroused a storm of indignant objec-
tion, accompanied by a loud demand on the
part of one section for a Royal Commission
to enquire into the charges made. Mr.
Hughes has refused to grant such a com-
mission ; and he is undoubtedly well within
his rights in doing so. As he says, there
is no more reason to grant a Royal Commis-
sion in this case than there was to grant
one in the case of the Australian Metal
Company; but, at the same time, we cannot
help considering his refusal unwise. It was
unwise because it gives those whom he has
attacked a handle. It enables them to say,
quite unjustly—though that is not a fact
which will hinder them from saying it—
that Mr. Hughes is pursuing nothing more
meritorious than a party policy, and that
he is making charges which he knows to be
false. We should, therefore, like to see a
Royal Commission granted (so long as it
was a Royal Commission that might be
trusted to work rapidly and make its report
within, say, a week), because, in the first
place, it would deprive those against whom
ANNULMENT BILL


the charges are brought of the specious ex-
cuses and denials they can now make, and
because, in the second place, we are con-
vinced that the last thing to be desired by
some at least of those against whom the At-
torney-General's accusations were aimed
would be a Royal Commission. The reason
why the appointment of a Royal Commis-
sion would be a serious blow to some of
these people is that a flood of light would be
cast upon proceedings which have not
hitherto seen the light of day, and have not
been meant to see the light. They may be
perfectly legitimate or they may not, but
assuredly there would be some most interest-
ing facts to be elicited by cross-examination
by a really competent counsel, whose heart
was in the work, who was bent on utterly
destroying German influence in the metal
trade of Australia, and who would, therefore,
be determined either to sheet home to the-
individuals named or alluded to by Mr.
Hughes the crime of playing into Ger-
many’s hands or to clear them entirely from
suspicion.
A commission would have some very in-
teresting questions to ask. It might ask, for
instance, What is the missing link between
Merton’s and Goldsbrough, Mort and Co. ?
That there is a missing link may be taken
for granted. Is it likely that Merton’s would
cable to a firm like Goldsbrough, Mort and
Co., which has never done anything in the
metal business, but has confined itself to
dealings arising out of pastoral pursuits?
The metal business is a most difficult and
complicated one, and its management can
only be entrusted to the expert. Are we to-
ENEMY CONTRACTS


suppose that the Merton firm is so careless
of its interests as to entrust such a business
to a firm that is wholly inexpert and inex-
perienced? The idea seems on the face of it
preposterous. Through what agents, then,
were the Goldsbrough, Mort people supposed
to buy? The answer would seem to he clear
—probably seems to be more clear than it
is. The mines governed by the Baillieu group
either control or expect to control the metal
output of Australia, and any metal buyer
must buy from companies controlled by
this group. If the Baillieu interests were not
concerned, one would like to know from and
through and by whom the buying was to be
done for Goldsbrough, Mort and Co. on be-
half of Merton’s, for assuredly the firm
does not know enough about the business
to conduct the work itself.
A word may be said in regard to the ex-
cuses so frequently put forward for dealing
with the Merton firm. These are two in num-
ber; firstly, that the firm acts as agents for
the British Government, and secondly that,,
even if Germans have an interest in the firm,
the profits on that interest are held in Eng-
land. It is well to state clearly the answers
to both these contentions. If the British Go-
vernment employs Merton’s, it is only be-
cause the metal-producing companies give
Merton’s their products. If the profits on
the German interest in Merton’s are held in
England, of what advantage is that fact?
Such profits are as much private property
as is the house of a German in England.
They may be held until the war is over; but
at its conclusion they will assuredly find
ANNULMENT BILL


their way into German pockets; wherefore
we say that people who deal with a firm that
is German-controlled are playing directly (we
do not say deliberately) into the hands of
Germany.
In conclusion, we should like to point out
two facts which are often overlooked, and
which must not be overlooked. One is that
the state of affairs hitherto has been that
English firms have not been able to buy
the products of the Australian base-metal
mines, the consequence being that the Bri-
tish Government has had to pay more for
what it needed than would otherwise have
been the case. It is, therefore, urgently ne-
cessary that an end should be put to re-
fusals to allow legitimate English buyers
to have metal. Secondly, it is well to point
out that, next to selling Australian metal to
Germany, the best thing that can be done in
the interests of Germany is to sell it to neu-
tral countries. Many of the American com-
panies are really German companies in
disguise; but that is not the point we wish
to make. It is this, that metal sold to
America or any other neutral country is
metal of which Great Britain is being de-
prived in her hour of need; and, therefore,
sales to America or any other neutral are
helpful to Germany, unless there is an abso-
lute guarantee that the metal is intended
by that neutral purchaser to be used in the
interests of the Allies.
ENEMY CONTRACTS


STRANGE DOINGS IN THE
METAL WORLD.
August 26, 1915.
It may be remembered that Herr Baer
recently boasted that there were far more
German than British shareholders in the
Broken Hill mining companies. The fact is
recalled by the circumstance that in the
Broken Hill Proprietary Company’s latest
balance-sheet there is a Dividend Suspense
Account for London of over £2949, and for
Melbourne of over £376. We are probably
justified in supposing that £3OOO out of this
total of nearly £3326 represents dividends
held on behalf of German shareholders. If
that be so, it represents 60,000 shares held
in Germany. The London office has 781,929
shares on its books out of a total of 1,181,006.
It might strengthen the hands of the Ge-
vernment for it to know how many of the
holders of those 781,929 shares reside in
enemy countries, and it would be well for
it also to have similar information in re-
gard to the other Broken Hill companies.
The Broken Hill Proprietary Company
has not, it seems to us, yet freed itself from
the suspicion not only of having dealt with
Germans, but of having dealt with them in
preference to British houses, yet when we
find the Directorate composed of such men
as Hon. D. E. Mcßryde, M.L.C. (Chair-
man), Bowes Kelly (Vice-Chairman), H.
C. E. Meucke, William Jamieson, D. W.
Harvey Patterson, R. O. Blackwood, and
H. G. Darling, it is hard to believe that
there can be any inclination for such a body
of men to act unpatriotically, since there
ANNULMENT BILL


is only one of the seven who is German,
though that one was for many years Im-
perial German Consul in Adelaide. If it
be these gentlemen who are responsible for
the actions which have caused the company
to be regarded with suspicion, it is for the
shareholders to deal with them. If, on the
other hand, it be the secretary to the com-
pany who has acted on his own initiative,
not fully disclosing to the directors the
.company’s dealings, it is for the directors
to deal with him. It is no use talking of
errors of judgment. The secretary is re-
sponsible to the directors, and the direc-
tors are responsible to the shareholders; and,
therefore, if the secretary take upon himself
more than he has been authorised to do, the
directors have a right to call him to ac-
count, and, if the directors take action
which is contrary to the interests of the
Empire, the shareholders will be guilty if
they do not call them to book. In either
case, the ultimate responsibility rests on the
.general body of shareholders.
One of the company’s most important
actions since the outbreak of the w r ar has
been the appointment of the firm of Noyes
Bros, as sole agents for the sale of the out-
put of the company’s steel works. The
appointment of this firm would be of no
greater consequence than the appointment
of any other firm were it not for the fact
that until the outbreak of war it represented
the famous German firm of Krupp’s in
Australia. It is obvious that it cannot act
as selling agent for the company without
knowing every secret of the company’s work
of production, and there is no guarantee that
ENEMY CONTRACTS


as soon as the war is over this firm will
not once again become agent for Krupp’s in
Australia. So soon as peace has been de-
clared, Krupp’s aim will be to re-establish
their connection with Australian industry,
and before doing so they will certainly leave
no stone unturned to learn all that is to be
learnt about the Broken Hill Company’s
works. One would not, therefore, be sur-
prised if either the New South Wales Go-
vernment or the Federal Government were
to step in and object to the company’s pro-
duct being sold through a firm which has
had such connections and may have them
again. At least, one would not be surprised
at the Federal Government taking such ac-
tion; but from the spineless New South
Wales Government no such action is, of
course, to be looked for. But, even if no
Governmental action be taken, one may well
ask whether there are not enough clear-
sighted shareholders of the company to
raise a protest against a possible imperilling
of their interests by such an appointment
as this?
Some singular things are being done in
the metal world, and not one of the least
singular has to do with the relations of this
company with the other two Broken Hill
companies which have joined it to form the
Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprie-
tary Limited. The Articles of Association
of that company make very interesting
reading. There are three shareholders, each
company holding one share. Provision is
made for a Board of Directors of six, two
of them appointed by the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Company, one by the Broken Hill
ANNULMENT BILL


South, and two by the North Broken Hill.
The sixth director was to be named by the
directors representing the North and South
companies, and that meant ''obviously
another representative for the North Broken
Hill. The directors are, accordingly, Hon.
D. E. Mcßryde and Mr. Bowes Kelly re-
presenting the proprietary Company, Mr.
F. E. How r ard, Managing Director of the
Broken Hill South, and Hon. W. L. Bail-
lieu and W, S. Robinson of the North
Broken Hill, while the sixth Director to be
appointed is Mr. Colin Fraser, who is un-
derstood to be in the Robinson employ. As
no share or other qualification is required
of any director, it is quite likely that this
gentleman does not owm a single share in
any of the companies concerned. These six
directors are appointed for seven years at
£SOO per annum, with an additional remu-
neration not to exceed £SOO per annum for
the chairman. Mr. Shackell, who is not
unconnected with the Baillieu interest, has
been appointed secretary at £IOOO per an-
num, and Mr. Delprat, of the Broken Hill
Proprietary, has been appointed manager,
but has since, it is rumoured, resigned his
position. It is perfectly obvious from the
constitution of this company that it will be
governed entirely by the Baillieu-Robinson
interest; and, with the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Company thus overborne, it is not
surprising to learn that there is already
trouble in the camp. That is a matter on
which we need not enter here; but it is
nevertheless a matter of the gratest concern
for the Australian metal business, since the
controllers of the company aim at the en-
tire command of the metal output of the
ENEMY CONTRACTS


THE PRESS AND GERMAN TRADE.
Statesman and Mining Standard, "November 19,
1914.
“Without advertisement, German trade would
not hold together a twelve-month; and we feel
sure that, once this fact is pointed out to the
great press of Australia, it will recognise its duty
and act as it asks the public to act. If it should
not do so, it may rely upon it that, sooner or
later, the public will call it to a reckoning, and
that the Government will take steps to face it in
the direction in which it would be well for it to
go voluntarily.”
THE REAL WAR BEGINS AFTER THE
DECLARATION OF PEACE.
Can you form an Anti-German Trading Union in
your circle of acquaintances? Remember, it’s after
the war our men will want help. If we hesitate
to do what is right now, the blood of our relatives
will be on our own heads. Kill, destroy, shatter
for ever the hold the accursed German race has
on this country. Australians, organise! “The
Statesman and Mining Standard” will publish lists
from time to time of German firms represented by
Australian houses. Beware of German goods com-
ing through the neutral countries.
Commonwealth. Shareholders in the
Broken Hill South and North Broken Hill
eompanies may well have some pertinent
questions to. ask concerning the constitution
of a company from which they, as share-
holders in the parent companies, are not
likely to derive any profits. They will,
however, have the satisfaction of knowing
that they are, in a truly Christian spirit,
providing nice comfortable seven-year bil-
lets for a number of gentlemen who_ are al-
ready in sufficiently comfortable circum-
stances not to he dependent on the charity
of others.
ANNULMENT BILL


ADVERTISEMENT.
AN AFTER THE WAR POLICY.
Published by Critchley Parker.
■Mr. Ambrose Pratt, the well-known publicist, has
written a little volume which cannot fail to have
very great interest to every manufacturer
throughout Australia. After dealing with his sub-
ject in seven chapters, the author sums up the
policy in twelve points, which are as follow:
{1) To protect our workers and manufacturers
effectively against enemy competition with high
customs duties, and to encourage the establish-
ment of new industries by Governmental bonuses.
(2) To grant Preferential Tariff rates to goods
manufactured by Britons in other parts of the
British Empire.
(3) To persuade the Imperial Government and
the Governments of the Dominions mutually to
reciprocate in Tariff concessions in order that the
trade and commerce of the Empire should be
carried on to the fullest possible extent within the
Empire.
(4) To impose customs supercharges on all
articles and goods of German origin, manufacture
or derivation.
(5) Never to buy from any merchant, home or
foreign, any articles ox goods of German origin,
manufacture or derivation.
(6) To boycott local tradesmen who import or
stock German goods.
(7) To create and foster into active growth a
public opinion which will make it impossible for
careless individuals to purchase, use, or possess
German goods.
(8) Never to travel in a German steamer or a
German ship.
(!)) Never to employ German ships or steamers
for the transport or conveyance of our industrial
products.
(10} To regard it as a shameful, unpatriotic and
dishonorable thing to hold any sort of commerce
with Germany.
(11) To restrict and prevent the immigration
of Germans.
(12) To teach our children in all our academies
and schools a proper execration of the German
moral system in order that the next generation
may understand, and if need be, carry on our
policy.
6d., by post 7d.
“Statesman and Mining Standard.”
Wholly Set-up and Printed in Australia by Statesman and
Mining Standard, Pty. Ltd., Melbourne and Sydney.


AUSTRALIAN TRADE AND GERMAN
INFLUENCE.
There has been such a lot of nonsense printed in the London
Press respecting the introduction of the Commonwealth
Enemy Contracts Annulment Bill, that we think it necessary
to state why it was introduced. This we have done under the
title of “Why it Became Necessary to Have an Enemy Con-
tracts Bill in Australia,” 20 pp., Crown Bvo. The Germanised
firms, such, for instance, as Aaron Hirsch and Sohn, Brandeis,
Goldschmidt and Co., Henry R. Merton and Co. Ltd.,
Metalgesellschaft, and Fried Krupp, had undoubtedly,
directly or indirectly, a very strong hold on this country,
but they did not obtain this hold without the help of some
very good Australian friends, and it was on this point that the
“Statesman and Mining Standard” first attacked them in
October, 1914, drawing attention to the actual position of
affairs as existing between Australian and German companies
at the outbreak of the war. Germany’s commerce is gradu-
ally disappearing from Australia, the undermentioned firms
are forbidden to trade here, and other German interests can
be maintained only by the help of traitorous Australians and
British residents in this country. The question is how much
longer will Chambers of Commerce, Chambers of Manufac-
tures, politicians, and, lastly, the newspapers (since they have
done least of all toward checking German trade), tolerate the
Australian German agent in our midst?
List of names declared to be enemy firms up to September
25, 1915, by the Attorney-General for the Commonwealth:—
Kirchner and Co., Sydney; Tudor Accumulator Co., Sydney;
Poldi Steel Works, Olarence-st., Sydney; Falk, Stadelmann
and Co. Ltd., agents David Blyth and Co., 366 Bourke-st,,
Melbourne, and 412 Kent-st., Sydney; A. Berwin and Co,,
Ltd., York-st., Sydney; The Export and Import Co. Pty. Ltd.,
Melbourne; Continental C. and G. Rubber Co., Melbourne;
Australian Metal Co., Melbourne; Steffens and Noelle Ltd.,
Sydney; August Blumenthal Ltd., Sydney; Stevedoring and
Shipping Co., Sydney; Polack Tyre and Rubber Co., Sydney;
Norddeutscher Lloyd, Sydney; German-Australian S.S. Co.,
Sydney; Bolder Bros, and Co, Ltd., Melbourne; Th. Gold-
schmidt Ltd., Sydney; Welsbach Co. of Australasia Ltd.
3000/9/15.
