

WHY IT WOULD BE BENEFICIAL TO ADMIT WOMEN
TO THE FRANCHISE.
Leaflet No. 3.
NOVEMBER, 1884.
J««ued 6y the VICTORIAN WOMEN’S SUFFRAGE SOCIETY .
It is evident that a more unbiassed consideration would be
given by Parliament to arguments for granting women equit-
able rights, in all legislation touching the relative position of
the sexes, if the voice of women could be exercised in the election
of its members.
It is believed that the exercise of the voting power would have
the gradual effect of enlarging the comprehension and under-
standing of women regarding the interacting effect of laws made
by Parliament, thus educating them to consider the common
benefit.
As the progress from the subordinate position of the Australian
“ gin ” to the advanced position of European women has been
accompanied by successive steps in civilization or association, so
the final raising of women to the political level of men would
be accompanied by the fulfilment of duties on her part, in the
management of our concerns, the loss of their participation
in which has retarded the symmetrical and perfect working of the
principle of association or civilization.
As the bias in the minds of men, when judging a womans
case in the courts of law, is the result of the former low consider-
ation for women as human beings, it would follow that her equal


position in power would ensure her equal justice ; and, as injus-
tice reacts in the destruction of a part of the sum of human
happiness, all must suffer indirectly until justice is attained. The
many sorrows of mankind, in the highest stage of civilization,
come from our ignorance of, or blindness to, the action and
reaction of customs and laws which are not perfectly equitable.
The deference paid to women, by a gallant regard to them as
the weaker sex, would be transformed into a higher feeling
of esteem, which would be the ground of a nobler love, as towards
an equal companion in mind, when her sympathies are equally
expanded.
At present women, being in a state of tutelage, are prone to
take one-sided and partial views (as, indeed, do men also), and,
because seeing only the near and immediate pleasure or gain,
are laid open to the temptation of the baser motives of their
nature, which have wrecked the happiness of innumerable
persons.
The mental capacity is expanded and moulded by the con-
ditions of our existence; and if women restrict their interest
to the household only, or to the fashion books and gossipy novels,
they must submit to be left in a state of tutelage, and to be
classed with children and idiots, or, like convicts, be deprived of
political rights—who are justly so deprived because of their
disregard of the common weal.
Nature is continually struggling to produce mind, as seen in
the development of brain, from the lowest form of life in the
series up to humankind ; brain, like other physical qualities,
being subject to the law of sexual development, it would appear
that cultivation and stimulation of thought will produce a vigor-
ous mind in the progeny when both sexes contribute to the
superior qualities of their offspring.


As such a purpose runs through nature, it will be wise to
advance in her obvious trend, in smoothing the way by which
the future mothers of the race may have their minds drawn
into a wider sympathy with the general progress.
Advancing civilization, or a more and more complete organi-
O 7
zation, replaces physical power ; that is, whilst force becomes
less necessary, reason accomplishes con amove , or with love, w>»at
destructive force formerly was employed to correct in human
relations. So that, now the mental powers require full play in
politics, the female half of mind should be brought into part-
nership to ensure the smooth working of the intricate wheels of
our social system.
There is a vast field before us for the operation of reason in
rectifying the state of society, in which so many things are out
of joint or incongruous, and which feminine reason can equally
aid, seeing that women form one-half of the human race.
The attainment of the common happiness is the end we should
all strive for. Selfishness cannot be happiness, seeing that we
cannot exist alone; therefore the restricted sympathies of women
should be widened into an understanding of all political action,
which should have for its aim the satisfaction of all our just
wants.
Finally, it is asserted that selfishness reigns, in consequence of
the inequity which has in the past deprived woman of her equal
rights as a fellow-creature. Victorians, take action 1I !
By a Member of the Victorian Women’s Suffrage Society.


Short of the Statement of the Present Political Position
of Women, 1884.
In the territories of Wyoming and Idaho (U.S.A.), and also in the
Isle of Man (Great Britain), the franchise is there exer-
cised without distinction of sex.
In municipal elections, and in the election of school boards
women may vote in Great Britain ; and in England,
since the time of Queen Elizabeth, women of property
could vote in the election of parish vestries.
In Australia they may vote in municipal elections.
In Holland the franchise is not specially forbidden to the female
sex.
In Italy a bill was introduced by the Depretis Ministry, in 1882,
conferring the right to vote, in provincial and municipal
questions, on all citizens of both sexes who know how to
read and write.
In Austro-Hungary women may vote by proxy.
In Bohemia a countess was elected member of the provincial
assembly ; and at Agram a woman was elected member
of the municipal council.
In Iceland unmarried women and widows have votes for municipal
councillors.
In Sweden women vote on the same terms as men in the choice
of the parish clergy, of municipal councillors, and in the
naming of the county council, which elects the members of
the upper chamber.
In Russia women of property vote by proxy in county affairs.
Quite recently, in the United States of America, a lady has been
nominated for the presidency.
That Victoria may have the honour of giving the full franchise
to the mothers, sisters, and daughters of its male voters is
the object of the Victorian Womens Suffrage Society.
The membership requires a subscription of five shillings or
upwards yearly, paid to any member of the committee or
authorized canvasser, or to the Honorary Secretary,
George Robertson and Company, Limited, Printers, Melbourne.
