

Why You Should
BUY
“Australian Made”
With the Compliments of
“AKUBRA HATS”
129 YORK STREET
SYDNEY


You Mu£l Fight Film
NO WHITER TEETH WITHOUT THAT
If you want whiter teeth, you
must combat the film that
clouds them. Millions do
that now. Wherever you
look you can see the results.
THE CLOUD IS FILM.
The cloud on teeth is film.
At first the film is viscous
You can feel it now. No
ordinary tooth paste effec-
tively combats it, so much
of the Him remains.
Soon it becomes discolored,
then forms dingy coats.
That’s how teeth lose beauty.
Film also causes most tooth
troubles. It holds food sub-
stance which ferments and
forms acid. It holds the
acid in contact with the
teeth to cause decay. Germs
breed by millions in it.
They, with tartar, are the
chief cause of pyorrhea.
You have little chance to
escape such troubles if you
do not Hght the Him.
Dental science has now found
two effective film combatants.
One disintegrates the Him.
one removes it without harm-
ful scouring.
These methods were proved
by many careful tests. A
new type of tooth paste has
been created to apply them
daily. The name is Pepso-
dent. Now careful people of
some 50 nations employ it,
largely by dental advice.
SEE WHAT IT DOES.
Pepsodent also multiplies the
alkalinity of the saliva. That
is there to neutralize mouth
acids. It multiplies the
starch digestant in the sal-
iva, to digest starch deposits
better. These combined re-
sults are bringing millions
the benefits you want.
Note how clean teeth feel
after using Pepsodent. Mark
the absence of the viscous
film. See how teeth whiten
as film coats disappear.
a
Made in Australia
MARK
TRADE
JfTe New-Day Dentifrice
Now advised by leading dentists the world over
and supplied by all chemists in two sizes


Why you Should Buy "Australia-Made"
SYDNEY, APRIL, 1925
Introductory
WHY YOU SHOULD BUY ‘AUSTRALIAN-MADE’
JT seems almost an anomaly that Australians need
to be told why they should buy “Australian-Made.”
At first glance it would appear that so natural an
idea would require no stressing. One would almost
think that the obvious thing for Australians to do would
be to buy the products of their own factories and farms.
The matter, though, is not as simple as it would ap-
pear. In a young country the early activities of its
people are always devoted to the development of its
pastoral and agricultural resources. In these fields
Australia has already gone far. Her wool, her wheat,
her hides, her precious metals—her primary products,
in a word—have already a world-wide reputation.
And this is the ideal we must set ourselves to reach
with regard to our secondary products—the goods turn-
ed out in our factories and farms.
So busy have we been developing our primary in-
dustries that, until a few short years ago, manufacturing
in Australia had attained quite insignificant proportions.
The result was that practically all our requirements in
this direction had to be brought from abroad. That is
to say, we got into the importing habit because we real-
ly needed to do so. This.like every other habit, has
taken a strong hold upon Australians, and, though the
need for importing has long since disappeared, the old
habit still survives.
It begins to be clear now why it has become nec-
essary to tell Australians why they should buy “Aus-
tralian-Made.” It has become imperative, in season and


out of season, to preach the doctrine of preference to
“Australian-Made,” otherwise this great country can
never be developed to its fullest potentialities.
The reason of this is, of course, obvious. No mod-
ern country that devotes all its energies to its pastoral
and agricultural industries can ever be truly great. The
development of the towns must coincide with the de-
velopment of the country. The two are inter-dependent,
and the progress or stagnation of the one means the pro-
gress or stagnation of the other.
What would the towns do without the country?
And where would the country be if there were no towns?
If our cities had to feed themselves, they would perish
and if the country had to supply itself with clothing,
with tools and implements, and buy the manufacturing
goods it requires, it would sink into a condition of hope-
less muddle and inefficiency. The division of every
civilised nation into urban populations and rural popu-
lations is but one of the many aspects of the great prin-
ciple of industrial specialisation, which adds so vastly to
the productivity of human labour and the wealth and
happiness of mankind.
Perhaps, as civilisation advances, the towns will
grow more towards the country, and the country more to-
wards the towns. Our cities will obtain more of the
spaciousness and wholesomeness of the rural districts,
while the rural districts will share more of the comforts
and conveniences of our cities. The one thing sure is,
that they have common interests which can only be pro-
moted by working for one common end—the welfare of
the nation as a whole.
There is, therefore, no conflict between the factory
and the farm. They are complementary. They pre-
suppose each other, and, indeed, exist for each other.
Every improvement in the factory helps the man on the
land, for it provides him with better and cheaper manu-
factured goods. And every improvement in farming
helps the man in the factory, for it provides him with
cheaper food and raw material.


It becomes evident, therefore, that it is only by the
development of ALL her resources that Australia can
ever hope to take her place among the great industrial
nations.
The manufacturing industries of a country are its
greatest bulwarks. Every factory is a fort. Every work-
shop is an arsenal. Every industrial enterprise turning
out ploughs and cultivators and machine tools, and cre-
ating wealth of all kinds, is doing more to defend the
shores of the country than even its greatest ammunition
plants can claim to do. For industry means progress.
Progress means power. Power is security. The best
lines of defence that can be built against the unfriendly
aggressor is a line of factories running north and south
and east and west in this fair land of Australia.
It must be understood, though, that, in order to
carry on manufacturing on a profitable basis, the ex-
pensive plant and machinery with which the modern fac-
tory is equipped must be kept working at full pressure.
There must be no slowing down because of a lack of de-
mand. If “Australian-Made” articles are to hold their
own in point of quality and price there must be a steady
and very increasing demand for them by the support of
the home market, otherwise production can be neither
efficient nor economic.
Let it, then, be the firm resolve of all good Aus-
tralians to manfully do their part in building up their
country’s industries. This can be accomplished by giving
on all occasions a definite preference to “Australian-
Made.” Australians will thus, at one and the same time,
make their country powerful and safe, and help to
strengthen it as a still worthier outpost of the Great
British Empire.


Harnessing the Air
Messrs. Sidney Williams & Co. help to Stabilize the Water Supply
HE most serious problem that has forced itself on the attention of all
If I who make their livings out of the soil of our country, in one way or
another, has been the water supply.
This was the problem before Mr. Sidney Williams when, in 1897, after
years of practical experience in all part of the country, he determined to put
his energy and ability into the task of helping the man on the land to over-
come it. And that determination
was the initial step in the building
up of a business which is now a
household word throughout the
Commonwealth.
Mr. Williams built, soon after he
established the business, his first
windmill—a mill that embodied
some of the features still to be
found in the “Comet** mill, made
to-day by this firm. The two main
features referred to are, the direct
action of the mill and the special
wood bearings. It is a high tribute
to Mr. Williams* skill, experience
and ability that Ke was able so early to determine the type of mill that
would prove to be absolutely suited to Australian conditions and do so
much to stabilise the water supply throughout vast stretches of Australia.
The success of his endeavour may be gauged from the fact that to-day
the firm has works and offices in Rockhampton (Q.) —the site of the orig-
inal works—in Sydney (covering 40,000 to 50,000 sq. ft. in area), stores
and offices in Brisbane (new premises, 10,000 sq. ft. in area), in Towns-
ville (Q.), and is contemplating adding an additional 3000 sq. ft. to the
Sydney works.
WHY YOU SHOULD BUY “AUSTRALIAN-MADE"


The direct acting mill has proved itself a remarkably efficient and lasting
type. The present form of the “Comet” has been the result of extreme
care on the part of the makers to have every detail finished in the most per-
feet manner possible, and made of the
very best materials only. Every
step of the work is standardised,
every part can be replaced at the
very shortest notice, the workman-
ship is equal to the best than can be
obtained in the country.
A distinctive feature of the method
of working of this company lies in
the fact that it has made it a part of
the construction policy to embody
the ideas and requirements of users of
the mills. No man buys any of the
products of the company without a
full inquiry being made into his re-
quirements and the utmost care being
taken to see that he gest the right
thing. This is the secret of the suc-
cess of the products of Sidney Wil-
liams & Co., Ltd.
The “Comet” mill itself pumps
more water and is better in every
way than the geared mill. Wood
bearings in windmills have proved
themselves in actual practice, over
many years, to be superior to other bearings. Some wood-bearings Have
been in use for 30 years without any appreciable deterioration.
In addition to the “Comet” mill, this firm was also the first to make
large corrugated iron tanks, capable of taking up to 60,000 gallons of water,
and the now popular type of trough clip and band, etc.
Sidney Williams & Co. make all their mill parts themselves (thus en-
suring absolute uniformity of design, workmanship and material), including
castings, in their own foundry, from the best B.H.F. pig iron.
The mills are always made in quantities so as to gain all the advantages
of lowest production cost and standardisation in construction.
Besides the manufacture of windmills,pumps, etc., the firm also makes
a highly successful sheep jetter—designed like everything else turned out
from these works expressly for the conditions prevailing in this country.
The firm also does a large business in steel frame buildings for the
country—buildings suitable for woolsheds, shearers’ quarters, etc. These
buildings have such obvious advantages as being fire-proof, white ant proof,
portable and of low erection cost.
Other “Comet” lines are: Well-built power pumping heads, full-way
float valve, and similar fittings, steel tank stands, tanks and troughing,
all types of windmill pumps, including irrigation pumps, pump rods and saw
bench, etc.
As we have pointed out, two principles have been responsible for the
deserved success of Sidney Williams & Co., Ltd. These have been that the
buyer comes first and must be studied, so as to get his requirements exactly
right; and the principle of standardisation which has enabled them to turn
out the finest products at extremely moderate prices.
HARNESSING THE A 1 R


Australian Hats
How Akubra Hats Company showed that “it CAN be done !"
HEN, in 1911, a company was established to manufacture high-class
111 hats in this country, people “in the know” shook their heads and
* gloomily suggested that it could not be done. People did not
want Australian hats; they would not buy them—that was the sort of thing
that met the Akubra Hat Company when it started out to educate Aus-
tralians to wear their own hats only fifteen years ago.
But the company had more faith in the Australian than he had in
himself. They were right.
To-day Akubra is a name known throughout the Commonwealth,
because a few men had enough faith in their own country to risk their money
and skill in doing something which everybody “who knew” said couldn’t
be done.
Of course, the Akubra Company did not build its business on faith
alone. Hard work was needed, and before that, what was even more' im-
portant, hard thought. It was as a result of the most careful thought that
the company decided on a general policy that would enable it to keep its
prices low and at the same time keep the quality of the product at least
as high as that of the imported article. They decided that the only way
they could hope to achieve this double purpose was to introduce the prin-
ciple of standardisation. The first problem was what to standardise. There
are literally hundred of possible hats. After the most careful investigation
they decided to confine their efforts to three types of felt hat, and three only.
It was only as a result of anxious and careful investigation that the types
were finally “fixed.”
The first of these is known as the “High Quality" Akubra Hat—a hat
equal to the best felt hats imported into this country, in appearance, style
and finish, and distinctly superior in lasting qualities. This style of hat is
just half the price of the imported hat of the same grade.
The second line is known as the “Super Quality” Akubra Hat—a hat
which is quite unique in the Australian market. There is no competition
among imported hats in this quality. It is a hat fashioned purely to meet
the Australian taste, and its wearing quality is especially designed to meet
the requirements of the very various “climates” in which this continent
abounds.
You will find Akubra “Super Quality” Hats in every part of the
Commonwealth, from the torrid north to the most frigid points of the south
at its wintriest. That says more tl an words need say for the quality of the
Australian product.
The third quality of hat made by this company is known as the “Best
Wool Quality Akubra Hat—a lower grade than the other two, sold chiefly
for boys wear and the cheaper requirements of men. Even in this grade,
designed expressly for the buyer of a cheap hat for rough and every day
purposes, the Akubra quality is very much superior to the imported hat of
the same grade.
In the manufacture of all these hats the utmost care has been taken
to ensure that the public should get the best. Over a million rabbit skins
WHY YOU SHOULD BUY "AUSTRALIAN-MADE


are used every year in the manufacture of Akubra hats, thus helping to
turn a pest into a profit for Australia. The mills are staffed by thoroughly
experienced hatters from Denton and Stockport (the recognised hatting centre
of the world). These highly skilled workmen have made their homes here
and are not merely engaged in making Akubra hats, but also train Australian
men and boys in the highly skilled art of making soft felt hats. These
Australians have shown by their aptitude and skill that they are quite capable
of turning out work equal to that of any in the world. The dyes used in
Akubra hats are similar and are obtained from the same sources as those
used by the best English manufacturers, the same being also true of the trim-
mings, which, unfortunately, are unobtainable in Australia. The machinery
used is the most up-to-date in the world. The works are built on the most
modern and hygienic lines and the Akubra mills come nearer to being a sort
of “happy family” affair than anything of their kind elsewhere.
Australians may have had a prejudice against the goods of their own
country some time ago. But the energy of Australian manufacturers such as
the Akubra Company has proved to them that they need have no fean of the
local article. Perhaps that was at the bottom of it all along. The average
Australian only needed the men to come along with sufficient faith in them-
selves and their countrymen to turn out the right stuff at the right price, and
the alleged prejudice would die down. That is what has happened in the
case of Akubra hats, at all events.
The period of doubt is over. Not only have this company's mills
increased steadily in size during the past few years, but the demand of
Australians for their hats has become so great that new extensions are being
contemplated. It is firms such as this who have helped to build up the
Australian sentiment we need so much, in a much more practical manner
than merely by talking about it. They have gone out and done something.
And it is something worth doing and something we can appreciate practically
every time we buy an Akubra hat.
CREATE EMPLOYMENT. ALWAYS ASK FOR AUSTRALIAN
MADE.
AUSTRALIAN HATS


The Romance of Wire Netting
Lysaght Bros' Grit and Determination
AT Five Dock Bay, near Parramatta, about sixteen acres of land are
occupied by the works of Lysaght Bros. & Co., Ltd. Those works
employ 1,200 hands, and, every month, they turn out 3,000 tons
of wire, 2,000 miles of wire netting, 600 tons of barbed wire, 600 tons of
wire nails, and 200 tons of zinc white.
The story of the hard fight put up by this firm to reach its present posi-
tion is one of the most enthralling romances of Australian industry.
It was in 1884 that the first attempt was made by Lysaght Bros, to
manufacture wire netting in this country. This was on the present site of
the company, on the Parramatta River. At the beginning, of course, a
modest start was made with a few machines for turning out wire netting only.
In those days the prejudice against anything made in Australia was
profound, and that was the first obstacle that the young firm had to face and
overcome. Added to that, there was the violent opposition of importers—
the foreign product held the field and had to be dislodged.
The question of price was important. Even so long ago as that, the
standard of living in Australia was so much higher than in other countries
that wages costs were tremendous. But Lysaght Bros, believed that skill,
grit and perseverence would enable them to pay the Australian workman a
handsome wage to enable him to keep up a decent standard of living and
at the same time give the consumer of wire netting and similar products the
very best that could be produced at a moderate figure. They have done it.
They have done it against local prejudice, against high costs of pro-
duction, against foreign competition of the deadliest sort, against complete
indifference on the part of the Government, which should surely have been
alive to the value of such a vital industry.
That the man on the land to-day can obtain the finest products of their
kind in the world, at a reasonable price, made in his own country, is due
to no one at all except the firm that fought to give him that benefit.
It was a lucky thing for the man on the land that Lysaght Bros, were
there to attempt this task. If Australia’s supply of wire netting, fencing wire,
barbed wire and so on had been dependent upon overseas supplies, it is
difficult to appreciate the loss that would have ensued from two great causes
at least. The first was the swift spread of the rabbit pest, with the consequent
demand for fencing and netting on a large scale. Lysaght Bros, met that
necessity when it arose, and have been, without any doubt, the greatest factor
in holding back the pest and saving the farmer literally unknown wealth.
The second great source of loss (real cripping, financial loss) would have
been the war. When the war broke out its effect was immediate. Prices
soared. Shipping was uncertain. Supplies of everything became difficult to
count upon. Things looked black for the country if it could not be sure of
safeguarding its primary industries. The land was our backbone, and if that
were affected, industrial and social paralysis would follow. It did not follow,
as we know. And one of the greatest factors in the averting of that danger
was Lysaght Bros. It is imperative that every man who gets his living
from the soil should realise how much he depends on his fencing and his
netting. It seems a commonplace thing to say, but it is the commonplace
WHY YOU SHOULD BUY "AUSTRALIAN-MADE"


things that need to be said more often than the startling things. We do not
realise that we need air to breathe until the supply runs out. We do not
realise how healthy we are until we become sick. Lysaght Bros, foresaw
the danger of “air” running out—the “air” that keeps the man on the land
alive—his fencing wire and his netting. They had taken the precaution of
installing a wire-drawing plant. When the war came stocks of wire were
quickly depleted. This firm was not worried about the situation. It was
prepared. It had the plant to turn out its products from beginning to the end
of the process, in the plant, with Australian workmen, and ready for distri-
bution where needed.
That service, then, depended upon the fact that Lysaght* s manufacture
the whole of their wire and re-manufacture it into wire-netting, galvanised
wire, barbed wire, fence wire, wire nails, etc., and zinc white, which latter
forms the basis of all the best paints and is used in the manufacture of rubber.
The costs in production have just doubled since 1914. The price has
risen about 75%. These simple facts speak volumes for the Lysaght organis-
ation. Most firms would have been content to “pass it on." Lysaght* s studied
how to improve their methods and reduce costs. They succeeded. That
accounts for the moderateness of their prices. They did nqt take advantage
of the efficiency in their organisation. THAT was what they passed on—the
gain that was achieved by unremitting vigilance and care,
THE ROMANCE OF WIRE NETTING


Australia’s Wine Industry
Messrs. Lindeman’s Great Achievement
' VJ%%'DCH hard thought, hard work and persistent endeavour has gone to
the building up of an industry which has done so much to make the
name of Australia known throughout the civilised world.
It was in 1827 that Dr. H. J. Lindeman, the founder of the present firm
of Lindeman Ltd., who was a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, plant-
ed his first vineyard. He very aptly gave it the name “Cawarra,” a native
word meaning by the side of running water.” The vineyard is planted on
the rich alluvial soil on the banks of the Patterson River, a tributary of the
Hunter. This area is famous throughout Australia for producing the very
finest light wines, such as Claret, Hock, Chablis, Burgundy, and now the
sparkling wines.
Although wines were imported into Australia before this date, it was
Dr. Lindeman s vineyard which established the industry by the importation
of 350 varieties of grape-vines. Only the most suitable of these were selected,
and it is to these vines that most of the old vineyards owe their existence.
The first 25 years of effort were devoted to the patient storing and maturing
of the whole output, and it was a serious setback when, in the year 1851,
the cellars and entire stock of wine were completely destroyed by fire.
This catastrophe did not prevent the company from developing the in-
dustry, and patient effort, combined with the most expert viticultural know-
ledge, succeeded in re-establishing it.
Right up to the beginning of the war, however, the history of this
company is similar to that of so many other Australian industries. The
absurd prejudice that anything produced in Australia was necessarily inferior
to similar imported products was, as is well known, almost universal. For
very many years, Lindeman’s Ltd. had to fight this prejudice, and only
patience, perseverance, and serene confidence in the future have placed them
where they are to-day. The event has proved that they were right.
To-day a thousand acres of flourishing vineyards in all the wine-growing
districts are under the direct control of the firm. These vineyards produce
the typical bouquet that has done so much to win for the name of Cawarra
the praise of the expert.
It is worth nothing that the dates of the planting of the various vine-
yards are as follows: Kirton, 1827; Porphyry, 1837; Cawarra, 1843;
Corowa, 1843; Coolalta, 1866; Ben Ean, 1870; Felton, 1870; Southern
Cross, 1870; Warrawee, 1898; Sunshine, 1910.
In the year 1927 Lindeman’s, Ltd., will be celebrating the first cen-
tenary of the planting of their first vines. Few industries in Australia can
point to a history of such long and patient endeavour, and crowned with
such success.
Not merely has this firm established itself firmly throughout Australasia,
but during the past decade at least a large demand has sprung up in England
and on the Continent for their wines. The world knows the quality of
Cawarra light wines, and the sparkling wines are achieving similar success
with wine drinkers everywhere. Quite a large proportion of the export trade
is done in small shipments of a few cases sent by Australians to their friends
abroad.
WHY YOU SHOULD BUY "AUSTRALIAN-MADE


The Australian Home
Wunderlich Limited Revolutionises Australian Home-Building
AUSTRALIA is unlike most other countries in the all-important charac-
teristic of climate. It is especially unlike the older countries—
Europe and America. And yet many of our habits and our circum-
stances of life have been brought piece-meal from such a country as England.
As time goes on, however, we are increasingly breaking away from tradition
and discovering what is best suited to our own particular needs and the
requirements of a new and advancing country.
It was a conception such as this which actuated two brothers, Messrs.
Ernest and Alfred Wunderlich, when they decided upwards of thirty years
ago to surround themselves with the finest craftsmen obtainable for the
purpose of developing a distinctive Australian method of covering our walls
and ceilings. Wunderlich metal ceilings were the result.
These now famous art-metal ceilings and wall linings are provided,
through the enterprise of the firm, in hundreds of highly aesthetic designs
created by prominent designers. We suppose there are few people who are
unacquainted with at least some of these designs—we all know of homes and
business places where these ceilings and coverings are installed. But there
are other advantages besides the artistic effect to be obtained from the use
of these materials in the home. In the first place they are light in weight,
which is a consideration to the country buyer when he comes to calculate
the freight that his materials will involve. Again, the material of which
they are made is a touch, durable metal which will not disintegrate, crack
or break. White ants, vermin, etc., cannot logde in it. It is unaffected by
fire. And thirty-eight years of constant use have proved it ideal for our
climate. When it is realised that the ultimate cost is lower than that of
any other effective substitute, the reader will understand that the brothers
Wunderlich have succeeded in building up an industry which deserves the
success it has achieved. Wunderlich art metal is ideally suited to Australia.
Of course the firm of Wunderlich, Limited, did not stop there. As well
as its art-metal ceilings it produces Durabestos sheets for lining walls, archi-
tectural terracotta, terracotta roof tiles, and specialises in modern shop
fronts.
Durabestos is an asbeestos-cement compound which has achieved remark-
able popularity for wall linings. It has given the amateur (as well as the
professional) home-builder an opportunity to produce something genuinely
distinctive. It enables him to create picturesque wall effects, reminiscent
of old England's half timber treatments, and is fast giving a new aspect to
the suburbs of Australian cities and the countryside of each of the States.
The chief advantages of Durabestos lie in the facts that it is easy to use,
thus making the erection of houses a pleasant occupation rather than the
highly technical thing it used to be—simple nailing is all that is necessary
to keep the sheets in place; that it cannot rust or rot or harbour insects and
other pests; that paint is not necessary to preserve it —and the colour is
pleasing and always fresh looking; and that the cost is very low. But these
facts scarcely need repetition to-day. The number of Durabestos houses being
erected every day throughout Australia sufficiently testifies to the hold it
has gained on the affections of the home-builder.
WhlY YOU SHOULD 6UY "AUSTkALI AN-MADE “


In keen request, by host and ~ guest —
— imsb"
\
Nh
A
yv
lindemJnS wines
V
.11 II ™» I|,W
n
LINDEMAN’S, LTD., Queen Victoria Buildings, Sydney.
AUSTRALIA’S WINE INDUSTRY


Still more remarkable, however, has been the development in the Use
of architectural terracotta. This is a material used for facing buildings and
has been brought into prominence by the modern development of concrete
and steel frame buildings. The glazed or matt surface of this remarkable
material may be treated so as to produce a wide range of colours, and it
may be modelled into any desired architectural form, which can then be
produced in any number to give complete uniformity. It only needs hosing
or washing at long intervals to remain perfectly clean and new. It has
extraordinary durability. All of which explains why the company found it
necessary to erect elaborate works at Rosehill to produce it in sufficient
volume to meet the local demand.
The Wunderlich Tileries, Rosehill, near Sydney
Terra cotta tilea are, of course, known everywhere throughout Australia.
In addition to the familiar shades of red, Wunderlich, Limited, produce
them in chocolate, brindle, buff and colour-blended effects. The results
are really beautiful, and most house-owners now realise that the value of
their property is considerably enhanced by these tiles. They absorb only
minute quantities of moisture, and we note with interest that their hardness
and durability, added to the care with which they are packed, render them
peculiarly suitable for transport—it is extremely unlikely that they will be
spoiled by breakage in transit.
In addition to these enterprises, this firm has lately gained special
prominence by its beautiful work in designing (and re-modelling) shop fronts.
For instance, the important task of remodelling the shop fronts of Messrs.
Anthony Hordern & Sons, Limited, the largest emporium in this country,
fell to the lot of Wunderlich, Limited. The result is to be seen by everyone
who passes along Pitt Street. It is a distinctive example of their work.
This firm, indeed, originated in Australia the metal shop front, and
since the inception of this branch of their work, they have designed and
installed many thousands of shop fronts all over the States. A feature of
their method is that it gives a greater area of display space, as well as pro-
viding greater strength than wooden mouldings. It is seldom that a shop
front of distinction is built in the capitals that is not designed and completed
by Wunderlich, Limited.
It is characteristic of the thoroughness of the firm that as it extends its
scope to include a wider area of operation, it at once scores a success. Since
the inception of the firm it has grown enormously and is expanding all the
time. It has been of inestimable benefit to Australia.
THE AUSTRALIAN HOME


Wireless in Australia
Burgin Electric Co. helps to develop a new Australian Industry
3T is only a few years since the world was startled by the invention of
the means of sending messages, music and concerts without the aid of
wires and over great distances. The new science of wireless telephony
soon achieved world-wide popularity, and we all remember how Australia
entered the field of broadcasting and wireless reception. The demand at once
arose for receiving sets, and enterprising firms proceeded to fill the demand
either by importing them from abroad or manufacturing them in this country.
Importing sets for reception in this country proved, however, hazardous —
it was difficult to get reliable sets that were suited to Australian conditions,
both of wave length and climate. At this juncture the Burgin Electric
Company, a few years ago, determined to produce high-class instruments
especially designed for Australian use and to meet the requirements of the
Australian public. That is how the now famous Burginphone came into being.
After a close investigation
of the experience of radio en-
gineers in the United States
and Europe the Burgin Co.
succeeded in producing a re-
ceiving set that has withstood
comparison in actual tests with
sets from every part of the
world. The chief aim of every
manufacturer is to produce a
set that will operate under the
most diverse conditions of cli-
mate, that will be capable of
receiving over a large wave
length range, and which, at
the same time, will have few
“controls," and thus be easy
to operate. These conditions
have been met by the manu-
facturers of the Burginphone.
Last year (1924), for ex-
ample, the Government held a
special test at Bourke, open to
the world, for the purpose of
demonstrating, the use of
wireless in the schools. This
was a severe test. It meant
the reception of a broadcast-
ing programme in daylight
over a distance of 400 miles.
The Burginphone came out of
this test second to no other
instrument which entered. It
WHY YOU SHOULD BUY - ‘AUSTRALiAN-MAD£“


was used for the reception of the official speech of the Minister for Educa-
tion, broadcasted from Sydney. This was merely one of many tests to
which this instrument had been subjected, and which it has surmounted
yrith equal success.
Since the company began operations it has extended to the other States,
the head office and works in Sydney consisting of a five-storied building
at 340 Kent Street.
The Burginphone has been constructed with a careful eye to its appear-
ance. The cabinet is made of 5-ply laminated maple, thus ensuring its
durability under the extremely varied climatic conditions which it may have
to face when it reaches the user of North Queensland, Tasmania or Western
Australia. The finish is admirable.
The instrument is made with either 3,4, 5, 6 or 7 valves. It has had
a deserved success throughout the whole of the Commonwealth, and the
Company has received many quite unsolicited testimonials from satisfied users
everywhere.
Late in 1924 the company found that a demand had arisen for a
cheaper set, and it was decided to produce one on a different system of
tuning, which should be simple to operate, but at the same time thoroughly
efficient. This resulted in the production of the Becolian. The Becolian has
BUY AUSTRALIAN MADE. BUILD AUSTRALIA’S TRADE.
a simplified control, it receives over a very great distance range, the selec-
tivity is clear and free from interference and maximum results are obtained
by the simplest means of operation. The Becolian is also made in a portable
form, and is very popular for use while travelling or on holidays.
The difficulties that beset the manufacturer of wireless sets have been
mainly due to the inherent difficulties of wireless reception in itself. No
manufacturer in the world would maintain that he could produce a set which
would receive broadcasting over any distance under any conditions of weather
without any interefence of any sort. No doubt this ideal will be achieved
in time, but until that time arrives we must be content with the best that
the genius of the wireless engineer can give us. There is little doubt that
the Burginphone and the Becolian do give us that. For instance, it is worth
noting that reception has been achieved on a Burginphone operating a loud
speaker over a distance of 500 miles, and using an indoor aerial only.
An important feature of both the models manufactured by the Burgin
Company is the arrangement of the wiring. No unsightly wires are to be
seen, and the only external connections necessary are to the aerial and the
earth. In appearance, the instruments rival the highest class gramaphones,
and add a distinctive touch to the home.
The Burgin Electric Company deserves the success it has achieved" with
these receivers. It is perhaps fortunate that wireless did not from
the handicap that afflicted so many other Australian industries. By the time
it arrived, the Australian had been educated to understand that his own
country could produce goods equal to those of any other, so that when the
Burgin Company produced models they were given fair consideration
beside the receivers of the whole world. They have withstood that test, and
this fact alone is sufficient to convey an impression to the reader of their
efficiency. Wireless is growing in popularity throughout this country, as in
every other country, and the expansion of the Burgin Company amply demon-
strates the high opinion in which it is held by listeners-in everywhere.
WIRELESS IN AUSTRALIA


Farm Machinery
An Account of Che Sunshine Harvester Works
JN no industry in this country has such striking progress been made as
in the production of engines, implements and machinery for the farm.
Of course, Australia depends largely for her prosperity on primary industries
but the proper feeding of these with the necessary machinery is of the utmost
importance. It is a tribute to our enterprise that we have not been slow to
meet the situation, and no country in the world can boast of being our super-
ior in the production of the necessary equipment to meet local conditions on
the land.
The Sunshine Harvester Works are a case in point.
They occupy 40 acres at Sunshine, 1\ miles from Melbourne, and of these
28 acres are covered with buildings. Perhaps the best idea that can be con-
veyed of the vast activities of the firm will be obtained by a consideration of
the following surprising figures.
The wages paid amount of £600,000
per annum; 10,000 tons of steel and
iron are used annually, as well as
£lOO,OOO worth of timber, £15,000
worth of leather, £25,000 worth of vari-
ous fuels and other large items. The
works have been the occasion for the
development of a quite considerable town
around them with a population of 3,000,
beautifully laid out with a park and
gardens, tennis courts, and bowling
greens, all maintained by the company.
Many of the employees own their own
comfortable homes.
These facts will give the reader
The “Sunshine ” Reaper and Binder
~~ some idea of the large size of the in-
dustry and the enormous quantity of farm implements of all kinds turned out
by these famous works. It is safe to say that scarcely a farm throughout this
continent—to go no further—would not be found to contain at least some
implement or engine that bears the Sunshine brand or the name of the firm
—H. V. McKay Pty. Ltd.
It is only possible here to attempt to give the reader some idea of the
work done by the firm and the enormous variety of ways in which it aids
the efficiency and helps to develop the prosperity of our farms.
One of the most important branches of the company’s activities con-
sists in the building of internal combustion engines, from to 10 H.P.,
spray pumps, pumping jacks, etc. As well as being used for actual con-
structional work, such as this, the engine works of the firm are used for
manufacturing a large number of parts for harvesters, binders, headers, and
other implements. To complete these processes of manufacture satisfactor-
ily, this branch of the works contains approximately 100 machine tools.
Visitors to the works are always interested to examine such highly impor-
tant machines as the multiple gear cutting machine, which automatically
cuts the teeth of twelve gear wheels in one operation, making them absolutely
WHY YOU SHOULD BUY “AUSTRALIAN-MADE


accurate and alike; the wet-stone grinding machine, which grinds crank pins
to within one-two-thousandth of an inch; the surface grinding machine;
the turret lathes, planing machine; and so on. Nothing short of a visit to
the works can convey to the stranger even a limited idea of the enormous
scope of these machine shops.
But, on leaving these shops, the visitor next comes to the bolt and nut
manufacturing department, with both hot and cold process plants, the total
capacity of the plant being over 37 million bolts and nuts per annum. Many
of the 70 machine tools used in this department are not to be found in
any other factory in Australasia.
Attached to the works is a heat treatment department, used for hard-
ening the tools and dies used throughout the works. Special furnaces have
been installed, equipped with pyrometers, so that the heat of the steel may
be ascertained accurately, and special cooling-out devices are employed.
This is a most important part of the technical work, as an example of which
it might be mentioned that a “tap” of inferior temper may fail after tapping
a few hundred nuts, while another, perfectly tempered, will be in good order
after tapping as many as 70,000.
Of course, works of this size have a laboratory attached. Over 5,000
analyses are effected each year on wrought iron, steel, pig iron, scrap iron,
rubber, paint, pigments, varnish, coal, coke, moulding sand, fire-clay, etc.,
so as to keep the quality accurately under observation. Many other impor-
PATRIOTISM THAT PAYS—BUY AND BOOST AUSTRALIAN
MADE.
tant tests are also carried out by this vital branch of the firm’s activities.
In the gate shop are manufactured gates, trucks, bag loaders, harrows,
swingle-trees, chain and pulley horse yokes and large quantities of parts
used in various Sunshine machines.
The manufacture of reapers and binders, one of the most important
of the activities of the company, is conducted on the most scientific and
up-to-date principles, the assembling, constructive work and testing receiv-
ing considerable care, in each individual case, so that the grower may feel
the most complete certainty that his machine will take off his crops without
a hitch.
Also attached to the works are the timber yards, carrying a stock,
usually, of 3,000,000 super feet, and comprising all varieties of Australian
woods; the foundry (probably the largest in Australia) employing 300 men
and producing as much as 550 tons of finished castings per month, and the
main processing room, housing the cutting-up, blacksmithing, drilling, turn-
ing, fitting and sheet-iron working departments. This building alone covers
four acres.
In addition to these there are the large beam press, the assembling shop,
the wood mill, duplicates department, etc.
This will give the reader an idea of service performed for the farmer
by the many activities of the Sunshine Harvester Works. It is a service
that Australia needs more than she realises. Few of us grasp the significance
to the prosperity of our country of such an industry as this. It would be a
liberal education if every farmer were to make a visit of inspection to- the
Sunshine Works before embarking on his conquest of the soil. In no other
way could be bd brought to understand how much can bo done to help hunt
and how much IS done to help him by an industry such as this,
FARM MACHINERY


Miss Australia’s Hose
Messrs. Hughes & Mayor, Ltd., gives Australia a New Industry
OST people will be surprised to learn that before 1914 there was
Hjm 1 no “fine gauge” hosiery being manufactured in this country.
There was, of course, the manufacture of the coarser types of
ladies’ and men’s stockings and socks, but it was only when Messrs. Hughes
and Mayor erected (with their own hands!) the machinery to turn them out
that Australia entered the field to produce the higher-class goods.
In those days they could not even command the labour to erect the
machinery, so it can be imagined that they had very considerable difficulty
in getting hands to turn out the stockings even when they had the machinery
installed. It was in February, 1913, that a real start was made at 449
Pitt Street, Sydney (since destroyed by fire), and, in order to effect this,
the partners had to import a female operative from New Zealand to train
local girls to do the work.
This meant considerable trouble and expense, as well as heartbreaking
delays. Added to these troubles, also, were the usual helpful remarks from
their friends that has been the lot,
almost without exception, of every
man that had the temerity to suggest
that his own country could compete
with the foreigner and beat him on
his own ground. “It won’t pay,“
“People don’t want Australian stock-
ings,” “Labout costs will be too
high,” “You cannot get the materials
cheaply enough”—such were the re-
marks that were dinned into the cars
of the members of the firm while they
were putting up a fight to catch the
ears of the Australian retailer and
user of stockings and socks.
The reader will have no difficulty
in picturing what happened. He must
realise Messrs. Hughes & Mayor get-
ting their labour with infinite diffi-
culty, training the operatives them-
selves in the mechanical part of tKeir
work and seeing that they got the requisite training in the finishing of
the hose. Simultaneously with this, they had to study English and foreign
methods of manufacture carefully in order to adapt them to the conditions
prevailing in this country; they had to give a great deal of time, thought and
care to a study of the Australian market, and had to spend a tremendous
amount of energy in teaching the Australian retailer the value of their lines.
It took them nearly twelve months, for instance, to determine which lines
WHY YOU SHOULD BUY “AUSTRALIAN-MADE”


they should concentrate on, so that they should not be dissipating their
energies on lines that were not needed by the “consumer.**
These problems were overcome. To-day “VANITY HOSIERY” is
known everywhere. The pay-roll shows sixty names. The normal capacity
of the firm s plant is 600 to 750 dozen pairs per week. By working another
shift this can naturally be increased. It was decided, after infinite care had
been taken that the lines required could be limited to about twelve. fn
these twelve varieties of stockings and socks, wherever possible, Australian
cotton is now being used, and, in the case of the imported materials, these
are chosen for their quality first and last. The striking thing about this
enterprise lies in the fact that even in the very cheapest grades, only thd
very best grade quality of yarns are used. It took courage to adopt that
course. The foreign article is so often made of shoddy materials so as to
reduce the cost of production artificially, that the cheaper lines were dis-
credited. It is to the credit of Messrs. Hughes & Mayor that they 5 have re-
established them in public favour—and with no sacrifice to cost. It is the
sober truth that, in the face of the fact that they only use the very highest
grade materials and that labour costs are high, nevertheless this firm can
TO ENSURE NATIONAL SECURITY, BUY AUSTRALIAN MADE.
ADVANCE AUSTRALIA.
produce in this country hose superior in quality and actually LOWER IN
PRICE than the imported lines of the same grade. In shoddy goods they
could not, of course, compete even if compelled to make up these lines.
The retail prices for VANITY HOSIERY, for instance, range between
2/11 and 6/11 —all lines are popularly priced and are noted for their
superior workmanship and finish and are guaranteed in every way for their
durability and servicability.
In each of the twelve lines the greatest care is taken to see that the
dyeing is perfect. In each line they are able to produce from 25 ko 50
or more shades. Some of these are very delicate indeed.
Finally, let us mention one example only of the enterprise of the firm.
Large quantities of “fine count” mercerised cotton and artificial silk are
now used in hosiery mills throughout Australasia. This firm imported
the first shipment of these materials to reach this country and they also led
the way in importing the first fine gauge hosiery plant into Australasia.
Messrs. Hughes & Mayor have every reason to be proud of the record
they have established. They were the people who actually introduced a
new industry into Australia and made it pay in the face of hostile comment,
foreign competition, labour difficulties and the blindness of their own
countrymen. This is the spirit that has already made Australia's name and is
making us into a nation. Australia is now on the map. It is up to us to
keep her there. People like the makers of VANITY HOSE are doing their
bit. Do yours by insisting on their products. You’ll only have to insist
once—after that you won’t need any teaching to realise that they “deliver
the goods.*’
MISS AUSTRALIA’S HOSE


The Story of Pepsodent
N 1911, a leading dental investigator announced experiments which
proved that a dentifrice should be mildly acid. The majority of
tooth pastes at the time were alkaline. Within a few years, other
leading dental investigators announced like conclusions. Now leading den-
tists have everywhere accepted the principle of a mild acid tooth paste,
and by clinical tests have proved the principles right.
Pepsodent was the first mildly acid tooth paste to be put on the market
anywhere in the world. In 1919, it took the American and Canadian mar-
kets by storm, and by 1920, had become one of the most popular tooth
pastes in England. During 1921 and *22, its use became world wide, and
it was in 1922 that the factory in Australia was opened in ordeif to make
Pepsodent available to the public in Australia at a price within the reach
of all.
Entrusted with the management of the Australian factory, Mr. G. A.
Dunbar decided that from the outset, although the Australian office was one
of the world-wide Pepsodent organization, the “Made in Australia” Pepso-
dent should be backed up by a thoroughly representative Australian organ-
ization. After a period of training in the manufacture of Pepsodent by an
overseas factory representative, the management of the Australian factory
passed into the hands of a competent Australian. To-day, the whole organ-
ization in Australia is Australian, and pledged to support the interests of
preference to Australian-made goods.
Step by step, the purchase of goods outside Australia in connection
with manufacturing has been eliminated, and, with the exception of those
raw materials which are not available in Australia, it can now be said that
the Australian-made Pepsodent will contain raw materials whose origin is
in Australia. Of course, to keep the paste uniform throughout the world,
it is essential that the formula should remain identical with that which gave
Pepsodent its initial success. The formula contains a number of ingredients
which come from widely different sources throughout the world, and which
are not Australian products at all. It will interest readers to know that, in
order to ensure this uniformity, batch samples are collected from all the
Pepsodent factories throughout the world at their head office, and analysed
and passed upon. In the early stages of manufacture at our new factory,
these samples were approved before the paste was made available to the
public.
In November, 1922, the factory was opened, and within two years
Pepsodent has become the most widely known tooth paste in Australia
owing to its extensive newspaper advertising campaign which runs con-
tinuously. Its success has been due to the fact that it represents a new
era in the manufacture of tooth pastes. It is the first mild acid tooth paste
made at present, and the only mild acid tooth paste marketed in Australia.
As such it has the hearty support of leading dentists everywhere.
It is also a quality product, and the manufacturers take particular pride
in the appearance and get up of this product. Examine the snow white
tubes, and compare then with many imported lines. Compare the cartons
for quality and appearance. This is alone sufficient to show that Australian
manufacturers can produce goods equal, if not superior, to those mamxfac-
WHY YOU SHOULD BUY "AUSTRALIAN-MADE


tured in any other part of the world. Our recent purchase of tubes has
been made from Sydney tube manufacturers, and we have been supplied
with cartons from leading Sydney and Melbourne carton makers. They are
glad to turn out high-grade work, and have told us of their particular pleas-
ure in catering for Pepsodent requirements. The general quality and ap-
pearance of the article is one on which the public is entitled to pass opinion.
On the scientific side, however, the manufacturer’s statement of the excel-
lence of his product would be biassed. We prefer to publish in detail the
report of an examination of the Pepsodent premises and process of manu-
facture by a representative of the “Medical Journal of Australia,** which has
been given in their issue of August 25, 1923. We have emphasised those
parts which we believe will be of particular interest.
“Pepsodent Tooth Paste” is manufactured by The Pepsodent Company (Australia),
Limited, at 139 Clarence Street, Sydney. Our inspector has visited the factory and
reports that it Is well lighted, well ventilated and very clean. The girls employed in
tending to the filling machines and the packing wear white aprons and caps and strict'
attention appears to be paid throughout to cleanliness.
“Pepsodent” contains calcium phosphate, calcium sulphate, pepsin, gums, hydro-
chloric acid, flavouring and antiseptic agents, glycerol and water. The calcium phos-
phate, calcium sulphate, pepsin and gums are obtained from America in paper-lined
barrels. They are weighed, mixed and placed in a machine which brushes the powders
through a very tine brass sieve and thoroughly mixes the substances together. Glycerol,
hydrochloric acid, water and alcoholic solutions of eucalyptol, menthol and oil of pep-
permint are mixed together and placed in a glass-lined tank. The sieved powders are
placed in a mixing machine and the fluid mixture run in at a steady rate while the
barrel and blades of the machine are rotating. This takes about three-quarters of an
hour. The churn and blades are then rotated at a greater speed for about one and
three-quarters of an hour until finally there is a homogenous mixture of the solid and
liquid constituents. The paste is then conveyed to the hopper of a filling machine-;
the tin tubes of paste are filled automatically and the bottoms sealed and clipped auto-
matically. The churns and hoppers are washed with boiling water as soon as a batch
of paste is finished and tubed. The process of manufacture leaves nothing to be desired.
The individual ingredients were examined and found to be of the highest quality,
the pepsin being a particularly fine sample.
Analysis of a sample of the paste obtained at the factory and of one purchased
outside gave:
Factory Purchased
Sample. Sample.
Hydrochloric Acid .. 0.164% .. 0.158%
Ash 59.96 % . . 57.89 %
The ash consisted of almost equal parts by weight of calcium sulphate and calcium phos-
phate.
A little of the paste was placed on a plate of gelatine jelly and after a few minutes
washed off. The gelatine was distinctly etched, showing that the pepsin was active;
both samples g’ave the same result. Some of the paste was mixed with 0.2% hydro-
chloric acid and a small piece of fibrin added and the mixture incubated at 37° C.; the
fibrin w r as largely dissolved.
A microscopical examination of the paste showed that the calcium phosphate was
in the form of a fine powder, but the calcium sulphate was present as small, sharp
crystals. Rubbed between, two plates of glass the paste did not produce any scratches
visible under the microscope and the crystals broke into small fragments. When used
as a tooth paste “Pepsodent” feels decidedly gritty; that is due to the presence of the
crystals of calcium sulphate and the absence of soap.
It is claimed by the manufacturers that “Pepsodent” attacks and removes the film
on teeth. This it may do partly by the cutting action of the calcium sulphate anid
calcium phosphate and partly by pepsin digestion. It is doubtful, however, whether the
pepsin is in contact with thd teeth together with acid for a sufficiently long time to have
much effect in this direction.
For those who desire an acid tooth paste, “Pepsodent” can be recommended as a
carefully compounded and highly efficient product.
The factory machinery represents the most up-to-date devices known
for mixing, clipping and closing, and we believe is unequalled anywhere in
Australia to-day.
To-day, Pepsodent embodies the most recent researches of leading
dental investigators, and in Australia, as everywhere it is produced, its tube
and carton with the finish leaves nothing to be desired. We are indebted to
manufacturers of tubes and cartons and printers alike, for their co-opera-
tion with us in our endeavour to reach the highest manufacturing standard.
THE STORY OF PEPSODENT


I HOSKINS’ I
| |
| Iron & Steel (o. Limited |
5 E
Blast Furnaces and Steel Works, LITHGOW. |
Cast Iron Pipe Works, Foundry and Boilerworks, |
SYDNEY. I
Cast Iron Pipe Works, RHODES. I
Steel Pipe Works, BRISBANE. |
Coal Mines, LITHGOW and WONGAWILLI. j
Iron Ore Deposits, CADIA, GRENFELL and TAS- |
MANIA. |
Limestone Deposits, EXCELSIOR and MARULAN. |
o I
Head Office: Wattle Street, Sydney. |
'Phones : City 6757 and MW 1666 |
City Office: Kembla Building, Margaret Street, |
Sydney. I
■Phones ; B 7891, B 7892 |
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiimiiiiiiiiiimmiiiiiHiiiimmiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiimiHiiiiuiiiimiimtmiiiHiiiiiimiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimmiiiiiiiiiiimß
Sydney Lithgow Rhodes Brisbane
Uthgow Blast Furnaces
WHY YOU SHOULD BUY “ AUSTRALIAN-MADE"


in mm mm
a iiimimmmiHmmimmiiimimiimimiimimimiiiiiimiiimimimmiiiiiiiimmmiimimiiiiimimimimimiiimmiimiimiimiiiimiimiMiiimimmimim
Hoskins’ Iron and Steel (d. Ltd.
Structural Steel.
Shoeing, Bolt and Rivet Steel.
Spiral, Laminated Spring Steel.
Plow Share and Plow Spring Steel.
Cast Iron Pipes and Fittings up to 48in.
diameter for Water, Sewerage and
Gas Reticulation.
Special Castings.
Boilers, Tanks and General Engineering
Manufacturers of
At LITHGOW.
Pig Iron.
Steel Blooms and Billets.
Steel Rails and Fastenings.
o
At SYDNEY
and RHODES.
Work.
o
At BRISBANE.
Steel Locking Bar Pipes.
imimimu mu
ikON AND STEEL


O)holly Set-up an&~Printed in Australia
bp 60. Pierpont Black Si Co. Ltd.,
at 304 Kent Street, Sydney


We
banner anil iairgmatTa
2|auiibnofe
An All-Australian Journal now a recognized
authority on all matters appertaining
to Every Class of Farm Holding
This journal has been issued in co-operation with
such firms as the Coastal Farmers’ Co-op., North
Coast Co-op., Gibbs, Bright & Co., Winchcombe
Carson, Schute Bell & Co., Pitt Son & Badgery,
Farmers’ Co-op. Dist. Co. (Q’land), Country
Freezing Co., Etc. This alone guarantees its value.
If by any chance, you have not had a copy, send along Sixpence for
postage, and a sample copy will be sent immediately
Future Issues will be on Sale at all Bookstalls
Published by
BLACK & GORDON (Australasia) LTD.
304 Kent Street,
SYDNEY.


m
m
Australia's Best
RESCH’S
Lager
Dinner
RB
DA
Lager
AI e
BITTER ALE
8.
OTAT YY
m
