

WHY DO THESE MEN
THUS DIE?
ADDRESS BY
REV. A. P. CAMPBELL, B.A.
Published by Request.
Delivered at a National Service of Commemoration and
Intercession arranged by the local clergy and held
in the Killara Hall on Empire Sunday,
May 20, 1917


J' ERGUSON COLL .ectionAW
•>
t


THUS DIE?
ADDRESS BY
REV. A. P. CAMPBELL, B.A,
■
•*
WHY DO THESE MEN
Published by Request
Delivered at a National Service of Commemoration and'
Intercession arranged by the local clergy and held
in the Killara Hall on Empire Sunday,
May 20, 1917.


Why Do These Men Thus Die?
The purpose of this service is the commemoration
of the fact of Empire. And in normal times an
address at such a gathering as this would be occu-
pied with a setting forth of the greatness and glory
of that most amazing phenomenon in all the category
of nationhood —the British Empire, to which it is
our pride and privilege to belong.
But the occasion permits no such intrusion. The
Empire is involved in a life-and-death struggle.
Upon her shoulders rests the chief burden of a
conflict which is to determine, for weal or woe, the
destiny of the race. The burden is pressing heavier
and heavier. An hour of agony requires not praise,
but high-born deeds and noble purposes. It is not
as the thought of tradition thrills us, but as the will
to triumph enthralls us —that we best serve this
time of momentous crisis.
Hence it is according as the inspiration of this
service unfolds a clearer vision, and compels a
worthier fulfilment of our obligation,' that its aim
is best fulfilled.
I would, therefore, base what I have to say on a
suggestive injunction of Holy Scripture, to be found


in the Epistle to the Galatians, Chapter six. verses
four and five.
‘‘Let each man prove his own work, and then
shall we have his glorying in regard of himself
alone, and not of his neighbour.”
“For each man shall bear his own burden.
A military chaplain has written home to the
following effect: —
“I stood one afternoon lately by the side of a
man in mortal agonv. Cruelly wounded, he was yet
very strong, and life left him slowly. Meantime he
suffered unspeakably. Torn by the pain, he could
hardly speak, and because he was brave, he would
not cry out. He was finishing his ‘bit.’ For several
hours he was as one on the cross. As someone has
said, he might truly have declared, ‘My broken body
thus I give.’ And about sunset God set him free.
“What did that man die for? He was only one
of thousands who so die. And all of them have died
with a vague belief that by playing their part in
this struggle they are helping some great cause.
. . . . They believe their sufferings are the price
that must be paid for some great good, and they
pay it without murmur. But of what is all this
agony the price? What result is going to justify
these unspeakable sufferings, these tragic farewells?
“Make no mistake,” he concludes, “it is you at
home who must answer that question.”
Yes. It is we at home who must answer that
question. That belongs to our burden.
“Every man shall bear his own burden.” It is
not sufficient that we record their names on our
honour list. It is not sufficient that we commend


their heroism. They are not bearing our burden;
the}’ are bearing their own; they are not doing our
“bit”; they are doing their “bit”—for “some great
cause,” for “some great good.” And each of us, for
the same great cause, for the same great good,
“must prove his own work, and then shall he have
glorying in regard of himself alone, and not of his
neighbour.”
It is easy to slip into an attitude these days that
lets praise of “our brave boys at the front, ’ and pro-
vision for their personal comfort, suffice as our
response to the call of patriotism, ft is easy to
lean on the manhood of others, and to let the proxy
do duty for the personal. But the blood of an
hundred thousand men cries from the ground in
protest, challenging such as glory in regard to their
neighbour, and requiring each to prove his own
work, to bear his own burden.
There must be no shirkers, these days. “Have you
enlisted?” runs the recruiting poster. “If not, why
not?” That is forceful enough as far as it goes!
It is issued by men whose business is the military
campaign; but the military campaign is not the
crisis. It is a part of the crisis. It is the tragic
preliminary. The crisis proper will face us long
after the war is over. The davs are still ahead of as
which are to declare whether the awful sacrifice will
achieve the end it has in view.
As it seems to me. there are two questions equally
vital. The one is commemorative, the other is in-
trospective. What kind of men are fighting for the
nation? That is the first question. What kind of
nation are they fighting for?—that is the second.
There is onlv one answer to the first. The second
we must each answer for ourselves. We must


answer the second in steady contemplation of the
answer to the first. That is why the first part of
this service has been given to commemoration. We
must keep before our minds the sacrifice—the awful
sacrifice ! Splendidly awful, it is !
Have you read Masefield’s Gallipoli*? A book
that will always live as the record of failure made
glorious by sacrificial achievement—a book which
links past to present, a book which tells the world,
amongst other things, that the Anzac is a noble
scion of a noble sire—that the Anzac spirit is a spirit
that will “give up all that makes a man to the some-
thing which makes a race!”
That is Masefield’s phrase! An arresting phrase!
It is the challenge of this crisis to which they, of
their part, have nobly responded. “The giving up
of all that makes a man to the something that makes
a race.”
But while in so doing they proved their own man-
hood, it did not mean victory for the race. “They
went,” says this compelling writer; “They went like
all their brothers in that Peninsula, on a forlorn
hope, and by bloody pain they won the image and
the taste of victory And then, when their reeling
bodies had burst the bars so that our race might
pass through, there were none to pass; the door was
open, but there were none to go through in triumph.
“And then, slowly, as strength failed, the door
was shut again, the bars were forged again, victory
was hidden again, all was to do—again.”
I am not concerned just now to rehearse Gallipoli
—to rehearse the cause of the failure. But I press
the point that Gallipoli is a parable whose mean-
ing we do well to apprehend. When the bars are
burst—when the gates are opened—there must be a


race to pass through in triumph—the triumph of
which they yonder can know but the image and the
taste. To see this crisis steadily is to know that the
sacrifice of the frontier requires the sacrifice of the
citadel to complete it.
That is a truth to which all history has borne
witness. Rome’s legions, you recollect, brought
back a victory which the home citizenship turned
to Rome’s destruction. Rome went to pieces, not
for lack of heroism and sacrifice afield, but for lack
of moral reinforcement at home. Her real foes, as
ever, were they of her own household. The gate had
been opened by bloody sacrifice. There was not the
race to pass through ! The sacrifice of the frontier
requires the sacrifice of the citadel to complete it.
Hence as we commemorate this last record in a
long line, of the spirit that has made us what we are,
we must hear the challenge to complete their hero-
ism with a heroism of our own. We must live for
that for which they have died—the same great good
—the same great cause.
What, then, is the cause?
The preservation of our Empire, surely! Is
it?
Well, Mr. Asquith says “'No”! In an utterance
which has become historic I find these stirring
sentences: —
“It is not merely a question of self-preservation
or safeguarding against attack the fabric which has
withstood so many storms; there is something larger
at stake in this great testing of our people.
“We have been entrusted with the guardianship
of interests and ideals stretching to the confines of
workbspread Empire, ideals which concern the
whole future of humanity.”


The cause is not the Empire. The cause is some-
thing in whose higher interest the Empire has been
called into being: something for which, in the minds
of her best citizens, she has ever stood —the “some-
thing which makes a race."
Someone has said—it is a very startling thing to
say —“A man is not an Englishman unless he can
endure the decay and even death of England—the
body of her."
There is something for which England —the true
England—is ready to give her body, knowing that
thus she wins her soul.
That is precisely what Mr. Asquith meant. That
is why he goes on to say that we will fight “to the
last farthing, the last ounce of our strength, the last
drop of our blood.” The greatness of the nation is
not to be assessed by the scale of material values,
but is rooted in moral and spiritual sanctions.
What makes a coin a coin is not its material value,
but its Imperial sanction. It was cast in the Royal
Mint. It bears the image of the King. What
makes the nation a nation is her faithfulness to the
Imperial destiny unto which she is called of God.
British patriotism, in the minds of the nation’s
best citizens, has never been a narrow self-aggran-
disement. It has ever been in essence sacrificial.
It has involved a spiritual enterprise; it has imposed
a moral burden—faithfulness that has looked beyond
the nation’s self that has caught the vision of her
God-appointed destiny.
It has stood for the defence of Justice, Freedom,
and Truth. And not for the first time in her long-
history is the body of her being bled that these
eternal verities perish not from the earth. Such in
essence is the one great good —the one great cause


the “something which makes the race what God
would have it be.”
What, then, is this bursting of the bars, this open-
ing of the gates, but a challenge to us who must
give the image its reality —the taste of victory its
satisfaction —a challenge to us to recover again the
ancient vision of our calling, to tread the Christ-
led road of our appointed destiny.
We have no destiny apart from Him. We have
no history that we can count resplendent that is not
rooted in allegiance to his name. We have been
strong as we have leaned on Him. We have been
weak as we have forgotten Him. Ours is the flag
of the Triple Cross- —fit emblem of our charter as
Defender of the Faith—the Faith which has made
us what we are.
When we crown our King we place in his hand
an Orb —the symbol of world-dominion. There
have been kings and emperors who have grasped at
the Orb, who have thought to possess world-power
by martial might. But the Orb is not thus to be
grasped. In our King’s hand it is the symbol of
world-dominion by way of sacrificial service. That,
in a sentence, is the ideal for which we have been
called to stand.
And we have been given to know how the ideal is
to be actualized. The Orb is surmounted by a
Cross. ‘‘When thou seest this Orb thus set under
the Cross, remember that the whole world is subject
to the Power and Empire of Christ, our Redeemer.”
That, in fine, is the something committed to us.
We are called to be trustees of the Faith of Christ—
the something that makes a race what God would
have it be.


When we talk of the Englishman's ‘‘sense of
duty/’ the Englishman's “word of honour.” the
Englishman’s “passion for freedom” —to know our
history is to know that the pre-eminence of these,
for us, has lain in the fact that they have their
sanction in religion, the religion of Christ. A nation
never rises higher than the God it worships. The
future of humanity is safe in our keeping, the sacri-
fice yonder is assured it completion, as we rekindle
the ancient fires, as with a clearer vision, and a more
steadfast purpose, we emerge, refined and purified
through consent to the availing grace of the world’s
Redeemer.
“Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet
Lest we forget.”
Thus commemoration makes way for intercession.
If victory is to be a reality, if through the sacrifice
yonder we are to know more than the image and the
taste, we must bring the sacrifice of the battlefield
to the altar of God.
“Here and here has England helped me: how can I
help England? Say
Whoso turns as 1. this evening, turn to God to praise
and pray.”
That was Browning’s ansyer. It was Kipling’s,
too. He wrote his Recessional, you recollect, as a
warning in a time when England was tending to
glory in her martial might. We must turn again
with a humbler spirit to the altar of God. Each of
us must look his own manhood in the face. Each
of us must submit his own soul to the searching
scrutiny of its Maker, who is also its Redeemer.
The bars are breaking, the gates are opening! Is
there a race to pass through ?


Once again in history, there speaks the voice that
is never silent where there are ears to hear. 1
are hearing it yonder, however vaguely. W e must
hear it as well as they. It is the voice of the Lord
of all human destinv. It is the Changeless Decree
which, for our life, we must hear and heed.
; ‘Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation
that keepeth the truth may enter in.”


‘'dhristian
rew 3trs
