

WHY
WORTH QUEENSLAND
WANTS
SEPARATION.
BY A. G. STEPHENS.






WHY
NORTH QUEENSLAND
WANTS
SEPARATION.
BY A. Gr. STEPHENS.




i "\fjfTHILE a Journalist resident in South Queensland,
the writer inclined to believe that Separation
was inexpedient. Residence as a Journalist in North
Queensland has convinced him it is both expedient and just
Many Northerners know what they want, but cannot justify
to others the faith that is in them. The following pages
attempt to supply intelligible justification. The calculations
and arguments differ often and widely from those adduced
by other supporters of the Separation movement ; the
conclusion is identical with theirs.




WHY NORTH QUEENSLAND WANTS
SEPARATION.
I.-THE ARGUMENT A PRIORI.
WHEN a wheelwright makes a wheel, does he put the hub on the rim? No ;
he puts it in the centre, whence the strength it gives is equally diffused
to every point of the circumference. When an engineer erects a stationary
engine, loes he not erect it as near as possible to the place where its power is to
be exerted? He knows that power is lost in transmission. Vet the people of
Queensland have placed their administrative engine, the hub of their Govern-
ment. in the extreme corner of a territory of 670,000 square miles ; and expect
th .t the power of the Sta*e will be equally exerted at Bowen and at Brisbane,
that the benefits of the State will be equally shown at Ipswich, twenty miles
away from the capital, and at Croydon, a thousand miles away. Is the expecta-
tion reasonable?
bo s not the analogy hold good between the physical body and the social
body ? '1 he heart is the centre of the circulatory sv-tem. Its rhythmical pul-
sations drive the blood to the farthest limits of the frame, to feed the exhausted
cells and replace their worn out substance with new m terial. Laden with
waste products, the blood returns to be revitalised by the oxygen of the «ir, and
departs anew upon its purifying mission. So a Government, the centre of the
political system, collects through its agencies the surphr. products of national
life, and returns to each member of the body politic systematic aid, protection,
and control. When the heart or he Government is energetic, the total life is
strengthened and increased; when ei her flags, sickness and decay are not far
distant. What would you think of a man 'ho told you the circulation of the
blood would be more perfect if the heart were placed in the big toe? an we
not take a lesson from Nature?
Supp se that the lmart were really placed in the big toe. What would be
the result? '1 he tirst result would be an increased flow <f blood to the toe.
Instead of receiving only a portion of the blood, the whole of the blood of the
body would pass through it. The veins would become'congested ; the nutrition
of the toe would be stimulated; it would speedily grow to an enormous size,
while the rest of the body would lose proportionately in health and strength.
Just so, whui we place the seat of Government in the extremity of a colony, we
might expect to find ail the wealth of the colony attracted to the capital, and the
capital enriched at the expense of the rest of the colony. Population would be
drawn to the capital because more money was spent there than elsewhere ; it
wou'd be necessary to spend still more money to feed the new population ; more
population would be attracted by the new expenditure ; and so we should travel
round in a vicious ircle.
Would tbis be desirable ? Would it be desirable that a man’s body should
become subordinate to his big toe ? W’hat would follow ? In the first place, we
should lose the use of the toe as a toe —by no means a small loss. Then we
would gradually develop a type of humanity different from anything we know or


-nn 'conceive. T'l%e*to6 would become supreme in the srgamsation : instead}
■the mam wagging the toe, the toe would wag the man. As the power of
■organ deperids upon the supply of blood which it receives,, the toe and one foot
arid*leg would become swollen and much stronger while the_ other foot and leg
vwou'd^wither away. The arms would become feeble; the brain, receiving
nmuch less blood, w.uld loie its power; taste, sight, smell, and hearing would be
weakened or d. strove d. J bus the second result of placing the heart m the big
r fcoe wou’d probably' be to make us cripled, blind, deaf, dumb, and idiotic. Long
; be ore that, however, we would be exterminated by some race of men whose
,ieal Simbar IyT wh erf we place the centre of Government in the corner of a
, icoiony and accumulate in the capital the wealth and population which should be
.’distributed over the whole of the country, the first result is that we lose the erne
(•Of the population of the capital as servants of the community. They beco ™®
of the community; and instead of the country ruling the capital the
■ cnnital rules the country. As the aggrandisement of the capital continues, the
• out tig districts are proportionately impoverished. The more people tffireare
• collected in the capital, the more mouths there are to feed. Consequently it
i becomes necessary to spend large sums of money upon public works about thp
• canitaf— upon buildings, upon roads and bridges, upon salaries to the officials
who superintend these works, and upon salaries to other officials who superin
t tend tffise officials. The provin :es are thus defrauded in two ways. Ihev aie
• defrauded of the money which should be spent, not in feeding an unpr.
• noDulation but in assisting the pioneers of productive industry. ar ®, a . ,
• defrauded of the men who should he the pioneers of industry, but who find that
• employment is most easily obtained at the metropolis.
illustration supposed that the concentrati n of the blood in the
■ extremity of one limb would tend to strengthen that limb and enfeeble or waste
the other limbs. Ihe leg attached to our fortunate toe would
at the expense of the other leg. Just so we would expect to find the halt of the
colonv nearest to our misplaced capital flourishing at the expense of the other
half " The profits of metropolitan monopoly would naturally cluster in the
districts adjacent to the metropolis. Proximity to the seat of Government
would give the inhabitants of these districts power to urge their wjshes moro
vehemently and persistently on the attention of the Government. When the
interests of a district close to the capital conflicted with the interest of a dlstri °£
far awav, the former would almost always triumph. In course of time, pst as
the metropolis established a monopoly of influence against the c ° lon y\
nart of the 1 colony nearest the metropolis would establish a monopoly of interest
theßart farther away. It is a mechanical axiom that the longer the
ifver the greater the power-so long as the fulcrum is steady. But in the case
we are considering; the longer the lever the farther up it the fulcrum of loca
influence is shifted. So that the half of the colony remote from the capital is
actually trying to work with the short end of the lever.
II. —THE BRISBANE MONOPOLY.
Let us apply these deductions to the particular case, and ascertain whether
they are inductively confirmed. We can see theoretically that when the capital
K is plsesa at one extremity, population and Government expenditure
Will re-act upon one another to swell the importance of the capital at the expense
of the rest of the colony. This conclusion is proved in practice. Brisbane, the
capital of Queensland, is situated in the extreme south-eastern corner Since
the foundation of the colony it has been the seat of Qovernment Built on the
banks of a winding river which, in spite of large expenditure, is still dangerous
for shipping, it possesses no pre-eminent natural advantages. Making a <
for the fact that the district around it was the scene of the earliest se t tle ™ e t ’
and that it is the port for a tract of rich agricultural and pastoral countn, we
are still startled to find that after more than thirty years of national life, over


25 per cent, of the whole population of this great colony, 670,000 square miles in
are i, are gathered together within a ten-mile radius from the city of Bris ane.
That is a fact shown by the census of 1891. The population of the whole
colony was then 393,718 persons, and the population of Brisbane, witlr'n a ten-
mile radius, was 101,551 persons, or more than a quarter of the whole. This
disproportion is being steadily increased until Government immigration was
stopped, every immigrant vessel helped to swell the population of Brisbane.
During the three years 1889-90-91, 13,680 Government immigrants were brought
to the colony. Of these, Brisbane absorbed 6,685, or 48 per cen of the whole *
and without doubt a great number remained in the neighbourhood of the m tro-
polis.f During the last five years the population of Brisbane increased by 24 per
cent, within the five-mile radius,} while the population of the rest of the* colony
increased by only 21 per cent. J
Since many towns and districts of the colony are equal or superior to Bris-
b me in natural advantages or natural wealth, it follows that there must be arti-
ficial advantages to attract this extra population. Our theory would lead us to
expect that the chh f of these is the inordinate expenditure of public money.
This inference is correct. More public money has teen spent in Brisbane than
in any other dozen towns of Queensland. Up to 30th June, 1891, there had been
spent on public buildings in and about Brisbane (exclusive of schools and railway
stations) the sum of £695,603, while in;the whole remainder of the colony, during
the same period, there was spent only £998,617. That is to say that, since the
colony of Queensland started to govern itself, 41 per cent, of all the money spent
on public buildings by the Department of Works has been spent in Brisbane.S
This disproportionate expenditure is still going on, and at a greater rate than
ever. The report of the Government Architect for the ye ,r ended 31st Decem-
ber, 1891, shows that £ll7 984 was spent on p iblic buildings by the Works
Department during that year. Of this sum, £66,052 or 56 per cent, of the whole
was spent in Brisbane.
Even now, the case of Queensland against Brisbane is not fully stated. The
Government returns are not constructed to show these startling contrasts, and
information must be obtained piecemeal. But there may be pointed out among
recent items of expenditure in Brisbane the railway to Fortitude Valley, in length
2 miles 16 chains, for which £300,000 was voted, or at the rate of about £135 000
a mile ; || and the Victoria Bridge debentures, amounting to £120,945, met'last
year. The fam is th t Brisbane is like a sponge, which sucks up the wealth of
the colony through fifty pores at once ; though, unlike a sponge, it is impossible
to squeez'* it. At the end of 1891, the Government had lent to local authorities
throughout the colony £1,386,412.11 Uf that sum, £772,180 or 55 per cent, of the
whole, was lent to t e city and suburbs of Brisbane within the ten-mile radiu *
Brisbane always gets the lion’s share of whatever is going. Local authorities
in the No<-tli cry out for assistance lo make roads over high ranges, t'uo :gh
de se tropical scrub, which they attack just as Nature left it; but the money
goes to improve ro ids in and around Brisbane, where the land has been cleared
for twenty years, and the country is as Jevei as a bowling-green. It is no wonder
population increases where so much money is spent. Thus, as already pointed
* Immigration Agent’s Report 188 '-90-91.
t The mmigration Agent’s report for 1889 has a table showing the distribution of “ immi-
grants and other laborers'” by railway. The immigrants arriving in Brisbane during 1889 num-
bered 3403, and the departures by rail were 17u3, or just half. This number, however, includes
others than immigrants, and many tickets were issued for stations close to the metropolis. No
sim'lar table is attached Ic the reports for 1893 and 1891.
j So comparison is available for the ten-mile radius.
§ Parliamentary Return C.A. 95 —1891.
|] Railway Commissioners’ Report, 1891. The ex tc+ expenditure is not given.
Government Gazette, May 30,1892,
* Brisbane Grammar Schools £13,793: Municipality, £149.117; Waterworks, £494,398;
Sleuth Btisbane Municipality, £100,872; Coorparoo Shire. £3 663; Toowong Shire £:944;
Ithaca Shire, £11,319; Windsor Shire, £5709; Booroodabin Division, £26,558 ; Enoggera I ivi-
sion. £4286 ; Nundah Division, £857 ; Kianawah Division, £3145 ; Rulimba Division. £930;
Stephens Division, £1541; Balmoral Division, £13,044 ; Hamilton Division, £5973 ; National
Association, £25,000.


out money brings pophlaiion ; and more money is spent to fewi bka-fresh popu>
LtionT and more population comes to share the fresh expend*—*;, and: so. it aoe<*
"To Berlin!” cried the Parisians in 70 “To Brisbane-r every Queens-
lander cried long before and ever s nee. Ihe Government,. Me officials,, tile,
SStmWiagai everything'is in Brisbane Nor hern collected fill a museum
lSSs“ne,rl .11 raids'in .ho North, and the I epartmenfc . 1 Mines andlite.
reside in Brisbane, and work four hours a day at refusing-;
Northern applications to assist this and inspect that; the management; oft North,
Roitnern api Carpentaria is vested in Brisbane*nob a paling,can be-
. sm t P fence or a policeman decorated with anew uniform,.north.
most so to Brisbane,, for bWe-or, ap,
■ “ is iust now rivalry among Southern constituencies regarding the,
rESSwuSSutSS college. ILh wishes the college placed in, its own. to™,
:forT iht outcry it it were established at Cooktown may be imagined. Xet it.
i is iust as reasonable to place agricultural colleges at Cooidown asto,place
us, just as lectscnac e v where they are practically useless to.four-.
JTOiSSSEE-SttSi valuable tbe£ scibntii functions. To
.ttttsoi ne i b Brisbane would destroy the Brisbane-monopoly. But
;re TT- i! ° ™ thl altogether out of the question. The loss both: fo, the.
eGovernment and to private persons would be immense, and no. Piirliameni* w.ouldt
i agreeto such a step what those 100,000 souls congregated at Bmshana,
. It is interest 1 (leaving the English capitalist out of «onsid-ra-
■no for a living ■* e the land Wealth is simply the result of the,
tion) all oui w ealtl natural resources. Now, the total number of people
application at the 189! census, was.
M£ fd That numbe°r of persons were employed in cultivating land,, or in, W-
-08,28a. 1 hat nu p obtaining raw products su<h as gold and silver,
/^srl- shell and beebe-de me That is to say that, white
fojlbn, or j per cent of t > 5 cent . Q f the whole population of tlaa
W l e!ol “ , ,K oSian of Mablne rlLnta who are ta produoiug
colony, the pioportion population of the colony, hut of
wealth is less than 2! per jnUI of Brisbane, only 6162 are
101,554 persons gathered g h of those 6162 supports five persons
bSKS; K d“ic remaining .event, thousand live on » They live on
tlie nlTLlnrtive argument is therefore borne out inductively J that is, we find
Our deduc » . w n e n ier W e argue from general principles to pro-
Sertn'S. TwVeTher w. take facts and try to argue up to the onuses which
have produced them.
III. ARGUMENTS IN REBUTTAL.
nil complaints regarding the inordinate expends
There is an easy W hy,” it is said, “Brisbane is the
tare of and you must erect buildings in which the work
capital, the seat ° f , on » Were this argument valid, it might be con-
of Government can b ® public buildings has not been unduly large. As
tended that the ® x P?“ d * of £ 695 603 represents the amount spent on public
previously stated, the s " of schools and railway stations) to 30th June,
buildings at B piLtfon iB9l as a b asi9 0 f expenditure, f this should be
1891. -L&King t P P
ena • EnoffErera, 470 j East Morfitoti, 9qo , Oxley, 636 \
i££3S?*2l&fZßs&sß&i&KlSU « « - »
s s« «* “ »“»•


■only £423.555, supposing equal justice to be done to Brisbane and other places.
The difference, then, of £272,048, is the s ,m spent on pnbiic buildings in Bris-
bane for the administration of the affairs of the whole colony, and did this stand
alone and were the population basis admissible for comparison, the expenditure
might b- justified.
But it must be remembered that Brisbane absorbs not only money for
public buildings which benefit the whole colony, but also money for works which
benefit Brisbane solely. Taking the quoted figures of loans to local authorities,
we find that on the population basis of 1891, Brisbane should only have received
£346,603 instead of £772,180. But here the defence of metropolitan monopoly
shifts its ground, and we are told that the question is not one of population, but
of security. Brisbane is wealthier th m any other town, and raises more money
in local rates; hence the Government can safely lend to Brisbane larger sums
than it lends to other towns. Yet, in truth, both these arguments are fallacious.
In the first place, the point is not whether, Brisbane being the capital, more
money should be spent in Brisbane than elsewhere. For it is contended that,
supposing Queensland to remain one colony, Brisbane ought not to be the capital
.at all, bee iu ,e its situation enables it to usurp more than all the advantages which
should accrue to a capital, while yielding less than a capital’s ue share of
service. Thus, when the question is whether Brisbane should or should riot be
the capital, it is beside the question to argue that Brisbane has no more than a
capital's privileges.
In the next place, for the purpose of distributing public moneys, to com-
parison of population can be sound which does not take into account tlie capacity
of the population for public service. Help should follow desert, ume .s given
expressly as charity. The claim of an individual or a community ujon the
general wealth is in a direct ratio to his or its contribution, actual or possible, to
the general need. A man is effective, in the military phrase, nnlv when he is of
use, and the commander who should devote the energies and funds at h diapos 1
to nourishing non-combatants at the expense of the fighting men would naturally
weaken ihe efficiency of his army. Yet we have sedulously dev ted ourselves in
Queensland to increasing the number of non-efficients. So far as the production'
of wealth is concerned the population of Brisbane are mainly drones, yet we treat
them better than we treat our fighting men, the pioneers of industry. It is
absurd to say that a n an who lives on the community deserves as much en-
couragement as a man who lives or the community. Thus, so far from Bris-
bane being enticed to an expenditure from general revenue proportioned to its
population, it is only entitled to an expenditure proportioned to its serviceable
population, and we have seen how small that is when reduced to the lowest term,
that of wealth production.
there must, of course, be a certain addition for industries and callings
which, though not directly productive, are indirectly useful ; but it is evident
that, when all is reckoned, there remain in the metropolis many p rsons who
are positively or comparatively useless, since they perform no service for tlie
common profit, or else perform services which are less profitable than others in
which they might engage elsewhere. Yet for all these Brisbane claims and has
received a subsidy from the public purse on the principle that all deserve alike
from the State, whether we Ith-producers or wealth-consumers, workers or
idlers.
Again, on the question of securitv for Government advances, which is given
as a reason vhy more money should be lent to Brisbane, where it is least needed,
than to sparsely settled districts, where it is most needed, we must i nquire not
only why the fat pig is continually greased, but also how the pig grew fat. How
has Brisbane become so weal hy ? It has neither mines, nor wool, ior crops to
make it rich. The answer must be that already given : Brisbane has grown rich
at the expense of the colony, partly as a port but chiefly as a capital. Thus the
very wealth which Brisbane has acquired from other districts becomes a reason
for treating it better than other districts are treated—for endowing it with larger
sums, for lending it more, and for expending upon it a larger share of the general
revenue. One has only to examine Brisbane pretentions in this way to see how
hollow they are.


ro attract population by spending Government money and then to make the
increased population a reason for spending more Government money; to be
enriched by others’ efforts, and to make the riches a reason for claiming a still
larger share of the product of others’ efforts—this is the justice which justifies
the Brisbane monopoly.
IV.—LOAN EXPENDITURE.
According to our a priori argument, in such a colony as Queensland, with the
capital placed seven hundred miles from the centre, and one thousand four hun-
dred from t‘>e Northern boundary, the districts nearest the capital would natu-
ralh' flourish at the expense of the districts farthest away. That is precisely
what has happened. South Queensland has always had a greatly preponderant
share in the general government, and as a consequence North Queensland has al-
ways enjoyed a greatly deficient share of tin gene al expenditure.
U ake first the case of loan expenditure, remembering always that North
ocn™ 1 '??! with the dividing bne at ("ape Pa merston, comprises roughly
250,000 of the total 670,000 squt re miles which make up the colony’s area. The
principal security of the pub'ic creditor is the land; and the area of South
Queensland is 63 per cent, that of North Queensland 37 per cent of the whole
land of the colony. Yet to 30th June, 1892, the expenditure in South Queensland
has been 78 per cent, in North Queensland onlv 22 per cent, of the total Peal
loan expenditure.
■''°uth Queensland there have been built 1796 miles of railway, and in
North Queensland 524 miles, costing £14,196,52" in the South, and £3,567,568 in
the North. It is the same with other items of expenditure. On public build
mgs £184,555 has been spent in the South, and £81,031 in the North. Tlie-e are
the official figures of local loan expenditure divided as it was propo-ed to divide
man 1 j F j nancial Districts Bill of 1887 and the Decentralisation Bill of
188 J. In addition, there is given as the expenditure on public buildings on
general account ” the sum of £679,902, and it is safe to say that of this “ gene-
. expenditure the thousands have been spent in ihe South and the hundreds
ln A he j * th ’ So wi . fch immi gration, on which £2,760,503 has been spent; and
with defence, on which £198,717 has been spent. These items are supposed to
ene t the whole colony, but there is no doubt that tin expenditure benefits
c nelly the Southern half of it. Brisbane is the grand distributing centre, and
the pub.Lc funds shrink noticeably in passing through Brisbane fingers. r i he
bulk ot the residue naturally goes to aid the districts where there is the loudest
outcry and these are of course the districts nearest the metropolis, an arch-
angel s voice at Herb°rton is reduced to penny whistle proportions by the time it
reaches the ear of the dispensing Queen-street bureaucrat, and a flea-bite in
movoomba has immensely more significance that a massacre of Christians at
e Gulf. Yet there is, apparently, no means of calculating how much of such
items as immigration and defence expenditure is due by each half of the colony,
and so they are put down to “ general account.” This may betaken as an
euphemism for money which the South generally absorbs without accounting for.
The expenditure on harbors and rivers “gene”al account ” falls in a similar
category. The sum of £894,892 has been spent by the Department of Harbors
and Rivers in the South, as compared with the sum of £596,253 spent in the
North. To Southern eye 3 there is nothing unfair in this ; the Northern coast-
me being only three times as long as that of the South, and therefore needino
considerably less attention. But there is also an item of £363,764 on “ general
account.” This represents principally the Departmental stock-in-trade,
steamers, dredges, and machinery. The p’ant is supposed to be for the service
o the whole coion s' and for this reason three-fourths of it is always collected in
risbane or some other Southern port, where it can be best utilised for the good
or the community as that phrase i-i understood in the South. The wages and
expenses on account of harbors and rivers plant form a very acceptable addition
to the little pickings which the Soutli receives from a paternal Government. Yet


it is obviously impossible to localise the expenditure, hence it goes to swell “gene
ral account ” in the returns, and assists that useful column to reach a total of
four-and-a-half millions. Lighthouses also help The local expenditure on these
has been only £13,373 in the South, and £1092 in the North ; but the general'
expenditure amounts to £90,537 — a contrast which readers who have sailed up
Moreton Bay at night will, with the illumination afforded, be able easily to ex-
plain.
Where there is no third column to lessen the contrast, the disproportion be
tween Government loan expenditure in the South and the North becomes pain-
fully manifest- On roads and bridges there has been spent in the North £223,856,
and in the South £538,31*, or nearly double. This is because a Southern Gov-
ernment believes that roads and bridges in the North are much more cheaply
built and maintained than those in the South. The Northern territory is under-
stood to be much less rugged and mountainous than the °outhern ; while it costs-
less to clear tropical scrub than gum-tree thus, and the tropical rainfall is very
slight, and is distributed equally over the year. Then £1,173,137 has been lent to
local authorities in the South, and only £245,418, or about a fifth, to those in the-
North. This is because the area gov rned by Northern authorities is three-
fifths of that which Southern authorities govern, and also because the best official
traditions affirm that Northern roads only need clearing, while southern roads
must be paved and guttered. If boards and municipalities in the South are
allowed to borrow live times as much as those in the North, it is because paving
and guttering costs five times as much as clearing. This argument applies also
in the case of road boards and shire councils. These useful bodies have much
more work to do in the outh than in the North, and accordingly they have been
granted £84,913 in the South and £22,341 in the North. For water supply there
has been expended £192 686 in the South and £41,717 in the North, while
£40,478 is put down to “ general account.”
The remaining division of loan expenditure is telegraph* 3 , which have cost,
£433,637 in the South and £387,194 in the North. The total loan expenditure to
30th June. 1892, (exclusive of £397,338 for redeeming Treasury Bills) was
£27,024,581, of which £17,712,036 was spent in the South, £5,166,478 in the
North, and £4,146,067 on “ general account,” as officially apportioned.*
V.-REVENUE EXPENDITURE.
Returns of revenue expenditure since the foundation of the colony, nppor;
tioned to the several districts in the same manner as loan expenditure, are. un-
fortunately, wanting. Anyone, however, who analyses this expenditure will find
that it tells the usual tale of the shoeing of the outhern horse and the Southern
mare, while the Northern colt goes as bare as decency will permit. Take, for ex-
ample, the revenue expenditure for the year ended 30tli June, 1892, as give in the
Auditor-General’s report. There are first the schedules, including the salaries
of the Governor and the Ministry, the expenditure on Grammar Schools, on New
Guinea, on the payment of Members of Parliament, and on the so-called Au -
tralian Squadron. With the exception cf the items Grammar Schools and in
terest on Victoria Bridge debenture’ (£6062), this expenditure would be put down
to “ general account.” so that schedules show £16,312 for the South, £lOOO for
the North, and £90,279 on “ general account.” Here, again, it may be pointed
out how the ioutli 1 enelits from this division, since all the salaries are paid, and
must be in large part expended at Brisbane. 3he interest on the public. d ;bt,
amounted to £1,167,061. Dividing this according to the proportion of loan ex-
penditure in each district, we get £764,969 for the South, £223,047 for the
North, and £179,045 on “ general account.” The section “ Executive and Legis-
lative,” amounting to £17,989, must also be put down to “ general account,”
though the whole is paid and expended in Brisbane.
* For comja - ative figures in foregoing section see Parliamentary Jistui ns A. 27-91 ar.d A.
32-9-,


Vi* 2 Same 8 >:? I tem division, an< 3 calculating as close!v as the in-
? ! 1V u n permit ’ '"' e find the expenditure in the Chief Secrc
Ic'wn ’ P t tO , b L £3 i 7o °? Northe ™ account, and £86,882 on “ general
I ndeS in t thr “fourtln of the latter amount is paid and ex-
pended in the South. In the Colonial Secretary’s department there is an ex-
°J £ U 7,580 ’ f 80 ’ 279 bein § for the South, £25,451 for the North, and
department f en . eral account.” Tl)e fast amount includes £30,000 for
birds wil l ‘m’ Uearly , a ' P aid in Brisbane; £164,485 for poli e, rare
PrhTtini nZ« l d T-T n pa ®*,9 a P e Palmerston ; £32,000 for the Government
£6BOO for J?inV Bn !?‘ 1 n ; £4 °’ 000 for asylums, all located in the South;
lluncVotSr Mnnnn G ,? ve ™ ment pleasure boat Lucinda and the steam-
cellaneoushomt °’??°- fCr th . e shearers’ strike expenses; and a variety of mis-
eofT hems. I ivision of last year’s endowments shows that for'Hospitals
*24,5 atXCfhf'K?’ r d i h f N , orl lf 4ei6,B9ojfor Five Brigade, tile sTth
£BO3 ’ dth N th £321 1 f ° r Schools of Arts - the South £2146, and the North
account I ' Bepartmen t of Justice there is £14.425 to debit to Southern
nearly J he , rn a ocount; and £16,“47 to “general account”;
rtc/L • thls,asfc representing fees and salaries paid in Bri bine,
m asttn t - X^ 6ndl V Ue 011 publlC . was £252,638. the whole of which
• g ,;° c , f,en . eia account, with the exception of £21,50.1 spent on Orphm-
mSt there t IT? f 4 °- >9 r in the { Nort .In the Colonial Tre usurer’s Dip.irV
the Somh • V-n t ! pe » dlfcai ' e of £315,386 Of this £l7B Ll 6 wis expended in
thus receivino 0 ’ 811 - 1 ! 1 Na:t ! ’ and £8, >> 3 -5 don ■< general account.” the outh
accotmt ”tol?th nSI, 'm • by i r| u 3re th ; l . n was e *P eiided on Northern and “general
different nth t" i ' IIS stri^l ' l f disproportion is tartly accounted for bv the
Dili this io v u idowmenc to Mumom ilities and » ivisionil Bo mis. Mmiici-
irfth^North Ao . 1 l ’e eived £0580; in tlie outh, £47,420. Divisional l oads
thm h IVed , £W - 1 ?lS7 ; 11 tbe Soilth - *70,277. Five pilot steamers, eos-
tit etui ports ele em P ,oyed 111 '-oiithern ports; and three, costing £I7OB, in Nor-
£3oßa\n v l) H Partment l °i r ; a : ids there is * 1 7,647 to debit to Southern account;
“Au .. I' 5 ' hern f ; 1 f. 4 ’ 471 to ;‘ account.” As before, the amount
of n r ‘ u nt , 1-< ll chletty made up of s ilaries, which cannot, in the absence
are nt'i 1 i ,hi’ !? Z 'phoned-, but of which bv far tbe greater number
rroJ‘n v ■ t 1 lnavbe lloted tl,!lt 05 the t‘37o:» granted for th • irn-
the South °u.m U ! inipa } reserves, £925 was given to the North, and £2784 to
teb uth. 1 hisits exclusive of £2245 p lid to maintain the Bri shine Bo time
Gardens and £297 for the Brisbane Government Domain. The grant to Wi-
and be Wb Societies was £ p 7o7, of which the North got £l5O.
liOnm f tH £ ; 557, be x d ® s a s P e cial grant of £750 to the Brisbane Society;
£ 10,01-j was spent on rabbit fen mg in the South.
Sontb^Smu 0 / th ,® ex P enditure °J f ,ie department of Works gives £6412 for the
Soutn, £3299 for the North; and £43,535 on “general account.” Here, again,
Ar/n f t f rg m e rn° l ‘ 111 aVo ',' ot fhe outh ' since the report of the Government
Architect for 1891 previously quoted, shows that more than half of the ex-
penditme foi buildings m that year occurred in Brisbane. But it is not possible
to disentangle the Southern items from “ general account ” with the information
available for critics. For the same reason the ./hole of the expenditure of the
Mines Department, £31,213, must be placed to “general account.” in the case
o railway expendUure it is possible to reach an ipproximation to the truth, and
y?lOiR7 ni 3 fl? 6 | o V‘ g f*t ral acc , ount ”; £160,504 on Northern account; and
£o 19,167, oi hve-aixths of the whole, on Southern account. There remain the
Postmas,er-General and the Auditor-General, who add £336,561 to “ general
account. 8
. r > e fn'^^ l ' s anal ysis we dnd that of the revenue expenditure
for 1841-2 £3 625,280 there was expended for the South, as far as can be ascer-
tained, £1,618,8 lb; for the North, £420 563; and on “general account,”
* Parliamentary Return \. 25—1892.


£1,585,871; or 45 per cent, to the South, 11 per cent, to the North, and 44 per
cent, on “general account.” On the supposition, not far from the mark, that the
benefit of the expenditure on “ general account” is shared in the proportion of
local expenditure, the figures become £747,532 for the North, and £2,877,748 for
the South ;or 20 per cent, for the one, and 80 per cent, for the other. This is the
existing ratio of population in the two divisions, which is supposed to be the
basis for apportioning expenditure. Hence the presumption is that theforegoing
calculation, though pursued under difficulties, is approximately correct, lhe
contention on behalf of the South is, of course, that the departmental expendi-
ture, which forms the greater part of this “general account,” is incurred on e-
half of both sections of the colony, and that it is, therefore, unfair to charge the
bulk of it to one section only. But the point we are considering is the advantage
each section derives from the concentration of the business of Government m the
extreme South; and it is obvious that, even supposing South and North to re-
ceive an equal proportional share of the services for which the Government pays,
the South benefits in a ffiition by the surplus of payment, which is certainly
made in the South. Suppose that of an expenditure of four millions, one million
and a-half was spent directly in the South, one million in the North, and one
million and a-half in the South for the benefit of the whole colony. Is it not
plain that the inhabitants of the South would practically enjoy an expenditure
of three millions, since, no matter for what services the money was paid, it would
be distributed exclusively among Southern residents ?
VI.—NORTH VERSUS SOUTH.
The administration of the Colony’s finances proceeds in Brisbane on the
supposition that the Northern and Southern Divisions are equally taxed in pro-
portion to population, and enjoy the benefit of an expenditure equivalent o
revenue, less the cost of administration. Nothing could be farther from the
fact. A return compiled on August 31st, 1892, by Mr. M. Hume Black, M-B-
-shows that during the past six years the inhabitants of North Queensland have
contributed from 12s. to 38s. per head per annum in Customs taxation more than
the inhabitant* of South Queensland, or a total of £469,850. This money ha.
been abstracted by the Southern Government from the pockets of Northern
residents solely, and four-fifths of it has been spent in the South on the assump-
tion that the contributions of North and South have been equally proportioned
to population. If we accept the practical admission of last year s Constitution
Bill that much of the duty on goods consumed in the North is collected in the
South, and assume that 20 per cent, of the published Northern Customs revenue
is so collected, which is probably near the mark, the over-contribution of t e
North to Customs taxation during the past six years has been £B-1,987. ini f
means that during those six years every man, woman, and child m the Nort
has paid £ll 3s. 6d. more than the shire of taxation paid per individual in tiie
South, in this one item of Customs alone ; and out of each sum of £ll so over-
paid £8 18s. 9d. has been expended in the South and for the Fouth on a popula-
tloU There is no doubt that this estimate is approximately correct. If further
proof be needed it is furnished by a return of Customs revenue laid before the
Legislative Assembly on 7th September, 1892.* This shows that during the
year ended 30th June, 1892 the Customs revenue collected in North Queensland
was £3 11s. 2d. per head. In South Queensland it was only £2 14s. sd. par head.
This means that the population of North Queensland are taxed through the
Customs, according to the Treasury statement, sixteen shillings and nmepence
per head per annum more than the population of South Queensland. it we
again assume that 20 per cent, must be added for duty collected in Brisbane on
goods consumed in the North, and credited to the South, it is seen that the true
* Parliamentary Return A. 30. —1592.


contribution of the South to Customs revenue is £2 10s. 10|d. per head per an
num, while every individual in the North contributes no less than £4 ss. 4fd.
per annum. This is equivalent to saying that the Norths is taxed nearly twice
as heavily as the South—which is a fact. Were the extra revenue spent where it
is raised, the grievance might be bone, but 80 per cent, of it is spent in the
South on the assumption that taxation is equal throughout the Colony. Thus
during the single year ended 30th June, 1892, no less than £112,293 of revenue
raised in the North was appropriated and expended in the South.
Under these circumstances it is obviously to the interest of the South to
encourage high Customs taxation, since the greater the tax the less the propor-
tion of it which is paid by the South, and the greater the sum which is drawn
from Northern pockets for Southern benefit. The amount which the South may
thus expect to gain, and the North to lose, from the increased tariff now in force
is at least £150,000 per annum, as long as the present ratio of population be-
tween North and South is maintained. The Constitution Bill provides that the
duty collected m one Province on goods consumed in another shall be credited
to the consuming Province. But this is only the lesser half of the yearly Nor-
thern mss. As the Bill reserves the whole control of Customs taxation to the
Bouse of Bepresentatives of the United Provinces, in which there are thirty-two
Southern representatives to the Northern nine, the chances of the greater half
being refunded are small indeed.
This item of Customs revenue and expenditure is the most important of all
tor the purpose of comparative enquiry, since not only is the Customs revenue
more than a third of the total revenue of the Colony, but it is almost the only
branch oi taxation for which the person taxed receives no direct equivalent.
The other branches of revenue include receipts from land sales and land rents,
irom railways, from the post and telegraph offices, and from various other ser-
vices which the Government performs for the community. In nil these cases
the Government has to exchange for its revenue something which may fairly be
considered a quid pro quo, since it is at the option of the community to make the
exchange or not. In the case of Customs taxation there is no option. People
must eat, drink, and be clothed, since the habit is more or less an obligation ;
and m return for the heightened price of food, drink, and clothing, the Govern-
ment gives simply government. It is, therefore, in regard to Customs taxation
that maladministration is of the greatest moment, since the taxpayer cannot
here receive his quid pro quo in the tangible shape of a piece of land, or a railway
ticket, oi the carriage of a letter to London, but only in the abstract form of
good administration. If the land is poor, or the railway slow T , or the postage too
highj he need not buy the land, or travel on the railway, or send a letter, unless
he chooses. But if he eats bread, or drinks tea, or wears boots, he has no choice
but to pay the tax. These are in the ei es of most people primary necessities, to
which otners are secondary. Whether or not an equivalent is returned depends
entirely upon whether the affairs of the Government are well administered.
Hence, in this narrow view, it is in the matter of Customs revenue that good
administration is of most importance, and malversation of the funds is of most
serious consequence ; ai/d it has been shown that the Northern resident not only
pays more in Customs taxation than the Southern resident, but that four-
fitth of his surplus payment is spent for the benefit of the Southern resident.
So much for taxation. As regards services, the Government habitually
give 3 the Southern resident more for his money than it gives the Northern resi-
T " e , Government offices in the South are in better buildings, better
fitted, and better staffed than those in the North, and consequently the functions
oi government are performed with greater accuracy and celerity. As a subject
tor comparison, take the Department of Bailways, which performs the chief of
the Government services, and enjoys an income of over a million per annum, or
nearly another third of the Colony’s revenue. It is managed by three Commis-
sioners, all resident m Brisbane, so that the South has the benefit of speedy re-
dress for grievances when shown to exist, and of the constant personal attention
oi the heads of the Department to Southern wants. The t'outh has the best
stations, the best engines, the best goods waggons, the best passenger carriages,
and pays less for superior than the North for inferior accommodation. EaJes


on the Mackay, Cooktown, and Bowen lines are 25 per cent, higher, on the Cairns
and Normanton lines 50 per cent, higher than those on any Southern line. Yet
the Southern newspapers teem with complaints that the rates are too high.
What would the aggrieved individuals say were they 25 or 50 per cent, higher, as
they should be in justice ? It would naturally be supposed that Southern rail-
ways either cost less, or earned more, than Northern. The very reverse is the
fact. Southern railways cost to 80th June, 1892, including rolling stock,
£12,908,369 ; Northern railways only £3,138,481, or £9,769,888 less. Including
rolling stock, Southern railways cost £7187 per mile ; Northern railways only
£5989 per mile, or £ll9B per milfe less. The construction cost of Southern rail-
ways was £6510 per mile; of Northern railways only £5657 per mile, or £B?>3
per mile less. By deduction, the cost of rolling stock on Southern railways was
£677 per mile ; on Northern railways only £332 per mile, or £345 per mile less.
This means that tw'ce as much has been spent for equipment of Southern lines
as for Northern, proportionately to mileage ; and proves the statement previously
made as to the comparative conveniences for traffic in the two Divisions.* Yet
the nett revenue of Southern railways last year was £2 9s. 6d. per cent, on the
invested capital, while the nett revenue of Northern railways was £2 19s. sd. per
cent., or 9s. lid. per cent. more. The capital expended on railways per head of
population is in the South £39 4s. 9d.; in the North £3B 11s. 4d., or 13s. sd. per
head less. The nett revenue of Southern railways last year was 19s sd. per head
of population; of Northern railways £1 2s. lid. per head, or 3s. 6d. per head
more. Yet the North has to pay interest on the cost of such huge blunders as
the Cairns railway, the fruit of the scandalous jobbery of Southern politicians.
It is in the face of such figures as these that the Northern miner pays £2 14s. bd.
to carry a ton of crude ore 94 miles from Croydon to Normanton, over tne
cheapest line in the Colony, paying £3 5s 7d. per cent, on the outlay ; while the
Southern farmer pays only 13s. to carry a ton of wheat the same distance over
lines in the Southern Division, some of the dearest in the Colony, of which eleven
branches in eighteen are run at a loss, and which pay in the aggregate only
£1 15s 9d. per cent, on the outlay. The farmer pays 2s. 6d per ton for the first
ten miles, and ljd. per ton for every additional mile; the miner pays 6d. per
ton for the first ten miles, and 7Jd. per ton for every additional mile Thus the
miner pays on the first ten miles 200 per cent, more than the farmer, and for
every additional mile 400 per cent. more. Fifty per cent, is clapped on because
the miner lives in the North, and the remainder because he is a miner and not a
farmer. This is the comparative equivalent in railway services which a Southern
Government gives the Northern and Southern taxpayer.f
These two items of Customs and Railways comprise two-thirds of the Colony s
revenue, and in both tlfS North is a heavy loser, while the South gains corres-
pondingly. As regards the remaining third of revenue, there is less injustice
done to the North. It is impossible for the Government to charge differential
postal or telegraphic rates, or differential land and mining fees,, though the
trouble and delay caused to Nor the r n residents by Brisbane centralisation outweighs
the value of many a fee. It is sufficient to have shown that as regards two-thirds
of the Colony’s revenue the North is persistently bled for the benefit of the
South.
*B6 per cent, of the Department’s cairiages and waggons, including all the best patterns, are
now in use on Southe; n railways, though those have but 77 per cent, of the total mile ig ,
contribute but 77 per cent, ot the nett traffic revenue. .
f For foregoing figures see Raliway Commissioners’ Report for 1891--. The amou i
from those previously quoted from loan returns, since they do not include loss on sa
bentures. The m leage of South and North is taken as 1798 and 524 respectively, as P
6 of Commissioners’ report, though at page 41 it is given as 1795 and 525.


VII.—THE POPULATION BASIS.
™? Jf nS a £ d \ 3 gcm ™ ed on the hypothesis that the incidence of taxation is
ffi h r gh ° Ut the CO On , y ' lhe dtizen of the North is suppose ito contri-
precisely the same amount to the revenue as the citizen of
the bouth When there is question of dividing surplus revenue, after the cost
exneSnf/ii 1011 1S - d ® frayed) the cltlzen in the North is s: pposed to benefit by
expenditure to precisely -the same amount as the citizen in the South There-
No?h r n officidls ’ of South Queensland is four
foui fifths ?T enS anf ’ f^ l 0 T S t , hat South Queensland contributes
iour-fittns of the total revenue, and should enjoy four-fifths of the total
expenditure. But we have seen that the hypothesis is false The burden of
notion 11 of not equally ® hared ; The North contributes much more than its pro-
foui fifthf of V ti nUe ’ receives IeB , B tban lts proportion of expenditure, since
° f ?? rp US revenue of the North is appropriated for the South.
teSSS: 6 P °r ation I bßSis is demons trably unfair in practice.
As long as the North has a smaller population than the South, and the forces of
vernment are concentrated in the South, the practice is bound to be unfair.
The minority are at the mercy of Tie majority, and the majority have no mercy'
W h°f eS rtl i nd S ° uth for Government benefits 7 is like the con-
nuddine e Th^ a waif C ° PPer f eid a"?, the waiter ’ as to whicb would get the most
pudding. The waiter professed the greatest anxiety for fair play ; but what
his Hh]p a nnn etde l °:? a ! ld ’ S appetite ’ his despatch to David’s dispatch, and
his tablespoon o David s teaspoon, the boy got very little pudding. While the
population basis ol administration givei the South a tablespoon to the Northern
separate basfns° Uth W 1 mfalllbly get most pudding-until the pudding is put in
m practl ? e > administration on a population basis, signifying adminis-
Thp average 3) ls . a]s ° erroneous in theory. Take first the case of revenue.
w 1 01 J anisatlon / one in which burdens and benefits are equally
shared by every efficient member of the community. The Government is the
Executive of the community, and its acts should conform to the ideal as far as
practicable. Its motto should be the socialistic motto: From each according to
wfdTl f 6aCh acco I rdmg to his services. But as individual capacity differs
that the r d nv* 18 lm P f os ® lbl ® t 0 ada P* a special burden to every back, it follows
S ordnr S should strive to level up capacities to the same standard,
ZlTl l g eneral _ burden may be equally borne. Or in other words, the
ideal community is one m which material prosperity is equally diffused among
eSerVmg -- The existence of extremes of riches and poVe.ty among itf
eoVdpn mL PreJU Tn C - la - t0 the . fetate ’ . whlch should endeavor that all may enjoy the
is precisely what our Southern Government does not do.
NpnVW ’ i, h ? ugb theoretically equal in incidence, is unequal in essence.
S rT r r ° m th ? C "? toms by . a scheme of duty on food,
nearlv aq irmpii n art icles ° f f? neral utility, of which the poor man consumes
rPvPnL ! v, i the riCh ‘ 5 onSeqUently tbe P° or man contributes to the
revenue a much larger proportion of his revenue than the rich. Each may
contribute £lO ; but £lO deducted from £IOO per annum is ten times as much
K I V B £l °r K ed^ ted £lo °° ** annum ' So that the weakest
back bears the heaviest burden ; though the Government, averaging the strength
of the backs on a population basis, presumes that the burdens are equal. 8
Similarly with expenditure there are in any community, at the present
stage of civilisation certa,in functions which can be better executed by a central
authority than by the individual or local authority. The precise nature of these
may vary from time to time, and is always a subject for discussion.
The central authority is permitted to levy taxes in order to discharge these
functions, and should levy no more and no less than are necessary to their
adequate discharge. Moneys thus raised must be spent for the benefit of the
whole community, without reference to the individual contributors, since for any
other object than the common benefit they should never be raised by the central
authority. With the population basis of administration, the benefit of the com-
munity is supposed to be secured by division of the expenditure on a capitation


average, without reference either to need or desert. But it is manifest that t
may be often impolitic. For example, it is against the interests of the comma y,
in a colony such as Queensland, that the bulk of the people should be congregated
in towns, and that the resources of the country should be comparatively unde-
veloped for want of labor. Rational administration of the common funds wou
expend a much larger sum in opening up the wealth of the country than
adding to the conveniences of the towns. administration on the P°P U J« °
basis counts parasites in the towns of as much importance as toilers n the
country, and nourishes a disease which is already dangerous. . ga ,
interest of the community that the common funds should be devoted to reto g
natural inequalities as far as may be, so that settlement may a va
whole territory, and not alone in a few favored districts. Rational admi
tion would give greater assistance from the common funds to residents where
the conditions o i life are naturally arduous than to residents where they are
naturally easv, provided the duties fulfilled are equally s-:rviable 1 o the com-
munity. Administration on the population basis accentuates the naturali mspro
portion of comfort, and discourages the man whose labor is greatei in order to
reward the man whose labor is less. So throughout almost the whole field sav-
aging its expenditure on a population basis, the Government helps those most
who need it least, and often deserve it least.
Take, for instance, the item of Divisional endowment. From physical
reasons, the Divisional authorities of the North have as a rule a much heavier
task than those of the South. The construction and maintenance oroadsi
the North is more difficult than in the South. Yet, at present, all the Divisional
Boards of the colony are placed on the same footing as regards Government e -
dowment. Those in charge of the wealthy and populous districts of the ‘;° utn
are assisted equally with those of the unexplored, unsettled regions of the i o t
The diviision of the Barron, which took over from the Government a territory of
four hundred square miles in area, mostly covered with dense scrub, traversea
by a huge mountain range with its attendant spurs, and broken y UUj<
streams and gullies, with hardly a mile of road fit for heavy traffic, gets pie-
cisely the same endowment aid as the division of Booroodabin, which tools
over a district only three square miles in area, cleared and level, and pe e-
trated by numerous well-made roads. To the first, because it ias a » y
population of struggling pioneers, Government lends £4OO ; to the be-
cause its natural advantages enable it to levy oil a large number of P™ 8 P er ft
ous ratepayers, Government lends £27,000. these cases are
rest. Boards whiffi started close to centres of population, with their mo t
arduous tasks already performed, are treated not only as well as, but better
than those which have all their troubles to come, sinoe the former rec
greater gross amount in endowment, and are able to ask for larger loans-
These matters were considered at the Conference of Northern Local Authori-
ties held at Herberton in 1891 and it was decided in justice to the unsettled
districts where pioneers, selectors, or miners have to contend with
natural difficulties, to make an appeal to the Government for differential en-
dowment, favoring the boards whose chief work is to do at the
those for whom it has been already done. After six months had elapsed the
Colonial Secretary replied refusing to recommend differential endowment, on
the ground that the North had already enjoyed special assistance from go-
vernment. In the light of the facts as we know them, this reply is nonsense.
The truth is that the Conference was snubbed because, however just ns a -
guments, it is highly inexpedient for any Ministry which values the favor or
Southern constituencies to attempt to give snch arguments practical foroe w °
that we come to the familiar conclusion, reached in a hundred d “ feie J^ ’
that as long as the South legislates for the general interest and administer
for her own, so long will the North suffer while the South prospers.
So far, we have been dealing with government on the population basis
in relation to revenue and revenue expenditure. Its operation ®, P? n
diture remains to be considered. Here again, the quality ot i ihe population
must be taken into account. A miner at Croydon is i ™ .. .
community than a commission agent at Brisbane. Of all t


make tip tlie population, primary producers, such as farmers, nainers,
graziers, and so on deserve most encouragement and assistance, since by
their efforts the general prosperity is built up now, although the population
of the North is only 20 per cent of ihe whole population, that part which is
engaged in primary productive industries is 32 per cent of the whole popula-
tion. Stress must also be laid on the argument that money borrowed by the
Central authority on ths credit of the community should be expended for tho benefit
ofthe community. If it is expended for individual or local benefit, only indi-
vidual cr local < redit should be pledged. But the bulk of money borrowed
by the Queensland Government for the benefit of the community has been
expended for the benefit of the South. For example, the object of borrowing
money for the construction of railways is that the natural wealth of the
colony may be developed by the provision of facilities for cheap and speedy
carriage and communication, thus aiding settlement and progress. The natu-
ral wealth of North Queensland is at least as great, in proportion to area, as
that of South Queensland. It is quite as much to the advantage
■of the community to dev. lop the mineral and timber resources
of the North as to develop the pastoral and agricultural resources of
•the South. Yet while the area of North Queensland is 37 per cent, of the whole
area of the colony, its railway mileage is only 22 per cent, of the whole mileage
■of the colony. It is the same with other items of loan expenditure; the North
gets always 15 per cent, less than the share to which its wealth and area entitle
it. Southern politicians have always affirmed that population must be the basis
■of expenditure, and the North has acquiesced. But, so far as there can be a
permanent basis, it is not population, but area. For, after all, the chief security
of the public creditor is the public land. Population fluctuates, but the land is
fixed. Given natural wealth, and population follows. But given population,
vveath does not follow, unless there is dormant wealth to repay labor. Fifty men
living on the Charters Towers mines offer better security for a loan than fifty
thousand living on each other. One man who owns a hundred acres of land can
get a Bank overdraft denied to twenty men with nothing but the clothes they
stand in. Surely the North is entitled to a share of loan expenditure propor-
tional to the loan security it offers.
But, it will be said, the whole population contributes equally to pay interest
on the public loans, and therefore the South is entitled to a loan expenditure
proportional to its interest contribution. This is a repetition of the fallacy which
supposes that moneys raised for the benefit of fie community (and the Govern-
ment has no right to raise moneys except for the benefit of the community)
should be spent for the benefit ofthe individual. The position is indefensible.
The essence of communal government is the surrender of individual rights for
the general good. If it is for the good of the colony of Queensland as a whole
that the resources of the North should be developed in proportion to t' eir wealth
and extent, and not in proportion to the momentary population, then the com-
mon funds, raised for the common benefit, on the common security, may be
justly devoted to tbeir development. Besides, the difficulty rights itself. Were
expenditure proportioned to resources, which may be taken as synonymous with
area, the population of North Queensland would speedily become as dense as
that of South Queensland, and pay its due share of interest on a population
basis. Expenditure and population have re-acted on each other. Had the
expenditure of Government moneys in North and South Queensland been always
in proportion to area, the population of the two divisions would now be tqual in
proporton to area. But instead of dealing with North and South together as a
homogeneous community ■ outhern politicians have separated them before
Separation-—so far as (he profits of union are concerned. The losses are another
matter.


VIII.—THE NATURAL OPPOSITION.
South Queensland lies almost wholly within the temperate zone; Northi
Queensland lies wholly within the tropics. To those who will think what this
fact implies, there must come conviction that the system of government which is
suitable for the one can never be good for the other. The natural opposition is
too great. Radical differences of soil, of vegetation, of climate, of rainfall, ot
physical contour, of natural resources, of artifical products, must cause corres-
ponding differences in the character and pursuits of the inhabitants of the two
territories, and in the laws and customs by which they should be governed.
Hitherto these differences have been ignored, and Northern industries have
been lopped or stretched until they fitted the bed of the Southern Piocrustes.
At one time Southern legislators decide that sugar culture for which the
coastal districts of the North are . especially fitted, must not be carried on by
colored labor. A few years elapse, and they affirm with equal conviction that
colored labor must be re-introduced. An Act to regulate the Not them pearl-
shell and beche de-mer fisheries was passed in 1892, not one in ten of the mem-
bers of Parliament who voted for it knowing anything of the conditions under
which these fisheries are carried ox. It proved unworkable; was immediately
nullified by special regulations; and is practically inoperative, because to put it
operation would kill the industries at once. In these, as in a thousand minor
instances. Northern wishes or necessities count for nothing. Southern whims
are all in all, and there is a cheerful belief in t’m South that ruined Northern in-
dustries may be revived with a stroke of the pen. “ A breith can make them,.
as a breath has made.”
Southern industries fall in quite another category. They require careful
treatment. Hence the need for a protective Customs tariff, such as that n°wm
force, which deliberately favors the South at the expense of the ® '
North grows no wheat, therefore for every loaf of brea i which the Noithein
farmer, the Northern miner, the Northern grazier consumes, he pays an extia
fee, which goes directly into Southern pockets. The manufacture of boot* and
shoes centres in the South, therefore, in order that Southern capital may be well
employed, and Southern manufactories may prosper, the Northerner has to pay
ahe ivy extra charge on every pair of boots he wears. There is a duty on bar ley,
on beans and peas, on bran and pollard, on butter on cheese, on chaff, on wheat
and flour, on hay, on maize, and on oats —all chiefly or exclusively produced in
the South, and largely consumed in the North. The duty on sugar assists both
Northern and Southern growers. There is also a duty on ri^ e ’ wl^ gov
in the North and consumed to a small extent in the South. But the Treamie ,
who protects both the W irwick wheat-grower and the Warwick floui-miller, e.
pressly refused to protect the Cairns rice-rniller. In or er o , *
manufacture of starch in Brisbane the tariff provides that starch manufactu e
in bond from imported rice shall be duty free This is the equal justice which,
according to a score of Southern apologists, the South dispenses for the North
If all the other arguments for Separation were a dead letter th ere 1S an amp
argument in the tariff and the policy which the tariff is calcuiated to support-
a tariff which teaches that the North was created rich and progressive m orde
that the South might periodically milk it; a poll y which that Sout e
votes are perpetually to be bought at Northern expense. „ ~ P *
testing of no use arguing ; only one protest, one argument can be effective, and
that is the protest and the argument which finally severs the < iestll “ es
tories naturally opposed in interest, and sets each free to wor
° r Tor?KSrTm,yl>ewith the South, while the North has immense
natural wealth at command, a protective policy must be fallacious. Itß object is
said to be the encouragement of manufactures, and the provision °*
for the ariisan class. As long as the North has more natural weaUh to develop
than there are hands to develop it, she wants neither manufactures nora rtls >
if she has to pay more for the home-made than for the imported product,
artisan’s labor adds to the value of the raw product; but if he isi paid the
equivalent of his labor it adds nothing to the wealth of the community. If a


miner digs an ounce of silver from the ground he adds 3s 2d to the wealth of the
an ar tisan makes that ounce of silver into spoons worth 6s 4d,
the extra 3s 2d is not added wealth, but added price, representing the skill ex-
pended. As long a 3 there is silver to win the artisan would be more profitably
to the community employed in extracting silver, provided that the demand for
spoons can be supplied by importation at a lower rate than the artisan can afford
to work for. To the end of 1891 North Queensland had produced 24 million
pounds worth of minerals, the South not half that amount. Yet Northern min-
ing is still in its infancy. While the North has such magnificent stores of raw
products at command, directly exchangeable for commodities, she should
employ the whole of her population as producers of wealth or assistants in pro-
duction, throw her ports open to the world and charge not a penny of duty unless
• absolutely needed for revenue. Then every man in the community would have
e greatest possible income and the least possible expenditure, and a sure
foundation would be laid for future progress. Of course, as long as the North is
exploited for the benefit of the South, such a vision is absurd.
If, instead of taking advantage of Northern weakness, the South did its ut-
most to overcome the natural obstacles to good government on the present plan,
its eftoits would still be fruitless. The obstacles are insuperable. Area and distance
put energetic administration from Brisbane out of the question. The southern
boundary of North Queensland is as far from the capital as Switzerland from
London ; its northern boundary is as far as Greece; it takes longer to go from
Brisbane to Norman ton than from London to New York. If the British Islands
were ruled from St Petersburg the faciaties for administration would be about
equal to those which Brisbane possesses for ruling North Queensland. In 1856
the advocates of Separation in Brisbane denied outright that the Brisbane district
could be adequately governed from Sydney 500 miles awav. To-day the oppo-
nents of Separation in Brisbane areVonvinced that the “Gulf and Gape York
districts can be adequately governed from Brisbane, 1000 to 1500 miles away.
We have now the telegraph, it is true; but the telegraph has its limitations, and
these are keenly felt. When there are no postage stamps at Charters Towers,
no mining forms at Croydon, a fresh supply cannot be sent by telegraph from the
risbane depot. Public officials cannot come by telegraph, nor public documents,
nor public tenders, nor public correspondence. A Northern resident who has
business to transact with a Government Department in Brisbane cannot get a
repv in Jess than a fortnight or a month, according to distance. Tf a resident
ol Ipswich waited a month for an answer to his application for a brand, or a
Dirtli certificate, or a billet, he would probably t <1 aggrieved.
But however substantial its grievances, i f t- vain for the North to petition
tor redress. If a Northern district needs a school, or a mail service, or a dredge,
or a hundred other tilings, it beats vainly at the Ministerial door where a South-
ern district enters without knocking. In the South one has only to ask to
receive, even in the hardest of times, if the request is at all reasonable, and as
a rule the Departments anticipate the wants of the settlers, and provide all the
conveniences at administrative disposal before they are asked for. And why ?
Because Southern electorates are nearer to the capital, to the centre of govern-
ment, to the centre of influence, to the centre of expenditure. The cry of the
* 6 iterate reaches Brisbane as a faint and superfluous murmur, if
indeed it reaches them at all. The cry of the Southern electorate is a forceful
summons which causes instant commotion in the Ministerial hive. Members run
to and fro; the papers take up the cry and emphasise its justice; there is a
question in Parliament next day, and to the answer everybody listens intently •
in a week the grievance is redressed. So it will ever be un er the present
system of administration, which governs from a point many hundreds of miles
awa\ territory of whose nature and need the governors have scarcely an idea.
A “ linc * e examples might be cited of the difficulties caused by the adminis-
tration of h orthern affairs from Brisbane. Every Northern town teems with
them ; nearly every Northern resident has had personal experience of the uses of
monopoly which are only sweet to the monopolists. One or two tvpical instances
may be given from last year’s batch. Early in April the Department of Public
Instruction called for tenders, with deposit, for additions tc the teacher’s resi


sidence Cairns State School. Good Americans, when they die, go to Paris;
and in Queensland everything dead or alive goes to Brisbane. The tenders
and deposits went to Brisbane. Time passed, and the tender-
ers grew curious. The Department made no s'gn. The tenderers grew
anxious. The Department was serenely calm. The tenderers grew indigent.
More time passed, and the Department notified that they had decided not to go
on with the work. The tenderers grew angry, and demanded their deposits
back. They received them in June, two months after the tenders had closed. They
did not consider their loss in time, trouble, and money sufficiently compensated
by their opportunities for admiring the beautiful system of centralisation.
In August last a kanaka employed on a sugar plantation at Geraldton
developed a cutaneous disease which was thought to be leprosy. He was arrested
by the police, and examined by the two local doctors, one of whom said the eruption
was leprosy, while the other said it was not. The matter was, of course, referred
to Brisbane, and the leper was put in the hospital, to the disgust of Geraldton
residents, until the authorities could consider his case. Presumably he was
unused to the centralisation system in his island home, for he grew tired of
waiting, and escaped into the scrub. The police went after him, and hunted
■energetically for several days until they found him. He was brought back and
chained to a hollow log sixb divo, lest he should contaminate the lock-up, while a
constable watched that he did not break the chain. By-and-by came up
that the Government officer who had to do with lepers could not spare the time to go
to Geraldton. eight hundred miles away ; and the leper must go to Brisbane like
fci< betters. But the steamboats naturally refused to take him,
and as the Lucinda, the Otter, and the rest of the Govern-
ment fleet were engaged at Brisbane, a deadlock ensued. Meanwhile
the leper voted for Separation from his hollow log. and escaped again.
Again he was hunted and recaptured, while the police passed perspiring weeks
in correspondence with a sleepy C ivil Servant in the metropolis who wondered
where the—(yawn) - Geraldton was. The leper resigned himself to his fate and
ate his rations from the end of a long pole with as much appetite as could be
expected ; while the Geraldton people, having made up their minds that contagion
had long since taken place, arranged picnics to the hollow log, and inspected its
resident with as much interest as if he were an animal at the Zoo. At last a
brilliant idea struck the rulers of the leper’s destiny in Brisbane. The mountain
could not come to Mahomet, and Mahomet would not go to the mountain; but
if a bit of the mountain were sent ! The police obeyed orders; a piece was
sawn off an outlying locality of the eper; and the sample was duly despatched
to Brisbane for ex parte examination. Then followed weeks of suspense, during
which the leper knew that at any moment he might be led to execution, and
grew visibly thinner. At last the fiat was issued—if his bulk was similar to the
specimen parcel, the leper was no leper, and might go free. He did. The time
of action for this little drama was three months, and the b per is profoundly im-
pressed with the wonderful resources of colonial administration.
Passing from small things to great, the construction of the second section of
the Cairns railway is a stupendous example of Southern mismanagement of
Northern affairs. The amount of the original tender for this piece of line was
£290,984 ; the amount paid to the contractor to 80th June, 1892, was £880,406 ;
and arbitration on a further claim for £262,311 is now’ proceeding. The whole
responsibility for this monstrous extravagance falls upon the Minister, the Hon
W. Miles, who let the contract, and upon the Ministry, with Sir S. W. Griffith
at its head, which supported Mr. Miles. The .work was of unusual difficulty,
and the Government engineers and surveyors recognised that unusual care was
needed in the preparation of plans and specifications. They protested in vain
that they were not eady ; that the necessary preliminu-y te-ts hid not been
undertaken ; that no trial shafts had been sunk along the course of the line to
ascertain the n iture of the country. Political reasons were piramonnt ; the
protects were unheeded ; the plans were “rushed through at the rate of fifty
miles an hour,” as one of those concerned graphically puts it; and the result was
that tenders were called for a line which could not possibly be constructed. It
was suspended on the verge of precipices, where there was not foothold for a fly;


it found a basis of solid rock where there was only treacherous earth; a* one
point of its progress it was literally hung in mid-air, like Mahomet’s coffin. The
result was that instead of the railway being constructed on the plans and speci-
fications it was constructed piecemeal The plans were given up altogether, and
at every mile the engineers went ahead and decided what direction the next mile
should take. In fifteen miles of construction there were sixteen miles of devia-
tions; and in place of 587,000 yards of excavation there were 2,824,000 yards.
The total cost will probably be a million sterling; and the line should have been
built for a quarter of that amount. Consequently, for a long time to come the
Cairns railway cannot possibly pay interest on capital expenditure; the defi-
ciency must be made good bv the North ; and at Separation the debt must be
taken over by the North. This is the most signal of all the blessings for which
the North has to thank a Southern Government. No Northern Government
could have blundered so wilfully and so grossly.
IX.—THE GRIFFITH COMPROMISE.
Ever since the agitation for Separation began it has been looked on with
disfavor in the South. To Southern Legislators Reparation means that the
Southern Parliament will be shorn of a great part of its revenue, authority,
importance; to Southern men of business Separation means the destruction of
the Brisbane monopoly, the establishment of rival industries, the progress of
rival ports. Jt means the abolition of ui equal taxation, the steppage of unequal
expenditure, the end of the system of centralisation which drains all the wealth
of the col ny into a single reservoir. With the consent of Southerners, Separa-
tion will never come. For long the justice of the agitation was denied. At last
the inexorable logic of facts compelled an admission that the North could not be
effectively governed by a Southern Parliament, and since that time the leaders
of Southern opinion, while virtually acknowledging the necessity for Separation,
have endeavored to find some compromise which shall gi'e the North the
shadow of authority while retaining the substance for the South. With such of
these schemes as have proved abortive we need not concern ourselves; but the
final one—the Constitution Bill—introduced by Sir S. W. Griffith in the last
Session of Parliament, is said to be still before the country, and some considera-
tion of its provisions will not be unprofitable.
The issues which the Bill involve are issues whose decision would tax the
powers of the profoundest juris- consvltu— issues including a subversion of the
i onstitution of Queensland, issues of the most momentous importance to the
future Australia. Yet they were brought forward for consideration casually
—almost jauntily. They were discussed conversationally, and at random, by
half the representatives in the last Session of a Parliament whose mandate, in
the French phrase, had long been exhausted. They were decided as carelessly
as if they had been proposals to grant £SO to a Brisbane charity. “A totalisator
bill,” said the Courier , “or a \ote of £IOO to an incapacitated civil servant,
would have provoked a far more earnest discussion than was excited by the
Constitution Bill.” But for the clamor f r Separation there is no reason to
believe the Premier would have stirred in the matter. The Separation advocates
were hot on the trail, and he drew a red herring across—yielding in order to
conquer, and giving part that he might not be compelled to give the whole.
The history of the measure is indeed extraordinary. Commencing as a Bill
to divide the colony into three Provinces—North, Central and Southern— it was
brought forward by the Premier as a Government measure, and supported by
the other members of the Ministry. Finding that in this form it was
unacceptable to his adherents, and daunted, in spite of his obstinacy, by the
force of the arguments brought against it, the Premier then withdrew the Bill,
and brought forward a Bill to divide the colony into two Provinces only—North
and South Queensland. In this shape, after various amendments had been
made, it was passed by the Legislative Assembly and rejected by the Legislative
Council. From the beginning the Bill was consistently supported by Northern


representatives in the Assembly, with perhaps one exception. The Central
representatives supported the Tri Provincial Scheme, and oppose e
81-Pi ovinuial, exclaiming bitterly against their “betrayal by the Govern-
ment. Most of the Southern representatives expressed a preference
for complete Separation between North and South Queensland, though
yielding to the pressure used to pass the Bill through the Assembly.
The wisdom of the support given by the Northern members was more than
•doubtful. Some of them defended their attitude on the ground that the division
of the colony into provinces would be a stepping-stone to Separation. The pro-
babilities do not support this view. Separation would be possible, no doubt; but
it would be indefinitely delayed. Had the Legislative Coun ll passed the Bi ,
Sir S W. Griffith could inform the British Government that there was plainly
no need of Reparation, since the South had acceded to the demands of the North
.and the North, through its representatives in Parliament, had accepted the
measure of autonomy offered. ~~ „
The d inger is, seemingly, not yet over. We are now told that should jhe
( oalition Government, or its heirs and assigns regain office after the genera
■election, the Bill will probably be brought forward again. The Hon. H. M.
Nelson, who has succeeded to the Premiership, is in favor of Separation it any
partition at all take place; but the Darling Downs Gazette, which is generally
supposed to be his press mouthpiece, states that this circumstance will not pre-
vent him from supporting the bill. In spite of his announced retirement from
politics Sir S. W. Griffith is determined that Separation shall not come without
a struggle. Under these circumstances it is worth while understanding what
measure of relief the amended Constitution Bill would really afford to the North,
and what are its advantages compared with Separation. The preamble of the
amended Bill declares that “it would be for the general benefit of the
people of Queensland that the local affairs of the Southern and Northern
divisions thereof should be administered by the people of those divisions rej|pec-
tivelv.” The original Bill declared that “it would be for the general benefit of
the people of Queensland that the local affairs of the Southern, Central, and
Northern Divisions thereof should be administered by the people of those Divi-
sions respectively.” The Premier and the Government in the same week
supported both propositions with equal ardour; or rather, considering the
character of the debates, with equal indifference. There P r ® tenc ® °|
adequate discussion. The Premier clearly comprehended that the time had
arrived when either Separation or some substitute must be acquiesced in by the
reluctant South. So that it was not Separation or an equivalent he cared little
what was-the substitute. The Government did the Premier s bidding. .
The Bill goes on to affirm the desirability of the “ general allairs ot the
whole colony continuing to be managed by a general Parliament and a general
Government.” Whether this desirability exists depends chiefly, from a Northern
point of view, on the interpretation given to the term “general affairs. ine
object of the agitation for Separation is that the North may manage its own
affairs both general and local for the benefit of the North. Hitherto as has been
shown, they have been managed by the South for the benefit of the South. Will
the Constitution Bill, if made law, alter the state of things ? Let us see.
It is shown that the chief causes of Northern misgovernment have been the
concentration of the profits of Government in Brisbane and the South, and the
preponderance of Southern influence in the general Parliament. It is father
alleged that so diverse are the interests of North and South, so opposite the
conditions of administration, that it is physically impossible for thelaffunof! the
North to be adequately directed by any Southern Government. Does the Bill
then, propose to remove the seat of general government from the South ?It
does not. Does the Bill propose to destroy the monopoly of the profits ot
Government by Brisbane ? It does not. On the contrary it affirms and strengthens
that monopoly. Brisbme remains the capital of the Lnited Provinces and
the seat of the general Government. Instead of two Legislative Chambers the Bill
provides four Chambers sitting in Brisbane, with a Governor, Deputy Governol',
President of the Senate, Speaker of the House of Representatives, President of
.the Legislative Council, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, five Ministers for


the United Provinces, and six Ministers for the Southern Province. That is
there are to be in Brisbane two Governors, four Houses of Parliament, with four
residents, twelve Ministers, and 134 members, all drawing salaries, and each
House, doubtless, provided with its own short hand reporters and its own re-
iresnment-bar. To accommodate the new Houses, new buildings must be
erected, furnished and fitted ; and new expenditure incurred in nearly every de-
partment of the public service. In return, the North is granted one Legislative
Chamber, with one Deputy-Governor, one Speaker, four Ministers, and 32 mem-
bers. -this is what is called decentralisation, and Brisbane folk will take just as
much of this kind of decentralisation as the country chooses to give.
Will the Bill destroy the preponderance of Southern influence in the general
Parliament? It will not. By far the greatest power created under the Bill is
wielded by tLe House of Bepresentatives in the United Provinces, and ' lause
ance^ eIS 0006 ieams Northern autonomy in matters of real import-
follows •— 1 !” ei ? b , e , rS to H® chos ® n b 7 ® ach Province at the first ehction shall he as
follows. South Queensland, 32 members: North Queensland nine members.
'i hat is the new Northern Province starts on its career of better «OVern-
ment with odds of a shade under four to one against. Who will take them ?
The subjects as regards which Northern grievances are to ba redressed by
a majority of nine to thirty two are set 'orth in Clause 61 as follows
the W® V oVi r,r 0f tllis ct S® 9 neen Shan, with the advice and consent of
1 Afse ™Hr. have full power and authority to make laws for the peace order and
tha°t ifto say- the Unit6d Pr, ' Tir;CeS > with res P ec t to all o, any of the matters followfng,
o' con “titution, privileges, and proceedings, of the General Assembly :
ibe constitution ot new Provinces and the alteration of the boundaries of Provinces • but
always subject to the consent of any Province affected by an alteration :
f > be admission of new I rovinces to the United Provinces, and the terms of such admission •
r . ■i f alteration ot the respective powers and functions of the General Assembly and the
Legislatures or the Provinces ; hut always subject to the consent of the Provinces
o External aflairs and the relations of fhe United Provinces to the United Kingdom of
SCys tKLen’s Awstralasia ' Colonles and Provinces 5 but saving
l„!h C !!'hfp! n TT m respect of contracts or engagements entered into by the Colony of Queens-
id.iiu or Dy tee united Provinces ;
nronerttof thp tw°/ p lO 9 olgn y of Queensland and of the United Provinces, and the public
propei ty of the United Provinces ; and the adjustment of accounts between the several Pro-
nces and between the United Provinces and the f rovinces respectively ;
vinces • 6 re^u * ab * on 0I " trade and commerce with other countries, and among the several Pro-
and Excise and bounties, hut so that duties of Customs and Excise and bounties
shali ho uniform throughout the United Provinces, and that no tax or duty shall be imposed
Ol l an y S?2ds exported from one Province to another ;
Kammg money by any other mode or system of taxation ; but so that all such taxation
shall be uniform throughout the United Provinces ;
To 5, ori ' owm p money ou the public credit of the United Provinces :
salaries h and P aTlowances° fthe ' fficerS ° f tbe Gover nnient of the United Provinces, and their
13. Postal and Telegraphic Services ;
tlm cn l iK e i'o n i ta r-M Bn u Naval x ’ ' efeuce of the United Provinces and the several Provinces, and
° at of the *° rce r sl *° execute and maintain the laws of the United Provinces, or of
any . lovmce or any part of the United Provinces :
15. Munitions of War;
16. Navigation and Shipping;
17. Ocean Beacons and Buoys, and Ocean Light-houses and Light-shins •
10. Quarantine ; 1
19. Sea Fisheries;
20. Cen us aud Statistics ;
99* g urr ? nc *y Coinage, and Legal Tender ;
So - anki ;:/' th ® Incorporation of Banks, and the Issue of Paper Money ;
23. Weights aud Measures; J
24. Bills of Exchange and Promissory Notes ;
25. Insolvency ;
97 Copyrights and Patents of Inventions, Designs, and Trade Marks;
27. Naturalisation and Aliens ;
m United Provinces of Foreign Corporation and of Corporations formed
m a] Provmce or any part of the United Provinces;
29. Marr.age and Divorce ;


30. The Criminal Law, but so that the Executive Governments of the several Provinces
sha'l be charged with the administration of the Crimla il Law within the Provinces ;
31. The Service and Execution throughout the United Provinces of the Civil and Criminal
Process and Judgments of the Courts of the United Provinces and the several Provinces ;
32. The recognition throughout the United Provinces of the Laws, the Public Acts and Re-
cords, and the Judicial Proceedi gs, of the several Provinces;
33. Immigration ana Emigration ;
34. The influx of Criminals ;
35. The control of Railways so far as the Railway systems of the several Provinces compete
with one another;
33. The constitution of a Court of Appeal from the Courts of the Provinces;
37. The appropriation of the moneys raised by the Government of the United Provinces;
3d. Matters referred to the General Assembly by the egislature or I egislatures of any Pro-
vince or Provinces, but so that the law shall extend only to the Province or Provinces by
whose Legislature or Legislatures the matter was referred, and to such other Provinces as may
af r erwards adopt the Law.
39. Any matters necessary or incidental for carrying it.to execution the foregoing powers
and any other powers vested by this A. t in the General Assembly or the Executive Govern-
ment of the United Provin es or in any department or officer thereof ;
40. Generally, all matters affecting the United Provinces collectively.
These are matters in which the Northern province will have no authority
whatever, unless its nine representatives can manage to outvote the Southern
32. But lest there should still remain some real power to the new Legislature
of the Northern province, clause 62 follows:
62. The Queen, with the advice and consent of the General Assembly, shall also, subject
to the provisions of this Act, have power, to the exclusion of the Legis atures of the Provinces,
to make laws for the peace, order, and good government of the United Provinces with respect
to the following matters: —
1. The affairs of people of any race with respect to whom it is deemed necessary to make
special laws Dot applicable to the general community ; but so that this power shall not extend
to authorise legislation with respect to the affairs of tne aboriginal native race ;
2. The government of any territory which may by surrender of any Province or Provinces
and the acceptance of the 'General Assembly become the seat of government of the United
Provinces, and the exercise of like authority over all places acquired by the Unite 1 Provinces
under this Act, or afterwards acquired wiih the consent of the Legislature of the Province in
which such places are situate, for the construction of forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards,
quarantine stations, or for any other purposes of general concern ;
3. Matters relating to any other Department or Departments of the Public Service, the con-
trol of which is by this Act vested in the Executive Government of the United Provinces ;
4. Such other matters as are by this Act declared to be within the exclusive powers of the
General Assembly.
The Departments of the Public Service of which the control is vested in the
Government of the United Provinces, are the Civil Service Board (clause 199),
the Railway Commissioners (clause 201), and the Land Board (clause 202). That
is, with relation to these officers, the General Assembly sitting in Brisbane has
power to make laws to the exclusion of the Northern Legislature. The point is, of
course, the management and construction of railways On railways has been
expended the greatest part of the borrowed money for which the whole colony
is responsible; and, after taxation it is with regard to railways that the North
has most reason to complain. Does the Bill then, clearly transfer the authority
over railways to the Provincial Legislatures? It does not clearly do so. Under
the control of these Legislatures are indeed placed “ local works and under-
takings, including the construction and management of railways.” But as
there is also vested in the General Assembly “ the control of railways so far
as the railway systems of the several provinces compete with one another,” —a
very elastic clause; as the Railway Commissioners are expressly stated by
clause 201 to be officers of the United Provinces; as clause 62 (3) gives the
General Assembly power to make laws respecting them to the exclusion of the
Legislatures of the Provincesand as clause 204 provides that when a law of a
Province conflicts with a law of the United Provinces, the
the latter shall prevail —the point is at least doubtful. The doubt is not settled
by that portion of l lause 201 which provides that the commissioners’ functions
shall remain-the same until other provision is made “by laws of the respective
provinces.” Suppose that laws of the respective provinces dispense with the
Railway Commissioners, or alter their functions, in the belief that the provinces
control the railways ; will the United Provinces have power to reinstate them,
since they possess the exclusive right to . legislate concerning the Railway
Commissioners ? v


When so much has been taken away, it is necessary to see what those
powers are. The Provincial Legislature can levy taxes, but not by Customs or
Excise; it can borrow money ; appoint Provincial officers ; control property and
civil rights, lands ami minerals, education, railways (with the reservations
mentioned), justice, and matters of local government generally ; provided always
that it does not fall foul of the General Assembly, in which case its Acts are
waste paper. This is what is offered by the Constitution Bill. But, in order to
pay the interest on the Northern share of general debt all land rents, one-third
of the gross earnings of the railways, and such other moneys as may be prescribed
by a laic of the United Provinces, must be paid over every month to the Treasury
of the United Provinces, in Brisbane. That is, the House of Representatives
may deal with Northern revenue as it thinks fit, until the interest on pist and
future loans, as apportioned in the South, has been paid. In addition, as it
controls the public debt and adjusts accounts between the province-, the
House of Representatives has power to perpetuate all the existing abuses in
regard to the burden of taxation and the distribution of expenditure.
Enough has been said to show that the House of Representatives is the
supreme authority under the Bill. Its seat is in Brisbane, it contains thirty-
two Southern members to nine Northern, and its laws are paramount. The
provisions of the Bill, such as that relating to inter-provincial trade,* are so wide
that the House of Representatives may practically interpret them as it pleases.
The number of Southern members may at any time be raised from thirty-two to
forty by a vote of the majority, fince on a population basis the North has more
than its share of representation. The House of Representatives controls the
most important departments of the public service, it collects a principal part of
*he provincial revenue, and may collect the whole ; it has power to pledge the
credit of the whole of the colony as security for loans, and to appropriate the
proceeds as it pleases. Under Separation, North Queensland becomes entirely
her own mistress, raises her own revenue, controls her own expenditure, and
directs her own progress. Under the Constitution jMII her laws
are still made, her burdens allotted, and her expenditure con-
trolled by the South. The Bill removes a few minor grievances,,
and settles more firmly the yoke of the greater ones, while creating
new machinery which cannot be worked without difficulty and expense. Separa-
tion is comparatively easy. A stroke of the pen, and we have two colonies where
there w’as one before. They should differ in nothing but name and situation ;
their Constitution would be a copy of the existing Constitution; they would
begin the journey of independence on a familiar track, bristling with guide-posts
of precedent and example. Partition is comparatively very hard. It means not:
alteration but creation, for local conditions prevent the experience of foreign
countries from perfectly fitting the case, and what fits badly does not fit at all.
"Whether the Constitution Bill is or is not a stepping-stone to Separation,
once the North places foot there, it will stay in the ford for many a long day to
come. The Bill is a last effort to bolster up Brisbane Supremacy. North
Queensland may accept it with whatever proviso, on whatever understanding it
pleafes; but provisoes and understandings will be qrnetly ignored, and the
British Government will simply say : “ The question is settled, with the consent
of both parties- We decline to re-open it until the new system has had a fair
trial. You cannot be continually tinkering at your Constitution.” No exception
can be taken to such a reply ; and the Separation sun, just risen above the hori-
zon, will set for another dozen years at least. In the meantime the proportion
of debt to be taken over by the North will probably be doubled, while even year
of union is piling up claims of North against South for unfair taxation, unfair
egislation, unfair administration, which will never by any chance be liquidated.
*lB7. A law of the United Provinces may prohibit or annul any law or regulation made by
a province, or by any authority constituted by a province, which if valid would have the effect
of derogating from freedom of trade or commerce between the different . arts of the United
Provinces.


Victoria, 1851.
Queensland,
1859.*
West Australia,
1889.
North Queens-
land, 1892.
Settlement area
87,884 sq. miles
174,600 sq. miles
200,000 sq. miles
250,000 sq. miles
97,489
25.020
43,698
81,372
£392,455
£178,189 t
£382,213
£781,659
£4i0,864
£38^,000
£747,532
£1,056,437
£818,127
£1,203,492
£1,422,909
£500,000
£748,898
£2,810,177
Shipping tonnage ...
129,426
22,086
20,000 ’
486,647
42,806
1,277,390 t
93,819 +
390,923
300,000
119,571
1,942,781 t
6,'89,923
2,000,000
2.336,681
1,524,0141
Cultivated land
57,472 acres
2 000 acres
73,408 acres
51,650 acres
X.—IFS AND BUTS.
There is not a single valid reason to urge agiinst Separation, but there are
mauy counterfeits. It iscuriout an ’ amusing to find that the chief arguments
of the opponents of Separation in 1898 are exactly similar to those used by the
opponents of Separation before 1859. Hes Queensland had any reason to regret
the Separation of 1859 ?
Then, as now, an endeavour was made to terrify residents in the new colony
by pointing out the tremendous expenditure which would be necessary after
Separation. Queensland has found that expenditure a trifle in comparison with
the wealth and progress which it has purchased. Yet the Queensland of thirty
years ago was much less able to stand alone than the North Queensland of to-
day. Here are some comparative figures : —
The comparison is favourable to North Queensland in almo-t every item.
If Victoria was fit for autonomy, is not North Queensland fit, with double the
revenue and double the production ? If Western Australia is entit’ed to indepen-
dence, is not North Queensland entitled, with double the revenue and three times
the production ? If the Separation of Queensland in 1859 has been justified,
is not the Separation of North Queensland in 1893 justified, since the latter will
start its career of self-government with more than three times the population,
more than four times the revenue, and more than five times the productive
capacity, possessed at the outset by the elder colony ?
Queensland was assured in 1859 that her income would never meet her ex-
penditure. Precisely the same assurance is given to North Queensland in 1893,
and with much the same foundation. On this point no exact figures are avail-
able ; but the Northern Separation League has published from to
time’ to time statistics sufficient to convince the most distrustful.
The estimate above given has been reached by a scrutiny
of official documents , and the case for North Queensland has been put into the
worst possible light. The expenditure for last year, calculated from the Auditor-
deneral’s report, is set down at £747,532,* which approximately corresponds
with the expenditure due on a population basis, and is therefore presumably
•correct. The amount given as revenue, £781,659, comprises the official Customs
.revenue, with 20 per cent added; the revenue for Northern rai'ways; and a
proportional share of the revenue from other sources on a population basis, with
the exception of the revenue from mining occupation, of which the Northern
share is taken as three-fifths, and excluding the sum derived from special sales
of land in the South. There is thus shown a surplus of £34,000, which is the
smallest possible ; since the lowest estimate of revenue has been taken, and the
highest estimate of expenditure. The true surplus is probably £150,000 at
least; since in this estimate the South is conceded the whole of its overcharges
for loan interest, while no credit is taken for the miscellaneous items in which
* Coote’s History of Queensland. t 1860. t 1891.
♦ See Sec. V.


“general account ” robs the North of its due share of expenditure. 1 here can
be no doubt not only that the North is in a position to defray the additional
expense of a separate Government, even on the present iuinous system ; but
that with the more efficient administration thus secured the surplus will in-
crease ins ead of diminish, though the burden of taxation will be lightened,
and the country become the cheapest in the world to live in, instead of one of
the dearest, as at present. Once the Southern incubus is lifted, Northern
progress will astonish those who best know Northern resources, The Northern
gold yield alone for 1892 was 370,5860 z, or at £3 10s per oz £1,297,051, nearly
£l6 per head of population -and miners know how they are now hampered.
The sugar export was valued at £305,605—and hew sugar cu ture has been as-
sisted all are aware. The surplus of exports over imports was £1,606.685, or
more than three times as much as the total export of Queensland in 1859 What
•would Victoria, what would Queensland be to day if it had remained a depen-
dency of New South Wales? What will North Queensland be in thirty years if it
remains a dependency of the South? If not fit for self-governm nt now, «lien
will it be fit? To such questions as these there is no Southern answer con-
venient.
In 1856 the New South Wales Conservatives were aghast at the difficulties
in the way of dividing the public debt between the new col- ny and the old.
After Separation, the difficulties melted into air. Work was found for a few
clerks for a few months, and that was all. The debt was divided. To day
work will be found for a few more clerks for a few more months—and that is
all. Probably some Southern claims will be disputed by the North, in which
case the arbitration of the British Secretary of State for the Colonies may be
needed. There may be a difference ; there cannot possibly be a difficulty.
Listening to Southern vaticinations, no one ignorant of the facts would dream
that the whole process had been gone through before—Separation, division of the
public debt, everything. The debt, too, is steadily increasing. If division is
difficult now, it will be much more difficult in ten years time, when the liability
cf the North has been greatly increased, and the revenue abstracted by the South
has reached an enormous figure. All the precedents point one way. There is
no precedent whatever for a misgoverned colony dividing itself into two pro-
vinces, and for one province, larger than New South \\ ales, retaining or govern-
ing a dependent province three times as large as Victoria. In 1859 there was no-
settlement of Cape Palmer* ton. The Northern districts were simply in-
cluded in the new colony for convenience sake, and with a view to Separation
when the time came. It has come.
The public debt of the colony at 30th June, 1892, was £32,068,579. Dividing
this amount in the same proportion as local loan expenditure, the share of the-
Northern division is £7,241,085. This is the utmost which could be claimed from
the North, and is subject to large reductions when the apportionment is finally
made, since it includes the whole of that “ general account ” to which the South
is so much indebted, and nothing is deducted for surplus Northern revenue ex-
pended in the South. It must be remembered that the North has had practically
no voice when thu debt was contracted, or the funds expended. Southern poli-
ticians borrow the money, and expend it when tLey judge that it will be most
useful to their interests. Nevertheless the North is liable. Assuming, for the
sake of argument, that the maximum claim is correct, the interest contribution
due from the North would be £263,522 per annum. We have seen that the pre-
sent revenue of the North enablef it to pay this, together with its share of ad-
ministrative and general expenditure, and enjoy a considerable surplus. fter
.'•eparation, and freed from the oppressive Southern tariff, this surplus would be
largely increased. As to capacity to repay the principal when due, there can be
no possible question. The public works upon which the money has been expended*
are in themselves value for a part of the amount, and for the rest the public and
private wealth of the North gives a hundred times the equivalent in security.
Until the loans are repaid there can only be a book-keeper’s division of the
-Queensland debt, since Imperial legislation makes the separated colonies jointly
i-nd sever ally responsible to the public creditor for both principal and interest.
Neither colony is responsible to the other, unless the deficiency of one is paid by


the other. Until 1915, when the North will have to repay a portion of the prin-
cipal, the whole of its liability in respect of the general debt is the annual pay-
ment of £263,000 per annum, or whatever less amount may appear to be due on
impartial scrutiny of the details of loan expenditure. The returns from railways
and other securities is over £IOO,OOO per annum. Considering Northern resoures,
is the remainder a liability to be frightened of when self-taxation and self-
administration would bring a gain of £150,000 now annually overpaid in taxa-
tion?
Upon this point of the apportionment of the public debt, as upon the doubts
raised as to the mode in which Separation should be accomplished, full and.
valuable information is to be found in the publications of the North Queens-
land Separation League, and particularly in the writings of Mr. William Coote, by
whose knowledge and research the cause of Separation has been so greatly
benefited. These questions need not here be further dealt with. The argu-
ments are conclusive that the Crown retains the power to grant Separation with-,
or without the consent of the Queensland Legislature, and Sir Henry Norman
has observed that this is never likely to be given.* For such action more than,
sufficient cause has been shown, and the leading objections to it considered.
One or two minor ones remain. Ihe first is the dread that the city of Towns-
ville will acquire too great an influence in the new colony. However this dread
may apparently be justified by the energy of Townsville citizens, there is really
no foundation for it. There is no obligation to constitute Townsville the capital
of the new colony, which would do wisely to follow the example of the United'
States of America, and place its metropolis out of reach of the animosities of
rival ports. A league of the smaller towns could reduce Townsville to impotence ;
and in any event, if there is to be a choice between Townsville and Brisbane,
Townsville interests are Northern interests, while Brisbane interests are dis-
tinctly Southern interests. The objection is premature, and to submit on
acco int of it to present and future grievances is as sensible as a sick man’s
refusal to be cured of small-pox lest he should get the toothache.
The remaining objection is based upon an alleged anxiety of North Queens-
land to become a slave colony. Great capital was made out of this by ir S. W.
Griffith in 1884, and subsequently, when he informed the Governor that the
Separation movement was conceived, carried on almost solely, and sup. or ted
wholly by the money of the sugar planters. He added that the public feeling of
the North was thoroughly averse to colored labor. Since then the po’itical wind'
has changed, and the weather-cock now points in an opposite direction. Sir S.
W. Griffith, without taking *he trouble to consult the public feeling of the North
in a constitutional way, has re-introduced colored labor, and firmly riveted the
chains of the imaginary slave Without discussing the question of colored
labor it may be said at once that the objection is baseless. There was never any
evidence that the Northern or Southern planters were anxious to imitabLegree ;
and there is an overwhelming body of evidence, endorsed by S. VT. Griffith him-
self, to prove that the condition of the so-called plantation slave in either North
or South Queensland is immeasurably better than that of the English field or
factory drudge Iu any case the planters’ influence is electorally small; and
there is not the slightest chance that they will be able to impose colored labor
upon the new colony, should the wishes of the mining class, the commercial
class, and the remainder of the agricultural class be decidedly oppo.-ed to it As
a matter of fact. Sir S. W. Griffith’s statement that the public feeling < f the
North is averse to colored labor is probably true as regards a good In If of the
population. The greatest anxiety for the re-introduction of colored labor was
shown by banks and business people in the South, who saw the value of
Northern securities diminishing. After Separation, strange as it may seem,
* If must not be supposed that the mass of Southern reagents are actively or even
passively hostile to Separation. They are quiescent and indifferent. To set the c > e before
them p ainly would probably secure their suffrages. But the South must be jolgedby its
representatives.


uere is much more chance that the South will maintain colored labor than the
North will, unless the area devoted to sugar culture on the Eastern seaboard can
be considerably increased.
Something has been said of the necessity of waiting for Australian Federa-
tion before Separation is accomplished, but this objection need not be considered
Separation is a present and pressing need ; Federation may remain in the clouds
for twenty years to come. In any case, North Queensland is as well able to
federate as South Queensland; and in the matter of Separation, as Sir Henry
Norman says, there is ro reason why Tasmania, West Australia, or the other
colonies not immediately concerned, should be called upon to discuss and decide
the destinies of the North.
XI.-CONCLUSION.
Hie North has everything to gain from Separation, and nothing to lose. Its
revenues, free from Southern peculation, are more than sufficient for its require-
ments ; its lesources, left undeveloped by Southern mismanagement, can
nourish a far greater population ; its industries, relieved from the handicaps of
Southern jealousy, are capable of unlimited expansion. It is proied, it is
admitted, that the North has suffered in the past from union with the South :
what has it to gain in the future ? How can it possibly benefit by Southern
administration? With such a seaboard and such a territory, how can its affairs
fail to be badly administered by a Government at .Brisbane? Why should it
remain a Southern dependency, paying so dearly for bad government when it
can have good government cheaply at home ? Is there any single branch of
administration, or departmei t of industry, which North Queensland could not
manage better as an independent colony than as a dependent province ? Separa-
tion must come some day. The distances from the seat of Southern government
are too great, the opposition between Northern and Southern conditions,
characteristics, interests, is too marked to permit of the whole of Queensland
being ruled in perpetuity from Brisbane. Why should not Separation come
now? ffhe answer from a Southern point of view has already been given: it
will not nay to let slip a wealthy dependency whose revenues are farmed and
•distributed in the South. From the Northern point of view there shoul ibe only
one answer : Separation must come now.
It has been shown that the location of the capital of Queensland in the
southern extremity inevitably tends to enrich the capital at the expense of the
colony ; that this process has now gone on so long that the disproportionate
aggrandisement of Brisbane is a menace to the general welfare, and the centrali-
sation of Government business in Brisbane is a serious hindrance to the progress
•of the North, while it is impossible to remove the capital; that the natural
opposition between North and South necessitates important differences in the
system of government suited to each; that nevertheless the preponderating
influence of the South in the general Parliament has governed the whole colony
on Southern methods for Southern benefit to the great detriment of the North ;
that the actual money loss of the North amounts to hundreds of thousands of
pounds appropriated by the South, while its loss through unjust and inadequate
legislation and administration has been far greater; that the area of Northern
territory must prevent the best Southern Government from remedying these
evils, and no cure is possible short of Separation ; that the longer the eure is
delayed the more intense will the evils become, and the more difficult it will be
to remove them ; that the severance of Victoria and of Queensland itself from
the parent colony was justified by similar reasons, and opposed by similar
jealousies, to those which justify and oppose the severance of North Queensland;
that North Queensland is in a better position to commence self-government than
was either Queensland, Victoria, ,or the newly-constituted colony of Western
Australia; and that while for Separation all these reasons plead, there is not a
single valid reason against it.


Why, it may be said, insist on Separation when so much pains has been*
taken to furnish an efficient substitute? For the simple reason that the substi-
tute is inefficient. Northern prosperity is not a thing to be settled by passing a
Bill in so many parts, so many chapters, and so many clauses. Considered
from a legal point of view, the Constitution Bill is an admirable Bill. It is
couched in admirable language ; it is subdivided into admirable plots and com-
partmento, each properly labelled ;it contains an almirable series of imaginatory
machinery for guiding the destinie- of the bipartite colony. But the point is-
this : The North does not want legislation, however admirable ; it wants free-
dom. Its great grievance is the absorption of Northern wealth and influence by
the South, through the medium of a Parliament which sits in the extremity of
the South, is swayed by Southern agencies, and controlled by a Southern
majority. That grievance the Constitution Bill leaves almost precisely as it
finds it. There will still be an overwhelming Southern majority in the joint
Parliament, and the joint Parliament still controls taxation, the public debt,,
defence, shipping, fisheries, posts and telegraphs, criminal law, banking, money
and insolvency ; and it can meddle with railways, and spend and borrow as it.
pleases. All that the Bill does for the provinces is to give them the power to
impose new burdens in addition to the old For righting Northern wrongs,»for
hastening Northern development, for taking the Southern drag off Northern
prosperity, the Constitution Bill is absolutely worthless.
These are some of the arguments for Separation. But in truth and in fact
the Constitution Bill has made argument unnecessary. Before it, or before the
tentative schemes which led up to it, though the case for Separation was amply
convincing, the South refused to be convinced. Northern residents could only
reason from the analogies of history, to show that other colonies had started oa
independent and prosperous careers under less advantageous conditions. They
could only point out the natural conflict between the North and the South, be-
tween the temperate zone and the tropics, and shows the impossibility of govern-
ing by the same laws territories so dissimilar. They could only add the sum of
grie- ances produced by the concentration of authority in a Government un-
acquainted with Northern conditions, influenced by Southern prejudices, baffled
by distance when its intentions were best. But now the North has no longer to
plead its cause in the unwilling ear of the South. The Constitution Bill, though
in its character of a compromising half measure it denies the expediency of:
Separation, contains still an undeniable admission of its justice. No evasion of
this is possible. If not planned to remove the disabilities of the North, with
what object was the Bill planned ? Not for the Southern district, which would
be only too glad to let things alone. And if for the Northern district, the reasons-
which justify partition justify Separation, while in favour of Separation a host,
of additional arguments pleads. Partition is intricate and difficult;
Separation is simple and easy. Partition would increase the tax-
payers’ burden; Separation will lighten it. Separation, in a word,,
will satisfy the existing need; and partition ne.er would. Yet the Government
which supports partition cannot consistently oppose Separation. Sir S. W.
Griffith, when introducing in 1891 the partition proposals on which the Consti-
tution Bill was based, told Parliament that between his scheme and Separation
there was really only a nominal difference; almost all the power for pra- tical pur-
poses, which the North would exercise as an independent colony it would exercise
as a dependent province. Apply the statement to the reversed position. A
Government which goes to so much trouble to evolve a disjunctive scheme, which
is willing to alter the constitution and to ask the intervention of the Imperial
Parliament, should not refuse to take some trouble for Separation—which is
practically the same thing. The need which is admitted to exist exists still, and
grows always more pressing. Until it is satisfied there should be only O'Connell’s
motto for Northern residents : “ Agitate, agiiate, agitate !”
Given a strong pull and a pull altogether, it will not be a long one. Eventual
victory is sure. The case for the North is overwhelming—based on precedent,
supported by reason, its justice admitted even by opponents. Public opinion in
Great Britain is on the side of the North ; the reply of the late Secretary of State
for the Colonies to the Central deputation was tantamount fo an affirmation


that the British Government would take action were the Con-
stitution Bill rejected by the Queensland Parliament. r J hat rejection
has taken place, and North Queensland has now to press for the
conversion of the affirmation into fact. The Liberal Government now in office
may be supposed to favor the principle of Home Buie for North Queensland as
well as for Ireland, though the circumstances are so different. The representa-
tions of the Separation Committee in England should be enforced by the presen-
tation of petitions from Queensland, until the justice of the wishes of the
Northern community is as clear to the British Government as to Northern
residents themselves.
What will then remain? Nothing but the words which the Secretary of State
for the Colonies addressed to the Governor of New South Wales in 1856, substi-
tuting for the name of Sir Charles Fitzroy, the name of the most bitter opponent
■of the Separation of North Queensland. “ I have now to inform you that Her
Majesty’s Government have determined that the time has arrived when this
Separation would be desirable. They have not failed to give their fullest atten-
tion to the arguments adduced by ? ir S. W. Griffith against this determination ;
but they feel that those arguments rest on premises which are every day more
and more set aside by the progress of events. And on the whole they believe
that it is better to run the risk of forming into a colony a community as yet in
some respects immature, but rapidly advancing to maturity, than of letting the
partial * ifficulties of .reparation, and the ill feeling which the present state of
things are calculated to engender, grow stronger from day to day.”
Printed at the Office of the Townsville Hebald Newspapeb Co., Ltd., Flinders-
street, Townsville.


