

Why Federate ?
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION
FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE
BY
W. JETHRO BROWN, M.A., LL.D.
PROFESSOR OF LAW AND MODERN HISTORY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA,
AND ACTING-PROFESSOR OF LAW IN THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
SYDNEY
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET
1898




PREFACE.
JN submitting this paper, in its original form,
to the consideration of a wider and perhaps
severer audience, I wish to guard against any mis-
conception of my main object by remarking that no
attempt has been made to treat the subject from the
point of view of any one colony. I state the general
advantages of a Federal Union from the Australian
point of view. If the reader prefers to regard the
subject from a provincial standpoint, it will be easy
for him to supplement my statement by reference to
the peculiar circumstances of his own colony. I
may also remark that I speak of results which must
follow Federation. No one could well doubt that a
change so vast must involve many preliminary
difficulties and sacrifices. Almost invariably, how-
ever, the difficulties are of a mechanical character,
and to suppose that time would not remove them,
would be to deny the evidences of experience
and to question the ability or the honesty of the
Federal Parliament. They are the initial costs of
those advantages which I have endeavoured to state,
simply and fairly, in the text.
I have to thank Mr. R. R. Garran, 8.A., author of
“The Coming Commonwealth,” for generously con-
senting to revise the proof sheets.
University, Sydney,
April , 1898.
W. J. B.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.
PAGE
INTRODUCTION 7
Part I.—PEACE—(lmportance of Peace in the Past—Pax
Romana—U.S.A.) 9, 10, 11
i. Domestic ... 12
ii. Intercolonial - (a) Adequacy of Union to Secure 13, 14
(b) Necessity of Union to Secure ... 15
(Inadequacy of Commerce and Democracy) 16
iii. International (repression of militancy)—Protection
from Foreign Aggression 18
(а) Adequacy of Union to Secure ... 19
(б) Necessity of Union to Secure ... 21
Part lI.—PROSPERITY.—Economic Possibilities of Large
Aggregates .. 23
i. Present Waste—(a) By Application of Excess of Force 24
(5) By Powerlessness to Apply Suffi-
cient Force 25
(c) By Misdirection of Force in spheres
of Production and Exchange 26
ii. Relations with Foreign States 28
Part lII. — HONOUR. Argument from Influence of Reli-
gious Sanctions, Patriotism, Loyalty, and other
ideals 31
i. Absence of Ideals in Australian Life—Evidences—
(a) Commonness of Social Tone ... 32
(5) Provincialism 33
i. Proved Inadequacy op Ideals op British Race and
British Empire 34
ii. Efficacy of Union to Creation of New Ideals ... 36


PAOK
Part IV.— THE FEDERAL FORM, Merits as compared
with—
i. The Unitary State 40
ii. The Confederacy 41
Part V.-A PRESENT FEDERATION 45
i. Consideration of Some Objections—
(а) Weakness of Federal Sentiment 45
(б) Foreign War ... 46
(c) Sacrifices Necessary 47
{ d) Commonwealth Bill ... 47
ii. Arguments prom Precedent, and Prospect of
Increasing Difficulties 49
iii. Conclusion 51
APPENDIX.—Some Opinions on the Commonwealth Bill ... 52


THE ADVANTAGES OF A FEDERAL UNION
PAPER BY JETHRO BROWN, LL.D.
INTRODUCTION.
The immediate future of these Colonies is threatened
by one of the gravest dangers which can beset a free
people. We are about to undertake the decision of a
great question whose issues are rarely understood,
often misstated, and at times regarded with the eye
of fatal indifference. This is a serious menace to our
future, and it matters not whether we attribute mis-
leading statements to ignorance, or to that wilful
perversion which is the servant of sinister interests.
Whichever way we regard the subject, there is
occasion for the gravest anxiety.
There is but one hope for our future—-a wide
diffusion of a sense of personal self-answerableness,
the popular recognition of an individual responsibility
to ourselves and to those who are to come after us.
When we reflect upon the present inadequacy of this
recognition, and remember how soon the question of
Union is to be submitted to the suffrages of the
people, grave questions confront us. How is the
popular vote to be given ? By men determined to do
justice, or by men determined to do less than justice ?
Is the well-being of the whole community to prevail
over class interests ? Or is the broad and sympathetic
view of an enlightened patriotism to be obscured by


the darkening counsels of faction, of parochialism, of
constitutionalism ? I have too much faith in the
people of these Colonies to regard such questions with
despondency. Yet there is a very real danger to
which we are all more or less liable—the danger of
losing sight of general principles in minor issues. In
my own case, the fear has driven me to attempt an
appreciation of the advantages we may hope from our
Union. In submitting the results of that attempt to
the judgment of others, I have gained some confidence
from the reflections that complete originality cannot
be expected where the ground has been so often
explored by others; and that rhetoric is unnecessary
where the subject is one already commended to our
interest by its vast and immediate importance. I
have, therefore, striven to be comprehensive rather
than original; to be brief and simple rather than
elaborate or ornate. To be otherwise in dealing with
so momentous a question, to embellish by art, to
strive to create a fictitious interest by the artificial
aid of rhetoric, must expose myself to your censure,
and imply a complete and inexcusable distrust of your
patriotism.
I propose first to direct your attention to the advan-
tages of Union as a means of ensuring our peace, of
promoting our prosperity, and of advancing our
Honour. I shall then proceed to state certain argu-
ments in defence of the Federal form, and shall con-
clude with an examination of some current objections
to present Federation.


PART I.—PEACE.
The long peace which these Colonies have enjoyed
under the protection, and subject to the control, of the
Mother Country, has not been favourable to our appre-
ciation of its supreme value. Nor can we easily perceive
the importance of securing to posterity the blessings
which we have been apt to receive as a matter of
course. Perhaps the best remedy for such defects is
to be found in a brief retrospect of the utility of war
and peace, in the long and painful course of Social
Progress. The first faltering steps of primitive man
towards the goal of Civilisation were taken under the
stress of constant conflict. Under the stern tutelage
of a necessity, begotten of the spirit of inveterate
hostility, men learnt the golden lesson of political
union. Thus by war was the race rescued from the
conditions of barbarism. Men were compelled, in the
interests of self-preservation, to undertake the work
of union in larger and larger groups. The larger
groups continued to wage war against each other, but
within the group Peace was established—the one
thing to which all other things were to be added.
Tribes which would not, or could not, learn the stern
lesson of nature, were sacrificed in the fearful struggle
for existence. But a great change has come over the
world since those early days when War was so essen-
tial to Progress. Though the struggle for existence
continues in our own time, the mode of its operation
is changing. The conflict of arms is being superseded


by the rivalries of conflicting economic interests.
Thus, while in earlier stages the State needed Peace
within its borders that it might be proof against the
horrors of open invasion, in our own day the same
need exists, but with the different object of enabling
the State to cope with the more secret but almost
equally fatal hostilities of a great economic struggle.
If Australia is to emerge from that struggle triumphant,
we must have the most effectual guarantees of Peace—
Peace, that we may be strong by the devotion of all
our energies to the great work of national develop-
ment.
The same conclusion is reached if we survey the
course of human evolution somewhat more compre-
hensively. That evolution has been marked by two
great changes—in habits, man has ceased to be
military that he may become industrial; in character,
he has ceased to be brutal that he may become
humane. But, if these developments are to continue,
we must of all things have Peace. “On the political
side,” writes Fiske, “ civilisation means primarily
the gradual substitution of a state of peace for a state
of war. This change is a condition of all other changes,
implied by the term civilisation.” So, too, Spencer:
—“ The conclusion of profoundest moment, to which
all lines of argument converge, is that the possibility
of a high social state, political as well as general,
fundamentally depends upon the cessation of war.
After all that has been said, it is needless to emphasise
afresh the truth that persistent militancy maintaining
adapted institutions, must inevitably prevent, or else
neutralise, changes in the direction of more equitable
institutions and laws ; while permanent peace will of


necessity be followed by social amelioration of every
kind.”
If, then, Peace is so supremely desirable both for
its own sake and for the blessings which follow it, a
proposal for its permanent realisation must deserve
the closest examination. Our self-interest and our
patriotism are alike engaged: for in proportion as
we recognise the supreme importance of the object,
we are driven to look beyond the evils of the present
that we may guard against the dangers of the
future; and to remember the claims of posterity as
well as our duty to ourselves. If, then, with a due sense
of the gravity of the problem, we turn to history for
instruction, we discover its verdict to be unequivocal.
Peace has been secured in the past by the union of
alien or independent groups of men under the pro-
tection, and subject to the control, of a common
authority. The motive power of the union may have
been coercion, or consent; in either case the object
is achieved. The world first knew peace under the
iron rule of the Poman Emperors. In our own day,
the legions of Rome are a memory of the past; but
the civilisation which the Pax Bomana rendered
possible, has opened up the prospect of more glorious
visions of Peace —more glorious because founded not
upon the principle of coercion, but upon the principle
of voluntary union. It is impossible in this connec-
tion to ignore the decisive precedent of the United
States. As Professor Fiske points out: “ The United
States to-day cling together with a coherency far
greater than the coherency of any ordinary federation
or league. Yet the primary aspect of the Federal
Constitution was undoubtedly that of a permanent


league, in which, each State, while retaining its
domestic sovereignty intact, renounced for ever its
right to make war upon its neighbours, and relegated
its international interests to the care of a central
council, in which all the States were alike represented,
and a central tribunal endowed with purely judicial
functions of interpretation. It was the first attempt
in the history of the world to apply on a grand scale
to the relation between States the same legal methods
of procedure which, as long applied in all civilised
countries to the relations between individuals, have
rendered private warfare obsolete. And it was so
far successful that, during a period of seventy-two
years, in which the United States increased fourfold
in extent, tenfold in population, and more than tenfold
in wealth and power, the Federal Union maintained a
state of peace more profound than the Pax Bomana.”
If we regard the subject with special reference to
the welfare of these Colonies, our attention is directed
to three distinct points of view—the domestic, the
Intercolonial, and the International. In the first
place. Union would give to each of the Colonies a
more efficient guarantee of domestic peace. The
genius of great areas is relatively pacific; the intensity
of civil discord is ever in direct proportion to the
smallness of the arena on which opposing parties play
their parts. What storm so violent as the storm
within the teacup —to those who have the misfortune
to be within. “ The influence of factious leaders,”
wrote Hamilton in the Federalist , “ may kindle a
flame within their particular States, but will be unable
to spread a general conflagration through the other
States j a religious sect may degenerate into a political


faction in a part of the confederacy; but the variety
of sects dispersed over the entire face of it, must
secure the national councils against any danger from
that source ; a rage for paper money, for the abolition
of debts, for an equal division of property, or for any
other improper or wicked project, will be less apt to
pervade the whole body of the union, than a particular
member of it; in the same proportion as such a malady
is more likely to taint a particular country or district,
than an entire State.”
But Union means much more than the preservation
of Peace within the herders of the several States which
have united to form it. To the greater security which
is realised within a State, we must add the diminution
of strife in the relations of that State towards the
remaining members of the Union. In my endeavour
to justify this statement, I shall occasionally employ,
without reluctance or apology, arguments which may
seem to apply to the future rather than to the present.
The Australia of our time is supported by the arms
and the authority of the Mother Country; yet who
can contemplate with unconcern the perpetuation of
a condition so dependent ? Imperial Union may be
admirable ; but the foundation of that Union should
rest on something higher than a conviction of our own
weakness. To entertain such views is not to proclaim
oneself an advocate of severance. The ideal of this
great continent, in its relations to the Mother
Country, should rather be one of an amicable equality
than of a perpetual tutelage. This is the high and
honourable ideal towards which we are rapidly
tending, and in proportion as we appreciate its
significance, we are prepared to admit the reality of


dangers which, under a mistaken impression of their
remoteness or irrelevancy, may be regarded by some
with apathy. The thoughtful citizen will prefer to
face the facts. He will recognise that the ultimate
alternative to Federation is the development of the
Colonies into more or less independent States; that,
even in the present, much harm may result from
intercolonial quarrels which never event in bloodshed;
and, finally, that it is better to guard against some
dangers than to await, in incompetence and temerity,
the unhappy period of their occurrence.
As such considerations can require no emphasis, I
shall at once proceed to discuss two practical questions
which claim our attention. Does the Union of these
Colonies, under a Federal Commonwealth, afford a
reasonable hope of establishing, on a permanent basis,
the blessings of intercolonial peace ? If Union be
adequate for this purpose, is it also necessary ? The
former question can be answered without difficulty or
delay. Quarrels which may involve separate States
in jealousies or bloodshed, are referred, in the event
of their Union, to the peaceful decision of a common
authority. But disputes are not only settled; they are
prevented. Under a peaceable federation, there is a
constant tendency towards a diminution of the causes
which tend to originate, or to maintain, the conditions
of inter-State hostility. Both the sense of a community
of interest, and the presence of a common tribunal upon
whose power and justice reliance can be placed, tend to
prevent disputes from ever arising. Local jealousies
are deprived of their importance; a community of
feeling is fostered by the community of interest; and
to the state of constant distrust or hostility, there


succeeds the disposition to mutual confidence and
compromise.
While the adequacy of Union to secure peace between
Colony and Colony will be generally admitted, there
are some who may doubt its necessity, and who may
hope for the achievement of the same ends by agencies
operating independently of constitutional change. Yet
experience does not sanction such hopes. Whether we
regard men as individuals, or as members of a group,
we are forced to conclude that bloodshed can only be
prevented by submission to a common authority. “If
these States,” wrote the great American statesman
already quoted, “ should either be wholly disunited,
or only united in partial confederacies, a man must be
far gone in Utopian speculations who can seriously
doubt that the subdivisions into which they might
be thrown, would have frequent and violent contests
with each other. To presume a want of motives for such
contests, as an argument against their existence, would
be to forget that men are ambitious, vindictive, and
rapacious. To look for a continuation of harmony
between a number of independent unconnected
sovereignties, situated in the same neighbourhood,
would be to disregard the uniform course of human
events, and to set at defiance the accumulated ex-
perience of ages. The causes of hostility among
nations are innumerable. There are some which have
a general and almost constant operation upon the
collective bodies of society. Of this description are the
love of power, or the desire of pre-eminence and
dominion; the jealousy of power, or the desire of
equality and safety. There are others which have a
more circumscribed, though an equally operative in


fluence, within their spheres; such are the rivalships
and competitions of commerce between commercial
nations. And there are others, not less numerous
than either of the former, which take their origin
entirely by private passions in the attachments, enmi-
ties, interests, hopes, and fears of leading individuals
in the commuities of which they are members. Men
of this class, whether the favourites of a king or of a
people, have in too many instances abused the confi-
dence they possessed; and assuming the pretext of
some public motive, have not scrupled to sacrifice the
national tranquillity to personal advantage, or per-
sonal gratification.”
The authors of the Federalist admitted, and later
writers have often emphasised, the pacific tendencies
of Commerce and Democracy—two great forces of the
modern world operating independently of the more
direct agencies of political union. May we not put
our trust in these forces? The question deserves
your attention. Whoever reflects upon the bewilder-
ing complexity of modern civilisation—the extent,
character, and the influence of that environment for
which commerce has been so largely responsible—
must regard the awful possibilities of war with a
sense of unspeakable aversion. We have given
hostages to Fortune; in the maintenance of Peace
we have a deep and growing interest altogether
unintelligible to the savage whose most valuable pos-
sessions consisted of the weapons of warfare. More-
over, the commercial interests of the various nations
are now so bound together that third parties display a
growing inclination to favour, or even to compel, the
amicable settlement of disputes. Democracy, too.


hath its victories, no less glorious than those of
Commerce. Under the new regime, the monopoly of
honour no longer belongs to the profession of the
soldier; dynastic quarrels and the patrimonial theories
of government are superseded; the power of declaring
war is placed in the hands of those who suffer most
by its exercise; and the sympathies of men are
broadened and deepened by the dawning sense of a
Universal Brotherhood.
Yet those err who wholly place their trust in the
pacific tendencies of commerce and democracy.
The causes of War are largely independent of these
forces. The forces themselves have not invariably
told for Peace; in some special respects they have
proved directly favourable to War. The rivalries of
Commerce have often involved the Nations in terrible
conflict; the advent of Democracy has often forced a
Nation to undertake a WAr which it might otherwise
have avoided. The commercial Republics of antiquity
do not escape the imputation of a prurient militancy;
nor are the records of modern Democracies wholly
free from the stains of aggressive warfare. “Have
republics in practice been less addicted to war
than monarchies ?” asks Hamilton. “Are not the
former administered by men as well as the latter ?
Are there not aversions, predilections, rivalships, and
desires of unjust acquisition, that affect nations, as
well as kings ? Are not popular assemblies frequently
subject to the impulses of rage, resentment, jealousy,
avarice, and of other irregular and violent propen-
sities ? Is it not well known that their determinations
are often governed by a few individuals in whom they
place confidence, and that they are of course liable to


be tinctured by tbe passions and views of those indi-
viduals ? Has commerce hitherto done anything more
than change the objects of war ? Is not the love of
wealth as domineering and enterprising a passion as
that of power or glory ? Have there not been as
many wars founded upon commercial motives, since
that has become the prevailing system of nations, as
were before occasioned by the cupidity of territory
or dominion ? Has not the spirit of commerce, in
many instances, administered new incentives to the
appetite both for the one and for the other ? Let
experience, the least fallible guide of human opinions,
be appealed to for an answer to these inquiries.”
I have spoken of the realisation of Peace within the
borders of the several Colonies, and of Peace in the
relations of one Colony to another. If we turn from
the domestic and the inter-provincial aspect of the
question to the International, the prospects of Union
are no less encouraging. As already remarked, the
genius of great areas is relatively pacific. The spirit
of undue aggression is more difficult to evoke, where
the people of a vast territory have to be aroused to
action. lam not unaware that the prospect of undue
aggression on our part is one to which little impor-
tance will be attached, even by those who admit its
possibility, and who recognise its dangers. There
are some who would deem the mere suggestion of its
possibility a proof of unpatriotism and a disregard of
the established maxim that foreign wars invariably
arise from the folly or the injustice of foreign powers.
I will therefore proceed to enquire how we may guard
ourselves against the evils of aggression on the part
of other nations. Here again we may profitably ob


serve a familiar distinction. How far is Union
adequate to secure us from attack T Supposing it to
be reasonably adequate, how far is it also necessary ?
If we ask the safest means which an individual can
adopt to secure himself from the aggression of others,
I think common sense would suggest —Be Strong I
Grain the respect and the fear of others, by the reputa-
tion of a power and an inclination for inflicting severe
reprisals. “ Men/’ argues Machiavelli, “ offend with
greater reluctance those who are ambitious to be loved,
than those who are ambitious to be feared.” It can-
not be pretended that Nations love one another. The
Ethics of International policy, it is to be feared, will
justify almost any aggression which is likely to be
successful. The demands of a foreign aggressor are
measured less by reference to considerations of ab-
stract justice than by reference to the very elementary
principle of getting as much as is possible. Those
who fondly believe that the world has passed beyond
this stage may be reminded of the unhappy sequel to
the Franco-German war. Can anyone forget how the
defeat of France was followed by stern and pitiless
oppression on the part of her victorious enemy ?
If, then, our safety is to be secured by our strength,
we are naturally driven to ask whether Union will
really tend to make us strong. In the first place, both
the reality and the appearance of strength would be
secured to a United Australia by the mere force of
her wealth and the extent and character of her popu-
lation. I hold this argument to be incontestable. We
are far too apt to judge a nation’s strength as a com-
batant by the extent and the efficiency of her military
forces. There could be no graver mistake, nor one


which, foreign statesmen are less likely to make. If
the mistake should ever he made, and the United
States of America should be the subject of the experi-
ment, we may look for a useful object lesson. I enter
no plea for the abolition of defence forces. With the
weapons of warfare at the command of the modern
combatant, incalculable harm may befall a Nation
which is wholly unprepared for attack. I only wish
to emphasise the significant fact that the oppression
of a Nation, great by her wealth, great by the intelli-
gence, the enterprise, and the courage of her citizens,
must ever be a work of stupendous difficulty. No
foreign statesman will lightly undertake it; no foreign
State will easily effect it.
In the second place, a United Australia would be
strong by the increase in numbers and efficiency of
her fighting forces. Leaving England for a moment
out of consideration —and the state of helpless depen-
dence on England is a condition which no Australian
should regard with resignation —the unorganised con-
dition of our military forces invites contempt, if not
invasion, on the part of foreign States. In the event of
actual conflict, the helplessness which was its occasion
has further consequences in the shape of humiliation
and defeat.
Again, a United Australia would be strong not only
by virtue of her wealth, not only by the extent and
vigour of her population, not only by the increase in
numbers and efficiency of her fighting forces, but also
by virtue of the wisdom of her rulers. It cannot be
necessary to support this statement by an appeal to a
remote past, or by dwelling upon the extent to which
modern wars might have been avoided but for the


want of wise and strong statesmen. It is enough to
direct your attention to the power of a Federal Union
to guard us from this evil. The choice of men
would be far wider; and a stronger class of aspi-
rants would be tempted by the obligations, the
honours, and the possibilities of Federal statesman-
ship. For both these reasons, the Government which
must represent us in our dealings with foreign States,
is certain to be more able, more consistent, and more
judicious in the control of its foreign policy.
To the foregoing aspect of strength, one may be
added, less obvious but no less important. I allude
to the strength which comes of the conviction of
power —power to resist, and if need be, to fight and
to conquer. No people were ever truly great, and no
people ever could be truly great, who were unsup-
ported by the abiding sense of their majesty as a
United Nation. But how can we hope to obtain this
sense as a group of separate Colonies, almost wholly
dependent for our protection upon the navy of a
European power? The conviction of strength can
hardly thrive on a soil so ill prepared. If the under-
standing is to be convinced, if the imagination is to be
appealed to, we need the evidences of incontestable
fact; we need a real, visible, organic union.
If we take the arguments just mentioned, it is easy
to see in what ways a union of the Australian people
must lessen the probability and the evils of foreign
aggression. Nations, like individuals, offend with
discretion. We may therefore turn from the adequacy
of the proposed means to discuss the question of their
necessity. May there be no other and better way to
secure our peace ? Can any be conceived ? If so, let


those who oppose Federation come forward to suggest
and to advocate it. “ Leave America divided,” wrote
Jay in 1787, “ into. thirteen, or, if you please, into
three or four independent governments, what armies
could they raise and pay, what fleets could they ever
hope to have ? If one was attacked, would the others
fly to its succour, and spend their blood and money in
its defence ? Would there be no danger of their
being flattered into neutrality by specious promises,
or seduced by a too great fondness for peace to
decline hazarding their tranquillity and present safety
for the sake of neighbours, of whom perhaps they
have been jealous, and whose importance they are
content to see diminished ? Although such conduct
would not be wise, it would nevertheless be natural.
The history of the States of Greece, and of other
countries, abound with such instances; and it is not
improbable that what has so often happened would,
under similar circumstances, happen again.”


PART II.— PROSPERITY.
A country may be deemed prosperous wben it is
making the most of its opportunities. How does
Australia stand in this respect ? Great and undoubted
are our opportunities; do we embrace them ? The
most sanguine would not answer this question in the
affirmative. The waste of energy which results from
our disunion is too apparent to escape the most
casual observation. I desire no exaggeration in this
matter; nor does the occasion call for any display of
sentiment. Let us first regard the subject from the
point of view of our internal relations, and consider a
simple straightforward question: How far does our
present political and industrial machinery attain a
fair level of efficiency ? If that machinery is to be
satisfactory, it should achieve the greatest possible
results for the least expenditure of energy. How far
is this object attained ?
One of the most familiar facts of our day is the
economic efficiency of co-operation. Unity has always
meant strength; but unity has not always been prac-
ticable. Such industrial unities as the modern
Company are essentially the creatures of modern
civilisation. Their advantages and the possibilities
of their future are still indifferently appreciated.
But Nature is teaching its lessons in its own way.
Just as primitive groups of men were taught the
lesson of political union by the stern instrumentality
of barbaric warfare; so, in the modern State, the


advantages of extensive co-operation in the sphere
of industry are being enforced upon our notice by
the keen and unremitting strife of industrial com-
petition. Gradually we are learning to detect the evils
of duplication and inevitable inefficiency involved
in the older system of individual proprietorship. If
we look around us we see the signs of industrial
co-operation on a vast scale. Competition and the
increased complexity of human life have demanded it.
We must not suppose that this economic movement
has no political significance. From a commercial
point of view, the State is but a vast Company; the
larger that Company is, consistently with the require-
ments of a real and not merely artificial unity, the
greater are the possibilities which lie before it. The
constant differentiation of special organs to meet new
needs, has become more than ever an essential con-
dition of political progress. But as these needs have
increased in number, it has only been possible to keep
pace with them by means of larger and larger
combinations. Think for a moment of the United
States—think of its Agricultural Department which
alone employs 10,000 persons engaged at home and
in foreign countries, in the compilation of statistics
respecting the area and condition of crops, the cost
of transit, the condition of foreign markets, and the
prices of labour! Think of this department as but
one of several, all directed to securing a greater
economic efficiency by saving the nation from the
evils of misdirected effort. Compare with this state
of things the present condition of these provinces !
If we pursue the question of economy of force a
little further, three elementary principles engage our


attention. It is clearly desirable that wo more force
shall be applied to an end than is absolutely neces-
sary ; that yet sufficient force must be applied; and
that the force must be carefully exerted in the right
direction. Yet each of these principles is violated
under the present system. (1) More force is used for
certain purposes than is required. The cost of
government is ruinous. For every department of
administration, each colony claims its complete
system of officials. To some extent this evil must
remain after a federation has been effected. But
there could be no comparison as to the waste under
the two systems. In affairs of common concern, the
administration of the Commonwealth would supersede
the several administrations of the provinces. For a
striking illustration of the way in which saving might
be effected, one has only to turn to the Postal and
Railway Departments. For the luxury of all this
surplusage we have to pay. Nothing can be more
certain; few things can be less satisfactory.
With respect to this aspect of the question, one
should observe the rate of interest payable on our
State debts. That rate is determined by the in-
adequacy of our present securities. If we really
desire to indulge ourselves in the luxury of its
payment, nothing is to be said. Yet it is as well to
face the truth—there is no reason, apart from our
disunion, why Canadian stocks should command so
much higher a price in the Home markets than our
own.
(2) The advance of our prosperity is often impeded
by the inadequacy of the forces at our disposal. A
great country, even more than a great mine, needs a


generous as well as a capable management. But, at
present, this is often impossible for mere want of
funds. How different must be the situation of a
United Australia! Great works of commercial enter-
prise, quite beyond the unaided powers of the several
colonies, are brilliant possibilities for the Common-
wealth. Why should not the present generation
enter upon this heritage ?
(3) The evils to which I have alluded are familiar;
but they are less serious than the evil about to be
considered. It is unfortunate when there is a waste
of force through the excess or the inadequacy of the
forces at our disposal; it is disastrous when we have
to contemplate a persistent misdirection of our energies.
Yet such an evil is inevitably attendant upon the
system of disunion, and finds a most forcible illus-
tration in the spheres of production and exchange.
If wheat is more easily and cheaply produced in one
Colony and fruit in another, what policy can be more
fatuous than for each of those colonies to insist in
producing its own supply of wheat and fruit! Yet
this kind of thing is happening all around us. As a
result of our protective systems, each colony strives
to produce its own commodities, quite disregarding
the circumstance that in another colony the same
results can be attained with much less labour. There
is only one way of avoiding this enormous waste.
We must follow the guidance of Nature and allow
commodities to be produced where the conditions are
most favourable. In the processes of distribution,
too, the same fatal hostility may be seen. If a people
are to make the most of their opportunities, it is
clearly necessary to abolish artificial restriction on the


carriage of produce to markets. Here, as elsewhere,
it should be our object to effect a constant reserve of
force, a prudent expenditure of our energies, so that
each result represents the possible maximum. Nothing
must be lost on the way. If we reject the quickest,
shortest, or easiest route, because it lies through
another Colony, in the last result we have to pay.
So far as the producer himself is concerned, the
difficulties are partly overcome by the competition of
hostile railways. But nothing can be more certain
than the fact of waste, and the necessity imposed upon
the community of paying for it. “ Railroads,” writes
Parsons, “have been built to compete against rivers,
and to haul produce and stores over unnecessary
distances to gratify the greed of rival cities and ports.
Australians pay the bill for all this waste. If the
laws of cheapness and least resistance were allowed to
prevail, Australia would be enriched by the vast sums
that would be saved by the abolition of cut-throat
tariffs and political and rival railways.”
There is a further point. Few people realise the
inestimable value of an Australian market for Aus-
tralian industries. Intercolonial freetrade means the
creation of a new market capable of justifying new
industries, of developing many industries already in
existence, and of preventing or alleviating those con-
gestions of trade which at present are so fatally
common. Australian merchants have already had
occasion to observe the extent to which large invest-
ments of foreign capital have been kept away from
the Colonies by the circumstance of a limited market,
the actual existence of border duties, or the reasonable
fear of their imposition in the future.


If we discuss the question of prosperity from the
point of view of our relations with foreign States, the
cause of Union is strengthened by the support of
additional arguments. Union would enable us to
protect our own commerce from destruction by force
of arms, or from injury by the imposition of hostile
tariffs. It would indicate an excess of confidence to
rely, in such matters, upon the great power and the
favourable inclination of the Mother Country. The
power, great though it be, would be materially aided
in the protection of Australian interests by the estab-
lishment of an Australian Federal navy; the inclina-
tion, though always favourable and often generous,
has not always proved itself so strong as to warrant
us in neglecting an opportunity of strengthening it by
exchanging the weak and often inconsistent represen-
tations of the several Colonies for the representations
of a Federal Commonwealth. But though the power
and the inclination of England to help us must be
strengthened by our union, I would rather rely upon
the argument that we should learn to protect our-
selves. This is our destiny; let us fulfil it. It cannot
be thought that, like the degenerate Britons of old, we
should be wholly dependent upon the protection of a
distant power, and at the mercy of an invader when-
ever, from necessity or from policy, the support of our
protectors is withdrawn. But, whether we rely upon
the aid of Great Britain or are ambitious to protect
ourselves, the conclusion to which we are forced is
the same. In either case, we must be united, if we
would take a position among the Nations of the earth
as a power to be reckoned with, to be consulted, to be
feared, and even to be indulged. “If we continue


united,” wrote Hamilton in the Federalist, a we may,
in a variety of ways, counteract a policy unfriendly to
our prosperity. By prohibitory regulations, extending
at the same time throughout the States, we may
oblige foreign countries to bid against each other for
the privileges of our markets. This assertion will not
appear chimerical to those who are able to appreciate
the importance to any manufacturing nation of the
markets of three millions of people increasing in rapid
progression; for the most part exclusively addicted
to agriculture, and likely from local circumstances to
remain in this disposition.”
In connection with the question how far Union
would increase our prosperity by affecting our external
relations, there is an aspect of the question which I
have yet to present; but it is one of great importance.
An American writer of to-day, speaking of the
industrial competition between the old and new
worlds, declares : “ Agriculturally, Minnesota, Ne-
braska, and Kansas are already formidable competitors
with England, France, and Germany. But this is
but the beginning. It is but the first spray from the
tremendous wave of economic competition that is
gathering in the Mississippi valley. By and by, when
our shameful tariff—falsely called ‘ protective * —
shall have been done away with, and our manu-
facturers shall produce superior articles at less cost of
raw material, we shall begin to compete with
European countries in all the markets of the world;
and the competition in manufactures will become as
keen as it is now beginning to be in agriculture. . .
It will not be long before this economic pressure will
make it simply impossible for the States of Europe to


keep up such, military armaments as they are now
maintaining. . . . The economic.competition will
become so keen that European armies will have to be
disbanded. But this involves the forcing of the
great States of Europe into some sort of Federal
relation.” If we would survive in the keen economic
struggles which lie before us, we must adapt our
organisation to meet the new necessities which the
progress of the world imposes. Sooner or later we
shall have to face the inevitable alternative of Union
with its strength and a great position in the world's
economy, or disunion with its weakness, and a wholly
subsidiary place among the nations of the earth. I,
for one, desire to meet this dilemma at once, and to
take the step which alone can ensure that full measure
of prosperity to which a beneficent Nature has
entitled us.


PART III.— HONOUR.
The considerations which I am about to submit to
your judgment would be rejected with disdain by
those who regard the glory o£ a country as a matter
of sentiment, and who look upon the rise of a Nation,
in so far as it involves no increase of material comforts,
as an event without interest or meaning. It is not to
critics such as these, that I venture to address the follow-
ing arguments. Uather do I speak to those who would
hold that there is something higher in life than logic,
or than the calculus of profit and loss; who would
believe that the full development of the individual is
only possible where the National life is strong in its
influence on the popular imagination; and who, there-
fore, recognise the crying necessity of agencies capable
of elevating and sustaining the tone of our social and
political life.
Where may we hope to find such agencies ? This
is a question which I should contemplate with despair
but for a conviction which I do not hesitate to lay
before you—the conviction that the achievement of a
common organisation for the various Australian
Peoples must be followed by a recognition of
our essential unity, and by an inspiring faith in the
splendour of the future which must lie before us.
In the records of human history there is no page
devoid of interest, nor any period from which we can
derive no instruction. If, for example, we examine
the genesis of Political Society, our attention is arrested


by a fact of striking and immediate significance—the
essentially moral or spiritual character of the bonds of
social union. To whatever extent social aggregation
may have been promoted by the fears or the motives of
hostility, the permanency of political organisation was
only rendered possible by the influence of religious
sanctions. The spell which the primitive priest threw
round the notion of political duty has never wholly
left us. The crude conceptions of a primitive theology
have been largely superseded by the more refined
interpretations of altruism and Christianity. But we
have still before us the great fundamental fact of
a non-utilitarian conception of political duty; our
obedience to the civil authority is still largely deter-
mined by religious considerations, by a sense of the
sacredness and the majesty of the State. Were things
to be otherwise, we should soon have occasion to
observe a decline in the force of the legal sanc-
tion, and a marked deterioration of the social tone.
So, too, if a people lose its national ideals, an
irreparable harm is suffered by the national character.
Reflect upon the influence of patriotism in times
that are past. The power of that sentiment to
raise a nation by improving the efficiency of its
fighting forces was but the most elementary part of
its saving power. It caught men in its strong embrace,
and they became capable of great and heroic deeds,
strong of purpose, generous of toil, magnanimous in
conduct. The same consecrating power may be
observed in the influence of loyalty during the middle
ages. That ideal did far more than to contribute to
the realisation of social order. Under its mysterious
spell, the whole character of Mediaeval life was trans


formed. Art and Literature, Thought and Feeling—
in all departments the evidence of its benedictory
touch was manifest.
I believe that it is just the absence of such ideals
which is the special danger of these Colonies. What
are the evidences of this danger? Can we not discover
a remedy apart from Union ? Would Union go far to
save us ? These are questions which deserve our
closest attention.
In speaking to those already acquainted with Aus-
tralian life, the want of national ideals and the
indurating influence of the deprivation upon the
Australian character are subjects too familiar to
require proof, and too melancholy to invite rehearsal
or illustration. Yet, though the evidences of short-
coming can need no insistence, we may perhaps
extract melancholy profit from a contemplation of
the commonness of our social tone and the almost
universal prevalence of a spirit of parochialism. The
latter of these evils is not peculiar to Australian life ;
but it has attained among us a magnitude which, if
not exceptional, is at least alarming, and if not un-
justifiable by the exigencies of colonial development,
is at least pernicious in its present influence upon the
Australian character. Under Austral skies, life
should be free and independent, disdainful of the
petty barriers of purely artificial boundaries. Instead
of this, the spirit of provincialism is everywhere con-
spicuous. The mind which should be gloriously open
to the inspiration of the Race, proves itself often
incapable of looking beyond the borders of a Colony
—is perhaps confined in its enthusiasm to the material
prosperity of a district. The responsibility of the


Parliamentary representative to his Colony is seldom
enforced by the electors and often ignored by the
members of our Legislatures. As between the
separate Colonies, there is little endeavour to arouse
a sense of that common life and those common respon-
sibilities which community of race, territory, and
interests renders so easy and so desirable.
The provincialism of which I have been speaking
has further consequences. Political life generally is
marked by a certain commonness of tone. Can we
wonder at this ? ec I prefer/ 5 said the noble Fenelon,
a my family to myself, my country to my family,
mankind to my country. 55 In Australian life, the
reversal of this order is conspicuous. We have no
National ideals to fire the enthusiasm and to impart a
generous ardour to the imagination. Men are free
and independent; but they are not loyal and mag-
nanimous.
While the want of national ideals is too apparent
to escape notice, prudence requires a careful considera-
tion of the question whether the creation of such ideals
cannot be effected without undertaking the achieve-
ment, and incurring the responsibilities, of political
union. The ideals, both of the British Pace and of
the British Empire, might be thought not incapable
of impressing the imagination by the splendour of the
past, or the proud pre-eminence of the present. Yet
experience has only proved the inadequacy of these
ideals. The history of the Mother Country does
not inspire us. It appeals to us rather as the history
of the race from which we spring, than as the history
of our own race. Dimly and unconsciously, but with
increasing force, it is felt that we must work out our


own salvation. Neither do we draw strength trom
the ideal of Empire—a fact which illustrates the
extent to which civilised man is governed, in his ideas
and in his conduct, by the conceptions, habits, and
institutions of remote times. The State in its origin
was an organised body of men occupying a definite
territory. The human race has never outgrown this
territorial conception of the State; nor is it possible
to obliterate, in their influence upon the imagination,
the existence of intervening oceans. It is probable
that the future will witness great and far-reaching
changes in the character of our ideas, and that, under
the expanding sense of unity and power, we may
realise a federation of the English-speaking peoples.
But such glories are not reserved for our time; nor is
it even possible to achieve a Federation of the present
Empire until men have overcome the limitations of
a crude territoriality. We are not ready for Imperial
Federation; the task before us is more easy, more
practicable, and more safe. It is the Federation of
these Australian Colonies. Let us not be deceived by
chimeras of the imagination. Australia is our native
land, and if the sentiment of a national ideal is to enter
into our lives, it must be as Australians. “ I think
nothing is to be hoped from you,” said Thoreau, “if
this bit of mould under your feet is not sweeter to you
than any other in the world.” “Nothing,” said
Ruskin, “is permanently helpful to any race or con-
dition of men but the spirit that is in their own hearts,
kindled by the love of their native land.” Let us, then,
be true to ourselves. The destiny of this great con-
tinent rests in our own hands; the fact has never yet
appealed to our imagination, nor ever can under the


regime of artificial boundaries, and tbe pathetic petti-
ness of intercolonial jealousies. Nothing but a
political union can give us the ideal we so greatly
need to broaden our sympathies and to refine and
elevate the whole tone of our political life.
Hitherto my argument has been negative rather
than positive. Unhappily, the proved inadequacy of
present ideals does not establish the efficacy of a
Federal Union. Will the federation of these colonies
broaden our sympathies ? Will it refine and elevate
the tone of our political life ? The answers to these
questions must depend upon our own worthiness. No
Union can save us if we are unworthy of Union. Yet
it is impossible not to look upon the issue of Federa-
tion with some confidence, when we remember the
arguments by which our expectations may be sup-
ported. I can do no better, in this connection, than
quote the eloquent and convincing language of the
Hon. A. I. Clark: “ The populations of the several
Australasian Colonies are located in very similar
physical environments, but there is a sufficient
difference in those environments to co-operate with
the tendencies which separate communities possess of
exhibiting varieties of type, and so to produce dis-
tinctive features in the social and intellectual life of
each of them. Proximity and frequent intercourse
extend, in a large degree, to the people of the whole
of Australasia the characteristics primarily manifested
by particular colonies, and we have consequently in
Australasia a distinctively Australasian type of life
and character which, in successive generations born
on Australasian soil and nurtured under Australasian
influences, will become more and more emphatic, and


will more clearly distinguish the native Australasian
from his contemporaries in England and America;
and it is this distinctively Australasian type of life
and character which will be our contribution to the
multiform civilisation of the world. But, in order to
make that contribution complete and perfect, the
populations of the several colonies must be included
in one political organisation which will increase their
mutual intercourse and co-operation, and impart to
them an abiding consciousness of their common
nationality and destiny. The influences of an in-
clusive political organisation upon the intellectual and
moral development of its component communities may
be subtle and difficult to trace and to define, but
they are real and powerful, and the nascent nation-
ality of Australasia would rapidly strengthen and
expand under their operation. Every one of us who
was born on Australasian soil may well be proud of
our British origin and traditions; but Australasia is
emphatically and peculiarly our country and our
home, and our highest duty to our children and to
humanity is to do all that is within our power to
ensure the development and maturity of the nation
which Providence has appointed us to create. The
feeling which we describe as patriotism may undoubt-
edly exist in a high degree in regard to a centre of
associations and traditions which, as a city or a
province, is a part only of some larger political
and geographical aggregate; but its highest
manifestations are not invoked until it embraces
all that which, under the name of nation or
country, gives to us our distinctive name and place
among the other nations around us. It is truly a


glorious privilege throughout the civilised world to he
able to say, ‘ I am an Englishman/ It has become
almost an equal privilege to say, c I am an American/
Why should it not become also in due time a similar
privilege to say, ‘ I am an Australasian ? ’ But
before that day can come Australasia must become
politically, as she is now geographically, a unit/’
“Federation,” writes the Hon. B. R. Wise, “will
widen the horizon of our national life on every side
by giving fresh standards of criticisms, higher ideals
in all professions and pursuits. Just as the concep-
tions of life are, as a rule, wider in a town than in a
village, so will the destruction of these isolating
provincial systems broaden our ideas.”
Such arguments derive confirmation and illustration
from the approved precedent of the United States.
For more than a century, those States have enjoyed
the privileges and survived the responsibilities of a
Federal Union. In the long run, their peace and their
prosperity have been assured. But what of the spiritual
aspect of the Union ? This is a difficult question, and
one which requires for its settlement a wide experience
of the American people. I therefore direct your atten-
tion to the judgment of the highest representative of
American thought—one who united, with the wisdom
of the sage, the insight and inspiration of the prophet.
“The highest separate personality of these States,”
writes Whitman, “ will only be fully coherent, grand,
and free through the cohesion, grandeur, and freedom
of the common aggregate, the Union. . . . This
is what makes the importance to the identities of
these States of the thoroughly fused, relentless,
dominating Union—a moral and spiritual idea,


subjecting all the parts with remorseless power. . . .
Indeed, what most needs fostering through the
hundred years to come, in all parts of the United
States —north, south, Mississippi valley, and Atlantic
and Pacific coasts —is this fused and fervent identity
of the individual, whoever he or she may be, and
wherever the place, with the idea and fact of American
Totality, and with what is meant by the flag, the stars,
and stripes. We need this conviction of nationality
as a faith to be absorbed in the blood and belief of
the people everywhere—south, north, west, east —to
emanate in their life, and in native literature and art.
We want the germinal idea that America, inheritor of
the past, is the custodian of the future of humanity.
Judging from history, it is some such moral and
spiritual ideas appropriate to them (and such ideas
only) that have made the profoundest glory and
endurance of nations in the past.”


PART IV.— THE FEDERAL FORM.
Since union will ensure our peace, promote our
prosperity, and advance our honour, the motives of
self-interest and patriotism are engaged in its defence,
and the alternative proposals for its realisation deserve
the attention and should receive the verdict of every
voter. The union of these Australian Colonies might
be effected in one of three ways, according to the
authority conferred upon the government of the
Commonwealth. That authority might embrace the
whole conduct of the private citizen, in which case the
governments of the several Colonies would cease to be
political and become merely municipal; or it might
embrace a defined portion of the citizen’s conduct, in
which case, outside that sphere, the political authority
of the governments of the several Colonies would be
retained; or again, it might embrace no portion
whatever of the citizen’s conduct, in which case the
governments of the several Colonies would retain a
full control over their respective citizens, but subject,
in the exercise of at least some of their powers, to the
advisory superintendence of the government of the
Commonwealth. Such distinctions may be more
briefly indicated by the terms Unitary State, Federal
Union, Confederacy. These forms severally deserve
our attention.
In the Unitary State, as we have seen, the authority
of the government of the United Commonwealth is
all embracing, and the governmental control of the


several Colonies is completely merged. There is much
to be said in favour of this form, but there is one very
simple argument which completely disposes of its
claims upon our consideration. It is impracticable.
The separate Colonies would not consent to a
surrender of their individuality. Minds of a certain
order betray an instinctive preference for this form of
Union; but the preference proves an obstacle to its
own realisation when it fosters a spirit of opposition
to those intermediate steps which must precede the
stage of complete Unification. There is but one
course of conduct open to those who are disposed,
from motives of policy or of patriotism, to advocate
the claims of the Unitary State. That course is to
accept the Federal form as a first instalment, and to
trust to the centralising influences which Federation
renders possible and encourages, for an ultimate
realisation of their ambitions.
Under a Confederacy, the constitution and powers
of the several Colonies remain intact, and the
authority of the Commonwealth, however extensive
in scope or majestic in character, is confined in its
influence to the governmental organs of the several
States. Between the government of the Common-
wealth and the citizens of the several Colonies there
is no relationship; laws have no binding force on the
private citizen until sanctioned or enacted by the
authority of local Parliaments. Such a Union hardly
deserves the name. Its inadequacy is abundantly
illustrated by experience, and must be apparent to
the common sense. How can Peace be secured by a
union where the central authority enjoys no power
over individuals, and so is compelled to undertake.


for the coercion of recalcitrant States, the maintenance
and dangers of a standing army ? How can we hope
for our full measure of prosperity when the authority
entrusted with our common interests enjoys so limited
and so precarious a power ? By what right do we
expect to overcome the evils of provincialism, and to
develop a patriotic and national spirit, when no direct
relation is established between the central authority
and the individual over whom the desired influence is
to be exerted ? Such questions need hardly detain
us; yet it may be observed that the convictions of
common sense are in complete agreement with the
conclusions to which an historical investigation must
lead us. This aspect of the question very fully
engaged the attentions of American Statesmen at a
time when the imperfections of a Confederacy had
been impressed upon the imagination by the disagree-
able instrumentality of experience. The verdict of
the American leaders derived an additional signifi-
cance from the fact that the principle of legislation
for States in their collective capacity did not run
through all the powers delegated to the Union,
What, then, was the conclusion to which these leaders
were led by an investigation of their own experience
and the available experience of other countries ?
“ Experience,” wrote Hamilton and Madison, “is the
oracle of truth; and where its responses are unequi-
vocal, they ought to he conclusive and sacred. The
important truth, which it unequivocally pronounces
in the present case, is, that a sovereignty over
sovereigns, a government over governments, a legis-
lation for communities as contradistinguished from
individuals; as it is a solecism in theory, so in prac


tice it is subversive of the order and ends of civil
polity, by substituting violence in the place of law, or
the destructive coercion of the sword in the place of
the mild and salutary coercion of the magistracy
The condemnation of the Unitary and Confederate
forms of government, as impracticable or as inadequate,
compels us to examine the claims of a third possibility
—the intermediate form of government popularly
known as the Federal. The novelty of this form
consists in the dual citizenship of the subject, who
owes allegiance, on the one hand, to a provincial or
State government; on the other hand, to a central
authority empowered to deal with matters of common
or national concern. It is to this form of Union alone
that we can look with either confidence or hope. If
we examine it impartially, we discover in its favour
much more than the negative virtue of escaping the
imputations to which alternative forms are exposed;
we shall find, in short, that it is practicable, adequate,
and endowed with certain special excellencies which
entitle it to rank as one of the very highest forms of
government which the ingenuity of man has devised.
It is practicable, because it affords a means of uniting
these colonies under one common government without
sacrificing the separate existence of local Parliaments
and local patriotisms. It is adequate, because it gives to
the national authority sufficient powers to effect the great
objects of union. Finally, regarded as a form of govern-
ment to be applied to avast territory, it offers certain
very special advantages; the obligations of a dual citi-
zenship exercise a highly educative effect upon the
voter, since he becomes a citizen of the Commonwealth
while remaining subject to the stimulus imparted by the


interests and activities of local self-government; and
the division of governmental powers between central
and local authorities, while gaining the advantages
of union where union is desirable, affords exceptional
opportunities for developing a vast and varied terri-
tory, by respecting the autonomy of localities wherever
that autonomy is required by local diversities of climate,
soil, or population. “ There are,” writes Whitman,
“two distinct principles—aye,paradoxes—at the life-
fountain and life-continuation of the States; one, the
sacred principle of the Union, the right of ensemble,
at whatever sacrifice—and yet another, and equally
sacred principle, the right of each State, considered
as a separate sovereign individual, in its own sphere.
Some go zealously for one set of these rights, and
some as zealously for the other set. We must have
both; or, rather, bred out of them, as out of mother
and father, a third set, the perennial result and com-
bination of both, and neither jeopardised. I say the
loss or abdication of one set, in the future, will be
ruin to democracy just as much as the loss of the
other set. The problem is, to harmoniously adjust
the two, and the play of the two. . . . For the theory
of this Republic is, not that the general government
is the fountain of all life and power, dispensing it
forth, around, and to the remotest portions of our
territory, but that THE PEOPLE are, represented in
both, underlying both the General and State govern-
ments, and considered just as well in their indivi-
dualities and in their separate aggregates, or States,
as considered in one vast aggregate, the Union.”


PART V.— A PRESENT FEDERATION.
I have spoken of the general advantages of a
Federal Union, It remains for us to consider whether,
while yielding a general assent to the reality of such
advantages, we may affirm that the time is not ripe
for attempting their achievement. The citizens of
the several Colonies have their own peculiar diffi-
culties to consider; hut, speaking generally, the
common resource of hostile argument is to admit the
advantages of Federation while postponing the period
of their realisation. The absurdities of our present
system are too obvious for open opposition, and the
anti-federal spirit is constrained to express itself
in a plea for indefinite delay. It may be of some
service to analyse this plea, since hostility is never
more dangerous than when, in the guise of prudence,
it appeals to our procrastination. It behoves us to
guard ourselves against those who advocate a continu-
ance of present evils and a neglect of present oppor-
tunities; and whose opposition, if successful, must
increase the difficulties, if it does not imperil the
achievement, of Union in the future.
The plea for postponement is often based upon the
weakness of Federal sentiment. Yet it is surely
unreasonable to expect a Federal sentiment before
Federation itself is a realised fact. Only among the
leaders of thought can we justly look for a sentiment be-
longing to the period which follows Union rather than
to the period which precedes it. Realise Federation as


a fact, and the Federal sentiment must follow. Let us
avoid urging as an objection to a Reform an evil
which it is the very object of the Reform to overcome.
In the community of our race and interests, there is an
all-sufficient basis for that community of feeling which
it is the great object of Federation to establish.
There are some who would persuade us to await,
with resignation, the occurrence of a foreign war.
Under the prospects or experience of invasion, men
will learn, it is argued, the lesson which they disdain
in time of Peace. This may be true ; but if true, it
is also lamentable. It is almost incredible that a
great and free people should descend to look upon
foreign invasion as indispensable to the realisation of
domestic Reform. A course of conduct so ignoble is
unworthy of our self-respect, and must be attended
with certain very obvious dangers. The real advan-
tages of Union are indefinitely postponed; if they
are ever realised, it must be at a time of great
strife, and under conditions which preclude a calm
and dispassionate settlement of opposing claims. We
may easily imagine our state under such conditions.
In the event of war, we should be in the position of
having neglected past opportunities; of being very
inadequately prepared for present dangers; and,
finally, of handing on to posterity a legacy of disputed
questions certain to lessen the advantages, if not to
imperil the cause, of the Union we desire. I entertain
too high an opinion of our nascent nationality to
believe it capable of contemplating, in a spirit of
unworthy inaction, evils so extremely prejudicial to
its future. Above all, I protest against the conduct
of those who, while professing their own readiness for


Federation, are prepared to oppose its present realisa-
tion out of a regard for the imagined frailties and
deficiencies of others.
There are some who, while confessing the reality of
advantages, are so impressed with obvious sacrifices,
that they oppose the cause of Federation, present or
future. It must be clear that, if such sacrifices are
not necessarily incidental to the Federal form of
government, time may be trusted to work justice. To
suppose the Federal Parliament capable of sitting with
folded hands while gross and palpable injustice is
being done, should indicate a mean and ungenerous
spirit rather than a power of foretelling the future.
But if, on the other hand, the sacrifices are neces-
sarily incidental to the Federal form, one is naturally
led to enquire how far their existence in other Federa-
tions has proved the undesirability of Federal move-
ments. The enquiry would hardly detain an open
and candid mind for long. We do not hear of the
citizens of the existing Federations of Germany,
Switzerland, the United States, and Canada regretting
the step they have taken. They count the gain and
the cost, and know on which side the balance rests.
Yet no one of the countries referred to could claim
that homogeneity of population which is ours, and
which must ever constitute the chief condition of
successful Federation.
There is another class of objectors who base their
opposition upon the character of the Commonwealth
Bill. Some will not have Federation because the Bill
does not include provisions the very presence of
which must have secured an overwhelming rejection.
Others allude to really grave difficulties, such as the


financial clauses of the Bill—clauses necessarily
tentative and dealing with questions the ultimate
decision of which is impossible until we are supplied
with data only procurable when Federation has
already been realised. The great question in such a
connection must be this: Can we trust the Federal
Parliament to do reasonable justice between man and
man and between colony and colony ? or can we not ?
As for the purely Constitutional questions of the Bill,
there are necessarily many questions for discussion;
and it is incredible that the settlement of each and
every one of these questions should be effected in
such a way as to satisfy the ideal of any one man.
Probably in view of the fallibility of the individual,
a persuasion of the perfection of the Bill might arouse
the suspicion of the impartial. If any individual would
delay Federation until he can approve of the Bill in
every particular, his position must be described as one
of uncompromising hostility. The true Federalist will
recognise the absurdity of insisting upon a condition
so unwise, and will praise or condemn by reference to
a broad and impartial view of the Bill as a whole.
There are many—and these, perhaps, not the least
wise—who will prefer the judgment of the Federal
Convention to their own, and will, therefore, under-
take to vote for the Bill which has received its final
sanction. The advantages of Federal Union are
obvious; the constitutional questions involved in the
Commonwealth Bill are complicated and difficult, and
require for their discussion the experience, the skill,
and the wisdom of a Select Assembly. It would seem,
therefore, not unwise in a citizen assured of the
advantages of Federation, to entrust the solution of


constitutional difficulties to the capacity of the Federal
Convention. Never in the history of these Colonies
has there been so apt an occasion for the display of a
generous confidence. If we fail in that confidence, we
condemn our own selection, and imply the incapacity
of future generations to remedy the particular evils
which subsequent experiences may reveal.
There are, I conceive, two very special arguments
which support, if indeed they do not justify, the cause
of present Federation. In the first place, there is the
argument from precedent. Do any of us believe that
the American States in 1787, or the Canadian Colonies
in 1867, were premature in the work of Federal Union ?
«This much I have no hesitation in saying/’ wrote
the Marquess of Dufferin, “ that, in the case of Canada,
her increased prosperity, self-respect, and prestige, as
well as the sentiment of her nationality, have been
immensely stimulated by Federation. Nor through-
out the six and a half years during which I presided
over the Grovernment of the Dominion, did the Union
which had recently been brought about seem to work
in any other way than to the advantage of every
member of it.” Yet, who would deny that the
Australian Colonies are advanced beyond the require-
ments which either of the foregoing precedents
warrant us in demanding ? Tried by the tests of com-
merce, of population, of internal development, or of
the capacity for self-government —tried by any or by
all of these tests —are not the results of the comparison
invariably in our favour ? Then why persist in affirm-
ing that the Colonies are not ripe for Federation !
In the second place, the postponement of the Union
must increase certain difficulties in the path. The


disturbance of certain vested interests, which come
down to us like a legacy from the past, is already felt
as a serious obstacle to Federation; it is an obstacle
whose terrors time can only increase by adding to
their just occasion. The position reminds one of a
discussion on the undue profits of the middleman. To
all proposals for reform, the middleman made demur.
“The organisation of Society made my existence
possible, and even necessary. Acting in the faith of
that organisation, I have acquired a vested interest in
the profits which I make.” “My dear friend,”
answered the representative of Society, “ you are quite
right in much of what you say as to the past. But in
the present, things have come to an issue. Either you
or Society must yield; and it is better that you should
suffer, if need be, than that you should batten on
Society. National Progress must not be impeded;
the happiness and prosperity of the nation must not
be sacrificed for the interests of a class. You, my
friend, must find a new channel for your activities.
If you have any regard for your country, you will not
oppose a reform so essential to its welfare.” There is
an obvious analogy between this case and the problem
which Federalists have to face. The Union of these
Colonies cannot be effected without prejudicially
affecting the circumstances of certain individuals who
have acquired an interest in the continuance of present
evils. To me, one of the most hopeful signs of the
times is the way in which many individuals so affected,
have thrown in their lot for Federation. But I wish
now to direct your attention to another fact. The
obstacle to Union, arising from the necessity of inter-
fering with vested interests, is an obstacle which grows


greater and greater every year. In this respect, it is
quite true to say, as Mr. G-arran does say, that every
step not in Union is a step further apart.
I have nothing further to do than submit to your
own consideration some urgent questions. Are we
worthy of the destiny which may be ours ? Have we
the prescience to desire Union, and the courage to
achieve it ? Are we capable of laying the foundation
of a splendid fabric within whose portals these great
Colonies may shelter ? Can we take the tide of Fortune
at the flood, without waiting for the stimulus imparted
by war, or for the impossible time when Union can
be realised without involving sacrifice ? Are we
sufficiently broad-minded and generous to be capable
of rising above constitutionalism or parochialism,
of boldly placing our trust in the verdict of the
Federal Convention, and of entrusting to the wisdom
and integrity of future National Assemblies to remedy
the defects which may exist in the present arrange-
ment ? Such are the questions I leave to your con-
sideration, not without a confidence of the answer
they must receive at your hands. It is incredible
that those should remain long separate who are
bound together by conditions of territory, by ties of
self-interest, and by the sacred bonds of race and
language. Our only real danger is our ignorance;
great opportunities may be neglected from failure to
appreciate their advantage. Against such a con-
tingency it behoves us to fight. The goal before us
is worthy; let us struggle towards it, in the assurance
that to have contributed in the great work of its attain-
ment, must secure for us the approval of our own con-
science, and the enlightened gratitude of future ages.


APPENDIX.
THE COMMONWEALTH BILL.
In the Review of Reviews for March, 1898, there are some
expressions of opinion on the Commonwealth Bill to which a peculiar
significance must be attached. I take the liberty of making several
extracts dealing with questions which have recently received much
discussion.
DEMOCRATIC CHARACTER OF THE BILL.
“ I welcome the Constitution as the most magnificent institution
into which the chosen representatives of a free and enlightened
people have ever breathed the spirit of popular sentiment and of
national hope. ” — Mr. Kingston.
“ Nothing can be done under the Constitution which is contrary
to the will of the people.”— Sir Edward Braddon.
“ It is a Constitution framed for a free people.”— Mr. Barton.
“ If ever there was a people’s Constitution it is this one.” —Mr.
Holder.
“This Bill is more liberal than any other Constitution in the
world. No other Constitution provides for the election of both
Houses by the whole people, or for a double dissolution.”— Mr.
Deakin.
“Fancy describing as ‘conservative’ and ‘dangerous’ a scheme
of representative and responsible government based on the bi-cameral
system with manhood suffrage, one-man-one-vote, and a double
dissolution of both Houses in case of deadlocks.”— Dr. Quick.
THE EQUAL REPRESENTATION OF STATES IN THE
SENATE.
“ Those who continue to denounce equal representation now are,
in fact, the opponents of Union, because they oppose the only form
which the people of Australia will agree to.”— Mr. Wise.


THE FEDERAL TARIFF.
“ The financial clauses should prove satisfactory ; nothing more
so has been proposed, and nothing less so had a likelihood of
acceptance.” —Sir Philip Fysh.
“ Electors may usefully observe that, while some of our critics
declare that Federation is a surrender of Freetrade, others declare
that it is a surrender of Protection. When extremists agree in
condemning a particular cause, moderate and sensible men may
fairly assume it to be right.”— Mr. Wise.
THE QUESTION OF POSTPONEMENT.
“ There are flaws in the scheme, and so are there spots on the
sun, but we do not therefore refuse to share the light it sheds on us.
. . . . If we do not come in now, we shall have failed to take
at its flood the tide that leads on to fortune, and, having done that,
shall have done irreparable damage to the cause of Australian
Nationhood.”— Mr. Holder.
“ Warnings have been given as to the dangers of Union, but we
are entitled to reply that the account shall be balanced by an
estimate of the dangers of disunion.”— Mr. Deakin.
“ I wish to tell the people of Australia that if they do not go to
the poll and vote for the Federal Constitution which the Convention
recommended to them, a fatal blow will be struck at the whole
movement.” —Sir Richard Raker.
Websdale, Shoosmith & Co. Printers, 117 Clarence-street, Sydney.
