

Eft .
\
MX 3?““l **&al
..ate..,,,- ‘'"•‘■ v<
WIILGA COMES
TO SCIIIOOIL
JEAN A. McCABE


vl V
<P o
Vk°


WHS A COMES
TO SCHOOL
JEAN A. McCABE
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
PATERSONS PRINTING PRESS LTD.
PERTH, W.A
PRICE THREE SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE


C 15271
i y mov ic*,
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
ll \I 1 I— I> * ' •
1. The New Term - - 7
2. The First Day - - 10
3. Wilga Goes Swimming - 13
4. The Outcast - - 17
5. A Happy Meeting - - 21
6. Carnival Day - - 25
7. In the Sick Ward - - 33
8. Assembly Night - - 38
9. A Moonlight Escapade - 43
10. The Next Day - 49
11. End of Term - - 52


Wilga Comes to School
Chapter 1
THE NEW TERM
“Hullo, Nina I Hullo Iris! Has anyone seen Jean Rowland? And
has Betty Frankson arrived yet?” cried Isabelle Jamieson, a tall, fair-
haired girl, as she came racing across the lawn to join her schoolmates.
The long summer holidays were over and the girls of John Hind-
marsh Memorial School were eagerly looking forward to meeting their
chums again and exchanging excited accounts of their own particular
fun during the past few weeks.
John Hindmarsh Memorial School was situated on the North
Esplanade at Glenelg and only a short distance from the gum tree
under which their famous patron had proclaimed South Australia
part of the British Empire just 106 years before.
From where the girls stood in groups on the front lawn they had
a glorious view of the sea, for there was only the width of the road and
a narrow garden, then the sea wall and a long stretch of glorious white
sand to the water’s edge. From both directions along the sea wall,
girls could be seen strolling in two’s and three’s, happily chatting with
their own particular friends, whilst a few impatient ones dashed along
despite the heat.
A sudden burst of cheers, happy laughter and the noise of several
dozen voices talking at once and never waiting for an answer, an-
nounced the arrival of the school bus which picked up scholars who
attended “John Hindmarsh.”
“Brought your bathers back, Clare? I’ve got new ones . . .”
“Hope we have a decent team in Grade Six this year . . .”
“I wonder who’ll swim in Jean’s place . . .”
“Didn’t you know she wasn’t coming back, Nina! Yes, her mother
is rather ill and Jean is staying home until the May vacation at least.”
“Bad luck,” cried Isabelle. “Grade Six will miss her swimming. I
wonder if we will have a dip today?”
“Nina, Iris, look there! It’s Betty! Good old Betty! Hurrah!”
Betty was a general favourite with her class and although she was
rather too inclined for mischief in the prefects’ opinion she was such a
quick pupil at all lessons and such a good swimmer that she was really
popular with all. Nina, Lily, Isabelle, Jean and Betty were insepar-
ables. They were also the swimming team for their grade and as “John


Hindmarsh” was so keen on the sport the girls were pretty efficient.
Only four girls in the primary school held Life Savers’ Badges, three
in the Grade Seven team and Isabelle in the Grade Six team. As the
chums had hoped Jean Rowland would obtain her badge soon it was
a sad blow that she would be out of the team.
The school swimming carnival was held in February and there was
a splendid trophy for competition in both the primary and super-
primary grades.
The chums were so busy greeting Betty and listening to her bright
chatter that it was some time before Lily noticed a thin pale-faced girl
standing near, eagerly listening to their conversation.
“Who’s the inquisitive youngster?” exclaimed Lily rather rudely.
The youngster blushed and hung her head in confusion whilst the
other girls giggled and stared curiously.
Betty Frankson looked ashamed for a moment, then she gave a
little laugh too and turning to the pale-faced girl, said, “This is my
cousin, Wilga Barret, everyone. Sorry, Wilga, I forgot all about you in
the excitement of meeting the girls again. Wilga is in our grade,
chums, so we’ll have to give a hand ’til she settles in and makes
friends.”
“Come on, Wilga, you’d better come to Miss Mills.”
The friends looked in dismay after Betty’s cousin. Surely they
wouldn’t have to go about with her. She looked too shy for words and
a regular spoil sport. As Betty moved off with her cousin to find Miss
Mills, Lily grumbled, “What a beastly shame! I suppose we’ll have to
take the kid for swims with us and paddle about with her instead of
practising for the carnival.”
“Yes,” chimed in Isabelle, “and I’ll have to pick out another mem-
ber for the team and train her and we’ll all have to practise together
for the relay race.”
“What bad luck. We do seem fated never to get the shield. Betty
sprained her ankle last year and when we were in Grade Four there
was an epidemic of some sort and the sports were abandoned,” sighed
Lily.
“Oh, well, cheer up, girls,” laughed Nina, who was never down-
cast for long. “Why, we’ve not even commenced school yet. You all
look as though you had failed your exams instead of there being a
glorious term ahead.”
Nina’s infectious laugh soon cheered up the chums and very soon
the new girl was forgotten in the excitement of relating how each had
spent their holidays.
Nina’s cousins lived on a sheep station nearly two hundred miles
beyond Port Augusta and she had spent Christmas with them. How
the girls laughed at her account of the long camel ride from the rail-
way siding to Emu Plains, her uncle’s property. Nina was a great fav-
ourite with her classmates but they were always teasing her about
her fussiness over her appearance. Poor Nina and the discomforts of
camel riding through hot sand amused the girls greatly.
Lily and Betty had stayed home and spent their days swimming
and sunning on the beach. They were both in good trim for the coming
Swimming Carnival.


But how the girls crowded round Isabelle Jamieson when they
learnt that she had spent part of her holiday in camp.
Isabelle was a Guide Patrol Leader and she had gone with her
company to Kangaroo Island where they had evidently had a splendid
time, hiking, fishing, swimming and inspecting the native animals in
Flinders’ Chase and even visiting the lighthouse. “It was simply glori-
ous, girls,” enthused Isabelle. “Oh I wish we had a Guide company
here; you’d all love it, and it’s lots and lots of fun.”
“I’m sure I’d enjoy it,” sighed Lily, “but 1 don’t suppose it would
be all fun like camping. Why, perhaps we’d even have to work,” she
explained in mock horror.
Lily always made out to be terribly lazy and although no one ever
saw her working very hard she was always near the top of her class.
The sudden booming of a gong caused all the girls to hurry to the
school buildings for the assembly that always preceded a fresh term’s
work.


Chapter 11
THE FIRST DAY
As Betty and her cousin moved towards the school Wilga felt a
terrible desire to run away and hide from all these strange girls. She
had never seen so many girls together in all her life for her home was
hundreds of miles away in Central Australia and their nearest neigh-
bours were eighty miles. Until now Wilga’s only companions had been
a few little aborigines whose parents were station hands.
Come on Wilga, let’s hurry, Miss Mills —our head —has her office
just along the passage; she’ll want to see you before assembly.” Betty
was anxious to get rid of her charge and hurry back to her com-
panions.
Wilga found herself being rushed along a long wide corridor. It
seemed delightfully cool and inviting after the long hot journey in the
school bus. Several girls were standing about and one or two of them
stared curiously at the new girl who hung her head shyly and blushed
under their gaze.
“Country bumpkin, 1 bet,” came a rude voice, followed by a lot of
giggling.
“Don’t mind them, Wilga,” said Betty hotly as she tossed her
head. only Third Graders and haven’t learnt any manners
yet. Anyhow they’ve no right in here and they will catch it if Miss Mills
sees them.”
“Go on babies, run away and don’t cheek your superiors,” or-
dered Betty.
The culprits shuffled uneasily and made off down the corridor.
Wilga looked with awe at her cousin who could make other girls
obey her with such ease.
Betty, quite unconcerned, knocked at a door near them.
“Come in!” cried a voice.
Betty opened the door and clasping Wilga’s arm, walked in.
“Here’s my cousin, Wilga Barret, Miss Mills.”
Miss Mills* looked up from the letter she was reading and smiled
at the girls.
“Wilga Barret —our new pupil.” Miss Mills looked a dear, thought
Wilga.
“How are you, Wilga dear, and Betty, too. 1 am glad you came in
plenty of time as I want to have a little talk with you.”
“Betty, you can run along now and join your friends. I’m sure
you’ll all do your very best to make Wilga happy.” Then as Betty left
the room and closed the door, Miss Mills turned to her newest pupil.
“Sit down, Wilga dear, and tell me about yourself and your fav-
ourite games and lessons.”


“I like horses,” whispered Wilga in a very tiny shy voice, “but I
can’t swim and I don’t think the girls like me, and I’m not a country
bumpkin—not really.” The shy pale face suddenly flushed angrily at
the remembrance of the giggles and curious stares she had noticed.
Miss Mills looked rather surprised but let the matter pass.
“Tell me, Wilga, what games do you like? You know we
don’t go in for riding here, but being right on the sea front all the girls
make the most of their opportunity and we have some quite good
swimmers at “John Hindmarsh.” I expect you can swim at least a little
—can’t you now !”
“I can’t swim at all, and I don’t think 1 want to learn. We don’t
have a chance up home and Daddy won’t let me try the waterholes
’cause they’re dangerous, and I hate water.”
Miss Mills looked greatly startled, more by the intensity of the
outburst than by what the little girl had said. Wilga had looked really
upset and had quite forgotten her shyness in her determination not to
learn to swim.
“Well, Wilga, you’re very strange here my dear, but I’m sure
you’ll soon settle in with the other girls and enjoy the water as much
as they. Anyway we will wait and see.”
“Now, about your lessons. I believe you’re to be in the Sixth
Grade and that’s quite good for a little girl of eleven. There are some
very nice children in that class and I’m sure you’ll be happy amongst
them/’
“I’m not very good at lessons but I’m going to try hard ’cause
Daddy wants me to do well, but I won’t be any good at swimming and
I don’t want to learn.”
“Well we won’t talk about that any more for the present, Wilga.”
Miss Mills stood up as a clock suddenly chimed.
“It is time for assembly, Wilga, and I want you to come along now
and meet your new class mates.”
It seemed a terribly long day to Wilga. Everything was so strange
and the girls in her class were all so eager and happy at seeing one
another again that she was quite forgotten. It was horribly lonely too,
to be hundreds of miles from home. Wilga wondered what they would
be doing on the station now, and suddenly she longed to be back home
at Faraway Downs.
“Day dreaming, Wilga,” laughed Betty, as she came up behind
her. “Come on out to the tennis courts and if you can’t play we will
teach you.”
Off went the two girls and on reaching the courts at the far end
of the playground they found Isabelle, Iris and Nina waiting for
them.
“I don’t suppose the child can play,” grumbled Isabelle who didn’t
at all like her chief chum, Betty, to be so taken up with someone else.
“Let her chase the balls whilst we four have a set.”
“No, I can’t play, but I’d love to learn,” smiled Wilga, “that’s if
you don’t mind.”
“Oh, all right, but I’m sure I don’t fancy teaching kids to play ten-


nis and to swim. At “John Hind marsh” we learn all those things right
from the start. Hadn’t she better go along to Miss Trentan and start
with the kindergarten?” came the slightly malicious reply.
Isabelle was evidently in a bad mood and took no pains to hide
the fact that she, at least, resented the new girl’s inclusion in their
special set.
Betty looked in amazement at her chum. “Why, Isabelle, whatever
is wrong with you? Surely you don’t mind. We can’t let Wilga start
with the babies. Why, everyone would laugh at her, and anyhow she’s
my cousin and I’ll coach her myself if you’re going to be disagreeable.”
At that moment one of the prefects called Betty who ran off,
leaving her cousin to face three cross girls.
Betty ran off, leaving her cousin to face three cross
girls
“Now see what you’ve done,” snapped Isabelle, “you’re a jolly
nuisance and an interfering busybody; you’ve just about caused a quar-
rel between Betty and me. It will never be the same now if we’ve got
to have you tacked on to us everywhere we go. Can’t you find some
friends of your own?”
Wilga started back as though she had been slapped and even Iris
and Nina looked ashamed and horrified at their chum’s unkind out-
burst.
Seeing Wilga aimost on the verge of tears Iris spoke more kindly
and offered to give her her first lesson in tennis.
Isabelle was still sullen so Iris explained the first rules of the
game and she and Nina took it in turn to show Wilga how to serve.
After half an hour’s play Betty returned, and Wilga, unused to the
game, was glad to sit and watch the four chums play until the bell
summoned them to prepare for tea.


Chapter 111
WILGA GOES SWIMMING
Because everything was so strange to her, Wilga did not sleep well
on her first night at school. It had seemed funny to be going to bed in
a dormitory with six other gilds instead of in her little primrose and
blue room at home.
When the lights went out she suddenly felt terribly lonely and
homesick and try as she would to be brave, a few tears trickled down
on to her pillow. Then too, their windows overlooked the sea and the
thunder of the waves was such an unusual sound to the country girl
that she just tossed and turned and tried to shut out the noise. Wilga
really hated the sea. The moment she first saw it, it had frightened
her and now the sound of it, so loud in the stillness of the night, quite
terrified her. At last, worn out with crying, Wilga fell asleep only v;o
dream of girls and tennis balls and bells and water all mixed up to-
gether.
A loud gong booming through the house roused her.
“Come on girls, it’s six o’clock and a really glorious morning for
a swim,” came Miss Trentan’s voice from the doorway.
“It’s far too nice to sleep in till seven today so I want everyone
in bathers and wrap at the foot of the side steps at a quarter past.
Betty, please see that your cousin puts on her surf shoes and brings
her right towel. Now, hurry up, and I’ll meet you in a few moments.”
“A swim, oh how glorious.” “What a sport she is—” “Fancy tak-
ing us all before breakfast.”
“You forget, Nina, we’re in Grade Six now, and we can always
go for an early dip if we have a life saver with us, and we’ve got
Isabelle right in our own dormitory.”
Wilga crept slowly out of bed, not because she was lazy for she
was used to very early rising at home, but because she dreaded this
swim that all the others seemed so thrilled about.
“Do we have to go?” she asked timidly, then blushed furiously
at the horrified gaze of the whole dormitory.
“Have to go, good heavens, child, don’t you realise it’s a wonder-
ful privilege to be able to go? Why, of course you’ll have to come. You
don’t want to stay in bed till seven on a morning like this, do you ? The
girls in the other grades would give anything to change places with
you. You are a funny kid,” said Betty in a very puzzled voice.
A few moments later about forty girls in bright blue bathers trim-
med with bands of white and wearing white bathing caps, surf shoes
and towelling capes, were speeding over the warm sand towards the
sea. It didn’t seem to take a moment for them to drop their things in
heaps and line up ready for the plunge.


“I think it would be a good idea for the Seventh Graders to move
further along the beach,” said Miss Trentan. “1 know you can all swim
well and as you have three life savers you’ll be in no danger!”
Wilga then noticed that the live girls who were life savers wore
black bathers with the special life savers’ badge. They looked very
smart and efficient.
“In you go, girls,” cried Miss Trentan.
“Betty and Nina and Lily, I want you to swim out to the 200-yard
buoy and back and then Betty you had better watch the other girls to
see who is most likely to take Jean Rowland’s place in the team.”
“Now, Wilga,” said her teacher kindly, “I believe that you can’t
swim at all. Well, Fay and Lucy and Geraldine can’t swim more than
a few yards either. I think we will all take hands and wade out and
splash and lie in the shallow water until you are quite used to it.”
“Oh, Miss Trentan! It’s cold,” cried Lucy, “please can’t we race
out to the sand-bar and get properly wet? I hate getting wet in bits.”
“Yes, Lucy, of course. You can all have a race.” Then seeing
Wilga hanging back, the teacher took her hand and began to splash
through the water after the others.
“Come on, Wilga. I’m sure you’re going to love the water after a
while. You can just play about to-day, and then to-morrow I’ll give
you your first swimming lesson.”
As the cold water crept up her legs Wilga tried to pull back, but
Miss Trentan had a very firm hold of her hand. How Wilga hated it.
Every time a little wave broke against her she gave a gasp and jumped
to avoid it. The sea looked terribly deep and cold and frightening to
her: but Miss Trentan just waded on and on, until the water was up to
Wilga’s waist.
Fay and Geraldine and Lucy were already at the sand bar and
were bobbing up and down, and splashing and dashing water at one
another. lik* little fat porpoises at play.
“Well, here we are, Wilga; now get yourself wet all over and bob
about like the other girls. You’ll soon warm up. I’m leaving you here
for a while. Now children,” she said, addressing the three laughing
girls, “see that Wilga doesn’t go out any further whilst I watch the
Seventh Grade team further along.”
Miss Trentan needn’t have warned Wilga not to go any farther out,
for she was nearly frozen with cold and terror, but the three on the
sand bar didn’t notice that either.
“Come on under, Wilga, it’s just glorious!” squealed Fay, who
had lost her cap in a rough-and-tumble game with her chums.
“Yes, come on baby, or I’ll duck you,” cried Geraldine, as she saw
Wilga had no intention of getting any wetter.
“Why, I believe she’s afraid,” scoffed Lucy, who was the baby of
the class and feared nothing.
“Oh Isabelle! Isabelle! Come over here, please do,” shrieked the
trio as the life saver swam past.
“Well, cherubs, what is it now? Have you suddenly discovered
that one of you is fit for the team?”
Isabelle was in her element in the water and consequently in a
good humour.


“Oh Isabelle, Wilga won’t get wet, and she won’t bob down and
splash and play. She’ll never learn to swim if she just stands and
stares, will she?”
Isabelle looked curiously at the little country girl who was stand-
ing in water to her waist, and shivering miserably.
Guide and all, as she was, Isabelle was always inclined to be im-
patient of anything that didn’t fit her idea of how things should be,
and she was far too inclined to treat unkindly, children who were
either timid or unable to excel in the sports or lessons that she did so
well herself. Girls either hated Isabelle or loved her, for she could be
very loyal to her friends.
“Afraid, is she?” laughed Isabelle scornfully.
“Goodness child, surely you don’t mind water, or didn’t you ever
use it back home? I suppose some people don’t bother to wash when
no one is about.”
The little girls giggled delightedly. Isabelle’s sarcastic tongue was
notorious.
Wilga was not at home in the water
“Well, child, say something. Don’t be a silly little goose. I’m re-
sponsible for the swimming in Grade Six, and 1 shan’t have a coward
amongst them, so if you won’t get under by yourself we’ll jolly well
push you under.”
Wilga stared at her tormentors in horror and saw that they really
meant it. They would push her under she felt sure, but try as she would
to summon up the courage to plunge in by herself, she couldn’t face
the thought of letting the waves break right over her.


“All right, Wilga,” said Isabelle in a grim voice, “under you go.”
“Come on, girls, help me duck her. The stupid child will catch
her death of cold if she stands there shivering.”
Eager hands grasped Wilga to pull her under, but the girls soon
got the shock of their lives.
“No, I won't! I won’t!” screamed Wilga. “Leave me alone, you
beasts; I’ll scratch your eyes out if you touch me.”
Wilga had suddenly come to life, and hitting out wildly she
struck at the girls. Right and left went her long arms. Taken by sur-
prise the four had no time to get out of reach before Isabelle had been
struck a heavy blow in the face and received a nasty bruise on her
shoulder and Geraldine had received a nasty cut above her eye. The
strong hands, made so from the handling of frisky horses, would have
done more damage if help had not been at hand.
The sudden shrieks and yells soon attracted the attention of
everyone else, and Miss Trentan, hurrying back, grasped Wilga about
the waist and lifted her away from the others. Not realising that it was
her teacher, but thinking some of the girls were attacking her from
behind, Wilga shrieked and yelled and kicked until Miss Trentan and
several of the Seventh Grade girls carried her to the shore. There she
flung herself on the sand and cried as though her heart would break.


Chapted IV
THE OUTCAST
Wilga was in disgrace. There was no doubt about it. By breakfast
time the whole school had heard of the disgraceful show she had made
of herself on the beach. The chums were inclined to say, “1 told you
so,” to Betty. And even she was ashamed of her cousin. No one had
ever acted like that at “John Hindmarsh.” The littlest children in the
kindergarten classes were braver in the water, and just loved to splash
and “crab crawl” in the shallow pools. Even some of the six-year-old
children could swim quite well.
It was the chief topic of conversation. During breakfast many un-
kind remarks were passed in whispered undertone, not loud enough
to Teach the teacher at the head of the table.
“Cowardy-custard, does not need any more bread and butter,”
scoffed the girl sitting next to Wilga, as she rudely snatched the last
slice from the plate in front of her.
“Cry-baby, diddums miss its mummy,” laughed Nina scornfully.
“ITI buy your bathers for one-and-sixpence,” offered Iris with
a grin. “I need a new pair, goodness knows.”
“Does the poor little thing want a dolly to play with ? I saw a stray
one in the infant room. Perhaps you could have that!”
Wilga sat with downcast eyes, red and swollen from crying. She
looked a pathetic little figure as she sat silently at the table. Her idle
fingers crumpled and twisted her serviette, for she scarcely ate any-
thing. She felt as though the food would choke her.
At last the meal was over and the girls filed out for the hour’s play
before nine o’clock school.
As they reached the corridor a senior girl called out, “Wilga Bar-
ret, you are wanted by Miss Mills in her office, at once!”
Wilga started guiltily and followed her, whilst several pairs of
eyes opened wide and stared curiously after the retreating pair.
“In you go, Wilga, she won’t eat you,” said the senior as she
knocked at the study door. The big girl felt sorry for the new pupil.
Miss Mills had looked cross and the senior knew that Wilga was in for
a bad half hour.
Fearfully, Wilga entered the head-mistress’s study. Oh, how dif-
ferent it was from when Betty had brought her there the day before.
Then she had felt shy and nervous, but she had been looking forward
to a long term of play and work and fun and lots and lots of new
friends, and Miss Mills had been so kind to her too. Now everything
was spoilt, and the head-mistress looked very severe and displeased.
Miss Mills looked up from her desk. “Sit down over there, Wilga
Barret, I’ll attend to you presently.”


Wilga sat down on the edge of a very hard and uncomfortable
chair. This was awful. It was like the time she had been summoned
to Father’s study after she had disobeyed him, and ridden the prize
pony and lamed it. Father had made her wait too, and that was far
worse than the scolding that followed. Wilga glanced about her un-
easily. The most striking thing about the study was the great portrait
in colour of Governor Sir John Hindmarsh, that hung between the
French windows that opened out on to the terrace.
There were quite a number of sports cups of silver standing on a
shelf over the fireplace. She supposed they had been won in swimming
competitions. Also there were several pictures of happy girls in bath-
Miss Mills and Wilga
ing costume. Some were single pictures of championship winners whilst
others were groups of the school teams. All these signs of how much
swimming meant to the school made Wilga feel more miserable than
ever and she heartily wished herself back home at Faraway Downs.
“Come here, Wilga,” said Miss Mills suddenly as she laid aside
her work. . , , ,
Wilga started and walking slowly to the centre of the room stood
dolefully before the desk.
“Well, child, what is this 1 hear about your strange conduct dur-
ing the swimming lesson this morning I said Miss Mills in a displeased
manner. , ~ . , .
Then, as Wilga did not answer, she continued —speaking in a
low, grave’voice, “1 noticed that you were looking at the portrait of


Sir John Hindmarsh, Wilga. 1 think you know that this school is named
after that very noble and courageous soldier, and we here in this
school, try to live up to the ideals he has set. You know it takes courage
and spirit and character to become a pioneer—and this school aims at
building character. You cannot hope to have the courage to face your
difficulties when you have to make your way in the world unless you
can learn to control foolish fears whilst you are a child.”
“I couldn’t help it, Miss Mills, truly I couldn’t,” stammered Wilga,
“but I’m not a coward like the girls said and 1 won’t be called a
coward, either.”
“That’s quite sufficient, Wilga.” Miss Mills spoke sharply and
looked quite angry.
“You have still to show us that you are no coward, and when
you have done so I’m sure the girls will be ready to let bygones be
bygones.”
“Oh, Miss Mills!” came the horrified cry, “surely you don’t think
I’m a coward, do you? 1 can’t help not liking swimming.”
“I can understand that you may not care for the sport, Wilga, and
even that you may have some fear of the sea, but I cannot understand
the outrageous manner in which you carried on this morning. You have
still to prove to me that you are not a coward. I hope you make good
for your own sake.”
“As it is likely to be very hot today we will be having a bathe
about sunset so if you can show us then that you can conquer your
fears we will all be very glad to forget this morning’s exhibition.”
“Now, Wilga, this all really only concerns you, and the remedy is
in your own hands if you want to make friends and be happy here;
but there is a far more serious side to the matter. In your concern over
your own affairs I daresay you have forgotten about the injuries you
caused to Isabelle and Geraldine. They are both spending the day in
bed due to your hoydenish behaviour. As far as I can make out your
attack on them was spiteful and unprovoked.
“Oh no, Miss Mills, I didn’t touch them until they tried to duck
me.” Wilga had no intention of taking any more blame than necessary.
“Still I don’t see your need for having been so violent with them.
Don’t you realise that ‘ducking’ is part of the general fun amongst
bathers? Why, our littlest ones take it all as a joke. You had better
go now and apologise to Isabelle and Geraldine, then join your class-
mates.”
The corridor was quiet and cool and Wilga was thankful that
there was no one at all about. From the playground came the shouts
and laughter of the girls making the most of their time before lessons
began. As she slowly mounted the stairs to the dormitory she heard
the school ’bus arrive and the sudden outburst of chatter as the boarders
greeted the day scholars.
“Talking about me, I suppose,” she thought bitterly. Then to hide
her tears she rushed up the remainder of the staircase and hurrying into
the dormitory flung herself on her bed.
“Oh heavens, here’s the spitfire again,” wailed Geraldine from her
corner. I wish I could get at her. I’d give her something to cry about.
My eye is hurting like fury.”


Isabelle rolled over with a groan and regarded the figure on the
bed.
“Here you I Wilga Barret, stop that infernal row. You’ve already
treated us to a sample of your temper but we don’t want any cry
babies in here. You’ve come to the wrong place for sympathy.”
Wilga, who had forgotten that the room was occupied, jumped
up—and dashing the tears from her eyes—went over to the corner bed
where Geraldine regarded her sullenly with the one eye that was vis-
ible amongst her bandages. She turned her back when Wilga stam-
mered out an apology for her injuries.
Blushing furiously at the insult she crossed over to Isabelle and
was even more discomforted to find the sick girl regarding her with a
queer smile.
“I’m sorry,” stammered Wilga.
“Sorry for what,” came the slow drawling answer in Isabelle’s
most sarcastic voice. “Sorry you made such a show of yourself, or sorry
you bruised my face, or sorry you didn’t hit me harder?”
Wilga stared in discomfort at her. She didn’t know how to answer
the girl.
“Well, Wilga Barrett,” —there was an amused gleam in Isabelle’s
eyes and her voice was mocking—“you know, I think a lot more of
vou to-day than I did yesterday. I didn’t think you had it in you to hit
me.”
Then seeing the look of utter astonishment on Wilga’s face she
laughed in a queer manner and said quite crossly, “Now, get out, do:
I want to rest, and you give me the “blues” standing there like a
startled rabbit.


Chapter V
A HAPPY MEETING
The days that followed were a nightmare to Wilga. She had not
been able to conquer her fear of the sea, and nothing, or no one, had
been able to persuade her to try to swim. She had gone into the water
with the others because swimming was part of the curriculum, and
Wilga had to obey the rules as well as any other girl. But she had not
ventured beyond the very shallow pools along the edge of the beach.
Now after a whole week at school, she was no nearer making
friends. In fact, the girls seemed to avoid her, or at least leave her to
her own devices. The chums had soon tired of calling her childish
names, but she noticed that Betty, Iris and Nina had not again offered
to teach her to play tennis. When Wilga had asked them about it Isa-
belle had looked at her quite scornfully and said, “The other girls
and 1 are practising our team for the carnival. Surely you don’t think
we would be bothered with a tiresome child like you. You would prob-
ably scream every time you missed a ball.”
It was the Saturday afternoon before the Swimming Carnival and
nearly all the school were on the beach. The teams were getting in
some good training, and many of the other children were bathing also.
“If only the weather will keep hot until Wednesday,” someone
said.
“1 don’t think Grade Six have much chance this year, do you?”
said another. “That new girl will be to blame if they don’t; she hurt
Isabelle and Geraldine and made them miss two days’ practice.”
“Oh, 1 don’t know Fay; you must remember that Jean Rowland
isn’t here this year, and Grade Seven have three life savers.”
“I still say it’s the new girl’s fault,” cried Fay fiercely.
“Shush, Fay, here she is: she’ll hear you,” whispered her com-
panion with a nudge as Wilga passed by.
Wilga did hear and hurried on. She did not go towards the jetty
because one had to be accompanied by a senior, or else have permis-
sion to go into Glenelg. Instead, she walked swiftly along the beach
towards the sandhills where she hoped she would be away from every-
one.
Wilga hoped that if she found a pool out of sight of the school,
she might find the courage to wade in to her waist and splash and crab
crawl as she had seen the other beginners do.
Wilga took off her bathing cap and let the sea breeze blow
through her hair. It was glorious tramping along the beach with no


one in sight, and no one to tease her. Presently her attention was at-
tracted by an elderly lady standing near the water’s edge. She was
scattering crumbs to the gulls that circled hungrily around her. Wilga
loved birds; she had studied the habits and calls of the birls near her
home ever since she was a wee child.
“Oh, you lovely things! she cried happily, as they circled and
swooped and pranced along the sand, greedily squabbling over the
crumbs.
“So you love birds, too, my dear,” came a quiet voice beside her.
Wilga found herself looking into the kindest face imaginable as
the elderly lady moved nearer.
She was scattering crumbs to the gulls that circled hungrily around her
“Here you are, my dear,” offering a slice of bread, “you throw
some too. I feed the birds every day but “Chum” here, is naughty and
will bark and chase them in his excitement.”
Chum, a brown and white fox terrier puppy, wagged his tail and
cocked his mischievous head as though to say in his own doggie lan-
guage, “Well it is fun, and I do like making a noise.”
In no time the two were chatting away like old friends, and for
the first time for a week Wilga forgot her shyness and loneliness.
“Come on here, Chum,” called his mistress as the little dog rushed
into the sea after the birds that always were too quick for him: “leave
the poor gulls alone, you bad dog.”
They are really petrels, aren’t they?” enquired Wilga timidly.
“Their cry is wilder and shriller than the gulls,” and there is more
black on their wings,”


Miss Sumners —for that was her elderly companion’s name —
looked at her in astonishment.
“Yes, they are petrels, Wilga, but very few people could pick the
difference as you did—even people who have spent their lives by the
sea. I can see that you have studied birds thoroughly and are really
fond of them.”
“Well, Dad always said bush life makes one observant; and so
many different birds come around the waterpools to drink at dawn
and dusk that I’ve learnt quite a lot of their cries. Dad gave me a
camera for my birthday when I was nine, and I’ve taken quite a num-
ber of snaps of the birds nesting and feeding their babies. I’ve even
one of a lyre bird displaying.”
“Oh, Wilga, you lucky child. Do you know how rare that is? You
interest me more than 1 can say, and I want you to visit me one day—
say next Saturday—and I’ll show you some bird studies of mine. I
suppose you live at Glenelg, Wilga?”
“Yes, Miss Sumners, at present.” Somehow Wilga didn’t want to
mention that she was boarding at “John Hindmarsh” : she wanted to
forget about school.
All this time the two had been strolling along the sand, and pre-
sently Miss Sumners pointed out her house, a big red brick place stand-
ing facing the Patawalonga Creek.
Suddenly a series of sharp yaps from Chum caused them to look
round. The puppy had rushed into the water after a gull and in his
excitement had swum out too far. Fortunately for him he had been
able to scramble on to a rock; but puppy like, he crouched there
whimpering, instead of plunging in and making for the shore.
“Oh, dear, poor little Chum. Come here you foolish puppy!”
“Chum, Chum! Good dog—” but the frightened puppy would not
budge even at the sound of his mistress’s voice.
“Oh, what shall I do?” cried Miss Sumners anxiously, “the silly
little animal will drown if we don’t rescue him.”
“Why, Wilga! You’re in bathers and it’s not far out. You’ll go in
and bring Chum ashore, won’t you dear!”
Poor Wilga—how horrible—that water again, but could she re-
fuse her new friend ? The frightened girl looked at the little puppy
shivering and whimpering and knew that she could not refuse to rescue
him.
The water was horribly cold to her, unused to swimming as she
was. The waves were rough to-day and whipped by a cold south wind.
What would have been a pleasure to any other child was a very try-
ing ordeal to Wilga.
The only way she could force herself on was by keeping her eyes
on the puppy and so try to forget that at every step the water was
getting deeper and deeper. Before she was within reach of Chum the
water had reached her armpits and it was only with the greatest dif-
ficulty that she could keep her balance.
At last her outstretched hands touched the wet fur of Chum, but
he, too, was terrified and clung tenaciously to the rock.
Finally, with a desperate effort, Wilga tore the puppy from his
wet, rocky footheld and, clasping him in her arms, commenced wad-


ing to the shore. But it was no easy matter, for the dog struggled fran-
tically, and down they went whilst the water closed over them.
Wilga vaguely heard Miss Sumners’ shriek and then her mouth,
ears and eyes were filled with cold, salt water.
Scarcely knowing, in her terror, what she was doing, Wilga strug-
gled to her feet and, still clutching the dog, dashed to the sand.
Her heart was pounding furiously but cutting short the grateful
owner’s thanks, she pushed Chum into Miss Sumners’ arms and ran as
hard as she could towards the sandhills.
Although her heart was pounding and thumping from the fright
and her eyes smarting from the sea water, Wilga presently began to
feel unbelievably happy. She had braved the water! She had been
right under! and, best of all, she knew she could do it again.
After lying sunning and drying herself for a time, Wilga started
back along the beach to where the girls were just finishing their swim.
She had determined to keep her secret plunge to herself for a while
but she felt gayer than at any time since her arrival at “John Hind-
marsh.”


Chapter VI
CARNIVAL DAY
“Oh, wake up, Nina, Betty, Fay! How can you be so lazy; for
goodness’ sake wake up girls!”
“There you’re the most aggravating person ever —Isabelle. I de-
clare nothing thrills you. I’ve never seen you even the teeniest bit ex-
cited”—as Isabelle, roused by her pyjama-clad friend, yawned and
stretched herself with exasperating calm.
“What’s up, youngster?” came the slow drawly voice, “anyone
would think the place was on fire.”
“Oh, Isabelle! How can you—” “Of course you haven’t forgot-
ten!” “You’re only teasing!’ came a chorus of protests from the rest
of the girls who had been roused by Lily’s shouts of excitement.
The dormitory certainly did present a strange appearance. Al-
though it was only shortly after six o’clock, Lily and her friends were
scampering about in pyjamas and slippers. There was no sleep for
anyone once the lively Lily jumped out of bed, and somehow no one
wanted to sleep this morning—it was Carnival Day.
“It’s a glorious day! Simply topping,” shrieked Fay in an ecstacy
of high spirits.
I don’t care what the day is like—
“Let it rain, let it blow,
Hail or rain, heat or snow.
Isabelle! Get up, get up!
We must win the swimming cup.”
Round and round Isabelle’s bed danced the irrepressible Lily,
brandishing a hairbrush in one hand and a slipper in the other. Shriek-
ing with delight, Nina, Fay, Geraldine and Betty joined in the crazy
game, shouting and laughing out Lily’s doggerel verse as they pranced
about.
“There you are, Isabelle, 1 crown you Queen of the May,” said
Lily in mock solemnity, as she planted her slipper on the side of her
friend’s head.
“Goodness, girls, it looks like a bear garden, not a dormitory,”
came a quiet voice from the doorway.
“Oh, Miss Trentan, were we making too terrible a noise? But it is
Carnival Day, and a holiday, and we just couldn’t sleep.”
Miss Trentan laughed and, telling the girls not to be too noisy and
that she would forgive them this time, she closed the door and left the
girls to one morning of fun.
“You couldn’t sleep, young imp,” cried Isabelle, “and you refused


to let your betters rest either. Don’t you know you might easily upset
all my chances by rousing me early?”
Lily looked horrified at the solemn voice of her friend.
“Oh, Isabelle, have 1 done anything wrong? Truly, I didn’t mean
to.”
“Oh, you are an idiot, Lily,” cried Betty affectionately, “don’t you
see she is only teasing you?”
“Goodness! For a moment I thought you meant it, Isabelle—you
did give me a scare.”
“All right, youngster—the damage was done last month when
our little spitfire ‘dear Wilga’ bruised my shoulder.”
“Isabelle—how ghastly! Do you mean to say it still pains? The
little beast—l could scratch her eyes out,” said Fay, who adored Isa-
belle.
“Well, it’s a bit stiff still; I had hoped it would be better —but I
slowed up on the 200 yards last night, and I’m afraid your crowing
was a bit premature,” said Isabelle with a wry smile, as she swung
her arms gingerly.
“Wilga, Wilga I Did you hear that? Now see what you’ve done?”
Geraldine rushed over to Wilga’s bed and tumbled her out on the
floor.
“If Isabelle doesn’t win because of her shoulder, we’ll scrag you
to-night—just see if we don’t.”
Wilga, who had not joined in the other girls’ capers, but had sat
up in bed in miserable silence, turned pale before the fury of the girl
who had tipped her on to the floor so unceremoniously.
“Steady on, chums, leave the child alone. No one is going to ‘scrag’
her as you so vulgarly put it. Wilga is my problem and what I say
goes—understand everyone?”
“Why, of course, Isabelle, but surely you’re not standing up for
her—the prig.”
“Oh, I don’t know; it’s rather an odd experience to be defeated
by a new girl. I’m rather enjoying the experience. Anyway, I asked for
trouble.”
Wilga stared in amazement at her champion. Of all the girls in
her dormitory, Isabelle was the very last one she had expected to for-
give her.
All this time Lily, who was far too excited to worry about Wilga,
had been busy at the far end of the dormitory. A sudden crash diverted
the girls’ attention to her. And there she was, standing before the man-
telpiece surrounded by ornaments, a vase of flowers that had smashed,
a few photos—treasures of the girls—and all the knicknacks that
school girls love to keep about them. The whole mantelpiece was
swept bare, regardless of damage to property or the appearance of the
floor. The only article left in its honoured place was a delightful sea-
scape by James Ashton.
“Lily, you dreadful child, whatever are your doing?”
“Oh, my beautiful picture, it’s ruined,” wailed Betty as she rescued
a snapshot from the fireplace.
“My vase! It’s joined the dear departed—”


“And my ‘dinky’ little kangaroo’s lost his tail—”
“Never mind, my children,” said mischievous Lily, who was in one
of her tantalizing moods, “I’m merely clearing a space for the Cup.”
“The Cup! my infants; that’s what is going to stand here before
I’m very much older; and surely you wouldn’t have it surrounded by
all that rubbish,” she cried scornfully as she pointed to the mess on
the floor.
“Well, you are an optimist, anyway,” grinned Isabelle.
That morning there was only one subject of conversation —the
Swimming Carnival!
As was customary at “John Hindmarsh” the day was a holiday.
The morning was spent in whatever sports or pleasures the girls cared
to choose as long as they were not overtired.
At two o’clock punctually, the first event took place. For the occa-
sion the great swimming pool in the gymnasium was used, as parents
and friends had to be accommodated. It was the great summer event
as “John Hindmarsh” was famous for its swimmers.
Everyone seemed excited, and as it was a holiday, breakfast was
dawdled over, and the girls came and went as they pleased.
Out on the lawns groups of girls sat about chattering or reading,
whilst several sets of tennis were being played by girls not competing
in the Carnival.
“John Hindmash” was in festive mood. Flowers, gum leaves and
gaily-coloured streamers seemed to adorn every possible corner, the
senior girls were busily arranging tables under the trees, and along the
wide verandahs, as late afternoon tea would be served to the guests
before their departure. On this evening, too, a special high tea like a
glorious birthday party would be part of the pupils’ treat, and this
would be followed by an assembly, and the presentation of the Senior
and Junior Cups and other trophies.
“Oh dear, I do feel nervous. I’m sure I’ll forget to touch the end
of the pool,” wailed little Fay, who had been chosen by Isabelle as the
new member of the relay team.
“You’ll be all right youngster; don’t think about it so much ; you’ll
only make yourself worse, and you have practised well. I’m proud of
you, Fay.”
This was indeed praise from her beloved Isabelle, and Fay blushed
with pleasure. She had been overcome with joy when Isabelle had
picked her out from the rest of the class, and she had tried hard, but
Jean Rowland’s place would be hard to fill.
‘‘Well, girls, are you all quite ready? The visitors must be all here
by now as it’s ten minutes to two,” enquired Miss Trentan. “I think
you had better take your places in the gym. now. The Grade Six seats
are at the northern end.
“Near the starting place,” cried Fay, hopping about on one leg-
in her excitement.”


“Which race is first, Miss Trentan?” asked Nina.
“Oh, the Senior Relay, then the Junior Relay. By the way, girls
be sure you are quite ready, the non-competitors will mind your
cloaks.”
The gym. presented a very gay appearance. The visitors were
seated in a tiered stand that had been erected at the finishing end of
the long pool, whilst the whole school, all in bathers, were around the
sides.
Miss Trentan, the sports mistress, and Miss Faull, the kindergar-
ten teacher, were in charge of the events.
“Oh, it’s lovely, it’s lovely; 1 get so excited, you’ll have to push me
in Isabelle,” twittered Fay in a small voice catchy with nervousness.
“1 just will push you in, my girl, if you don’t spring to it as soon
as Nina touches the rope.”
Wilga at the school swimming carnival
Suddenly a bell rang out and all eyes turned at once to Miss Mills,
who gave a short opening speech of welcome to the visitors—then
the first event was due.
There were mostly life savers in the senior event and excited as
the chums were about their own race, they cheered and shrieked as
enthusiastically as any one else when it was evident that Mavis Fan-
ning from Leaving and Ffulda Tamblyn from Honours would probably
make a drawn race.
“Come on, Hulda. Come on Mavis,” came the cries from all sides.
How they shrieked and yelled when Hulda just managed to touch
the rope ahead of her opponent, but undoubtedly they would have
made just as much noise if Mavis had won.


The non-competitors from the senior school immediately rushed
forward with their friends’ towelling cloaks and bore them off to their
seats.
“Junior Relay Race competitors, please take your places,” came
Miss Trentan’s voice through the megaphone. Then she called out the
names of the Grade Four, Five, Six and Seven girls taking part.
Betty, a good steady swimmer, quick to start, moved forward to
the edge of the pool at the northern end. She had to dive in and swim
the fifty yards to where Nina stood at the south end. Behind her stood
Fay, nervous and jumpy. She was taking third turn whilst Isabelle, eas-
ily the best swimmer of the team, was taking last turn with the hope
of winning by a burst of speed.
“Ready,”—four girls poised on the edge of the pool, barely bal-
anced.
“One, two, clang!”
Before the sound died away the four leaders had started. Betty
went in with a magnificent dive that immediately gave her a lead of
two strokes over her chief competitor, Elizabeth Grey, of Grade Seven.
From the first it was evident that these two would easily outstrip the
younger girls; and Nina, crouched at the far end ready to dive as soon
as Betty touched the rope, actually toppled in, in her enthusiasm,
much to the amusement of her friends and the visitors. Not the least
bit abashed, she scrambled out and again took up her position on the
extreme edge of the pool.
“Oh, come on, Betty, you’re doing well.”
“Stick it, Betty, don’t let her beat you.”
Betty certainly did her best, but as she put out her hand to touch
the rope she heard the second Grade Seven girl plunge in. Elizabeth
Grey had overtaken her.
By the time she had scrambled out, Nina was well on her way,
and swimming in her best style. She was only a few yards behind the
seventh girl at twenty-five yards, and as the chums watched, she gradu-
ally lessened the distance between them.
“Oh, splendid work, Nina,” said Betty softly as she watched her.
“Yes, Nina is a jolly good swimmer,” murmured her companion
absently. Isabelle was more concerned about Fay.
“I wish I could have been down there to see her started,” she
said in a very worried voice.
“Oh, she’ll be right with Geraldine and Lily to see her off the
mark. Don’t worry Isabelle. Anyhow the other teams stalled with
their best swimmers and we have you to make up any time lost by
Fay.”
“I wouldn’t back on me too much,” came the answer. “This old
lady is definitely not up to form.”
“Isabelle, I’m dreadfully sorry about your shoulder; and to think
that Wilga Barret is my cousin too,” came the bitter reply. “I wish to
goodness Mother had never suggested that Aunt Alice should send her
here.”
“Oh cheer up, Betty, she is an intolerable nuisance, I grant you,
and Ido feel savage about the shoulder, but look! Nina’s arrived first


and Fay—oh! good girl Fay, she has made a splendid start. I knew
that youngster had it in her.”
Fay was indeed making haste, and was managing to hold her
own with the Seventh Grader who, although a better swimmer, had
started late. Nina’s splendid dash had given Fay the start she needed.
Geraldine was prancing along the edge like something bewitched.
She was keeping pace with her chum and urging her on with every
stroke. Her antics were attracting nearly as much interest as the race.
But Fay didn’t even hear her—she had kept her eyes on Isabelle, who
was straight ahead, and smiling cheerfully at her; Isabelle certainly
could inspire confidence in others.
Only ten more yards. Down went Fay’s head. She gritted her teeth
and put every ounce of energy into her strokes. Five more yards, now
three, and she was leading, she felt sure. She was there, hurrah —but,
oh, how tired.
She looked up happily, but Isabelle hadn’t started. She was look-
ing anxiously down at her, and her lips seemed to be moving, but Fay’s
ears were singing and she couldn’t hear.
Whatever was the matter? The Seventh girl had caught up and
touched the rope. With a sudden burst of horror she realised that she
hadn’t touched the rope, and of course Isabelle couldn’t start until she
did.
Swiftly she stretched out her hand and grasped the rope firmly
and Isabelle dived.
Nina, Geraldine and Lily dragged her from the pool
“You chump, Fay!”
“You priceless idiot!”
“Of all the goats, you swam wonderfully, and then just stood up
grinning like a Cheshire cat waiting to be stroked.”
“How could you, Fay? Poor old Isabelle started with an awful
handicap. Why, even the Fourth Grade child was ahead of her.”
“Oh, I know I’m a chump and an idiot, and a g-g-goat, too,” wailed
the miserable Fay. Her teeth were chattering with cold and she could
scarcely stand.
“I did want to do well too, and now I’ve lost the race for Isabelle.
She’ll never forgive me.”
“Oh, come on; it can’t be helped now, you ninny. Let’s dash down
and see the finish.”
Fay was almost in tears from mortification, but the others dragged
her on.
“I thought it would be Wilga’s fault if Isabelle didn’t win, and
now I’m to blame. Oh, how dreadful.”
“Good heavens! Has anyone seen Wilga this afternoon?”
“Oh yes, she’s over there, sitting all by herself. 1 feel rather sorry
for the poor kid.” Lily never bore malice for long.
Down at the finishing place the girls were crowded in excited
groups, each cheering on their classmate.
The Seventh Grade girl was leading, then came Isabelle and the
Fifth girl. The little Fourth Grader had no chance. Isabelle was easily
the best swimmer and she soon shook off her companion, but she had
at least six yards to catch up the leader. She was swimming as she had


never swum before, but her shoulder was almost numb with pain from
the tremendous energy she was putting into her strokes.
Isabelle was fiercely determined to win and gradually she gained
on the Seventh girl.
If the Seventh Grader had spurted it is doubtful if Isabelle could
have done it, but she continued in her steady style, quite unaware that
her opponent was catching up so rapidly; and before she realised it,
Isabelle had shot ahead and touched the rope a few seconds before her.
The girls were delirious with delight and capered about and
laughed and yelled with joy. Fay rushed up and flung her arms around
her friend.
“Oh, Isabelle, Fm so glad you won. I thought Fd lost the race for
you. I could have wept when I found out what Fd done.”
A small, cold hand touched Isabelle softly and, looking around,
she saw Wilga standing timidly by.
“Fm pleased you won, Isabelle,” she whispered; and then before
the other girl could answer she darted off.
Isabelle took a few paces after her, but she shrugged her shoulders
and strolled over to her seat instead.
The rest of the afternoon went quickly and pleasantly for the
girls in watching the kindergarten races; and at last came the final
and most important event—The School Cup.
It was open for competition by Life Savers only, so Isabelle was
the only Grade Six representative.
Four times the length of the pool and three turns was a fairly
hard test of speed and endurance.
Isabelle was the smallest of the group and looked rather pale,
and Wilga, who was watching her anxiously, felt her heart sink. She
was sure Isabelle had no chance against Hulda and Mavis, Elizabeth
and Ida.
Anyhow, she had caused the injury to her shoulder and Wilga
felt sure that Isabelle was in pain now, for she had scarcely taken
her eyes off her, and had seen her wince several times since the relay
race.
“They’re off, and a splendid start too; all together,” came the cry.
For the first length and turn the five kept together and on the re-
turn were slightly spread out, but no one counted any positions until
the last fifty yards. All the girls were taking it quietly, swimming eas-
ily and steadily, with the hope of tiring the others and then of putting
on speed after the last turn.
Hulda was the first to complete the hundred yards, and then
started off at a slightly quicker speed. Ida came next, and close behind
her Isabelle.
Then it was that disaster overtook Isabelle. Her shoulder was
paining her again, and in flinging out her arm to give herself a good
push off she jerked it badly. A sudden stab of pain rushed up her arm,
and quite suddenly she felt sick and faint. Somehow the water seemed
to become heavy and dragged at her. The rows of girls around the
pool swung round in a mad circle and the whole building seemed to
come crashing about her ears.


With a deep sigh Isabelle went limp and sank back into twelve
feet of water. She had gone down in the deep end.
There was a sudden silence, then several girls shrieked. Only the
Life Savers were capable of diving to the bottom of the pool with any
hope of raising an unconscious girl, and most of them were swimming
towards the far end, quite unaware that anything had happened.
Miss Faull and Miss Trentan immediately dashed to Isabelle’s res-
cue, but someone was before them.
A child screamed, “Isabelle! Isabelle!’’ and racing to the pool
jumped in feet first.
It was Wilga!
Shy, timid Wilga. The prig, the intolerable nuisance, the coward!
She had seen the queer look on Isabelle’s face before she sank, and
flinging off her cloak had jumped almost before anyone had realised
what had happened.
As the water closed over her and she shot down, Wilga’s terror all
returned and she gave herself up for drowned. After what seemed
years her feet touched the bottom, and her hands frantically groping
about, touched something soft and yielding. Wilga grasped it as tight-
ly as she could and kicked out in a frenzy of fear.
Up she came, but how slowly it seemed, and her lungs felt as
though they were being squeezed tightly. Her burden made it worse,
but Wilga never thought of letting go.
At last her head came above the surface and she took a great
gasping breath, but would have immediately sunk again, only for the
strong hands of Miss Faull, who quickly swam with her to the edge
where willing hands drew them out. Miss Trentan had taken the un-
conscious Isabelle from her grasp and already was busy resuscitating
her.
Fortunately, neither girl had been in the water long enough to
come to serious harm, but Miss Mills called a doctor who found that
Isabelle’s shoulder was dislocated, and who ordered both girls to bed
in the sick ward, under the watchful eye of Matron.
A tragedy had been averted and a few days would see the girls
about again.


Chapter VII
IN THE SICK WARD
When Wilga woke next morning it took her some time to remem-
ber where she was. At first sight of the row of white beds all neatly
made, she had started up in a fright thinking that she had overslept
and that her classmates had gone down to breakfast.
Then looking round and seeing Isabelle in a bed the other side of
the room, she remembered that dreadful moment when Isabelle had
collapsed and her own terror when the water had closed over her as
she jumped into the pool. Wilga couldn’t tell whether Isabelle was
awake, because her back was turned and only her short, rumpled, fair
hair was visible, so she slid down again and lay quite still. Somehow
she felt embarrassed at facing Isabelle.
Although Isabelle had always been rather intolerant towards her,
and regarded her as unimportant, Wilga admired her tremendously
and longed to be counted as a friend. Now, she supposed, Isabelle
would be nice to her out of gratitude and Wilga didn’t want gratitude
or thanks or pity, she wanted Isabelle to like her for herself. So when
she heard Lily, Nina, Fay and Betty at the door she pulled the sheets
up round her ears and pretended to sleep. She didn’t want to hear
them discussing her with Isabelle.
“Isabelle! Are you awake?” whispered Lily, as the chums stole
into the room.
Isabelle opened her eyes and grinned cheerily at the girls. She
was still looking rather pale and shaken, and her arm and shoulder
were in a sling.
“Oh, come in, girls! I am glad to have someone to talk to. I’ve
been lying here for ages just dying of boredom, and no one to tell me
what’s been happening. Sit over there,” Isabelle waved towards the
vacant bed next to her, “and tell me everything.”
“Matron said we mustn’t disturb you or upset you or else we’d get
into trouble.” Fay’s big solemn eyes regarded Isabelle anxiously. “Are
you sure we’re not a nuisance, ’cause we’ll clear out if you say.”
“Goodness, child, do I look as though 1 was going to die from the
shock of seeing you all. I’ll admit you four are as solemn looking as
judges but I think I’ll survive the ordeal of your visit,” laughed Isa-
belle teasingly.
Naughty, irrepressible Lily laughed delightedly at Fay’s anxiety.
“Oh Isabelle, what do you think Fay did yesterday when they
pulled you out of the pool? You’ll simply never guess—”
“Don’t tell Lily, you are mean!” cried Fay, blushing crimson.
“Why, what did she do; something awful, I’ll bet. You didn’t start
a war-dance over my poor body, surely, Fay?”


Isabelle had spoken in fun, but Fay, already worked up with the
events of the previous day, suddenly burst into tears and took refuge
on Nina’s shoulder.
“Never mind, Fay, it’s all right now, old girl. Isabelle’s not going
to die, so don’t be an old silly,” murmured Nina soothingly to the
overwrought girl.
“Why, whatever is the matter?” queried the bewildered patient.
“Who said anything about me dying? Why, I never felt better, except
for the shoulder, and Dr. Pierce says it will be right in no time.”
“Well, Isabelle,” explained Betty, “when you came out of the
water you did look pretty ghastly, and your dislocated shoulder looked
nasty, and altogether you gave us a pretty bad scare.”
It took Miss Trentan about a quarter of an hour to bring you
round, and then you kept fainting off again. Dr. Pierce came quite
soon and he said it was your shoulder that caused you to faint all the
time. It must have been less than half an hour from the time you col-
lapsed until you were brought up here and Dr. Pierce pronounced you
out of danger, but it seemed like hours. Anyhow, the visitors were
given afternoon tea as usual but Miss Mills has postponed Assembly
Night until next week.”
“But why is Fay so upset?” puzzled Isabelle. “I’m sorry I broke
up the proceedings and gave Miss Trentan so much trouble, but still 1
don’t see what’s troubling the child, unless she’s still worrying about
the relay race.”
“It’s not that Isabelle. Strange as it may seem to you, the child
is actually fond of you and nothing would convince her that you
weren’t going to die. She cried all night, I know, because Geraldine,
who sleeps next to me usually, heard her and asked me if she could
get into bed with Fay and comfort her.”
“Oh, I say, this is awful. I’d no idea anyone was upset about me :
why ever should they be?” Isabelle looked red and embarrassed and
spoke quite gruffly. Everyone knew how she scorned any display of af-
fection and how she laughed at girls who went about arm in arm.
“Oh, don’t worry, old girl, we told her nothing was going to hap-
pen to you. Why, people like you always live to a ripe old age just to
be a tease and a nuisance to all their friends,” proclaimed Lily.
Everyone laughed and relieved the situation until Fay looked up
and blurted out in a husky voice, “I don’t care; anyhow, you were just
as bad Lily. You were awfully white and 1 believe you cried too.”
“Me cry! Of course 1 didn’t. 1 wouldn’t cry about Isabelle, you
may be sure of that. Why, I’ve lots better things to do”—but her hot
flush and downcast eyes belied her words.
“Well then, why did you put Isabelle’s photo in the place you had
reserved for the cup?” accused Fay.
“Oh, spare my blushes girls,” laughed Isabelle uncomfortably.
“You’ve all been sitting about for ages and you’ve not told me who
did win the School Cup.
“Make her guess, Betty, don’t tell. Oh, you’ll never, never guess.
We were too surprised to believe it at first.”
“Why, Hulda, of course. She’s easily the best long distance swim-
mer in the school.”


“Wrong, Isabelle. 1 knew you’d never guess,” cried Lily delighted-
ly.“lt was Elizabeth Gray from Grade Seven. Now what do you think
of that ? Everyone who wasn’t watching you being hauled out said
she was simply wonderful. 1 don’t think she quite realises it herself
yet.”
“Elizabeth Gray! Why, I’d no idea she could last the distance.
How splendid! That means the Cup comes to the Junior School after
all—Hurrah!”
“Oh, I wonder if Wilga is awake,” inquired Nina. “We must say
‘hullo’ to her if she is. We’ve been making a fearful noise, I’m afraid.
I’d forgotten the poor child was trying to sleep.”
“Wilga! What do you mean, Nina? Where is she, and why is she
trying to sleep ?”
“Why, Isabelle, didn’t you know I She’s over there on the other
side of the ward,” said Fay.
“I can’t see,” complained Isabelle irritably, “I can’t turn over on
my left side. But what is she doing here? I didn’t know she was sick.”
“Isabelle, don’t you know?” repeated Fay, her eyes growing-
round and startled. “1 wondered why you didn’t say anything. 1
thought it funny and unlike you.”
“Shush, Fay.” Nina pressed her hand over Fay’s lips but it was
too late. “Matron warned us not to say anything because you hadn’t
been told, and she said it would upset you if you knew what a terrible
risk she had taken.”
“Come on, Betty, out with it. Just what is this mystery, and why
should I be upset about Wilga’s pranks, even if they have led her into
trouble ?”
The girls looked uncomfortably at one another and no one seemed
inclined to break the news against Matron’s wishes. She would be ter-
ribly cross and probably forbid them to visit Isabelle again.
“Isabelle, it was Wilga who saved you. She jumped in before any-
one had realised what had happened. She let out an awful shriek
when you sank, and went in feet first. It must have been terrible for
her not being able to swim and hating the water as she does. Miss
Trentan and Miss Faull reached her just as she brought you to the
surface. We don’t know however she managed to find you and lift you
as quickly as she did.”
“Wilga! Wilga!” repeated Isabelle, like someone in a dream. She
could scarcely take it in. A terrible feeling had come over her and she
looked quite blank and dazed.
“Oh, we have upset you, Isabelle,” cried Lily dolefully, as she
looked at her friend’s suddenly drawn face.
“It’s nothing, girls, truly,” replied Isabelle in a vague voice that
didn’t sound a bit like her own, “but please go away now, I’m tired
and I want to think.”
Quietly and rather guiltily the chums crept away.
“Wilga saved me!” Isabelle kept repeating the phrase over and
over to herself. “I wonder whatever made her do it? I’ve treated her
abominably and not even attempted to hide the fact that I’ve despised
her as a coward. What will I say to the child? I can’t make a long-
grateful speech: she’d hate me for it. I believe she hates that kind


of thing as much as 1 do. She’s really terribly reserved and would re-
sent being fussed about. We’ll just have to include her in our set as
though she were an old friend —that’s if she isn’t too proud.” So Isa-
bell argued with herself, trying to get things straight. She was utterly
bewildered that Wilga, the child she had openly called a coward, a
nuisance and a prig, should have risked her life for her.
Suddenly making up her mind, she called out softly, “Wilga! Are
you awake? I want to talk to vou.”
A tousled black head raised up quickly. “Yes, I’m awake, what
do you want?”
“Are you able to come over here for a minute? I can’t turn over.”
There was silence for a moment, then a bed squeaked and soft
footsteps padded along the floor. Wilga curled up on the bed facing
Isabelle and waited.
“Thanks for the rescue,” said Isabelle off-handedly. “I’d have
thought, from you’re point of view I’d have been better left at the bot-
tom of the pool.”
“Perhaps you would too, that remains to be seen,” came the sur-
prising answer. Wilga was terrified of having Isabelle think she ex-
pected gratitude.
Isabelle looked disconcerted for a moment, then she smiled. She
understood perfectly. Wilga was like herself: she hated a show of feel-
ing.
“Well, anyway ask Matron to move you over here, as we’ll be in
bed for a few days yet, so we may as well be where we can talk. Here
she comes with our lunch now.”


irrrra.
\
■V
\ \
r 'll'T I " n 1^
... • •'••■- '•
'^ Y " 1
Nina. Iris Betty ana Wilga on the lawn.


Chapter VIII
ASSEMBLY NIGHT
“Is everyone here now, Lily? Let’s see —Nina, Pay, Geraldine,
Iris, Mavis—oh is the whole class here?’’ cried Betty, who had called
a meeting of Grade Six in the classroom.
“Yes, 1 think we’re all here. You posted up the notice this morn-
ing and everyone has been talking about it all day,’’ replied Lily.
“Everyone listen please,” called Betty who had climbed on a chair.
“1 suppose you’ve all guessed that I’ve called you together to talk
about Wilga Barret. Isabelle and Wilga will be back in class tomorrow
and we must decide how we are going to receive Wilga. We’ve all man-
aged to make the child pretty uncomfortable since she arrived, and
really it’s time we behaved decently to her, apart from the fact that
she dived in after Isabelle when we, who can swim, didn’t dare.”
“How would it be if we all apologised, Betty?” suggested some-
one.
“Oh no! 1 don’t think that would do. We’d only make the girl
feel embarrassed,” protested Nina.
“Well, Betty, I was talking to Isabelle and she said that Wilga
would hate a fuss, so it might be best if we say nothing, but just treat
her as one of ourselves. Let’s be nice to her without fussing; just like
we would to any ordinary new girl,” came Fay’s suggestion.
“Oh, good idea, Fay,” chorused the girls. “That’s a splendid
notion. “Im sure it would be best for everyone.”
Wilga felt terribly shy at facing the girls at breakfast on her first
morning down from the Sick Ward. It was even worse than the very
first day at school, because she simply didn’t know how they would
treat her. She had made up her mind too, that she wouldn’t let them
make a fuss of her.
Isabelle had bounded down the stairs on hearing the breakfast
bell and was at once the centre of her particular chums, but Wilga
waited until the last moment and went in on the end of her class line.
No one made any remark except to call out “Good morning!” And at
table they passed her food and included her in their talk without once
making any reference to her rescue.
The remainder of the day passed happily for Wilga. In class she
had found a lovely apple on her desk, and Nina, who admitted putting
it there, laughed and said she had a whole boxful sent from home and
everybody was welcome to a share. In the afternoon the chums had
gone to the courts but neither Isabelle nor Wilga played ; they had just


sat about or chased balls for the others. And now in the evening, there
was to be the school assembly and presentation of swimming prizes.
The girls just loved assembly nights because it meant no home-
work, and they usually ended up with singing or a few items, and then
supper.
“Oh Isabelle!” squealed Fay who was dancing in excitement, “do
you think this white dress will do for to-night? Mother made it for me
during the holidays.”
“It’s very nice, Fay, but you’ll have it crushed to bits if you don’t
sit still.”
“Poor old Fay,” laughed Lily, “I believe she’s just as excited about
going up on the platform with the relay team as she was on Carnival
Day.”
The girls were dressing after tea for the assembly at 8 o’clock.
On this occasion they were allowed to wear their best frocks, or party
dresses, or whatever summer dress they pleased.
“Oh dear, oh dear,” wailed Nina, “I’ve lost one of my shoes. I’m
sure I had them both a moment ago, and a stocking is gone too.”
“Please comb the back of my hair, Betty. I know it won’t lie
flat,” pleaded Geraldine.
“Oh, Wilga, what a sweet dress! Did your mother make it?”
Everyone seemed to be talking at once and not waiting for an an-
swer most of the time. But eventually Nina’s shoe and stocking were
found under Lily’s bed—Geraldine’s hair was combed into place af-
ter being well damped under the tap—and at last everyone was ready
to go down to the great school hall which occupied nearly all the
centre of the building. What a pretty sight it was too; nearly four
hundred girls, all in gaily-coloured frocks, had taken their places. The
kindergarten children in the long gallery that extended right round
the back and sides of the hall. The middle and upper school were in
the body of the hall, whilst Miss Mills and her staff sat on the plat-
form. But the centre of attraction was a small table in front of the
headmistress and on which were the cups, trophies and medals for the
Swimming Carnival winners.
It was a really beautiful hall. The walls were panelled in oak, and
in the centre of each panel was the school coat of arms and a class
banner of coloured silk embroidered with the class motto.
The lovely stained glass windows—mostly presentations from past
scholars—were set above the gallery and were the pride of everyone
at “John Hindmarsh.” At the top of the hall a great life-sized coloured
portrait of Sir John Hindmarsh was hung immediately beneath the
Union Jack. School plays, assemblies, concerts and talks by visitors
were given in the hall and were always considered a great occasion.
Wilga had been spellbound by the brightness and strangeness of
the scene, and her eyes roved everywhere trying to see it all. Happen-
ing to look up at the platform she was startled and very surprised
to see none other than her old friend, Miss Sumners, sitting beside Miss
Mills. How she hoped Miss Sumners wouldn’t see her. She didn’t want


Miss Mills and the girls to know about rescuing the little puppy
“Chum.”
The first speeches were soon over and how everyone clapped when
the prize giving started. Hulda Tamblyn was a great favourite with the
girls and as it was her last year at school, everyone was pleased that
she had won the Senior Cup, for best all-round swimming. Then came
the presentation of medals to the senior relay team and the new senior
life savers.
“The Junior Cup presented for the best all-round swimmer has
been awarded this year to Isabelle Jamieson. Although Isabelle was
unfortunate in her chief race, she has taught many of the junior school
girls to swim, trained the successful relay team, and is one of the few
life savers in the lower school,” announced Miss Mills.
How the girls applauded. No one had been sure who would win
the coveted cup for all-round proficiency and there seemed no doubt
that Isabelle was first choice with everyone. Isabelle had scarcely
dared to dream about it herself. She had longed to win the Junior Cup
ever since she had started at “John Hindmarsh’ ’and now it was really
hers. She felt like someone in a dream as she went up on the platform.
And it was rather a funny feeling standing there whilst everyone clap-
ped and Miss Mills shook hands and said something she didn’t hear.
Then she was back again in her seat clutching the precious cup. It was
a beautiful silver cup, engraved with her name and the date and why
it was won.
“Oh, I’m glad 1 cleared the mantelpiece,” chuckled Lily. “Now we
can stand Isabelle’s cup there. We will be a proud dormitory. We’ll
have a midnight feast to celebrate.”
“Hush, Lily, don’t let Miss Trentan hear you mention midnight
feasts, and Miss Mills is talking again, too.”
Soon it was the winning Junior Relay Team’s turn to go up on
the platform, and it was a proud moment for the whole of Grade Six
when Isabelle, Nina, Betty and Fay were congratulated by Miss Mills
and received a gold medal engraved on one side with name, grade and
date, and on the other side with the figure of a girl diving.
Very soon all the prizes had been distributed and Miss Mills stood
up to speak.
“I think there is one subject, girls, about which you have been
expecting me to speak for some time; but as it is connected with the
swimming I purposely left it until tonight and also for the reason that
the two girls concerned are with us again.” Miss Mills smiled down
at Isabelle and Wilga and several girls turned around and stared.
“I’m not going to say very much about the matter,” continued the
headmistress. “I’m sure, however, that everyone realises that we have
here, at “John Hindmarsh,” a little girl who is willing to risk her
life for another girl whom she scarcely knows, and we are very proud
of her.”
Miss Mills raised her hand for silence as some of the girls started
clapping—“but it was a very dangerous thing to do, Wilga. For a non-
swimmer to plunge into deep water in an attempt at rescue when a
number of competent swimmers was at hand was both risky and
foolish. It meant that two, instead of one girl had to be looked after.”


Wilga hung her head in confusion but Isabelle, who was sitting
one side of her whispered. “Lucky for me you did/’ whilst Lily, who
was the other side of her, squeezed her arm, so she really didn’t mind
much after all.
“Thehe is still one more thing, girls. 1 think most of you know
Miss Sumners.” Miss Mills turned to the visitor and smiled. “Miss Sum-
ners is, of course, a very old friend of the school as she was our first
headmistress. Well, Miss Sumners has a few words to say so I’ll
ask her to speak now.”
After congratulating the girls on their swimming prizes Miss Sum-
ners said she had just made a discovery that evening about a girl who
was a pupil at “John Hindmarsh.”
To the girls it seemed a queer story that she had to tell. It was
about a little girl who couldn’t swim, but who had waded out into the
breakers and rescued her little puppy “Chum.” Miss Sumners told them
how she had been away for their swimming carnival, but had recog-
nised the girl to-night, as a member of the school. Miss Summers told
them she would not say the girl’s name; but it didn’t take them very
long to guess it was Wilga Barret. One look at her flushed shy face
soon gave her away.
Once more all heads were turned towards the Grade Six chums,
and several girls even stood up to see what the others were staring at.
“Bravo! Wilga!”
“Was it really that shy child?”
“Oh, cheers for Wilga!”
Remarks, questions, eager enquiries came from all round her; but
it was Isabelle’s quiet remark and the quick look of admiration that
Wilga remembered longest.
“You’re a plucky youngster, Wilga, and in more ways than one.”
Isabelle was gone before Wilga could reply, but the new girl flushed
with pleasure. So Isabelle did like her for her own sake at last.
When the excitement had died down, Hulda Tamblyn, who was
an excellent pianist, played the school songs and several choruses, and
everyone joined in the singing. Then they all trooped out to supper,
and it was a very special party supper too. There were delicious cakes,
cream puffs, sandwiches and hot milk. Everyone talked at once and no
one listened, but the chums were especially thrilled for Isabelle and
Wilga had brought honour to their grade.
“It has been a lovely evening,” sighed little Fay. “Mother will be
absolutely thrilled when I tell her I’ve won a medal for swimming. 1
don’t think she will believe it, though, unless I show it to her. Mother
says I’m still a baby and I’m not —I’m twelve, almost.”
Everyone laughed at Fay. She was so tiny for her age and had
such big shy eyes that everyone at school called her “Baby” too, but
the girls all liked her. Fay was one of the cleverest girls in her grade.
“Will your people be pleased about the cup, Isabelle?”
“I guess they will, Nina. The boys think they’re marvellous swim-
mers, but neither of them has won a cup yet. Dad will be proud, 1
know, although he won’t say much.”
As supper ended and the girls slowly mounted the stairs to bed,
Lily, Nina, Betty and Geraldine drew together in a little group, and


had Miss Trentan seen their shining eyes or noticed their excited whis-
perings, she would have been on the look-out for mischief.
Lights were scarcely out when the irrepressible Lily sprang from
her bed and, calling excitedly to the others to listen, proposed that
they should celebrate the winning of the cup by a beach picnic one
night when the rest of the school had gone to bed.
“Oh, Lily! How marvellous,” cried Isabelle.
“We’ll get into a hue row if we are caught, but it will be worth
the risk.”
“We can get some of the day girls to buy the “eats” and cool
dr.nks in Glenelg for us,” added Nina.
“Can I come too?” pleaded Fay. “You wouldn’t go without me,
would you, Isabelle?”
“Why, of course you and Wilga will both come. We’ll all be in the
fun. It’s ages since we’ve done anything really naughty and I’m tired of
being good,” announced Isabelle in a very decided voice.
“You haven’t heard the rest of the plan yet,” interrupted Lily.
“Beryl and Lurline said their father and mother would be out next
Monday night, so they could buy our “eats” after school and slip out
from home in the evening and bring the things along to us. Of course
we’ll have to invite them to supper, too, but they are both good fun.”
“Oh, I’m glad the twins will be there,” chuckled Betty.
“Next Monday night, then, Lily. You arrange with the twins and
we’ll collect as much pocket money as we have left.”
“Quiet everyone, I can hear Miss Trentan coming.”
When Miss Trentan looked in a few moments later, every child
was lying still with closed eyes.


Chapter IX
A MOONLIT ESCAPADE
How the next few days dragged for the chums. As Geraldine re-
marked, “Every day seems longer than the day before when you re
waiting for something nice to happen.”
With all the whispering and giggling that went on it was a great
wonder that one or other of the girls was not caught before the night
arrived. Every spare moment was spent in planning or talking about
the picnic. It had been decided that they all would wear bathers and
surf shoes as it would not take so long to dress. Venturesome Lily had
quite made up her mind to have a moonlight swim for the weather
was extremely hot even for summertime.
“Everything is arranged, girls,” whispered the twins when they
arrived at school on Monday morning. “Mother and Dad will be quite
late so we will be able to get away. We’ve picked out the sort of food
we want from Tulsa’s cafe and they are going to have everything ready
at half past ten. It will be nearly eleven by the time we get here.
WeTl have six bottles of lemonade to carry too, so if you can get away
earlier come along the beach and meet us. We will have to wear frocks
over our bathers or else someone in the cafe might think it queer ’cause
they’re sure to recognise our school bathers anyway.”
At last everyone was in bed and lights were out. Miss Trentan had
given a last look at her charges and was now on her way to her own
room.
For a few moments all was quiet in the dormitory, then first one
head then another raised cautiously.
“Shush everyone,” whispered Isabelle, “it’s only a quarter to ten
yet. Try not to go to sleep but do keep very quiet and don’t talk. It
won’t be safe to move until half past ten at the earliest.”
Once more there was perfect silence in the dormitory although no
one was asleep:
This was going to be a tremendous adventure for Wilga. She could
scarcely realise that a week ago all these jolly girls had despised her,
and now they were treating her as though she had been one of their
friends ever since she had arrived. As she lay trembling with excite-
ment waiting for the signal to get up her mind went over and over the
events since hdr arrival, and she was very very glad that some impulse
had made her forget her fear of water and plunge in after Isabelle.
From a distance came the half-past-ten chimes and several boards
creaked as the seven girls crept cautiously out of bed. They were al-
ready dressed in bathers and their wraps and surf shoes were neatly
arranged under their mattresses. Quickly donning their shoes and
wraps they tiptoed out on to the landing. There was Isabelle who had


been appointed leader, then Fay and Geraldine clasping hands and
shivering with half fear of the big silent, shadowy building. Nina and
Wilga followed by Betty and the quick-witted Lily brought up the rear.
Keeping as close to the bannisters as they could the girls trod as
softly as possible, but the tiniest squeak seemed to sound like a gun
shot in the silence. On the first landing they had to pass Miss Milks
drawing room and to their horror the door was half open and the light
burning. It was a very warm night and Miss Mills and several of her
staff were playing bridge before the open terrace windows.
It took the chums five minutes, which seemed like hours, to pass
Miss Mill’s door. They each crept up close to the door and watching
their chance darted past. Down the long passage they went. How dif-
ferent the place looked at night. The moonlight slanting through the
windows threw queer patterns on the walls and floor. The usual cur-
tains and chairs, the bookcases and cupboards seemed to take on
strange and weird shapes. It was a nervy journey and everyone sighed
with relief when the french windows of the reception room were
reached. They opened easily and the girls hurried out on to the lawns
and darted for the shadow of the palm trees.
Fay was still rather fearful from the fright she had received
when several coats hanging in the passage had blown out with the
breeze and brushed against her face.
“Oh good, we’ve managed the worst part,” whispered Nina.
“Yes, everything went beautifully. I thought we were lost when
I spied Miss Mills’ door open.”
“It’s twenty to eleven, girls,” gasped Lily in dismay. Lurline and
Beryl will be on their way.”
“Let’s go down on to the sand and walk towards the jetty,” sug-
gested Wilga, “we might be able to help them carry the ‘eats’.”
“I’m starving,” moaned Lily in mock anguish as she clasped her
sides and staggered about on the beach. “I’ll die of ‘starvedness’ if you
don’t all hurry up and rescue the cream puffs and ginger pop or what-
ever they have in bottles.”
Lily’s nonsense set the others laughing and talking merrily, and
determined to enjoy their venture to the full, they chased one another
down the beach and waded along the edge of the sea. The water was
deliciously cool after the hot day and although most of the girls had
been in swimming only a few hours previously, this was much, much
better.
Being a hot night the sand and jetty were crowded so the chums
passed unnoticed.
“Look, Isabelle! There’s the twins. They’re simply loaded down
too. I’ll race you to them, everyone,” shrieked Nina as she bounded
away.
“After her quickly, or she’ll eat all the party before we arrive,”
shouted Betty, and with a skurry of spray the girls tore along the
sands after the flying figure of Nina.
“Thank goodness you’re all here,” gasped Lurline as she dumped
several bottles of lemonade on the sand.
'‘Beryl and I had decided that we would halt every hundred


yards and have a drink and a sausage roll, so if you’d been any later
there wouldn’t have been much left.”
‘‘What have you eaten already, you greedy wretches?” scolded
Geraldine. “Didn’t you know that poor Lily is nearly fainting from
hunger and thirst?”
“Can we sit down here and start the party?” Fay enquired. “I’m
a bit hungry too, Isabelle. I think I was too excited to eat my tea
properly and Geraldine told me not to have too much supper or else
you wouldn’t let me have any party.”
“You didn’t believe that tease, did you ‘baby’?” laughed Isabelle.
“I’m simply starving too,” Wilga announced. I’m sure it’s much
more fun to have supper first and then we can paddle along the beach
as far as Broadway. Mother sent me some money today and I’ve
brought two shillings in my surf shoe. We could buy ice-blocks at
Broadway.”
“Ice-blocks!” squealed the twins, their eyes opening wide in de-
light.
“Ice-blocks!” echoed the others. “You are a sport, Wilga.”
So having decided to start their party at once the chums spread
their capes for a cloth and squatting around in the hot sand, soon
had all the bags and parcels opened and the contents displayed.
“What do you think of our buying?” chuckled the twins.
“Sausage rolls, cream puffs, iced cakes, sandwiches and choco-
lates !”
“Fruit and peanuts, too!”
“Lemonade and ginger beer!”
“You didn’t buy all this with the few shillings we gave you, sure-
ly?” enquired Betty.
“We picked the fruit from our own garden and the ginger beer
is home-made. Granny made it.”
“It’s gorgeous—oh, I wish 1 was twice as hungry, or else twice
as big,” sighed Lily.
“Isn’t she greedy, Beryl? You’d better watch out or she’ll start
on you. She loves twins.”
The twins had even brought a packet of paper cups so it was a
delicious half hour that followed. And not until every crumb had been
eaten and every bottle emptied did they stop.
“It was scrumptious,” sighed Fay happily. “I don’t think I’ve
ever been so naughty before but it is fun.”
“Come on, lazybones, no lying about sleeping off the effects; we’re
making for Broadway now. You can have a dip when we come back if
you really want to, Lily. But you’ll have to promise me you won’t go
in too far as it’s dark and the twins say a shark was seen at Henley
during the week-end.”
“Sharks! No thanks, Isabelle. I’ll wait for morning for my swim.”
Off again the chums started. Down the beach to the water’s edge
and then Betty started “Follow-my-Leader” in and out the water until
they reached Broadway.
“Why we’re quite near home here,” announced the twins.
“Of course, I’d forgotten!” exclaimed Isabelle. “How would you


two like to say goodbye when we start back? You’ve been such sports
buying the ‘eats’; it would be a shame for you to be caught.”
“Besides, we might want you to buy for us again,” said Lily
saucily.
“All right, Isabelle; if you don’t mind, I’d rather we got back
before Mother as she always looks into our room on her way to bed.”
Presently the twins, waving goodbye to their companions in mis-
chief, and sucking the ice-blocks Wilga had promised them, disap-
peared into a house along the seawall.
“Come on, girls, it’s gone a quarter to twelve,” exclaimed Betty.
“1 heard the town hall clock chime some time ago. If we are going to
the top of the jetty and back we’ll have to hurry.”
“Yes, come on,” urged Geraldine, who was beginning to feel
rather tired. “We should get back before one o’clock, don’t you think?”
Back along the beach the girls scampered, and ten minutes later
they were at the Pioneers’ Memorial just as the clock chimed twelve.
“There’s hardly anyone about now, so let’s race to the end of the
jetty,” urged Isabelle, and suiting the action to the words she bounded
away and the six after her.
To everyone’s surprise Wilga arrived first, having outpaced the
others without any effort.
“Oh look! Isabelle, there’s a dinky little boat at the bottom of
the steps. Wouldn’t it be fun to sit in it for a while and pretend we
were shipwrecked?”
“Lily was in very high spirits and determined to get every excite-
ment she could out of their forbidden escapade. The others were just
as eager for fun. Down the steps went and excitedly tumbled into
the small fisher boat tied to the steps. But then disaster overtook the
chums, for as Betty, who was last, jumped in, her foot caught in the
painter and pulled it away from the post round which it had been
loosely thrown instead of being tied. The force of Betty’s landing
pushed the boat away from the steps and before anyone had realised
what was happening, they were several yards from the jetty and
rapidly being carried out to sea on the tide.
Miss Trentan said goodnight to Miss Mills and Miss Faull at half-
past eleven and went up to her own room. But the night was too hot
for sleeping and Miss Trentan suddenly remembered that she had
closed the door of one of the Grade Six dormitories earlier in the even-
ing, and decided to go up and open it and see how her charges were
sleeping.
Miss Trentan had barely opened the door when she saw a bright
shaft of moonlight lighting up Nina’s very tumbled empty bed. Think-
ing that Nina may have been restless and gone for a drink, Miss Tren-
tan went softly into the room. At once she saw that Fay’s and Ger-
aldine’s beds were also empty. Now thoroughly vexed, the teacher
hurried to the rest of the beds only to find that the seven girls from
this dormitory were missing.
“What mischievous children, they are,” she murmured softly.


“I do hope they’ll be in soon, then I’ll attend to them myself, but
if they’re too late I’ll have to speak to Miss Mills about their escapade.”
Leaving the dormitory, Miss Trentan went down again to her own
room and, taking up a book, she placed her chair near the open door
so that she could not fail to catch the culprits when they returned.
Miss Trentan had had a very long day and she was more tired
than she realised and in a short time she was asleep, her book lying
open under her hand.
It was just two o’clock when a slight breeze caught the shutter on
Miss Trentan’s window and shut it with a loud bang. Startled from
sleep the teacher sprang up, her book crashing to the floor.
“Two o’clock! Oh, 1 suppose I’ve missed those naughty children,”
she thought as she hurried upstairs. It was a terrible shock to Miss
Trentan to discover that the beds were still empty. She could under-
stand that the girls had disobeyed rules and broken ‘bounds’ but to be
out so long could only mean an accident.
“Miss Mills, Miss Mills, are you awake?”
A short silence then a light went on in the headmistress’s room
and Miss Mills appeared at the door.
“Why, Miss Trentan! Whatever is wrong at this time of night?
Come in and sit down for a moment; you look as though you had seen
a ghost.”
In a few sentences Miss Trentan told the headmistress of her
pupils’ escapade and their prolonged absence.
“What a pity you didn’t tell me as soon as you discovered their
prank. I can quite see that you wished to deal with it yourself but I’m
afraid this is very serious. It’s after two, so they must have been away
for more than three hours.”
“I’m going to ring the police,” announced Miss Mills decisively,
and she went at once to the ’phone on her table and dialled the num-
ber. “Is that XO909?” she enquired after a moment.
“Oh, Inspector Grant, this is Miss Mills from the ‘John Hindmarsh
Memorial School’ speaking. I’m sorry to report that seven girls are
missing from their dormitory. I wouldn’t trouble you only that their
teacher, Miss Trentan, and 1 fear they might have met with an acci-
dent. Even the naughtiest girl would scarcely stay out so long.”
A fairly long pause then, whilst Miss Mills appeared to be listen-
ing to some startling news. “Yes, yes, Inspector, it might be they, but
surely the girls would never do such a foolish thing. Yes, please do
come around and we’ll have a description of the girls ready for you.”
Miss Mills rang off and turned to her assistant. Miss Trentan’s
heart sank when she saw her worried look and white anxious face.
“What is it, Miss Mills. Has anything been seen or heard of
them ?”
“The Inspector tells me that a local fisherman reported that
several people in bathers had taken his boat from the jetty steps about
midnight. ,He was too far away to see how many there were or
whether they were girls or boys. The worst of it is that he had the oars
with him so his boat is drifting aimlessly about with the children on
board and clad only in bathers. They’ll catch pneumonia even if we
find them.”


“Perhaps it’s not the girls,’’ Miss Trentan tried to cheer up the
headmistress but she felt sure it was the chums, and shuddered at the
thought of them spending the night in an open boat. She refused to
dwell on what might happen if a heavy wind arose or if the children
became panic-stricken and rocked the boat too much.
Within a quarter of an hour the soft ringing of the door bell an-
nounced the arrival of Inspector Grant.
On hearing the description of the girls and learning that they were
clad only in bathers, he shook his head and remarked seriously, “I’ll
admit it looks bad, ladies. I’m afraid it’s the girls we are seeking. Un-
fortunately we have sent our night patrol boat to help in the Marino
Rocks’ salvage and we will have to wait for daylight before sending
out the ordinary patrol. It would be madness to look for them without
a searchlight as we would probably be miles out or worse still have to
risk running them down.’
“Well, I’ll be going now, Madame. It will be daylight in a couple
of hours and we will put out as soon as we can and let you know im-
mediately there is any news.’’
Inspector Grant hurried off and left the two teachers to their
anxietv.
Meanwhile the chums were well out to sea. At first they had been
inclined to regard it as a lark. But when time passed and they drifted
further away the seriousness of their prank came to them.
Long before dawn they were all shivering, and Fay and Geraldine
had long since cried themselves to sleep. Isabel'e somehow felt that
the responsibility rested upon her of seeing that her chums came to
no harm.
“Just try not to move about too much,’’ she had counselled them
when their shouts had failed to attract attention.
“Let’s sit as close together as we can ; it will be warmer, and we
can put Fay and Geraldine in the middle,’’ suggested Lily who could
be serious and levelheaded in an emergency. So the girls drew their
wraps about them as tightly as they could and huddled together for
warmth. For a while they sang, but as they became colder and more
exhausted they grew silent, and when dawn came and the police boat
found them four miles from shore, only Isabelle, tired, haggard and
holding Fay in her arms, was awake.
In less than half an hour seven weary and woebegone girls were
received by Miss Mills and Miss Trentan and hurried off to bed. The
rest of the school slept quite unaware of their companions’ adventure
and it was not until the guilty seven did not turn up for breakfast or
lessons that they guessed something was wrong.


Chapter X
THE NEXT DAY
Isabelle was the first to wake later in the day, and was just turn-
ing- over for another sleep when she suddenly remembered the events
of the previous night, and sprang out of bed.
“Wake up, everyone, it’s terribly late. It must be lunch time at
least,” she cried as she ran from bed to bed and shook each girl.
“Oh, Isabelle! Isabelle! I’ve had a most terrible dream,” wailed
Geraldine, “and the worst of it is, it’s true. We’re in disgrace this time,
and I’m scared.”
By this time everyone was well awake and talking and wonder-
ing what Miss Mills would say.
“What if we are expelled. Mother would be terribly cross.”
Betty’s voice sounded quite solemn and worried.
“Well, Miss Mills can’t eat us, that’s certain. We’ll get a horrid
lecture and be barred from swimming for the rest of term, that’s all,”
announced the ever cheerful Lily.
“I expect we were awfully naughty, and just when things were
being so nice, too. I wish to goodness we’d left the boat alone. The
rest was such fun and I did enjoy the feast,” announced Wilga, who
didn’t mind a row a bit when there were several others in it with her.
“I’m scared of Miss Mills when she’s cross, and I’m hungry too.”
Fay’s big solemn eyes were full of tears and her lips trembled as she
struggled against crying.
“Cheer up, youngster, it’ll all be over soon, because I can hear
Miss Trentan coming.”
Miss Trentan looked very serious indeed and only stayed long-
enough to order the girls to dress quickly and go down to Miss Mills’
study.
The half hour that followed was easily the worst any of the girls
had ever experienced. Miss Mills was terribly cross and she reminded
them of the anxiety they had caused the teachers and the police: she
drew a vivid picture of their parents and of how grief-stricken they
would have been had the girls been drowned; she told them they were
a disgrace to the school and deserved to be expelled, and she very
severely blamed Isabelle as the eldest, and a prefect, for taking part
in such a wild escapade, and especially for leading very young girls
like Geraldine and Fay into such danger.
Long before the interview was over Fay and Geraldine were in


tears and most of the others felt much the same way. Only Isabelle,
and Wilga who feared nothing but water, kept calm.
“Of course the whole school knows about your escapade. In fact,
it is all over Glenelg, according to the day scholars. The fisherman,
whose boat you stole, lost no time in telling everyone what kind of tom-
boys we have at ‘Sir John Hindmarsh’.” Miss Mills’ voice was both
scornful and angry.
“Please Miss Mills, we didn’t steal his boat; we were only going
to sit in it for a moment and the rope gave away and we drifted,’’
interposed Lily.
“Well, I’m glad to hear you didn’t deliberately take the boat. I
suppose you don’t realise that the fisherman lost a night’s work besides
thinking his boat was lost. I have decided that he should be recom-
pensed for his loss of work and so all your pocket money for the
rest of term will go to the fisherman.’’
“As far as the scnool is concerned, you will take no part in swim-
ming or tennis and will play and study alone. I will not have the
younger children upset with your wild schemes.’’
“You may all go now with the exception of Isabelle, and I have
something to say to her in private.”
Six very downcast girls filed out of the headmistress’s study.
“I wonder what she wants Isabelle for?” said Lily, breaking the
silence.
“I’m afraid poor old Isabelle is in for a bad time, and really it was
our idea to give the midnight party in honour of her, and yet she’s get-
ting most of the blame,” grumbled Nina.
“Let’s wait on the lawn until she comes out and see what it’s all
about.”
“No, that won’t do, Betty; we’d better clear out of sight of any
of the teachers. I’ll wait in the passage till she comes and then let you
all know,” announced Geraldine.
“Can’t I wait, too?” pleaded Fay. I’m only small and 1 could hide
quickly if I heard anyone coming.”
How the time dragged to Betty, Wilga, Nina and Lily who were
waiting. As ten minutes grew into a quarter of an hour, they imagined
all sorts of things, amongst which that the two watchers had been
caught. But just as they gave up hope of any news, Geraldine came
flying across the tennis courts to the shade-house where they were
waiting.
“Well, what happened?”
“Tell us quickly, Geraldine.”
“Were you caught?”
“Where’s Isabelle and Fay now?”
“I don’t know what happened girls, but it must have been terrible.
Fay and I waited and waited and at last Isabelle came out and she
looked simply awful. She was as white as a sheet and she just stared
ahead of her and didn’t even see us. I went up to her and took her arm
after a bit and asked what happened, and she didn’t look at me but
just shook my hand off —told me to ‘clear out and leave her alone.’
Then she went up to our dormitory. 1 didn’t like to follow her ’cause
you just can’t with Isabelle.”


“Was she crying, Geraldine?”
“Of course she wasn’t; you never see Isabelle cry. Not if the most
awful things happen.”
“But where is Fay?” insisted Wilga.
“Well, when Isabelle went upstairs, Fay went after her; just
quietly and not saying anything at all. If anyone can do anything at
all it’ll be Fay ’cause she adores Isabelle and Isabelle thinks a lot of
her too.
It was not until half-an-hour later that the girls were joined by
Fay who looked very woebegone and tearful.
“It’s too dreadful for words,” she sobbed.
“What’s it all about, baby? Can’t you tell us?”
“Isabelle had a terrible time with Miss Mills after we left and
she went upstairs and shut herself in the dormitory, but 1 went in too
and 1 don’t think she minded because she didn’t seem to notice any-
thing much. We just sat down on her bed and said nothing for ages
and ages, then she got up and took the Cup from the mantelpiece and
told me to take it to Miss Mills ’cause the Head said she wasn’t fit to
keep it any longer.”
“What! Give up the Cup! But she won that for swimming, not for
good conduct.”
“That’s not the worst though,” continued Fay. “When Isabelle
gave me the Cup to take back, she said, “That’s the end of the school
as far as I’m concerned, Fay. I’ve been asked to leave at the end of
term.”
“Expelled! Isabelle to be expelled! Oh, it’s not fair. We were all
in it together. What’s the use of blaming her just because she’s the
eldest and a prefect. We all agreed to go. Isabelle didn’t make us do
it.”
But the fact remained that they were all in disgrace and Isabelle
was to leave at the end of the term in a month’s time.


Chapter XI
END OF TERM
End of term was now only two days away, and it was the worst
end of term that the chums had ever remembered. Somehow the
thought of holiday wasn’t nearly so pleasant, for Isabelle would not be
there when they came back.
The whole school had been sorry to hear of her disgrace and the
chums had had to put up with lots of teasing about their escapade. In
fact they were regarded as heroes, and it would have been a glorious
adventure if only Isabelle was not to be expelled.
None of them had had a swim for a month and all their pocket
money had gone to pay the fisherman for his loss.
“Of course it would be extra hot too,” grumbled Betty.
“Yes, and I’m simply dying for some ice-blocks. When we were
all in the town yesterday the twins offered to buy me a vanilla block.
In fact, they had actually got it and Miss Trentan saw them giving it
to me and, would you believe it, she said in her strictest voice, “Betty
is in disgrace, Beryl, and I’ll have to ask you to give that ice-block to
one of the other girls, or else eat it yourself.” 1 could have wept, and
that beastly child Mavis Edwards, giggled and made some horrid re-
marks about us all.
“Oh, that girl is a sneak anyway. She’s the one who ought to be
expelled. She is always doing something underhand. Isabelle is straight,
anyhow. She wouldn’t know how to be mean,” announced Fay indig-
nantly.
“Yes, I know, Fay, but you must admit that Isabelle can be unkind
to girls she doesn’t like, or who can’t do lessons or play games well,”
answered Nina, who believed in being fair to everyone.
“Not at all, Nina,” retorted Geraldine hotly, “it’s just that
Isabelle can’t bear sneaks or slackers.”
“Oh, do stop quarrelling, for goodness sake,” grumbled Wilga in
a very cross voice. “We’re to have an assembly tonight just for the
whole school, so something must be up.”
“How do you know, Wilga?”
“Who told you ?”
“It’s unusual to have an assembly the night before break-up.
Surely Miss Mills isn’t going to lecture us again in front of the school.”
Betty was horrified.
“1 saw it on the notice board in the hall. There were crowds around
it, and no one seemed to know anything for certain,” answered Wilga.
“By the way, where is Isabelle?” queried Lily of her companions
who were packing ready for the holidays. All the heavy luggage was
going in the morning and only light cases were left for travelling.


“Isabelle packed everything when we were in the gym. this morn-
ing, and she’s gone down behind the tennis courts with a book. 1 know
because 1 went over to talk to her and she nearly bit my head off,” re-
plied Fay ruefully. “I think she’s terribly upset about leaving in dis-
grace. Her people haven’t been told yet. Miss Mills couldn’t get in
touch with them before, but she’ll tell them to-morrow when we have
our proper Visitors’ Day.”
It was most unusual for “John Hindmarsh” to have a full school
assembly on the night before end-of-term. Usually visitors were invited
the last evening and reports and prizes were distributed, so the assem-
bly hall was a buzz of excited, questioning voices that evening, as the
whole school waited to hear their headmistress’s speech.
As Miss Mills and all the staff came on to the platform there was
sudden silence and everyone settled down to hear the special an-
nouncement.
“Girls, I have assembled you to-night because 1 wash to speak to
you of a matter that concerns the school alone. It can only be decided
by the staff and scholars of “Sir John Hindmarsh” and it is not fitting
to discuss our school problems before visitors.”
“It’s getting more and more mysterious,” whispered Lily to her
neighbour as Miss Mills paused. Everywhere girls were showing their
suppressed excitement and curiosity by slight shufflings and low mur-
mu rings.
“1 want you all to recall a certain very unfortunate incident of
last month,” the Head continued gravely. “You will remember that a
number of girls held a midnight picnic on the beach and, not content
with that, they borrowed a boat and drifted out to sea. It was a very
foolish thing to do and might have had very serious consequences. In
fact, 1 viewed the matter in so serious a light that 1 felt compelled to
ask the ringleader not to return to this school next year.”
This time there was dead silence as the Headmistress paused.
Wilga and Nina glanced at each other guiltily and Fay affectionately
squeezed Isabelle’s arm.
“However,” continued Miss Mills, “1 have been almost over-
whelmed by girls from all classes in the school, from the kindergarten
to the seniors; begging me to reconsider my decision. When 1 found
that one girl had made herself so popular with her schoolmates 1 be-
gan to think her influence for good in the school was something we did
not want to lose.”
A few barely subdued claps and faint cheers greeted this speech.
Things were beginning to sound much more cheerful.
“But that was not what fiinally decided me to change my mind.”
Miss Mills was actually smiling, and the chums brightened up with
excitement.
“What made me certain that we didn’t want to lose Isabelle at
all was the loyalty of the six girls who were in trouble with her.
“Each girl came to me separately, and, 1 am sure, unknown to
the others, and offered to take all the blame. Each girl even suggested


that she should be expelled instead of Isabelle. In fact, the youngest
girl of the party told me a long rambling story about how she made
all the others go when they would have preferred to stay in bed. I
might say you were very loyal Fay, but really no one could imagine
you leading six other girls, older than yourself, into trouble.” Miss
Mills looked quite amused and Fay hung her head in embarrassment
at being found out doing a good turn.
“To continue, girls, 1 talked the matter over with my staff, and then
we spoke to the senior prefects and everyone is anxious that Isabelle
should stay at school, and, of course, her six loyal chums too.”
“Oh! hurrah! hurrah!” shrieked Lily, jumping up and down in
wild excitement. It was a signal for general rejoicing and instantly
girls were cheering, laughing, clapping and chattering about the good
news.
At last, when the excitement had died down and order was re-
stored, Miss Mills again stood up and held up her hand for silence.
“There is still something else I want to tell you all,” she said,
“something that 1 am sure you will all be very glad to hear. This morn-
ing I had a letter containing such a strange story, and I’m going to
tell it to you. ‘Some years ago a farmer and his wife bought property
in the far north of South Australia. It was rather a lonely place, but
they had two little girls, twins, just three years old, and they didn’t
mind the lack of neighbours. Everything went well with this family:
the first season was a wonderful sucess; there was plenty of feed and
there had been good rains at the right time. Then one day, just about
a year after they had gone to their new home, tragedy overtook tlm
family. The father was out attending to the stock and the mother
was busy making some cakes for the twins’ fourth birthday party next
day. The twins had been shut out of the kitchen whilst the cakes were
being iced and had wandered off to amuse themselves. Suddenly the
mother heard faint shrieks and cries and ran from the he use calling to
the twins. Imagine her horror when, on turning the corner of the house,
she saw both little girls struggling in a waterhole which was well filled
after recent rains. The poor mother jumped in and after a while man-
aged to get one little girl to safety but the other twin had disappeared,
and although a black boy who happened to come along just then dived
for the little one, she was drowned when they brought her ashore.’
“The little girl who was saved is eleven now, but she still fears
water and 1 am sure that after that dreadful experience anyone would
be terrified. I am very, very glad we heard this story because we know
now that Wilga Barret is not a coward and has good cause to be
frightened, for I’m sure you’ve all guessed by now that Wilga was the
twin who was saved.”
“Oh dear, 1 thought it was going to be the horridest end of term
ever, and instead it’s the best of all terms,” sighed Fay happily as the
girls were getting ready for bed that night.
“I thought it was a gorgeous surprise when we came upstairs and


found Isabelle’s swimming cup back on the mantelpiece,” added Nina.
“It’s been a strange term to me,” said Wilga thoughtfully. “When
1 first came 1 just hated everything and everybody and I longed to be
back home again. Then 1 grew to like the girls, but 1 felt too shy to
make friends; besides, 1 couldn’t swim, and didn’t know why. But now
1 love every minute of it.”
Isabelle looked up from her book and smiled.
“Yes, it has certainly been the best term ever,”


.
I ' 'H ■ -i ■■■■■-


3 1508 02233163 6


cnb
S? 'dJ tr r-r^
..u ‘ * '" ggjgaa
• , Vj wlV*** • » » .V .'}* *
WIILGA COIVIES
TO SCIHOOL
Bv JEAN A. McCABE
