

William Shakespeare
In
Romance and Reality
By
William Thomson
I had rather know than be known
Bacon’s diary
MELBOURNE: SANDS & McDOUGALL
1881




William Shakespeare
In
Romance and Reality
By
William Thomson
I had rather know than be known
Bacon’s diary
MELBOURNE: SANDS & McDOUGALL
1881


Of the same benefit would it be to our intellectual
life if his famed contemporary Bacon were revived
in a suitable manner. . . . Both poet and
philosopher looked deeply into the history and
politics of their people, and stand upon the level
ground of reality. One national spirit, the same
practical hearty sense of life . . . fashioned
that poetry so full of life, and that philosophy so
rich in experience.
Gervinus.


William Shakespeare
“The life of Shakespeare is a fine mystery,
and I tremble every day lest something should
turn up.”
Charles Dickens.
The life of William Shakespeare, in relation to the
drama given to the world under that name, is usually
viewed in two aspects, one of romance and another in
reality. The romantic being the favourite I propose to
illustrate it by some recent writings. Of these one in
The North American Review and one in The Victorian
Review romance beyond fable. In the latter a tyro
could not fail to find a glowing panegyric of an ideal
being rather than a narrative of “what we really know
about him ” as the reader is led to expect. Of the
myth of the Mermaid tavern the enthusiast observes:—
“And Fuller, in his British Worthies, makes special
mention of the wit-combats he had witnessed at the
same club between Shakespeare and Ben Jonson.”
Fuller was born in 1608; Shakespeare left London in
1611. Fuller was a good wit but not a roisterer before
he was three years old. Writing from hearsay forty
years after Mermaid mirth had ceased to flow of
encounters he could not have witnessed, he in fancy
only did “behold the wet-combats” of worthies right
witty in their cups. Jonson the tumbling galleon and
A 2


Shakespeare the raking frigate fought only in Fuller’s
humour; and where he floated in drink and wit the
critic adrift got aground on a wit-shallow. Fuller knew
not nor has any one since learned whether or no
Shakespeare ever entered the Mermaid, or joined the
coterie clubbing in its parlour. “That he also belonged
to it we can hardly question” is all Mr. Dyce ventured
to conjecture. Bolder guessers make surmise reality.
But the quaint word-fun in “wet” and “wit” is blown
away like froth on the dull head of the dry arguer
pottering among the pots without tasting the liquor.
Of imaginary sallies not a word—not even a pun, in
Beaumont’s Mermaid half-fish half-flesh doggerel, has
come down to posterity. Fiction keeps no diary and
Fuller could record no fact.
In affirming that contemporary evidence yields com-
plete proof of Shakespeare’s verity, the same credulous
writer easily finds another living witness in Spenser,
whose lines in The Teares of the Muses he takes to refer
to Shakespeare, although of this there is ample room
for more than doubt. The one particular line mostly
trusted is by him supposed to name Shakespeare:—
“ Our pleasant Willy, ah ! is dead of late.”
That line is now known to apply to Sir Philip Sidney.
He was killed at the battle of Zutphen not long before
the poem was written, and was “ dead of late ” in no
figurative sense, but as a sad matter of fact, as the poet
without any sophistry tells. Spenser had cause to
lament untimely death in the noble friend who took
his hand to fortune; and so he sang of him as “Willy,”
in the endearing word for a friend who was also a
“ gentle shepherd ” or poet, as Sidney truly was. On a
keenly-debated point the unwary writer discards doubt


and clings to an exploded Collier forgery; for such is
now found to be the fantastical application of Spenser’s
kindly allusive poem.
To that error the same writer adds the idle asser-
tion that: ‘ Somewhat later Spenser again eulogises
Shakespeare, under the name of Etion, of whom the
poet says :
‘ A gentler shepherd may nowhere be found.
Whose Muse, full of high thought’s invention,
Doth, like himself, heroically sound.’
The allusion in the last line being to the heroical name
of the dramatist—Shakespeare.”
Be it, however, observed that it is “himself,” not his
name that like his Muse heroically sounds. Who then
was “ himself resounding ? In the Characteristics of
English Poets , Mr. Minto contends that, though the
four lines in Spenser’s Colin Clout are often thought
applicable to Shakespeare, equal probability may be
made out for Drayton ; and the reasons he gives are
very generally accepted. Before I read them I had
satisfied myself that the real poet had been overlooked,
and that the “himself” was George Chapman, the
heroic translator of Homer; and with all respect for
Mr. Minto’s argument I shall here explain the grounds
for my independently formed opinion. Chapman was
Spenser’s great friend, by whom he was reverenced for
his worth and admired for his spirit as a poet. Aetion
was reverenced for worth and heroism by Achilles his
rival. To Spenser, Chapman would be another King
Aetion when telling the tender parting of white-armed
Andromache and her boy with plumed and mailed
heroic Hector with all the verve of the finest episode in
the Iliads, of which he was then making for England’s
literature the one heroic version. Beside it all other


efforts to reproduce Homer pale their ineffectual verve.
He made it his own province;
“And who make thither else, rob, or invade.”
With Francis Bacon the fervid poet but gentle man
was very friendly, later in life dedicating to him a
translation from Hesiod; as also with Essex. Hence it
probably came that he figures in the Sonnets as the
rival poet. The intimacy between Chapman and Bacon
will explain how the dramatist got access to read the
later parts of the Iliads from which he wrote the very
political play upon the heroic poem in Troilus and
Cressida, a work printed in 1609, but allowed to have
been written several years earlier. The hero and heroine
are taken partly from Chaucer, and partly from mediaeval
romance literature ; but other parts are, Stapfer finds,
direct from the Homeric translation. From this it is
inferred that Chapman and Shakespeare were acquainted,
though no other circumstance warrants the belief.
Between 1591-5, when Spenser’s poem was written and
printed, Chapman had made his first efforts in Homer,
in the full heroic strain he ever maintained; while
nothing yet given under Shakespeare’s name bore a
heroic stamp, or associated him with Aetion, classic as
are the Venus and Adonis and icy cold Lucrece. About
that time Bacon was working out the earlier form of
The Advancement of Learning, where he made with
Hector the odd blunder of misquoting Aristotle about
young men’s unfitness to ." hear moral ” in lieu of
“ study political ” philosophy. Bacon often erred in
that way, as when speaking of the serpent of Moses,
for Aaron’s serpent, that swallowed the enchanted.
In still greater inconsistency the author deals with
the diary of the Rev. John Ward, Vicar of Stratford-


upon-Avon, who wrote fifty years after the events he
chronicled. Credulity readily accepts the legend that
made Shakespeare supply the stage with two plays
every year while living retired in his native town, or
eight in all, though nobody can guess let alone tell
which plays they were; but when the same honest
diarist tells what rumour or tradition told about the
manner of death from a fever caught after a hard
drinking bout, if not thereby brought on, incredulity
calls the tale of the no longer faithful chronicler “a
rash assumption at variance with the whole tenor of
Shakespeare’s life,” of which, by the way, the author
began by declaring'he knew little more than nothing!
The ever ready facility again appears in an easy
belief about an apocryphal gift of .£I,OOO to Shakespeare
from Earl Southampton. The tale may be true, but no
letter from one to the other ever was seen except
among the clever Ireland forgeries. In valid negative
proof that nothing of the kind existed, a letter said to
have been found among the Ellesmere papers in which
the Earl of Southampton alludes to Shakespeare as his
“ especial friende ” and “ writer of some of our best
English plays which were most singularly liked of
Quene Elizabeth ” is now found to be “ a manifest
fabrication.” The black velvet tablecover supposed to
have been given to Shakespeare by the Queen, and a
dice-box, are to the fore, but no autograph of earl,
queen, or king has been deemed worth preserving.
Nobility, royalty, gentry, and learning were held lightly
by the princely spirit that created drama for kings and
statesmen. The poet revelling in pure art threw away
all trivial token of his fame, yet he bowed before a
dicer’s box and the dismal tablecloth on which dice
had oftener rolled than sheets of foolscap. “ Keep a


gamester from the dice, and a good student from his
book, and it is wonderful ” is after all no shallow
philosophy.
In relating Green’s death-bed attack on Shakespeare,
as “one of those burs that cleave, those puppits that
speake from our mouths, those anticks garnisht in our
colours,” who “supposes hee is as well able to bombast
out a blanke verse as the best of you,” the author
garbles to accuse Chettle as the real writer, and lug
him in as a contemporary witness. Repudiating Green’s
pamphlet, Chettle says :—“ With neither of them that
take offence was I acquainted.” Chettle knew nothing
about either Shakespeare or Marlowe; he only came to
hear about the former’s civility and quality in the art
he professed when called on to disclaim a hand in his
deceased friend’s work. Reflecting on the dead he
gratified the living to be peace-maker among the angry.
Chettle is made to appear low, scurrile, intriguing,
in maligning Shakespeare; but upright, fair, decent,
when praising that vanity. The late Mr. Dyce thought
the Groatsworth of Wit no forgery; and held both
Green its author, and Chettle its printer, worthy though
indigent men. Never does Green allude to Shakespeare
as a writer. Only at a “bombaster,” the quality he
professed, he jeers. This is also how the author of
Ratsie's Ghost refers to him; deriding only a thrifty
close-fisted player, proud with speaking others’ words on
the stage; an actor only, never an author; a noteworthy
fact always unheeded. The panegyrists never refer
to Ratsy’s apt allusion, though it is one of the few
contemporary notices of Shakespeare never impugned as
a modern forgery !
Equally evaded is the legend that Shakespeare began
his London career by holding horses at the theatre.


This tale is denounced as worthless fiction, untrue for
that the Globe stood near the river and visitors went
thither by water. On Hollar’s map, where all is drawn
as seen, not fancied, horsemen refresh at the inn
on their way to the play, and horses graze in the
field behind the Globe and Beargarden. A band of
“Shakespeare’s boys” there may have been; there were
horses for it. The troop of little hirelings is true to all
known of the middle-man leader, who spunged on the
vails of the little varlets for his first money venture.
Again, in repeating the belief that the Stratford bust
was cut from a cast after death, the writer never refers
to the plaster cast in the British Museum, from which
Gerard Johnson, the London tomb-maker, worked in
carving the head and features. That cast was always
considered to be genuine until, on closer scrutiny, it
was found to represent a meaner head than that on the
bust, with “ the forehead as fine as Bacon’s.” Then the
paltry thing was discarded; although in every other
respect agreeing with a life-portrait taken in 1610, and
perhaps the only one extant. That plaster cast does
not flatter, like fancy pictures, and hence it is held
untrue to nature. And this is how romancers argue
out the verity !
I come now to a point I would rather avoid. The
eulogistic author makes it important to his theory to
observe that William Shakespeare was the son of
“A gentlewoman by birth and station, and from her,
if we adopt the commonly received theory of sons
inheriting their intellectual conformation from their
mothers, Shakespeare must have deduced that glorious
mind, the possession of which enabled him to become
one of the greatest benefactors of the human race.”
Now this rhetorical and panegyrical style is no doubt


very fine writing, but, let us ask, if that mother were
not of gentle blood will it follow that the son derived
no intellect ? The Arden family at Wilmcote came no
offshoot from Arden of Yoxall, no stirp in collateral
descent from ancient lineage. One in name only, the two
families were no way related. “ These flourishes of the
heralds, by whom applicants were sometimes furnished
with ancestors as well as with coat-armour,” gave all
the rank that Arden or Shakespeare boasted. The
crests unquartered tell that at the Court of Henry VII.
were no retainers of either name. From the frugal wife
of a thrifty yeoman the son derived a money-making
heart to
“ Live to clutch the golden keys ”
and win, or with poetry divide, thrift’s adoration.
Ingenuous narrative discards spurious heraldic trumpery.
The rustic Mary Arden had no gentle strain of blood.
The ploughman’s child came of a race caring for not
even the rudiments of education, and gave to her son a
trait he in turn imparted to his own children. The
centre of a large family circle, William Shakespeare
had no near relative who could either read or write.
Whether he could himself is doubtful. Letters to him
on law affairs occupying all his thought are extant, but
those from him, if ever any there were, are all gone.
Every letter to him refers alone to money matters;
not one containing a bare literary allusion. Beggars or
borrowers at usury were all the correspondents of him
who bought the biggest house in town, put a lie on the
hatchment, and left his fair daughter Judith untaught
to read the legend.
Biographers assume that correspondence Shakespeare
must have had with co-partners in the London theatres


about new plays written at Stratford and sent for acting;
or with his daughter Susanna, who was accounted “witty
above her sex,” and who perhaps could write; or with
his son-in-law, a physician who affected the literature of
his profession; yet with all these opportunities for cor-
respondence never a line appears. The very name
inscribed on the copy of Montaigne’s Essays, in the
British Museum, is now held not genuine; while the
“W. S.” in studied calligraphy on the fly leaf of
Plutarch, in the Greenock library, requires so elaborate
proof of authenticity as to leave no impression on the
reader other than one proving painful ability in the
proven If William Shakespeare could write the world
has been left nothing to show it. Mary Arden could
never have taught her boy to read out of the then
most popular book in England, and elsewhere the poet
learned the Bible lore that runs through every play.
No more could that mother help to impart the know-
ledge of French and Italian evinced in the drama.
That William Shakespeare knew either language there
is not a tittle of evidence to show, any more than there
is that he ever visited Italy to enable him to describe
localities from reflected vision. From the plays it seems
to be evident that their author was born of an intelligent
and educated mother from whom he derived his intel-
lectual character; that he had not only visited but had
lived in France and Italy and in daily intercourse with
natives of those lands became familiarly acquainted with
their manners, customs, arts, politics, literature, and
language.
Admitting the physiological theory that mental char-
acter in sons goes by the mother, in daughters by the
father, here is a capital illustration of this natural law
in heredity. The tutor to Edward VI., Sir Anthony


Cooke, was a scholarly man, of literary tastes, and
original views, with an infinite fund of quaint humour,
remarkable in word-play, to convey them. Of his four
daughters, all famed either for general intelligence or
high literary attainment, one became wife to Lord
Burghley and mother of Robert Cecil; another married
Sir Nicholas Bacon and was mother of Francis; the
third was mother to the Russels ; and the fourth was
the celebrated Catherine Killigrew, whose rare literary
gifts were reborn in her grandchild who, carried off by
smallpox before she was twenty-five, was yet so
famous—
“So youngly she began to serve her country,
And what stock she came of,”
that Dry den had already dedicated to her his finest
elegy, and sang of her as “ a grace for beauty and a
muse for wit.” That Sir Anthony Cooke was author
of the comedy called Jack Juggler , written to entertain
and educate his royal pupil by allegory, is from marked
likeness to Cooke’s character and manner perfectly
evident. The comedy is intensely political and protes-
tant, and was printed anonymously, its author never
having until now been even guessed at. The style is
in imitation of Plautus, and forms the earliest English
adaptation of a Latin play, coming shortly before
Udall’s Ralph Roister Doister, though for political
reasons not printed till later. Thus literary genius and
dramatic verve ran in Bacon’s veins and were bred, as
instinct is transmitted, in brain tissue by the mother’s
side. Than this example of the enounced physiological
doctrine of intellectual heredity it would hardly be
possible to find a better; while it also gives primti
facie proof verifying the other theory of the authorship


of the greater drama. It even clears up another point
of difficulty for commentators, who often wonder why
the dramatist was so partial to his favourite name of
Anthony, seeing that William Shakespeare had neither
relative nor friend so named. But on the contrary
Anthony was only brother to Francis Bacon, and
dearest to him on earth, the apple of his eye; while
Anthony was his maternal grandfather, who lived till
Francis was sixteen, exerting over his grandson’s home
training the potent influence bestowed on his own
daughters. This grandfather invented the English poli-
tical drama brought by this grandson to the acme of
political perfection.
Discussing physiological heredity the Lancet, March,
188 1, regarding efforts for special mind work for women,
holds the aim vain and futile, because nature ordains
that mental strain in the mother is prone to run into
neurosis or latent insanity in sons; while organic brain
power with good native intelligence is more likely to
confer high intellectual energy. The Lancet gives no
historic illustrations of the modern idea about mind
growth the wrong way; but it may consider those here
noted. Bacon’s mother had natural ability generally
cultured without over-straining specialty.
The invidious contrast here drawn between two gene-
alogies will be taken in reply to the romancing vanity
and not as a gratuitous vain-glorying of one over
another family history. No doubt the comparison affords
an admirable example of a social problem of great
interest in connection with the modern revival in the
higher education and special mental training of women
altogether apart from the literary argument for which it
is introduced; but leaving it here I gladly turn to
pleasanter themes in personal vindication.


That Bacon’s plan of publication was abruptly altered
in 1621 by stress of poverty there can be no doubt-
When “the printer’s fingers itched to be selling” the
products of a fertile brain Bacon was working hard
with his pen, his only factor and mart, for daily food
to feed the busy organ. “He was struggling with
penury, often borrowing small sums for his most press-
ing necessities.” He sold plate and jewels for money
to pay petty debts owing to poorer creditors, scarce
leaving himself bread. He begged the beer he could
not buy, nor get on credit at the ale-house, till denied
by Fulke Greville’s well-fed butler. He tasted of the
King’s mercy, but never of his bounty. The promised
pension he neither got, nor could he borrow on the
faith of it. These statements may to some knowing
not his case seem strange; yet he writes“ Some
wretched detractor hath told you that it were strange
I should be in debt; for that I could not but have
received an hundred thousand pounds gifts since I had
the seal; which is an abominable falsehood. Such
tales as these made St. James say that the tongue is a
fire, and itself fired from hell, whither when these
tongues shall return, they will beg a drop of cold water
to cool them.” Tongues claiming a monopoly of truth
call him liar and robber still; and yet, that he had
ready-money dealings with a printer for means to live
is simply matter of fact. That he interposed unnamed
works between his avowed publications about 1622 his
letter to Fulgentio leaves certain. What the works
there alluded to were cannot be known beyond a hint
that they were on “the inwards of things” and recrea-
tions of severer studies, as the drama would obviously
be. Although he felt that those lighter works would
yield more lustre to his name than graver works could


do, yet he, longing after no “untimely anticipation of
that which is proper to follow a man,” left those works
wrapt in mystery. These are not the words of one
ambitious to be thought an author, the newest phase
of Bacon’s alleged duplicity and vanity!! If the 1623
folio formed part of those literary recreations then the
same name that had of old been used was again
employed to print the book, and Shakespeare was still
retained sib in the familiar utility. This view is quite
in keeping with every known fact of the first folio,
while it explains some points otherwise inexplicable.
However greatly at variance with an e facie reading
of the commendatory verses prefixed to the 1623 folio
by Ben Jonson the new idea of authorship may seem,
it yet agrees with an oblique reading of them as applied
to Bacon of whom Ben Jonson wrote as:—
“He who hath filled all numbers, and performed that in
our tongue, which may be compared or preferred either to
insolent Greece or haughty Rome.”
Turned into verse this prose reads:—
“Leave thee alone for the comparison
Of all, that insolent Greece or haughty Rome
Sent forth, or since did from their ashes come.”
Here then Ben Jonson turns his prose into verse in
order to eulogize Bacon and Shakespeare in the same
words and make the pair equal.
But this equality is quite inconsistent with the strange
neglect of Jonson to include Shakespeare’s name in his
famous catalogue of great writers, along with More,
Wiat, Chaloner, Surrey, Eliott, Essex, Ralegh, Savile,
Sandys, Egerton, Sidney, and others, beyond all of whom
Francis Bacon is made to “stand as the mark and
of our language.”


The fact that neither Camden nor Bacon ever named
Shakespeare in the Annals is often noticed. A neglect
which some say betrayed fear or envy in Bacon, could
betoken no motive in Camden. But the far more re-
markable omittance on the part of rare Ben to name
his old familiar friend as one of the great writers of his
time, as by me for the first time mentioned, can only
be reconciled with the glowing eulogy in the laudatory
verses by assuming that those verses in the first folio
were really addressed not to Shakespeare as they appear
to profess, but obliquely to Bacon, as they plainly imply
according to Jonson's direct eulogy of him in the
same terms. At the time those verses were written
Shakespeare had been left unsung for seven years in his
grave • while Jonson and Bacon were living together on
terms’of closest intimacy. Ben was editing Bacons
minor works, and perhaps translating others into Latin
for him. Then Bacon plied his pen, and only strove
by it “to live out of want and die out of ignominy,,
craving no panegyric before his death, content to leave
name and memory to future generations.
Thus easily disposed of is Ben Jonson’s testimony to
the known authorship of the drama, and that is always
brought forward as the great contemporary evidence
and irrefragable proof. That Ben Jonson edited the
i 6 2, folio, the nominal editors working under him
ignorant of their employer’s relationship to the rea
author, is inferable from, amongst other things, the
identity of a passage in The Induction to Bartholomew
Fair to another in The Address to the Great Vanety of
Readers in the folio. Of Jonson no biographer suspects
any such connection; but a reticent policy about
editorial supervision would consistently conceal even that
fact from everyone.


When Lord Palmerston avowed belief that Bacon
wrote the plays he was asked how he got over Ben
Jonson s word, and bluntly answered:—“ Oh, he was
deceived like the rest of them.” Had the Statesman
who would have England be true to herself as Bacon
and the Drama wished her, keeping alive the “enjoying
peace, ready for war” spirit, been aware of facts brought
to light since his time, and now gathered into argument,
he quickly would have pierced Dickens’ fine mystery!
With an inkling of truth a hearty instinct did the rest.
No casuist, he knew how truth never trammels up a
consequence for plotting Thane or jesting Pilate, nor
humours vanity in romancing reviewers.
Of the Victorian reviewer the contrary to Palmerston
is true. A ripe Shakesperean scholar of the orthodox
school and refined critic in art and letters, he writes
pleasingly for popular reading. A subtle dialectic
deforms the facts of a doubtful character to put un-
lettered readers on the alert for threatened heresy.
Sceptics might abolish the Atonement, and abrogate the
Devil to their liking; but no heretic pen may cast
doubt on the Inspired source of a devoutly adored
Drama! That idea must be firmly gript as the last
lingering proof of the existence of an inspiring Deity.
A celestial origin for a Pagan ethic, proving by moral
induction that crime on earth never has its doom
adjourned to the world to come, is a paradox. Nemesis
not Satan is the new avenger. With Bacon the Drama
may teach us that, between Physics and Divinity no
Meta-physical aid can help an erring mortal; that an
impassable gulph divides the realm of Faith from the
region of Morality; and yet critics fail to perceive in
this idea the main ethical lesson taught by both Bacon
and the Drama.
B


In claiming a prior title to the dramatic throne and
breaking the hope of an iconoclast, the Victorian reviewer,
by anticipation, would hinder truth lest candour conjure
up the fearful something haunting idolism with a daily
dread. He may have been by an editor invited to
forefend, but he certainly is invita Minerva. Not under
her aegis he “takes authority for truth, not truth for
authority”—authority, like Autolycus, “oft led by the
nose with gold.” To the toil of the compiler he brings
a fancy for forming new facts or adorning the old for
variety; borrowed charms that lend fascination to eulogy
and make a bald theme beautiful. Where word-paint
is bliss a plain unvarnished tale may not be equally
attractive.
Of literary criticism on the drama the author is
sparing and wisely, for what little he does attempt is
singularly infelicitous. In noting the meagre details
on Shakespeare’s life the paucity is ascribed to an
intense objectivity in the poet’s genius, never revealing
the working of his own personality in the drama. The
trait may be true, but the critic forthwith confutes his
inference by giving a long list of quotations purporting
to illustrate the contrary psychology, and prove that
the poet was intensely subjective, bringing out his own
domestic life and fireside sorrow in characters pourtrayed
from inward dolor rather than arising out of theii
appropriate dramatic action, and prompted from feeling
more than projected by imagination, lowering the
dramatist from a creative to a mere descriptive poet.
Thus the wail of Constance for loss of her boy “ could
only have been written by one whose feelings had been
lacerated by the loss of a beloved child,” which is equal
to averring that the poet could never declare “The
beetle that we tread upon feels a pang as great as


when a giant dies ” unless he had been a beetle, suffer-
ing agony through the soul of Pythagoras. In a wild
strain bordering on rhapsody the critic contends that
the life ways of the poet are revealed in the Sonnets ,
in Viola, Constance, Prince Henry, and Prospero, a
rather extended subjectivity to prove the “glorious
objectivity” of the inspired dramatist.
But instead of showing how the artist rose out of
himself to pourtray airy beings in creative fancy, or
delineate men and women of reality, egotism would
prove him rather a thrall to Learean logic:—
“ What, have his daughters brought him to this pass ?
He hath no daughters, sir.
Death, traitor! nothing could have subdu’d nature to such
lowness but his unkind daughters.”
For so the poet could not preach Viola, mourn Constance,
cant Prince Henry, nor rave Lear, unless he had had a
wife older than himself, lost a darling son, lived a
scape-grace, or been harried by pelican daughters!
Bacon had no child, nor Shakespeare one to make him
feel how sharper than a serpent’s tooth is an ungrateful
child; but the poet had what the critic cannot appre-
ciate, sympathetic imagination.
The failing is often found in dramatic critics. One of
them thought a fine presentment of Perdita did not
come up to the ideal of the prettiest low-born lass that
ever ran on the green-sward, “so singular in each
particular,” as Bacon would say, as never to be met
with in womanly form. But the poet pourtrays Perdita
as appearing to the eye of Florizel, in a fine frenzy
rolling, as one of the strange things lovers speak of,
when they see “Helen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt/’
B 2


let alone in a pretty girl—a “ most peerless piece .of
earth ” in the part of Perdita. The critic evidently
failed to note the poet’s feeling, as he failed to feel the
artistic charm by which the love-tale was so finely told.
But even allowing that here and there a subjective
psychology looms through dialogue or soliloquy, and
taking the instance cited by the reviewer for an example
in Prospero, who, I ask, is most strikingly typified in
that magic and enchanting being ? For reply to the
query let us go outside the circle who contend in
upholding either theory to one who defines Prospero’s
psychology with great ability. Showing how in the
plays of Shakespeare the popular Witch and Wizard of
the time assumed noble and dignified form, rising to
tragic grandeur and magnificence, an eminent but
anonymous biographer observes:—“ The Magician is
merely a scholar who has dared the heights of human
wisdom. In the person of Prospero in the Tempest he
is preternaturally wise, beneficent, removed from human
feeling and sympathy by the very height and abstraction
of his pursuits. But with a Baconian loftiness of thought
he has a Baconian iciness about his heart. Human
griefs and joys barely affect him. He is scarcely sus-
ceptible of anger. With tenderness, but little love for
his kind. Having mused too long on the perishable
nature of all things, to feel a special concern for one.”
Need a word be added to complete the portrait or point
out whose is the likeness? Truly indeed “the causes
which governed and ruled the poetry of Shakespeare ”
likewise “subserved the intellect of Francis Bacon,” with
the fullest effect if not in the absolute reality of a
common intuition.
But whether the poet had in Prince Henry his own
prototype or not, he drew Bacon’s political ideal in the


polity of that. Prince’s councillors. For in describing
Bacon as a politician Dr. Abbott observes:—“No passage
that I know of, expresses that multiplicity in unity,
that identity of object amid diversity of agents and
means, which was to characterize Bacon’s ideal English
nation, so aptly as the well-known extract from the
council scene in Henry V.:—
‘ Exeter :
For government, though high and low and lower
Put into parts, doth keep in one consent,
Congreeing in a full and natural close
Like music.
Canterbury:
Therefore doth heaven divide
The state of man in divers functions,
Setting endeavour in continual motion,
To which is fixed, as an aim or butt,
Obedience.’
And with Bacon, as with Henry’s councillors, the
natural sequence to such a description of a well-ordered
kingdom appeared to be a summons to war.”
Dr. Abbott may not allow it to be inferred that
Bacon wrote the dialogue, yet his remark making it
probable shows us how scholars are continually finding
in both writings words reiterating thought, and wonder
over their discovery. Here is whole-read men’s diffi-
culty. But half-read men learn all Shakespeare by
heart with never a line from Bacon, and yet oracularly
declare there can be only one possible dramatist.
This half-reading makes the mediocre author say of
Shakespeare:—
‘‘ bram cbild l re ” came forth perfectly mature, faultless,
and fully apparelled, like Minerva from the head of Jove.”
But a better-read man says of BaconHe, as much


as Shakespeare, was of Pallas’s brood. He leapt, ready
armed, into the arena of life, a god in apprehension and
wisdom, to give laws to mortals, and forestall the know-
ledge of many centuries”—placing in man’s “hand the
wand of Prospero, giving him power over the spirits of
air, and over the pent-up forces of nature.” Had this
eloquent writer been arguing up through apt illustration
to my conclusion he could not have been more con-
firming. Yet his examples are stronger in my cause
than if they had been purposed. They are the un-
conscious testimony of truth, and better than if an
affirmative had been formulated out of what is as yet
only innate conviction.
By the same writer my belief that Wolsey is auto-
biographic of Bacon is thus supported:—“ In the fall of
Wolsey the great poet has indicated the pathos and
personal suffering supplied in the fate which has now
fallen on Bacon, of surviving the death of his proudest
hopes.” If Shakespeare did so indicate, the vaticination
must have been by half a dozen years prophetic, for in
1616, the rising lawyer had hardly risen to greatness,
nor was he even then looming like an arrogant of whom
prophetic wisdom could foretell a fall. If then the
indication of Wolsey’s fate point a dramatic allegory
to what awaited or had befallen Bacon, it must have
been long after Shakespeare’s death, and therefore in
the category of Cranmer’s foretelling all about Ann
Bullen’s infant daughter and her successors already on
or near the throne, in vaticination after the facts
became known, to some such one as Francis Bacon, or
the poet, whoever he was, who depicted in Wolsey’s
fate what would be, or had been, Bacon’s fall.
All the fine writing about the poet’s hand and mind
going together with ease must be taken cum grano, for


an evolving art went slowly on in every one of the
plays where first draft and final form can be compared,
and therefore it was probably true of all the rest where
no earlier forms exist. The same altering and adding
went on in Bacon’s avowed writings. There is just the
same difference between the first and final Hamlet,
King John, Merry Wives, Romeo and Juliet, as there
is between the Essaies of 1597 and those of 1625, or
between Interpretation of Nature and Advancement of
Learning, or The Greatest Birth of Time and the final
Installation, works every one written in the transitory
English peculiar to Bacon and Shakespeare, and after-
wards turned into Latin as the lasting tongue. By no
other author of the time, philosophic or dramatic, are
writings wrought out from meagre to elaborate forms.
In this trait Bacon and Shakespeare are alone alike, and,
taken together, unique. A marvellous celerity in other
playwrights multiplied ephemeral plays, never altered;
but in Bacon and Shakespeare alone the ever-enduring
was an evolution.
That Dr. Abbott had the double reading for a com-
parative critic is known by his Memoir of Bacon
and “A Shakesperian Grammar furnishing students of
Shakespeare and Bacon with a short systematic account
of some points of difference between Elizabethan syntax
and our own”; two works evincing a mastery in both
subjects. The latter explains where the grammar of the
English language has undergone change. “The Victorian
idiom is clearer but less terse than the corresponding
Elizabethan idiom which it has supplanted.” In showing
how the freedom in forming verbs arose from the
unfixed nature of the language, and a desire for brevity
and force, the author adds:—“Had it continued, it would
have added many useful and expressive words to the


language.” Utility better than philology can reckon up
the gain and the loss. The archaic idiom was reflective
and inflected; the modern is descriptive in dreary
auxiliary wording. Each idiom stands relative to in-
tellectual life in the Golden Age and Age of Bronze.
Mind forms her vehicle of thought for
“The fair tongue, conceit’s expositor.”
The terser idiom with “Adjectives freely used as
Adverbs, and nouns plural standing nominative to verbs
singular”; intransitive verbs used transitively ready for
epigram, and double negatives in word-play to please
a quibbling age, is by the Victorian idiom altered from
“a sleepy language” to periphrase unfit for poetry,
which with the lost idiom vanished. We have word-flow
now, but no word-play, in what goes for modern poetry.
The Drama needs no fancy now; nor an inflected
tongue. The milliner, scene painter, and stage carpenter
are become your only dramatic poets. Handicraft brings
whole armies flaunting in brass and ribbons “Within the
circle of an O,” to spare fatigue to ideality. When
Imogen was drawn and Hermione sculptured a female
form was never dreamt of to personify womanly
fortitude. Playgoers had to think they saw the very
persons of the noble story as they were living. No magic
scenery or flowing drapery revealed the human form
divine. Therein lay poverty in the old theatre. In the
new the nude is not bare by any res angusta of the
playhouse. Serious Melpomene wears a splendid gar-
ment, laughing Thalia a scantlier petticoat; and why
may not Hermione and Perdita wear the like without
offending classic taste ? High art might put Rosalind
“in trowsers,” to bear her body more seeming, like
Audrey; but, might not this seemly garb to city eyes


seem a thought unseemly to Touchstone in the forest of
Arden ? The play we know is meant to be natural.
The poet is blamed for often erring; but this anach-
ronism would be the ugliest blur a finical critic would
thrust him into. Rosalind would wear a mannish air
and wears a manly garb to carry it off; and if a
Terry or a Pomeroy animate the form for the poet, so
do they read the poetry with intellectual vivacity. They
enact no mystery or morality for angel or devil, saint
or sinner, cant or hypocrite; but only perform in a
worldly play for men and women about their daily life.
“Only they who come to hear a merry bawdy play”
feel their own Caliban ears tingle. By no failing of the
modern actress, but only because modern writers are
critical and not creative, reviewy not original, is there
no more poetry left in the English tongue.
To say that Shakespeare purified English prose from
archaisms differs from Dr. Abbott, who shows where
they abound. In archaisms the idiom of Shakespeare
and Bacon agree. Both are obsolete. One dare no
more imitate their idiom than hope to rival their
grandeur. This secures them against pilferers and
plagiarists. To write as they wrote would be to
slaughter language and dislocate syntax. Popular scribes
may emulate Macaulay and hardly be found out ; but
Shakespeare and Bacon are as far beyond servility as
the Bible. From those inimitable types of English when
English was at its best, eloquence, as Ben Jonson says,
grows downward, and academic Melbourne, full of
schools and colleges, is proud of the depravity.
When the Schoolmaster went abroad he settled in
Victoria and taught pedagogue critics to regard rule of
grammar before range of thought, revering what Bacon
galled a study nothing very noble.


In the greatly debated impersonality of the drama
many begin to think the objectivity often directly indi-
vidual and political, and abstract only in the precision
piercing human motive, in eliminating, and deducing
general law from every particular action, according to
Baconian axiom.
Without arguing this view it will suffice to show how
narrow and shallow is a critic s idea of every element
in the poet’s mental or moral nature. Thus when
averring of Shakespeare“ Some secret voice whispered
to him that the privilege of immortality was annexed
to every line he wrote,” illustrating the inference with
the line:—
‘ My love shall in my verse live ever young,’
the reader is led to infer that the poet felt concious of
being peculiarly favoured with undying fame. But
surely every fairly well-read person is perfectly aware of
other lines in other poets to the same effect. So far
from being a rarity the gift of immortality to bards is
rather trite and dreary. “To help to correct a vulgar
notion that Shakespeare stood alone in the lofty confi-
dence of eternal memory” Mr. Minto cites the lines
from Drayton’s Sonnet vowing to his adored:
“So shalt thou fly above the vulgar throng
Still to survive in my immortal song.”
Nay, for that matter our reviewer may find within his
own circle immortal longing in the poetic soul. Even
while he wrote the eloquent orator on literature to the
Melbourne Social Science Congress tingled all ears in
haranguing how:—“As records of the national thought
and feeling, books take precedence of statues, paintings,
buildings—even of temples and pyramids. A few sheets
of inscribed parchment survive kingdoms and outlive


empires.” So Bacon in like phrase holds that:—“The
monuments of wit survive the monuments of power, the
verses of the poet endure, while states and empires pass
many periods.” And even Shakespeare sings:—“ Not
marble, nor the gilded monuments of princes, shall
outlive this powerful rhyme.” This longing after im-
mortality afflicted Drayton equally with Bacon, Blair,
and Shakespeare, who speak a common sentiment in
one another’s words. For the gardens of the Muses
keep the privilege of the Golden Age and flourish ever:
their flowers of rhetoric, like the verses of Homer, are
capable of perpetual renewal, as Bacon says.
Throwing a girdle of oratory round about the literary
earth in forty minutes, and naming all the great
writers of all time, the Orator named Bacon aKfxrj of
our language and, like Ben Jonson, never mentioned
Shakespeare’s name!! To him Bacon is “The practical
genius of the Anglo-Saxon race, dealing with the
mightiest problems of the human mind in reference to
material things.” Hence even Victorian literati rise to
“ Look across the waste of writers since his time; but
he alone seems, no barren but an evergreen Hymettus,
soaring above his fellows” And so was Bacon raised
above Shakespeare by Mr. David Blair, in 1881, before
the Victorian Literary Congress, honouring the architect
of the house of Salomon in the realized city of
Renfusa, capital of a “ happy land ” prefigured!
After that florid oration it can no more be said
Victorian folk are not literary. True, it was the only
oration of a long syllabus ; but paucity does not always
plead poverty. That people cannot be accounted illiterate
who built a palace for a public library and filled the
shelves with rarest books in every tongue, that may
some day be read. The wilderness they dot with pretty


schools in freckled brick and bid all come to be taught
free. A noble fount they have for Mimir’s spring, and
for Odin’s eye a museum. With lofty towers they deck
their colleges, and fret their halls like solemn temples
wherein most learned clerks may housel erudition; for
if Maecenas grace no living literature his wealth has
well endowed dead learning. The open hand would
spin Victorian wits both round and full out of the
softest and the whitest wool, nor let the hogget thoughts
go wool-gathering. And though from the intellectual
factory all may not turn out literary, every one must
learn at least to be a grammarian.
Offering little by way of criticism literary or aesthetic,
but confining admiration to the hero’s deft art in
money-making and sharp life in living to “clutch the
golden keys” as the ideal good, the author tells how at
the zenith of contemporary fame “ His King Lear was
printed three times for the same bookseller in 1608 ;
and in order, perhaps, to increase its sale the name of
‘William Shake-spere’ was placed very conspicuously,
and most unusually, at the top of the title-page.”
But not a word is said about the many so-called
Shakespeare plays that were printed before 1608
without the name of William Shakespeare being on
the title-page, far less with that name made there
prominent. For many original quartos, and even
repeated editions, bear no author’s name. Amongst the
nameless are King John, 1593; Richard 11., 1597;
Richard 111, 1597; Romeo and Juliet, 1597, 1599, 1609;
Henry IV., first part, 1598;. Henry V., 1600, 1602,
1608. In none of those quartos is there any outward
sign to inform the reader by whom they were written.
Hence Stapfer may well say that Shakespeare’s name
to a piece was no proof that it was his. True enough,


some of those anonymous quartos may have been
pirated prints, filched from the author or owner by
“ A company of base knaves ”; yet it bespeaks their
genuineness that they were all collated for the 1623
folio, some of the single plays on quarto being found,
when compared with the same plays in that final
volume, complete in all their parts. A fourth edition of
Romeo and Juliet without date or author’s name contains
some important various readings of note on this point.
Then why the anonymity of those quartos if a play-
wright dividing his longings between money-making and
immortality were really their author ? He could have
had no motive immediate or remote for withholding his
name, especially if, being popular, that name would help
to make the book sell—to vent the book, the sole end
for which according to romantic opinion the plays were
written.
Nor need there be any doubt about veracity or use
of angry expletive ill-mannered to express it, since the
original quartos in Ashbee’s facsimile lie on the book-
shelf in our public library where to read is easier than
lying or accusing. Of Romeo and Juliet edition after
edition sold without a name. The play had often been
acted by the players of Lord Hunsdon, one of the
barons who tried Essex; and the allegory was at once
political of the evils springing to the state out of faction
feuds, as between the houses of Cecil and Essex, hot
when the play appeared to quell them.
Than Francis Bacon no man felt more keenly those
feuds, or used greater effort to repress them. Seeing
the part he took, it is easy to understand why he, in
the abundant leisure that was forced upon him by the
feuds of Essex and Cecil, should compose an allegory
to exemplify their evil influence upon the state, as it is


equally easy to feel for him in refraining from giving
his name to a political play taking living personages to
the life. But by no imaginable reason could William
Shakespeare think to observe reticence about a non-
political play, telling an idle love tale to entertain
wantons.
It cannot longer be said that I am alone in calling
the plays political allegories, and no mere theatrical art
work. In A New Study of Love’s Labour’s Lost, which
appeared in The Gentleman's Magazine since I wrote,
the comedy is viewed in the light of contemporary
history, exactly as I view Twelfth Night The writer
shows, as I do, how real persons are brought upon the
stage under false names in allegory, but all “so framed
to the life” as to be readily recognized by any one
curious enough to lift the thin veil and look behind
upon reality. The writer adds in the very manner in
which I have often offered my opinion, that “The
drama has been too little studied in its political aspect,
students having hitherto devoted their attention to its
literary excellencies or philological peculiarities, its study
from any other point of view having been unfairly
underrated.” Like other wistful readers he grows weary
of worn-out glossing in an inquiry more laboured than
advanced, and gladly turns for relief to the political
theory, which therefore already gives a new direction to
research and alters commentary.
Neither is it alone the literary or the philosophic
critic who inclines to follow in the new direction.
Fulfilling the Cui Bono of my book the daily newspaper
already adopts the theory as its guide in practical work.
Advocating a chair for English literature at the Univer-
sity of Melbourne the leading Liberal journal in Victoria
holds that studies in the mother tongue in the works of


Bacon and Shakespeare directly affect the actions of
Englishmen in the nineteenth century, saying :—“ What
we want for work of this sort is an honest attempt to
understand the Poet by his contemporaries ”; and of
Bacon, “To distinguish the element of political wisdom
in lines in which he resembles Shakespeare.” I have no
right to know who wrote that brilliant article. He may
be a learned professor piercing my argument he dare
not openly broach, to draw off wisdom to quench the
thirsty University Council. This he will doubtless count
an honest way to pick up a new idea without telling
where he got it. In snapping up my theory as an
unconsidered trifle this newspaper Autolycus speaks
of honest work. If he find word in mine not honest his
duty as an honest publicist would be to point it out. If
“honest lago,” who hints what he dare not speak, forget
the maxim of the part he acts I can prompt him from
Bacon’s own:—“For men’s souls are more precious than
their bodies or goods, and so are their good names”—
even in print. Suffice it to know that my theory has
pierced the thickest head to be rivetted in the biggest
newspaper in Australia. Of that theory the popular
leader can say what Pope sang of Vice:—“l looked and
shunned, then looked again, and then embraced, without
avowal; for literary larceny is the besetting vice of my
age.
The University guide to the higher criticism may set
before alumni a nobler due from scholarship to origin-
ality. When a competitor for the Shakespeare honour
would adopt the new view in his thesis he may not
tacitly be required to do what the Latin translator of
The Advancement did—omit part to ensure entrance
into Italy, and prove a despotism of professors another
Vatican tyranny to be written down to. More worthily


will the young lecturer inculcate that of all narrow-
minded and illiberal people the most intolerant is a
literary bigot.
The orthodox pyre stands still up there built of
popular journals ready to be lit to roast a heretic as
fiends lit fagots that burnt Bruno for an opinion; and
men stand there also ready in the end to exalt and
adopt that opinion as it rises a true Phoenix from the
ashes of the incinerated sinner.
Equally hopeful of a more liberal future another
leading journal writes:—“We live in a time of much
mental activity. Questions once thought to be settled
are opened up afresh, and looked at from fresh points
of view, while new problems force themselves forward
for solution. No one who is not wilfully blind or hope-
lessly ignorant can fail to acknowledge this. Difference
of opinion, therefore, corresponding to the different
stages of men’s thought and knowledge, is only what
has to be expected in this transition period. Indeed,
it is only what ought to be. Perfect unanimity would
indicate stagnation and death.” Or as Macaulay says:
“Perfect unanimity brings silence; but it is the silence
of the grave.” Let no thinker then be burked or
gagged however much his theory appear eccentric.
And be it here once for all remarked that this new
political theory of the drama is altogether distinct and
apart from the minor question of authorship. Often
confounded the two questions only help to illustrate
each other and elucidate the whole subject Frivolous
indeed would it be to expend time and trouble to prove
any point so trivial. Neither Bacon nor Shakespeare
cared to be known as the author of the plays, and why
should anyone now-a-days be more solicitous. As un-
fruitful would it be as to count the capital letters or


the feminine endings, work fit only for effeminate wits
of degenerate criticism ; but to reveal the true political
purport of the Drama, as I have done and as others
are following me to do, is a work nobly worthy of
the highest criticism. The Baconian authorship, or the
“ monistic ” theory as it is now termed, makes the
political theory more manifest, to the great gain of
literature. This will be found so, for example, when
Biron, in the comedy, is shown to be none other than
the young Frenchman of great wit, who afterwards
became a very eminent man, whom Bacon lived with at
Poictiers, and from whom he heard all about the
reasons why crabbed age and youth cannot live together,
as set forth alike in Bacon’s writings and in the drama.
The truth is that in Bacon’s times as in our own day
the bovine English intellect had to be roused up to
conservative fervour by red-rag allegory, and by example
be led on to do hot deeds it never could be moved to
do by any goading doctrine. And just as Mr. Heraud,
in his Inner Life of Shakespeare, clearly shows how from
first to last, from comedy to tragedy, in The Two
Gentlemen of Verona, Hamlet, Macbeth, Lear, Anthony
and Cleopatra, Coriolanus, Othello, and The Tempest, in
fact always, unless a special reason made the poet vary
the method, the play is either partly or one complete
Trilogy, so does the author of Lothair tell how he
contrived Coningsby, Sybil, and Tancred to form a real
Trilogy, meant to educate by allegory the same political
mind up to a full knowledge of the means to be
employed in elevating and improving the moral and
physical condition of the English people. In other
words, Beaconsfield exerted his commanding literaiy
power to inculcate indirectly through enticing fiction
political views which were the matter of his frequent
C


conversation and hourly thought, /precisely as Bacon'
directed his undoubtedly great dramatic prowess for the
very same purpose, both adopting, the form invented by
to a like end in a similarly transitional period
of Gregian history. Once only Bac.on taught the lesson
in a direct manner in The History of the Reign of
King Henry the Seventh# and so f ‘took him to life” to
“shew one of these ancient pieces” to a Prince inclined
to follow a political example. The character of the
monarch and of every person brought upon the scene is
so livingly pourtrayed, “so framed to the- life,” that the
reader sees every action as in a drama at the theatre,
the writer never requiring, like other historians, to pause
and moralize or lecture, but leaves the effect to fall
through perfect delineation, exactly as happens with
plays in the drama, where true poetry likewise makes
History visible.
r But I may be told that it' is absurd to argue against
the accepted authorship of the drama when the dedica-
tions alone are enough to confirm authenticity. r But"
that reply will hardly hold. For although in 1594 when
Venus and Adonis and r Lucrece were printed their
dedicatee Lord Southampton was mutual friend to
Bacon and Essex, whose cause the drama favoured,
later on, in 1597, the date of the first printed quarto,
Bacon began to find out Southampton’s duplicity, dis- ’
loyalty, and peril to Essex, and forthwith all dedication
ceased. Had Shakespeare found any reason for declining'
the honour of Southampton’s further patronage ?If he
had the literary world in all its gossip has never heard
a whisper of it. The alleged, letter to him if genuine
would tell the contrary, but that fulsome document is
now- found to be of doubtful authenticity; if not, actually
spurious; g Like most other -contemporary evidence it-


means nothing beyond critical roguery. Such a letter
accompanying a munificent gift of £I,OOO, would surely
evoke another grateful dedication. But no; after 1594
Southampton gets no more compliments. The early
quarto and the final folio alike ignore him, although
from 1594 fill 1623 the once favoured noble was either
very popular or a prime Court favourite. He in old
grudge moved the Lords to hinder that felon Bacon
from offering them insult by publishing a book.
The subject of the second quarto, printed in 1597,
anonymously and not dedicated to Southampton was
in Richard 11. one that profoundly affected Bacon at
the time. He then “played the ignorant statesman”
to the Queen in Cecil’s absence in France, advising how
to “pacify Ireland and recover and win the people by
justice, which of all other courses is the best.” He
adjured Essex not to go over to that country in com-
mand of the army. When importuned by Essex to say
why, he “shot his fool’s bolt” and told how he “would
meliorate the condition of the whole Irish people in
an united country free from meddling Spain.” That
policy looms through the dramatic allegory. Had Cecil
been about, Essex would not have gone to Ireland, and
there would have been no State tragedy and no scandal.
Bacon could only advise a vacillating woman wavering
between love and duty, and a wilful man whom Cecil
alone dare control. Nothing so annoyed Essex as the
appointment to equal command of Cobham, and nothing
so perplexes editors as how to fill in the hiatus left
after the name of Cobham in act ii. sc. i. The play
and Bacon’s writings in 1597 relate alike to Irish
turmoil, and both were mysteriously adverted to at
Essex’s trial! Throughout the play the language is as
Baconian as the metaphor. The inimical fleer at the
C 2


“rough, rug-headed kerns” agrees with Bacon’s sarcasm
about “the wild Irish” and “their Irish wars.” “The
King did not neglect Ireland, being the soil where these
mushroom and upstart weeds that spring up in a night
did chiefly prosper.” In the play a gardener compares
the same unruly nobles to “the noisome weeds, that
without profit suck the soil’s fertility from wholesome
flowers.” While some did doubt if the island would not
be better in a pool, Bacon would transform it into a
fertile garden.
While dealing with dedication the resemblance between
the prose in that to Venus and Adonis and the prose
in Baconian dedications may be noted. For surely “So
strong a prop to so weak a burden ” reads very like
“So good an argument to so poor an author.” The
Latin motto for the poem reminds one of Bacon’s
sayings:—“ That as Hercules, when he saw the image
of Adonis, Venus’ minion, in a temple said in disdain,
Nil sacra es.” So extremely classical are these poems,
and the first dramas attributed to him, that Stapfer
calls Shakespeare pedantic “if they are to be accepted
as his work and his only!” Why doubt? The Latin-
isms in Bacon’s known style are held to make it differ
from the purer English of Saxon origin used by
Shakespeare. And yet Hallam’s notice of the Latinisms
in the drama, as verified by Gervinus, and Neil’s state-
ment that the “poet’s language is strongly tinged with
Latinisms ” have quite lately been brought forward by
Stapfer, in his work on Shakespeare and Classical
Antiquity to prove that the poet must have been
educated at a grammar school! Like Bacon’s early
writings the first dramas attributed to Shakespeare are
“laden with classical reminiscences and traditions of the
schools,” almost to ludicrous pedantry.


The latest critic infers high classical attainment in the
poet by signs in allusions to Pythagoras and pantheism,
Heroditus and weeping philosophy, Democritus and
laughter, Aristotle in et,hic and politic, Homer, Cicero,
Virgil, and many more among ancient authors, and
specially to Rabelais, Montaigne, and Italian novelists
among moderns. Yet surely every reader of Bacon
knows to the utmost bounds of familiarity how often
all those names continually recur throughout his writ-
ings ! His running commentary on work and doctrine
is in the easy tone of the drama acquired only by
great reading.
Baffled and beaten at every point and driven to their
wits-end for a fresh argument, outwitted critics turn the
cat in the pan and feign to contend that since poet and
philosopher are One the poet must be him to whom the
great philosopher stood sib! They confess and explain,
in legal jargon, that what would be a miracle in one
is natural in the other! But this plea of popular
literature can be refuted in a word. Wit, satire, irony,
have pith in truth, but lose their sting when found
unfair in fact. With labouring gloss a smartish writer
in The North American Review aims to show that the
writings of Bacon and Shakespeare were synchronous,
and to draw therefrom an inference. But what are
the facts ? Unless Bacon gratuitously lied to Father
Fulgentio, the earliest form of the histauration was
written under the magnificent title of The Greatest
Birth of Time, as a juvenile hymn hailing the twin
re-birth of Natural Science and Natural Drama, in
1585, or a year before Shakespeare left Stratford;
while Henry VII., the most dramatic history ever
written, was undreamt of till 1621, five years after
"these bones”; were laid under the flags. The most


living narrative in the English tongue came not long
after the prayer Addison likened to the devotion of an
angel rather than a man, when thte not dying but dead
Swan of Avon was quiring to the music of the spheres.
Later still, from Bacon’s rich imagination came the
“ glorious prophesy ” in “ boldness and originality of
fiction” showing all a toiling world would recreate, as
Melbourne people realize on the spot where Bacon built
the magic house “More wonderful than Aladdin’s
palace.” The New Atlantis was no Utopia. In “mighty
magic of induction ” the museum in the city of Renfusa
“ enlarged the bounds of human empire,” as Bacon
meant, and as Gonzalo in The Tempest divertingly
makes the Commonwealth he would control, as Bacon
would jest when he let loose his wit.
On the other hand the comedy of Love's Labour 's
Lost was composed about 1583, and in 1585 the earliest
draft of Hamlet read at Oxford and identified with the
first quarto* 1603, as that is with the second, 1604, was
written a year before Shakespeare saw London; facts
for inexorable logic. When young Francis Bacon tra-
velled in Italy, looking on spots afterwards brought into
the drama, in Venice, Padua, Pisa, Mantua, or gazing
with a poet’s eye on nature’s works “in courts, fields,
and gardens,” always “with all creatures for my books”;
hearing sermons in stones and seeing something good
for man in everything; or looking on the finest works
of nature’s truest imitators, in harmony with his own ;
as those of Julio Romano, of the three arts, one revivi-
fied in the living statue of Hermione, spoken of as
painted sculpture, in Romano’s art —“corpora sculpta
pictaque ”; or again in Germany, to see the “ virgin
crants” or “swaggering upspring reels” that some infer
the poet saw among German people in London; or in


making notes on the state of Europe, welling-out in
every line of the earlier plays, William Shakespeare was
loitering round lanes and hedges leading a sordid life.
Of the-beginning of that career nothings is known; of
the end -all that can be- told is how in full flow of
animal life at prime a' brain was voluntarily det wither
like Hard leayes in an early fall before naturb retired in
her grand climacteric ; and long ere some of. the
noblest works-with that brain associated were heard of
in literature. Washington Irving Wonders at the fruitless
autumn; and an able, critic-was; struck with the argument
drawn by me from the “ accredited author’s mental
inactivity after his retirement from the stage when, in
full vigour of his faculties, opposed as such inaction is
to the imperious instincts of genius-—that brain-hunger
which perforce assimilates and gives forth expression, in
some wise, to the end. Only absolute paralysis of the
intellect could rationally account for such lapse in one;
so supremely gifted, supposing him the author of the
plays. Inglorious indeed the rust that defaced that
relinquished sword.” He let the brain fust in- him
unused, as his own psychologist Hamlet puts it.
The idea of a synchronism may be only a blundering
canard in, a foolish romancer, but behind it comes, a
literary crime such as no silly or severe jeu de mots-
wotild perpetrate. Perhaps I had better give the fact
and let.,the reader apply the , epithet. In upholding
his mock argument the author avers that Bacon,
being ambitious of tho fame of a philosopher, induced
Shakespeare to help him to ;write the prose essays and,
treatises which are his ; chief works, and adds This,
remarkable fact is stated by Bacon jn a letter to Tobie
Matthew, written; in June, 1623, in which he says that
ho is devoting himself to making his writings morq


perfect—instancing the Essays and The Advancement of
Learning—'by the help of some good pens, which
forsake me not.’ One of those pens was that of Ben
Jonson, the other might easily have been that of
Shakespeare. Certainly there was no better pen in
England at that time than his.” Why, at that time
of 1623 Shakespeare had been seven years in his
grave! The mendacious nonsense shows how wits as
well as romancers need good memories. How untrue it
is to say that Bacon “has himself admitted that he did
actually ask the aid of the dramatists of his time in
writing his books ” his own words in the letter cited
tell. There he writes:—“lt is true my labours are now
most set to have those works which I had formerly
published, as that of Advancement of Learning, that of
Henry VII., that of the Essays being retractate and
made more perfect, well translated into Latin by the
help of some good pens which forsake me not,” &c.
Here the helping pens were to translate not to write
works already printed in the vernacular. Bacon feared
that “modern languages will one day play bank-rowtes
with books.” If we foretell the future from growing
infidelity to truth in popular literature the fear was not
ill-founded. The Cretans became noted liars after they
were democrats, and so does literature palter as it
grows to be what Bacon called it a Democratie. To
laugh this matter out of court these advocates lie it
out of countenance.
In shooting his fool’s bolt this North American
reviewer surely strives to illustrate Touchstone’s seven
degrees of veracity, for to the direct assertion he adds
the worser form of suppression:—he never mentions
Henry VI/., a dramatic history written in purest English
in 1622 serving not his purpose.


The translators of Bacon’s fleeting English into lasting
Latin were Thomas Hobbes, George Herbert, and
Dr. Rawley ; Ben Jonson editing the minor pieces, in-
eluding the dramatic folio of 1623. The “dastard nobles
who had all forsook” him included not these nobler
pens. Long before that Dr. Playfair had been found too
fine a translator in Latinity for an author who preferred
to give excellent matter in harsh words to glossing in a
flowing style, which popular writers only care for in
their trade of supplying their mart with a commodity
required by the popular reader; a trade in which the
supply seems always equal to the demand, —a morbid
intellectual appetite that grows by what it feeds on, in
mental marcour.
Even in the bibliography of the question the American
writer is barely half read-up. In telling how the idea
of a Baconian origin of the drama came from Delia
Bacon, and Mr. W. H. Smith, whose books I have not
read, he fails to state that the germ of the thought is
found in Horace Walpole’s Historic Doubts , where that
author plainly shows the identity between Richard 111.
and Henry VII, and feels moreover in full force the
mysterious political allusion lurking in The Winter's
Tale to Anne Bullen as the chaste mother of Queen
Elizabeth, in Hermione pictured.
But now-a-days popular authorship does not imply
literary research, neither it nor brain-work being wanted
for commodity in the word-selling trade. In this
unwholesome facility the American quizzer avers that
Mr. Holmes in 1866, in a work I have not read, pointed
out the quotation from Aristotle, hinting that that
writer first called attention to it. Yet a critic in a fine
problem ought not to be unaware that as far back as
1858 the point was noted in Spedding, vol, i., p. 739;


as was also in the same place and time the wonderful
likeness between Perdita’s flowers and the. flowers iii
the Essay Of Gardens. He, moreover, forgets that in
an error alike in both Bacon and Shakespeare, mis-
quoting Aristotle, as was Bacon’s quoting fault, rests
the gist and pith of the whole argument for. this
illustration of the “ monistic ” theory. Long before
Holmes wrote, the error was familiar enough to readers
of the great biography, of whom the mocker was not
one. Like his Victorian contemporary he deals only in
second-hand brains. „• ; ?
Peering into that glittering icicle his own mind, no.
Christopher North, fixed as the North Star, but flicker-
ing in the lettered firmament a flame of
“ The borealis race
That flit ere you can point their place,”
this Northern Light shines out Ben Jonson as “The
best reply to those who think that Shakespeare could
not have gained much knowledge of science or litera-
ture because he did not go to Oxford or Cambridge,”,
and asks triumphantly—“ What opportunities had Ben
Jonson?” This ;brilliant query reflects the scintillation
of a sparkling wit. . For nearly a decade Ben went to
Westminster school where he became a favourite pupil
of John Camden, got to the top form, and left that
great man to go to Cambridge, where he staid long
enough to make, us aware that he had greater oppor-.
tunity to learn classics than had fallen to the lot of
his unwisely compared compeer. ..
In the entire travesty only one point is worth further
handling to trim it down to nothing. The writer holds'
that since The Advancement of Learning appeared in
print in 1605, and Trollies and Cressjda not until. 1609*


Shakespeare could have read in the treatise about
Aristotle’s opinion on young men and political philo-
sophy. But, it may be asked,, if Shakespeare wrote
that treatise in Bacon’s name, what need had he to
wait? He would be familiar with his own blunder.
This difficulty has been removed by Stapfer, who lately
reopened the whole argument about Shakespeare and
classical antiquity, to prove beyond cavil that whoever
wrote the play must have read Chapman’s The Iliads of
Homer; and as that work was not completed in print
until 1611, the poet could only have read part of it in
manuscript. This, argues Professor Stapfer, he might
have done through friendly relations with Chapman, as
a frequenter of the Mermaid Tavern. But in the new
edition of the Encyclopcedia Britannica, it is shown
that Shakespeare and Chapman were not acquainted,
bringing us to conclude that someone else perused the
MSS. leaving the inference all in Bacon’s favour. Well
may* Stapfer exclaim —“Against superstition reason is
futile.” In homely wit it cleaveth to mother ignorance
whose withered dugs leave it a brain starveling.
Such are a few among a host of self-confuting pleas
put forth by apologists who are perforce of reason
compelled to allow that in Bacon and Shakespeare,
“ Their philosophy of man and of life was the same.”
To those cavilings I shall only reply that, if a philo-
sopher never yet was a poet, whilst a poet has often
been also a philosopher, surely this particular philosopher
must likewise have been a poet. The logic of common
sense is here overlooked by the quizzer, in anti-
thetical absurdity. That Bacon was the one exception
to an otherwise universal rule in the human mind is
undoubted. May we not ask—Was not Bacon’s just
such an intellectual empire ? I - may not dare -say aye,


for opinion might beget opinion, and of two non-
consorting breed a cross one. But others who knew
him well, and whose judgment stands out beyond all
cavil or denial declare“ Things that were singular in
all other men were all conjoined in him.” He alone—
“ Hatll filled up all numbers, and performed that in our
tongue, which may be compared or preferred either to
insolent Greece or haughty Rome.” Either then he is
“An Angel! or, if not,
An earthly paragon.”
The dramas bring the inductive method to bear on
the study of motive, and ethics under exact science.
Brushing away the moulds of theology and lifting the
fogs of metaphysics and mists of a priori clear from
bewildering schoolmen, they illustrate humanity in every
grade of life from palace to shieling. Like the Baconian
philosophy they abound in aphorism and work through-
out by antithesis, often strained, indeed, and even
fantastical, so that not alone in their unbounded
excellencies but also in their many defects, are they
in perfect harmony.
Like his North American cousin The Westminster
Review tacitly admits the wonderful identity. To the
great organ of liberal opinion my book is not what
Organon was to King James, like “the peace of God
that passeth understanding.” The stolid pedant felt
only what moved under his own big regal bonnet; but
in the Eclectic Reviewer no want of brains to appre-
hend, but only want of heart to admit the truth of my
demonstration is the great failing. It is no longer an
intellectual feat, but a moral scorn of consequence.
Another popular journalist lately in The Gentleman's
Magazine claims for the poet po fewer than five.


different styles in his prose compositions, a variety
agreeing with Bacon’s habit of altering his style to
adapt it for every occasion. Affirming that Shakespeare’s
prose stands alone as his own creation, for Daniel,
Donne, Hall, Ralegh, the best prose writers in respect
of style had not began to publish when Shakespeare
was engaged in composition, this writer adds:—“ The
translation of the Bible did not appear till 1611,”
implying that the creator of his own style got no aid
therefrom either. The new version of the Bible printed
in 1611 must here be meant, for many English trans-
lations were in print long ere Bacon or Shakespeare
drew breath. An original copy of the Geneva Bible
dated 1562, printed on better paper with blacker ink
and clearer type than the eye-torturers of our own day,
stands on the shelf at the Public Library. The well
cared for volume now fitly bound in crimson pig-skin
Bacon may have read at his mother’s knee. With her
the great Whig Bible would be a favourite. Beside
that venerable volume stand an original Cranmer and a
Matthew that too may have been held in Bacon’s hand,
as well as a Venetia, 1588, all looking the firmer for
the ephemery around. True, Matthew is but a reprint
from Coverdale, 1535, as the Geneva is of Cranmer,
1540 ; but they all would be dear to Anthony Cooke,
Coverdale as being the proscribed, Matthew the fictitious
name for roasted John Rogers, for there were literary
bigots even in those days with no free press to let
truth alone be heard. Milton had not married truth to
conscience for newspaper cant to divorce in free-love
freedom. Every one of those English Bibles contained
the truth, told in good broad bold plain English, it was
the love labour of his life to unfold. Most likely Bacon
learned to read out of Coverdale or Matthew that


English of which he became grand master. Neither is
a popular book now. Broad English has grown too
superfine shoddy for that vulgarity.
Drama and Bacon’s books are replete with Scripture
phrase, to an abounding few are aware of. With a
Biblical quotation in English The Advancement begins,
and it ends with another in Latin. The earlier forms
of the sacred text were the fertile source of archaisms
peculiar to Bacon and Shakespeare. In a worthily
popular book, Dr. Wordsworth says Shakespeare used
the Bible more freely than Bacon did. A different
idea comes from reading Bacon’s works. From The
Interpretation of Nature , written long before his rise, to
the hymn on his fall they are a continued homage to
the Word of the great First Cause of All that brought
Cerimon and Prospero to search out the hidden causes
of things, the “Second Causes, which we call Nature.”
Scientists now call them Law, and study them as Bacon
taught how they should be studied.
The reverend author errs on another point. Admitting
that particular words and modes of speech in the Drama
come direct from the Bible, and that, like many in
Bacon and Shakespeare, they have since undergone
change, Bishop Wordsworth adds “It is probable that
our translators of 1611 owed to Shakespeare as much
as, or rather far more than he owed to them.” But
how that could be possible is not plain, since of the
thirty-seven plays from which he selects passages to
compare with passages in the Bible, only one-half were
printed before 1623, and only fourteen before 1603, the
year when the revising divines began their work. They
were enjoined by Bacon, who directed their labour, to
alter as little as' possible arid avoid the taunt of
Seminarists that the new faith was unstable, a fiction,


a fickle caprice without any standard. Throughout their
eight years’ toil, 1603 to 1611, they could have had no
help at all from plays not printed until 1623, twelve
years after their work was over, unless indeed they
went to the theatre; and even then they could not
have heard them all. The poet must have read in
Coverdale or in Matthew, or maybe in the Venice
Bible of 1566, or in the Vulgate Bacon so well knew,
about Jesca or Jescha, in Hebrew meaning a gadding
girl, gazingstock, or looker-out which, as Elze observes
throws light on Shylock’s warning to Jessica the
giddy:—
“ Clamber not you up to the casements then,
Nor thrust your head into the public street
To gaze on Christian fools with varnish’d faces
But stop my house’s ears, I mean my casements.”
In the 1611 version the name reverts to Jscah, so
the poet did not read that, nor could he, as his play
was written before; but no more did the revisors copy
the poet, who, by the way, must have read about
Schelach— Shylock—in the Hebrew original.
, Whether or no the English of the new be finer than
in any older form can be tried at our Public Library
rich in rare Bibles and Shakespeares, by comparing say,
as appropriate for watering an intellectually arid colony,
a' few verses of that pouring shower of pulpit oratory
the fifty-fifth of Isaiah, where in Coverdale and Matthew
the vernacular is in rhythm far liker the language of
Bacbn and Shakespeare than is that in the Geneva or
any later volume. But as every reader cannot go to
the Library parallel passages will here let readers think
fpr themselves., These passages are selected from four
qf the best known of the older versions, afid from the
very latest of the new. / ■


VARIOUS READINGS IN THE ENGLISH BIBLE.
Coverdale & Matthew 1535-1551.
And like as the rain and snow
cometh down from heaven, and re-
turneth not thither again, but watereth
the earth, maketh it fruitful and
green, that it may give corn and
bread unto the sower : So the word
also that cometh out of my mouth,
shall not turn again void unto me,
but shall accomplish my will and
prosper in the thing, whereto I send
it.
Authorised Version 1611.
For as the rain cometh down, and
the snow from heaven and returneth
not thither, but watereth the earth,
and maketh it bring forth and bud,
that it may give seed to the sower,
and bread to the eater :
So shall my word be that goeth
forth out of my mouth : it shall not
return unto me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I please, and
it shall prosper in the thing whereto
I sent it.
Geneva Bible 1562.
Surely as the rain cometh down
and the snow from heaven, and re-
turneth not thither, but watereth the
earth and maketh it to bring forth
and bud, that it may give seed to the
sower, and bread unto him that
eateth,
So shall my word be, that goeth
out of my mouth : it shall not return
unto me void, but it shall accomplish
that which I will, and it shall prosper
in the thing whereto I sent it.
Cheyne, New Trans. 1881.
For as the rain cometh down, and
the snow from heaven, and thither
returneth not, except it hath watered
the earth, and made it bring forth
and sprout, and given seed to the
sower and bread to the eater ; so
shall my word be that goeth forth out
of my mouth; it shall not return unto
me empty, except it hath accom-
plished that which I please, and
made to prosper the thing for which
I sent it.
Of the incomparable beauty of Coverdale’s happy
English, in which Tindal shared, there can be only one
opinion. Flowing smoothly in a gliding rhythm with
every note touched gently it reads like that in the
drama, whose author found in it a pure lesson in his
mother tongue. The form is in the dramatic present
“watereth,” “send,” not narrative past “watered,” “sent”;
and the idea is clearly suggested while a little is left
for the reader’s imagination to naturally fill in, and in
this art lies the true secret of all beautiful poetry. In
later forms the idea is more fully brought out by eleven
diluting words of descriptive prose, always dull reading,
flat as explained wit, required by popular readers of
English in the Victorian idiom.


Can it possibly be that the reason for the 1611
version of the English Bible is now forgotten or
misunderstood by literary clerics from prelate to pro-
letary? That version was not contrived to invent a new
English tongue, but only to get rid of a few defacing
blurs that crept into the printing, and troubled and
vexed enemies of the reformed faith with laughing and
scoffing at a creed without a textual standard. Similar
efforts are now being made to meet like frivolous verbal
objections raised by the captious Crypto-Jesuit of the
hour, who would drown the spirit in watery words, when
it will be found that the English tongue as a vehicle of
thought in prose or poetry has not bettered since Bacon
revelled in “the loose grammar of Shakespeare’s age,”
and delighted in Tindal and Coverdale’s poetic diction.
Rather than multiply verbose translations for easy
reading, Coverdale should be reprinted in a garb of
modern spelling that youth might read the English
read by the dramatic poet.
In Jessica’s name a meaning is conveyed, as in many
other names, such as Perdita, the lost, and always in a
metaphorical way, although often violating precise rules
in ignoble syntax, which in true poetry are little
regarded. They are for finical slaves of popular prose,
with no poetical ideas to express.
That Bacon was poet enough, with wit and fun
abounding, to create the drama we have on every hand
high testimony. One eminent critic, who can logically
distinguish between moral flaw and intellectual grandeur,
styles him the Poet of Science:—
“It is curiously characteristic of Bacon that he lays more
stress upon that most important object, the recognition of
similarities, than upon the observation of subtle shades of
difference. Yet the latter is pre-eminently the philosopher’s
D


faculty, while the former is the poet’s. But Bacon was a
poet, the poet of science. His eye, like the poet’s,
‘ln a fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heav’n to earth, from earth to heaven,’
catching at similarities invisible to uninspired eyes, giving them
names and shapes, investing them with substantial reality, and
mapping out the whole realm of knowledge in ordered beauty.”
Even so Macaulay finds Bacon’s mind wonderfully
quick in perceiving analogies of all sorts, proper and
metaphorical, and gifted with the power of close-packing
them in the very pith of wit, in which “he never had
an equal not even in Cowley, not even in the author of
Hudibras.” Indeed, continues this judge so often cited
in judgment against Bacon, “this faculty he possessed,
or rather this faculty possessed him, to a morbid degree.
When he abandoned himself to it without reserve,”
as he would do in the drama, “the feats which he
performed were not merely admirable, but portentous,
and almost shocking. On those occasions we marvel at
him as clowns on a fair-day marvel at a juggler, and
can hardly help thinking that the devil must be in
him.” Hence he “cannot wish that Bacon’s wit had
been less luxuriant.” It affords pleasure, makes obscure
truth plain, repulsive truth attractive, and fixes “in the
mind for ever truth which might otherwise have left
but a transient impression”; in all which it is identical
with wit abounding in the drama.
Then again continues Macaulay:—“The poetical
faculty was powerful in Bacon’s mind. No imagination
was ever at once so strong and so thoroughly subjugated.
Though disciplined to obedience it gave noble proofs of
its vigour. In truth, much of Bacon’s life was passed
in a visionary world, amidst things as strange as any
that are described in the Arabian Tales. Yet in his


magnificent day-dreams there was nothing wild, nothing
but what sober reason sanctioned”; just as in the
drama. And yet we are told Bacon had neither wit ,
nor poetry , nor genius enough to be author of a drama
which alone is like himself!
This meting out the poetic faculty to Bacon and
likening his genius, wit, fun, and humour to Shakespeare’s,
by masters able to gauge the mental calibre of great
men, stands out in bold relief from the flat dictum of a
local litterateur that: —
“ While Bacon was a man of talent, the dramatist’s supreme
distinction was that his was unrivalled genius.
The author of that opinion has a right to his own
view, and few will dispute the claim or envy the
illation. The idea is original and native to Victorian
mind and will no doubt be cherished. Yet it may
not be amiss for the general argument to cite to the
contrary the opinion of Addison, to whom Bacon was.
“A man who, for greatness of genius did honour to his
age and country, almost to human nature itself.” With
Aristotle’s knowledge he had “All the beautiful lights,
graces, and embellishments of Cicero. One does not
know which to admire most in his writings, the strength
of reason, force of style, or brightness of imagination.” ,
It would hence appear as if the brilliancy of Bacon s
genius outshone ordinary seeing capacity, and can only
be reflected by the brighter kind of intellect. The
duller sort are blinded by its glow, dazzled to darkness,
“or purblind Argus, all eyes and no sight.’ Verily,
“they who do not like him, are in some manifest
danger not to understand him,” as he was understood
by Addison and Macaulay. But the discrepancy can be
more easily explained; it is mere matter of difference
D 2


between rumour and knowledge. They who do not like
Bacon have not read him. Addison and Macaulay read
and re-read him with ever renewed delight, and the latter
says “nine out of ten who speak and write about
Bacon have not read him.” With this accords my own
experience. Many who say they have read him reveal
in their talk that they have not. It is easy to tell
whether or no any quotation from Bacon be at first or
at second hand ; the former is a rarity, the latter of
daily occurrence. Like the Bible and Shakespeare one
may learn everything in Bacon by reading him, but can
know nothing of him at second-hand through compilers’
abridgements or commentary. With Sir John Herschel
“we must go to refresh at the fountain.” The famous
Discourse took me thither.
Not only is Bacon’s name always linked with that of
Shakespeare, but no other name is ever so associated.
No other author unwittingly enters men’s thoughts along
with the author of the drama, except alone Bacon; and
he only is the magician or creator of the pervading
Baconian philosophy. Alluding to Shakespeare’s fore-
stalling Newton when making Cressida compare her
heart to the centre of the earth drawing all things to
it, it is asked how he knew what Newton was going
to discover. But Voltaire long ago showed where
Bacon forestalled Newton. How then did he know
what Newton would discover? Either both Bacon and
Shakespeare forestalled Newton on the great physical
discovery, or one mind did so in two different ways
at the same instant of time. Perhaps the idea floated
in the air and fell into Cressida’s mouth and Bacon’s
ink-horn at one and the same moment. Germs in the
air do float in that fashion, yet have not always
equally fertile brains ready to entrap them.


But there is an explanation more rational and less
a marvel to offer. That the “poet of science” should
discant on the Persian Magic as a fit theme for a King
to hear and therefrom learn how his three kingdoms
ought to be ruled after the order of Nature, at the very
instant when the “poet of drama” sang the same theme,
shows one motive. When Bacon explained to King
James how “bodies fall towards the centre of the earth,”
and “iron trembles under adamant,” Shakespeare made
Prince Troilus vow he would be true to Cressida
“ As iron to adamant, as earth to centre,”
while her love for him in return
“Is as the very centre of the earth drawing all things to it.”
Both poets made clear their views by analogies from
natural philosophy, as Persian Magi did of old, and
that a dozen years before the “poet of history” Ralegh
defined Magician “ a studious observer and expounder
of divine things. No doubt Shakespeare might have
learned from Porta’s popular work what Cressida
speaks, but Bacon investigated gravity, weighing truth
in conflict on motion in sun, star, planet, globe, sphere
centres, starry heavens, ether, everything in the firma-
ment. An unlearned poet might know from Batman,
1582, as Furnival shows; but Bacon was the one
great living inquirer, facile pnnceps, in the scientific,
philosophic, theologic, political, and poetical aspect of
the problems.
When Bacon’s detractors of the Draper sort cite
second-hand and read no original, they omit context to
assert he rejected Copernicus and despised instruments.
Yet he says: “It is plain that the sun can sustain the
nature of a centre, and perform its office in some things,


and so has the better title to be constituted the centre
of the universe, as was asserted by Copernicus.” Again,
“It is now ascertained by telescopes that these spots
also have their own irregularities, so that the moon is
found to be clearly of manifold configuration, and that
selenography or map of the moon, which Gilbert con-
ceived, seems now by the industry of Galileo and others
to be nearly attained.” Praising Galileo for resolving
the light in the milky way “into stars numbered and
placed,” he adjures Baranzano to follow up his master,
for “nothing can fall out more happily than that you,
being what you are (Galileo’s pupil), should contribute
the first fruits of the work, by composing a history of
the Heavens, in which only the phenomena themselves,
and the different astronomical instruments, with their
uses, and at the same time the exact calculations of the
periodic returns, and other things of that kind, shall be
set forth plainly and simply, without any doctrine or
theory whatever.” With these words before him, or
as they ought to have been before him, the author
of The Intellectual Development of Europe gravely
asserts that Bacon “Was doubtful whether instruments
were of any advantage ”; and people who read to cite
third-hand believe and repeat the libel! But if, instead
of letting idle tongues and frivolous pens disparage
Bacon, the busy brain would read him it would find
him saying of the Museum of the future:—“We procure
means of seeing objects afar off; as in the heavens and
remote places ; and represent things near and afar off;
making feigned distances. We have also helps for the
sight, far above spectacles and glasses in use. We have
also glasses and means to see small and minute bodies
perfectly and distinctly; as the shape and colours of
small flies and worms, grains and flaws in gems, which


cannot otherwise be seen; observations in urine and
blood, not otherwise to be seen.” Here is the telescope
lauded ; the microscope, periscope, and polariscope fore-
told as clearly as is the spectroscope forecast in The
Intellectual Globe to explain the varying colours of stars
and other heavenly bodies, by one who had in imagery
instruments of all kinds; “ also means to convey sounds
in trunks and pipes, in strange lines and distances,”
undreamt of before his time, and only perfected in our
own day. And yet the real inventor of the telephone
and of the freezing process, even by “condensed air
that always creates cold ” for preserving meat for
human food, is accused of decrying instruments! Like
Prospero:—
“He has brave utensils, —for so he calls them, —which, when
he has a house, he’ll deck’t withal,”
precisely as Bacon deck’t withal his ideal House in
the New Atlantis. Goes intellectual development in
Europe downwards ? It has already reached the phase
biology would call atavism in the moral sense; there
to abide unless grateful Australia revive new growth by
building her benefactor a monument.
In this close political parity the poets of science and
drama recited to the student king the laws of union in
natural bodies to inform him how union in three jarring
kingdoms would leave them no longer odd atoms
hanging by one another ready at a jar to repel, but
would mingle them in laws, customs, institutions by
affinity of imponderable elements into one grand unit.
Divided the Monarch’s England, Ireland, Scotland, could
only adhere in crude mechanical mixture a mere tria in
uno; but in uniting they would become perfect composition
as in the ultimate elements, matter, form, and force, the


tres entering into the constitution of every unus or
organic entity in nature. For “Nature exists in three
states” is the first aphorism opening The Interpretation
of Nature. This was the metaphorical analogy drawn
by the poet of natural philosophy before the royal pupil.
In highest statesmanship it gave mathematical definition
to a political proposition. Embracing the whole doctrine
of the correlation of forces, it forestalled the exact
radical doctrine of modern physics, including chemical
combination ; while it agreed in ideal analogy with the
T/octs derived by from the Magi for Greek
Drama; with the Platonic triad in “the divine science”
of politics; and with the bases of Aristotelian philosophy.
Mystic as the Delphic Triad it thus
“ In one rich scroll
Plato, the Stagyrite, and Tully join’d.”
In harmony with the Cymbric Triads , or poetical
histories of the Welsh bards, it likewise illustrated
the original myth of the three Gorgons, borrowed by
Aischylos from Hesiod. One of the three, the only one
among them mortal, the Medusa, with beautiful face
and flowing hair, is a Gruoch of the Lady Macbeth
type, not yet transformed into the beautiful flower with
the serpent under it. Hence when the Priestess in
the Eumenides comes from the chamber where murder
has just been done, and speaks about a man:—
“Sitting as suppliant, and with hands that dripp’d
Blood-drops, and holding sword but newly drawn,”
we at once recall Macduff’s appalling call to:—
“ Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
With a new Gorgon.”
From the earlier Greek came the triple to be adopted,
after the revival of learning, in Bacon’s triplas and in


Shakespeare's trilogies. Hence came Macbeth , as a true
work of art with a beginning, a middle, and an end, in
the tale of temptation, crime, and retribution, to be cast
in the form of ancient Greek tragedy, showing how
even-handed justice will have judgment here, nor leave
dealers with juggling fiends, or Ate, upon this bank
and shoal of time, even when
“We’d jump the life to come.”
These grains of philosophy, political, homely, meta-
physical, theologic if you will, are easily threshed out of
the heads and ears of History, and husky chaff of
criticism. To try by literary husbandry to delve the
corn again into virgin soil in Victorian brains ought
not to be “to plough the rocks.”
Such were among the subtle reasons Bacon gave
King James in 1604, when Troilus and Cressida was
being written, to convince England s new monarch on
his wisest policy, and secure an union which but for
Bacon’s direct teaching and metaphorical analogy in
dramatic allegory, might never have been brought about
in peace or civic strife. That was the Cui Bono of a
drama which still shows England her wisdom in holding
herself true to the triple state of three estates in firm
tri-unity. To thrust between them a fourth estate in a
dictatorial graphocracy would break up the perfect trinal
that holds the planets steady and England great, as by
some mystic trigon. The inventor of triennial parlia-
ments, if not of the perfect number of three hundred
pounds a year patriot dole, feared freedom would find
in an usurping printing office no security.
In the last number of The New Shakespere Society’s
Transactions Mr. Furnival cites Marlowe’s Faustus to
show that dramatist familiar with the starry notion of a


ruling primum mobile in politics as among planets. But
that author never alludes to Bacon’s words —“ The
motions of the greatest persons in a government ought
to be as the motions of the planets under primum
mobile: when great ones in their own particular motion
move violently, it is a sign the orbs are out of frame.”
These words convey Bacon’s idea of what government
in England ought to resemble; and they agree with
the same thought figuratively uttered in Faustus, in
Henry V., and in Troilus and Cressida. Perhaps the
idea floated in the intellectual air of the time and
merely got appropriate expression in these writings;
or perhaps Faustus was an earlier Baconian work, it
and Edward 11. being foster plays for which before
Shakespeare’s day Marlowe stood sponsor. For Marlowe
is called the true founder of that dramatic school, first
to introduce blank verse in the public stage, and
harmonize it with variety and pause; in delineating
character reaching truth; in the plays named attaining
to real grandeur and pathos. He was coupled with
Shakespeare in Green’s attack, and in Chettle’s apology.
Poor Green evidently had misgivings about the bona
fides of both as reputed playwrights and without
actually knowing their secret shrewdly guessed they
often published writings of others in their own names.
Marlowe, Green, Chettle, were needy, scholarly, reckless,
desperate, profligate, beside a thrifty, saving, money-
maker. That all were somehow intimately mixed up in
a common calling is very certain, as true as that there
was a reserve, or secret undivulged amongst them; a
Fine Mystery causing jealousy, bickering, recrimination
and apology. To clear it up is hopeless, yet we know
that Edward 11. is considered by many writers having
no theory to support, the first ill order of the English


historical dramas. In it the poet speaks of Peter
Gaveston as Bacon speaks of another Court favourite.
The play is not divided into acts and scenes but is left
in epic form like all the early quartos printed with or
without Shakespeare’s name, but unlike Marlowe’s own
works. In comparing it with The Contention , Mr. Knight
says:—“ There are two specimens of power unequalled
by any poet except the author of one of the passages.
The power of both passages is in their reality. But
where did Marlowe attain that power, so essentially
different from his wonted characteristics ? We forbear
to press the point.” Forbear, forsooth! Why forbear ?
Would pressing the point start inquiry to end in
resolving the fine mystery?
The political theory not only turns research into a
new channel, but also revives old views on the same
way, as the latest Year Books of the Shakespeare
Societies show. The relation between Shakespeare and
Bruno remarked by me is there established, for the
dramatist had studied, and adopted his ideas and even
borrowed types of character from him. But it is asked
“ whether the ideas ascribed to Bruno’s influence were
not a part of that general stock of thought which is (so
to speak) in the air of any given period, and makes
it hard to distinguish resemblances from borrowings.”
Applying this remark to Hamlet , if the 1603 or 1604
version be taken as original, then the air could not be
filled with Bruno’s thoughts, seeing the melancholy
thinker left London in 1586, eighteen years being long
enough to clear away a phantom. But if Hamlet
read at Oxford in 1586 be connected, the play and
Bruno’s harangue touched college dons all in a week.
Heterodoxy in a gloomy play breaking unity and form
scholastic angered the university proper playwright Nash


to write a withering tirade on the daring innovator.
Jealous of an amateur he derided the born Noverint for
trying his endeavours of art who could not Latinize his
neck verses if he had need, nor write anything better
than Hamlet’s tragical speeches, which personal abuse
mightily pleased the university fellows. At the same
time Bruno’s fervid orations on the nature of the soul
in man and brute so horrified orthodox divines that the
wary men silenced the assailant of their creed and drove
the doubter out of the cloisters that enshrine belief.
Leaving Oxford, Bruno went to Wittenberg for a
hearing from ears ringing with Luther’s din.
The episode is a criterion for the date of the play,
for Hamlet’s going to Wittenberg is set down as an
anachronism betraying the poet’s ignorance that in the
historic Hamlet’s day no Wittenberg existed. That the
poet should in 1586 pointedly allude to it shows he had
Bruno in his mind when writing the drama. In the
old German version, now held to be from the original
English, the pleading Queen expostulates with her
“ dear son ” about his thought to go away from her and
to betake himself to Wittenberg. This Wittenberg
incident, with the feigned madness, the ear-poisoning,
Ophelia’s deceit, the secret told Horatio, the Ghost’s
behaviour, and other points are all so plainly told in
the 1586 tale as to leave doubt of identity impossible.
Bruno had lived in London for three years, 1583-6,
guest of Sidney; and the pair, with kindred spirits,
formed the academe taken off in Love's Labour’s Lost.
Bacon knew the coterie who bound one another
to abjure society and study “ sweet philosophy ” as
in the play. The air of literary London was full of
Brunoism; but the Avon bard had not yet breathed
the atmosphere.


Here are definite data to go by in studying the
problem.
In another paper on Hamlet its sources and political
allusions, attention is given to the difference between
the story and its treatment in the play, changes
attributed to the purpose of the dramatist of making
political allusions to Mary Stuart as the guilty Queen
Gertrude, her son James as Hamlet, Darnley as the
murdered King, Bothwell as the regicide, Ruthven as
Laertes, Anna Douglas as Ophelia, and her servant
Rhynd as Reynaldo, giving a political cast to every
character in the play. If Poley were made Polonius,
Walsingham’s domestic spy would fill the roll in a state
affair of which Spedding says, the dry official report
“reads like a leaf out of the closing scene of some
majestic tragedy—
‘ High actions and high passions best describing.’ ”
In the new variorum Mr. Furness cites an opinion:—
“ That there was some individual nobleman more par-
ticularly pointed out in Polonius I can entertain no
doubt, nor that some attentive observer of the men of
these times will one day trace the Poet home.” Why
anyone should try if the Poet be already known sounds
a paradox, like all Shakesperean commentary. One
makes Hamlet political; others rave over a mystic
dream.
The political allusion fit 1585-6, when Maty Stuart
was tried. Douglas dealt with Walsingham to ignore
her and bring over James to the Wittenberg faith. He
never went to Wittenberg. Bruno did. But the allegory
would be out of joint and against the stomach of the
time in 1603, unless the play then printed was meant
to revive the memory of a tragic deed, dear to James,


who in that year came to the English throne. Perhaps
a politic poet took a tropical way to please the new
King. Courtiers bent before the sun orient rather than
bow to the sun Occident. The play would show the
King loyal to his mother by an aim to wipe out her
stain and avenge his father’s murder. Bacon knew how
the allegory would work. This revival links the Hamlet
of 1603 to that of 1586, by one motive. In 1585
James was twenty, Hamlet’s age, by the grave-maker’s
reckoning.
The writer thinks the guilty mother refers to Mary
Stuart, in political appropriateness seized on in the
older play. But this assumes her guilt. Hossack says:—
“ The mother of Hamlet had committed the very
crimes which are charged against Mary Stuart. She
had been an accomplice in the murder of her husband,
and she had married the murderer. What should we
have thought if Shakespeare had represented her as a
miserable broken-hearted woman upon her wedding
day ? ” But Mary Stuart was broken-hearted on her
Both well enforced marriage. In the play as we have it
remarks Mr. Furness, it is “doubtful whether the Queen
was privy to the murder of her husband; but in the
scene, in the first copy, she says,— ‘ But, as I have a
soul, I swear by heaven, I never knew of this most
horrid murder.’ And Hamlet, upon this declaration,
says,—‘And, mother, but assist me in revenge, and in
his death your infamy shall die.’ The Queen, upon
this, protests,— ‘ I will conceal, consent, and do my best,
What stratagem soe’er thou shall devise.’ ”
These vowings, and, indeed, the whole colloquy,
harmonize throughout with all that was then known or
suspected to have passed between Queen Mary captive,
and her “ dear sonne ” free; and, above all statesmen


not actually employed in the State inquiry, nor officially
informed of the equivocal results, young Francis Bacon,
then six-and-twenty, was in the best position to become
familiar with all unpublished reports, and rumours of
conspiracies in which Mary was suspected to be involved
for her own liberation from a rigorous if not a cruel
dungeon life.
Thus, in history and in drama alike, have inquirers
to decide between conflicting accounts of Queen Mary’s
complicity.
But if we assume Bacon to be the dramatist the true
explanation is ready in a moment In 1585-6 his father
and uncle were on the trial commission, and both
believed Mary innocent; as indeed did Elizabeth herself,
who let her warm heart be leadened cold by frigid
bigots, priests, and politicians. True, her hot blood-
breeding felt hurt that no oath-sworn mignon took
“the shortest way” to give her enemy the tragic stab,
and rid her of a rival. There was warrant for it, yet
no one would act. The claw of the cat in that adage
was sheathed. After Macbeth compunctious conscience
began to tell on statesmen. From Bacon’s action in the
Commons his own opinion cannot be learned; but he,
being privy to his near kinsmen’s conversations, would
know the truth, though not allowed to divulge their
views and betray them to the block without saving the
victim. They were out-voted at Council, and had to
say no more about it. Not daring to speak aloud, to
make bad worse, he yet assuredly would take his own
way to rescue the Scottish Queen, spare Elizabeth a
crime, and absolve his father and his uncle. Those ends
he achieved by composing Hamlet and Macbeth , one
shortly after the other, the former in 1585, the latter in
1586, when he had ample time for the work, in leisure


for which biography can find no other occupation. I
repeat it that Bacon gained the end he aimed at of
rousing the Queen by an allegory to a sense of horror
in taking a wrong way to right her own wrong, for
Mary’s death was never her doing.
By the Hamlet allegory Bacon at the same time
awoke the nation to vivid sense of alarm from the subtle
craft of her great foe, the art of the secret poisoner, an
art in which Court physic was an adept. The cunning
of the craft Bacon learned through puddering in physic
all his life, just like Cerimon.
Of Bacon’s mind on Mary’s murder Mr. Spedding
divines that “ Upon a case so rare, and so full of matter
to strike the imagination, to touch the feelings, and to
exercise the judgment, he must doubtless have had
many thoughts ; but whatever the conclusion, they can
hardly have been other than painful ; painful for the
conflict of feelings involved in the case itself, more
painful for the reflexion it cast upon the character of
Elizabeth.” While occupied in this way with the then
greatest issue for England, Bacon was yet bound to
silence on the subject. He was held by the Queen in
hand like a “ bated hawk ” even after she had trained
him on to offer counsel. But if he dared not speak out,
nor like French falconers fly at what he saw, yet, to
clear away doubt where the “ignorant statesman” might
not directly address the Queen or Burghley, he could
call in the potent aid of dramatic allegory to play with
his bow upon men’s minds and show the age and body
of the time its form and pressure.
Forbidden to proceed in any way openly the “ hooded
valour” resolved somehow either to prove the innocency
of Mary Stuart, or “ essay the detection of her guilt by
the device of a play performed before the suspected


criminal.” It is simply a matter of history that a play
with a plot so contrived was acted at Oxford University,
in the spring of 1586, at the very time when prepara-
tions for Mary’s trial, which took place in the following
autumn, were going on, so that dates fit the hypothesis
if political allusions correspond. The form of crime
pourtrayed in the play is singular, and no less apt
would it then be for a printed political allegory if those
who saw it acted knew, as doubtless “the green-coated
Jesuits” there assembled did know, how the implicated
Bothwell had suddenly left the palace at Orleans a few
days before Francis 11., Mary’s first husband, was
poisoned by deadly distillment of midnight Jierbs poured
into the porches of his ear, a crime Bothwell either
imitated or repeated on Darnley, his rival, over whom
he hoped to gain his own personal end of marrying
Mary Stuart, to whom he had been from boyhood
fondly attached. By the union he, scion of an ancient
family, a stirp of royal linedge, hoped to regain, if not
an early love, at least hereditary claim to the Scottish
throne and realise his family’s ambition. Here then
were at hand all the romantic threads for the poet to
weave into a political allegory, with, as usual, an old
chronicle to alter, transform, and adapt for the ground-
work and pattern. Date, circumstance, and motive point
to Bacon as the author. Without an intimate knowledge
of Court life and political intrigue no poet could have
filled Hamlet with political allusions or drawn the play
in so fine allegory.
Mr. Furness sums up the evidence about the relation
between the Hamlet of 1603 and the German version
with the remark that there can be little doubt that in
the latter “we have a translation of an old English
tragedy, and most probably the one which is the
E


groundwork of the quarto of 1603.” And as the latest
views of such critics as Mr. Furnival ( The Academy ,
August 7, 1880) discover in the 1603 and 1604 Hamlets
one play altered by the poet himself, we therefore trace
both back to the Hamlet read at Oxford in 1586; a
tragedy with which Bruno and some rare law student,
a shifting companion who tried his endeavours of art,
were connected. •
If these details offer tangible criteria bearing out the
political theory of the drama, so will they equally
explain political allusions wrapped up in Lucrece as
another allegory for the time. The Tarquin deed is an
image of the Bothwell rapine. When ruined Mary was
“ravished and detained by the Earl of Bothwell,” she,
like ravished Lucrece—
“ln deep dejection only long’d for death.”
John Knox called Holyrood palace “no better than a
bordell,” such as Mariana was forced into.
If Pericles came in 1586 to repel foul charges of
adultery “in the bordell at Holyrood” thrown at Mary,
the Mariana of the play, a higher motive than a
courtier’s fawning kept it out of the 1623 folio, an
exclusion never fully explained. Allusions that in the
last decade of the sixteenth century made Pericles
popular, would in 1623 renew painful memory. Those to
Mary in the Mariana of Measure for Measure , political
of the time, are different. In the Hamlet of 1623, unlike
the 1603-4 quartos, the Queen, like Mary Stuart, at that
time, is held innocent of guilty knowledge of her
husband’s murder. Surely someone caring for King
James, and still living in 1623, directed these things;
and of all London, literary or political, no one was so
likely as Verulam to be that way inclined.


Between the claims of Bacon and Shakespeare judg-
ment may be given in a fine old sentence, which
modern rule in grammar dare not invade to alter and
spoil with finical verbing:—“Your fat king and your
lean beggar is but variable service, —two dishes, but
to one table: that’s the end.” For, in Bacon and
Shakespeare is one intuition.
In helping to clear up the fine mystery writers should,
with Mr. Halliwell-Phillipps, above everything keep
“clear of the shameful forgeries that have been the
curse of Shakespeare biography and text-criticism for
nearly forty years.” About the truth of those “stories
that have been unblushingly fabricated in even recent
years ” there lingers in Victoria a melancholy relic.
Among Victorian reviewers “the assurance with which
these forgeries have been uttered would be amusing
were it not so mischievous.” Those gross fabrications
and their misleading effect on uninquiring people who
yet would gladly learn the truth are well shown in the
fables of the plaster masque and Mermaid already
exposed. But the most abiding effect of forgery is a
belief that Othello was acted in 1602, immoveable in the
face of detected fraud. The entry fixing on 1604 as
the earliest date of the play is also spurious. All stories
about accounts paid for Court revels “are of no historic
value.” They are only believed by “ignorant credulity
that will not come up to the truth,” the willing victim
of the popular author poorly read.
The only hint that plays unheard of before 1623 lived
in playhouse tradition is given in the address to the
reader, wherein some rather ambiguous wording conveys
an idea that the newly-printed plays had all had their
trial already. But the equivocal intimation has been
found quite inaccurate, Indeed the phrase was only a
E 2


cunning device to sell the book, resorted to by a trady
stationer whose fingers itched to be selling, to recoup
his few pounds’ outlay for loan of the immortal manu-
script that left the world no copy save that in the
human heart.
That Othello was unknown to literature till 1622 is
beyond honest dispute, unbacked by forgery. In that
year the new play was a printer’s venture. The
stationer very particularly tells how:—“ The author
being dead” he “thought good to take that piece of
work upon” himself. Here was a marvel—a stationer’s
mind turning on other wheels than those of profit!
But after taking the confiding reader into his cunning
confidence Mr. Walkley does not say where he got the
“copy,” as one so freely communicative would do unless
he had some very special reason for reticence. Neither
does he tell where he laid away the M S.; for surely
care would be taken of a precious relic of the great
poet whose memory survived for seven years after his
burial. But no; that manuscript went the way of all the
rest, leaving no trace of its fate or whereabout. Was
not that copy quickly returned to good Mr. Meantys,
after the faithful steward obtained through lending it to
the printer a little ready money for his starving master?
Meantys then was in truth to Bacon everything that
good Flavius is to Timon. The manuscript of Othello
that Walkley printed from in 1622 was not divided
into acts and scenes; while the completer version in
the 1623 folio is, as would be expected, under the
editing of three practical actors. Therefore, the 1622
quarto agrees with the older quartos up till 1609, in
not being fitted for acting. Is this like the doing of
an old actor? Does it not rather agree with the work
of an epic poet?


In 1623 the former partner in life of William
Shakespeare, and wearer of his trinkets if not of his
memory, still survived till within a few weeks of the
printing of the folio, to claim property in the plays,
if she held any right thereto. Or if that property
belonged to a theatre, parting therewith, or allowing a
stranger to step in and take upon him their great high
honour to keep alive their dead comrade’s fame is most
unaccountable. More likely Mr. Walkley only used the
old familiar name “ Because that name was sufficient to
vent the work” he had for sale. This aim he states in
very plain business candour, such as any Victorian
stationer will easily understand. Then as now the
“ company of base knaves ” went by the name of the
author rather than by the merit of a book. But in
truth Walkley, with his quarto, like Heminge and
Condell, with their great first folio, gives two reasons
for using Shakespeare’s name, one to keep green the
poet’s memory, another to sell his own book. In all
dual motive neither is usually the real one. Shakespeare
longed for fame, but not through brain-children; for him
grand-children were enough:—he enlarged his daughter’s
portion if she bore a man-child to bear his name to
posterity! In this regard the Will of Bacon and the
Will of Shakespeare widely differ; each being index to
the heart that drew it. One Will is all about learning,
books, and manuscripts; the other Will is all about
trinkets, beds, and goblets. One Will is all pathos;
the other Will is all bathos. In either, nothing in life
became him like the leaving it.
Having already given political aim to Othello in 1622,
I need only add that, if feeling burned living intensity
into its heart, then in Bacon’s soul began the juggling
fiend tormenting jealousy to give him “great and just


cause ” to write as is written in the drama. A few
hours after his death his widow wed her ancient.
In this quarto Othello of 1622 is therefore every sign
of a hurriedly sold, or lent for hire, manuscript of a
newly-writ drama, allegorical in stirring political event
of the time, and never known before to literature; a
history affording very cogent inferential proof, the only
kind available, that some master mind still living in
1622 was the author.
From 1622 let us go back awhile to 1586, the date
of the Macbeth trilogy.
The reign of Macbeth is the one episode in Scottish
history, real or legendary, made visible in a drama
revealing the moral law of regal retribution. It aimed
to deter a Queen from the crime of taking off a Queen
by showing her the “ deep damnation ” of a regicide.
The warning is enforced by nature’s agony at the
murder of a royal victim. The kingly tale told by
Fordun and Boethius Elizabeth had, as young Francis
Bacon well knew, often translated for her tutor Roger
Ascham. Holinshed’s compilation was printed not long
before the time of the play, and John Bellenden had
turned the weird tale into the Scottish vernacular in
highly dramatic form. From all sources the stories of
the soaring falcon and the mousing owl; the frantic
flesh-tearing horses; the voice that murdered sleep; the
ingredients in the poisoned chalice; meetings with weird
sisters who “vanished immediatelie out of their sicht ”
on the blasted heath, are all boldly ingreft into the
horrifying filigree. Tales of kernes and gallowglasses ;
many . a strange and uncouth wonder; vain fantastical
illusion ; are told with dramatic verve though they are
often thought original in the poet’s own fertile imagery.
In the grand trilogy is no new poetic creation or


character or plot invention. Glowing eulogy on the
plot-creative genius of the poet in supernatural soliciting
reveals frenzy in the unread critic rather than fancy in
the well-read poet. Thus the colloquy between Malcolm
and Macduff, repeated in that between Gloucester and
Buckingham, on wearing the crown to save the country,
is word for word from the old chronicle! Macbeth like
Richard 111. is dramatised history—History made visible
to Queen and Ministers by dramatic poetry. Both paint
in horrid tints the deadly family feud, involving the
ever recurring retribution. The Maormor and wife had
a double wrong to right with Duncan, who by the
shortest way in vogue had aforetime come between
them and the throne, making them hereditary foes for
vengeance, after the prevailing custom. The ancient
feud came back to memory among things done of old
to make Macbeth stand rapt; as well as things done
of old that made Duncan speak of past ingratitude to
his brave and noble cousin, as well as gracious to his
fair and noble hostess at her castle gate. Memory
in King, and Thane, and Wife, revived old strife, and
struck the key-note for Lady Macbeth to read the
letter opening the tragedy in a divining spirit. Moved
by the same instinct Donald Bane bids his brother flee
from where the near in blood the nearer bloody.
When Macbeth was read privately before Elizabeth
the like family feud filled her Court and Kingdom with
equally foul and bloody brooding and intent. Glammis
cared not to kill a King who had honoured him of late,
if not afore. New favour made old enmity relent. Not
so the Maormor’s wife. The memory of murdered kith
and kin filled her from crown to toe top-full of direst
cruelty when her turn came round to plague the inventor.
She who had been gruach among the gruagach, the


peerless beauty with the flowing hair, the fair blue-eyed
favourite at the Scottish Court, forgot not that she was
grandchild of a murdered King, nor the foul deed by
which she had been disinherited. Tilted off the step to
a throne, the proud Gael held loyally to revenge. This
family feud of old is the key to Lady Macbeth’s
psychology, and to the proper action of the drama as
an allegory. As a typical beauty of the Gaelic minstrel
the poet also thought of her as having often heard
praised “ that little hand ” of a “ darling chuck ” to
bring out the mental habit in sleep-walking agony.
Pourtrayal of that beauty and charm ineffable evoked
pity in Elizabeth for another lovely gruach on whose
behalf a dramatic poet making history visible pleaded
not in vain. The poet knew how to touch tenderly
the female heart to a fine political issue. When the
lady Gruoch had become a Maormor’s wife, and when
from a happy home she was torn by feud, driven to
wander homeless with the babe that milked her, seeking
refuge in her neighbours’ country, fleeing from foes that
stabbed her lord by her side and burnt him in his
castle before her face with all the horrors of barbaric
ferocity, she keenly felt how, as is fully told in the
early drama,
“ Dangers that have long prevail’d
Upon the fancy, even when they are dead
Live in the memory awhile.”
Even so did fatal memory fire imagination in the
erstwhile lady Gruoch, widowed from her Maormor by
cruel feud. In the allegory Queen Elizabeth was
brought to see and feel that sorrow when fortune of
civic feud sent her old family foe under her battle-
ments. With vivid imagination, quick perception, and
stern will, neither feminine avenger needed inciting


missive to prompt her to take the shortest way, nor
hint for quick despatch of a cousin in a family feud for
a crown and kingdom, nor taunt about cowardly
waiting, like the poor cat in the adage ; and yet how
alike are Macbeth’s and Elizabeth’s suggestive letters!
In both cases opportunity threw hospitality and natural
tie to be riven in revenge. To his wife’s keen eye
Macbeth’s spirit shone through him, as evil glanced
from Elizabeth’s prompters. The wary fellows had to
make a window in her heart and reflect in their faces
what they did “ guess what hint they were to act upon,
without further orders”; and then they were to go
direct to the “shortest way to settle the quarrel of a
true inheritor.” Her face was “as a book where men
may read strange matters,” to let them “ read the
mind’s construction in the face,” so, as Bacon says,
“a man may read formality in your countenance.” In
palace and theatre one said: —
“What beast was’t then
That made you break this enterprise to me ? ”
The fascinating power exercised by Lady Macbeth'
over Macßiodagach equalled the winning manner that
made Walsingham afraid to allow Mary Stuart oppor-
tunity to meet her accusers face to face. The wary
Secretary, who, like Macbeth in play or chronicle, kept
a well-fee’d man in every nobleman’s house including
the arch-spy’s own, feared the facile Lords might amiably
yield to the graceful dialectic that made John Knox
dumb in his own polemic, when her turn came to plead
her own cause and expose her entrappers of the Gilbert
Gifford sort. The Burton brewer who bartered in blood
to sell beer was of too common a tribe to go before
the Lords with a denial. “The History of England is


a bloody one,” and bloody is the drama which makes
that history visible. One proud historian gloats over the
haggled neck of Walsingham’s mangled victim, in telling
with dramatic effect how the Leopard of England lapped
the blood of the Scottish Panther! The infatuation
runs parallel even in nickname. Crabbed Samuel
Johnson calls Lady Macbeth, Pythoness. Fact dislocat-
ing Froude styles Mary Stuart, Panther. As lief might
he cry cat. The diminutive feline epithet is quite as
elegant and equally effective. The larger and coarser
expletive may quicker reach the greater and rougher
heart for whom popular histories are written. The
historian or the politician who refines too nicely on
probabilities is lost. Both must be oracular. Poor
Mary felt sorely grieved when likened to Medea, Jason’s
wife. That calm rebuke in quiet irony and dignity of
conscious innocence spiteful moralists who hate their
enemy in print neither feel nor apprehend. Her purity
is a rebuke to their foul suspicion. The just perception
of her true attitude is beyond the psychology of men
who glory in denial of counsel to a State prisoner! To
the same warped mind the Lady Macbeth of the poet
or of chronicle will ever remain an unsolvable enigma.
Perhaps there are no even lines running between the
characters of Lady Macbeth and Queen Elizabeth or
Mary Stuart; yet all met at points often enough in
reality for allegory to warn her who held in her will
the life of another in double trust, her guest, her kins-
woman, and one who had honoured her of late; for
whatever thoughts creep in through chinks of accusation
Mary did pay due homage to Elizabeth as her hostess,
reserving, as Duncan reserves, her own regal, right
The play therefore is no idle tale; it has an alle-
gorical meaning and a political definition. It clouds no


regicide, nor brutal woman’s lust for power. It rather
reclaimed a lost heritage. In the play someone or
other made History visible before Elizabeth to hinder
her from making real the painted guilt. The epic
poem had the designed effect. Elizabeth did not kill
Mary. Her mignon did a deed at which she stood
appalled, dreading poetic retribution ; else she was the
most trembling coward that ever forsook servant, as
well as the archest hypocrite who ever consummately
acted. Anyhow the attempt and not the deed confounds
her. She accused her Secretary of standing a coward
in his own esteem, letting I dare not wait upon I would,
like the poor cat in the adage. She would have him
persuade Amyas Paulet to hire some discontented
gentleman weary of the vile buffets of the world to
take the shortest way to stab her rival, yet not in her
house, but in such a way as to make some unworthy
groom appear to have done it. She would have poured
her spirit into the ear of amiable Sir Amyas, and
chastise him with the valour of her tongue; for she
knew that whatever he would highly, that would he
holily, and not otherwise; he could not be prevailed
upon to do the deed.
The tribal creed of Lady Macbeth taught her who
ought to have been Queen in her own right to try to
regain her crown by the very means that had been
before taken to deprive her of it. If she had not the
sanction of her clan there was an approving tradition
for it. What she had been brought up to hold sacred
she lived to find hateful. So learned Mary Stuart’s
takers off. The tribal creed of Elizabeth Tudor taught
her who held the crown in her own right to rid her
way of a rival by the very means she feared might be
taken to deprive her of it. The motive that was held


to impel Mary Stuart did actuate Elizabeth Tudor, and
Mary Attour, the maiden name of the lady Gruoch, as
John Bellenden tells. The tragic stab was an ordinary
way, and familiar family custom. Yet Mary Attour is a
Pythoness; Mary Stuart a Panther; while amiable lovely
Elizabeth Tudor is a God-fearing English Princess!
Well may we all with Isabella ask:—
“ Who is it that hath died for this offence ?
There’s many have committed it.”
To that degree analogy in allegory is perfect. The
fate of Lady Macbeth is a feudal discipline in retribution.
Throwing the shadow of an obscure era on a half-
barbaric Court upon the mirror of the time, the tragedy
did not merely depict a pictorial tyrant to amuse a
gaping throng of truculent minds by horrifying their
vulgar nerves with brutal gusto, as would a bear-baiting.
From these premises I argue that the wonderful
drawing from real life was meant to warn Elizabeth
from imbruing her own hand in her cousin’s blood.
“Never shake thy gory locks at me,” appalled her, and
made her bid the lords “to take some other way ”;
and then again the air-drawn dagger met her vision to
stop the tragic stab she meditated. The mousing owl
brought down a falcon, not soaring in her pride of
place, but only moulting in a prison. It was a sorry
sight. The lurid forecast was realised when the braid
borrowed from some other foregone gruag rolled on the
floor in a pool of the blood of her who had no longer
a gruag to dabble. Weary prison life had thinned the
lovely gruag nature gave, and the axe cut away the
work of the artificer. The ghastly scaffold spectacle is
re-enacted before a world that careth for nought but
shows in Froude’s dramatic mockery. Pious sight-seers


of a beheading that wed Mary Stuart to immortality
bullied the wearer of a peruke to throw away the false
hair along with her false religion ! The association of
ideas made religion a mere vestment. The historian of
whom England is at this day proudest allows that the
worst crime of “the bad woman” in a palace “no better
than a bordel,” as eyed askant by obliquely godly
Ruthven, was wearing a “front” and praying as she in
childhood had been taught to pray. To be true to the
faith of her youth is to Froude no earnest of fidelity in
other life relations. In the Puritan brain religion is a
holy hereditary instinct; in the Catholic cerebrum it can
only be a morbid thought. Bacon knew better when he
advised Elizabeth to stay persecuting, and rather try to
mould the opening mind in the coming generation.
Firm in her own faith Mary Stuart would wisely forbear
with every other. There was room enough in the world
for all. With the vagrant fly Corporal Trim could not
be more tolerant. Mary wanted neither a world nor a
heaven all to herself, with a hell into the bargain. She
most wished to be spared from turbulent fanatics who
would blend all three in one earthly infernity.
That Elizabeth was adjured to spare Mary is
undoubted. The silent monitor, or “ignorant states-
man” who advised that merciful policy has never been
unearthed. The play’s the thing that caught the
conscience of the Queen.
lt may be argued that the date of the play forbids
the idea of its relation to Mary Stuart. But who knows
that date? First printed in 1623 Macbeth is known to
have been acted in 1610; but it was certainly written
long before, because a Latin translation of it was
performed at Oxford in 1605. William Shakespeare
is not known to have been in the habit of having his


works that were first written in English turned into
Latin; but that conversion of all his works was with
Francis Bacon a continual custom. By a few loose
criteria the date of Macbeth is only conjectured. A
thievish tailor was hanged for stealing French hose ; a
greedy farmer hanged himself in fear of plenty; a
double allusion to “twofold balls and triple sceptres”
typified the King of an united kingdom, in a monarch
who traced his name back to Stewart of Banquo ; the
royal touch revived with great ceremony ; are all made
to point to somewhere early in the reign of James. But
the conversation between Malcolm and Macduff takes
place before the palace of Edward the Confessor, who
invented the healing finger and devoutly applied the
royal nostrum by a red rag dipped in spirit of super-
stition. Edward being contemporary with Macbeth was
unquestionably the very liberal England who lent her
ten thousand troops to fight the Northern tyrant! To
him therefore did Malcolm’s remark about the King’s
devotion alone refer. To misapply it to King James
is to break unity in time and place, a fault of the
commentators laid on the playwright. He is made
obsequious while they only are sycophant. It is plain
then that internal evidence does not determine the date
in King James’s time; so that we are carried back
to the earlier date, when that form of evidence is
cumulative in the affirmative of my theory.
That Pericles was cognate comedy to the Macbeth
tragedy is clear from family likeness. Mariana in one
and Lady Macbeth in the other served the same
political end of trying to avert the fate impending over
Mary Stuart as Walsingham’s prey. Parallels of word,
thought, and circumstance unfold affinities between
Mariana and Mary Stuart near enough to make the


heroine of history and her of romance fit the dramatic
stereoscope. Realities in life give pictures identifying
the original and the copy. Without enumerating all, a
few will suffice for qualitative examples in the argument.
Both princesses had a chiding nativity. A parent died
the minute each was born. Both could say:—
“ Though wayward fortune did malign my state :
My derivation was from ancestors
Who stood equivalent with mighty kings:
But time hath rooted out my parentage,
And to the world and awkward casualties
Bound me in servitude.”
When Mary “at five or seven” left her birthplace
for France, in the very words of Mariana’s lament she
says :
“ This world to me is like a lasting storm,
Whirring me from my friends.”
And again, as Mary had been brought up along with
the Dauphin, and at fourteen was sought for murder by
Catherine de Medici, so :
“She at Tharsus
Was nurs’d with Cleon: who at fourteen years
He sought to murder.”
But her better stars shone briefly and led her to
Scotland, as stars of fortune brought Mariana to
Mytelene. From “cruel Cleon and his wicked wife”
Mariana had to flee, as Mary fled from Catherine de
Medici. Both in their flight fell in with “a crew of
pirates; roguing thieves serving the great pirate Valdes.”
An Admiral Valdes was captured with a ship of the
Armada, and he afterwards went roving. Valdes was
no Greek pirate; but, like an ancestor and namesake,
was a North Sea rover. The fate of Mary and Mariana
hang upon the contents of a silver casket, containing a


letter of peculiar character—“ Know you the character?”
Although some historians malign Mary as “a bad
woman,” others extol her as “a piece of virtue” that,
like Mariana, “would make a Puritan of the devil”;
a sentiment and phrase less in accord with Tyrean than
with Edinburgh sixteenth century society.
In flesh and blood each heroine combined the “roses
white and red ”; and both “ preached divinity ”in a
brothel. Such a den of infamy to the “pretty one” of
eighteen, proved the bordel of Holyrood. The tempted,
all but forced, Mariana repelled the same insolence that
Mary had to resent from “truculent noble,” “mouth-
watering Spaniard,” and “the French knight that cowers
i’ the hams” As did Monsieur Veroles, who “offered
to cut a caper at the proclamation,” so Monsieur
Chateler, the French poet, “made a groan of it” for
villainy by hiding under Mary’s bed to bring down
calumny on the innocence conspirators dared not openly
traduce. The wrangling of rebel peers for “ free
election ” to the crown; their cant about the “ danger
to a kingdom left without a head,” as Scotland had
been left, in time of a royal minority, and the feigned
excuse for usurpers “ signing the bond,” fatal alike in
compact to Mary and Mariana: —
“We’ll clasp hands:
When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands,”
are all as plainly figured in the play as ever they were
set forth in the primer books of history.
The minor event of grain-laden ships, mistaken for
men-of-war in the offing, sailing from “ some neigh-
bouring nation,” as happened off Leith Roads, and
Tharsus, during a famine and a political crisis at both
ports, gives certainty to conjecture. This is further


corroborated by the colloquy between Dionyza and
Leonine in the play, which is, as already said, a very
counterpart of one in the palace between Elizabeth and
Davison, to employ Sir Amyas Paulet to hire an
assassin to stab Mary in her prison of Fotheringay,
secretly, and spare her cautious kinswoman public
scandal. Thus, in the play ;- —
“ If you require a little space for prayer,
I grant it: pray; but be not tedious, for
The Gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn
To do my work with haste.”
To the indecent hurry of the urgent Secretary the
imperturbed victim calmly answered :
“ Why will you kill me ? ”
And then to the reply
“To satisfy my lady”
she continued asking :
“Why should she have me kill’d?
Now, as I can remember, by my troth,
I never did her hurt in all my life:
. . . How have I offended,
. Wherein my death might yield her any profit, -
Or my life imply her any danger?”
These remarkable words of Mary falling from the lips
of Mariana are followed by the very words spoken by
Davison when he urged to Mary that his
, - ' “Commission
Is not to reason of the deed, but do it.”
To- complete the identity in dialogue in play and
palace, did not infirm of purpose Elizabeth Dionyza
“Play the pious innocent,
--And for an honest attribute cry out,
‘ She died by foul play ! ’ ”
F


These words spake Elizabeth after the beheading that
brought her mignon to bury his own head alive in the
Tower as his poetical reward for over-zeal in taking a
royal humour for a warrant.
It might be rather difficult to follow every line in the
play to fit words to characters in history; but forcing
Mary to loathed wedlock with Bothwell, the horrible
command:—
“ Come, mistress; come your ways with me ”
sounds not unlike the ferocity of the daring reprobate.
Again, rapacity in the plurality Primate, Archbishop
St. Andrews, brother to Hamilton, worst plotter against
his sovereign and near relative, is plainly allied to the
“whales o’ the land, who never leave gaping till .they’ve
swallowed the whole parish, church, steeple, bells, and
all”; a sentiment spoken by Bacon in his paper on the
depopulation of towns and villages. The simile is
obviously quite foreign to a play with the scene laid
in Tyre, but true to men and women with Greek names
speaking Scottish sentiment.
It would be tedious to allude to every line of analogy
in the character of Mariana to Mary Stuart. Of the
former amiable and able one the poet says :
“ Deep clerks she dumbs; and with her neeld composes
Nature’s own shape, of bud, bird, branch, or berry.”
Of the latter history tells the same, about debates
with Knox, the deep clerk she dumbed on his own
crafty and fierce theology; while of her needle, it is
known she never sat down at a Council without it and
the wounded cambric, plying it as she heard or spake.
Equally so in love of music and the dance, unholy
pastimes in which Mary is at all points a wickedly-
perfect Mariana.


That the horrible Boult is the dread image of the
horrid Bothwell is plain enough, needing no more
remark to guide the reader of history with the drama
by its side. ;
The Lord Keeper Bacon along with the Earl of
Essex, two of the Commissioners who tried Mary Stuart,"
more than doubted the veracity of Murray and Maitland;
and both disbelieved the verity of the infamous “casket:
letters.” To them as to every clear head and good,
heart the forged thing was a “casket stored with ill.”
Hence they held firmly to belief in the purity, fidelity,
sincerity, innocence, of Cecil’s victim, who had had
“ That excellent complexion which did steel
The eyes of young and old.”
The affair would be often talked over between
Nicholas Bacon and Amyas Paulet, within the hearing
of Francis Bacon, to excite his rich imagination, yet
impose silence, for
“ Who has a book of all that monarchs do,
He’s more secure to keep it shut than shown.”
But, to the “lively imagination guiding a ready pen”
the invention of an allegory would be an easy mode of
making the younger onlooker a real actor in the grandest
tragedy in English history. _ j
If Macbeth and Pericles were planned to bring about
the political object named as early as 1586 the date
forbids the idea ordinarily held of their authorship.
The pursuits of Cerimon so well agree with those of
Bacon about that time that he is by them suggested.
Others no doubt studied physic as amateurs; but of his
work in that line we quite certain.
F 2


Any opinion on this point drawn from the internal
evidence depends a good deal on conjecture. But as
this mode of deciding is frequently adopted, it is allow-
able to test critically what goes for fair commentary.
Taking the character of Lady Macbeth as a criterion,
I remark that allowance is never duly made for her
tribal creed, or idiosyncracy, or personal history,
implied by the poet. Called a cold abstraction of
cruelty, statue-like, inhuman, it is quite forgotten that
with natural language only, rather than by words,
would one bent on a fell purpose return the endearing
address of her husband. His thoughts are on her; hers:
on his action. Once she betrays her passion, but it is
only upbraidingly. When he would falter she flings
the bitter taunt “such I account thy love,” in the
scornful fervour of her countrywomen. Critics who are
content to compare the poet with himself, and damp
his fire with their logomachy, blur the finer ornaments
of thought that are only felt in reading yet may be.
shown in acting. Slovens would degrade the heroine
to a drunken beldame, uglier than Ogress, Fury, or
Sister of Lucifer; and so would misrepresent her as
overcome by the cup that overcame the unwary grooms
whose swinish nature she wrought upon.
In the narrative of the fatal supper of King Duffe’s
chamberlains with Donwald and his wife, is no note
of inebriety in host or hostess. They cunningly kept;
sober, nor drank to keep their courage up. Lady
Macbeth was bold, but sober. Womankind exult in the
poet’s making her drunk before doing the deed, as if
woman could never be cruel in cold blood. But the
poet better knew the mind he copied and gave nerve
in poetic fitness. So far from indulging in the degrad-
ing vice, which to her was more abhorrent than regicide,


she plans how “When in a swinish sleep their drenched
natures lie as in a death” she would have the deed
done. The revolt from drink shows she could not by
it deliberately degrade her nature. So again in the
ironical jibe:—
“ Was the hope drunk
Wherein you dress’d yourself? hath it slept since?
And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
At what it did so freely?”
her thoughts reveal horror of the brutal habit. Quailing
Richard called “for a bowl of wine”; but Lady Macbeth
is not a coward. Rather is she ashamed of the effect
of what made Christopher Sly the:—
“ Monstrous beast ! how like a swine he lies !
Of death the loathsome image.”
The invisible spirit of wine that made Cassio drunk
and speak parrot to his own shadow was not more
shocking to him than were the “hot waters from the
wild Irish” to Francis Bacon, but to the more than
cordial use of which William Shakespeare was rather
addicted. At any rate of Lady Macbeth and the
swinish grooms, what had “ made them drunk hath
made me bold ” by chance not purpose. Blundering
criticism on the greatest and least understood of all the
poet’s heroines well illustrates the observation. Forget-
ting the context, one editor alters the cherished because
beautiful retort:—
“ Such I account thy love,”
to horrid “Such I account thy liver!” Such coinage of
vulgar slang might come from the mint of some rather
obtuse editor; but no thought of it would ever rise
in the mind, or phrase of it ever leave the lip, of
a Highland gentlewoman. The coarse Leontes talks


of a “ wife’s liver infected as her life ”; but refined
commentary will now more gently scan Lady Macbeth’s
nobility.
Then again, Lady Macbeth is, just like Elizabeth,
made to lose nerve on hearing the tale of murder “in
our house! ” As if out of it, what matter ? The “ look
to the lady” of Macduff and Banquo, and the “look to
the lady” of Cerimon, express the same concern, but
the fainting in one case is from over-grief, in the other
from over-joy. A fiendish pride in which Lady Macbeth
is absurdly depicted would not give way at the noisy
recital by Macbeth of his killing an unworthy underling
or two.
Had she been as the bearded weird women, what
need had she to invoke the spirits to unsex her? An
androgyne were all unsexed already. No Ogress is she
at the banquet; nor when her love hides from his
“ dear’st love ” his fell intent, till she approve the deed;
nor after when to bed; nor in sleeping agony.
That Lady Macbeth was esteemed for her native
gentleness is plain from Macduff’s sympathetic address
to her in the words:—
“ 0 gentle lady,
’Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:
The repetition, in a woman’s ear,
Would murder as it fell.”
To fit the character to the Ogress style this part of the
dialogue has to be left out; and yet these words are
essential for the true pourtrayal of the poet’s allegory!
To act the part so on the stage may be effective, but
it cannot realise the idea of the poet, who makes that
faint the culminating strain on the nerve, beginning the
terrible reaction. Hence came the tragic Queen to feel
where she failed to embody the lithe golden-haired


blue-eyed buidhe. Adapting the part to the person of
the great actress has warped popular ideas of the image.
Since I wrote six years ago in The Daily Telegraph to
point out the error, the false notion has gone and critics
now follow in my wake. They may not allow I taught
them; but they are taught, and that for me is enough.
An “Amateur Critic” made the editor his sib for the
nonce. Taking him off a trodden track I brought him
round the hill side to view the “ blasted heath ” of
critical error, and to show him all that went on within
the martlet haunted turret, through the clear pure air of
truth.
Yet after all my pains the critics cannot have quite
got hold of the idea of the drama, else they would not
talk of “ the widowed lady Gruoch.” The lady or
queen Gruoch was only a maid of honour to the Scottish
Queen, fairer than the rest, and got her title from her
personal charms and beautiful hair. Now one cannot
well write about a “ widowed maid of honour.” At
least I fancy the Gruoch would change her maiden
name when she became the Maormor’s wife; for I
am sure she would be pained to learn that she made
Melbourne grammarians write a solecism.
Since all our critics have now come round to agree
with me about the way in which the heroine ought to
be presented, the newer reading will carry us back to
the original form of the dramatic allegory. Then will
the tale be told as it is written about a comely
woman, with
“ Great blue eyes, a lovely hand and arm,
And feet so small, they scarce seem’d made
To tread, but skim the earth”;
with a full-flowing gruach of natural golden hair, a
flexile tongue to utter the valour of the heart, in


accents musical enough to pour the finer spirit of fell
intent into the honour-faltering ear; and in all to show
the terrible contrast between a frail, loveable woman and
the mind unsexed, not to an Ogress, or a Fury, but
only to a leal Highland gentlewoman fit to take a
wrong way to right her own wrong and dare the conse-
quence. In regaining by an ordinary feudal deed a
feudal right to the Scottish throne, the fateful retribution
warned another royal cousin about to perpetrate a like
feudal deed, and incur like penalty. That is all.
In so viewing the motive of Macbeth a clue is got to
a labyrinth of meaning, giving, the political poet a
definition, a revelation, and a rational interpretation.
To gratify popular lust for intense ferocity, the play is
tnade preposterous. Even as a picture the Rembrandt
light and shade thrown in enhances the beauty, com-
pared with the forbidding pall of black and red.
Depraved public taste may prefer what the poet did
not depict. The mirror was not turned down to nether
realms to reflect a Titaness. It was held before an
every-day crowd of ambitious folk hurrying on to either
destiny. The transcendental had been reached by
Dante, and has been again achieved by Milton; but
the homely play of a Highland feud is a human
story, and as such will for ever keep a firm hold on
human sympathy. Fantastic whims conjure up Titans,
Hippogryphsy and Sisters of Lucifer; but ere living in
the play Lady Macbeth lived in nerve and heart and
mind a leal Highland woman. No abstraction typifying
a class, it only showed how one may do again what
another before had done.
Thus we find that the plays do not individualize
classes; but rather classify individuals, that inductions
may be drawn from particulars, then to be thrown into


deductions for the general weal. This teaches how
from given conditions of social or political life definite
results or outcomes are just as predicable as the effect
is known in any laboratory experiment. It was the
method of observation applied to ethics.
To admit the theory needs no belief in an intuitive
moral sense. Enough is it to know the poet’s drift;
what he argued for, not the abstract truth. Hearers
may be creedless, and yet understand him. The struc-
ture of the plays befits all time; but this would not
be so if they had been desultory efforts of fancy cast
in no unity of type. They imitate nature which has no
monstrosity. They show how none live free from the
hovering between dieu and diuelle , somehow giving moral
balance, yet leaving fate the arbiter.
If every Macbeth have no nobler end, no finer point
to prick the sides of his intent than earthly ambition,
the vaulting will o’erleap its cell and mightiness of
conceit meet misery of contention. Thus the Baconian
aphorisms of the plays are as marked as are the
antitheses in which reside the force of their literary
diction. They teach that to this complexion it must
come at last, that clods may mingle with mother earth
before their time and think their living is a life; but in
their living death they only take their putrefaction here,
having no hereafter.
Having fully enough illustrated the romantic and the
real in regard to prevailing ideas of the drama and its
author, I shall only add that although the romancer in
The Victorian Review is himself all fiction he descends
not to every follower’s folly. He polishes spots where
“ The Mirror oi Melbourne Culture ” dims its own
lustre. Reflecting on sib as a word filched from barbaric
lingo Victorian reviewers said they liked no hard word


out of their reading. This murmur makes their mentor
tell where “these critics assume that that which they
understand not is false set down.” They ignorantly
take novelty for paradox. The etymology of sib is
given in The Aryan Household , a book printed at their
own door, and yet these critics know it not! The
learned author says sib is used in Scotland in “ a
dyslogistic connotation,” a scholarly phrase for a Doric
expletive found in a dictionary printed in modern
Athens for readers over the border. Of Dr. Hearn’s
popular book, a real mirror of Melbourne culture,
Victorian reviewers know as little as they know of the
text or literature of the drama. But sib is neither a
Scotch nor Scottish Scotticism scotching snaky nerves
withal. Sib is current in Latham’s Johnson's Dictionary ,
as well as in Chambers'; and though not found in a
vocabulary of Yankee slang is still used in Brewer’s
scholarly book of phrase and fable. Shakespearean
scholars find it in Halliwell, and playfellow with God
throughout the drama. Well-bred people know it in
their Faerie Queene and other classics for polite learning.
To Victorian Reviewers alone
“ She is a tonnishe gyb,
The devil and she be sib.”
And just as Skelton, Spenser, Beaumont and Fletcher,
Montagu, Brewer, and Hearn employ the word to mean
a vow relation so do I use it to denote how William
Shakespeare stood vow sibman to Francis Bacon’s plays,
their godsib or gossip. No other word so tersely well
conveys to properly educated and well read people the
idea of literary sponsor. With every play “licensed it
must be ere it could be printed,” author or sib was
needed. With plays Bacon would be known as neither.


He would not profess to be a poet. “He loved better
to be a poet than to be accounted so.” He would
write and even print dramatic epics to make History
visible agreeably to his own admirable and original
definition of the true function of dramatic poetry; yet
he did not care to be known as their author, and that
too, for potent reasons fully set forth in his private
letters, as every reader knows, and so he printed through
sibmen. Besides, a sort of literary sibrede was Bacon’s
foible and continual habit. Essex was once his sib for
a Device , and Burghley for the most eloquent and
important State manifesto of his time. Peele may yet
be found only a sib for Edward /. as Marlowe assuredly
was for Edward 11., plays now allowed to belong to
the English Historical series. That Miles Smith was
sib for the Address to the Readers of the 1611 Bible I
have already held, and find many able judges agree in
that opinion, which indeed only needs close scrutiny to
be confirmed. But I find as few clerical readers of that
remarkable composition as I find literary readers of
Bacon’s finest works. Like the Essex letter to Fulke
Greville on studies proper for a young man, it is “So
very Baconian in matter and manner that every word
of it might have been written by Bacon in his own
person”; an illative from the same kind of evidence as
that from which I infer about the sibmen.
And yet we are bid believe that Victorian Reviewers
confute a theory of whose simplest premises they are
deplorably ignorant! “ Let boors and franklins say it,
I’ll swear it,” swore the Argus , for, “if it be ne’er so
false, a true newspaper will swear it in the behalf of its
friend,” when endorsing at second-hand his grotesque
absurdities. But, the wish is father to the thought, and
truth is mother to disappointment. Readers who are


led through books by critical apron-strings will do that
bidding; but to refute the theory and leave it not a
waddling “ leg to stand on ” will require a defter dialectic
than the stolen ideas and pilfered phrase of a predatory
critic, and sharper vision than that that failed, as Argus ,
November 13th 1880, did fail, to see the deception.
Nor will the pithy word drop out of use amongst lost
beauties of English, while editorial sibs keep up the
dyslogistic connotation. Words will paint bird wits
who flout proud yEschylos for spelling his aristocratic
name with an O, offending 7roAA<xn-os twv of Victorian
reviewing misologers. Trinculo and Caliban may entice
Autolycus from The Winter's Tale to thieve with them
in The Tempest; but there the deft rogue will be too
arch for the Arcadians. The pair are enough in one
farce. To run a third with them in a Trilogy would
try the talent of Bacon and genius of .Eschylos, or wit
of both combined in one Shakesperean trine.
Yet this kind of merry fooling is nothing to Victorian
wits holding their mottled mirror up to Melbourne
culture. The coterie in the adytum of the new literary
system, with novel readings to fill their void in the old,
will have Beatrice make fun of Juliet’s fervour; Othello
vow Desdemona should have died hereafter; the croaking
raven bellow for revenge on Shylock; and Launcslot
Gobbo, with “his clog at his heels,” trip not his father,
but a step-dance with a Yankee merriman. Play-goers
will then see themselves divertingly reflected in the
theatre, as play-readers are already reflected in “ The
Mirror of Melbourne Culture.”
And now to bespeak a kindly word on behalf of a
literary recreation that has been a torpedo to many a
lettered finger hindered in palsy from holding the pen
for a review. Written hurriedly from a multitude of


notes made in brief intervals of broken leisure through a
busy life, and without a thought of publication, the book
was only printed for others who wished to read what
they had often heard about. Critics who tremble every
day and want no something to turn up, turn down a
frown on the book to prevent them. With unrevised
manuscripts in great part given to the printer while the
ink was wet, the form may not better the letter. But
that the material is valid, not a vision; the theory
true, and no paradox, proof enough comes out the
quicker by brisk critical brushing. One among the
diligent writes : —“ There is a narrow feeling among the
self-constituted litterateur out here, as always in small
communities; they know little and care little for pure
literature. Newspaper writers are not judges, even when
they are not jealous of that which is beyond them.”
Perhaps this caustic censor of his own fraternity would
add what Goldsmith says of critics generally “ They
are like eunuchs in a seraglio, who are incapable of
giving pleasure themselves, and hinder those that would.
The mentally unseminar’d Mardian can do nothing to
woo the Muse, nor procreate thought. His fierce affec-
tions envy what is done in freer thought. The slave
can only mar as Dian bids.
K I
“ Like her! O Isis ! ’tis impossible.”
After reading my reply this critic of critics will send
his stricture far into the literary world abroad.
Rather than repine I prefer to appropriate the genial
words of Stapfer“ There is nothing perhaps more
exquisite in literature than the writings of an occasional
and spontaneous character, of men gifted with knowledge
and talent by whom literature is not followed as a
trade.” Mine were not meant to display knowledge,


but only to divert. When I wrote long ago of Macbeth
as a “ hastive impromptu,” the thought was ridiculed.
Later writers speak of the play as a “glorious
impromptu,” and are admired; which shows how critics
can discriminate in distributing reputation.
If now my mode of arguing be more cogent than
before, it may better point a style more deadly to error
than fatal to friendship. Such slain error is that in an
Edinburgh reviewer who calls the Sonnet Bacon says he
wrote to reconcile Elizabeth to Essex nothing else than
“a political squib.” For how can anyone tell the nature
of a poem never seen ? All known about that Sonnet
is that it was composed to reconcile two differing
friends who were somehow related as lovers, in love and
despair. That very motive pervades, and is indeed the
gist and tenor of the Shakesperean Sonnets. Moreover,
Bacon’s Sonnet is one among the very few works
specially named by him that never could be found.
It vanished into thin air along with the MSS. of the
other Sonnets. Their fate is the same, if not their
poetry.
Whether the point be new or old I cannot tell, having
read no book on the “monistic” theory—fine word,
monistic. For want of a book I had to write a book ;
and whatever betide it now, it then did not violate
a Novum Organum canon against multiplying books
without need, as an Edinburgh reviewer would aver.
On the hap, as writers critical enough to be reviewers
allow, the work, albeit written in harsh words without a
flowing style, unfit for popular reading, does fill a void
in the literature of the drama. As such it fulfills the
aphorism on Criticism in The Advancement directing
inquiry into any part of learning hitherto omitted or not
laboured enough, as this part of Dramatic Poetry has-


now been shown deficient. And wonderful though it
may appear to a reviewer in modern Athens to find
in the Athens of the South a reader of drama at all;
and more wonderful still to find there a writer thereon;
still most wonderful of all is it that an Edinburgh
reviewer can only half-quote Bacon in his own art,
leaving the other and better half to be filled in for him
by the outer barbarian whom the refined illiterate affects
to hold up to ineffable scorn. For if Novum Organum
do protest against uselessly multiplying books, so does
The Advancement of Learning add:—“For the opinion
of plenty is among the causes of want, and the great
quantity of books maketh a show rather of superfluity
than lack; which surcharge nevertheless is not to be
remedied by making no more books, but by making
more good books, which, as the serpent of Moses,
might devour the serpents of the enchanters.”
Even so, my aim has been not to make another book,
but to write a good book that would disenchant men’s
minds out of the dreamland of reverie, and bring their
ideas down from the realm of romance to the earthly
level of human probability and reality.
FINIS.


“The ridicule so lavishly poured upon the Greeks,
and the marked respect shown for the Trojans.”
Professor Stapfer.
“Bacon constantly disparages the later Greeks.”
Professor Fowler.
“How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
A lightning before death.”
William Shakespeare.
“In this very session I have had some taste of
• your loving affections, which I hope was not a
lightning before the death of them.”
Francis Bacon.


BY
WILLIAM THOMSON, F.R.C.S., F.L.S
“We find it far easier to believe that Shakespere
wrote those dramas than that Bacon or anybody
else wrote them, although we confess the con-
viction has been somewhat staggered by these
resemblances, often amounting to identity of
thought and expression in the writings of Bacon
and Shakespere. Certainly, to the controversy
on the subject, this work of Dr. Thomson, with
its original views, supported with learning and
research, is a valuable contribution. . . . We
repeat, it is an important book—scholarly, the
diction pure and eloquent, and the new lights
which it presents are backed by an assemblage
of facts often powerful, and always interesting.”
New Zealand Herald.
MELBOURNE : SANDS & McDOUGALL.


