

(f/cp-f
Series A. No. 4 —WENTWORTH


"The Australian Political Scene" is an advanced
Discussion Group Course dealing with our Institu-
tions and policies of today.
To show you how we got these Institutions and
policies such as a free press, trial by jury,
responsible government, Protection, Federation,
the basic wage, industrial arbitration, and so on —
we're giving you stories of the men who built the
foundations of our political scene.
Series "A" are:
No. I.—For The Term of Their Natural Lives (Con-
vict Days).
No. 2.—John Macarthur.
No. 3.—The Roadrnaker (Governor Macquarie).
No. 4.—William Charles Wentworth.
• At the end of this story there are blank pages
for your own notes. It’s a good idea to jot down
points for discussion as you go along.
A.A. EDUCATION SERVICE
DISCUSSION GROUP SCHEME


WILLIAM CHARLES
WENTWORTH
LONDON, 1818, in the reign of the Prince Regent.
An exclusive club. Smooth-footed waiters in livery
carry punch in tall glasses. A group of fashionable
young men are standing near the fireplace listening to
one of their number hold forth. The young man who
is talking is tall with a lionlike head. He is arrogant,
ambitious, a Colonial. He stands still to hide the slight
limp with which he walks. He has a cast in one eye.
He is saying to the young men around him:
“We are a nation and as such are entitled to all the
rights that free-born Englishmen enjoy everywhere.
New South Wales is no longer a penal colony. We
demand the right to rule ourselves.”
Someone asks sharply, “Who would you have to rule
at Botany Bay? You have no gentry, William.”
The young man interrupts:
“That’s where you are wrong. We are building up
an aristocracy of great landowners. Why, my father
has greater estates than any duke in England. Some
of my friends have lands greater than an English
county—lands richer than any in this country. We
have the land and the people for a ruling class. We
demand a New Britannia in another world.”
That was William Charles Wentworth in 1818, the
voice of a budding Australian nationalism —a colonial
boy in a strange city, feeling a little out of it; prob-
ably the first native son of Australia to be “aggres-
sively Australian,” as a writer of the nineties was to
put it. He wanted freedom of the press for Aus-
tralians, trial-by-jury, representative government. And
as he showed later, he was prepared to stage a Botany
Bay tea party to win them.


WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH
Let Britain beware, he said. She had lost the
Atlantic colonies to America. She might lose Australia,
too. In 1813 with Blaxland and Lawson he had found
a narrow track along the ridges over the Blue Moun-
tains. There was no other path. Had not explorers
searched for years? In places the path was only 30 ft.
wide.
“Of what avail would whole armies prove in those
terrible defiles?” he asked. “We could take our people
and herds across and then hold these defiles with
artillery fire. A few colonists could hold up the flower
of the British Army.
“A few minutes’ exposure to such a dreadful car-
nage would annihilate the assailing army; or, at best,
only preserve its scattered remnants from destruction
by raising an intervening barrier of the carcases of its
slaughtered martyrs.”
A firebrand? Not exactly, because some of it was
rhetoric. An Australian? Yes. Never mind his motives
now—they can wait for the present. Necessary? Yes.
He gathered together and gave form to what so many
native-born Australians of his day were feeling, if
somewhat vaguely.
The first settlers were exiles from England. They
had come to grab fortunes and return to the lives of
country gentlemen in England. Something of Australia
got into a few of them; John Macarthur died among
his flocks at Elizabeth Farm; he hadn’t been happy in
England when he had been banished from Australia
and had hungered for the sight of his lands and heavy-
woolled sheep. The soil had got into some of the
others, too; but they still spoke of England as “home”
and talked of the time when they could return.
With their sons it was different. They didn’t know
England and they were coming to look upon Australia
as their home. They were beginning to feel that some-
thing was wrong. They were conquering a continent,


but many of them had already won the battle. They
could be self-conscious and assess themselves, too.
What had happened, though, of course, they didn’t
see it that way, was that their economic progress had
outpaced their constitutional progress. They were still
ruled by military dictators. A civilian could be tried
by a military court-martial for breaches of the
criminal law. (These were juries for civil cases.) Yet
free-born Englishmen everywhere else had trial by
jury for all offences—the right of a man to be tried
by 12 of his equals. In this new country they hadn’t
freedom of the press. Nor had they representative
government in 1818. In 1823 the Home Government
was to make some concession to them—a Legislative
Council of members nominated and presided over by
the Governor. But that they were to feel wasn’t
enough. They were free-born men, and, anyway, the
seat of Government was still in England, and that was
too far away. Men there couldn’t handle problems and
understand them as well as men on the spot.
Wentworth synthetised these vague feelings, doubts,
assertions, and gave them form. That was his contri-
bution to our story and our way of life.
It was necessary at that stage of Australia’s
development that someone should teach us to think
and be “aggressively Australian.” Today, enlightened
Australians are thinking along different lines.
Let’s look at another picture. The place is again
London. But this time it is not an exclusive Regency
club but a servicemen’s canteen. A R.A.A.F. sergeant-
pilot is talking to Allied airmen—to Canadians, Eng-
lishmen, South Africans, Americans, New Zealanders,
Belgians, Frenchmen, Norwegians, and Dutchmen.
This R.A.A.F. sergeant-pilot is expressing what we
Australians are beginning to think today:
“The war has bumped our Australian habits of
thinking. We thought once that we could shut our-
selves off from the world and that so long as we got


a good price for our wool we would be O.K. The world
could have all the wars it liked; we Australians, we
told ourselves, would sit tight in our own little back-
yard and grow cabbages.”
Or, if you don’t like pictures, let’s read a few lines
from a recent leading article in a big Australian morn-
ing daily, headed Part of a Big World.
“The sentiments expressed in Advance, Aus-
tralia Fair are sound enough, if we do not inter-
pret them too narrowly or take it for granted
that our geographical isolation must exclude all
external interests and commitments. Our land is
girt by water; but it is also girt by many other
lands and many millions of people belonging to
our own and other races. ... It would be simply
ridiculous to imagine that a country of some
7,000,000 people could save the world—and
thereby save itself —by concentrating on its
domestic problems; the nearest approximation of
Utopia that mankind can ever hope to attain will
have to be world-wide, and its population will be
legion. . . . This question of population is closely
bound up with the wider question of universal
freedom and political progress. Australia has
been a laboratory for political and social experi-
ments, many of which have been eminently suc-
cessful ; but the more successful they are, the less
are we entitled to put a parochial wall around
them and decree that our friends are to be kept
outside that wall as rigorously as our enemies.
Nor can we forget that without friends we would
have found it impossible to keep out our enemies.
. . . No insular Utopia could hope to be safe from
them by relying on an ideological wall and a
privileged population. We must look beyond our
frontiers for an increase in our numbers; we
must widen our political perspective and get a
bigger picture of the post-war world.”


Let’s see what had happened at Botany Bay to make
a new set of ideas, as put forward by native-born
William Charles Wentworth, necessary for the
development of our young nation.
Governor Macquarie had had the same old instruc-
tions from the Home Government—to found a peasant
state. But he could not undo the past. His rule was
rather an adjustment than a reversion. He had been
sent out to clean up the Rum Corps, but the job
couldn’t be done. Land grants couldn’t be resumed.
Macquarie could nibble a privilege away here, find a
flaw in a title deed here. That was all. The officers
were too well entrenched. The best that Macquarie
could do, as the two Australian writers who use the
name of M. Barnard Eldershaw put it in their book
My Australia, “was to encourage the small landowner
and by government favour to raise up a middle class
of emancipist traders in the face of the old oligarchy.
This precipitated a class struggle where before there
had only been a class distinction.”
Macquarie’s love of building was also a weapon with
which he nibbled away at the exclusives. His public
works schemes employed many thousands of convicts
who would otherwise have been cheap labour to swell
the fortunes of the great landowners. But it cost
money and the Home Government protested, and
eventually sent out a Commissioner to check over
Macquarie’s “extravagances.” (From 1787 to 1809
about 10,000 convicts had come to Australia; during
Macquarie’s reign 22,000 convicts and 1,300 free
emigrants had arrived; but he was expected to manage
on the old budget.)
One act of Macquarie’s, too, was to make impossible
the policy he was ordered to carry out. It was the
opening up of the interior by the crossing of the Blue
Mountains in 1813 by three explorers, Blaxland, Law-
son and Wentworth—the same young man whom we


caught a glimpse of a few pages back, being “aggres-
sively Australian” in an exclusive London club.
Macquarie couldn’t control the vast hinterland and at
this stage of our development it was probably only
convicts and poor immigrants with small holdings
suitable to the pastoralist, the big landowner. Ex-
could not build a big wool industry. That needed
capital, plenty of land, cheap labour. Probably, too,
no other commodity but wool could have become Aus-
tralia’s staple during this time. The country was huge,
distances immense, and transport by bullock dray
slow and rough. Anything perishable and breakable
was out. Wool was durable. It was economic, too. The
explorer Sturt estimated in 1835 that £2,814 invested
in wool growing would amount to £9,845 in five years,
after paying per cent, expenses all through.
Events in Europe were taking a hand in how this
country would develop. Governor King hadn’t had
much time for sheep. The original idea for Botany Bay
was that the convicts should become self-supporting
and grow a little hemp for Britain. Sir Joseph Banks,
who had been with Cook on his Endeavour voyage,
and who was an “expert” on the new continent, had
said in 1803 that wool would never thrive in New
South Wales, that the grass was too coarse, that the
climate and soil were unsuitable, and there was no
good point in encouraging John Macarthur’s experi-
ments.
But sheep did thrive.and the Industrial Revolution
was shaping things so that Britain was beginning to
look to Australia as the source of large supplies of
wool. The Industrial Revolution had changed Britain;
it had increased her wealth and population and had
rearranged her social system. A powerful middle class
had risen and began to press for its interests.
The Enclosure Acts had despoiled the peasantry of
their common land; new severe game laws took away
the sources of some of its food. Wages for farm


labourers were low and became even lower as prices
rose and purchasing power fell. The farm workers
went to the towns and cities to compete with machines
and the cheapest of all labour—pauper children. A
few people grew richer and richer and the great mass
of people poorer and poorer.
Here was where wool came in. The woollen manu-
facturers imported most of their wool from Saxony,
but the demand was greater than the supply. Then
John Macarthur had come to London with his fine
wools—wool as fine in texture as any from Saxony.
Here were the interests that were going to be
brought to bear on New South Wales—capital looking
for a market (which could command abundant cheap
labour) and a demand for a big source of raw wool
within the Empire. These were the factors that were
going to influence the report on Macquarie’s steward-
ship by John Thomas Bigge, the Commissioner who
arrived in New South Wales in 1821. Bigge knew
what was expected of him.
He censured Macquarie and advised against the old
policy of settling small men on the land. He urged
larger land grants for pastoralists and the lowering
of the import duty on Australian wool into England.
Convicts, he said, should not be used for public works
and they should not be put on farms. There was a
danger for British trade if the colony was allowed to
develop secondary industries. Macquarie, you remem-
ber, had backed men like Simeon Lord who was in-
terested in weaving, rope-making, extracting tannin
from wattlebark and soda from seaweed. He had
sponsored these men as a foil to the landowners.
Bigge went on to deplore that “democratic feeling has
already taken deep root in the colony, in consequence
of the absurd and mischievous policy pursued by
Governor Macquarie, and as there is already a strong
combination amongst this class of persons, it cannot
too soon be opposed with vigour.”


From then on there was a new land policy for New
South Wales—putting rich men on the land and keep-
ing poor men off it.
For three years Governor Brisbane, who had suc-
ceeded Macquarie, was allowed to make small land
grants. Large grants, however, were made in London.
Then, after three years, Brisbane was permitted to
make grants so small that ordinarily a settler could
not make a living. Darling, who followed Brisbane,
could make no grant smaller than 320 acres, too large
an area for the poor man, and he was forbidden to
make grants to ex-convicts.
The stage was set for capital, for large holdings:
The cards were to be stacked against the small man—
drought, floods, a country that was hard to tame, little
government assistance. These factors were to build
up and precipitate the great land struggles after the
gold discoveries. A million men were to come to New
South Wales seeking gold. When gold petered they
were to cry out for land, and another new set of con-
ditions were to bring about another set of ideas.
But in the meantime, sheep was to be king, and the
political struggle was to be mainly constitutional.
English capital began to flow into Australia.
Where does the young man we listened to in the
first pages come into this picture? In 1818, when we
saw him in London, he was 26, studying law at the
Inner Temple, and writing a book about his native
land. Many snap titles have been applied to Went-
worth—the Patriot, the Democrat, the Man of the
People, the Constitutionalist. The last is probably the
most accurate. He had a sincere love of his country,
but he wasn’t a democrat. He had no time for demo-
cracy, as we know it. To say that is no condemnation
of Wentworth. He was a man of his times. Demo-
cracy, as we think of it, was still a new idea in those
days. The Chartist movement was not to get under


way in England until the 1840’s. Wentworth despised
the masses and believed in representative government
by an enlightened aristocracy.
Wentworth has come in for his share of fashionable
“debunking.” He has been accused of inconsistency;
of “ratting” on his earlier ideals; it is said that Went-
worth, “the fighting democrat” climbed to power as
the champion of the emancipists and then, as his
power and possessions grew, dumped them. But is
this really true?
Fairest estimate of Wentworth is probably that
made by Dr. A. C. V. Melbourne. In a Macrossan lec-
ture at the University of Queensland in 1932 he said:
“Apart from the changes wrought inevitably by
wider knowledge and mature experience, Wentworth’s
later principles did not differ materially from those
which regulated the behaviour of his earlier years.
There was indeed, in Wentworth’s life, a period dur-
ing which his actions were directed more by passion
than by principles; but most of his critics have
neglected altogether the opinions held by him before
he heard of his father’s early lapses, and before he
quarrelled with the Macarthur family.”
It seems clear that Wentworth’s political career was
influenced to an extraordinary degree by his personal
experiences. Let’s see what two of these personal
experiences were—the discovery of the circumstances
of his birth and the row with the Macarthurs.
In 1818 William Charles Wentworth was in London.
Back in New South Wales his father, Darcy Went-
worth, who had arrived as a young surgeon in the
Second Fleet, was now a wealthy landowner. Young
Wentworth looked upon himself as belonging to the
aristocracy of big landowners. His interests and
tastes were theirs. He had hopes of marrying John
Macarthur’s daughter. (His devotion to her seems
sincere enough, but ambitious young Wentworth also
saw the material advantages of such a union. He


wrote to his father from London that such a union
would bring about “the formation of permanent and
respectable establishments in the colony . . . and
would bring about “the accomplishment of those pro-
jects for the future respectability and grandeur of
our family.”)
Sir Henry Parkes, his political enemy, summed
Wentworth up very shrewdly: “It may be, with just
reason, doubted whether the phrase so often idly used,
‘the people’ ever in his (Wentworth’s) mind included
the masses of his fellow men. Mr. Wentworth spoke of
the people as the old conservative Whig gentlemen of
England spoke of the people a hundred years
When indignantly repelling the charges, which were
often made against him during the years 1847 and
1854, of having abandoned his former radical prin-
ciples, I myself once heard him exclaim, in vindication
of his political consistency, that he was never a
radical, but always a Whig. Constitutional reform
with him meant putting an end to government from
Downing Street, and handing over the affairs of the
colony, including the public lands, to his own class.”
The real nature of the American “revolution” or
War of Independence, you remember, was the same—
prosperous American colonists wanted to throw off
rule from London to have the affairs of the colonies
in their own hands.
Wentworth believed himself to belong to the ruling
class by right of birth. He believed himself to be an
aristocrat but with a sense of responsibility to others
he thought less fortunate than himself. In 1817, for
instance, he wrote about his decision to study for the
bar. ... “I am actuated by a desire for better qualify-
ing myself for the performance of those duties that
birth has imposed.”
He added that he wanted to make himself familiar
“with all the excellence of the British constitution and
hope at some further period to advocate successfully


the right of my country to participate in its
advantages.”
Then at this stage he was to experience two shocks
that were to put him on the wrong foot for the next
20 years.
Early 1818, when he was 26, Wentworth learnt in
an accidental way the truth about his father and his
birth. It came as a thorough shock to him, although
it had been common knowledge in New South Wales.
His father had escaped transportation for highway
robbery by going to New South Wales as a surgeon.
He, himself, was probably a natural son of his father;
and all he could be reasonably sure of was that his
mother’s name had been Catherine. When he had been
at Norfolk Island, Darcy Wentworth had two convict
mistresses, both of whom were called Catherine.
This disqualified him from the exclusives. For 20
years afterwards he was to fret “against the conse-
quences of a self-imposed exclusion from the society
to which he naturally belonged. He wandered in a
wilderness of his own choice, a self-branded Ishmael,
giving full play to his vengeful feelings. He main-
tained this attitude until the arrival of free immi-
grants with new political ideas forced him to realize
that he had more in common with his erstwhile
enemies (the Macarthurs and others) than with the
new democracy.”*
In Paris he quarrelled bitterly with John Mac-
arthur’s son, James. Wentworth ran short of money,
tried to borrow from James, and was rebuffed. The
breach was never healed.
In 1824 Wentworth returned to Sydney. He had
graduated in law at Cambridge. He had talent and
he had a magnificent grasp of British constitutional
law. At Cambridge he had entered a poem of 3,400
lines, “Australasia,” for the Chancellor’s Gold Prize,
*Dr. A. C. V. Melbourne.


mainly to score off young Macarthur who, Wentworth
said, not unjustifiably, had been 14 years at Cam-
bridge and had wasted his time.
Wentworth’s poem ran second. In lines like these
you sense the new Wentworth, the young man smart-
ing under the stigma of his origin and determined to
outlive it:
Land of my hope! soon may this early blot
Amid thy growing honours he forgot;
Soon may a freeman’s soul, a freeman’s blade,
Nerve ev’ry arm, and gleam through ev’ry glade —
No more the outcast convict’s clanking chains
Deform thy wilds, and stigmatize thy plains . . . . '
In the last stanza you sense, too, his genuine love
of country and a piece of colonial impudence that must
have taken away the breath of the judges (he was
lucky to run second) :
And, Oh, Britannia! shouldst thou cease to ride
Despotic Empress of old Ocean’s tide —
Should thy tamed lion—spent his former might —
No longer roar, the terror of the fight;
Should e’er arrive that dark, disastrous hour,
When, bowed by luxury, thou yield’st to power;
When thou, no longer freest of the free
To some proud victor bend’st the vanquished knee;
May all thy glories in another sphere
Relume, and shine more brightly still than here;
May this, thy last-born infant then arise,
To glad thy heart, and greet thy parent eyes;
And Australia float, with flag unfurled,
A new Britannia in another world!
Back in Sydney, young Wentworth began to fight
for a new Britannia in another world—a Britannia
of the 1820’s, you should note. All the reforms he
fought for—freedom of the press, trial-by-jury, and
representative government were constitutional and
not social ones. Liberty in those days had a political


sense—freedom of speech, trial-by-jury, representa-
tive government and so on.
Wentworth didn’t like the officer set. The enmity
went back to times before his father had sent him to
be educated in London. Darcy Wentworth was very
friendly with ex-convict Dr. Redfern. Redfern, who’d
been sent out for his part in the mutiny of the Nore,
was a favourite of Macquarie, and was hated by the
officers. Darcy Wentworth supported Redfern.
Smarting under his newly-found social stigma,
young Wentworth flared up against the “overbearing
arrogance of the military faction” and their “insolent
comportment to the colonists in general.” He decided
to smash them. How could he do it? He would enlist
as allies the group most hostile to the exclusives—the
freed convicts, or emancipists. He would publish a
newspaper.
The new Governor, Sir Thomas Brisbane, was still
carrying on much of Macquarie’s good work. But the
exclusives held all important government jobs, had
influential friends in England where the policy of
governing the colony was decided.
Wentworth and Robert Warded launched The Aus-
tralian on October 14, 1824. The colony until now
had had only one paper, “The Sydney Gazette” and
“New South Wales Advertiser,” a carefully censored
journal that published government notices, court
reports, and classified reports, and which was about
as critical as a valedictory illuminated address.
The Australian supported the emancipists, slammed
the exclusives and slated the British Government for
denying trial-by-jury and representative government.
The Secretary of State for the Colonies in London
urged the Governor to draw the paper’s fangs. Gov-
ernor Brisbane did nothing. The exclusives passed
round the hat, collected £1,500 to start an opposition
paper and peddled £BOO a year for an editor of “legal
and constitutional principles.” The Australian’s cir-


culation soared. Wentworth took the fight into the
courts and appeared for emancipists.
Then Governor Brisbane’s term came to an end.
The new Governor, Sir Ralph Darling, arrived.
Wentworth forced the “committee of welcome” to
insert into their address the political aims of his new
party. Darling realized that the young barrister was
the strongest man in the colony and tried to win him
over. The constitution of 1823 had set up a Council
Legislature of 12, to be nominated by the Governor,
to assist in the ruling of the colony. Darling offered
Wentworth a seat on the Council. Wentworth didn’t
fall for the trap; as a counsellor he might become am
exclusive, would have great influence and social status.
He hesitated. But his ambitious nature needed more
than this. He wanted to take his revenge on the
Macarthurs, and he wanted to be his own man and
not the Governor’s.
Next year his big chance came. Two privates of
the garrison, Sudds and Thompson, deliberately com-
mitted theft so that they would be crimed and become
convicts. (Apparently the life of a convict in 1826 was
preferable to that of a private soldier.)
They were court-martialled, convicted, and sen-
tenced to transportation.
Darling, a soldier of the old school, said the crime
was an open insult to the King’s uniform. He changed
the sentence to hard labour on the roads. They were
loaded with heavy chains, had iron collars put around
their necks, and were marched from the barracks to
the gaol. Sudds, who was ill, and whose collar was
“too small for his neck,” died soon afterwards.
Sydney flared up. Wentworth addressed public
meetings, called Darling a murderer, threatened to
bring him to trial in the House of Commons. The
Australian and a new paper, The Monitor, attacked
the Governor.


WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH
Darling called Wentworth a “republican.” He
drafted bills to suppress The Australian. The Chief
Justice, Francis Forbes, emasculated them. Then
Darling tried to levy a tax of 4d. on newspapers. This
move failed, too. The struggle was bitter. Warded
fought a duel with Darling’s brother-in-law; and he
was fined £lOO in a libel action.
The Australian didn’t let up. Then Darling sued
Wentworth for libel. He won his case, but public
sympathy was with Wentworth.
Downing Street woke up. Darling was recalled to
join the procession of recalled governors King,
Bligh, Macquarie. As the Governor’s barge was rowed
out boats flew pennants, whistles blew and the people
went on holiday. A bullock decorated with coloured
ribbons was paraded through Sydney and was bar-
becued in the grounds of Vaucluse House that night.
Wentworth staged the biggest “do” that Sydney had
ever seen.
He had won his first big battle—that of freedom of
the press. Macarthur had ousted Bligh, Wentworth
had ousted Darling.
Meanwhile, he had had another fight on his hands—
for trial-by-jury. Marines and convicts of the First
Fleet had been subject to military law; Prime Minister
Pitt’s Attorney-General didn’t think convicts were
“the proper stuff to make juries.”
Some reform had come in Macquarie’s term. Free
men and freed men were given the right of trial-by-
jury in civil cases—that is, disputes between persons
over land deals, business transactions, libel, debts and
such matters. But breaches of the criminal law were
still tried by court-martial; free citizens, as well as
soldiers and convicts, had to submit themselves to its
authority.
Wentworth spoke for free and freed, demanded that
they should be judged by their peers and not by the
Judge-Advocate and six naval or military officers.


He said the freed had served their term and should
be treated as free men again. The exclusives resisted.
Chief Justice Forbes backed Wentworth and urged
the Governor to grant juries in criminal cases, but
Darling held out a little longer.
William IV had succeeded to the throne. Wentworth
fell back upon the plan that had worked so well in
Brisbane’s time—that of including suggestions for
reforms in public addresses to new governors.
The citizens of Sydney sent William IV a con-
gratulatory address. Wentworth included a clause
asking the King to grant to New South Wales “the
rights of Britons, a full participation in the benefits
and privileges of the British constitution.” Went-
worth, the constitutionalist, pointed out that New
South Wales was the only British colony where such
rights were denied to free men.
It worked. The Governor was told to go ahead with
trial-by-jury. In 1830 the Legislative Council passed
an act which provided for juries in all criminal cases,
allowed emancipists to sit as jurymen, and excluded
only those ex-convicts who had been convicted for
fresh offences committed in the colony. (Today ex-
criminals are still barred from jury service.)
Wentworth was now 39. He was rich, his position
was assured. His paper had been profitable and he
had earned big fees at the bar. He owned large estates
and his interests shifted steadily to his flocks. He
sold his paper and gave up his bar practice. But he
didn’t let up on his third objective—representative
government. It was, of course, a somewhat restricted
representative government—taking the affairs of New
South Wales from London and handing them over to
the class into which he had now won his way. Yet it
was a progressive step; other men were to come later
and build on the foundations of self-government that
Wentworth won.


Wentworth’s party petitioned the House of Com-
mons for more representation by the people. The
Commons refused.
Wentworth organized the Australian Patriotic
Association; significantly he now chose many wealthy
men for the executive positions of his Association.
The Association agitated for an elected parliament,,
but the Home Government refused to grant this so
long as New South Wales was a convict settlement.
James Macarthur and other exclusives opposed the
Association.
But the two opposing camps were soon united on
one great issue—transportation.
The character of the population had changed gradu-
ally. The Australian Patriotic Association had got its
drive from the old emancipist party which had been
concerned mainly with political and legal problems.
The old repressive system had imposed political and
legal disabilities on the emancipists but it had not
prevented them from prospering. By 1838 the inter-
ests of many emancipists were those of the exclusives.
Under pressure, there had been a switch in the land
policy. In 1831 land had been thrown open at 5/- an
acre. The Home Government had assisted immigrants
and thousands of free labourers arrived. Some new-
comers bought land and settled on small farms. Up
went the price of labour. Some settlers failed and
went back to labouring. Others came out to sell their
labour. Here was a new class interested in employ-
ment and in wages.
Wealthy emancipists joined forces with the
exclusives in opposing the immigrants. Large holdings
needed low wages, they claimed. The prosperity of
Australia depended on wool, they insisted. And Went-
worth’s voice was heard with theirs.
The price of land was raised to 12/- an acre. There
was an outcry from the immigrants. They couldn’t


buy land at this price. They had left England for
Australia to be farmers, not labourers, they said.
Immigration of free labour came to a standstill. The
squatters saw their labour supply falling off;
exclusives and wealthy emancipists of the Australian
Patriotic Association were now united by fear of ruin.
The Pastoral Association of N.S.W., of which Went-
worth was an active member, petitioned the Home
Government to send out more convicts. The Pastoral
Association also urged the bringing in of cheap Indian
coolie labour; convicts and coolies would lower wages
and the cost of farm produce. Although the Governor
was advised by his selected Council, he got his orders
from London. Prosperous exclusives and emancipists
saw that their privileges could be retained only if
they controlled the government. They demanded a
House of Parliament elected by landowners.
Wentworth and James Macarthur spoke from the
same platform. The poorer emancipists, small farmers,
shopkeepers, tradesmen and labourers who had
brought him power were shocked. His old paper, The
Australian, wrote: “His day is gone by. His opinion
is worth nothing. Certainly, he first taught the natives
of this colony what liberty was, but he has betrayed
them since and they have withdrawn their confidence
in him.”
But all Wentworth had done was to get off the
wrong foot and revert to type. He had, in Dr. Mel-
bourne's words, “imposed his leadership upon the
people of the colony by sheer force of character, and
when wealth inherited from his father was added to
his own substantial earnings at the bar, he became a
man of property. With the passage of time, his hos-
tility lost its edge, especially when he was led at last
to believe that he had acquired a right to assume the
position to which, in earlier years, he had mistakenly
thought himself entitled by the circumstances of his
birth.”


The Legislative Council granted New South Wales
in 1823 was of six naval or military officers and six
civilians selected by the Governor and appointed by
the King. Wentworth’s agitation forced the Home
Government to add 24 members to the Council. The
twenty-four were to be men of property elected by
freeholders. They had to own land worth £2OO or get
£2O a year in rent.
Wentworth was elected to the new Council and be-
came the leader of the elected party of 24 in opposi-
tion to 12 nominated by the Governor. Wentworth and
his followers demanded the right to levy and spend
taxes, the right to control appointments to govern-
ment jobs and decide purely domestic matters. (The
fathers of the American “revolution” had fought for
these same things.)
Wentworth’s ideas had changed since 1819 when in
his book on New South Wales he had advocated votes
for everyone. Now he argued that votes should not
be given to the stupid and incapable, and that only the
stupid and incapable were unable to succeed in New
South Wales. It is the familiar story of the self-made
man who believes that every one should be able to
make money because he has. (By this time Wentworth
owned several sheep stations, and his rents from other
properties brought him £4,000 a year.)
Wool dominated the forties. Agriculture decreased,
except in South Australia. In New South Wales and
Victoria the ratio of an acre a head of population fell
to three-quarters.
The convicts arrived. The new free immigrants
knew that convicts would take their jobs and that
lower wages would seal their doom. They raised such
an outcry that even the Colonial Office heard it. The
temper of the people was ugly. There were demon-
strations in Sydney and Melbourne. The convicts were
sent to outlying settlements. England sent no more.


Governor Gipps had followed Darling. On March 27,
1843, Gipps sent on to Queen Victoria a petition pro-
testing against the bringing of coolies into New South
Wales. It was signed by 4,129 people. Six weeks later
he sent on another petition asking for the introduction
of coolies, signed by 686 exclusives and their sup-
porters. The 4,129 urged that the need for more labour
could be met by bringing in the surplus population of
England; cheap coloured labour, they said, would bring
down wages and lower the standard of living.
The petitioners made what was an even more telling
point in British eyes: every native of Great Britain
employed in Australia would be a valuable customer
of his native country; coolies wouldn’t be.
The Home Government supported the 4,129. The
people had won the first round in the fight for a White
Australia; no coolies would be admitted into New
South Wales. •
In 1849 Wentworth urged the Council to set up a
University; Governor Fitzroy signed the bill on
October 1, 1850, and Sydney University came into
being. In the Great Hall today there is a statue to
Wentworth’s memory.
Wentworth now had made many enemies; he was
extraordinarily able, but he couldn’t suffer fools;
many, too, said he had twisted on his earlier ideals,
and he narrowly escaped defeat at the polls in 1852.
Wentworth kept pegging away for self-government.
Empire affairs could be left to England, he said.
Petition after petition was sent to England.
Wentworth hit hard. He warned England that she
had meddled so much in the family affairs of the
American colonies that they had rebelled and left the
Empire. Let England beware that New South Wales
might do the same. Rebellion! Secession! That was
the same warning he had given in his book.


The Home Government gave in; the Governor was
to be responsible to the people, not to Downing Street.
Wentworth set out to plan the new parliament. As
a law student he had spent many hours watching the
British Parliament at work. He wanted a parliament
on the same line for New South Wales. The Council
fell in with his plans.
Then Wentworth thought of the House of Lords.
Why not have a House of Lords in Australia? The
landtakers and pioneers had conquered areas larger
than the whole British Isles. He saw himself as the
first of a long line of Australian noblemen.
This was too much for Australians. As Wentworth’s
carriage rolled by he was mockingly saluted as the
“Duke of Vaucluse,” James Macarthur was dubbed
the “Earl of Camden.” One wag aspired to the title of
the “Duke of Wooloomooloo,” Another called Went-
worth’s brain child the “Bunyip Peerage,” and the
name stuck. Ridicule killed the plan.
Wentworth’s defence of his “Bunyip Peerage”
shows his distrust of democracy in a letter to his
son he described Henry Parkes, who was becoming the
leader of the new class of wage-earners and small
farmers, as “that arch-anarchist.” He told the
Council:
“In reference to the hereditary clauses I would
observe that they have been adverted to out of doors
as if they only were intended to include one class. This
is a mistake; and no man, however humble, can be
debarred from aspiring to see his children educated
and looking forward to achieve a position of rank and
honour, and occupied in far higher pursuits than the
money-making schemes of this filthy lucre-loving
community
“ Why, I ask, if titles are open to all at home,
should they be denied to the colonists? Why should
such an institution as the House of Lords (which is


WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH
an integral part of the British constitution) be shut
out from us?
“I have been taunted with entertaining a desire to
be one of the hereditary legislators of the colony.
Whether I do or do not entertain that desire is a
matter of very little moment; but, admitting that I
do, is it an improper object of ambition? Or am I to
be denounced for cherishing the hope that some son
of mine will succeed me in the councils of my country?
If such an ambition were felt by some fifty or sixty
other gentlemen of this colony, from whom ultimately
might spring an honourable, wealthy and educated
aristocracy, I would ask are those mischiefs to be'
avoided, or ends to be desired and consummations
devoutly to be wished for?”
The truth was that Wentworth had not outgrown
the bitterness that had overwhelmed him when he
learnt the facts of his birth. Now at 60 years of age
he sought to found a new nobility on the basis of
public service.
He turned bitterly on those who opposed him; in
justice to him, they had continually thrown up his
birth at him:
“The paltry efforts of. my dirty revilers do not
affect me. If it be true that there is any blot on my
escutcheon (if I have one), which has not been of my
handiwork, what blame on that account can attach to
me? I submit my whole public life to the severest
scrutiny. I speak for myself alone; and, in the
language of Pope will say—
“Honour and shame from no condition rise,
Act well your part; there all honour lies”
The hereditary clauses were dropped. Wentworth
pressed for a constitution on British lines. The Council
hammered the bill into shape. Wentworth went to
London to nurse its passage through the House of


WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH
Commons. It was a long and stormy one, and was
nearly wrecked at one stage, but got through.
In 1853 New South Wales got its parliament of two
houses—a Legislative Council nominated by the Gov-
ernor, and a Legislative Assembly (lower house). The
lower house franchise had certain property qualifica-
tions which were to be removed by later reforms.
Wentworth had urged these qualifications as a check
on growing democracy.
The constitution was Wentworth’s monument and
his last great work for his country; he went to Eng-
land in 1862 and died there 10 years after. In his
agitation for colonial self-government Wentworth was
a pioneer and did his greatest service to Australia.
His bitter enemy, Henry Parkes, said of him after his
death, “Of Mr. Wentworth’s labours in the constitu-
tion perhaps I may be permitted to say I have lived
long enough to see the error of some of my feeble
opposition to those labours. I have lived long enough
to know that in that constitution he was careful with
the painstaking care of a man having a fatherly regard
for his country, to make broad the foundations of it.”
And again in 1893 Parkes said, “For colossal power,
clear insight in the principles of government, and for
comprehensive grasp of almost all questions put before
Wentworth, there have been few superior men, any-
where in my time.”
At such a stage in our development Wentworth did
invaluable service. After 1853, as his old paper The
Australian put it, his day was indeed gone. The new
problems were not to be legal or political, so much as
economic. The new class of wage-earners and small
farmers were growing and demanding a bigger say.
Wool had served Australia well, but its interests were
no longer the only ones. Farming was playing its part,
factories were beginning to produce. The flood of new


WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH
immigrants lured here by gold were bringing new
problems, and a new set of ideas would then be
necessary.
Wentworth symbolised the growing self-conscious-
ness and nationalism of his time. Today we are
beginning to think internationally; it is being forced
on us that a new set of ideas is necessary for a new
set of problems.
We are, as the Australian daily put it earlier, indeed
“part of a big world.” We must sink or swim together.
To be “aggressively Australian” isn’t enough is,
indeed, no longer a virtue but a hindrance to our
welfare—and the world’s.
Whatever his faults and limitations, Wentworth
had vision. If he were alive today he would be urging
us to think in world terms.
POINTS FOR DISCUSSION:
I. Is Wentworth well described by any of these: Patriot,
Democrat, Man of the People, Constitutionalist, or Whig?
2. What was the importance of wool to Australia in Went-
worth's day? What is its importance to-day? Will syn-
thetics affect our wool trade?
3. What were Wentworth's contributions to a growing Aus-
tralia? Do you think we should be "aggressively Austra-
lian" to-day or not? Should we think internationally?
4. Wentworth agitated for constitutional reforms. Do you
think there are any constitutional reforms needed to-day?


NOTES


NOTES
By authority: Ramsay, Ware Publishing Pty. Ltd., 117-129 King Street. Melbourne
