





~ ~~ ,TI ' ' " ' * 1 * '— '
FLORA.” Sketch design for Tapestry executed by Morris & Co.
Hgure by Sir Edward Burne-Jones. Ornament by William Morris. 1886.


I ■ '/t
I | ‘ ■• Kl 'JSSBSSwi' ' : m -
J . | J • | I Z$-~.J m
WILLIAM MORRIS AND HIS ART.
‘ Hammersmith
Carpet Weav-
ing at Merton
Abbey Works
(pp. 5 and 2 i).
NO one in the least interested in Decorative Art —and
who is there does not profess that much ?—wants to
be told at this time of day who William Morris was.
His name is prominent among the few true poets of the
age; it heads the list of those who in our days have
wrought and fought for the lesser arts —for art, that is to
say, in the larger sense of the word. He it was snatched
from the hand of Ruskin the torch which Pugin earlier
in the century had kindled, and fired the love of beauty
in us. He was the staunchest defender of our ancient
monuments. He stamped the mark of his personality
upon the design of his generation. There seemed no
limit to his enterprise, no end to his endeavour —but
death, which came too soon.
The very variety, however, of his activity, the many
forms in which his vitality found vent, tend in a mea-
sure to create confusion as to what he did precisely.
Enquiry into the order of his work and the date at which
it was done, goes far to dissipate such confusion, and to
show, not only what he did, but how it was possible for
him to do so much.
The circumstances of his early youth do not seem to
have been such as to implant or encourage in him any
care for art. His old friend Mr. F. S. Ellis tells (in
a paper read before the Society of Arts, May 10th, 1898)
how he went to the Exhibition of 1851 —he was then seven-
teen years old—and how he sat himself down on a seat,
and steadily refused to go over the building, declining
to see anything more wonderful in this wonder of the
world than that it was “ wonderfully ugly.” He never
got over that prejudice against the Great Fair, which he
accused of giving the death-stroke to traditional design
in this country. Nevertheless, he owed something, if
not to that event, to the awakened
interest in artistic production of
which it was the outward and vis-
ible sign.
For Morris was born just at the
right moment: the way was pre-
pared for him. Walter Scott, with-
out really appreciating Gothic art,
had called popular attention to
its romance, Rickman had long
since “discriminated” the “styles
of English Architecture,” Pugin
had published his “True Princi-
ples of Gothic Architecture,” and
was designing all manner of me-
diaeval furniture ; and, by the time
he came to take any heed of art,
Gothic architecture was the fash-
ion. Winston had written his
Essay on Stained Glass, Shaw and
others had published books on
mediaeval antiquities, and Viollet
le Due his famous dictionary;
even Owen Jones, the orientalist,
had cleared the ground, by creat-
ing a reaction of taste against
mere naturalism in pretending to
be design. Fergusson, Freeman,
Semper, Wornum, Digby Wyatt,
and above all, Ruskin, had been
writing about art until people
were beginning to listen. Men like
William Burges and E. W. God-
win were hard at work already:
there was reaction in the air:
the times were ready for the man
—and the man was William Morris,
He seems to have gone to Ox-
ford with a quite open mind on the
subject of Art; but there the spirit
of Mediaevalism was abroad, and
he promptly caught the infection.
Ruskin was an influence there;
it was later that Rossetti went
. down to decorate the walls of the
Union, and there he became almost at once close friends
with Edward Burne-Jones, his life-long fellow worker,
who, by a strange coincidence, matriculated on the same
day with himself. That was in 1852. But it was at litera-
ture that he first began to work, establishing the “ Oxford
and Cambridge Magazine.” Mr. Ellis tells us that for the
year of its existence he found the necessary funds. That
was an early instance of a liberality characteristic of him
to the last. A short year in the office of George Edmund
Street when he left Oxford, in 1856, was enough to
sicken him of professional architecture, which seemed at
first, and was in those days thought to be, the entrance-
gate to all the arts not claiming to be fine. He may at one
All designs herein are the -property of Messrs. Morris Company, who hold all rights of reproduction ,


Morris’s Works W3' '•' A?
Abbey, Surrey Jf s’ , $ *
<p.6).i ''T^i*i. *
HEW*/ '• M&ftf -V - ■y, 1 * /-* , vBm
\v "
HHfcp. a TOyHnkJtM f /x^HH
-_"‘ii--' ' jpfe. :^MjBPB^P|b ' iL
SP*vi%o. , '. i'S
fc ' • ■ Jp ' ' * «f HRM
Vine pattern
Wall-paper j
time have contemplated painting ; but the publication in
1858 of the “ Defence of Guinevere ” seems to show that
for a while he devoted himself to poetry. And as a poet
he first became known.
It was, perhaps, the difficulty which he has told us he
experienced in getting decent furniture and fittings for
his own house, when he married in 1859, which irritated
him into artistic activity once more. At all events, in
1861 he set to work in earnest to produce beautiful
things for the house, and, with his friends, started busi-
ness in Red Ifion Square. The idea of reviving art in
everything about us was not entirely new. So long
before as 1847 “ Felix Summerly,” to whom we owe
South Kensington Museum, had organised a combination
of artists, including Creswick, Dyce, Maclise (who ought
to have been a designer), Mulready, Bell, and Westma-
cott, for the production of “ Art Manufactures.” It is
true they called them manufactures, and they did not do
great things ; but it was set forth in the prospectus that
“ Beauty of Form and Colour and poetic invention were
(once) associated with everything. So it ought to be
still, and, we will say, shall be again.” Morris put it
better ; but that is in effect what he said ; and he man-
aged to bring it about.
The venture of the firm of Morris, Marshall, Faulkner
and Co., was itself a protest against what was already
being done, and was resented accordingly by the trades.
It was in 1866, I remember, that the name of the firm
first came to my ears, and I asked an old hand at design
who they were. The answer was: “Aset of amateurs
who are going to teach us our trade.” Amateurs in a
sense they were, no doubt; that is to say, they set to
work at many a trade about which they knew very little,
and worried out the secret of it for themselves, distrust-
ing the knowledge which was to be acquired from men
who had served their apprenticeship to it; but the won-
derful thing is that they did teach the trade its business;
and it was practically Morris who did it.
Others before them had started with high artistic
ideals, but had lacked the courage to go on, or had
been drawn by hard circumstances, or driven perhaps
by necessity, into the ways of trade ; he had not only
convictions of his own and the courage of them, but
was in a position to hold fast to them. He was in every
sense of the word independent: his father was dead,
and he could go his own way, and from the time of
his coming of age he was what most of us would call
well - off. He never knew what it was to lack the
means of livelihood or to fear for them. He was free to


■' J&xr m& :a *' " *"' ■ 'J&m : ' ■ 7 ”' / • r :$aB -■■<&&■■■'
' JE:<& Hi W '^^H-1 J&' bv*
>. &*■ ' — j v *9 pp. nH '•ir>K*‘i * ■” r£ " wr pBjpr r '. *
; —-jJp • fdfejJi tfni'P IbW gj J —7T x I-
>: k <!“-- 5 ftpPP
u —
carry out his artistic ideal. He had no occasion to bow
to the demands of trade or fashion. This gave him a
splendid chance—and he took it.
The earlier work of the firm was of course pronoun-
cedly Gothic in style; so much so that the medals
awarded to them at the exhibition of 1862 were given
for “exactness of imitation” of mediaeval work. The
wording of the award may express more nearly the point
of view of the judges than the aim of the exhibitors ; but
it was inevitable that the new firm, starting when it did,
and as it did, should begin by working very much in the
old way.
However, Morris soon made Gothic his own, and used
it to express himself. His mediaevalism was in the end
distinctly modern ; but he boasted himself always a Goth.
“The age is ugly,” he said ; “if a man wants to do any-
thing, he must just choose the epoch which suits him
and identify himself with that; he must be a thirteenth-
century man, for instance.” That is very much what he
would fain have been—“intrepidly retrograde,” as a French
critic said. The logic of his argument is not convincing ;
but his sympathies were all with mediaevalism, and he
harked back to the time when, as he was firmly per-
suaded, art got off the track. He did all he could to
forget six centuries or so and make-believe we were
living in the Middle Ages—a feat impossible for most
of us, but all of a piece with the childlike simple-mind-
edness of the man. So convinced was he of the good-
ness of all things Gothic, and mainly of Gothic things,
that if a thing seemed good to him, it almost followed
that it was Gothic ; thus, appreciating the value of con-
tinuous growth in pattern, he puts it down as a matter of
course to the time “when young Gothic Art took the
place of old Classic,” quite forgetting that the ancients
had ever perfected the continuous scroll, and that the
only new departure of the Middle Ages was, to put scrolls
of flowing ornament side by side and make “all-over”
patterns of them.
Merton Abbey
Works,from the
bridge (p. 6).
Rose pattern
Wilton Pile
Carpet (p. 22).
First design and
working draw-
ing by William
Morris.
Ca. 1877.


Peacock pat-
tern (p. 22).
Coarse
Wool Hangings.
Working draw-
ing by William
Morris.
1878.
The early work of the firm embraced the
greater part of what goes to house decoration,
including the production of stained glass,
painted tiles, embroidery, cabinet-work, and,
presently, woven and printed stuffs; and it
maybe gathered from the fact of its removal,
in 1865, to Queen Square, that it soon began
to flourish; at all events, from that time it
became generally known.
A year later Morris had a chance of show-
ing what he could do at South Kensington
Museum, where he decorated the small dining-
room known as the green room, a very typical
example of his work at that time. The dis-
tribution of the walls, their modelled surface
(painted too !), the fruit and figure panels on
a gold ground, the lively frieze, the colour
scheme—all of which to-day do not
much stir the curiosity of the casual
diner—were new and rather start-
ling innovations in decoration more
than thirty years ago.
From that time he took up one
branch of industry after another, his
appetite for such work increasing,
one may say, abnormally in eating.
He did not make quite all the things
he designed and brought out; his
wall-papers were printed, and con-
tinue to be printed, by Mr. Metford
Warner (better known as Jeffrey and
Co.); and his first chintzes were
printed by Mr. (now Sir Thomas)
Wardle. But, like all real workers,
he preferred to do his own work,
and would rather do it himself than
be at the bother to tell someone else
how it could be done ; and before
long he was printing his own cotton
stuffs, and weaving his own textiles;
and, by the middle of the seventies,
he was dyeing his own wools for
weaving. You might have met him
any day in the street with dye-
stained hands; for he was a born
workman, never afraid of soiling
their whiteness; and he was far too
much alive to stand by and see
anyone bungling over what he him-
self could do better, and not set to
work to show him how to do better.
In the midst of his artistic acti-
vity, or in the lulls between, he
found time to write the poems which
soon made him famous. Of these it
is not here the place, nor is the pre-
sent writer the person, to speak,
further than to point out how the
poet helped naturally to make the
artist known. The mere fact that a
poet of repute, near friend of the
pre-Raphaelite brotherhood, was de-
voting himself to the lesser arts,
made them of more account, in the
eyes of the literate at all events.
The younger generation of artists
and amateurs,accustomed to the fash-
ionable gush about “ arts and crafts,”
have no idea of what a very obscure


SI I.
$
Dove and Dose
pattern (p. 21).
Silk and Wool
Damask.
Working draw-
. ing by William
Morris.
1879.
person the decorative artist was a quarter of a century
ago. The meanest craftsman is now ranked as an artist;
then the master of his craft, unless he painted pictures
or carved statues, was put down as a mere artisan. The
author of “ The Earthly Paradise ” could not be relegated
,to that position ; what such a man thought worth doing
was clearly worth taking seriously; and decorative art
began to be taken at his valuation —that is to say, at
something like its true worth, as the root and stock of all
art, of which fine art is only the flower.
His personal repute made it possible for him to pursue
his ideal, and to fulfil it; and in 1877 he opened the pre-
mises still occupied by the firm of Morris and Co. in Oxford
Street —sure sign of further prosperity—and by the year
1881 he had finally quitted the old quarters in Queen
Square, and established his unique workshops at Merton
Abbey. Morris himself would probably never have
dreamt of turning the ruins of an old Norman monas-
tery into workshops; he would have preserved them
piously, as ancient monuments, to be held in trust for
posterity ; but he found manufacture already established
there, and so long established (that is, since the Reforma-
tion) that it was itself an institution worth preservation.
And there he carried on the crafts he cared for, in the
way he thought they should be carried on, the only way
in which it seemed to him they were worth continuing,
by the traditional methods of handicraft, with as little
resort to machinery as possible, with a view always to the
artistic worth of the thing done, and to the reasonable
satisfaction of the workman in doing it.
A visit to the works at Merton Abbey gives one a peep,
as it were, into the past he loved so dearly he must needs
continually fall out with the present, so far short of his
ideal. The primitive methods of dyeing, printing and
weaving, still in workthere, justsuitedhisnotionof design,
which was indeed shaped according to the traditions of
craftsmanship. There is nothing of the modern “factory ”
about his “mills”; an old-world air clings to the place, an
atmosphere of quiet, and of some leisure, in which the
workers, not harried to death, have space to breathe,
and to enjoy something of the repose and beauty of the
Bird and Vina
pattern (p. 21).
Wool Damask.
Working draw-
ing by William
Morris.
1881.


|
jR P| p : I / lb
m O .-'**T- .4 M 1 .jJBmS
. 4UB9 > *- ft) 7 ■■1
||g ; \BB wg; ' v '■«* ./ JfHla9sBL /WWPg? \j2S-
€fi6“" ‘ 1 -
WR // JBA
•- 1 • -// - •"..-:: _ ...... MBm\ \ BH
Cotton Printing
at Merton
Abbey Works I
(P. 6).
world. Imagine, by the Wandle’s side, an old walled
garden. On the banks, long, low-roofed worksheds, and
a waterwheel revolving at its ease; long strips of printed
cotton a-rinsing in the stream; great hanks of yarn, fresh
from the indigo vat, hung drying in the air; dyers and
printers moving quietly about—in all, a sunlit picture of
most peaceful work.
Morris expected work of his workpeople : work was no
hardship to him ; and he did to his workmen always as he
would have been done by. At Merton he began carpet-
weaving and there presently he set up his tapestry
looms, having first mastered the craft for himself. It
was characteristic of him that he should have put up a
loom in his bedroom at home, and there taught him-
self tapestry weaving in the early hours of the morn-
ing, when the rest of the household were abed—you see
the workman there. Kach separate enterprise on which
he entered seems, for a time, to have moved him to
extraordinary energy. He thought it out, installed it,
set it going, designed for it, trained men and women
in the work to be done ; and then, by degrees, as things
began to run smoothly and could be trusted to go on
without him, his interest became less active; a new idea
germinated in his mind, or an old one burst into bud, and
his energies broke out afresh in some new doing.
He had attended less and less to the business in
Oxford Street whilst he was organising experimental
industries at Merton. When these were flourishing,
he left them, as he had left the shop, very much to
his partners, furnishing such designs as were required
of him, or as occurred to him, and satisfying himself
that the work was being done as he would wish, but
making his visits to the works rarer and rarer as he
became more deeply absorbed in the subject of typo-
graphy and printing. It was in 1891 that the first
volume was issued from the Kelmscott Press, and from
that time he became very much the master-printer, his
invention finding fresh scope in the design of title-
pages, initials, borders, and book ornaments innumer-
able, superficially in one mediaeval style of his own, but
showing in their detail all the fancy and resourceful-
ness which belonged to him to the last. Had he but
lived another ten years, he would certainly have made
himself master of yet a craft or two before he died.
It is interesting, in connection with his type printing, to
remember, that in his youth he illuminated for his wife
and friends precious volumes of poetry, penned by his
own hand. The pages which, a little further on, by Lady
Burne-Jones’s great kindness we are enabled to illus-
trate, show him to have been no less careful as a
calligrapher than cunning as a designer, and expert as a
painter in miniature.
The current of his poetical writing, which all his life
long never ran dry, flowed in his later years into the
channel of prose stories told in beautiful, if somewhat
archaic, language of his own, not unrelated to the me-
disevalism pervading his design. But the writings which
concern us are his writings upon art. It is often said
that an artist should say what he has to say in his art,
and not talk about it. That is an admirable theory—for
the inarticulate ; but there are many things an artist may
wish to say which cannot properly be expressed in his
art, and which he may well want to put into words, more
especially if he chance to be, as Morris was, a master of
words also. He is a standing protest against any narrow
dictum which would gag an artist. He had more to say
than could be put into ornament, or even into poetry;
and he said it not merely admirably, but with a delight-
ful sincerity, straight from his heart. It was in 1877 that
he first set forth the Principles of the Society for the


/(**#^j
fee
feHii
gr v \ / ir^”
Of „v 'ml
$9 fS
|g^||
Protection of Ancient Buildings,of which society
he was a foremost founder and a bulwark to the
last; and between that time and 1881 he de-
livered every year at least a lecture or two upon
art. Five of these were printed under the title
of “Hopes and Fears for Art.” Others live
only in newspaper reports.
Strictly speaking, he did not often write about
art, but printed his lectures—just as he gave
them ; and you read the accent into them as
you peruse the book; you seem to hear him
speak ; and in his speech there was none of the
deliberate artificiality of his prose story-telling ;
he was as simple as could be, as frank and as
downright, so obviously convinced of the un-
answerable truth of what he said, that he car-
ried conviction with him—at least for the while
you heard him. We all of us think we are in
the right, Morris knew he was—even when he
was most mistaken. His logic, as a great French
critic said apropos of a brother critic, was “ ar-
dently combative.” He had a way of talking
and writing as if he were opposing some one,
and must bear his adversary down. The fact is,
probably, that he felt himself so much in oppo-
sition to the normal habit of philistine thought,
that he looked for resistance, and made haste to
get in the first blow.
The second series of his lectures, which ap-
peared in 1888 under the title of “ Signs of
Change,” were confessedly “ Socialist ”—he de-
voted, about this time and before, an enormous
amount of his time and energy to socialistic
work —but some of them at least deal directly
with things artistic, which, as he thought, and
as Ruskin, his friend and master, as he called
him, thought, cannot be separated from social
life ; Pugin thought it bound up with religious
life. Many of us recognise, of course, the inti-
mate relationship of art to life, without arguing
from that the necessity of socialism. Morris
did ; and there is no shadow of doubt as to his
sincerity and enthusiasm.
Those who, agreeing in the main with his
diagnosis of the social anemia of the century-
end, have no very great faith in his remedy, are
tempted to regret the precious time he gave to
the diffusion of the socialistic idea. There is
some consolation in the reflection that most of
his lectures, having been delivered with a pur-
pose more or less socialistic, he might very
possibly, but for “ the cause,” never have deli-
vered himself upon the subject on which we
wanted him to speak. In his last years he
naturally delivered himself oftener on the sub-
ject most on his mind, printing, woodcuts, “ the
Ideal Book”—to which he more nearly than
any modern printer himself attained. There
is probably no one of the various branches of
art which he in turn took up, on which he did
not say his say ; and, so outspoken was he, that
no serious student of his work could fail to
understand just what he meant to do, even if
he had not succeeded in doing it, which he
almost invariably did.
Morris was inspired by a passionate love of
beauty, and had a corresponding hatred of the
ugliness he saw about him. He set himself to mend that
State of things. Impossible ! they said. No matter, he
would try. But he did not covet beauty for his own selfish
enjoyment merely, least of all did he desire it at the
Fainted Decora-
tion of soffits ot
arches on stair-
case in St.
James’s Palace
(p. 27).
Designed by-
William Morris-
-1881.
7
WILLIAM MORRIS AND HIS ART.


— ■■ ■ —— ■' . ff"1 Vl/ 7^
M ' W flH ra| '■• y , gp»g»^ :
. • flb *|sj|S a
Washing the
Cloth at Merton
Abbey Works
(P. 6).
expense of others. He protested, vehemently against the
supposition that art was for the privileged few, for the
“upper classes,” whom he would have liked to abolish, and
who, curiously enough, bought his work and gave him his
repute. Art, he said, was meant to raise man’s life above
the daily tangle of small things that weary him ; and he
adopted, without reserve, the theory that the first step to-
wards art worth having was to make the life of the worker
worth living. “ Ret me say it, that either I have erred in
the aim of my whole life, or that the welfare of these lesser
arts involves the question of the content and self-respect
of all craftsmen.” He believed that if only life were
easier, and men had time to look about them, they would
learn to love art. Whether that be so or not, it was a
noble thought of his ; and noble thoughts go to make
great art possible. The converse certainly is true, that
mean and sordid surroundings deaden the sense of
beauty, and degrade alike the poor folk who make ugly
things and the rich ones who live amidst them.
He was never weary of protesting against the ugliness of
life. Life should be beautiful! Forhimself he was in a po-
sition to shape things about him as he would have them ;
but that was not enough for him, was nothing to him.
Hungry as be was for beauty, he had no stomach for a
feast of art whilst others were starving ; rather coarse
food which all could share, than dainties denied to
them. It is seldom that a high ideal is so perfectly ex-
pressed as his aspiration towards “an art made hy the
-people, and for the people, as a happiness to the maker
and user." If it seems to us that his splendid ideal is
impractical, his hope never to be realised—and it is to be
feared it does —that is perhaps because we are less nobly
minded ; it takes a big man to have great hopes, tne least
of ns can reach pessimism.
The sight of such a man spending his great gifts and
wondrous energies in holding forth to a dozen or so of
“ comrades ” leagues away from any right understanding
of him, was grotesque enough almost to make one doubt
his sense of humour. In reality he had a keen sense of
fun, as no one who ever heard him read “ Brer Rabbit ”
could doubt; but his mind was too sternly fixed upon
one serious end for him to see things as onlookers saw
them, or in their true proportion.
Nevertheless, the least sympathetic of his audience
could hardly see him on the platform and not be impressed
by his wonderful personality ; he looked the man he was,
powerfully built, thickset, stalwart and sturdy, without
any swagger, but with the air of a conqueror as he stood
up to speak ; an open face of fresh complexion, unshaven
and rather rugged beard; his hair, grizzled and curly,
upstanding like a mane from his broad forehead in a way
that gave him the look of a lion ; good grey eyes which
could twinkle with merriment, light up with enthusiasm,
or flash with indignation ; a voice that deepened as he
spoke ; action and speech so sudden, it seemed it must
be spontaneous.
To see him was to know him for a rebel born. He was
inclined, at times at all events, to divide men into two
classes, flunkies and rebels ; and he was not content to be
a rebel himself, but professed his desire to stir up rebel-
lion in others against what to him was intolerable. The
law ? What law ? Who made it law ? Conformity, to
him, was slavery. He would follow no custom. Usage ?
that was a reason for not doing likewise. His behaviour


y-wfr iMawayygaM .* %LJ i


Honeysuckle
pattern printed
on Linen
(p. 20).
Working
drawing by
William Morris.
1833.


"The Straw-
berry Thief ”
pattern.
Cotton print
(P. 20).
Working
drawing by
William Morris.
1883.
“Brer Rabbit”
pattern.
Cotton print
(p. 20).
Working
drawing by-
William Morris.
1883.
was individualistic, absolutely; he dressed, spoke, did, as pleased
himself, and had nothing but contempt for orthodoxy of whatever
kind. And with all this he was a socialist, and a militant one, con-
vinced that he saw in socialism a way out of the degradation unto
which society, and modern art and workmanship accordingly, had
fallen. He never seemed to suspect that socialism (as understood
by his political brethren) would leave less room than ever for the
free action of a man —of a man, that is to say, as distinguished
from a sheep !
Some stress is here laid upon Morris’s socialism because it so
greatly influenced his art. He would not, for the worker’s sake,
have made things by machinery even had he found it serviceable to
art; he hated and distrusted it too much to make the best of it, or,
for that matter, of science. He produced things which are indeed a
happiness to the user, and were a happiness to the maker—if he
was an artist (which not all workmen are), and things which were
made by the people: that they were made for the people can
hardly be contended, since it is not possible for any but the very
few to pay the price for handwork in these days.
Employing, as he did, handwork, or the simplest and most pri-
mitive of mechanical aids to handwork, he was free to design as it
pleased him. That suited him best. The fight then was between him
and the material; and he was
a fighter by instinct, never
so happy as in the thick of
the strife. I have heard him
say he liked being heckled ;
and he looked like it: he
was at home on the platform.
And in art, it was as much
as anything the fight which
interested him, the pleasure
of attacking a problem, the
joy of solving it.
In that way his career ex-
plains itself. The mystery
of his wonderful versatility
is cleared up. It was won-
derful indeed, but it was not
versatility rather the re-
verse, steadfastness in one
progressive purpose. He did
not veer about, but moved
straight on in quick steps,
each step a craft. Impatient,
he plunged into work and
fought his way through.
Once he had mastered it, he
ceased to be passionately in-
terested in it; but, though
his ardour was assuaged, it
had not burnt itself out. At
the first contact with some
new difficulty it burst out
anew, fiery as ever, to be
quenched only by accom-
plishment. No! not
quenched, but smothered,
presently to flare up at the
breath of some fresh oppo-
sition, at the hint of some new work to do; to do —that was it—accomplished,
it was done and ended.
Mr. Ellis has put it on record that Morris was less satisfied with his achieve-
ment in stained glass than in any other branch of his work. That seems, at
first thought, hard to explain, when we remember the splendid colour of his
glass, for which, even when Burne-Jones designed the cartoons, he was in-
variably responsible. Perhaps he cared less for the work because it was not
all his own, perhaps because for a long while the technique of glass painting
had the better of him. He mastered it at last; but he had never the


The “Wandle ”
pattern.
Printed Cotton
(p. 20).
Working draw-
ing by William
Morris.
1884.


“PritiUary ”
pattern Wall-
paper (p. 21).
Working draw-
ing by William
Morris.
1886.
triumphant sense of having carried it to the very furthest
point. In the technique of glass painting he had some-
thing to learn from men like Mr. John Clayton, who were
before him in the field. His was not the temperament
patiently to study the chemistry of glass colour; or to
prove by long experiment the dependence to be placed
upon a flux. The disappointments of the kiln were
of a kind he was least of the temper to bear; and at one
time (a scruple as to the right of putting new windows
into old churches aiding), he nearly gave up glass paint-
ing altogether—fighting is not such fun when you don’t
win—and turned his thoughts to processes which he
could more easily overcome. This was the only one which
seemed to baffle him for long ; the rest he mastered and
passed on—only to seek new trades to conquer*
And this progressiveness of his activity accounts for
thd continual renewal of his energy. He never worked on
at what tired him, as craftsmen and producers less hap-
pily placed are bound to do, but turned to something in
which he could take pleasure ; hence the spontaneity of
his design y it was done rapidly, at a white heat, and the
warmth remains in it. Working from impulse, never from
outward pressure (to which he had no occasion to yield),
he did the thing he was moved to do, and did it in the
way it came to him to do it. He did not ask himself, is
this thing in demand ? he did not stop to think if anyone
wanted it; but took it for granted that what he had to
give would be acceptable, and gave it with all the confi-
dence of his perpetual youlh.
He passed on the sooner from one trade to another be-
cause he was satisfied alwa}'S by the simplest effects, and
preferred to produce them by the simplest means. The
simple thing was the natural thing to do, and the work-
manlike, as well as being a protest against the ultra-
elaboration and false finish which is called refinement. It
was not difficult for a man of his capacity to master, for
example, the processes of old-fashioned dyeing, or of
cotton printing by hand-blocks. If he had entered into
the wider, the never-ending, fields of chemical dyeing and
complicated roller printing, he might have worked on in
them to the end of his days without satisfactory results.
Happily for him, he abhorred machine-printing, and
chemically-produced dyestuffs.
It was not in his nature to linger over a trade, to think
how he could carry it a little further towards perfection ;
he did not want perfection, did not care for it. Mr,
Ellis, from whose closely sympathetic paper I have so
often quoted, tells us that the French proverb, “ The
better is the enemy of the good,” was constantly on his
lips. Furbishing was not in his way; he wanted more
substantial work to do, something on which he could em-
ploy all his might—and he was a mighty worker. He
said himself that if he were unable to work, he would
die of weariness and despair. He would a thousand
“ Kennett" 1
pattern Chintz
(p. 20).
Working
drawing by Wil-
liam Morris.
Ca. 1889.


Photo, IP. II. It heeler, Oxford.
Window at
Christchurch,
Oxford (p. 25).
Ornament by
William Morris.
Figures by Sir
E. Burne-Jones.
From the glass
executed by
Morris and Co.


' ' ■ ■ ■ : > ■ r ■
_
Detail of paint-
ed decoration
(p. 27).
Working draw-
ing by William
Morris.
times rather have died, as he did, before his time, but
with his hands full of work, than linger a helpless on-
looker upon life.
He had not the patience to stand by. And his impa-
tience was deliberate and wilful. He valued impulse
more highly than any accomplishment; he did not care
for polish; rudeness did not offend him. “ I suspect I
like things rougher than most men,” he once said ; and
when someone complained of Dickens that he was not a
gentleman, his quick retort was, “ So much the better! ”
He makes clear to us the
impatience of his tempe-
rament in those lines of
his on Death :
“ Will it not be soft and
kind,
That rest from life, from "pa-
Hence , and from pain,
That rest from bliss we know
' not when we find,
That rest from Love that ne’er
the end can gain ? ”
The restlessness of life,
the gnawing of pain, the
emptiness of happiness,
the impotence of Love —
these are the common
property of the poets,
but patience hitherto has
been identified with rest.
His characteristic com-
bativeness, and its rela-
tion to his work, are ex-
emplified in the way he
set about the various arts
and crafts he took up : he
did not learn a trade in
the natural way from
those who knew it, and
seek then to better the
teaching of his masters ;
but, acknowledging no
master, except perhaps
the ancients, he would
worry it out always for
himself. He had a won-
derful knack of learning
in that way. It is a pity
if his example should mis-
lead (as it seems to be
doing) the younger gene-
ration of designers. He
succeeded; butwhoknows
how much time he wasted
by re - inventing, as it
were, what others could
have told him? His bril-
liant achievement seems to have encouraged the illusion,
lying usually at the bottom of a man’s self-consciousness,
that everything depends only upon the individual and
what is innate in him—genius in our case, of course—
that accumulated experience counts for nothing, and
education does no good. It is of the essence of ama-
teurishness to think you can do without learning your
trade, or that you can somehow worry through. Morris
came out with flying colours only because he happened
to be endowed as only one man in a century is likely to
be. There are many ways to success ; but, as a method
of proceeding, his was emphatically the most unlikely
way—except for Morris. No doubt there is a charm
always about experimental work, but it is a charm more
highly prized by the artist than by the purchaser of it,
who is perhaps the loser by its half-success.
Morris had not only an immense capacity for work,
but was himself a master workman, doing always what
he meant to do, and doing it about as well as it could
be done. “Delight in skill,” he said, “ lies at the root
of all art.” It was because he liked it just so, that he
would violate what some of us accept as laws binding
on the designer, as when
he made an acorn grow
from two stalks, or gave
a lily five petals, or when
he cut a scroll abruptly
short at the margin of the
panel instead of design-
ing it in the orthodox
way within the space he
had to fill. In this the
brusquer side of his na-
. ture showed itself, as it
was apt to do in his work;
but in spite of it his art
was essentially orna-
mental. “All real art is
ornamental,” was a dic-
tum of his ; and his own
art was essentially beauti-
ful. For his artistic ideal
was beauty. The words
which Browning put into
the mouth of Fra Lippo
bippi, would have come
as properly from his lips :
“If you get simple beauty
and nought else,
You get about the best
thing God invents.”
An artist is bound to
think it one of the best
at all events, most of all
the artist in ornament.
Certainly Morris thought
so, and all his striving
was in that direction, his
very socialism, as has
been said, being an aspi-
ration towards the beau-
tiful life. The beauty of
his design was preserved
from anything like sickly
sweetness by a certain
ruggedness of treatment.
There is much talk nowa-
days about healthy real-
ism : Morris was an abso-
lutely healthy idealist. Aesthetic he might be called; but
there is nothing faint about the atmosphere of his art,
nothing of the unwholesomeness which neurotic persons
would have us believe proper to the century-end.
As to his preaching on art, it is like a breath of fresh
air always ; in fact there is a bracing quality about his
speech which made it too keen for some —constitutions
less than robust could not stand it. In his case the
natural man was not absorbed in the artist. He loved
beauty indeed, believed in it and in its humanising
influence, and cordially hated the puritanism which
made for barren ugliness ; but he loved nature more, to


Interior
at
Stanmore Hall
(P. 27).
Decorated by
Morris and Co.
from designs by
William Morris.


Lily and Pome-
granate pattern
Wall-paper
(P. 21).
Working
drawing by
William Morris.
1887.


V fr~2 —^»rli^-----^_^^— ±
Ib)\ i 'I t*, , yA--- 1 C ffl
•• 'is. t - 't' ! fed ifj; ■■ * y 3
* ■ i ■*, §wj r -
v' ••-’
ii—Mn ■• ■ ITS os >*mgM Hm^j
.,, y:v M!^L-Z ,8a **^iWL^^LiMii i . 11 iA'KiT^ir%,w3yB5^gByBBwMKi|iSC^te]JKJ^^K^BB
]SJ 41 \‘*j y jiyj" I |j TT" —!bi iiMMfif fcf *“'''” **
■fc£ ‘ T3«S&r jB
\ v K£ ; ; M.v9i


I'
I I I j_
Loddon pattern
printed Cotton
(p. 20).
Working draw-
ing by William
Morris.
Ca. 1884.
the extent, that is to say, even of sacrificing artistic con-
siderations to it, if need were. He was of those who
allow themselves to be led at times along the path of
naturalism, no matter what the artistic consequences.
For he had more delight in design reminding him of
the woods, the fields, the cottage garden, than in any
triumph of craftsmanship. These are his own words: —
“Beauty mingled with invention, founded on the ob-
servation of nature, is the mainspring of decorative
design. If it is not beautiful it has no right to exist; if
it is not invention it becomes wearisome ; if it is not
founded on observation of nature it can hardly be either
beautiful or inventive. It is apt to become merely
strange and monstrous when it departs far from nature.”
And again : —“ I have said that it is good and reasonable
for us to ask for obviously natural flowers in embroidery;
one might have said the same about all ornamental work,
and further, that those natural forms which are at once
familiar and most delightful to us, as well from asso-
ciation as from beauty, are the best for our purpose.”
This is not very wide of Ruskin’s doctrine, that the
most familiar in nature is the most natural, and the most
natural the most beautiful in ornament.
Morris, it is true, admitted in so many words, that in
surface decoration it was not necessary to tell a story,
and that “ you may have decoration, as in some Arab art,
which simply aims at pleasing the eye by the repetition
of certain arrangements of lines, spaces, and colours that
do not recall to the mind any forms or events of nature,”
but he did not care himself for that kind of ornament.
“ No schools of art,” he says—rather without his book—
“ have ever been contented to use abstract lines and forms
and colours—that is, lines, &c., without any meaning.”
He allows, however, that “ the more intractable the
material is, the less we should attempt direct imitation
of nature; yet, on the other hand, the more beautiful
in themselves the lines of the design should be, and the
design the more thoughtful and inventive.” That is
spoken like an ornamentist; but, in the main, he
thought abstract ornament—that is, pattern pure and
simple, not reminding him of nature —something “ out-
landish.” Perhaps it is—and more’s the pity ! It would
be a stout form of patriotism which should contend that
it was necessarily the worse for that.
We need not mourn the narrowness of Morris. There
is strength in concentration : and the intensity of his
conviction was at the root of his success. He himself
believed in narrowness, and had some scorn for any
one whose love of art was more diffuse than his. He
used to say, he had rather a man did not appreciate many
and various forms of art, suspecting him probably, if he
did, of not loving any one of them truly. Catholicity
was obnoxious* to his temperament. He was not by
nature critically inclined, if we assume criticism to imply
weighing and soberly judging. What he did not like
he disliked ; that was all, and there was an end of it.
Once when we were acting as judges together, I sug-
gested that our personal feeling ought not to count for
too much, and said that our disliking a thing did not
make it bad. “Oh, don’t it though,” he answered;
“ what we don’t like is bad.”
Greek art was quite beyond his sympathy; “he was
not blind to its limitations,” is the way it has been
put. Surely the limitations were his. His coldness to-
wards Greek ornament (which he found so cold) might
be accounted for, perhaps, by the absence in it of
natural forms ; but, as it happens, he denied “ decorative
Lily pattern.
“ Wilton pile ”
stair-carpet
(p. 22).
Designed by
William Morris
Ca. 1881.


Poppy_ pattern j
Artichoke
jt pattern. Em-
broidery (p. 25).
drawing by
orr * 8-
instinct” to tlie Japanese, whose art errs on
the side of the naturalistic. True, it was also
“ blankly individualistic.” The solution of
the matter is probably to be found in the fact
that the qualities of refinement character-
istic of Greek art were just those he could
best spare. And then, there was so much
subordination in it, and he was an insub-
ordinate ; moreover, it was not art of the
people nor yet for them. There was the rub.
“The whole art of the classical ancients,
while it was alive and growing, was the art
of a society made up of a narrow aristocracy
of citizens, waited upon by a large body of
slaves, and surrounded by a world of bar-
barism, which was always despised, and
noticed till it threatened to overwhelm the self-sufficient aristocracy
that called itself the civilised world.” That was enough to make William Morris
intolerant of Greek art: he could not and would not like it. j
He confessed to some admiration for the mosaic pavement patterns of the
Romans, and his own peculiar scroll was not remotely related to the familiar
acanthus variety, Hiis attitude towards the Renaissance was very much that
of Ruskin; he looked upon it as “a period of blight.” “From the time of
the Renaissance onwards, life, growth, and hope are gone.” What was
undeniably good and beautiful in early Renaissance art [its sincerest admirers
do not claim much for later Renaissance design) he placidly attributed to
lingering Gothic influence; the bad in it was of the Renaissance, and the Renais-
sance was bad. He never meant to
be unjust; but he was a Goth.
For all that he very early broke the
traditions of Gothic design. Some of
the earliest designs of his we know are
frankly natural. In the fruit panels
at South Kensington (page 21) nature
is just made to grow in the way he
wanted. At its very severest, his fo-
liage was never so pronouncedly Gothic
as that, for example, of B. J. Talbert,
who, from the date of the publication
of his book in 1867 to the time of his
death in 1881, was perhaps more than Morris the model upon whom the
designers of the period founded themselves. A comparatively early instance
of Morris’s more naturalistic manner occurs in the “Vine” wall-paper
(page 2) sufficiently removed from nature by the artful distribution of the
alternating patches of leafage, and by the artificial lines of the “ boldly
circular ” vine stocks.
He could be more severe, Byzantine indeed in his severity (page 4), but,
throughout, his work is based on nature, more or less under restraint, as
the occasion might demand, but always there. His silks show influence
of Sicilian and early Italian design ; from the time of his interest in carpets,
we note the influence, even in his wall-papers and cottons, of Persian
forms—notably in the use of the “ inhabited leaf,” as he very prettily called
it; but he was always very much himself, and, moreover, thoroughly
English. By the way, he was something of a stay-at-home, not much
given to foreign travel and never seriously swayed by foreign art, though
in the later form of his scroll, as in the “ Bachelor’s Button” (page 30),
one may trace the influence of the illuminated choir-books at Siena. It
would be far-fetched perhaps to see in the intricate interlacings of his ini-
tial letter and the like, something of Scandinavian or Icelandic influence.
It was his opinion that “ ornamental pattern-work, to be raised above
the contempt of reasonable men, must possess three qualities—beauty,
imagination, and order.” It followed that he was for conventional treat-
ment —with the proviso that the convention must be the artist’s own—
otherwise, he thought, you had almost better just copy nature ; you would
not produce ornament that way, but you might learn something in the
process of copying. For the rest he subscribed to the axiom that, other
things being equal, the more mechanical the process, the less direct should
be the imitation of natural forms. Unfitness in ornament was to him an
offence against nature. “ What we call decoration is, in many cases, but


%
I M
v lip
:;-p : ::.’0k
2* u;-Vc y- 1 §u &d ©iSSrvAT#/ P)i\ j^^3*SSJ-
/. ‘‘£"''i / ( 'J j> '-'‘^' ,, ‘'"j | V’-^ K’'j) ' #* x -
Hawthorn pat-
tern. Enamelled
tiles (p. 27).
Designed by
Miss Faulkner
for Morris & Co.
a. 1885.
Tile Panel
(p. 27).
Designed by
William Morris,
and executed by
William de
Morgan.
1876.
a device or way we have learned for making necessary
things reasonable as well as pleasant to us. The pat-
tern becomes a part of the thing we make, its exponent,
or mode of expressing itself to us; and by it we often
form our opinions, not only of the shape, but of the
strength and uses of a thipg.”
He preferred pattern which did not hide its structure ;
much ingenuity, he thought, was wasted in masking the
constructional lines of design ; they gave largeness and
nobility to it; and “ the obvious presence of geometric
order ” prevented the effect of restlessness.
Above all things he disliked vagueness. “Run any
risk of failure rather than involve yourself in a tangle of
poor, weak lines that people can’t make out. Definite
form bounded by firm outline is a necessity for all
ofnament. You ought always to go for positive patterns
when they may be had.” Personally, he was no more
inclined to over intricate patterns than to metrical
gymnastics; it was natural to him to plan “frank”
patterns; but it was part of his romance to love mystery
—and that he got by interweaving two or more separate
growths (pages 2 and 24, etc.) into one pattern. He
showed his art in doing this without losing, as it were,
the thread of the design—which, in the coloured stuffs
or what not, was easier to follow than in the rendering
of them here in black and white. His floral growth
was not seldom entwined with his favourite scroll, readily
distinguished always by the contrast of its convention-
ality with relatively natural plant forms.
Frank colour also he insisted upon always. It was the
sign, according to him, of a “right-minded” colourist to
make his work as bright as possible, and as “ full of
colour ” as he could get it, and if he did not get it “ pure
and clear,” he had not learnt the trade. To have a preju-
dice against any particular colour he took to be indica-
tive of “disease”
in an artist. But
he himself found
yellow “not a
colour that can
be used in mass-
es,” red a “diffi-
cult” one, and
pxirple a colour “no one in his senses would think of using in bright masses.”
Green, on the other hand, he described as being “ so useful, and so restful to
the eyes, that in this matter also we are bound to follow Nature, and make
large use of that work-a-day colour.” Most of all he loved blue, the “ holiday ”
colour, as he calls it by way of distinction from “ work-a-day green.” In small
masses he found all colours useful except muddy or dirty ones, which he could
not endure. He was against all rules of colour. His experience taught him
“the paler the colour is, the purer it may be.” Pale, pure colour he found
“the best tone for wall-papers, or flat painted ornament”; the richer
Scroll pattern
Painted tiles
(p. 27).
Designed by
William Morris.
Ca. 1870.
Artichoke pattern. Painted tiles (p. 27). Designed
by William Morris. Ca. 1870.
“ Bough” pat«
tern. Painted]
tiles (p. 127).
Designed |by
William Morns
Ca. 1870.


if\ \~'
' ~~~ 5 ' £• j J -t"*^
t -^Uir’!*^^' "** :>■< '' i
j ; ■|n|f
< *
j| fl
By ||E gS* tV
r^‘-
Tlie Green
Dining-room at
South Kensing-
ton Museum
(p. 25).
Decoration
designed by-
William Morris.
The figures in
stained glass
designed by Sir
Edward Burne-
Jones.
and deeper colours he preferred to keep for rich
materials, or for small and confined spaces ; but he
was too good a colourist to attempt to explain what
can only be felt.
His colour schemes were not the result of theory.
They came out of the crafts in which he was engaged.
Combinations which we attribute to his individuality
are often, strictly speaking, not so much his choice as
what the conditions imposed upon him : he was master
enough to obey the dictates of technique. Thus, given
his hatred of dyes derived from coal-tar or other chemical
substances, it was almost a matter of compulsion that he
should use for his cotton printing the blue of indigo or
woad, the red of madder, the yellow of weld or Persian
berry, the brown of walnut juice (getting his green and
purple and black by combinations of these) and so work
practically with the chintz-palette of the early Oriental
cotton printers, which he certainly revived. He could
no more have got out of his block-printing in vegetable
dyes, the effects obtained by roller-printing in what he
called “ chemical dyes,” than the commercial printer can
get by machine-printingarange of pure, fresh colours. He
was wrong in his contention that the dyes due to modern
science are more fugitive than vegetable dyes. That
may have been true when he began to find fault with
them ; but it is true no longer. He was right, however,
as to the pleasant fading of his favourite stains : “ They
are not eternal; the sun, in lighting them and beautifying
them, consumes them, yet gradually and for the most
part kindly.” He followed his artistic sense in having
nothing to do with the colours of which he did not see
his way to make use. As to making the best of the
colours most readily available (and sure to be used by
the many), that was a problem which did not provoke his
attack. It is one, however, that is nearer solution to-
day than it was when Morris first took to the dye vat.
His own designs for cotton prints, etc., are rather fully
illustrated on pages 9, 10,11,12,17, 25, 31, and on Plate IV.
(opposite page 24).
A cotton print he conceived as something gay, some-
thing made up of “ the naivest flowers (and birds, too,
or animals), with which you may do anything that is not
ugly.” He would tell designers they could not well go
wrong so long as they avoided commonplace and kept
“somewhat on the daylight side of nightmare.” The
spooks and ghouls haunting a certain form of “ up-to-
date ” design he could not endure.
Without insisting upon a hard flat treatment of sur-
face design he objected to all simulation of modelling,
protesting that shading should never be employed
with the purpose of making an object look round, but
that “ whatever shading you use should be used for ex-
planation only, to show what you mean by such and
such a piece of drawing ; and even that you had better


II jKflL I W w\r§tb& I ■ 9 I M h 1
■I | yjjiAm .£ _ y “ ylg Vv^jf/* rr ' JJ jV M ■
j HI .A JR ■ I " ymfeL - 1) x.'fitl*' , HH
Kill >»' ’■ •'‘51. 1 lln /. u k //4^Wm
J4^■ x RIB
IB! ■ I MBs! /' ■» 8iflPBi!l . ; Ij 'llB
Details of
Painted Decora-
tion at South
Kensington
(pp. 18 and 27).
Designed by
William Morris.
1866.
be sparing of.” Recognising that cotton printing gave
occasion for “ hatching and dotting,” he used eventually,
both for cotton and wall-paper printing, a system of
enrichment by means of dotting, which greatly enhanced
the otherwise flat colour of the printer. This was a
device arising really out of the old-fashioned method
by which brass pins are driven into a wooden block, to
print-off as dots, and was employed early in this century
by cotton printers, who used what was called a “pinning
roller,” a hand-roller which Morris himself would not
have despised.
It would be interesting to show the plans on which
Morris designed his surface patterns, but space does not
allow it: they may be traced by the curious in such
matters in the patterns herein illustrated, which are
arranged as nearly as can be in the order of their pro-
duction, so as to show as far as possible the course of his
artistic development; He does not seem ever to have
designed a “drop” repeat, preferring, characteristically,
the more obvious lines of construction.
In the design for wall-papers, to be stretched out flat
on the wall, and about which there was no special
beauty of execution, he allowed that the designer
might be “driven” to do more than he otherwise
would in the way of masking the construction 01
his pattern ; but he was never at the pains to do
much in that way himself, not being of those who are
easily driven. He spoke habitually of wall-paper as a
“makeshift”; and would rather always have used for
wall-hangings, silks or other textiles—the sanitarians
notwithstanding. For all that, he was not satisfied with
mere pattern, even in a paper. “ Is it not better,” he
said, “ to be reminded, however simply, of the close vine
trellis that keeps out the sun by the Nile side, or of the
wild woods and their streams with the dogs panting
beside them ; or of the swallows sweeping above the
garden boughs towards the house eaves where their nest-
lings are, while the sun breaks the clouds on them ; or
of the many-flowered summer meadows of Picardy?”
Perhaps it is. At all events it sounds inviting, as he
words it. But his question might be answered by
another : does anyone really get that sort of enjoyment
out of the paper he lives with ? It may reasonably be
contended that the more important thing for the artist
to remember is that it is only a background he is design-
ing. He spoke more as a poet than as a practical
designer when he protested, as he did, that the decora-
tion which did not remind one of something beyond
itself was futile ; and it strikes one as rather odd that
though he must have meaning in his wall-papers, he
did not want it in the ornament of his books ; odder still
that, not content with abstract ornament there, he must
have natural forms bearing no relation to the text. The
character of his wall-paper designs is to be seen on pages
2, 12, 16, 24, 25, 26, and Plate IV. (opposite page 24).
When it came to designs for weaving, he considered
dots and suchlike, which were all very well to enrich
poor materials, quite beneath the dignity of silk or wool.
There the web was worth showing, and his native hon-
esty led him to prefer a broad pattern which compelled
the use of good stuff. You need only look at his
designs on page 5, to see that he was a devout admirer
of old Sicilian and Palermitan patterns. The sim-
plicity of their lines (they were manifestly weavers’


!pl
THUS ENDETH THE STORYOFTHE
MEN OFTHORSNESSJHE DWELL
ERS AT EYR AND THOSE WHO,
DWELT BY &\ANFIRTHSJ»3*Si£
Painted Wall
Decoration.
Side of window
recess at Swan
House, Chelsea
(p. 27).
Designed by
William Morris.
1881.
Detail of
Painted Decor-
ation (p. 27).
Working
drawing by-
William Morris
patterns), no less than the rich invention shown in them (they were
brimful of symbolism), appealed strongly to him, and it is obvious
that in his silks he to some extent founded himself upon them. In
the coarse woollen hanging on page 4, he seems to have gone back
to Byzantium for inspiration,
adopting the early weaver’s
barbaric but effective trick of
shooting colours across the cur-
tain in bands, with only half
regard to the forms of the de-
sign. This was designed for
heavy curtains and for use as
wall hangings in churches and
the like. It was hung in his
own room to within a couple of
feet of the ceiling, almost flat,
with only just enough undu-
lation of the surface to break
the evenness of the pattern.
The manliness of a pattern like
this helps us to understand how
it was he could see no redeem-
ing feature in the brocades of
the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. There was nothing
to be learnt from such “ mean-
ingless tormenting of the web”
but a warning; and, again, they
represented “the drudgery of
the operative,” as opposed to
the free work of the mediaeval
craftsman. But for that, he
must have recognised often
very beautiful colour in the
work even of the “ vile Pompa-
dour period.”
With carpets hebegan modest-
ly, by designing cheap Kidder-
minster, Brussels, Wilton pile
(pages 3, 17), and patent Ax-
minster (Plate 11., opposite page
8), machine-made varieties all,
not produced in his own work-
shops, but woven for him. But
apart from the objection that
these were machine-made, the
conditions of the loom were
irksome to him as a designer; he
did not like being restrained;
and, the beauty of the old Ori-
ental carpets imported into this
country inciting him, he eventually set about weaving “ real ” Axminster, t.e.,
carpets of soft close pile, all in one piece, after the Eastern fashion. These
were at first woven at Hammersmith, whence the name “ Hammersmith car-
pets,” but were afterwards made at Merton Abbey. The process is pictured
on the first page of this number, as it is still carried on by Mr. Morris’s part-
ners and successors—who are not merely still executing his designs, but are
vigorously carrying on the traditions he established. Carpet weaving of this
description he himself describes as a “mosaic” of small, woollen squares ; the
Last words of
“ Story of the
Dwellers at
Eyr” (p. 28).
Written
by William
Morris. 1871.
By permission
of Lady
Burne-Jones.
22
THE EASTER ART ANNUAL.


Portion of a
“ Hammersmith
Carpet” (p. 24).
Designed by-
William Morris.
1883.


designer has only to observe the size of the squares,
and he is free to let his fancy spread itself over the
carpet. Morris naturally found this kind of thing less
difficult than working within the lines given by narrow
strips of machine-made material. He founded himself
very deliberately upon Persian models, adopting from
the East the very doubtful practice of introducing animal
forms, which were as likely
as not to be seen upside
down on the floor; but he
produced beautiful carpets,
very much his own. The il-
lustration on page 23, lack-
ing colour, does scant justice
to his work. He did not
approve of the gradation of
tint so much sought after in
modern carpets, preferring a
pattern which lay “abso-
lutely flat upon the ground”;
and he contrived to get won-
derful variety and beauty of
tint by juxtaposition of con-
trasting colours (red and blue
by preference), bounded by
judiciously chosen outlines.
A carpet, he held, should
be not only a passable but
an exquisite piece of colour.
And, of course, it should
have something to say for
itself. Such was his appre-
ciation of Oriental carpet
weaving, that he half doubted
whether we had any busi-
ness to make a carpet in the
West. He knew we were
not in the least likely to beat
Persian work in the matter
of colour, and so thought we
were bound “to get enough
of form and meaning into it
to justify our making it at
all. 5 ’
Tapestry was but a step
beyond carpet weaving as
Morris understood it. His
tapestry is made on the haute
lisse, worked, that is to say,
on the warp standing tijt-
right in front of the weaver,
who has only to hold apart
the threads with his left
hand whilst he works his
bobbins in and out amongst
them, and so builds up his
coloured woollen picture, a
sort of embroidery with the
shuttle upon stretched
threads. The basse-lisse or
low-war-p loom, so contrived that the warp threads lie
horizontally over the cartoon below, he held in small
respect, as a cheap and relatively mechanical time-
saving contrivance, which did a good deal to degrade
the noble art of tapestry weaving, and cause it to be
neglected.
Morris ranked tapestry as “ the noblest of the weaving
arts’’ because there was nothing mechanical about it,
next to mosaic the most lasting form of decoration, and
next to painting the most desirable. The Merton
tapestries have more the quality of old Arras than
any other modern work. What is pictorial in them is
the picture of Sir E. Burne-Jones, which is always
decorative. They owe much of their beauty to the
figure work, but, harmonious as that is with Morris’s
own work, it cannot quite be said that the effect
is always absolutely one. This would not be sur-
prising in the work oj two separate men (friends though
they were), except for the fact that Morris was respon-
sible, not only for the details, such as the “verdure”
diapering and so on, but for the colour of the figures
also ; Sir E. Burne-Jones’s designs were made, if not in
monochrome, in a sort of tinting of his own not related
to the effect sought in the tapestry.
The qualities sought in the Merton tapestries are purity
Pink and Rose
pattern Wall-
paper (p. 21).
Working
drawing by
William Morris.
1891.




Bose pattern
printed cotton
(p. 80).
Working draw-
ing by William
Morris.
Ca. 1889.
and distinction of silhouette, depth of tone, richness of
colour, gradation of tint and abundance of “crisp”
detail. The principles proper to the art of the modern
weaver he describes as follows : “the figures are arranged
in planes close to one another, and the cloth is pretty
much filled with them, a manner which gives a peculiar
richness to the designs of the first years of the sixteenth
century, the opposing fault to this being the arrange-
ment of figures and landscape as in a picture proper,
with foreground, middle distance, and distance ” —which,
at great expense, gave only, he thought, “a poor filled-
up look.” The late Gobelins work he despised as “no
longer a fine art, but as an upholsterer’s to}-.” It will
be seen in our frontispiece and Plate 111. (opposite page
16) how far these principles of ancient Arras weaving
were carried into modern practice.
Embroidery he loved because it stands outside the limits
imposed by weaving, even in the relatively free tapestry
looms, and no mechanical process could therefore touch
it on its own ground. He considered it, accordingly, the
first business of the embroidress to occupy that post of
vantage, and never to forsake it, or wander off in the
direction of mechanical accuracy or cheap production,
where the driver of the loom has the advantage all on
his side. It was not worth while to do laboriously by hand
what the loom could do better. To justify the time spent
on it, embroidery should do something which could not
be so well done in any other way. What was the use of
freedom if you did not take advantage of it? And so
a thing to seek in embroidery was perfect gradation of
colour. His own embroidery designs (page 18) gave
always scope for such gradation. On the other hand he
did not invariably take full advantage of the scope
afforded for design in embroidery. The “Artichoke pat-
tern” (page 18) for example, is more a pattern than it need
have been for its purpose; and, large as it is in style,
and admirably as it is designed for stitching, there is an
element of economy in the planning it to repeat as it
does, which is more in accordance with the necessities of
mechanical manufacture than with the freedom possible
in handwork. An obvious repeat is suggestive rather of
the loom than of the needle. It is only by its delicate
gradation of colour, and by the direction of the threads
or strokes, that the pattern proclaims itself designed
for the needle. The designer was not sparing of the
needle ; embroidery, he thought, was not worth doing
unless either very copious and rich, or very delicate, or
both. The use an embroidress made of her needle was
the test of her understanding and appreciation of the
art she followed ; her needle strokes should be judicious,
the stitches so laid as at once to explain the form, and,
by the difference of their direction, to give play of colour
to the silk, and do justice to its lustrousness. There
was “no excuse” in embroidery for anything short of
great beauty.
Morris was never more a colourist than in his Stained
Glass (pages 13 and 20), advisedly “ his,” for, though
here again Sir E. Burne-Jones designed the figures, he
coloured them. It is strange that a painter, himself some-
thing of a magician in the handling of jewel-like colour, a
man born, one would have said, to work in coloured light,
should have been content to let even his most sympathetic
Autumn Flower
pattern. Wall-
paper (p. 21).
Working
drawing by
William Morris.
1888.
2 5
WILLIAM MORRIS AND HIS ART.


Norwich
pattern. Wall-
paper (p. 21).
Working draw-
ing by William
Morris.
1889.


ft;
’ * ft sT V jmS jk ** d& ~ ■ t? • g
ftt;'; - I ' '
Tooled bin ding
of an illumi-
nated MS. of the
Rubaiyat of
Omar-Khayyam
(p. 28).
By permission
of Lady Burne-
Jones. Designed
by William
Morris.
1872.
friend invent the colour for his cartoons ; but so it was,
although, except for a certain preponderance of green in
the ornament, which speaks of Morris, the glass does
not betray the fact. That it does not is proof of Morris’s
claims to be a colourist. In glass his theory of frank
colour works out perfectly. There is an evasiveness
about the quality of glass colour which makes it never
too positive, whereas in distemper-painting, for example,
frank colour may easily be too outspoken. The first
conditions of good glass, according to Morris, were
“well-balanced and shapely figures, pure and simple
drawing, and a minimum of light and shade.” After
that he insisted upon beautiful colour, not necessarily
strong, but pure and sweet, holding it only natural and
becoming “ that the light we stain should not be changed
to dirt or ugliness.” That is most rational doctrine.
In the matter of tile-painting, Morris contented him-
self, for the most part, with work more strictly on a par
with glass-painting than with ceramics. Eatterly some
of his more important tile designs, such as the panel
on page 19, were executed by Mr. De Morgan. The
hawthorn pattern on the same page was designed by the
late Miss Faulkner, the sister of his friend and partner.
It is sometimes questioned whether Morris really de-
signed all the work published in his name —practically he
did. Now and then one of his assistants produced a design
of his own, which was published by Morris and Co., but
these were very few indeed ; and in a sense they too
were the work of the master, who so inspired his pupils
that their work might easily be taken for his : he was the
last man to lay claim to what he did not do.
Of his work in house decoration it is impossible to speak
adequately in the short space possible here to devote
to it. It will be seen from the picture of Stanmore
Hall (page 15) that he was never afraid of pattern, in-
dulging in it to an extent which, in the case of an artist
less expert, would have been dangerous; but out of ela-
boration he managed, like the Orientals, to get repose,
owing largely to his command of colour. The result
of decoration, he said, must be colour not colours; and
he lived up to his principle. Decoration was to him
not so much a luxury as a necessity. He could hardly
imagine a puritan preference for bare walls, but he was
quite sure that whoever had such a preference must be
“in an unhealthy state of mind, and probably of body
also.” One of the chief reasons of art, he held, was to
make our houses at once beautiful and restful. He pre-
ferred hand-painting, but if not that, let us have the next
best thing to it—tapestry, silk, printed cotton, wall-
paper—anyway, “something that can be done by a great
many people without too much difficulty and with plea-
sure.” Stencilling was too mechanical a process to find
favour in his eyes ; he never used it except for the most
insignificant diaper work; and with him, therefore,
painting was necessarily rather a costly business. Ex-
amples ofhis painted detail occur on pages 7, 14, 21,-22, and
on Plate 11. (opposite page 8). The handsome scrollwork
on page 7 was designed for the soffits of the open arches
on the staircase of St. James’s Palace (i88r) to go with one
of his most sumptuous wall-papers, first used there. By
way of exception to his almost invariable practice of
employing only his own patterns, he there also made use
of two of Jeffrey and Co.’s leather papers, the one by
Walter Crane, the other by B. J. Talbert, both of them
curiously enough including amorini in their design—
amoririi were not much in Morris’s way. A favourite
plan ofhis was, where it was possible, to use oak wains-
coting for the lower walls and Arras tapestry above.
The idea of printing according to his own notion of
what a book should be, arose in the mind of Morris as
early as 1865 ; for about that time he not only contem-
plated an edition of “ The Earthly Paradise ” (p. 27) illus-
trated by Burne-Jones, but began to work at it. Many
Cloth binding of
“ The Earthly
Paradise ”
,'p. 27).
Designed by
William Morris
Published by
Messrs. Dong-
mans, Grroea
and Co.


r— ~ '
Title-page to
“ A Book of
Verse,” by
William Morris.
Written in
London (p. 28).
1870.
By permission
of Lady Burne-
Jones.
designs appear to have been made, and one or two of
these at least he cut on wood with his own hand, very
much after the manner, it need hardly be said, of the
early Gothic wood-cuts. The project came to naught, and
the idea of printing seems to have lain half torpid in his
mind, occasionally stirring as if it were about to take
active shape, but not doing so to any very serious purpose
until, after producing a trial book or two with the
Chiswick Press, he set up,
during 1890, his own hand-
presses, and at the beginning
of the following year began
to issue the famous publica-
tions of the Kelmscott press.
Here once more by a sort of
irony of fate he laboured for
the few. He had not faith
enough in the public to bring
out anything but limited
editions; which, of course,
got into the hands of biblio-
philes, and speculators who
bought for a rise in price,
and not of lovers of the book
beautiful. It seems more
than ever unfortunate that
in this matter of book-print-
ing, probably the very easiest
way in which the intellectual
life of the million can be
made fuller, the socialist
should have fallen so far
short of his ideal of art for
the people. And it is a
question whether his books
would not have gained by
less luxurious ornamen-
tation. His page is some-
times overladen, and the
repetition even of the beau-
tiful borders in the Chaucer
begins to weary you before
you get to the end of the
volume. One feels too that
some of the brush-drawn de-
tail of the ornament, nobly
as it is designed, is not deli-
• cate enough for the pages of a
book, even when the type is as
manly as the printer’s own.
In devising his types Morris
did a real service to typo-
graphy. Printers generally
will no doubt persist in
wanting rather lighter type
than his; but they cannot
help learning from him : he
has demonstrated, not only
the poverty of modern type, but how much better it
can easily be made. It is matter of regret that this side
of Morris’s art is not here illustrated, his trustees having
resolutely declined to lend any of the blocks. They are
apparently under the impression that Morris would not
have countenanced the reproduction of any of his book
ornaments by a photographic process. Certainly he was no
great friend to photography. But it was a friend to him,
assisting him, as it happened, materially in the design
of his very type; for it was by the examination of
numerous specimens of old printing, enlarged by photo-
graphy to a size convenient to be studied, that he con-
vinced himself as to what had best be done in the way of
new types.
Some amends for this gap in our illustrations are made
by the reproductions on pages 22, 27, 28, 29, and 30,
from his illuminations, which, by the kindness of Lady
Burne-Jones and Sir Philip Burne-Jones, we are enabled
to give. They contrast rather strangely by the ex-
treme delicacy of their workmanship, with the rough-
ness of his printed ornaments. The caligraphy is
beautiful. Even the fair copy of some of his MSS.
is remarkable; but the engrossing of these illuminated
volumes shows the artist proficient in yet another craft.
It is interesting to note that the illuminated ornament is
not, as a rule, strongly influenced by mediaeval workman-
ship-being often freely and even sketchily drawn, never
with a precise line. It looks almost as if the leafage
on pages 28 and 29 might have been first sketched
with the brush in colour, and the pen outline added


¥ Page from “ The
______ _ — — Story of the
Dwellers of
Eyr ” (p. 28).
jT* j Translated from
the Icelandic,
and engrossed
by William
Ti • r i m 1.1 sr-
1 horarm sine’s of ifici lewlithe mattos By permission
! of Lady Burne-
Jones.
re ' 'f rov> > '-Git/Crfor! evt Cc-ca/S
-ib-t' raw goocCfy
A yveis -tijc re -vvvC ft cyC toCcC' t(yo fy<fi v>g$ j xherrysScyycC
\erry i u>r M f cTtt/'i't' fGe» i / c('icb>t
Coi«-' not 7 citewy t(y<x-b ct>oim~iG Gc4x>C L GceTy cfo-ryc- O't jyyit?
. tferer oj- reo(/ Od m 7 k^Sy\
c-r> o-£ v>>c/ I
Of t' cT T
Avir' -f §~y~ /v rr cr
Vjfrcy woWys D^aVwonvii- d naoi/Ke^
*" .■ Gc*C' Gx vv / " trw>g(cri Sa vX £ cT
c* r |° ■♦Xgc/ S'VYyo\i>
l i% jH r XolX- ;j^<^
+1 it tcutTvfo »i Tg 0"1
<JUi nrf G3CC4 1 <seof g (v'tHyoit Xt-cfc i> not ai>v<Ci
-Xjctf SalX °Vervvi i m.cC Sort ojyryyyyy ok<£
tT ? ScwvgJX omrwi :
&Z ai C cTvoC give tXeo>vy GirXs >»>eo.fc
6 r c c (C w
, . f «' vvcv < J® T ' SCrtrcoWvvd/J-Uc^^/%• «*
ifwO^fwro.v^.nh.
mic, C t cUXCor vvdfe^^lT
'smj m ir , 15 , r r
:ivv>f| $gA h* ir
ni-gGi:Tr>ct €>c(/
Apt?''' '<%r < J'j e Cvlc G m/~--iti £$-'■ -'■0: '~~l
; j ’ ■
--I ■■— ■""*


f'ORY OF THE
D-MEN
(III L *« /
ill \mimJ 1i’ o <^w< (r wift ifm<i>
ataJjnfU IR<cL : 1
i(k tOI) 0^, ( Ittiif In'! It
uwiauy f \\()ov tnotbawaijatv
?«9 Jampniwti wt(fc runtfi
wi ut(rJ Wit'woman
treat *)<oj £f ra f (. tnanJ was as t*rr
ftw woman . a wise viati ,atufju Il,r r .(
com wef ' f hr £*xw<- » hearted waff wife J r m mmatniyat
Part of a page
from “ Icelandic
Stories ” (p. 28).
Translated and
engrossed by
William Morris.
By permission
of Lady Burne-
Jones.
Bachelor’s
button pattern
(p. 18).
Small sketch-
design by-
William Morris.
1892.
afterwards. The colour again is the artist’s own,
inclining more to natural green than to the primary
tints employed in old missals.
Among the few branches of design Morris does not
seem to have touched is metal-work—perhaps because
it gave no opportunity for colour, perhaps because
smithing had been revived before his time. He, or his
firm, was responsible for a great deal of furniture, but it
was designed mainly by his friend, Mr. Philip Webb,
and carved or inlaid from designs by Mr. Jack.
It will be seen from the account of Morris’s work here
given, short as it is, and inadequate as it must neces-
sarily be, that it was only by, in turn, pursuing one
craft after another that a man, whatever his natural
energy, could ever have brought so many to success.
The various trades in which he was engaged were all,
it is true, going on at the same time, but mostly without
any very active part being taken in them by him. He
had trained men to work in his way, and the work went
on in many cases with only very occasional reference to
him for help or advice. Mr. H. Dearie, for example, who
has designed the wrapper for this Annual, learnt to work
so like him that the design of the pupil may well be mis-
taken, even by the experienced in design, for that of the
master. As a matter of fact great part of the floral and
other detail in the tapestries woven at Merton is entirely
his. He, too, has of late years overlooked the tapestry
weavers. In the same way Morris’s partner, Mr. Frank
Smith, has for many years past virtually controlled the
decoration for which he was nominally responsible. The
truth is, Morris acted latterly more as consultingadviserto


r ; r “
© j • " _
J
“ Trent ”
pattern.
Printed linen.
(p. 20).
Working draw-
ing by
William Morris.
Ca. 1892.


El i
'HE® %jfc ~ Jf
ij$ v
'■'*•■■ JL? 1 ■
\
Photo. Fred. Hollyer. /
\Mjyhn
the firm bearing his name than as designer of decoration,
though he from time to time designed certain details of
decoration as well as new patterns for fabrics. It is not
surprising, therefore, to find that the work of the firm of
Morris & Co. (to whom, by the way, we are indebted for
great part of our illustrations) is going on to this day
much as it did in his
lifetime. And so it
may be said he
founded a school of
art which survives
him.
It would have been
impossible to discuss
the art of William
Morris without con-
stant reference to the
man he was. The
work of an artist is
always, of course, the
expression of the man
—more or less. Some-
times it expresses
only one side of him,
the better half, and
to make the acquain-
tance of the man is to
think less of him. It
was not so with Mor-
ris. To know him
was to understand his
work better —but you
felt he was the man
to do just such work,
it corresponded with
him perfectly. Its
merits were a reflec-
tion of the qualities
of the man, and its
defects (theshadeside,
so to speak, of the
merits) were equally
personal. One sees
in his design always
the exuberance of the
man, the impulsive-
ness, the big-boyish-
ness, just as one sees
his genuineness, his
hatred of compromise
or makeshift. He was
characteristically im-
patient, given to think
all who differed from
him fools, but only for a moment. He would storm, but
the lull soon came, and then he was the most reasonable
of beings. It seemed as though he wanted to have
it all his own way; yet, put him in the chair at a
meeting and he was as patient as the mildest of us.
Events proved him to be not a bad man of business,
though the ordinary ways of trade were too mean for
him. His idea of honest dealing was to “eschew all bar-
gains real or imaginary, and to be anxious to pay and to
get what a piece of goods is really worth.” One won-
ders almost at such a man’s hating puritanism. But
there you saw the artist in revolt against strait-lacing.
Genial as he was, and friendly, easy of access always, he
did not often let one get quite close to him ; even in his
verse, in which most men let themselves out, he does
not tell us much of
his own thought or
feeling; his poetry,
for all his tremendous
personality, is imper-
sonal.
Morris was a man
of such pronounced
individuality, and the
ideas he adopted he
made so entirely his
own, that those who
heard them first from
his lips can hardly
believe that he did
not evolve them en-
tirely out of his inner
consciousness. If they
were to read “The
Seven Lamps,” they
would think Ruskin
was quoting him, so
familiar to them
would the words seem
at times. He did not,
of course, by any
means originate the
ideaofmakingmodern
life beautiful, but he
adopted it with all his
heart, and was quite
the most powerful ex-
ponentof it in ourday.
He stamped himself
upon our decorative
art, and it will bear for
future generations the
impress of his genius.
Morris has exercised
considerable influence
upon manufacture,
but only indirectly,
his methods being
professedly those of
art. He did not pre-
tend to meet the
demand of the times.
He held those de-
mands to be (as partly they are) absolutely unjustifiable.
He left, therefore, something for others to do, a wider
work than his, and a more difficult by far—the task,
namely, of directing, in the way they should artistically
go, methods of manufacture which, disapprove them who
may, must presently come into almost exclusive use.
His task is done, and done right well. The greatest
pleasure in life, he said, was the pleasure of creating
beautiful things. He may be counted a very happy man.
Lewis F. Day.
All designs herein are the property of Messrs. Morris & Company , who , hold all rights of reproduction.
PRINTED BY }. S VIRTUE & CO., LTD, 294, CITY ROAD, LONDON.


