

AUSTRALIA'S FIRST ANIMATED CARTOON
WILLE
WOMBAT
Waste not-Want not
By
ERIC
PORTER
Presenting
COTOURING BOOR




WILLIE WOMBAT
IN
WASTE NOT WANT NOT
Featuring All Australian Animals
Illustrated and Prepared by
ERIC PORTER
All Right* Reserve^




WASTE NOT WANT NOT
Once upon a time, in the heart ol
the great Australian bush, there was
a quaint little town. Houses were
built in the trees, others in the side
of cliffs, but they were all so cun-
ningly hidden away, that you would
never know they were there.
In this town, there lived quaint little
bush people - Jacky the Kooka-
burra Benny the
Koala Bear, 'Oppy
the Kangaroo and
dozens of others that
we all know and
love so well


Now, on the outskirts of the town, in an untidy
and gloomy home built in the side of a cliff, lived
a chap named Willie the Wombat.
Willie was a lazy, good-for-nothing scamp. He
would sit for hours and hours in the sun in front
of his house. Here he had a large armchair carved
out of an old tree stump.
The other folks just couldn't find out how he
had managed to make the chair, for he was so lazy.
But there it was, and there he sat day after day,
hour after hour.
He would go off into the bush and pick arm-
fuls of fruit. Then he would come back to his chair


and eat and eat until he would nearly burst He
would take a bite from this and a bite from that
throwing the rest away.
The other townsfolk would tell him over and
over again not to be extravagant not to waste
what he had because some day he may need that
food But he would just laugh and sing:
“Life’s too short to save and stint yourself.
Put things on the shelf.
Hoard up all your wealth
Not for me.
I’m Willie the Wombat*
Now. in the heart of the town lived a Very bright
and happy little fellow named Bennie.
He was a Koala Bear, a cute little chap, all soft
and fluffy and cuddly. A very dashing figure he


made too. in his little red pants, as he pushed his
cart through the bush picking fruit
One day he was going through the bush, when
he came upon Willie the Wombat
'Hello Bennie," said Willie. "Working agaia I see.
Why don't you come and play, instead of working
all day?*
But Bennie was a wise little chap.
You are a very foolish fellow," said he. “Some
day you 11 be sorry, when you have nothing to eat"
But there is so much of everything." said Willie,
why should I save when there is food to be found
everywhere?"


Then he started to sing:
"Every day youll see me swing along.
Hear me sing a song,
And if things do go wrong,
I don't care.
I'm Willie the Wombat."
Then spreading out his arms, he said:
'Ah! Bennie, the world is good. Plenty to eat. a
home to live in, and the bright sunshine. Why should
I work and save up? You have a very gloomy
idea of life. I'm afraid."


"Everything seems good with lots of food lying
around.
But youll be sad when winter comes, no food
can be found,"
sang Bennie. With that, he picked up a lovely red
apple, and placed it carefully in his cart
"Ah! Pooh to you, and all your gang!
You should be hissed and boo-ed," said Willie.
But what about when winter comes ?
Then there'll be no food." said Bennie
Ha! Ha' Hal Ha!" laughed Willie. That's all


you think about'
“When winter
comes, and food is scarce,
you’ll be the one without." said
Bennie. Willie sat down beside
a tree, and laughed until his
sides fairly shook.
Then pointing a
fat finger at
Bennie he said.
"Go on then and
work if you want
to. I'm going to sit
here and enjoy
myself." With that
he began to throw
fruit at Bennie.
Poor Bennie had
quite a time trying


fo dodge the fruit, as Willie was throwing it so fast
that it fell around him like hailstones. Tou take my
advice. Willie Wombat," he said "put some food in the
store and save it for the winter time, or you’ll have
nothing to eat. Then when your work is done you'll
still find plenty of time to play and lie in the sun."
Then he picked up all the fruit that Willie had
thrown at him and placed it in his little blue cart. Tm
not going to starve, just because you want me to
come and play with you’


Ha! Ha! Ha!' laughed Willie, holding his fat
sides. 1 hope all your food goes bad Ho! Hoi Ho!"
But Bennie said Tm off to the store now to put
this food away for the winter, then my work is done
for to-day ’
With that, he started trundling his cart over the
uneven ground in the direction of the store, with
Willie’s laughter ringing in his ears.


Even Jacky, the Kookaburra spent several hours
• each day hunting and killing nasty old snakes, which
were his favourite dish.
He would sit in a tree, perfectly still, until he saw
a snake stealing through the long grass beneath.
Then, like an arrow, he would dive on to the snake
and break its back. Then he would drag it off to the
store where he had quite a collection put away for
the winter.
. / • >
All this goes to show us that Jacky is one of our
very best friends always, and we should all love and
protect him against harm We must keep his happy
laughter ringing through our wonderful Australian
bush, for when we hear it we all feel happy, and
grateful for the joy that he brings.


Now the store was an old hollow tree, that the
clever bush folk had turned into a regular bank. It
had its little doors and windows and even a balcony
to sit out on when it was too hot indoors. In the store
lived the teller, old Squiggs, the squirrel, who would
put all the food brought by the animals away safely
until the winter.
1
One day 'Oppy, the Kangaroo, came bouncing
in with a sack over his shoulder.
"What! More leaves. Oppy?” said Squiggs.
“My word.” said Oppy, “I was caught last winter
without enough food, but I'm making sure this time."




Alas! One cold winter's day, Willie Wombat
suddenly realised that he had no food to eat, and
feeling hungry, he set off in search of some. He
trudged through the snow, searching here and there,
but not a bite to eat could he find
Everything was bare. No fruit on the trees, no
leaves, no grass, nothing but a vast mantle of white,
stretched before him, and how cold it was! B-r-r-r-r!
He pulled his ragged clothes closer about him and
just kept trudging along, hoping that he would come
across something, sooner or later.


. But search as he did. he could not see a morsel
ol food anywhere.
"Hello, Willie,” he heard a soft voice, and looking
up he saw Bennie the Bear.
“Hello, Bennie! you gave me quite a start.” he
said, then his eyes gleamed greedily, lor Bennie had
his little cart all filled up with ripe fruit.
'Why, where did you get all that food? I have
been searching all day for something to eat and not
a thing could I find."
"Why Willie. I got it down at the store," said
Bennie, “there's plenty to eat down there."
"Oh! is there 7 said Willie. "Well stand out of my
way while Igo and see what I can get. Then, push


mg Bennie roughly aside, he strode off in the direction
of the store.
He stamped noisily in and strode boldly up to
the counter.
'I want food," he roared "lots of it. I'm hungry."
Old Squiggs squinted at him over his book, and
said. Why, its Willie Wombat I haven't seen you for
ages and ages." Then putting on his glasses, he
looked in his book, first on one page, then another,
but no mention of Willie could he see.
I m sorry, Willie, but there's nothing for you," he
said, you haven t put anything in, so you can't take
anything out."
Nothing! said Willie in a sad voice.


"Shucks 11 should have taken their advice.'
‘Sony Willie," said Squiggs. "Good-day."
Willie turned round and slowly walked out of
the store. My word how cold and bleak it was out-
side, and Willie felt very'unhappy indeed. He made
his way slowly into the bush and tramped on and on
but not a soul did he see.
By'this time he was very hungry indeed, and he
began to feel quite faint So he rested awhile on the
top of a hill and leaning heavily on an old tree, he
.looked, away, into. the.sunset


"How beautiful it is," he thought with a far away
look in his eyes, "but how when you are
hungry and friendless."
The sun was going down in a blaze of golden
color, the trees casting long shadows on the snow.
Presently, the moon rose and it passed a pale
glow over everything. Poor Willie just stood there,
wrapped in thought. With a sad little sigh he looked
down on the township.
It looked very pretty indeed with the lights twink-
ling in the windows and sparkling on the snow
outside the little homes.


He slowly turned and made his way back down
the hill towards the home of 'Oppy the 'Roo. As he
drew near, he could hear music and laughter, and
there was an air of homeliness and comfort about
the neat little house built in an old hollow gum tree.
He dragged himself wearily along through the
snow until he came to the window Resting his
hands on the sill he pulled himself up and. rubbing
the frost off the pane, he peeped in
What a sight met his gaze.
"Music and laughter in a world so cold and
cruel as this," he thought “I don't understand it all*
and he shook his weary old head sadly from side to
side


He thought of his own home, "Gloomy, dirty and
altogether a wretched place to live in," thought he,
"the cupboards are bare, nothing to eat. Oh! no. It
wasn't a home at all. compared to this." A tear sud-
denly squeezed from his blinking eyes and, rolling
down his face, it dripped off the end of his nose and
splashed onto the windowsill
A burst of music and laughter shattered his
thoughts. As he peeped in, what he saw made his
heart ache. There was Oppy and Jacky dancing
and singing away for all they were worth. Even the
baby roo was rocking in his cradle in time to the
music, and sucking contentedly at his bottle. “La-la-
la-de-de-de,” they sang and whirled and danced as
if their very lives depended on it


Willie turned slowly Irom the window and
moved off through the snow into the bush again. “I'll
just go for a walk and keep warm.” said he. although
he knew in his heart that he cduld not bear to stay
and watch the others so happy when he, himself, was
so sad
*
What an unhappy figure he made, as he wended
his way through the snow.
As he walked his past life swam before him
a big apple lake a bite throw it away more
fruit and more and more waste throw it
away everything was just a jumble in his mind
now his head was spinning round round
round he fell and he did not rise again


Jacky and ’Oppy very quickly prepared a meal
for Willie, who could not quite understand anybody
being so good.
After the meal Willie set off home laden with
good things which they had given him, and on his
way he realised how foolish he had been in
the past.
The kindness of Jacky and ’Oppy, when he was
nearly starved, taught him a lesson.
Ever after that night Willie worked hard. He did
not waste anything or want for anything, and was
always able and ready to help anybody, and be-
cause of doing those things he was always happy.
Printed by Publicity Press (1938) Pty, Ltd., 71-'75 Regent Street, Sydney, and published by Ayers & James Pty. Ltd,
24 Jamieson Street, Sydney,


Pfistad by Publicity Pc**,
-' (1838) Pty. Ltd.,
7 1 -79 Baawßt StrMt, «ydo»r




TAKE A LESSON
FROM THE ANTS
-"Every day is a savings day"
TO-DAY is a good time to save for future needs. It is
Nature's way-she permits no waste.
What a lesson to those fortunate enough to gather
money—even in tiny pieces. Follow the example of the ants,
and save for the day of need.
DON'T WASTE YOUR MONEY-SAVE IT.
COMMONWEALTH
■
oimMO ■■u«v I
SAVINGS BANK
