



V\/. a . /^£7K»'


The Linnean Society of New South Wales
Memorial Series, No. 1
WILLIAM AITCHESON HASWELL
1854-1925
(With Portrait)
(This Memorial Notice appeared in the Proceedings of the Society,
Volume liii, 1928, pp. 485-498.)




WILLIAM AITCHESON HASWELL.
1854-1925.
(Memorial Series, No. I.)*
(With Portrait.)
One of a large family of an Edinburgh banker, Haswell was born at Gayfield
House, Edinburgh, on the sth August, 1854. While other members of the
family showed ability in art and music he, in early life, displayed a preference
for quiet reading. His school was the famous Edinburgh Institution, whence he
proceeded at a comparatively early age to the University of Edinburgh. Here,
at this time, by a happy coincidence, an extraordinary combination of some of
the most brilliant teachers of the period found in young Haswell an eager
and responsive student, who showed unusual aptitude in these spacious intellectual
pastures. After winning high distinction in widely different subjects, he fitly
completed a great University career in 1878 by graduating as B.Sc. and by winning
the Bell-Baxter Scholarship awarded to the most distinguished Natural Science
student of his year. He had already graduated as M.A., and in 1887 he achieved
his D.Sc.
His friend and former colleague, Professor J. T. Wilson, writes: “It must
be regarded as a fortunate circumstance that Haswell’s period of training in
Natural Science coincided with Professor Huxley’s temporary occupation of the
Chair of Natural History in Edinburgh. He thus came under the scientific and
personal influence of that great master of animal morphology”.
He studied zoology under Wyville Thomson and Huxley; geology under Sir
Archibald Geikie, of whose class he was medallist; surgery under Lord Lister.
His earlier intention appears to have been to follow medicine as a profession,
but even the greatest of surgeons could not induce any deviation from the
path set by him in the later years of his University life, and his love of
Natural History drew him irresistibly to a scientific career. “There can be no
doubt”, says Professor J. P. Hill, “it was the teaching of Wyville Thomson and
Huxley that gave Haswell that bent for marine zoology that characterized him
throughout his life”. A friend and fellow student at Edinburgh was Lord Haldane,
with whom he studied Mental Philosophy and Logic, and with whom he used to
take long walks.
According to Lord Haldane, Huxley discovered his conspicuous aptitude in
zoology and took much notice of his work. Lord Haldane himself describes the
Haswell of that period as a man of real mark, very accurate and devoted to study
and interested in knowledge in many forms. “These early characteristics were
precisely those which, within my knowledge of the writer during a long associa-
tion, remained throughout as the outstanding and distinctive qualities of a
greatly esteemed colleague”.
* The Memorial Series will comprise memorials prepared, from time to time, under
the direction of the Council, of distinguished Members of the Society who have died.—Bn,


Professor W. L. Mclntosh, of the Marine Laboratory, St. Andrew’s, in a recent
letter to Mrs. Haswell relates the following: “Professor Haswell when a young
graduate in Edinburgh and I happened to meet after a celebrated professor’s
lecture, and he came to me and said: ‘Did you notice that Prof. gave
the wrong number of vertebrae to a certain specimen?’ He was quite right
and from that date his wonderful accuracy and acuteness were characteristic to
the end. The same care characterized his drawings.”
But all the branches of Natural Science, together with Mental Philosophy
and Logic, were not enough to satisfy this avid assimilator of learning. Besides
winning seven University medals Haswell also won the prize poem of his year
on the subject of the “Death of Livingstone”.
Amongst the many letters from his Edinburgh teachers is one from Professor
P. G. Tait, who states that Haswell was in “Natural Philosophy” “first, with
another, the highest place in a very strong year.”
Sir Archibald Geikie also wrote of his geology: “You carried everything
before you in my class and, what is more, you earned the affectionate remembrance
of your class fellows and teacher. In an excursion I had abundant opportunity
of cultivating your personal acquaintance and I was led to form the highest
opinion of your attainments.”
Professor Sir J. Wyville Thomson wrote: “I have the great pleasure in
recommending my friend and former pupil, Mr. Haswell, for any appointment
connected with Natural Science. Mr. Haswell is an excellent Naturalist, both
theoretical and practical and an accomplished and thoroughly reliable gentleman.”
Typically characteristic of the adult Professor was the reticent attitude of
this modest young prize winner. Only through public notices or through friends
did his own family hear of these successes, for he himself would never speak
of them. During his longer vacations he found time to travel to some extent
through Europe, and to study in Germany. He apparently missed the summer
term of 1877 to attend a course in zoology, anatomy, petrography and histology at
Leipzig University, a certificate of which is amongst his papers. Once also he
went to America. But with a not over-strong physique the strain of this work
was telling on him, and, by way of recuperating his health after taking his
degree in 1878, he sailed for Australia.
Here he was almost at once welcomed by Sir William Macleay—always on
the look out for men through whom, or means by which, he could advance his
beloved Natural History. Just as eagerly did the young zoologist respond—
scarcely seeming to understand the word holiday or only interpreting it in a way
commonly found with men of great mental activity, as change of occupation.
Huxley, during his memorable voyage in “the Rattlesnake ” spoke of Port Jackson
as affording an ideal and prolific region for the marine biologist. It is certain
that Haswell must have had this in his mind at this period. At any rate with
Sir William Macleay’s help and encouragement a small marine zoological labora-
tory was established in a hut at Watson’s Bay, and here Haswell initiated that
long series of researches that only came to an end with life itself. The collections
resulting from the “Chevert” Expedition to New Guinea were being examined
and Haswell took a willing share in working on this material. Thus, too, came
about the beginning of a long association with this Society, his first contribution
being “A description of six new species of Annelids”. This paper was read on
25th November, 1878, but his actual presence at the meeting is not recorded. Nor
is there any record of any official employment until his appointment as Curator


of the Brisbane Museum in December, 1879, but during the previous twelve months
he contributed no less than nine papers to the Peoceedings of this Society besides
two to the Annals and Magazine of Natural History, chiefly on widely different
branches of marine zoology.
Professor Hill writes of this period: “Young and enthusiastic, Haswell threw
himself with great energy into the study of the rich marine fauna of Port
Jackson and the adjacent coasts, and in the course of a few years published
in the Proceedings of the Linnean Society of N.S.W., numerous papers, mainly
of a systematic character, on the Crustacea, Annelida and Bryozoa of the Aus-
tralian seas. In particular we owe to him the first description of the giant
Phoronis that occurs in Port Jackson and which he named Ph. australis in
1882. Later in the same year he exhibited drawings of the early stages of its
development to the Linnean Society. During this period, however, he by no
means confined himself to the systematic Zoology of the Invertebrata, but con-
tributed papers of value to the Linnean Society on such diverse subjects as the
anatomy of birds, the structure of the paired fins of Ceratodus, the skeleton of
Elasmobranch fishes, and the early stages in the development of the Emu. In
1886 he described in the Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science the remarkable
striate muscle fibres in the wall of the “gizzard” of Syllis, and in 1889 he
published the results of a comparative study of the same fibres, in the course of
which he described certain remarkable relations between the nerve cells related
to them which were of very great interest from the point of view of the neurone
theory, and which well deserve reinvestigation. In 1888, also in the Quarterly
Journal of Microscopical Science, he gave the first detailed account of the anatomy
of that interesting ectoparasitic Trematode, Temnocephala, a form which will
always be associated with his name.”
Professor Wilson adds similar testimony “of the scope of his investigations
and the catholicity of his interest in the animal kingdom.”
Haswell was present as a visitor at the January meeting, 1879, of this Society
and was elected a member on April 30th of that year. From January to November
of the following year he was at the Brisbane Museum, from which he resigned
under the strong inducement to carry out work nearer to his heart.
At the annual meeting of the Linnean Society of New South Wales, 27th
January, 1881, Haswell was elected a member of the Council of the Society, on
which he served with the greatest regularity till his death. In this year,
following the example of Darwin, Huxley, Hooker and Murray in their zeal
for first hand knowledge by travel, and metaphorically following the wake of
H.M.S. Rattlesnake , Haswell seized on the opportunity afforded by the invitation
to join “H.M.S. Alert” on a surveying cruise to the Great Barrier Reef. It is
regrettable that Haswell himself recorded so little of the incidents of the
voyage, but, always a good sailor, he must have revelled in this occasion to
study—all too briefly—this illimitable wonderland of marine life. In “Four years in
Patagonian, Polynesian and Muscarene Waters, 1878-1882”, by R. W. Coppinger,
Staff-Surgeon, R.N., C.M.Z.S., p. 180, this reference occurs: “On leaving Sydney
we received a welcome addition to our number in the person of Mr. W. A. Haswell,
a professional zoologist, residing at Sydney, who expressed a wish to accompany
me as far as Torres Strait in order that he might have the opportunity of studying
the Crustacean fauna of the east coast of Australia. He was consequently enrolled
as an honorary member of our mess, and Captain Maclair kindly accommodated
him with a sleeping place in his cabin. I am indebted to Mr. Haswell for much
valuable information concerning the marine zoology of Australia.”


On his return he carried out an engagement to Sir William Macleay—
who thus showed his thorough appreciation of the brilliant young naturalist —
by giving a series of twenty lectures on Zoology at the Garden Palace under
the auspices of the Linnean Society of New South Wales.
In 1882 he was appointed Demonstrator in Comparative Anatomy, Physiology
and Histology in the University of Sydney; the title being changed in November,
1884, to Lecturer in Zoology and Comparative Anatomy and Demonstrator in
Histology. Always interested in the Australian Museum he published that year
a valuable Catalogue of the Australian Stalk- and Sessile-eyed Crustacea and.
during the absence of Dr. E. P. Ramsay from March, 1883, to February, 1884,
he was Acting-Curator of that Institution. On the 3rd February, 1891, he was
elected a member of the Board of Trustees of this Museum, in which capacity
he gave his valuable services until his resignation in December, 1923.
“Such was the reputation Haswell had established for himself as an original
investigator and teacher that the Senate of the University, when the Challis
Professorship of Biology was instituted in 1889, offered him the Chair, and this
he held continuously until his retirement in 1917” (J. P. Hill). The title was,
however, altered to that of Professor of Zoology in 1914, on the appointment
of a Professor of Botany. On his retirement the Senate of the University
conferred on him the honoured title of Professor Emeritus. During his tenure
of the Chair, he three times obtained leave of absence from the University of
Sydney for the purpose of visiting many European Universities as well as
those of England, Scotland and Wales.
In 1891 the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science held
its biennial meeting at Christchurch, New Zealand. Haswell was President of
the Biological Section and thus came into intimate contact with Professor
T. Jeffery Parker with whom he formed a close friendship, leading to their joint
authorship of the famous Text-book. Of importance, too, was the meeting which
followed with a gifted young pupil of Professor Parker, Josephine Gordon Rich,
co-author with her teacher of a paper on the Myology of Palinurus. Miss Rich
was a cousin of his friend, Lord Haldane. Quite naturally Haswell became the
guest, then and during following visits to New Zealand, of her father, W. Gordon
Rich, at his beautiful home, Toi-Toi. Just as naturally, too, this friendship,
commenced through, cemented by, and continued in congenial tastes, led in 1894
to the happiest of marriages and real life mateship, for Mrs. Haswell to the
end took the keenest and most sympathetic interest in the work of her husband,
generally accompanying him on his expeditions and on his two forms of
relaxation, trout-fishing and golf. Mrs. Haswell also contributed a valuable
share to the drawings of the Text-book of Zoology.
Not the least of Haswell’s legacies to the University of Sydney was the
Zoological Museum founded by him and continually developed throughout his
career as a valuable supplement to the oral and written work of his teaching.
Many visiting teachers from German and other Universities have paid tribute
to the high standard and value of this Museum.
“Outside the ranks of professional zoologists Haswell is perhaps best known
to the scientific world as the joint author, with his staunch friend the late
Professor T. Jeffery Parker, of the monumental Text-book of Zoology”, now (1928)
in its 4th Edition, “which was first published in 1898 after several years of
unremitting toil on the part of the authors” (J. P. Hill). This has become
the standard text-book in the English language; and it is used extensively and
highly appreciated in America as well as throughout the British Empire. Owing


to Professor Parker’s death shortly after the publication of the original edition,
the second (1910) and the third (1921) editions were entirely prepared by Haswell;
as was also the abridged “Manual of Zoology” first published in 1899 and
reprinted in 1908, 1913 and 1918. The fourth edition of the Text-book was issued
in 1928. This contains 1,536 pages in two volumes, and includes valuable
supplements on Distribution (23 pp.). Philosophy of Zoology (24 pp.), and History
of Zoology (22 pp.).
“The Text-book is a monument of scholarship and is apt to disconcert
the unwary student who, deceived by the ease of its English, fails to realize the
compression of its matter throughout.” (R. H. Cambage).
The late Professor Launcelot Harrison wrote in 1926 of this work: “It has
maintained its pre-eminence for nearly thirty years. To the zoological con-
fraternity in the United States the University of Sydney was known as Haswell’s
University.” Then in discussing the future of Zoology he wrote: “The trend of
Zoology is changing. The experimental method, still in its infancy, is making
rapid strides and its results are so important that they, together with recent
advances in physiology, must largely replace the pure morphology of current
text-books. But ‘Parker and Haswell’ will always hold its place as an
Encyclopaedia of Morphology and Comparative Anatomy to which the zoologist
must refer, just as he still refers to the ancient Owen’s ‘Comparative Anatomy
of Vertebrates’ for facts which are not otherwise easily accessible.” The wide use
and appreciation of the “Text-book of Zoology” is further indicated by its
translation into Russian by M. A. Menstier (Moskva, 1908). A characteristic
act of self-denial and chivalry towards his late co-partner in authorship occurred
in connection with the publication of the “Manual of Zoology” and explained in
Professor Haswell’s own preface to that work as follows: “Owing to the lamented
death of Professor T. Jeffery Parker, at a time when but little progress had been
made with this work, his actual share in it has been but slight: but the general
plan of the work was arranged between us, and the earlier parts had the
advantage of his revision, and more especially as this smaller manual owes
a great deal to his work in the “Text-book”, it has been thought right to let
the present work appear under our joint names as originally intended.” By this
chivalrous act Haswell received a considerably curtailed income from the proceeds.
The Linnean Society of New South Wales will always hold Professor Haswell
in grateful memory. He was its President for the years 1891-1893, and his Presi-
dential Address was memorable for his suggestion of the Macleay Memorial
Volume, a suggestion at once adopted, and followed up by its publication in 1893,
and to which he himself contributed. He was the intimate friend of Sir William
Macleay during the later years of Sir William’s life and—next to the late J. J.
Fletcher was probably closest in touch with him in discussing his ideas of
endowments. Haswell also contributed to the welfare of this Society by a
service of forty-three years on its Council and by a continuous series of papers
published in its Proceedings. As stated above, his first paper “On six new
species of Annelids” was read in November, 1878, his last, “Critical notes on
the Temnocephaloidea” in November, 1924, only two months before his death.
During these forty-six years he contributed no less than seventy-four papers,
in addition to one in collaboration with Professor J. P. Hill. These include for
their subject matter, almost every group in the animal kingdom and even one
botanical paper, “Notes on Tmesip.teris and Psilotum”. He also wrote several
papers that were read at the several biennial meetings of the Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science and published in their Reports, and


one, at least, “On the question of the occurrence of living organisms in the Artesian
Waters” in the Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South Wales.
On the occasion of the visit to Australia of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science in 1914 he contributed to the Federal and the New South
Wales Hand-books, editing the Zoological Sections of the latter. During his
last few years, in addition to his own research work he edited the reports of
the Australasian Antarctic Expedition, issued by the Government Printer at
Sydney. Outside Australia Haswell contributed widely to British and European
scientific journals. These include the Annals and Magazine of Natural History,
the Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science, the Transactions of the Linnean
Society of London, the Zoologische Anzeiger and others.
The Crustacea and the Polychaete Annelids constituted his chief systematic
interest and he returned to the latter group after his retirement from the Challis
Chair, publishing two papers on Syllids in 1920. But his papers deal with almost
every Phylum, from the Protozoa (parasitic Euglenoids and colonial Radiolaria)
to the Mammalia (brain of Gray’s whale). The paired fins of Ceratodus, the
myology of pigeons, the embryology of the emu, attracted his attention amongst
the vertebrates, but there is no doubt that he was primarily an invertebrate
zoologist, and that of the invertebrates the Platyhelminths held most interest
for him. He wrote a number of papers on the Turbellaria, Trematoda and
Cestoda. Possibly arising out of his early interest in Crustacea, he made a
special study of the Temnocephaloidea, parasitic upon the Australian freshwater
crayfishes. He monographed the group in the Macleay Memorial Volume (1893),
studied its embryology, after overcoming very great technical difficulties {Quart.
J. Micr. Sci., 1909) and was, at the time of his death, engaged upon its
revision. He discovered and described two of the five known species of
Histriobdellids, for which he proposed a genus Stratiodrilus, and here again he
included in his research a study of the embryology.
Professor Haswell invariably collected the material for his own researches
in the first instance, although he might invite distant colleagues to gather material
for comparison. He did all his own technical preparation, never seeking any
help from his staff and, with few exceptions, made his own drawings. Up
to the time of his retirement from the University his working day, after the
morning lecture, or lectures, was spent immured in his private laboratory. His
industry continued to the end, and he was working on a detailed study of the
eyes of Temnocephala up to the time of his fatal seizure.
He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1897 and was also a
member of various other learned Societies in Great Britain and other countries.
In 1915 he was awarded the Clarke Medal by the Royal Society of New South
Wales. Outside Australia, then, Haswell was best known as the author of the
Text-book and for his numerous and valuable researches. But throughout Aus-
tralia his name will live long as an inspiring teacher of a second generation
of zoologists. On this subject the words of his own student pupils are fitting.
The late Professor Launcelot Harrison wrote in his “appreciation”: “I first
attended his lectures in 1911 as a somewhat elderly undergraduate. My first
impression of him remains that of a little man with invulnerable dignity, a
nervous manner, and a difficult utterance, which to some extent marred the
scholarship of his lectures. For these were scholarly. He was a master of the
English language, and although he lectured almost entirely without notes, I
never caught him tripping over the composition of even complicated sentences.
Apart from lectures we students saw little of him. He never came into the


laboratories in my time, and all practical work was left to his junior staff.
As a senior student, however, it was my occasional privilege to take in to
him some of the more exciting of my mild discoveries in the field, and at these
times his punctilious courtesy and kindliness of manner, as well as the keen
interest with which he discussed the material I brought, gave me an insight
into the real character of the man. I was to learn all this much better, however,
at a later date, when, under painful circumstances, I found myself in charge
of the department over which he had so recently presided. I knew him so
little that I felt he would be as appalled as I was at my temerity in attempting
to occupy his vacated place. But I found him all kindliness and sympathy, and
he seemed to be confident that graduates of his training should be able to hold
any place. Moreover, he treated me as a colleague on an equal footing, which
was as precious in some ways as it was embarrassing in others.
“The younger Haswell I never knew. One story arises out of the past
which goes to show that under that reserved Scotch exterior there lay a certain
subtlety of humour. The professor’s room in the old Zoology Department looked
out upon, a courtyard in which, one fine morning, Haswell observed two of his
students dressing a dog in fine raiment, for the purpose of bringing it into lecture.
It duly appeared and, much to the surprise of the originators of the enterprise,
Haswell called upon them by name and fined each of them a pound. A third
student, who considered himself a bright lad, suggested to the crestfallen con-
spirators a method by which the fines might be halved. He would go to the
professor and confess to having been the sole author of the outrage. He would be
fined a pound, the others being let off and they could then each pay ten shillings.
All went according to plan up to a point. The student confessed and was fined
a pound. He then asked what of the others. The reply came: T have already
fined them a pound. Good morning! Mr. So-and-So’.”
Perhaps the best estimate of the worth and work of a University Professor
may be drawn from the positions occupied by the men he has trained. Two
of Haswell’s graduates have successively occupied his own Chair at the University
of Sydney, while others fill chairs in the Universities of Queensland, Tasmania
and Adelaide. In addition, Professor J. P. Hill, of University College, London,
received most of his training under Haswell at Sydney. Of what other professor
in any Australasian University can so much be said?
To this list may be added the names of Dr. R. J. Tillyard, F.R.S., who always
spoke warmly of his great debt to Haswell’s teaching and help, and Dr. H. L.
Kesteven, D.Sc., M.D. The latter writes: “I had always the greatest admiration
and respect for Professor Haswell. He was a man of few words and did not
encourage his students to seek his assistance. On the other hand, once one
had succeeded in getting beyond his reserve, and I believe that this could only
be achieved by proving one’s earnestness in research and need of his aid, one
was more than rewarded. Throughout the years of my studentship I saw little
of the Professor. After graduating, however, I took my problems to him and
discovered a keen, inspiring teacher and colleague. All the old reserve had
gone. He analysed my evidence with me, weighing point by point, suggested
further lines of investigation and encouraged me to continue. Professor Haswell
was a poor conversationalist, unless really interested in his subject; he had
no small talk, but I was always struck by the clarity and appositeness of his
remarks when once he did get under way, I do not think that I have ever
listened to anyone whose voice and words conveyed so much in so few words.
I have still on my shelves a complete transcript of his lectures on the anatomy


and development of the vertebrata as nearly in his own words as it was possible
to get them down in long hand. That transcript might be sent to the printer
without any editing: and the Professor lectured from brief headings on a single
little card.
“Only once do I remember to have seen Professor Haswell unbend completely.
We were on a deep sea dredging trip off the entrance to Port Jackson. Twenty
miles out, with over a thousand fathoms of line down, we were struck by a
Southerly Buster. For a while the excitement ran high. Would we have to cut
the dredge adrift, or could the skipper hold the boat against it whilst we
hauled in? Everyone on board except the Professor was suffering badly from
mal-de-mer but he appeared to be absolutely in his element. The scientific members
of the expedition were Hedley, Haswell, Hill, McCulloch and myself and the
Professor was the life of the party.”
Professor J. T. Wilson writes: “As a University Teacher Haswell’s work
was marked by the same accuracy and thoroughness which characterized all his
efforts. Although somewhat cold and undemonstrative as a lecturer, he was
perfectly lucid and logical in statement. In the entire absence of all oratorical
emphasis he succeeded in inspiring the serious student with something of his
own enthusiasm, and thus in establishing a school of zoology which has provided
the occupants of various zoological chairs and lectureships. Nor was his influence
as a zoologist confined to the classroom and laboratory. As Councillor and
some time President of the Linnean Society of N.S.W., as a member of the
board of management of the Australian Museum, and in various other local
scientific capacities Haswell exerted a potent influence for the furtherance of
zoological interests in the community. On the various University Boards he
was a trusted adviser, sparing of speech, but candid and just and fearless in
his opinions.
“Underneath his somewhat reticent and shy demeanour Haswell concealed
a most genial and kindly disposition. Those who had the privilege of some
degree of intimacy with him could not fail to appreciate and admire the fineness
of character and the breadth of culture, literary and artistic as well as scientific,
which were essential elements in the composition of his calm and unobtrusive
personality.”
Another colleague says of Haswell: “Beyond his own particular branches of
study he had a knowledge and appreciation of literature and philosophy that, when
his initial shyness was overcome, made him a profitable companion to those in
other walks: and mere acquaintances could not but be struck by his sterling
honesty and worth.”
His chief recreations were trout-fishing, gardening and golf. An expert fly
fisher —perhaps the only sport of his younger days—he used regularly to visit the
South Island of New Zealand during the summer recess to indulge his favourite
pastime. He played golf and derived great pleasure from tending his garden
at Woollahra Point, overlooking a beautiful part of Sydney Harbour. Indeed
his knowledge of both theoretical and practical horticulture was unusually wide
and he was always greatly interested in the artistic as well as in the productive
possibilities of his grounds. Of course botany was a part of his biological
equipment, but far beyond the academic regions of the subject he had the familiar
intimacy with the minutiae of the native flora only acquired by the natural
naturalist, aided by a tenacious memory. In his younger days he was fond of
long walks, but about 1900 he was one of the earlier Sydney patrons of the


motor car which he used for his daily journey to the University; and the memory
of which the writer cherishes as his own first experience of motor carriage.
Professor Haswell leaves a wife and an only daughter to mourn his loss.
To us, late fellow members with him —and others —he leaves a precious
record
of diligence —in his accomplished tasks,
of bravery —in facing their magnitude,
of modesty —in his quiet reticence,
of sincerity and honesty —in his fearless following of what seemed to him
highest and best.
Haswell represents to us the embodiment of that wide culture that was the
result of the combination of the study of Arts and Science in his ancient
University, interwoven with the fibres of a character inherited from a fine race —
a culture that in the words of Huxley “implies the possession of an ideal, and the
habit of critically estimating the values of things by comparison with a theoretic
standard.”
He takes his last rest in the Waverley Cemetery, within view of, and
almost on the shores of that great Pacific Ocean whose mysteries he loved to
explore, and from which he interpreted so many things previously hidden. Like
Newton he was content to wander along the strand of life, here and there
picking up a stray shell of truth from the myriads that lay around him
“Nor paused till in the westering sun
To sing because his task was done.”
Other obituary notices utilized and largely embodied above are:
Prof. J. P. Hill —Obituary Notice of W. A. Haswell (with portrait) in Proc. Roy.
Soc. Lond., 1925.
Prof. J. T. Wilson —Obituary Notice in Proc. Linn. Soc. Lond., 1924-25.
R. H. Cambage —Presidential Address, Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., 1, 1925, Pt. 1
(April, 1925).
Prof. L. Harrison —“An Appreciation” (“Sydney Morning Herald”, February 9
1925).
H.J.C.


LIST OF PAPERS BY W. A. HASWELL.
On six new species of Annelids belonging to the Family Amphinomidae. Proc. Linn. Soc.
N.S.W., hi, 1878 (1879), 341.
On two new species of Crabs of the genus Stenprhynchus. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., ill,
1878 (1879), 408.
Notes on the Anatomy of Birds, i. The Brachial Plexus of Birds. Proc. Linn. Soc.
N.S.W., iii, 1878 (1879), 409.
Notes on the Anatomy of Birds, ii. The Lumbar and Sacral Plexuses of Nerves, iii.
The Myological Characters of the Columbidae. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., iv, 1879, 303.
On the Australian species of Penaeus in the Macleay Museum, Sydney. Proc. Linn. Soc.
N.S.W., iv, 1879, 38.
Contributions to a Monograph of the Australian Leucosiidae. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W.,
iv, 1879, 44.
On Australian Amphipoda. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., iv, 1879, 245.
Note on the Phyllosoma stage of Ihacus Peronii Leach. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., iv,
1879, 280.
On some additional new genera and species of Amphipodous Crustaceans. Proc. Linn.
Soc. N.S.W., iv, 1879, 319.
On the Cyclostomatous Polyzoa of Port Jackson and Neighbourhood. Proc. Linn. Soc.
N.S.W., iv, 1879, 350.
Note supplementary to a paper on the Australian Leucosiidae. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W.,
iv, 1879 (1880), 403.
On the Australian Brachyura Oxyrhyncha. Proc. Linn. Soc, N.S.W., iv, 1879 (1880), 431.
On some Polyzoa from the Queensland Coast. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., v, 1880, 33.
On some new Amphipods from Australia and Tasmania. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., v,
1880, 97.
On Australian Amphipoda (Abstract). Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., v, 1880, 30.
On the Australian Brachyura Oxyrhyncha (Abstract). Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., v, 1880,
145.
On two new species of the genus Paratymolus Miers (Crustacea Brachyura) from
Australia (P. bituberculatus, P. latipes). Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., v, 1880, 302.
On some new Australian Marine Isopoda. i. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., v, 1880 (1881), 470.
On some new Australian Marine Isopoda. ii. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vi, 1881, 181.
Note on the occurrence on the coast of New South Wales of the genus Mesenteripora 81.
(Polyzoa Cyclostomata). Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vi, 1881, 199.
On some new Australian Brachyura. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vi, 1881, 540.
Description of a new species of Apseudes. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vi, 1881 (1882), 748.
Description of some new species of Australian Decapoda. Proc. Linn, Soc. N.S.W., vi,
1881 (1882), 750.
On the structure of the paired fins of Ceratodus, with remarks on the general theory
of the Vertebrate limb. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vii, 1882, 2.
Note on the anatomy of two rare genera of pigeons. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vii,
1882, 115.
On Australian fresh-water Sponges. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vii, 1882, 208.
Note on the brain of the Tiger Shark ( Galeocerdo rayneri ). Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W.,
vii, 1882, 210.
A monograph of the Australian Aphroditea. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vii, 1882, 250.
Note on some points in the anatomy of the pigeons referred to by Dr. Hans Gadow in
a recent paper on the anatomy of Pterocles. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vii, 1882, 397.
On the structure and functions of the elytra of the Aphroditacean Annelids. Ann. Mag.
Nat. Hist., x, 1882, 238.
On the segmental organs of Polynoe earns. Zool. Anz., v, 1882, 540.
Catalogue of the Australian Stalk- and Sessile-eyed Crustacea. Misc. Pub. Aust. Mus.,
Preliminary note on an Australian species of Phoronis ( Gephyrea “Tuhicola”). Proc.
Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vii, 1882 (1883), 606.


Note on a curious instance of symbiosis. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vii, 1882 (1883), 608.
Note on the segmental organs of Aphrodita. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vii, 1882 (1883),
610.
On some new Australian Tubicolous Annelids. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vii, 1882
(1883), 633.
Note on some points in the anatomy of the pigeons referred to by Dr. Hans Gadow in a
recent paper on the anatomy of Pterocles. J. Anat. Physiol., xvii, 1883, 218, 404.
On the brain of Grey’s whale ( Kogia greyi). Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., viii, 1883 (1384),
437.
Studies on the Elasmobranch skeleton. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., ix, 1884, 71.
Note on the claspers of Heptanchus. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., ix, 1884, 381.
The Marine Annelides of the order Serpulea. Some observations on their anatomy, with
the characteristics of the Australian species. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., ix, 1884, 649.
On a new Crustacean found inhabiting the tubes of Vermilia (Serpulidae). Proc. Linn.
Soc. N.S.W., ix, 1884, 676.
Note on the young of the Saw-fish Shark (Pristiophorus citratus). Proc. Linn. Soc.
N.S.W., ix, 1884, 680.
Revision of the Australian Laemodipoda. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., ix, 1884 (1885), 993.
A revision of the Australian Isopoda. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., ix, 1884 (1885), 1001.
On a new instance of symbiosis. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., ix, 1884 (1885), 1019.
On the Pycnogonida of the Australian coast, with descriptions of new species. Proc.
Linn. Soc. N.S.W., ix, 1884 (1885), 1021.
Notes on the Australian Amphipoda. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., x, 1885, 95.
Jottings from the Biological Laboratory of Sydney University:—
No. 1. On a destructive parasite of the Rock Oyster. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., x,
1885, 273.
No. 2. On some recent histological methods, and their adaptation to the teaching
of practical histology. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., x, 1885, 276.
No. 3. Minute structure of Polynoe. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., x, 1885, 278.
No. 4. An Australian species of Bonellia. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., x, 1885, 331.
No. 5. “Aquatic Respiration” in fresh-water turtles. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., x,
1885, 331.
Note on the segmental organs of Serpula. Zool. Anz., viii, 1885, 96.
On the segmental organs of Polynoe. Zool. Ants., viii, 1885, 233.
Jottings from the Biological Laboratory of Sydney University :
No. 6. On the myology of the Flying Phalanger. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W. r (II) i.
1886, 176.
No. 7. Cutting sections of delicate vegetable structures. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W.,
(II)i, 1886, 489.
No. 8. “Vocal organs” of the Cicada. Proc. Linn. Soc, N.S.W., (II )i, 1886, 489.
Observations on some Australian Polychaeta. Part 1. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., x, 1885
(1886), 733.
On the structure of the so-called glandular ventricle (Drusenraagen) of Syllis. Quart.
J. Micr. Sci., xxvi, 1886, 471.
Observations of the early stages in the development of the Emu ( Dromaeus novae-
hollandiae). Pr®c. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (II)ii, 1887, 576.
Jottings from the Biological Laboratory of Sydney University:—
No. 9. Notes on Tmesipteris and Psilotum. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (II)ii, 1887
(1888), 1025.
No. 10. On the embryology of Vermilia caespitosa and Eupomatus elegans. Proc.
Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (II) ii, 1887 (1888), 1032.
On Temnocephala, an aberrant monogenetic Trematode. Quart. J. Micr. Sci., xxviii,
1888, 279.


Jotting's from the Biological Laboratory of Sydney University :
No. 11. On Sacculina infesting Australian Crabs. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (II) ill,
1888 (1889), 1711.
No. 12. On a method of preparing Blastoderms of the fowl. Proc. Linn. Soc.
N.S.W., (Il)iii, 1888 (1889), 1712.
No. 13. Note on Urolophus testaceus. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (Il)iii, 1888 (1889),
1713.
On simple striated muscle fibres. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (Il)iii, 1888 (1889), 1794.
A comparative study of striated muscle (Abstract). Rep. Aust. Ass. Adv. Sci., 1888
(1889), 348.
On the development of Chilobranchus rufus (Teleostei symhranchidae)■ Rep. Aust. Ass.
Adv. Sci., 1890, 482.
Notes on the muscular fibres of Peripatus. Rep. Aust. Ass. Adv. Sci., 1890, 487.
A comparative study of striated muscle. Quart. J. Micr. Sci., xxx, 1890, 31.
Jottings from the Biological Laboratory of Sydney University:-
No. 14. On a remarkable Plat-worm parasitic in the Golden Prog. Proc. Linn.
Soc. N.S.W. (II)v, 1890 (1891), 661.
Recent biological theories. Rep. Aust. Ass. Adv. Sci.. 1891, 173.
Jottings from the Biological Laboratory of Sydney University:—
No. 15. On a simple method of substituting strong alcohol for a watery solution
in the preparation of specimens. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (II)vi, 1891 (1892),
433.
No. 16. Note on the occurrence of a Flagellate Infusorian as an intra-cellular
parasite. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (Il)vii, 1892, 197.
Observations on the Chloraemidae, with special reference to certain Australian forms.
Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (II)vi, 1891 (1892), 329.
Presidential Address, 27th January, 1892, Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (II)vi, 1891 (1892),
706.
A monograph of the Temnocephaleae, Part i. (Title). Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W.,
(Il)vii, 1892, 19.
Notes on a Trematode with ciliated integuments. Rep. Aust. Ass. Adv. Sci., 1892, 387.
On the systematic position and relationship of the Temnocephaleae. Ahh. naturf. Ges.
Halle, xvii, 1892, 455.
On the excretory system of Temnocephala. Zool. Anz., xv, 1892, 149.
Note on the minute structure of the integuments, &c., of Temnocephala. Zool. Ans.,
xv, 1892, 360.
Jottings from the Biological Laboratory of Sydney University:—
No. 17. Three zoological novelties: i. The occurrence of a second species of Phoronis
in Port Jackson. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (Il)vii, 1892 (1893), 340.
No. 17. ii. An Alloiocoele Turbellarian inhabiting the underground waters of
Canterbury, New Zealand. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (Il)vii, 1892 (1893), 341.
No. 17. iii. A new genus of the Temnocephaleae. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (Il)vii,
1892 (1893), 342.
Presidential Address, 29th March, 1893. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (Il)vii, 1892 (1893),
668.
A monograph of the Temnocephaleae. Maclbay Memorial, Volume, Linn. Soc. N.S.W.,
1893, 93.
On an apparently new type of the Platyhelminthes (Trematoda?). Maclbay Memorial
Volume, Linn. Soc. N.S.W., 1893, 153.
On Polycercus : a proliferating Cystic parasite of the Earthworms. Proc. Linn. Soc.
N.S.W., (Il)viii, 1893 (1894), 365. (With J. P. Hill.)
Zoology and Diving. Hermes. Medical Suppl. 4th December, 1895, xxix.


Jottings from the Biological Laboratory of Sydney University:—
No. 18. Note on certain points in the arrangement and structure of the Tentaculifer-
ous lobes in Nautilus pompilius. Prog. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., (II)x, 1895 (1896),
544.
On the development of Heterodontus ( Gestracion) phillipi. Part i. Prog. Linn. Soc.
N.S.W., xxii, 1897, 96.
On a prorhynchid Turbellarian from deep wells in New Zealand. Quart. J. Micr. Sci.,
xl, 1898, 631.
Text-book of Zoology. Two volumes, with illustrations. Ist Edition, 1898 ; 2nd Edition,
1910; 3rd Edition, 1921; 4th Edition, 1928. ( With T. Jeffery Parker.)
Manual of Zoology. Ist Edition, 1899 ; Reprinted 1908 ; 1913 (with corrections) ; 1918.
(With T. Jeffery Parker.)
On Didymorchis, a Rhabdocoele Turbellarian inhabiting the branchial cavities of New
Zealand Crayfishes. Prog. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., xxv, 1900, 424.
Supplement to a “Monograph of the Temnocephaleae”. Prog. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., xxv,
1900, 430.
On a new Histriobdellid. Quart. J. Micr. Sci., xliii, 1900, 299.
Note on the fauna of the gill cavities of fresh-water crayfishes. Rep. Aust. Ass. Adv.
Sci., 1900 (1901), 235.
On a Gyrocotyle from Chimaera ogilhyi, and on Gyrocotyle in general. Prog. Linn. Soc.
N.S.W., xxvii, 1902, 48.
On two remarkable Sporocysts occurring in My Ulus latus on the coast of New Zealand.
Prog. Linn. Soc. N.S.W.', xxvii, 1902 (1903), 497.
On a Cestode from Gestracion. Quart. J. Micr. Sci., xlvi, 1903, 399.
The question of the occurrence of living organisms in the Artesian Waters. J. Roy. Soc.
N.S.W., xxxvii, 1903 (1904), xlviii.
Studies on the Turbellaria. Part 1. On Ileterochaerus, an acoelous Turbellarian.
Part 2. On Anomalocoelus caecus, a new type of Rhabdocoele. Quart. J. Micr. Sci.,
xlix, 1905, 425.
Observations on the Australian Polyclads. Trans. Linn. Soc. Land., Zook, ix, 1907, 465.
The results of deep-sea investigation in the Tasman Sea. I. The expedition of H.MC.S.
“Miner”. 1. Introductory note on the first deep-sea cruise. Rec. Aust. Mus., vi,
1907, 271. (With C. Hedley.)
The results of deep-sea investigation in the Tasman Sea. I. The expedition of H.M.C.S.
“Miner”. 2. The colonial Radiolaria of the Tasman Sea. Rec. Aust. Mus., vi, 1907,
273.
Parasitic Euglenae. Zool. Anz., xxxi, 1907, 29 6.
A genito-intestinal canal in Polyclads. Zool. Anz., xxxi, 1907, 643.
Note on the Cephalochorda in the Australian Museum. Rec. Aust. Mus., vii, 1908, 33.
The development of the Temnocephaleae. Part 1. Quart. J. Mien'. Sci,, liv, 1909, 415.


Notes on the Histriobdellidae. Quart. J. Micr. Sci., lix, 1913, 197.
The Animal Life of Australia. Federal Handbook on Australia. Rep. Brit. Ass. Adv. Sci.,
1914, 210.
The Fauna of New South Wales, (a) The Mammals, (b) The Fresh-water Fauna.
Handbook of New South Wales. Rep. Brit. Ass. Adv. Sci., 1914, 287, 363.
Studies on the Turbellaria. Part 3. Didymorchis. Quart. J. Micr. Sci., Ixi, 1915, 161
On the embryology of Stratiodrilus (Histriobdellidae). Quart. J. Micr. Sci., Ixi, 1916, 301.
Note on the intrauterine eggs of Heterodontus ( Gestracion ) phillipi. Quart. J. Micr. Sci..
Ixi, 1916, 313.
Australian Syllidae, Eusyllidae, and Autolytidae. Prog. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., xlv, 1920, 90
The Exogoneae. J. Linn. Soc. Land., Zool., xxxiv, 1920, 217.
The proboscis of the Syllidae, Part 1. Structure. Quart. J. Micr. Sci., Ixv, 1921, 323.
On Astacoai'oton, a new type of Acarid. Prog. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., xlvii, 1922, 329.
Critical notes on the Temnocephaloidea. Prog. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., xlix, 1924, 509.
Mammals of Australia. Australian Encyclopaedia (Angus and Robertson), Sydney, 1925
16




,
-
■
'
pf *A - . v ” - ' ? j y f ; t * ■
ll'.. .M&.fV'S ' ' ■r" ' *... \^S r ,' **.A ‘ ~ .* *
