

f-n+cjtf
WILL EVIL LAST FOR EVER?
A LECTURE
DELIVERED IN SYDNEY ON THE 12th JUNE 1872,
* 6
WIL LI AM. - -RI DUE Y, M. A.
“ Oh, let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end.”—Psalm vii
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY GEORGE LOXTON & CO., 42, NEW PITT STREET




OUR DUTY TO EXAMINE THE QUESTION.
THE new circumstances in which the
Church of Christ finds herself in these
days, and especially her contact with the
scientific thought of Europe and America on
the one hand, and with the ancient religions
and modern philosophy of Asia on the ot her,
have forced upon the minds of Christians
some questions which had been much over-
looked or evaded. One of the greatest of
these is the question which I have under-
taken to answer here. Wise and good men
may think I act presumptously in attempt-
ing to answer it. Admitting the feebleness
of my qualifications for the right treatment
of so stupendous a subject, —a subject in
presence of which the most powerful and
comprehensive human intellect might well
bow with a humble sense of insufficiency,—
I cannot resist the conviction that it is the
duty of every one of us to examine the ques-
tion with all the powers he possesses. If,
after all, we feel ourselves unable to attain
any positive conclusion ; the enquiry may at
least have the good effect of keeping us back
from the confident assumption of an untrue
conclusion. If the supposition, that the sin
and suffering of lost sinners will continue as
long as the Eternal God endures, be not fully
proved by the Word of God ; it must be
acknowledged that it may be a most
flagrant misrepresentation of the Holy One
who inhabiteth eternity to assert this. And
if God has expressly revealed His purpose to
■ai'-V"*
WILL EVIL LAST FOR EVER ?
put an end to evil, to make His universe
once more pure from every taint of corrup-
tion ; it must be a sin scarcely short of
blasphemy, to affirm that evil will last for
ever. This is, therefore, a question which
no one has a right to avoid,—a question
which every human soul is bound to ex-
amine with all the lights available. May
He, concerning whose righteous ways we are
to seek clearer knowledge, Himself guide us
to the truth.
One very practical personal reason why
each one of us should seek to know the
truth on this momentous question is, that
our anticipation, whether true or untrue,
must grpatly influence our state of mind
towards God. And there are some external
considerations that render the importance of
the question obvious. For instance, Chris-
tianity has in these days been assailed by
vigorous and ingenious Scepticism. In
presence of such a hostile force it becomes
the Church to be more than ever careful to
avoid all groundless assumptions that might
offer weapons to the foe. British Churches
have also come face to face with the
Buddhists and Theists of India and China.
In those countries are professors of a religion
which numbers far more adherents than
Christianity, whom every Christian must
desire to see won over to Christ. These
people need the Gospel of Christ, and the
washing of regeneration and renewing of the


Holy Ghost, to deliver them from the power “worketh all things after the cmnsel of
of darkness. But they believe that sin and His own will,” is infinitely holy and good ;
suffering will after a while cease for ever.
And if Christians meet them with the pro-
position that sin and suffering must continue
for ever, it is inevitable that they should re-
coil f rom the faith offered tojtheir consideration.
If, indeed, the eternity of the sin and misery
of the wicked is an essential doctrine of the
religion which God has revealed, we have no
alternative; we are bound to bnng this
doctrine prominently before them ; and to
call upon them, on the authority of the
living and true God, to receive with sub-
mission the unwelcome truth, and to
abandon for ever the hope of their fathers,—
that the Creator and Preserver of men will
at length cause sin and sorrow to cease.
In seeking their conversion we must rely,
not on “persuasive words,” but on “the
demonstration of the Spirit.” But if God
has not required of us to maintain this tre-
mendous assertion ; how great must be the
guilt of those Christians who, without
Divine authority, cast such a stumbling-
block in the way of hundreds of millions of
their fellow creatures, and so hinder them
from receiving the Truth with which this
terror is associated, and repel them from the
Saviour of the world ! Surely nothing but
absolute certainty of its truth can warrant
the maintenance, in creed, or confession, or
sermon, of this proposition. Is it true, then,
let us ask, that evil —that is, sin and suffer-
ing-will last for ever ?
Inference from Divine Attributes.
Looking first to the revealed attributes of
God, infinite power, justice, holiness and
mercy, —one might infer from them that He
will cause sin and suffering to cease. The
righteous Lord loveth righteousness, and
will establish righteousness everywhere.
The Holy One who inhabiteth eternity can-
not look upon evil, and will not tolerate its
everlasting continuance. The Father of
Mercies, who is Love, “will not always chide,
neither will He keep His anger for ever. ”
Contemplating infinite compassion and good-
ness and holiness, it is impossible to regard
as a reality of the future, the God of all
Grace keeping in existence millions of
creatures, full of hatred falsehood and
blasphemy, and allowing them to sin, as
fallen angels and unrenewed men must needs
sin ; in order that He may for ever continue
to inflict suffering upon them. From these
premisses—(l) that He “of whom and to
whom and through whom are all things,”
who with omnipotence and omniscience
and (2) that evil has sprung up in His
dominions, defaced His handiwork, obscured
His glory, and filled many of His creatures
with misery;—the conclusion to human
reason is obvious and irresistible,- that God
will put an end to evil. But we are not
competent judges of the thoughts and
counsels of Gcd. “As the heavens are high
above the earth, so are His ways higher than
our ways, and His thoughts than our
thoughts.”
MANSEL ON THE EXISTENCE AND PERPETUITY
OF EVIL.
One of the most famous defenders of the
Faith in our day, the late H. L. Mansel,
thus spoke in his Bampton lecture on this
subject:—
“It is urged that sin cannot for ever be
triumphant against God. As if the whole
mystery of iniquity were contained in the
words ‘ for ever !’ The real riddle of exist-
ence, the problem which confounds all
philosophy, —ay, and all religion too, so far
as religion is a thing of man’s reason, —is the
fact that evil exists at all; not that it exists
for a longer or shorter duration. Is not God
infinitely wise and holy and powerful now ?
And does not sin exist along with that in-
finite holiness and wisdom and power ? Is
God to become more holy, more wise, more
powerful hereafter ; and must evil be anni-
hilated to make room for His perfections to
expand ? Does the infinity of His eternal
nature ebb and flow with every increase or
diminution of the sum of human guilt and
misery ? Against this immovable barrier, of
the existence of evil, the w'aves of philosophy
have dashed themselves unceasingly, since
the birthday of human thought, and have
retired broken and powerless, without dis-
placing the minutest fragment of the
stubborn rock, without softening one feature
of its dark and rugged surface.”
In the judgment of Mr. Mansel, then, the
fact that evil exists is as perplexing, as con-
founding to all our attempts to think of God,
as the belief that evil will last for ever. But
as to the origin of evil, we have only to con-
fess that we cannot fathom the mystery,
that we cannot explain how that which is
not of God ever came into His creation.
Whereas, to endeavour to persuade ourselves
that evil will, by Divine permission, be
everlasting, or even that it may be so, is to
grasp at tremendous and incredible contra-
dictions. If we accept Mr. Mansel’s con-
clusion on this question ; and it is in ac-


corclauce with the general scape of his argu- from Him. However sin first came into His
meat, —which is that we cannot know truth dominions, God is not, in any sense, the
relating to the unconditioned and infinite ;
we must stay at this proposition concerning
the Almighty; “ clouds and darkness are
round about Him ; righteousness and
judgment may he , for aught we know, the
habitation of His throne.” But we know,
from His own Word, that “righteousness
and judgment are the habitation of His
throne;” and still more that “mercy and
truth go before His face.” In His counsels
concerning the endless future, “ Mercy and
truth are met together ; righteousness and
peace have kissed each other.” It is true,
as Mr. Mansel argues, that, since God is in-
finitely holy and wise and powerful now, we
cannot think that He will be more holy or
wise or mighty, when He has put an end to
evil. But will not God’s holiness and wis-
dom and power be more manifested when
evil is no more ? And what is the whole
history of the universe, as disclosed to us by
revelation, by science, and by human testi-
mony, but a continuous manifestation of
God’s perfections ? When sin reigned in our
souis, all the glory of God was utterly hidden
from us. And wherever evil exists, it hides
that glory. Every act of God in the con-
quest and destruction of evil manifests forth
His glory more and more. And day by day,
century after century, He is ever manifest-
ing Hmiself hi deeds worthy or His Name.
When He broke down the tyranny of
Pharaoh, —when He chastened idolatry out
of Israel, —when He cast demons out of the
possessed,—w r hen He healed lepers, —when-
ever He blotted out transgressions, whenever
He brake asunder the chains of sin, when-
ever His Holy Spirit renewed and sanctified
a soul, thus putting an end to the reign of
sin in one of His creatures, —He manifested
His glorious perfections. And may we not
believe that He who is from everlasting in-
finitely good w’ill manifest His goodness yet
more than ever in the complete and everlast-
ing destruction of all evil !
ISSUE OF THE CONFLICT BETWEEN HOLINESS
AND SIN.
As God is infinitely good, and of old mani-
fested His goodness by making all things
* ‘ very good it is not without a Divine
warrant that human reason comes to the
conclusion that He will yet more abundantly
manifest His goodness by making His
universe to be, again and for ever, “ very
good.” For goodness is from everlasting—
in God ; evil is comparatively but of yester-
day. All good is of God ; but evil is not
author of it. The great theologian,
Augustine, calls sin “causeless,” because it
is outside the nexus of causation. God is
the first cause of all things ; but sin is not a
“thing,” not a being, or entity ; sin is an
intrusion, a disease, a disorder, a corruption,
an unspeakably horrible distortion of God’s
handiwork. And will He suffer this causeless
intrusion for ever to defile and deface any
part of His creation ? Holiness and sin can
never be reconciled. Each of them, from its
very nature, aims to extinguish the other.
Bin is termed by some of our chief theologians
“ deicidal, ” that is, God-killing. And this
is true ; for sin, the sin that dwells in us,
the sin that desolates the world, would, if
unrestrained and armed with sufficient force,
annihilate God. Sin invents myriads of
false gods ; against the living and true God
it rages with implacable hatred : so that
even the natural mind of man, though it
is God’s creature, is become, through the sin
which pervades it, “enmity against God.”
On the other hand, holiness in God and in
all who love God is ever seeking to destroy
sin. The warfare between them has been
going on for untold ages ; we are in the
midst of it ; and the end is not yet. But
what the end will be, whenever it comes,
cannot be doubtful. Holiness and sin will
never come to terms, and quietly divide the
universe between them. Sin would never
consent to be limited within any bounds.
Holiness would never consent to let sin con-
tinue in any corner or dungeon of the
universe undisturbed. In the end holiness
must triumph in the utter destruction of
sin.
TESTIMONIES OF HOLY WRIT.
But we will pass from reasoning, which to
some Christian minds may seem uncertain,
and even presumptuous, to the positive and
sure testimonies of Holy Writ, and see what
the Word of God says on this great ques-
tion.
1. The bruising of the Serpent's head. —ln
the first book of the Bible is a promise which
briefly, but not obscurely or uncertainly, in-
dicates the purpose of God to put an end to
all evil. This promise is, indeed, isolated.
And some expositors of the Bible object to
every text which seems to predict the ex-
tinction of all evil from the universe, that is
isolated ; and they demand that its meaningbe
limited by the context. Here are five words
in the middle of the 3rd chapter of Genesis,
completely isolated ; that is, if they refer at


all to redemption. It is the most gloomy God is destroyed; surely none of those
chapter in the Bible ; it tells of the fall and whom he has deceived and ruined will be
ruin of our race, the beginning and source of
all the sin and woe of mankind. Then these
five words “He shall bruise thy head,” if
limited by the context, must speak of some
additional shame and sorrow in store for
man. Yet all Christian expositors interpret
them as a promise of redemption through the
Son of God. And rightly ; for though they
be isolated, it is only as, amidst the shades
of night, the morning star is isolated. From
the midst of the darkness that overhangs
this sorrowful chapter, these precious words
shine forth with everlasting brightness to
lighten all generations of men.
This prophecy of the victory of the
promised Redeemer over Satan, which
Christian theologians call “the Protevangel,”
the first announcement of the Gospel of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, (in Genesis
iii. 15.) foretells, in symbolic language, the
destruction of evil. The Lord God said unto
the serpent, “ I wdl put enmity between
thee and the woman, and between thy seed
and her seed ; he shall bruise thy head, and
thou shalt bruise his heel.” To bruise the
heel of a man is to subject him to intense
agony, but not necessarily to destroy his
life. To bruise the head of a serpent, is to
put an end to it altogether. When a ser-
pent’s head is bruised his life is extinguished,
and all his dangerous properties pass away ;
he ceases to be a serpent; he becomes mere
putrifying matter, and shortly is converted
into earth. This symbolic prophecy, there-
fore, indicates that the Christ “the seed of
the woman ” will put an end to Satan ‘ ‘that
old serpent.” The binding of a serpent is
quite another thing. And those who know
how significant is every word, and every
variation of expression in the Holy Scrip-
tures, will acknowledge that the difference
between the two emblems, of binding the
serpent (in Revelation xx.) and of bruising
the serpent’s head (in Genesis iii.) signifies
an important difference in the truth symbol-
ized. A serpent bound may afterwards be
loosed, and again destroy and devour ; a
serpent whose head is bruised will never
again attack man or beast; his poison and
his breath are at an end. This prophecy in
Genesis looks beyond the fulfilment of the
prophecy in the 20th chapter of the Revela-
tion, —beyond the millennium and the day
of judgment. It foreshadows what is ex-
pressly foretold in the New Testament, that
Christ will destroy the works of the devil
and put an end to the devil himself. And if
the first instigator of human rebellion against
allowed to live on for ever in sin. The
bruising of the serpent’s head is a typical
prophecy of the extinction of all evil. So
early in the Word of God is the great ques-
tion answered.
2. The end of ivicJcedness. —The next pas-
sage is not typical, but literal ; and it is a
prophecy of a most assuring character, in
the form of a prayer. When God teaches us
to pray for anything, that is a most emphatic
way of promising that the result prayed for
shall be accomplished. There is a prayer in
the 7th Psalm which throws light on the
question now under consideration. In using
the language of the Divine Psalms, which
the Church in all ages and all countries has
found to be a perfect treasury of devotional
utterances, a book of Common Prayer and of
Common Praise, we are not limited to the
sense in which the original writers may have
employed the words. For under the
guidance of the Holy Spirit they wrote songs
of praise, and prayers adapted to the condition
of the children of God in future ages, amid
all the changing and expanding situations of
duty and of hope into which the Church may
come. Thus, much of what was said con-
cerning David, as the anointed king whom
God raised up to deliver Israel from the
Philistines, and of what was spoken of
Solomon, “the king’s son,” the Prince of
Peace, has its fulfilment in Christ. The
glory of Christ’s person and work, no words
can exaggerate, no human speech can
adequately describe. It is therefore a sound
rule in the interpretation of the psalms and
other prophecies of Christ and His work, to
take the words as expressing, not merely
what historical evidence renders it probable
that the writer understood by them, but all
that they are in themselves capable of
declaring. With this rule in view we take
up the prayer, in the 9th verse of the 7th
Psalm :—“ Oh let the wickedness of the
wicked come to an end.”
In the first instance these words may have
expressed the desire of the Psalmist that
God would check the wickedness of those
who annoyed him. But it is certain that he
also prayed that the wickedness remaining in
his own heart might come to an end. And
those who in all ages faithfully use this
psalm as a form of prayer and praise, make
it one of their most earnest petitions, that
God will put an end to the sin that dwelleth
in them. He to whom the Lord answers
this prayer, and fulfils the promise, “sin
shall not have dominion over you,” will


pray yet further unto Him who has heard scenes remote from our sight, hut its ex-
and answered him, that wickedness may
come to an end in his house, in the circle of
his friends, in every scene of social life in
which he has to bear a part. When he re-
flects on the sin, which prevails in the land
wherein he lives, and on the wretchedness
which that sin is bringing into the homes
and hearts of many, he is constrained to
pray concerning his country, “Oh let the
wickedness of the wicked come to an end. ”
And when Christians think of the actual
state of the multitudes, in professedly Chris-
tian nations, who live in the wilful rejection
of the truth that sanctilies ; and of the yet
larger multitudes of their fellow creatures
under the rule of false religions, that stimu-
late instead of repressing sin; how can they
be restrained from praying with reference to
the human race, —“ Oh let the wickedness of
the wicked come to an end” ? And there are
express promises that the wickedness of the
world, of the human race, will cease. “ All
the ends of the world shall remember and
turn unto the Lord ; and all the kindreds of
the nations shall worship before Thee.”—
Psalm xxii. 27.
Is there anything to limit this prayer to
the earth ? If the man of God is grieved
when he beholds transgressors, does the fact
that the sin which is continually committed
is out of his sight altogether prevent his
grief ? Dishonour is done to God by sin,
whether it be the sin of a fallen angel or of a
lost man. And can any pious soul contem-
plate the possibility ot hatred and rebellion
against God continuing for ever, without
uttering the prayer, “ Oh, let the wicked-
ness of the wicked come to an end ?” To
illustrate the spiritual and eternal by the
temporal and political,—in regard to the
putting away of evil from God’s kingdom, a
soul of comprehensive range and keen sensi-
bility cannot rest satisfied with a scheme
corresponding to that which Mr. Henry
Drummond, a member of the House of Com-
mons, once proposed for the putting away of
evil from England. That talented and
zealous Christian statesman recommended
that light offences should be punished by
transportation, and heinous crimes by hang-
ing ; to use his own phraseology, he would
put lesser criminals out of the country, and
more atrocious criminals out of the world ;
thus for England’s sake swamping new
colonies with offenders, and hastening the
passage of great sinners to the nether world.
The spirit of Jesus Christ would prompt us
to desire, not the removal of wickedness to
tinction.
The word rendered “wickedness” in this
prayer is as comprehensive as our word
“evil.” It is the Hebrew JTI almost the
same in sound as the English ‘ ‘ wrong. ” But
what is important is, that the word means
“wrong.” This word is used in the 23 rd
Psalm: “ I will fear no evil; for Thou art
with me and in Amos v. 14, 15 : “ Seek
good and not evil , that ye may live,” and
“ Hate the evil and love the good where it
signifies all moral evil. In Amos iii. G, the
same word stands for physical evil: ‘ ‘ Shall
there be evil in the city, and the Lord hath
not done it ?” This evil cannot be sin, for
sin is not the Lord’s doing ; it is suffering.
So that if we give to the words of this text
the full meaning of which they are capable,
they express the desire that the sin and the
suffering of all wicked men, and of all wicked
spirits, may come to an end. And without
reference to the fact that the word here
used comprehends physical evil as well as
moral evil, the end of sin involves the end of
suffering ; for if the most evil being ceases
from all sin, even that being becomes good.
Every creature is good, except so far as it is
permeated by sin ; and if the wickedness of
any wicked ones comes to a full end, without
having put an end to their existence, so that
they become once more good creatures of
God, it is impossible to believe that as good
creatures they will suffer endless woe. Let
us then, without mental reservation, and
without any presumptuous supposition as to
the manner in which God will bring about
the grand result, pray that in His own per-
fect way He will cause the wickedness of
the wicked to come to an end. ’ And He
who said “Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name, that will I do, that the Father may
be glorified in the Son,” will fulfil the desire
thus presented before the throne of grace.
3. Every evil plant rooted out. —That there
is no presumption in such a desire and such
a prayer, is evident from the words spoken
by the lips of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, and recorded in Matthew xv. 13:
“Every plant which my heavenly Father
hath not planted, shall be rooted up.” This
sentence was uttered by our Lord on hearing
that the Pharisees were offended at his say-
ing. And some of those who are for limiting
every gracious saying of the Redeemer which
bears a world-embracing aspect, would re-
strict the application of these words to that
sect. But in explaining the subject to ILs
disciples, Jesus said, “ Out of the heart pro-
ceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, for-


ideations, thefts, false witness, blasphemies.” plant which His heavenly Father has not
On His own authority, therefore, it may be planted shall be rooted out. He will there-
affirmed that He referred to all sin, in heart
and in action.
A nd sins are the only plants in the uni-
verse which God has not planted. As for
vegetable and animal nature, God has planted
all classes, genera, and species. But sin is
not of God in any sense whatever. He
solemnly repels the blasphemous insinuation
of those who say, “ The way of the Lord is
not equal.” To Him the prophet saith,
“ Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil,
and car.st not look upon iniquity.”—
Habakkuk i. 13. “ God cannot be tempted
with evil, neither tempteth He any man.”—
J ames i. 13. He, Himself, thus emphatically
denies that He had any part in the planting
of sin, saying of the transgression of His
people (Jeremiah xxxii. 85), “ Which I com-
manded them not, neither came it into my
mind that they should do this abomination,
to cause Judah to sin.” Nevertheless sin
has been planted ; in the heart of Satan it
has flourished for ages ; in the souls of the
children of men it has been striking its
pestilential roots for thousands of years. How
has this deadly plant multiplied and spread
over the face of the earth, and in other parts
of God’s dominions ! There are * ‘ spirits of
wickedness even in heavenly places.” —
Ephesians vi. 12. Satan went up with the
sons of God before the Lord, and there
accused Job falsely. An i he is described in
the Apocalypse (chap. xii. 10.) as “the
accuser of our brethren who accused them
before our God day and night.” Heaven it-
self has not always been exempt from the
growth of this noxious plant, sin. And look
at the unspeakable desolation and woe
caused by the innumerable varieties of this
deadly upas tree, in all parts of the world.
It defies all the wisdom and might of
creatures to root it out. We hear of the
desolating plague of the Bathurst burr in
Australia; and seeing the rapid, spread of
this troublesome plant, as it multiplies by
the million over the vast pasture grounds of
the interior, one might conclude that human
labour will never prevail against it. Here is
an emblem of the accursed plant sin, which
has fastened itself upon the souls of God’s
creatures, defaced His image, destroyed
innocence and peace, divided friends brothers
and families with hatred, and raised nation
against nation in the horrible work of
mutual slaughter ; and Still multiplying and
spreading defies the wisdom and power of
man to exterminate or limit its dominion.
But the Lord of all has said that every
fore root all the millions of sins, in their
countless species and varieties, out of His
universe. According to the representations
of some theologians, indeed, God is supposed
to transplant this cursed root, sin from
heaven and earth, to hell, there to grow on
for ever. This is as if a farmer were to clear
all his fields except one, of some noxious
weed ; and to set again in that one field the
plants he had rooted out of the rest of his
farm. Such a supposition concerning God
can only be entertained by those who refuse
to sit at the feet of Jesus and yield their
judgment and their whole heart to the sweet
dictation of His words:—“Every plant
which my heavenly Father hath not planted
shall be rooted up.” The time will come
when in no corner of the universe shall a
single fibre of the accursed plant sin remain.
4. The Creation delivered from corruption.
—This joyful hope is further illustrated by
what the Apostle Paul says concerning the
groaning and the deliverance of the creation,
in the Bth chapter of the Epistle to the
Eomans. In the verses referring to this
subject, the words “ creature ” and “crea-
tion ” are used by tRe English translators in-
terchangeably ; but there is only one word
in the original, “Ktisis,” creation. The sum
of the Apostle’s statement is, that the crea-
tion has been made subject to vanity, and
now groans and travails in bondage ; but
will hereafter be delivered from the bondage
of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
sons of God. That eminent Christian
philosopher, Schlegel, interprets this passage
as containing an indication of the calamitous
effects of a rebellion which long preceded
that of Adam—the fall of angels. Geology
proves that death reigned on earth for ages
before the creation of Man. Nothing stamps
“ vanity ” on the creature so fully as death
does. Death is that “vanity” to which
creation was subjected. And though Nature
presents innumerable evidences of beneficent
design, there are many things in Nature
W'hich the most devout mind is compelled to
ascribe to “vanity,” not to Divine goodness.
When, for instance, a pair of parent birds,
on their way home with food for their loved
offspring, are waylaid and devoured by a
serpent or a hawk, and the helpless brood
wait and cry in vain, day after day, till
hunger destroys them, the strongest sur-
viving a little w'hile, only to remain in dis-
tress amid the decaying bodies of the rest ;
or when a fawn bounding in all the delight of
youth over the plain, is seized by a panther,


and dies in terror and agony ; who, watching follow from this passage, in connexion with
these events could say that in them he sees others concerning Satan, that death s last
nothing but illustrations of Divine goodness ?
Many facts brought to light by modern
science concerning the pre-Adamite condition
of the earth concur in producing the impres-
sion that some features of the Divine ideal of
creation were distorted by the entrance of
sin, before the fall of our first parents
brought death upon the race of man. Milton
therefore wrote, not with scientific accuracy,
but with poetic truth, of the first death in
Paradise; and those theological geologists,
who seeing the fact of death recorded on the
primeval rocks, contend that death is not
“vanity,” but only a proof of beneficence,
have overlooked a grand principle in the
Divine government of the universe. Creation
now groans under the defilement and distor-
tion introduced through angelic and human
rebellion. But the Apostle assures us
(Romans viii, 21) that “the Creation itself
shall be delivered from the bondage of cor-
ruption into tire glorious liberty of the chil-
dren of God.” It should be observed that
in verse 23 the creation is expressly dis-
tinguished from the redeemed people of God
—“Not only” is the creation groaning;
“ but we also, who have the first fruits of
the Spirit” are groaning in ourselves ; so
that it is impossible to accept the limited in-
terpretation of those who would see in this
glorious deliverance of Creation only the
resurrection of the body of the Christian.
The eternal purpose of God, which he pur-
posed in Christ Jesus, comprehends the
deliverance of the creation itself from all
bondage and from all defilement. And when
the groaning and corruption of creation are
ended ; there will remain neither sin nor
suffering in the universe.
5. The last enemy destroyed. —ln the Ist
Epistle to the Corinthians, 15th chapter, the
same Apostle, commenting on the 110th
Psalm, foretels the glorious victories of Jesus
over all His enemies, “He must reign till
He hath put all enemies under his feet.”
Jesus is Truth and Love ; His chief enemies
are Falsehood and Hatred. Therefore the
symbolic expression of putting His enemies
under his feet signifies nothing less than the
complete extinction of falsehood and hatred.
He will not leave in existence any spirit
lying and hating. And “death, the last
enemy, shall be destroyed.” This implies
that all other enemies will be brought to
nought, before death itself is destroyed. He
who makes the wrath of man to praise Him,
compels even hostile forces to be instru-
mental in fulfilling His will; and it seems to
w r ork, as an executioner of Divine Judgment,
will be the destruction of Satan. After that
finishing stroke, death the last enemy will
cease to be. And then, when the Son has
put all things in subjection under His feet,
and has presented the kingdom, thus per-
fectly restored, unto Gcd the Father, —light
and love will universally prevail ; for “ God
will be all in all. ” How can evil continue
after that consummation?
6. All things reconciled to God. —Again in
the Epistle to the Colossians (i. 20.) it is
said by the same Apostle—“lt pleased the
Father that in Him (that is, Christ) should
all fulness dwell; and having made peace
through the blood of His cross, by Him to
reconcile all things unto Himself, —by Him,
whether they be things in earth or things in
heaven.” In the 15th verse he had said,
speaking of Christ as Creator, —“By Him
were all things created and then, as if to
place it beyond the possibility of doubt that
the term “ all things ” is to be taken in its
fullest meaning, he adds “that are in
heaven and that are in earth.” Both as to
creation and as to reconciliation, the work of
Christ comprehends all beings. When the
glorious work of reconciliation is complete,
there cannot remain in existence a being that
is not reconciled to God through the death
of His son.
7. and 8. The end of Satan and his works.
—ln the Epistle to the Hebrews (ii. 14.) it is
revealed to us that Jesus took on Him flesn
and blood “ that by death He might destroy
him that had the power of death, that is the
devil and in the Ist Epistle of John (iii.
8.) it is said “ for this purpose was the Son
of God manifested that He might destroy (or
undo) the works of the devil.” These are
sure testimonies of God making wise the
simple. Happy are those who in the
simplicity of faith receive their heavenly
Father’s word, and believe that it shall be as
He has said. Jesus will surely destroy the
devil and all his works ; for the Lord has
said it: and the “zeal of the Lord of hosts
will perform this.” He cannot deny Himself.
The Scripture cannot be broken. Let all
who have been grieved at the ravages of Satan
exult in the anticipation, that Jesus will
surely destroy the devil and undo all his
works. But to interpret these words aright,
it behoves us to take our place at Calvary.
The more one knows of the actual history of
this and of all worlds, the more it is seen
that the interest of all events centres in
the death of Jesus at Calvary. One of the


greatest historians of this century, Miiller,
in his old age avowed his conviction that
Christ constituted the centre of all
human history. And as “ angels desire to
look into ” the woik of redeeming love ; it is
reasonable to conclude that in all parts of
God’s dominions Calvary will be the theme
of endless wonder and praise. And in ages
to come, as Hr. Gumming has suggested,
angels may travel hither from the most
distant parts of creation “to see the place
where the Lord lay,” in those days when the
Giver of eternal life was dead. If we would
understand the eternal purpose which runs
through all ages of human history, we must
take our stand at Calvary. If we would
have just views of the glorious appearing of
Christ at His second coming to reign over
the earth in the millennium, we must look
back to Calvary. If we would judge our-
selves aright, we must consider our sins in
the light that shines from Calvary, where
He whom our sins pierced gave up His life
for us. And so, in order to interpret aright
the predictions of Christ’s future victories
over all evil, we must view them from
Calvary. There, amidst wicked men stirred
up by the powers of darkness to murder the
innocent, is He who is the brightness of the
glory of God, the express image of His per-
son, holy harmless and undefiled, yet nailed
as a malefactor to the cross, and expiring in
agony. He who from all eternity was in the
bosom of the Father, His beloved Son, His
delight, the Revealer of His glory, cries in
anguish that no mortal man can conceive,
“ My God ! my God ! why hast Thou for-
saken me ?” For what purpose has the
Divine Son given Himself up to this unutter-
able woe ? For what purpose has the Infinite
Father left the beloved Son in darkness and
horror, to die by the hands of the wicked ?
The words just cited from the Epistle of
John unfold that purpose. Evil has for un-
told ages spread desolation and enmity
through a part of God’s kingdom. The reign
of sin has debased mankind. Satan has
triumphed in their ruin. Darkness has
settled over this province of God’s domin-
ions, and the gulf of destruction yawns
beneath out race. But the Son of God, who
knows from the beginning all the projects
and achievements of the devil, in this and in
other worlds, has come into the very centre
of the devil’s triumphs, to destroy both him
and all his works. In dying Jesus made
propitiation for our sins, and for the sins of
the whole world. And while He thus
delivered us from condemnation, He struck
the decisive blow at Satan’s power. From
the cross, where we see our sin put away by
the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, we look
onward through ages of glorious victory won
by Christ over the powers of evil, to the
everlasting destruction of all that the devil
has wrought. Contemplating the death of
Jesus on the cross, and looking on these two
inspired sayings, we cannot anticipate less,
as the result of His sufferings, than that
Satan will be brought to naught, and all his
work undone by the mighty hand of the
Redeemer. Thus at length will the great
malady of the universe be healed ; not by
time, as some philosophers imagine ; for
even “ the long run of eternity ” itself can
bring no healing to man or to nature ; but
by the hand of the Lord Jesus, and as the
fruit of His sufferings.
As a matter of Christian experience, it is
noteworthy, that this testimony of the
Apostle John concerning the purpose of the
manifestation of Jesus, “that He might
destroy the works of the devil,” has been
the guiding star which first led many of us
to the conclusion that sin and misery will
not last for ever. In different churches, and
in different countries, we have been led, in
these days, to tlm conviction, that in
neglecting this testimony, or limiting its
meaning, we have withheld from our
Redeemer honour that is due to Him from
our lips. An impulse from above seems to
have acted simultaneously on our minds. To
some of our brethren it appears to be a
Satanic delusion. But though Satan does
sometimes transform himself into an angel of
light, his aim is invariably to turn away
men’s souls from beholding the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ. Never were
men persuaded by the deceiver that Christ is
more glorious than they ever thought before.
If any new views tend to make us think more
of ourselves, and less of Christ, we may well
suspect them to be from beneath. But the
acceptance, in all their fulness of meaning,
of these blessed words of the Apostle, is to
us the dawn of a new day from heaven,
giving us cause to bow with deeper rever-
ence and more exultant joy before the in-
finite majesty of the Son of God. It con-
cerns “the Crown rights” of our Redeemer,
to maintain this truth before the world.
And while I thank my Lord and Saviour
that He has enabled me to bear this testi-
mony for Him, I would in the gladness of
loyalty meet the loss of reputation and bear
the opprobrium of those who may esteem
me as “a. deceiver of the people,” rather
than forbear to proclaim this glorious truth


-that J esus will undo all the works of the
devil.
9. The universal Hymn to God and the
Lamb. —From the visions of the blessed re
suits of the atonement made by our Lord
and Saviour, recorded in the Apocalypse,
we will take two more short passages. In
Revelation v. 13., it is written, —“Every
creature which is in heaven, and on the
earth, and under the earth, and such as are
in the sea, and all that are in them, heard
I saying, Blessing and honour and glory and
power be unto Him that sitteth on the
throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and
ever. ” As if to remove any lingering doubt
whether the expression, “all things in
heaven and all things on earth, ” included all
beings, in every part of the universe, there
is here added the expression “ and under the
earth.” When this vision of glory is accom-
plished, there will not be a creature in exist-
ence that will not join the anthem of praise
“to Him that sitteth on the throne and to
the Lamb.”
10. The new creation. —The tenth and last
passage I shall now cite, which like every
one of the foregoing nine, predicts the per-
fect freedom of the universe from sin and its
attendant suffering, is Revelation xxi.
3,4, 5 :—“ And I heard a great voice out of
heaven saying, Behold the tabernacle of God
is with men : and He will dwell with them,
and they shall be His people ; and God Him-
self shall be with them, and be their God.”
Observe, this is said not of a people chosen
out from the rest of mankind, —not of Israel,
as in the ancient days, nor of the Church as
in the present dispensation; but of ‘ ‘ men. ”
It is of the race of Adam, that it is here
said, “ God shall be with them, and be their
God,” and what follows ? “ God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes; and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor
crying; neither shall there be any more
pain : for the former things are passed away.
And He that sat upon the throne said,
Behold, I make all things new.” The
first part of this passage may be supposed to
refer to the blessedness of mankind during
the millennial era. But the latter part has
a much wider scope :—“ there shall be no
more death ;” “ there shall be no more
pain.” And when Immanuel has, according
to His promise, made all things new, that
old serpent the devil, and all “the former
things,” the sins and sorrows of many past
ages, shall exist no longer.
Then more fully than ever will these
words concerning the Messiah, the everlast-
ing Son of the Father be accomplished
“He shall be exalted and extolled and be
very high.” Then all the regions of crea-
tion will reflect His glory ; all the living
will review, with unmeasured wonder and
delight, that stupendous conflict between
good and evil which began with the first
transgression of the first rebel angel ; which
deepened with the fall of man and the reign
of sin over our guilty race ; which culmi-
nated at the cross on which the Saviour of
the world gave up His life for us : and will
be gloriously concluded when Jesus, with
victorious hand, followed by the armies of
heaven and the innumerable company of His
redeemed, blots out the last remnant of
Satan’s works.
Thus from a consideration of the revealed
attributes of God, and from ten positive and
sure testimonies of the Word of God, the
question is answered : evil will not last
for ever. If any are still inclined to think
that sin and suffering will never cease in
hell, I entreat them to forget this lecture,
but to ponder in prayer before God these ten
Divine sayings, and consider whether sin and
suffering can remain, —when the head of the
serpent is bruised, when the wickedness of
the wicked is at an end, when every plant
which God has not planted is rooted up,
when creation has ceased to groan and is
delivered from the bondage of corruption,
when death the last enemy has. been
destroyed and God is all in all, when Christ
has destroyed the devil and his works, when
all things in heaven and earth are reconciled
to God, when every creature in heaven and
in earth, and under the earth, is ascribing
blessing and glory to God and to the Lamb,
when the former things are passed away and
Christ has made all things new.
THE END OF IMPENITENT SOULS.
Having answered the question proposed at
at the outset, I could willingly end here.
But when we speak of the glorious victory
of Christ in putting a full end to evil, we ai e
met by the enquiry, What then will be the
destiny of those children of men who are not
in this life delivered from the dominion of
evil, -who die in their sins' ? In considering
this most solemn question we are met by
conflicting opinions of devout and venerated
Christian men. Some, with Origen, —a
learned and faithful Greek father, —are of
opinion that all mankind will be finally re-
stored to the favour of God, and live on for
ever in the enjoyment of His blessing. When
we think of those who passed away from this
life without any token of repentance, who
when we last took note of them seemed to


have their faces turned to the way of de- declares that good will outweigh, counteract,
struction, we would gladly embrace such a overcome, arid utterly abolish evil. Ami
hope, if there were a Divine warrant for it. because of the revealed truth, that Christ
But the sentence of the King of kings, in
His righteous judgment, “ These shall go
away into everlasting punishment,” forbids
the hope. And the tenour of all the Scrip-
tures, on the subject of salvation, is that
there is to sinful man only one door of hope,
—“repentance unto life.” For God com-
mands all men everywhere to repent. By
His prophet Ezekiel He saith—“ Repent,
and turn yourselves from all your iniquities,
so iniquity be not your ruin.” And by the
mouth of His dear Son—“ Except ye repent,
ye shall all perish. ” Repentance or perdition
are the alternatives. “ To-day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts.” If
those who are summoned by the Word of
God t<? repent, refuse and die impenitent, we
are shut out from hope concerning them.
“He that, being often reproved, hardeneth
his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy.” And if by our mode
of speaking concerning the impenitent we
encourage any of them to think, “ I shall
have peace, though I walk in the imagina-
tion of mine heart,” we sin grievously against
God and man. Of those who die without
having had an opportunity of knowing their
Lord’s will, the Son of God said “ They
shall be beaten with few stripes.” That
punishment does not exclude the hope that
such may be finally saved. But of those
who “put from them the word of God and
count themselves unworthy of eternal life,”
no end can be anticipated but that they shall
perish.
Another opinion is that of Augustine, of
Jonathan Edwards, and many evangelical
theologians of the present day,—that those
who die in sin will for ever continue sinning
and suffering. Believing the souls of ail
mankind to be naturally and indestructibly
immortal ; and seeing that punishment apart
from grace has no converting influence ; they
conclude that lost souls of Adam’s race will sin
more and more, and be punished more and
more to all eternity. A good brother in this
city said to me the other day, that as the
righteous will throughout eternal ages rise
to higher and higher degrees of glory, so
will the lost sink into deeper and deeper
misery for ever. The human mind loves
parallels ; and in human theologies the
teachings of the Bible are sometimes stretched
into parallels and antitheses. But we do
not find the Word of God thus balancing, in
e ,ual scales, good and evil, blessedness and
misery. The Word of God, as we have seen,
will destroy the works of the devil, and
create all things new, we cannot believe that
any being will go on sinning for ever. Not
one of the ancient creeds contains the doc-
trine of Tertullian and Augustine—everlast-
ing preservation in sin and misery—which
was an invention of those fathers. The
Athanasian Creed declares that unbelievers
“ shall perish everlastingly.” This expres-
sion accords with a third opinion concerning
the future that awaits the impenitent that
after such a period of suffering as seems just
in the eyes of the unerring and righteous
Judge of all, the wicked will cease to be.
There may be other alternatives ; we must
not imagine that we perceive all the courses
open to infinite wisdom ; but I confess that
I cannot conceive of any other than these
three, —universal restoration, —the endless
duration of the existence of the impenitent
wicked in sin and misery,—and their final
destruction. The Word of God forbids us
to believe the first, or the second. As an in-
ference, therefore, from those inspired testi-
monies which shut out the hope of universal
restoration, and also' the expectation of an
endless continuance of sin, I conclude that
probably all beings that cleave inseparably
to sin, all spirits that remain incorrigible in
their love to lies, in their hatred of God and
of goodness, will at length be put out of ex-
istence.
The subject is one of such tremendous im-
portance that we may well tremble to state
a positive anticipation. But some truths
are clearly revealed concerning it, which we
ought to have in view while dealing with
the question. It is certain that all mankind,
the wicked, the lost, as well as the saved,
will live hereafter. It is certain that those
who die impenitent go to hell, and are tor-
mented, Jesus warns us to forsake sin, lest
we be cast into the Gehenna of fire “ where
the worm dieth not, and the fire is not
quenched.” And while the brothers of the
rich man at whose gate Lazarus had lain,
were still living on earth, Lazarus was in
Abraham’s bosom, and the rich man in hell
in torment. It is certain that all mankind
will be in existence at the day of judgment.
Death, therefore, is not the end of the wicked.
They must stand and be judged according to
their works in the great day. But after the
day of judgment, after eras to us now un-
measured, there comes the second death,
that is, the utter extinction of the souls of
the wicked, described by the Apostle Paul


in these words “Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord and from the glory of His power.”
—2 Thessalonians i. 9.
The issue between those who hold the
doctrine of endless torment and those who
expect the extinction of the souls that will
not be corrected, depends on the interpreta-
tion of our Lord’s solemn words, to the
justice of which we bow because of the
Divine goodness of Him who spake them :
“These shall go away into everlasting
punishment.” What is the meaning of these
words ? On the one hand, Augustine,
Jonathan Edwards, and many great and
good fathers of the Church, them
as meaning everlasting preservation in sin
and misery. On the other hand the Apostle
Paul chooses a word of the most opposite
meaning to the word ‘ ‘preservation. ” He de-
fines everlasting punishment as oXtOpov, des-
truction. Believing in the authority of Paul
as an inspired Apostle, we cannot accept the
opposite, the irreconcileable interpretation
of Augustine. The Apostle teaches that the
manifestation of the glory of the Divine
justice will overwhelm the wicked, so that
they shall exist no more.
For my part I see nothing in the Bible at
variance with this expectation. Deprivation
is punishment. To be cut off by human
justice from forty or fifty years life—as
when a young and healthy man is hanged
for murder —is not ten minutes but forty
or fifty years punishment. And to be
cut off from everlasting life is “everlast-
ing punishment.” Then, again, it is
nowhere said in the Bible that the wicked
are immortal. Man is represented, not as
immortal by nature, but as capable of at-
taining to immortality. After the trans-
gression of our first parents, God banished
them from the garden of Eden, lest they
should ‘ 4 take of the tree of life and eat and
* To those who read, in the Authorised
Version only, the words ascribed to our Lord
in Mark ix. 43-45,— 44 The fire that never
shall be quenched,”—it will probably appear
that the remarks in the lecture on this pas-
sage are an unwarrantable and presumptuous
attempt to limit the meaning of the Redeem-
er's solemn warning. But in those verses
there is no word in the original answering to
44 never ” or to 44 shall be ;” the phrase “that
never shall be quenched ” is, in each case,
given as the rendering of “ asbeston,” which
means 44 unquenched,” or “unquenchable.”
In Matthew iii. 12, this word is translated
44 unquenchable.” There is no valid reason
for translating it differently in Mark ix.
live for ever.” The tree of life was there-
fore fitted to impart to them endless life. In
the Gospel Christ is revealed as the tree of
life ; and all who come to Him are made im-
mortal. He says, “ 1 give unto them
eternal life.” They had not, by nature,
eternal life abiding in them. Of the mur-
derer, of every one that hateth his brother,
it is written, “No murderer hath eternal
life abiding in him.” Why should it be
asserted that the wicked have eternal life in
sin and misery ? The words that describe
the punishment of the wicked represent it as
more terrible than our thoughts can now
conceive ; but none of these words are equal,
in the unequivocal assertion of endless dura-
tion, to the words which speak of the future
existence of God and of His people. The
words rendered ‘ 4 for ever and ever ” are
literally “ for the ages of ages and the
word “ age ” thus used stands in the parable
of the tares (Matthew xiii. 39) for the present
dispensation only. The word * ‘ eternal ”
is used in 2 Timothy i. 9, and Titus i. 2,
where the phrase rendered “before the
world began” is literally “before eternal
times.” The undying worm and unquench-
able fire, first spoken of in Isaiah Ixvi. 24,
and repeated with awful (solemnity by our
Lord and Saviour, in his merciful design to
warn us to escape from the misery that
awaits the impenitent, signify the irresistible
executioners of just retribution. These
executioners will not fail ; no creature can
destroy the worm or quench the fire ; none
will ever be able to save himself from the
agonies of a guilty conscience and intense
self-hatred. But it is not said in the Word
of God that the wicked will be indes-
tructible.*
“Deathlessness” and “indestructibility,”
words that most absolutely exclude all idea
of an end, are not spoken of the wicked. The
word athanasia, meaning immortality, and
But it seems as if the translators had sought
to strengthen the expression by adding to
our Saviour’s words ; forgetting that nothing
is so mighty as truth, and that no words are
so well fitted to move the hearts of men, as
those which were chosen by Him who is
4 4 the Truth. ” There is a momentous differ-
ence between the two expressions : —the
words “that never shall be quenched ” in-
dicate a purpose of God to maintain the fire
for ever; the word “unquenchable”
characterizes the nature of the fire. Its
44 nature ’ is unquenchable by any created
power ; but all nature is under the control of
the Omnipotent.


exactly rendered in the Anglo-Saxon word
“deathlessness, ” is used only in 1 Timothy vi.
16 and i Corinthians xv. 63, 54. Of God it is
said—“who only hath immortality.” Gcd
only has inherent immortality. He is im-
mortal by nature, and it is His prerogative
to impart immortality to His mortal
creatures. In the other text it is said of the
Christian, “This mortal shall put on im-
mortality.” In the second chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, seventh verse, the
word rendered “immortality” is aphtharsia
“indestructibility.” Tbe theory of man’s
natural inherent immortality is derived, not
from the Word of God, but from Plato.
And the vehement protest of multitudes
throughout Christendom at this day against
the supposition that any human soul can ever
be blotted out of existence, may be in some
traced to a proud and anti-christian spirit.
Men are unwilling to receive immortality as
the gift of Christ. They would persuade
themselves that they are immortal by nature.
But “the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord.” And those
who are not “in Christ” have not eternal
life in them. As for the practical effect of
this view,—if a man will not be deterred
from sin by the prospect that, continuing
impenitent, he must be punished by
hundreds, perhaps thousands, of years’ in-
expressible suffering, and be exposed in the
Day of Judgment to the contempt and ab-
horrence of men and angels, and in the end
be consigned to. the bottomless pit of
nothingness; such a man cannot be re-
strained by the threatening of endless suffer-
ing. And there is this difference between
the two interpretations of “eternal punish-
ment,” that to the reason of natural men the
threat of endless suffering appears incredible
and unreal; while that of just and terrible
recompense from the irresistible justice of
God, tribulation and anguish ending only in
the utter destruction of the souls that would
not forsake sin, comes home to the conscience
of mankind as a reasonable and probable re-
sult of sin. It accords, too, with the words
of the Apostle James : “Sin, when it is
finished, bringeth forth death.” And to the
Christian the conviction that there is immor-
tality only for those “in Christ” inspires
new ardour in proclaiming “life through
His name.”
PRACTICAL LESSONS FOB EVERY DAY’S
WARFARE.
The expectation that those who have not
immortality through Christ will be finally
destroyed, is an inference from certain truths
revealed in the Word of God. Whatever
view may be taken of that inference, the
faith that Christ will put an end to all evil,
destroying the devil and all his works, is not
affected. By inference, by one step of
reasoning, we have arrived at the opinion
that, after the day of judgment wicked
beings will be blotted out of existence.
Much may be said against that inference.
But the sure testimonies of the Lord uphold
the faith that the Son of God will, in his
own perfect way, put an end to all sin and
to all suffering.
Let this truth have its due practical in-
fluence upon us. Those who refuse to
believe that Christ will utterly abolish evil,
are tempted to endeavour to reconcile them-
selves to its continuance. With the pros-
pect of their own endless bliss in the pre-
sence of God, their creed associates the ex-
pectation of the perpetuity of sin in their
fellow-creatures. What we regard as in-
evitable and everlasting we are constrained
to palliate. Hence, some good men in
defending the doctrine of the eternity of
evil, begin to fall into the error of calling
evil good, and darkness light. It is a matter
of practical moment to-us, every day of our
lives, that we should regard evil as that
which God cannot tolerate, and will not
suffer to continue. By an ingenious fallacy
the poet would teach us to call “ All partial
evil universal good.” But evil is “only
evil.” If we persuade ourselves that God
will leave sin and misery to go on for ever,
we are unavoidably led to think of sin and
misery as not intolerably bad. Some Chris-
tians even speak of the existence of the
devil to all eternity as necessary ; that as a
savage dog, kept by a good master, he may
frighten people from the ways of transgres-
sion. The supposition that evil or the devil
will last for ever must tend towards Pan-
theism on the one hand, or Manicheeism on
the other, and render the conscience less
sensitive to the intolerable nature of evil.
The faith that God will, in His holiness and
justice, utterly consume and put away evil,
inspires the soul with resolution to mortify
indwelling sin, to resist to the death all
temptation, and to contend, earnestly and
hopefully, for the suppression of personal
and social wrongs.
Every Christian may truly say “The same
Jesus who loved me and gave Himself for
me, who blotted out my sins with His own
blood, and breathed into my soul His spirit
of Truth and Love, will gloriously triumph
in the extinction of all eviland this
assurance enables him to lift his head, as he


pursues his righteous path, with exultant
courage, in the face of all opposition. The
feeble victim of sin’s baleful dominion, who
has but just turned from the way of trans-
gressors, and longs, but scarcely dares to
hope, for the peace and joy that attend the
path of the just, may derive cheerful con-
fidence from the knowledge of this truth, —
that the Almighty Saviour, to whom he
turns in his helplessness for deliverance from
sin, is resolved to put an end to all sin, and
will surely, in His abundant mercy, save
those who seek Him from all their trans-
gressions. And to those who are ready to
despair, as the memory of their sins rises up
to condemn them, He who has set His face
against all evil to destroy it, declares that
He is ready to forgive. But let all who still
love sin, all who have sought refuge in a lie,
tremble before the presence of the mighty
Destroyer of corruption and falsehood.
We trust in the Great Redeemer who, in His
death, conquered all the powers of darkness,
and who, because He “ loveth righteousness
and hateth iniquity,” will put an end to all
unrighteousness. While we are “looking
unto Jesus,” who is from day to day
triumphing over sin, by the grace of His
Holy Spirit, by saving mercy, by righteous
judgments, —His goodness and His severity
concurring to one end, the extermination of
Printed by George Loxton & Co., 42, New Pitt-street, Sydney.
evil; —while we are assured that He will not
stay His conquering hand until He has
delivered the universe from the last remnant
of corruption ; —with what joyful confidence
may we rely on Him to deliver us from evd,
to destroy sin within us, to give us the vic-
tory in every conflict against unrighteous-
ness ! Then, in the name of Immanuel, the
great Captain of our salvation, in the
great strength which His grace imparts, go
forward to the battle of the Lord’s host
against the evils of this time. Ye who are
earnestly striving for the suppression of in-
temperance, for the prevention of immorality,
for the alleviation of distress, for the correc-
tion of injustice, for political, social, and
sanitary improvement; —ye who are labour-
ing in any way for the deliverance of your
fellow-creatures from inhumanity or debase-
ment ; —ye who are seeking to be honest and
true, in word and deed, amidst the tempo-
rary but perplexing triumphs of manifold
deceits ; —rejoice in the assurance that Jesus,
the Lord our Righteousness, will not fail nor
be discouraged till He has fully accom-
plished His glorious purpose, the destructio
of all evil. His heart is with you in all youn
struggles against falsehood and wrongr
Trust in Him. And the joy of the Lord wil
be your strength.


J Arty
H c&fy
