

William Redfern, the First Australian Medical Graduate,
and His Times.
By Norman J. Dunlop, 8.A., M. 8., F.R.A.H.S.,
Sydney.
Reprinted from The Medical Journal op Australia, March 10, 1928.




WILLIAM RBDFERN, THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN
MEDICAL GRADUATE, AND HIS TIMES. 1
By Norman J. Dunlop, 8.A., M. 8., F.R.A.H.S.,
Sydney.
William Eedfern was a convict. It would be,
perhaps, nearer the truth if we called him a martyr.
1 Read at a meeting of the Central Northern Medical
Association on November 24, 1927. This article is being
published in the March issue of the Journal and Proceedings
of the Royal Australian Historical Society.
He may have been indiscreet on one occasion in his
youth, but he was never a criminal and always a
gentleman.
In 1797, a youth of nineteen years of age, he was
surgeon’s mate on His Majesty’s Ship Standard, one
of the ships that participated in the Mutiny at the
Nore. This outbreak occurred within a few months
of “the Great and Glorious Victory off Cape St.
Vincent,” when the names of our captains and the
deeds of our bluejackets were the talk and pride of
all England. Although “our ships were British oak
3
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.
March 10, 1928.


and hearts of oak our men” and although “we
scorned the foreign yoke,” all was not well with
the Navy. For some injudicious remarks at that
time Redfern found himself in the valley of the
Shadow of Death; he was condemned to be shot.
His youth, however, saved him and the sentence
was commuted to penal servitude for life.
Some of the Conditions that Led up to the Mutiny at
the Nore.
We all profess to be proud of “our boys of the
bulldog breed that made old England’s name”; but
have we given them always a fair deal or vouchsafed
to them that consideration that is or should be their
just due? The conditions in which “poor Jack”
lived and moved and had his being in the eighteenth
century were deplorable. Hygiene and dietetics,
the two things needful for keeping men fit, con-
tented and well, were ignored by the heads of the
Navy. It is true that Captain Cook demonstrated
in a striking way what could be done by these
means, but demonstrations and even arguments are
seldom sufficient to bring about reforms, be they
ever so urgent or necessary. The sailors’ place of
abode was dark, damp, badly ventilated, dirty and
evil smelling. In winter it was dark, damp and cold;
in summer it was dark, hot and wet. But whether
it were winter or summer it was always gloomy.
There was overcrowding also. The unfortunate
wretches were herded together like sheep in a rail-
way truck. If their place of abode was deplorable,
their food was exercrable. The water served out
to each man was often foul and always insufficient
for his requirements. The bread was unwholesome
and hard as flint. It went to sea in the form of
biscuits, composed of flour, water and an adultera-
tion of all sorts of inferior materials. That was bad
enough, but it was not the whole story. The bis-
cuits went from ship to ship and from station to
station, till at length from age and neglect the
original mixture of which they were made, became
transformed into nothing more than discs of rotten-
ness and weevils. The beef, pork and pickled horse
were indurated by an excess of salt. The allow-
ance of meat to each sailor was by a naval regulation
a pound per day; but the quantity actually received
was rarely over one-third of that amount. The
meat was practically devoid of nutriment, wholly
without flavour and so hard that it could take a
polish like agate or cornelian. Small quantities
of decayed cheese and rancid butter were found
occasionally, but not generally in the diet list.
Rum, crude and immature, was a delicacy to be
served out on rare occasions only. 1
In addition to the hardships due to bad quarters
and worse food, the bluejackets had to endure jjftAny
others, of which none was great, but each of them
corroding. Naval discipline was far too rigid and
irritating; shore leave and other concessions
depended entirely on the whim of some petty
tyrant.
1 The information given here of the conditions in the
Royal Navy at the time of the mutiny at the Nore is taken
chiefly from “Celebrated Naval and Military Trials,” by
Peter Burke, Sergeant at Law, and “Great Historical
Mutinies,” by David Herbert, M.A.
The pay in the Navy had not been increased for
a hundred years or more, although the cost of
living had gone up considerably. The pension
allowance, too, totally inadequate, had remained
unchanged for an equal period. Finally there were
the raids of the pressgang, that terror that stalked
by night. The method of obtaining men for the
Navy by means of the pressgang was unjust and
cruel. It led frequently to much hardship and
suffering. Not all the incidents connected with the
work of the “gang,” however, were tragic. The
story of the adventure of the young “snotty” who,
during the progress of his first raid with the “gang”
got separated from his companions and fell into
the hands of a number of lewd women of the baser
sort is distinctly humorous. Tobias George Smollett,
himself a naval surgeon, gives us in “The Adven-
tures of Roderick Random” a graphic description
of one phase of the life in the Royal Navy about
this period. The picture is undoubtedly fanciful,
but are the details given very much overdrawn?
Roderick’s story runs on:
In the morning after the captain came on board, our
first mate (assistant-surgeon), according to custom, went
to wait on him with a sick list, which when the grim
commander had perused, he cried with a stern counten-
ance: “Blood and oons! sixty-one sick people on board
my ship! Harkee, Sir, I’ll have no sick in my ship, by
God!” The captain then ordered the patients to he
sent to him on the quarter deck to be reviewed. The first
who came under his cognizance was a poor fellow just
freed of a fever which had so weakened him that he
could hardly stand. Mr. Mackshane, the surgeon (a new-
comer on board the ship and a tool of the captain) felt
his pulse and protested he was as well as any man in
the world and the captain delivered him over to the
boatswain’s mate with orders that he should receive a
round dozen at the gangway immediately for counter-
feiting himself sick; but before the discipline could he
executed the man dropped down on the deck and had
well nigh perished under the hands of the executioner.
The next patient to be considered laboured under a
quartan ague and being in his interval of health, dis-
covered no other symptoms of distemper than a pale
meagre countenance and emaciated body; upon which
he was declared fit for duty and turned over to the
boatswain, but being resolved to disgrace the doctor
died upon the forecastle next day during a cold fit. The
third complained of a pleuritic stitch and spitting blood;
for which Dr. Mackshane prescribed exercise at the pump
to promote expectoration; in less than an hour he was
suffocated with a deluge of blood that issued from his
lungs. A fourth with much difficulty climbed to the
quarter deck being loaded with a monstrous ascites or
dropsy, that invaded his chest so much he could scarce
fetch his breath; but his disease being interpreted into
fat occasioned by idleness and excess of eating, he was
ordered, with a view to promote perspiration and enlarge
his chest, to go aloft immediately. It was in vain for
this unwieldly wretch to allege his incapacity; the boat-
swain’s driver was commanded to whip him up with a
cat-o’-nine-tails; the smart of this application made him
exert himself so much that he actually arrived at the
futtock shrouds; but when the enormous weight of his
body had nothing else to support it than his weakened
arms, he quitted his hold and plumped into the sea
where he must have been drowned had not a sailor who
was in a boat alongside saved his life by keeping him
afloat till he was hoisted on board by a tackle. It would
be tedious and disagreeable to describe the fate of every
miserable object that suffered by the inhumanity and
ignorance of the captain and surgeon, who so wantonly
sacrificed the lives of their fellow creatures. Many were
brought up in the height of fevers and rendered delirious
by the injuries they received in the way. Some gave up
the ghost in the presence of their inspectors; and others
4
March 10. 1928.
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.


who were ordered to their duty languished a few days
at work among their fellows and then departed without
any ceremony. On the whole the number of the sick was
reduced to less than a dozen.
From whatever source our information is gained,
be it from history or fiction, one fact is borne in
upon us: the lot of the eighteenth century sailor
was hard and oppressive. The groans and com-
plaints of the poor wretches must have reached the
ears of the authorities time and again; but the
official ears were either deaf to or misinterpreted
the significance of the murmurings. In the year
1797 the crisis was reached; first at Spithead and
later in May at the Nore the men of the Navy,
normally loyal and docile, ran amok. Their powers
of endurance had become tattered and threadbare,
so they succumbed readily to the insane virus of
insurrection. However wrong were the methods
used to gain relief from a galling load, the risings
at Spithead and at the Nore most effectually
directed public attention to the gross abuses exist-
ing in the Navy. One of the results of the mutiny
Avas a slight increase in the population of New
South Wales.
Figure I.
Dr. Redfern.
William Redfern: Early Years.
The exact date on which Redfern was born is
not known. Five different years, ranging from 1770
to 1778, have been given by as many different
authorities as his birth year. They cannot be all
correct. J. T. Bigge, the Commissioner, tells us (1)
that at the time of the mutiny at the Nore, Redfern
Avas about nineteen years old. We can reasonably
accept this age as correct, for the Commissioner got
this information direct from Redfern himself. In
that case Redfern was born in the year 1778. Where
he Avas born is equally uncertain. Possibly it was
in Wiltshire, in England; but that is only conjec-
ture. Nothing is knoAvn of his schooldays. We are
told (2) that he studied for the medical profession
and passed the examination of the Company of
Surgeons, London, the predecessor of the Royal
College of Surgeons, but did not receive a diploma.
It is within the range of possibility that Redfern
received the whole or part of his professional train-
ing in Edinburgh, Scotland. This again is specula-
tion, but there are some points in favour of this
statement: Mr. R. H, Antill, of Jarvisfleld, Picton,
New South Wales, a grandnephew of William
Redfern, has in his possession two of the doctor’s
textbooks. 1 Again it was to Edinburgh that Redfern
took his son when the lad was sufficiently old to
benefit by a grammar school education.
Redfern After the Mutiny.
After the mutiny Redfern spent four years in an
English prison; then at his own request he was
exiled to Australia. 2 He left England about the
middle of the year 1801, arriving at Sydney on
December 14. He travelled either by Canada or
Minorca. The ships Minorca, Canada and Nile left
England at the end of May or the beginning of
June, 1801. The Nile was reserved for female con-
victs ; the Canada and Minorca had male prisoners
only. After a short stay in Sydney, Redfern was
sent to “that compendious and concentrated hell,
Norfolk Island,” where he assisted the surgeon and
superintended the work at the hospital. Within two
vears of his arrival in New South Wales he received
an absolute pardon from Governor King. This was
on June 19, 1803. The Sydney Gazette under that
date, on page 4, contains the following:
Notice.
WHEREAS His Excellency Avas pleased to Grant Free
Pardon and Conditional Emancipations to the following
persons on His Majesty’s late Birth Day, some of them
have not yet received them; notice is hereby given that
such as are included in the following list may have
their respective Deeds on Application at the Secretary’s
Office.
D. D. Mann, Clerk.
Free Pardons.
William Redfern,
At Norfolk Island Redfern shotved of Avhat metal
he Avas made. The excellence of his work, his prac-
tically unlimited capacity for Avork and his good
conduct attracted the attention of the Lieutenant-
Governor, Colonel Foveaux, Avho at the earliest
opportunity strongly recommended this young man
for the position of assistant surgeon on the colonial
1 Dr. Smellie’s work dedicated “To the students of mid-
wifery in the University of Edinburgh.” “The Anatomy of
the Human Body,” by John Bell, Surgeon. Dr. Bell was
anatMe Edinburgh teacher.
2 “Mr. Redfern in consequence of the mutiny at the Nore
in 1797 was, at his own particular request to Sir Jeremiah
Fitzpatrick, then Inspector of the Transport Service, sent
to this Colony in 1801. During the passage he assisted the
surgeon and kept the journal of the treatment of the
sick.” This statement is taken from page 38 of Governor
Macquarie’s brochure; “A Letter to the Right Honourable
Viscount Sidmonth in Refutation of Statements made by
the Hon. Henry Grey Bennett, M.P., on a Pamphlet ‘On
the Transportation Laws, the State of the Hulks and of
the Colonies in New South Wales’.” By Lachlan Macquarie,
Major General and Governor in Chief of New South Wales,
London. Published by Richard Rees, No. 14, Percy Street.
Printed by B. McMillan, Bow Street, Covent Garden, 1821.
5
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA
March 10, 1928.


medical staff. Writing to Lord Castlereagh in a
letter dater Sydney, September 6, 1808, Lieutenant-
Colonel Foveanx (3) says:
The distress’d state of the Colony for medical aid and
the expression of your Lordship’s wish to provide such as
could be obtained in this country has induced me to
appoint Mr. William Redfern to act as Assistant Surgeon.
As his skill and ability in his profession are unquestion-
able and his conduct has been such as to deserve particular
approbation, I beg to solicit for his Confirmation.
Three weeks later, in the issue of the Sydney
Gazette for September 25, 1808, under the caption
“Government General Order” we read: “Mr. W.
Redfern is appointed to act as Assistant Surgeon in
the Colony and is to do duty at Sydney.” When
Colonel Lachlan Macquarie assumed the office of
Governor of New South Wales on January 1, 1810,
he recognized the need of an efficient medical ser-
vice. Discovering that the acting Assistant Colonial
Surgeon was a man of capacity and worth, he did
what he could to secure the confirmation of his
appointment. In his first dispatch to Viscount
Castlereagh, dated Sydney, New South Wales,
March, 1810, the Governor urged the claims of
William Redfern corroborating the testimonial of
Colonel Foveaux. “I also beg leave to recommend,”
he wrote, “that Mr. William Redfern, who has for
some time past been acting as Assistant Surgeon
in the Civil Medical Establishment of this Colony
with great credit to himself and advantage to the
public service may be confirmed in that situation
by a commission from His Majesty.” ( 4) Macquarie’s
recommendation was favourably received and
Redfern’s appointment as Assistant Surgeon was
confirmed by Earl Liverpool, the Secretary of
State, in a dispatch dated, Downing Street, July
26, 1811. 1 The position carried a salary of
£136 17s. 6d.
Australia’s First Medical Graduate.
In 1808, as everyone knows, Australia had neither
a university nor a medical school. It did not possess
even a well equipped institution where a good sound
secondary education could be obtained. Yet in that
year Redfern passed a qualifying examination and
received a licence to practise. At the time of his
appointment to the Colonial Medical Service,
although he had gone through a course of medical
training in England, Redfern possessed no certificate
nor any other credential to prove his hona fides.
He therefore voluntarily underwent a searching
examination to test his technical knowledge. By
this examination a precedent was established. From
this time on for many years all those who desired
to commence medical practice in New South Wales
had to pass a professional examination. The name
of anyone failing to pass the test was gazetted and
the individual ordered to cease treating the sick
and afflicted. (5) The inscription on Redfern’s
diploma, the first ever issued in Australia, was the
following:
We whose names are hereunto subscribed do hereby
testify that we have examined Mr. William Redfern
1 Mr. Redfern will succeed to the situation of Assis’t
Surgeon vacated by Mr. Wentworth.”— Historical Records of
New South Wales, Volume VII, page 561. iurlcai beards of
touching his skill in Medicine, Surgery and other neces-
sary collateral branches of Medical Literature, and we
find him qualified to exercise the profession of a surgeon,
etc., etc., consequently to fill the situation of an Assistant
Surgeon in any Department of His Majesty’s Services.
Given under our hands at Sydney, in New South Wales,
the first day of September, 1808.
Thomas Jamison,
Principal Surgeon.
J. Harris,
Surgeon, New South Wales Corps.
William Bohan,
Assistant Surgeon, New South Wales Corps.
This examining medical board was appointed by
Colonel Foveanx.
The friendship early formed between Macquarie
and Redfern matured with the passing of the years.
In a dispatch, (6) dated Sydney, June 28, 1813, the
Governor begged earnestly for a commission for the
Assistant Surgeon. lie wrote;
Mr. Redfern was appointed Assistant Surgeon by
Colonel Foveaux on August 1, 1808. Mr. Redfern was;
appointed by Warrant by the Commissioners for taking
care of the sick and wounded seamen first, as Assistant
Surgeon on His Majesty’s ship Standard, having previ-
ously undergone the necessary examination. But in order
that no objection might be taken in point of professional
abilities he underwent at his own request an examination
here before a Medical Board appointed for the purpose
by Colonel Foveaux. The Certificate of which Board
was transmitted to Lord Castlereagh in a dispatch dated
September 6, 1808; and in a paragraph of which dispatch
Colonel Foveaux very strongly solicited the confirmation.
Mr. Redfern has done duty as assistant surgeon here and
at Norfolk Island from June, 1802. Lord Liverpool was
pleased to confirm Mr. Redfern as Assistant Surgeon as
communicated to me in his Lordship’s dispatch under
date July 26, 1811. He had not, however, received his
commission as Assistant Surgeon and in case it has not
already been made out, I have to request your Lordship
will be pleased to give orders respecting it being done.
I consider Mr. Redfern as a professional man a very
great acquisition to the Colony. His talents as a surgeon
far superior to those of any other person of that
description in the Colony and perhaps equal to those of
the most skilful medical men in any other country. With
such talents and such claims Mr. Redfern unquestionably
looks forward to filling the highest situation in the
Medical Department of New South Wales in regular rota-
tion of seniority, being able to produce satisfactory proofs
of his ability both with regard to professional abilities
and character.
When Redfern arrived at Norfolk Island some
time in January, 1802, Colonel Foveaux took advant-
age at once of his professional knowledge and
dexterity. The newcomer was appointed to assist
the surgeon in charge of the station. On June 19,
1802, he was given the oversight of the hospital
and acted as assistant surgeon. This position he
retained till May 12, 1804. Later Redfern was
transferred to Port Jackson, where he acted as
assistant surgeon till his appointment was confirmed
on July 26, 1811.
Australia's First Hospital,
A hospital is an institution rather than a building.
There were two buildings, the one succeeding the
other, on the first site chosen for hospital purposes,
but the institution was the same. The first hospital
in Australia was erected on an area of land in
George Street North, Sydney. The place is still
occupied by a government institution, a police
6
March 10, 1928.
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.


station, where the moral rather than the physical
ills of frail humanity now receive attention. On
the front wall of this building has been placed a
commemorative tablet by the Royal Australian
Historical Society, carrying the following legend:
THE
SITE
of the
First General Hospital
in Australia
1788-1816
R.A.H.S.
Figure 11.
The First General Hospital at Dawes Point, 1796-1816.
The erection of the first building was commenced
as early as February, 1788, and was the work of
twelve convict carpenters and sixteen men loaned
by the ships in harbour. The original building was
demolished in 1796 and reerected on a stone founda-
tion. In the second building the diseases and hurts
of the settlers were treated till 1816 when the Rum
Hospital in Macquarie Street was opened. Redfern
began his Australian career in the 1796 hospital.
It is interesting to note in Appendix C, page 196,
of “The History of the Sydney Hospital,” by Dr.
J. Frederick Watson, that the name of William
Redfern is to be found among those of the officers
in charge of the Sydney Hospital during the convict
period. Some of the “First Fleet” surgeons were
still hard at work in Sydney when Redfern joined
the hospital staff; so he may be regarded as a link
between the first beginnings and the more modern
development of medical practice in this country.
During a part of his term as medical attendant at
Sydney Hospital, Redfern had an apprentice named
Henry Cowper. This youth enjoyed the unique
distinction of being the first clinical student in
Australia.
The First Medical Specialty in Australia.
Undoubtedly the first medical specialty in Aus-
tralia was that branch of the profession dealing
with ‘preventive medicine and hygiene. When
Captain Cook was about to leave England on his
first voyage in 1768, he received from the Lords of
the Admiralty certain instructions that were to
be carefully followed. The instructions for his
surgeons only, will be mentioned. These were:
Whereas there is great reason to believe from what
doctor Mcßride has recommended in his book, “Experi-
mental Essays on the Scurvy and other Subjects” and
in his pamphlet entitled “An Historical Account of the
New Method of Treating the Scurvy at Sea” (of which
you will hereafter receive copies) and from the opinion
of other persons acquainted with the scorbutic disorder,
that malt made into wort may be of great benefit to
seamen in scorbut and other putrid diseases; and whereas
we think fit experiments should be made of the good effects
of it in your present intended voyage . . , The surgeon is
to keep an exact journal of the effects of the wort in
scorbutic and other putrid diseases not attended with
pestilential symptoms, carefully and particularly noting
down, previous to its administration, the cases in which
it was given, describing the general symptoms and relating
the progress and effects from time to time; which journal
is to be transmitted to us at the end of the voyage. <7)
The doctors who sailed with Captain Cook,
Surgeons Monkhouse and Perry, were principally
public health officers. The chief work of the first
fleet surgeons was in the department of preventive
medicine. They realized that it is better to put a
fence on the edge of a precipice, than to build a
hospital at the bottom of it. From 1788 to the
present time the specialty has been growing and
developing. At first it was a portion only of the
work of the colonial surgeon; later certain doctors
with special knowledge were set apart as whole
time public health officers.
From insignificant beginnings great institutions
for the prevention of disease and the preservation
of public health have sprung. The term public
health embraces now such a vast field of action that
no one individual can be an expert in every phase
of it. The original specialty has become split up
into a number of special specialties, each of them
big and exacting. In the year 1814 an event occurred
of prime hygienic importance. Three ships, the
General Hetvit, the Surrey and The Three Bees
arrived in Sydney each with a deplorable tale to
tell of disease, suffering and death. On one of these
ships, the Sivrrey, there had been upwards of fifty
deaths from preventible disease, the result of ignor-
ance, incompetence and neglect. The casualties
included the captain, the first and second mates and
the surgeon. The colony was shocked when the
tidings of the catastrophe reached the people. The
Governor ordered the assistant surgeon to make a
thorough investigation of the case; also to report on
the cause and prevention of sickness in immigrant
ships, hoping to obviate a repetition of the tragedy.
Redfern’s report discussed the subject under five
headings: clothing, diet, air, cleanliness and medical
assistance. The document is too long for inclusion
here, but excerpts from it will show the character
of the whole. In this report Redfern demonstrated
that he was an accurate observer and a wise coun-
sellor. His remarks on the attainments of the
ships’ surgeons were apposite. These men were
incompetent from their age, ignorance or intemper-
ance, very often from all three. “They are,” it is
pointed out in the report, “either students straight
from the lecture rooms or men who have failed in
the respective lines of their profession.” (B) As a
remedy it was suggested that well trained naval
surgeons, each supreme in his own department and
independent of the captain, should replace those
7
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.
March 10, 1928.


derelicts who had masqueraded till then as sur-
geons. Redfern’s recommendation was favourably
received and immediately carried into effect by the
authorities. Then fate, that capricious jade, played
one of her extraordinary tricks. One of the first
surgeons to arrive in New South Wales under the
new regime was James Bowman who later succeeded
to the position Redfern had considered his own by
right.
Redfern’s remarks on gaol fever, its tetiology and
infectiousness, are worth noting. As an introduc-
tion he states his confessio fidei concerning fresh
air. “Air, the great pabulum of life, without
which existence can scarcely be maintained for a
minute.” Then he goes on:
The bodies of men when closely confined in considerable
numbers possess a power of generating a most subtle
poison, the nature is not cognizable, but in its effects
not only injurious and deleterious to the bodies of those
by whom it is generated, but spreading baneful influence
far and wide among all who come within the sphere of
its action is fully evinced by many lamentable instances
on record. The case of Mrs. Howitt and others who
escaped from the Black Hole of Calcutta and were after-
wards seized with the fever which was generated during
their confinement and
the seeds 1 of which
were carried with them
is a proof of the first
part of this position;
and the second will be
equally certified by the
relation of one of the
most striking instances
of the kind on record,
which happened on the
11th of May, 1750. At
the Old Bailey the
prisoners were kept for
nearly a whole day in
small, ill-ventilated and
crowded apartments.
Some of them laboured
under jail fever; when
they were brought into
court the windows at
the end of the hall
The “Rum” Hospital,
opposite to the place where the judges sat were thrown
open, the people on the left of the court on whom the wind
blew were infected with fever, while those on the opposite
side escaped. The Lord Chief Justice and the Recorder
who sat on the Lord Mayor’s right hand escaped, while
the Lord Mayor and the rest of the Bench who sat at his
left were seized with the distemper. Many of the
Middlesex jury on the left side of the court died of it,
while the London jury who sat opposite to them received
no injury.
But why should we go so far back and quote cases
in proof of that of which we have got a melancholy
instance before our eyes. In the transport Surrey
the poison was generated by the close confinement
of the convicts in the prison. It diffused its malig-
nant influence through every part of the ship and
spared none who came within the sphere of its
action. With the knowledge of the day this part
of Redfern’s statement was an excellent exposition
of cause and effect. It was clear, logical and con-
vincing. The report concluded with the following
recommendations:
(1) That more warm clothing be provided for the
winter passage.
1 Redfern is here anticipating modern research.
Figure 111.
~ Macquarie
(2) That more regard be directed towards personal
cleanliness by facilitating the means of washing and
cleaning their persons and dress.
(3) That cold affusions be employed as largely as
possible.
(4) That the masters of transports be prohibited from
purchasing or exchanging, unless by direct instructions
from the Transport Board, any part of the rations of the
convicts.
(5) That a different distribution or rather an increase
of the quantity of the convicts’ wine be provided for.
(6) That no reduction, unless under peculiar circum-
stances, of the regulated allowance of water be suffered.
(7) That no part of their rations or articles of comfort
be surreptitiously or fraudulently withheld.
(8) That in order to prevent the generation of con-
tagion it is absolutely necessary that the convicts with
their bedding should be admitted every day, when the
weather will permit, on deck for a certain time; the
longer the better.
(9) That the prison hospital be regularly cleaned and
fumigated with nitric or muriatic acid in a gaseous
state; that the fumigation be as perfect and as general
over the ship as possible; well airing and drying the
prison before the convicts are sent below.
(10) That for the better preservation of the health of
the convicts more eligible medical attendants and on a
different establishment be provided.
(11) That an agent
for transports be sent
out in whose person
might be combined the
two offices of agent and
principal medical officer,
invested with powers
to cause the necessary
regulations to be
carried into effect.
At the end of the
report in a few sen-
tences the author
gives ns a valedic-
tion : “If, however,
anything contained
herein be the means
of throwing any
additional light on
Street, opened 1816.
the management of the convicts and by giving
more effect to the benevolent intentions of His
Majesty’s Government of ameliorating their con-
dition or be the means of saving the life of a single
individual, I shall feel more than amply compen-
sated for any pains I have bestowed on the subject.”
The report was dated September 20, 1814.
Vaccination as a prophylactic against small pox
has been practised in Australia since the earliest
years of the nineteenth century. It was introduced
to New South Wales in 1803 by John Savage, a
friend of Edward Jenner. Redfern vaccinated the
Governor’s son, Lachlan Macquarie, twice, once
unsuccessfully from arm to arm and once with fresh
calf lymph, when the operation was successful.
Concerning Emancipists.
The emancipists formed an important part of the
community in the earlier years of Australia’s his-
tory, The term “emancipist” was applied to any
individual who had been, but no longer was a
convict. It mattered not how he had gained his
freedom; whether by the expiration of the sentence
8
March 10, 1928.
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.


he was serving or by a pardon, absolute or condi-
tional, granted by the Governor. The free settlers
viewed the emancipists variously. There was one
section, well-to-do and influential, of which Robert
Lowe, J. T. Bigge and Lieutenant-Colonel Molle
were typical, that regarded those who had served a
sentence as social outcasts whose ostracism should
be permanent. The enormity or insignificance of
the crime committed had no weight with them; It
mattered not whether the individual was steeped
to the lips in crime or innocent altogether.” 1 If he
had been convicted once, his social doom was sealed.
Then there was another section, like Gallio, who
cared for none of those things, the attitude of
which was one of indifference. There was still a
third section of which the Governor himself was
the leader. This section desired to rehabilitate with
the very best of intentions those who, by their con-
trition and good works, had proved themselves
worthy of recognition. Curiously or rather natur-
ally enough, this policy of redemption was
vigorously opposed by the first section. The
Australian Pharisee thanked his God that lie was
not as other men were; he would have no dealings
with those emancipist publicans. Macquarie’s
method of carrying out the great work of rehabilita-
tion may have been clumsy and he may have been
wanting in tact, but the idea of reclaiming the
members of this unfortunate class was certainly
humane and commendable. The principle enunciated
by Macquarie was this:
That emancipation when united with rectitude and long
tried good conduct should lead a man back to that rank
in society which he had forfeited, and do away, in as far
as the case will permit, all retrospect of former had
conduct/ 1 ®
In other words the emancipist should be fully
and freely forgiven, his past forgotten in so far as
it is possible to do so and he should be eligible for
any situation for which he was suited by either
training or capacity. The Governor set the lead by
showing hospitality to a limited number of promin-
ent emancipists, each of whom was a man of
acknowledged probity. One of those chosen for vice-
regal recognition was William Redfern, assistant
surgeon on the colonial medical staff. Redfern
was specially favoured by the Governor by whom
he was appointed medical attendant to the vice-
regal household. His intimacy with Macquarie
and his frequent presence at the Government House
were rather a challenge to those opposed to the
reception of emancipists. The attitude of the
military caste towards meeting and recognizing
Redfern was generally one of sullen submission.
While his own old regiment was stationed in New
South Wales, Macquarie could rely upon the sympa-
thetic support of some of its officers who had been
his friends and colleagues in other days. His most
faithful ally and coadjutor was the major of brigade.
Captain Golden Antill. This officer saw much of
and shared the Governor’s admiration for Redfern.
The friendship between the two younger men
1 From Robert Lowe’s speech in the Legislative Council
on October 10, 1849, when he objected to Dr. William Bland,
an emancipist, having a seat in the first senate of the
Sydney University. The speech was published in the
Sydney Morning Herald for October 11, 1849.
developed later into a kinship when Captain Antill
and Dr. Redfern married two sisters, daughters of
Mr. Edward Spencer Wills, of Sydney and Geelong.
With the departure of the 73rd regiment,
Macquarie’s influence with the military ceased prac-
tically. The 73rd was succeeded by Colonel George
Molle’s regiment, the 46th. The officers of that
regiment from the Colonel down were very
exclusive and infected with class prejudice. They
were hostile to the Governor and strongly resented
his attitude towards reformed convicts. During the
whole time the 46th was stationed in New South
Wales the relations between Macquarie and the
soldiers were not at all cordial. At first there was
just a certain aloofness and lack of social inter-
course; later, the conduct of some of the officers
Figure IV.
Governor Macquarie.
became so offensive that the Governor refused to
have any communication with the Commandant that
was not strictly official. In due time the 46th was
recalled, being replaced by the “Heroes of Talavera,”
the 48th. That regiment arrived in Sydney in
August, 1817. Among the officers of the 48th there
was a division of opinion as to the line of action
to be adopted with the emancipists. Some of the
seniors, notably Lieutenant-Colonel Erskine, Major
Morisset and Major Druitt, took their cue from the
Governor. They fraternized with Redfern at the
Government House, accepted his hospitality and
made him welcome at their quarters. Colonel
Erskine even went so far as to invite the doctor to
the regimental mess. At one of these mess dinners
the junior officers present suddenly left the table
as a protest against being asked to meet an ex-
9
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.
March 10, 1928.


convict on equal terms. The Colonel in consequence
of this behaviour framed a mess rule forbidding
any one leaving the table until “the first thirds”
had been drunk. The indiscriminate repudiation
of the emancipists was at once unjust and cruel.
Many of them were free from any criminal taint
and were, moreover, gentlemen, by birth, education
and instinct. But, because they were unfortunate
enough to come to New South Wales as exiles, a
large section of the settlers wished to make them
feel that they were pariahs. Happily, the line of
demarcation between the free and the bond has
disappeared long since and we are now one people
with a common destiny.
James Bowman Succeeds D’Arcy Wentworth.
On May 5, 1818, D’Arcy Wentworth, the principal
colonial surgeon, resigned his position. He had done
the work since February 24, 1809, At first he had
acted as locum ienens for Thomas Jamison, who
had been ordered to England as a witness in the
Bligh-Johnston affair; later, he became his suc-
cessor, Jamison did not return to New South
Wales; he died in England in the year 1810. After
D’Arcy Wentworth’s resignation, Redfern hoped for
but did not receive promotion. Much to his sur-
prise and chagrin, James Bowman, an outsider,
received the appointment. It is passing strange
how at times the results of a reform act adversely
on the reformer. The medical profession is working
at high pressure to eliminate disease and push back
death. If these things could be accomplished, the
occupation of its members would be gone. A fate
of this kind overtook Redfern. He had made some
excellent suggestions to the Transport Board
through the Governor that resulted in a better
medical service on the transports, less discomfort
in travelling, an improvement in the general health
of the passengers and the saving of many lives
that would have been lost through preventible
diseases. Then, the first surgeon to come to Aus-
tralia as medical superintendent of one of these
transports was James Bowman, the man destined
to supplant him. 1
Redfern's Disappointment at Non-Succession.
Naturally Redfern was annoyed and dissatisfied
at the appointment of James Bowman as principal
colonial surgeon. He had every reason to suppose
that his own promotion had been assured.
Redfern had had a fine record of many years’
good service in the colony. He was capable, popular
Avith the patients and had much clinical and
administrative experience. Macquarie, who knew
his capacity better than any one else, was par-
ticularly anxious to secure Redfern’s advancement.
The Governor’s recommendation, a good example
of an intercessory prayer, is here quoted:
1 James Bowman arrived in Sydney on January 19, 1816,
as surgeon superintendent on the transport Mary Anne.
He had been trained as a Naval surgeon. On February 29.
1816, he applied for a position on the colonial medical
service, but, being disappointed in not getting just what
he desired, returned to England. He came back to Aus-
tralia in 1818 and succeeded D’Arcy Wentworth as prin-
cipal colonial surgeon. James Bowman married Mary,
daughter of John Macarthur, of Camden, New South Wales.
In succession to Mr. Wentworth as principal surgeon to
the medical establishment of this territory, I beg most
respectfully to recommend Mr. Assistant Surgeon William
Redfern to be appointed Principal Surgeon, as in every
respect perfectly competent and well qualified for execut-
ing the duties of that important office, being a man of
very eminent talents and an excellent scholar and possess-
ing universal knowledge. Mr. Redfern is at present only
second assistant on the medical establishment, Mr. James
Mileham being the first senior assistant. But this gentle-
man, though a very worthy good man is very defective
in medical knowledge; he is very old and very much
affected in his eyesight which render him incompetent
for the active and important duties of principal surgeon.
These are my sole motives for passing over Mr. Mileham
and recommending Mr. Redfern the next officer in succes-
sion to him, and these reasons, I trust, will have their
due weight with your Lordship. I have, &c., L.
Macqtjaeie. (ll)
In addition to his official position on the colonial
medical establishment, Redfern had been medical
attendant on the families of Governor Bligh and
Governor Macquarie, two of the King’s representa-
tives in Australia. He had also successfully treated
members of many of the best colonial families. John
Macarthur, out of the fullness of his heart for good
services rendered, bore excellent testimony to
Redfern’s worth. Writing to his wife from Bath,
England, on May 3, 1810, he says among other
things
Judge then what must have been and what are still
my feelings at reading the almost unhoped for news of
the favourable change which has taken place in the health
of my beloved girl. The day I received your letters, Mr.
Redfern’s nephew came over from Trowbridge, kindly sent
by his father with a letter from Mr. Redfern to me, in
which your account of the darling girl’s progressive
recovery is most fully and pleasingly confirmed. I think I
need not tell you, that if I had as much power as I have
inclination. Mr. Redfern’s reward for the service he has
rendered Elizabeth should he as great as the skill he has
manifested in discovering and applying an efficacious
remedy to her extraordinary disease. I hope he will be
informed that no pains were spared on my part to ascer-
tain how far it might be practicable to obtain confirmation
of his appointment, and I beg to assure him that whenever
Mr. Bligh’s affair is settled, whatever little interest I may
have shall be exerted in his favour.
Again, in a letter dated London, July 20, 1810,
Macarthur mentions his appreciation of Redfern’s
skill.
Tell him I saw his brother and nephew at Trowbridge
and that I shall feel the greatest pleasure if it should be
in my power to aid their exertions to serve him.
A private testimonial of this kind, the honest
opinion of a soldier, is of much more value as a
record of a man’s worth than the most flattering
epistle written for public use. There was another
reason why Redfern expected promotion. The Right
Honourable Henry Dnndas, later Lord Melville,
the Principal Secretary of State for the Home
Department, had laid it down as a principle in a
dispatch dated November 15, 1793, (12) “that the
right of succession to the office of principal surgeon
should belong to the assistant surgeon in order of
seniority of their commissions.” This practice had
been observed without exception till the resignation
of D’Arcy Wentworth. Nor was this all. Redfern
had a definite promise from Earl Bathurst himself
1 Some Early Records of the Macarthurs of Camden.”
pages 192 and 198. John Macarthur’s daughter was
threatened with permanent invalidism.
10
March 10, 1928.
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.


that he should succeed D’Arcy Wentworth. The
evasion of this promise is difficult to explain. Pos-
sibly, the influence of the anti-emancipationist party
was sufficiently strong at headquarters to prevent
an ex-convict getting his dues. Be that as it may,
the promise was broken. In spite of his high
qualifications for the position to which he considered
he was entitled, in spite of testimonials of which
he had many and in spite of his previous long and
honourable record of service well done, Redfern
failed to succeed D’Arcy Wentworth as principal
colonial surgeon. In a section of a dispatch from
Earl Bathurst to Governor Macquarie, dated
Downing Street, April 14, 1819, the appointment of
James Bowman was announced. “I am further to
acquaint you,” the paragraph ran, a that the Prince
Regent has been pleased to confer on Mr. James
Bowman the appointment of Principal Surgeon of
the Colony.” As soon as James Bowman succeeded
to the office, William Redfern resigned his com-
mission in the colonial medical service. His letter
containing the resignation is as follows:
Sydney, 18th October, 1819.
Sir, —His Royal Highness the Prince Regent having
been pleased to appoint Mr. Janies Bowman to be Principal
Surgeon in His Majesty’s Territory in New South Wales
in room of D’Arcy Wentworth, Esq., resigned, and as I
had reasonable expectations from the strong recommenda-
tion of your Excellency in my favour, from a long,
laborious and useful service of eighteen years, and from
the promise of Earl Bathurst to Viscount Castlereagh and
from his Lordship to my brother that I should succeed to
the vacancy occasioned by Mr. Wentworth’s resignation,
I cannot but feel that those reasonable expectations have
thus terminated in severe mortifying disappointment—
that my most sanguine hopes and best prospects in life
are thus utterly blasted, I have, therefore, the honour of
thus tendering my resignation—soliciting your Excellency
to have the goodness to forward the same for the gracious
acceptance by His Royal Highness the Prince Regent and
at the same time beg leave most respectfully to entreat
that your Excellency will be pleased to permit me, in the
meantime, to retire from the duties of my situation as
Assistant Surgeon till the will and pleasure of His Royal
Highness on the subject shall be made known. I have
the honour to be, sir, with the greatest respect, Your
Excellency’s most obedient servant. W. Redfern, Assistant
Surgeon to His Majesty’s Settlement in New South Wales.
In addition to his letter of resignation addressed
to the Governor, Redfern sent Earl Bathurst a com-
munication reminding his Lordship of the promise
he had made and mentioning his own great dis-
appointment at being superseded by Mr. James
Bowman. (13) He also petitioned for a half pay
pension on account of services rendered. This letter
was accompanied by two testimonials, one from
Colonel Foveaux and one from Mr. D’Arcy
Wentworth. Redfern ceased duty as assistant
surgeon on October 14, 1819.
Redfern as Magistrate.
Redfern’s career as a magistrate was brief. His
appointment to the bench was the result of his
failure to become principal colonial surgeon.
Macquarie was almost as disappointed as Redfern
himself at the turn of events and sought to succour
his wounded friend. He was willing to give the
doctor anything he had in his power to bestow in
the way of compensation. Redfern expressed a
desire to be made a justice of the peace for the
district of Airds, where his property was. Macquarie
did this and more; he made his protege a magistrate
of the whole territory of New South Wales. This
was a bold, perhaps an unwise thing to do; it gave
Redfern precedence over many older and more
experienced officers. But in tlie matter of making
an emancipist a magistrate, the Governor’s
authortiy was not to go unchallenged. Mr. J. T.
Bigge, the Commissioner, who was in New South
Wales at that time, strongly objected to Macquarie’s
action. He said in effect: “The policy of the
Governor in fraternizing at all with reformed con-
victs is bad enough and to be condemned by every
gentleman; but when he attempts to raise one of
the most notorious of them to the magistracy of the
whole colony, a vigorous protest must be made. I
shall not allow him to do it.” But Macquarie was
not so pliant as Bigge had hoped. The rugged
Scottish soldier ivhose character reflected his
country’s motto: “Hands off, wha dares meddle wi
me!” was determined to accomplish his purpose.
The correspondence that passed between the
Governor and the Commissioner was characterized
by much plain speaking not to say acrimony.
Macquarie admitted that in a matter of school
learning Bigge might be his superior; but in a
knowledge of men and things he would yield to no
man, not even to a Commissioner. Macquarie
closed the correspondence by telling Mr. Bigge that
he intended to make the appointment and there the
matter was to end as far as he was concerned. But,
“the best laid schemes o’ mice and men gang aft
agley” as Macquarie found out later. The notice
of Redfern’s appointment to the magistracy
appeared in the Sydney Gazette for Saturday,
November 13, 1819. 1 Commissioner Bigge, however,
did not let the matter end there; he communicated
with the Secretary of State for the Colonies. His
story and his arguments found favour in the eyes
of the English authorities and at last Macquarie
had to accept and acknowledge defeat. He was com-
pelled to cancel Redfern’s commission. It was an
unhappy Governor that addressed the following dis-
patch to the Right Honourable Earl Bathurst, K.G.,
His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the
Colonies : (14)
My Lord, I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt
of your Lordship’s letter, No. 9, dated the 10th of July,
1820, relative to the King’s disapproval of my appointing
Mr. William Redfern, late assistant surgeon in the medical
staff of this colony, a magistrate, and directing him to be
removed from that office. I have now to report to your
Lordship that the King’s commands have been carried
into effect in respect to the removal of that gentleman
from the office of magistrate. I have, &c., L. Macqxjakie.
One short year saw the rise and fall of Redfern
as a magistrate.
Redfern and “John Bull.”
*
Mr. J. T. Bigge’s attitude towards the emancipists
was one of active hostility; he saw no good in any
1 Government and General Orders, Civil Department,
Government House, Sydney, Friday, 12th November, 1819
His Excellency the Governor has been pleased to nominate
and appoint William Redfern Esquire to he a Justice of
the Peace and Magistrate in the District of Airds and
throughout the territory of New South Wales; and he is
to be respected and obeyed accordingly. By His Excellency’s
command, J. T. Campbell, Secretary. —Sydney Gazette, Satur-
day, November 13, 1819.
11
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.
March 10, 1928.


of them. Redfern particularly he delighted in
humiliating. In part he was responsible for
Redfern’s resignation from the colonial medical ser-
vice ; the doctor’s dismissal from the bench of
magistrates was wholly due to the Commissioner’s
influence with the Colonial Office. But Redfern had
graduated from the “University of Hard Knocks”
and refused to be crushed by Bigge’s blows. These
attacks were as undeserved as they were unjust.
Redfern knew this and, as he possessed neither the
inclination nor a sufficiency of the Christian grace
of meekness to endure them without protest, he
counter attacked. His intention was to write a
book in which he would tell the world what manner
of man Bigge was. He collected data to be printed
later, as an adequate and sufficient reply to all
the Commissioner’s aspersions and sought a pub-
lisher. As an earnest of the coming harvest,
Redfern sent a letter, evidently a precis of the larger
work to John Bull for publication. But the editor,
possibly he was a Scotsman, was too canny to pub-
lish it. John Bull, circumspect and fearful, of the
consequences if “freedom of the press” became too
free, printed, not Redfern’s letter, but its own com-
ments on what had been written. Redfern’s com-
munication was a plain statement of facts as he
saw them. It Avas personal, unrestrained in
language and unequivocal. It may be of interest
to reproduce John Bull’s comments. They are to be
found in the issue of that journal for August 25'
1822.
We must decline inserting Mr. Redfern’s letter, as being
a personal attack upon a gentleman known only to us
in his public character. We can feel Mr. Redfern and
can easily make allowance for the expression of his senti-
ments upon the subject of Mr. Bigge’s report; but we
cannot suffer this paper to be made a vehicle of an attack
upon a public officer, who has had a very arduous and
unpleasant duty to perform, and has, for all we know,
performed it well. Mr. Redfern appears to have mistaken
us; we are anxious to disclaim any connexion or com-
munication with any of the parties; we take subjects
up upon public grounds without fear, favour or affection
and when Mr. Redfern’s book appears we will read it and,
as it seems an object to him to have himself spoken of
by us, we will deal fairly by him, observing always that
the task assigned to Mr. Bigge by the Government was one
which could not from its nature fail of making enemies
of that class of the Colonial population to which Mr.
Redfern unfortunately belongs.
It is impossible to say if Redfern succeeded in
obtaining the services of a publisher for his book;
there are no copies of it available noAV. It is a
pity Ave do not possess the portrait of Mr. Bigge
from the pen of Dr. Redfern; it Avas draAvn faith-
fully even though some of the features Avere exag-
gerated. As it is, Bigge’s picture of Redfern hangs
alone and is lop-sided; it requires the other to act
as a counterpoise.
Redfern as a Medical Practitioner.
Redfern held the position of assistant colonial
surgeon during the greater part of his professional
life in Nbav South Wales. At first he Avas stationed
at Norfolk Island; later, his headquarters Avere at
Sydney. The salary he received from this appoint-
ment Avas £lB6 17s. 6d. per annum. In addition to
this he Avas supplied with rations, fuel, light and
quarters. The doctor lived in the north Aving of the
Macquarie Street hospital, the building hoav
occupied by the Legislative Council of Ncav South
Wales. The surgeon’s Avork at the hospital con-
sisted chiefly in the treatment of sick and injured
convicts; but free people, seamen and assigned ser-
vants, Avere also received under certain conditions.
An indigent free person could have treatment at the
hospital on the recommendation of the medical
officer after his financial history had been investi-
gated. The fees charged for the medical treatment
of sick sailors, the payment of which came from the
employers’ pockets, Avere the perquisites of the
surgeons, Avho shared and shared alike. The master
of an assigned servant had to pay for the patient’s
rations only. But the official Avork of the colonial
medical staff Avas confined not entirely to attendance
on the Avaifs and strays; the civil officers of the
CroAvn could claim also free medical service. 1
Besides attending the “cot cases” in the hospital
building, Redfern attended an out-patient clinic for
the “ambulatory cases.” The medical team of which
Ave hear so much in these days, consisted in the
early years of the nineteenth century of one man
and, as there Avas perfect unanimity in that “team”
and no time Avasted in useless argument, the work
Avas soon accomplished. Redfern’s activities
extended beyond the four Avails of the hospital;
he had unrestricted private practice. He Avas seldom
at the infirmary after midday and then only to
attend a patient for an illness of extreme urgency.
As a private practitioner Redfern enjoyed a great
vogue. His practice Avas large, probably the largest
in NeAV South Wales at that time, and his fees
Avere correspondingly high, so his income Avas some-
thing substantial. His clientele embraced all sec-
tions of the community, from the Governor at one
extremity to the no-class outcast at the other. On
one occasion he attended even royalty. 2
Redfern’s reputation as an obstetrician must have
stood high; the fee for his services Avas frequently
tAventy guineas. Redfern’s opinion and help as a
consultant were much in request both in toAvn and
country. Redfern avouM have been successful in
any calling. He kneAV not only his Avork, but he
had also a shrewd knoAvledge of human nature. He
did not possess the soothing voice and gentleness of
Dr. Bland, he Avas even brusque Avith his patients,
but those on Avhom he Avas called to attend, felt
safe in his hands and had a sure and perfect con-
viction that a recovery Avould be effected if it Avere
humanly possible.
1 The information about the work of the colonial medical
staff at the hospital has been taken chiefly from “The
History of the Sydney Hospital from 1811 to 1911,” by
J Frederick AVatson, M. 8., Ch.M.
2 “The King’s illness continued to increase rapidly and
on 7th December, 1821, Mr. Crook, the missionary, was
requested by a messenger to attend immediately as Pomarre
had fainted. He accordingly hastened to the royal resi-
dence with Mr. Redfern, a surgeon from Port Jackson,
and found that the patient’s end was fast approaching . . .
The British ships in the harbour fired minute guns recog-
nizing the solemnity of the occasion.” The foregoing is an
extract from The Missionary. Volume 2, page 84 (Church
Missionary Society, 1838). The extract refers to the last
illness and death of the reigning prince of Otaheite. He
had been the protector of the English missionaries. This
incident occurred evidently while Redfern was on his way
to England in 1821.
12
March 10, 1928.
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.


Vaccination and its Introduction to Australia.
Edward Jenner (1749-1823) vaccinated his first
patient, a boy named James Phipps, on May 14,
1796. The lymph was taken from the arm of a milk-
maid who had contracted cow pox from an infected
beast. One of Jenner’s pupils came to Australia
in 1803, 1 bringing with him a knowledge of this
epoch-making discovery and some lymph.
Vaccination was quickly recognized in New South
Wales as a great and valuable addition to the
armamentarium medicum.
On June 24, 1804, there was a notice in the
Sydney Gazette inviting the public to attend the
hospital for the purpose of submitting to the opera-
tion of vaccination. The wording of the notice runs
as follows;
All parents who wish their children to be inoculated
with the cow pox, are desired to attend the Principal
Surgeon at the General Hospital on Saturday next with
their children and after that day they are to attend every
Wednesday and Saturday from eight to ten o’clock in
the morning, during which hours regular attendance will
be given to all descriptions of persons desirous of availing
themselves of so great a blessing as that which now offers
in the happy introduction of the vaccine virus.
Redfern's Visits to England.
Redfern returned to England three times after
his transportation to New South Wales in 1801.
The first visit was paid in 1821 when he went to
England as a delegate from the emancipists to
obtain relief from certain disabilities that had been
burdensome and oppressive to that section of the
colonists. He went again in 1825. His last journey
to the home land was in 1828. On this occasion he
was accompanied by his son, William Lachlan
Macquarie Redfern, who was going to Scotland to
complete his education.
It was undoubtedly on the first voyage that
Redfern attended the sick Otaheitean prince. This
voyage, too, was notable for the “fact” that Redfern
died at sea six days before the Duchess of York
reached her destination. The news of Redfern’s
obituary proved, however, happily to be an “exag-
geration.” The Sydney Gazette for November 22,
1822, refuted effectively the persistent rumour of
Redfern’s demise in the following sentences:
We shall ever feel peculiar interest in detecting falsehood
and proclaiming truth. For the last ten days a report
has been industriously circulated in the colony, of letters
having arrived from London vid Liverpool, in the Clydes-
dale, purporting to come from Mr. Hosking, formerly a
much respected inhabitant of New South Wales, but now
a merchant of London, to a friend at Parramatta. The
information goes to say that the Duchess of York had
safely arrived, a circumstance which is correct; that Dr.
Redfern died six days before her arrival in the port of
■Mr Savage was appointed Assistant Surgeon by Letters
Patent on July 1, 1802. He sailed from England in His
Majesty s ship (Hatton, arriving at Sydney, New South Wales,
on March 11, 1803, by civil time and March 12, 1803, by the
ship s logs, after a passage of one hundred and sixty-eight
days. Unfortunately the supply of lymph brought out by Mr
Savage lost its potency during the voyage from England and
was useless. The transport Coromandel that arrived at Svdnev
on May 6, 1804, was the first ship to reach New South Wales
with a quantity of active vaccine. Two unsuccessful attempts
had been made previously to transport the material to
n^ S Walr a )Q On . e 0 7 he Glatton .and the other by the Calcutta.
xtV lBO4, Governor King was able to report to Lord
Hobart that vaccination had succeeded in one instance,” vide
Historical Records of New South Wales,” Volume IV, page 805
and Volume V, pages 207, 406 and 429.
London and that Mr. Hosking had unfortunately failed
in business in consequence of his mercantile connexion
here. Lately inattention to truth has been the order of
the day in Sydney, and therefore we have been induced
to sift many reports to the bottom fearful of giving
insertion to misrepresentations and found them invariably
a catalogue of base and unnecessary calumniations. We
are happy to have it in our power most unequivocally to
correct those reports, there not being the most remote
foundation to foster such ideas as the distempered imagina-
tion of some designing men would have the public mind
stored with.
Could any “catalogue of base and unnecessary
calumniations” be more completely exploded?
The First Banking Institution and the First Directors. 1
Before the year 1817 banks as we know them were
unknown in New South Wales. In the very early
days of Australian settlement there was no need
for them; later, however, when the übiquitous mer-
chant and trader appeared, the need for a financial
institution became imperative. In 1816 a number
of “magistrates, principal merchants and other
gentlemen of Sydney,” of whom Redfern was one,
met at Mr. Judge Advocate Wylde’s chambers to
discuss the best means of establishing a bank. The
gentlemen attending the meeting agreed that it was
essential that a sterling currency should take place
in the colony. How this might be accomplished was
then debated. After much discussion the united
wisdom of the meeting decided to establish a bank,
the Bank of New South Wales. The original idea
was to have a subscription bank with a nominal
capital of £20,000, divided into two hundred shares
at £lOO each. Later, a modified scheme was pro-
posed dividing the capital into four hundred shares
at £5O each. The bank was to be used for loan,
discount and deposit. The shares were taken up not
as readily as the founders of the bank had anti-
cipated and the sum of £12,600 only was realized.
The management of the bank was to be under the
control of seven subscribers or directors, of whom
one was to be termed president of the bank. The
first directors of the Bank of New South Wales
were Mr. D’Arcy Wentworth, Mr. John Harris, Mr.
Robert Jenkins, Mr. Thomas Wylde, Mr. Alexander
Riley, Dr. William Redfern and Mr. John Thomas
Campbell. Mr. Campbell was unanimously elected
as the first president.
The bank commenced operations on Tuesday, April
8, 1817, a charter to begin business having been
obtained previously from the Governor. The bank
was housed at first in a building known then as
Mr. Reibey’s cottage in Macquarie Place.
Mr. Howe, Dr. Redfern and a Horsewhip.
In the days of our grandfathers the three chief
instruments for punishment or correction were the
strap, the slipper and the horsewhip. The first
two were used for administration at home; the
horsewhip, a sort of high explosive, was reserved
for “work in the field.” We of the older generation
have most of us a vivid recollection of the chastening
effect of the application of the slipper and the strap
* The_ story of the genesis of the Bank of New South
Wales is well told m Volumes IV and VI of the Journal and
Proceedings of the Royal Australian Historical Society
Information also may be obtained from the Historical Records
of Australia, Series I, Volume IX, on page 219 and elsewhere.
13
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.
March 10, 1928.


in days of our childhood; but fortunately we are
quite ignorant of the charm and magic of the horse-
whip. In an admirable paper, under the caption
“The Howes and Their Press,” read at a monthly
meeting and shortly to be published in the Journal
and Proceedings of the Royal Australian Historical
Society, Mr. J, A. Ferguson, 8.A., LL.B., mentions
the fact that Mr. Howe, the editor and printer of
the Sydney Gazette was horsewhipped by Dr.
Redfern. He, however, gave no account of the cause
of the assault or of its sequel, both of which will
be here detailed.
On Wednesday, November 23, 1827, there
appeared in the columns of Mr. Robert Howe’s
paper, the Sydney Gazette, a paragraph considered
by Dr. Redfern to be outrageously scurrilous and
personal. With the smart of the wound still acute
he purchased a horsewhip and set out on a retri-
butive expedition. As a matter of fact the offensive
article was just the last of a series of aspersions
that had quite exhausted Redfern’s patience. Mr.
Wentworth, who defended Redfern in the subse-
quent court case, told the judge the whole story:
“Week after week, day after day,” said his advocate,
“there was another and another dish of scandal
on which the defendant was made to figure.” Some
ill-timed remarks on the asthenic condition of ,the
Bank of New South Wales was the exciting cause
of the assault. The institution that had begun
operations in 1817 under such favourable auspices
had practically finished its career within the short
space of ten , years. Dissolution seemed imminent.
Doubtless Mr. Howe thought the occasion was oppor-
tune for criticizing the conduct of the management.
Unfortunately for this purpose he invoked the aid
of that most dangerous of vehicles, sarcasm. He
fired his charge, the shot struck home, but the wound
inflicted was only skin deep, rousing the victim to
a condition of uncontrollable fury. Redfern sought
Howe’s gore. Here is the offending passage:
Mr. Thomas Raine, J.P., though pressed by the
majority of the proprietors to stand for the vacancy in
the direction of the Bank of New South Wales, has
declined. For this we are sorry in as much as now Scott
of the “Australian” company has also determined upon
not presenting himself as a candidate, we knoAV not to
what quarter the Board will turn for the purpose of com-
pleting its number, unless Mr. J. T. Campbell should take
compassion upon his brethren and allow himself to be
prevailed upon to come in again; but we rather presume
that Mr. Campbell even will not consent to the call of his
numerous friends, since it is next to certain that the
bank will only live to the 31st of December next. Many
of the old proprietors contemplate the winding up of the
bank for the purpose of transferring their capital to a
new bank, unless those who havn rendered themselves
unpopular are either willing to resign or else be dismissed.
There are only a few of the next year’s directors adapted
for such an office, wherein confidence, honour, capacity
and impartiality should be considered preeminently
requisite. However, the determination on the part of
Messrs. Raine and Scott, all circumstances considered, do
them credit. Some of the proprietors inform us that they
Avill insist upon Mr. Terry taking a seat in the direction
with his friend Dr. Redfern. This would be something
like a balance in trade.
A feAv hours after the publication of the Sydney
Gazette on that fateful day Mr. HoAve aatis riding
along George Street on his Avay from the General
Post Office to liis home in Charlotte Place. On
looking round he saw behind him in the far distance
an object, as it were a cloud no bigger than a man’s
hand, pursuing and overtaking him.
At first it seemed a little speck,
And then it seemed a mist;
It moved and moved and took at last
A certain shape
It was unmistakable; it was alarming; it was a
gig carrying a very irate Doctor Redfern armed with
a heavy, brand new horsewhip. Mr. Howe possessed
the psychology necessary “to suspect that the doctor
was not amicably bent.” Redfern allowed Howe to
reach his home before coming -into action. This Avas
a strategetical error. When Charlotte Place had
been reached the doctor demanded the explanation
of certain statements appearing in the ucavs sheet,
half hoping for an apology; but the printer rather
gloried in his vituperation. The gauntlet Avas flung
down! Redfern lost no time in getting to Avork Avith
the AAdiip, which he used deftly and to some purpose.
Half flayed, the aching Hoavc ran at top speed to
the refuge of the kitchen calling for help. Reinforce-
ments soon arrived and in the unequal contest that
followed, Redfern Avas deprived quickly of his
weapon. Undaunted he still fought with'his fists.
Ultimately he Avas forced to retire into the street,
bruised, battered, bleeding and discomfited. When
Howe had recovered his breath sufficiently, he
hurried to the police station to lay an information
against his assailant. Redfern Avas bound over in
the sum of £lOO and a surety for a similar amount
to come up for trial when called upon. The case
Avas mooted before the Court of Quarter Sessions
on Monday, January 21, 1828. The defence was a
plea of justification. The assault was clearly a case
of retribution for a number of aspersions published
from time to time in plaintiff’s neAvspaper. Redfern
Avas so ably defended by Mr. W. C. WentAvorth that
he secured practically a non-suit. The verdict of
the jury Avas “guilty,” but they recommended the
case to the favourable consideration of the bench.
“On what grounds,” asked the chairman. The jury
then explained that it Avas from an impression that
the defendant had been aggravated by the prosecutor
to commit the assault. The chairman then pro-
nounced the verdict: “The court, taking into con-
siderating the recommendation of the jury finds
the defendant in the penalty of thirty shillings to
the King.” Redforn wrote out the cheque and A\ r ent
on his way rejoicing. l But the incident had a
sequel. The doctor met Mrs. Hoavc in George Street
some days later and expressed his sorroAv for Avhat
had happened. “Mrs. Hoavc being a commanding
Avoman, broke her umbrella in pieces over the head
and shoulders of the doctor, aaJio made a hasty
retreat. It A\ r as a case of Greek meeting Greek,
but the doctor got the Avorst of it that time.” (ls)
Redfern; Landowner, Grazier, Vigneron and Agriculturist.
There is a suburb of Sydney and a railway station
called Redfern. The original estate from Avhich the
suburb derived its name consisted of ttvo properties
1 The Australian for Wednesday January 23, 1828, contains
the details of the trial
14
March 10, 1928.
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.


Figure V.
Redfern’s House at Campbell Fields.
of seventy and thirty acres respectively. The larger
area was a grant from Governor Macquarie; the
smaller a portion of the marriage dot of Miss Sarah
Wills when she became the Avife of the doctor. The
position of the estate is clearly shown on the excel-
lent plan, drawn for me by Mr. J. F. Campbell, L.S.,
a FelloAv of the Royal Australian Historical Society,
that accompanies this paper. In addition to this
holding, Redfern owned thousands of broad acres at
Bathurst, CoAvra, the Port Phillip district and at
Airds. His estate in the last named district alone,
called Campbell Fields in honour of the Governor’s
lady, contained at least 2,620 acres. This Avas his
favourite possession. He Avas introduced to the
fair land of Airds on Tuesday, November 6, 1810,
Avhen he accompanied Macquarie to Minto on the
Governor’s first official visit to the “interior of the
colony.” Doubtless what he saAv and experienced on
that occasion, the balmy air of late spring, the
green of the cultivated fields, the healthy appetite
born of exercise in the pure country air and the
picnicky feeling generally, created in him a desire
to possess a farm of his OAvn in this district.
Redfern’s scientific knoAvledge of agriculture and his
practical application of it made his farm one of the
best in the district. To receive from Commissioner
Bigge a very flattering testimonial on the condition
of his land, Redfern must have spent a great deal
of time, thought, labour and money on the cultiva-
tion of Campbell Fields. 1 Redfern did not originate
1 In the “Report of the Commissioner of Inquiry into the
State of the Colony of New South Wales by John Thomas
Bigge, ordered by the House of Commons to be printed
19 June, 1822,” we read on pages 140, 141: “Another fertile
district that of Airds has been occupied, principally by
small settlers of the class of emancipated convicts who are,
proceeding in the same cause of rapid exhaustion of their
lands, without regard to their future means of support
. . . . This farm (Redfern’s) and two others in the same
district belonging to remitted convicts form exceptions to
the general observations that have been made respecting
their system of cultivation. The farm of Mr. Redfern,
though not consisting of good land, has begun to exhibit
the improved system of English husbandry and reflects
credit upon the intelligence and spirit with which the
expensive operation of clearing the land from trees has
been conducted.” Again in that part of the report, ordered
by the House of Commons to be printed on March 13, 1823.
Bigge tells us: “The estates that are in the best state of
cultivation and exhibit the greatest improvement, are those
of Mr. Oxley, Surveyor General, Mr. Cox, Sir John Jamison,
Mr. Hannibal MacArthur, Mr. Redfern, Mr. John Macarthur,
Mr. Thoresby and Mr. Howe.”
the great wool industry of Australia, but he played
no inconspicuous part in its development. In 1821,
while he was recruiting his health in one of the
Atlantic islands, his wife wrote to Earl Bathurst
petitioning for certain concessions. The letter tells
us much of Redfern’s activities and is to be found
in the “Historical Records of Australia,” Series I,
Volume XT, at page 203. It is dated, 33, Rocking-
ham Row, Kent Road, London, January 13, 1824,
and runs:
Sheweth that your memorialist’s husband, Mr. William
Redfern, late of New South Wales, and now temporarily
residing at the Island of Maderia for the benefit of his
health, is about to return to the colony per ship Alfred
now under immediate dispatch, there permanently to
reside. That Mr. Redfern possesses in New South Wales
upwards of fourteen hundred (1,400) head of horned
cattle, four thousand (4,000) sheep and several horses.
But .the quantity of land he possesses (the greater part
obtained by purchase) is not nearly sufficient to subsist
his herds and flocks. That Mr. Redfern has gone to very
considerable expense in the purchase of Merino sheep
which he is about to convey to New South Wales for the
purpose of improving and increasing the production of
fine wool in that colony. And he has also engaged vine
dressers and procured vines at the island of Maderia at
considerable expense to proceed to New South Wales for
the purpose of cultivating the vine there. That it is now
impossible to procure land by purchase in New South
Wales; and as the quantity Mr. Redfern holds is entirely
insufficient for the subsistence of his stock of horned
cattle and sheep and in consideration of the expense Mr.
Redfern has gone to in procuring and conveying vine
dressers, vines and Merino sheep to that colony, your
memorialist most respectfully solicits your Lordship to
direct that a grant of land may be made to Mr. Redfern
in New South Wales. As your memorialist, Mr. Redfern,
&c., are to proceed in the ship Alfred, to sail in a few
days for New South Wales, the favour of an early com-
munication of your Lordship’s pleasure is respectfully
requested.—S. Redfern.”
The Redferns had as shipmates on the Alfred on
their return journey to New South Wales, Mr. W. C.
Wentworth and Dr. Wardell, two young lawyers
destined later to take a conspicuous place in the
making of Australian history. It is curious how
great issues hang on mere details. The fate of
Australia and especially of New South Wales
depended in a large measure upon the safe arrival
of the ship Alfred at Sydney in September of 1824.
Figure VI.
The Wine Cellar at Campbell Fields.
15
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.
March 10, 1928.


Redfern’s Public Services.
Bedfern lived and died before the people of Aus-
tralia had been granted the privilege of self
government, so had no opportunity of serving his
country in the Legislative Council. Nevertheless,
his contributions to the advancement of the colony
and to the welfare of the people were considerable.
His services were as great as they were varied. He
was interested in the work of the Benevolent Society
from its inception on May 8, 1813, till he retired
from practice many years later. It is of interest
to note that that society was the first of its kind
in Australia. It was originally known as “The
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge and
Benevolence,” being created “because, notwithstand-
ing the humanity of the government in providing
hospitals, Sec., still the numerous instances of dis-
tress out of reach of this provision continually occur
which it becomes the benevolent to mitigate.” (l6)
The society in its original form and name continued
the good work of alms giving till May 6, 1818, when
its title was altered. The institution has been
known ever since as the “Benevolent Society of
New South Wales.” Bedfern was appointed to the
committee in 1814. For many years he gave honor-
ary medical service to all the sick and afflicted that
came within the scope of the society’s influence. He
also contributed liberally to the funds of the institu-
tion. In 1818, when this philanthropic society was
reconstituted Bedfern’s advice and assistance were
greatly appreciated. He was a member of the*
committee convened in January, 1812, to frame an
address to Governor Macquarie.
As an energetic member of the Aborigines’ School
Committee he did much to mitigate the sufferings
of the natives and create in them a desire for the
decencies of life. In the “ ’teens” of last century
as in the “ ’teens” of this, the world was sick and
war weary. Disease and destitution were rampant
and very few English homes were free from the
blight of battle. Australia desired to offer practical
sympathy to those who had been hard hit. A com-
mittee, of which Bedfern was one, was formed to
carry out the work. The appeal was heartily
responded to and a large sum of money was trans-
ferred to England. It is interesting to make a
search of the files of the Sydney Gazette of that
period. Much that we are apt to think is quite
modern appears in the newspapers of one hundred
years ago. During the late war the daily papers
were flooded with anagrams, prophecies, jugglings
with words and figures, puzzles, the solutions of
which, unless given, were like the ways of Provi-
dence, past finding out. In the issue of the Sydney
Gazette for January 27, 1816, there appears a
curious and ingenious anagram on the words
“Napoleon Bonoparte.” Here it is: “ Bona Rapta
Pone Leno.” The translation of this is: “Plunderer
lay down your spoil.” There is nothing new under
the sun; sorcery, magic, divination and witchcraft
come from a dim and distant past. The columns
of the same newspaper for February 3, 1816, con-
tains “the names of persons in New South Wales
who have subscribed to the relief of sufferers at the
Memorial and Glorious Battle of Waterloo.” In
this list, amongst the names of those who had given
with a free hand appears that of William Bedfern.
with the other landowners Bedfern attended a public
meeting on January 23, 1819, to consider the ques-
tion of sending a petition to His Majesty’s
Government on matters concerning the colony.
On more than one occasion he was president of
the anniversary dinner. Bedfern devoted much time
and labour to have removed the disabilities the
emancipists had to endure. In the year 1817 the
King’s Bench gave a ruling that a Governor’s
pardon had the force of a pardon issued under the
sign manual only, leaving the emancipist in the
eyes of the law a “convict attainted” still “without
power to maintain personal actions or acquire,
retain or transmit property.” Until this decision
had become effective, it had been understood that
the Governor’s pardon had had the same force as
a pardon issued under the great seal of England
that made the individual free indeed with all the
privileges of which he had been deprived as a con-
vict, restored. This decision came into force in
New South Wales in April, 1820, causing a con-
siderable amount of apprehension amongst those to
whom it referred. A meeting of emancipated
colonists was convened for January 27, 1821, to
discuss the best means of dealing with the dramatic
situation that had arisen. At this meeting William
Bedfern was chosen chairman. After much discus-
sion those present decided to send the chairman and
secretary, Mr. Edward Eagar, to England 1 as
representatives of the victimized section of the com-
munity, with a petition to be presented to the proper
authorities. The advocacy of the delegates, sup-
ported as it was by recommendation from Com-
missioner Bigge, was entirely satisfactory. The
New South Wales Act of 1823 was passed. That
Act included a provision declaring all pardons
already granted to have the force of pardons issued
under the great seal; but prospective pardons to be
operative within the colony only.
Bedfern had been absent from England for twenty
years when he returned to it as an emancipist dele-
gate. From that time on his residence in New South
Wales was intermittent.
Redfern Retires from Practice.
After his return to New South Wales in 1824
Bedfern did not practise medicine seriously. He
was in his forties, had amassed^^ competence and
had other interests. His vines,.vine dressers, his
Merino sheep and horned cattle mil required super-
vision. He found he could not attend properly to
an exacting medical practice and at the same time
engage in scientific farming. One or the other had
to be discarded. Medicine was relinquished. He
shut his office door finally at the end of August,
1826. The Sydney Gazette for September 6, 1826,
has quite lot to say about this crisis. It tells us:
Dr. Redfern we understand intends returning to his
estate at Campbell Field in the course of a few days.
The doctor has been so long accustomed to a rural life
1 They sailed for England in the ship Duchess of York on
October 25, 1821.
16
March 10, 1928.
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.


and for such a number of years unused to the elaborate
practice of his profession that he finds it difficult to renew
such busy cares. We are sorry for this resolution of the
doctor’s inasmuch as the town and neighbourhood of the
metropolis have already been powerfully assisted by his
attention and many poor patients who have been in the
habit of visiting Macquarie Place daily since his residence
in town will sensibly feel the abrupt contemplated depar-
ture which we should like to see abandoned. Of Dr.
Redfern’s skill there can be but one opinion since his
most inveterate enemies are reluctantly obliged to do him
that justice. His methods, or his manner, let it be called
by what term our readers please, may not be so winning
or seductive as might he wished, hut then his experience,
his skill and his practice in our judgment make ample
amends for any apparent absence of overflowing politeness.
We should not have volunteered to offer so much, only we
like to render justice to every one that falls in our way;
and were we to say less, it is not likely that we should
state the truth. Though we join with the tide of public
opinion as regards a distinguished candidate for medical
fame and ever will continue foremost in awarding our
humble tribute of commendation both in public and private
life to that universally respected gentleman; nevertheless,
we are impelled from motives that can easily be explained,
if necessary, thus publicly to give an opinion of Dr.
Redfern’s professional merits. In public life he might
depend, of on nothing more substantial, upon our editorial
support were he to continue in practice; and even in
retirement he will be one of those who may always
calculate on our best wishes. If we were like the doctor,
independent of the world, we also should be glad to seek
repose from the ceaseless perplexities of public life;
though there are men amongst us so attached to public
life and enamoured of its charms that they would rather
part with the independence they possess and which they
might enjoy, than relinquish the drudgery of pre-eminent
misery.
Redfern left New South Wales finally two years
later.
Redfern’s Marriage and Death.
William Redfern married Miss Sara Wills on
March 4, 1811. From the little we know of their
married life, we have every reason to believe that
she was his excellent chum, companion and help-
meet. There were two sons born to them, William
Lachlan Macquarie Redfern, whose birthday was
July 27, 1819, and Joseph Foveaux Redfern. The
second son was born in 1823 and died on April 11,
1830. William survived. He was at school in
Edinburgh at the time of his father’s death. Later,
he married and had several children. Dr. Redfern
died at Edinburgh, Scotland, in July, 1833, where
he had been living for some years. No details as to
the cause of his death are available. Possibly the
hardships endured in his youth and early manhood
were contributing causes. When his call came he
was not an old man —about fifty-five years of age
The newspapers of the time made eulogistic refer-
ences to the doctor’s passing. From The Australian
for December 27, 1833, the folloAving notice is culled:
By The Brothers , Captain Towns, the melancholy intel-
ligence has been received of the death of William Redfern,
Esq., M.D., which happened at Edinburgh late in July
last. Mrs. Redfern, who left this port on the 10th March
by the Norfolk to join the doctor, unfortunately did not
reach London till two days after his interment. We are,
however, happy to be able to state that Mrs. Redfern, up
to the departure of The Brothers enjoyed a good state of
health. The long stay of the doctor in Europe was
occasioned by a paternal affection for his only child, a
son (now in his fifteenth year), whose education he super-
intended at Edinburgh. As a medical man the abilities
of Dr. Redfern were highly respected, and as a private
individual those who were connected with him by ties of
blood deeply lament a firm, liberal and affectionate friend.
Macquarie and Redfern.
One of the most admirable traits in the character
of Macquarie was the staunchness of his friendship
to Redfern. He jeopardized even his own chances of
preferment in defence of his friend. His advocacy
of Redfern’s claims to the position of principal
colonial surgeon of the colony and the appointment
of his protege to the magistracy brought him into
serious conflict with Commissioner J. T. Bigge. Of
that fight, a fight in which he had to face “fearful
odds,” Macquarie carried the scars till his dying
day. And this affection for the doctor was due not
merely to the fact that his friend was an emancipist;
Redfern was a man of worth, possessing attributes
that attracted people in every station of life.
Redfern had been “discovered” by Colonel Foveaux
years before Macquarie came to New South Wales.
It was the testimonial of the Colonel that began
a friendship between the Governor and the assistant
colonial surgeon that lasted without interruption
till the death of the older man in 1824. Redfern,
on his part, was not unmindful of his chief’s
favours; his loyalty and devotion to duty never
failed. In the eyes of the Governor, Redfern was
a man of many parts and a man of integrity, a
great reputation to be sustained only by hard work
and circumspection. During the "whole term of
Macquarie’s administration Redfern was medical
adviser to the Government House. He accompanied
the Governor on all his official visits to the interior
of the colony and elsewhere. In 1815 he crossed
the Blue Mountains with Macquarie on the first £
vice-regal visit to Bathurst. To the members of the S'
Central Northern Medical Association it is of gr
interest to know that Redfern was in this city in
1818 when his chief laid the foundation stone of
Macquarie Pier, now known as the breakwater.
Both Macquarie and Redfern returned to England
in 1821. Possibly they renewed their friendship on
the other side of the world, where amidst the seduc-
tive delights of rural England or the more rugged
beauties of Scotland, they could give and receive
hospitality free from the critical eye and gossiping
tongue of the military caste of New South Wales.
When the ex-Governor died three years later there
can be little doubt that had he been in England at
that time, one of the sincerest mourners at the
obsequies would have been Redfern.
Conclusion.
Life in New South Wales when Redfern first
arrived could not be called, by any manner of means,
idyllic. The mother colony was then only thirteen
years old and primitive conditions still survived.
Nature, “red in tooth and claw,” against which the
earlier settlers had had to wage a continuous war,
was being conquered, but very slowly. The first
two Governors, Phillip and Hunter, had returned
to England. Phillip had made his administration
notable by his enduring courage and amazing gifts
of organization. Possibly it was his prophetic vision
17
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OP AUSTRALIA.
March 10, 1928.


that sustained him time and again when the life of
the infant colony seemed destined to extinction.
John White, the first principal colonial surgeon,
did not share Phillip’s optimism. Indeed his out-
look Avas decidedly pessimistic. White’s testimonial
to Nbav South Wales at that time was: “a country
and place so forbidding and so hateful as only to
merit execration and curses.” He also spoke of
“my fate and that of my felloAV sufferers ” A con-
siderable amount of exploration Avork had been
accomplished during the first decade, but the
occupied British possessions in Australia for a
number of years consisted of only a small area
bounded by Port Stephens on the north, Port
Hacking on the south, on the east by the Pacific
Ocean and by the impenetrable barrier of the Blue
Mountains on the Avest. Mount TAviss, fifty-four
miles from the coast, reached by DaAves on December
14, 1789, Avas the Avestern limit. The rest of the
continent Avas as dark as the “Egyptian night.”
In 1813 expansion to the west of the Blue Mountains
became possible by the epoch making Avork of
Blaxland, Lawson and WentAvorth. Redfern lived
during the rule of six governors, beginning Avith King
and ending Avith Bourke and Avitnessed the evolu-
tion of Ncav South Wales from a mere gaol to a
decent, Avell ordered colony. -In 1801 there Avas no
press, free or censored. The first neAvspaper, the
Sydney Gazette, made its appearance on March 5,
1803. The first financial institution, the Bank of
Noav South Wales began operations in 1817. The first
steamship, the Sophia Jane, arrived in Sydney on
May 14, 1831. The arrival of this ship caused as
much excitement at the time as did the arrival of
Sir Ross and Sir Keith Smith by aeroplane nearly
one hundred years later. Jn the tAventies of last
century education received serious attention. The
Sydney Grammar School, of which the career aauis
very chequered till 1854, Avas founded in 1825. Two
King’s Schools, one in Paramatta and the other in
Sydney, were instituted in 1832. The Sydney
University Avas not founded, however, till some”years
later. The Botanic Gardens has a very ancient
Australian history. One of the first acts of Arthur
Phillip Avas to clear some ground for a farm and
garden. The land round the cove immediately east
of Sydney Cove, called Farm CoAm, Avas chosen for
the purpose. But it was not until June 13, 1816,
that the place was formally set apart as the Botanic
Gardens. The Wishing Tree, a large Norfolk Island
pine known to thousands of visitors to the gardens,
Avas transferred from the garden at Government
House to its present location by Governor Macquarie
in the same year. No more aaull be said. To pro-
duce an ample, exhaustive and complete catalogue
of Australian events during the lifetime of William
Redfern is not the intention of this article; suf-
ficient, hoAvever, has been said to demonstrate how
remarkably and quickly the colony greAAq expanded
and developed in a feAV years. Charles Lanvin,
the father of many modern biological specialties,
Avas astonished at Avhat he saAv in Australia Avhen
he visited these shores in Her Majesty’s ship Beagle
in 1836.
Character of Redfern.
Redfern was a bluff, hearty British sailor. He
Avas very human and no human is perfect. But if
he Avere not a perfect saint, neither Avas he a perfect
sinner. Virtues he had, probably more than most
men, of AAdiich one Avas his intense loyalty. There
can be no doubt about his loyalty to the King and
constituted authority. During the Bligh rebellion
Redfern stood by the Governor. At the time Avhen
the insurgents were at the very gates of the Govern-
ment House he Avas Avith the Governor’s family on
an errand of mercy. 1 It Avas his loyalty to and
sympathy for his unfortunate shipmates that lost
him his liberty and nearly cost him his life. Redfern
Avas not one of those of Avhom Australia has any
reason to be ashamed. If fate and fortune Avere
unkind to him in his youth, Avith the passage of the
years they made amends. In this ucav land an
important suburb of Sydney perpetuates his name.
By force of character and the buoyant spirit of
optimism he successfully came through a fiery
furnace that Avould have shipAvrecked the life and
scorched the soul of many a man. That he was a
skilful and well informed surgeon Ave have ample
proof; even Commissioner Bigge 2 testified to his
knowledge and talents. He Avas given to philan-
thropy. By personal service and in other Avays he
AA r as a toAver of strength to the Benevolent Society
in the tender years of its infancy. Macquarie’s
estimate of Redfern’s character is Avorth repeat-
ing : (17) “There are a feAV families avlio have not
availed themselves of his services. His duty in the
general hospital has been laborious and most cer-
tainly fulfilled Avith a degree of promptitude and
attention not to be exceeded. I have heard of many
poor persons dismissed from the hospital thank
him for their recovery, but have never knoAvn a
patient to complain of his neglect.” Redfern’s
bedside manner Avas not perfect; possibly this Avas
due to his early career in the Navy; but he had the
skill and that quality of character that carries con-
viction and inspires confidence, compensations that
more than balance honeyed phrases or flattering
remarks. Redfern Avas a good Australian pioneer.
With brain and brawn and hard cash he sought the
good and glory of his adopted country. Men like
the pioneers who fought a hard fight and Avon
through deserve our homage. Redfern is dead, but
AAdiile he Avas yet alive those avlio kneAV him best
Avere ahvays ready to declare that Avhatever might
be said against the emancipists as a class, one of
them at least could “bear Avithout abuse the grand
old name of gentleman”—Redfern.
Acknowledgements.
I desire to express my cordial appreciation of the
kindness and help of Mr. Hugh Wright, the Mitchell
Librarian and his staff; of Mr. J. F. Campbell aa4io
devoted much time and trouble in preparing the
plan of the original Redfern estate; of Captain
1 Redfern was attending- Mrs. Rutland, the Governor’s
daughter, when the soldiers entered Government House to
arrest Bligh.
2 Mr. Redfern’s skill was acknowledged and that aided by
great assiduity and good natural talents he had overcome the
want of early study and experience.”—Commissioner J. T.
Bigge on Dr. Redfern : Bigge’s Report.
18
March 10, 1928.
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.


Watson, President of the Royal Australian His-
torical Society, for the loan of lantern slides; of
Mr. R. H. Antill, of Jarvisfield, Picton, a grand-
nephew of Doctor Redfern, for family information;
of Mrs. Shaw, a member of the Royal Australian
Historical Society, for photographs of Doctor
Redfern and his house at Campbell Fields; of the
Research Officer at the Public Library and of Mr.
H. Selkirk who from time to time gave valuable
information that would not have been received
otherwise. The “Illustrated Australian Encyclo-
paedia” has been of considerable assistance. The
other authorities have been noted in their proper
place.
References.
(1) Report of the Commissioner of inquiry into the state
of the Colony of New South Wales, by John Thomas
Bigge. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed,
June 19, 1822. Page 84.
<2) “Historical Records of Australia,” Series I, Volume VI,
page 745.
(3> “Historical Records of New South Wales,” Volume VI,
pages 741 and 757.
(4) “Historical Records of New South Wales,” Volume
VII, page 306.
( b) “Historical Records of Australia,” Volume VI, Series
I, note, imst 185.
<8) “Government Dispatches,” Volume I, Number 3, June
28, 1813, in the Mitchell Library.
<7) “Historical Records of New South Wales,” Volume I,
Part I, pages 314, 315.
(8) “Historical Records of Australia,” Series I, Volume
VIII, page 275 et sequens.
<9) “Historical Records of Australia,” Series I, Volume
VIII, page 275 et sequens.
<10) “Historical Records of New South Wales,” Volume
VII, page 357.
(11) “Historical Records of Australia.
(12) “Historical Records of Australia,” Series I, Volume
I, page 458.
as) “Historical Records of Australia,” Series I, Volume
X, page 274.
uo “Government Dispatches,” Volume IV, November 9,
March 20, 1821.
(16) “Dr. Redfern,” by Grand-niece of Robert Howe.
Letter to the Sydney Morning Herald for October 16, 1926.
<l6) “Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly
During the Second Session of 1898, with the Various
Documents Connected Therewith.” In three volumes.
Volume 3 contains the genesis of the Benevolent Society.
<l7) Letter to the Right Honourable Viscount Sidmonth.
1508 00247192 3
THE AUSTRALASIAN MEDICAL PUBLISHING COMPANY LIMITED
19
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.
March 10. 1928.


