

P<am-\
P &rw
ill Ulster Fight?
A LECTURE
ALEX. LEEPER, M.A., LL.D.,
delivered before the
Protestant Societies of Victoria.
MELBOURNE :
MELVILLE &- MULLEN PROPRIETARY LIMITED,
Ir> ' 1 b


The writer desires to acknowledge indebtedness
to Mr. Pembroke Wicks? admirable work, The Truth
about Home Rule (Pitman; 1913), and to Mr.
Monypenny?s The Two Irish Nations (Murray:
1913).


ill Ulster Fight?
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I do not know whether any of you came here to-night
expecting the ordinary kind of popular lecture, full of
jokes and quips and funny stories. If so, you are doomed
to a disappointment so complete as to be almost tragical.
An Irish subject usually does lend itself to humorous treat-
ment. Perhaps there is no country in the world that has
yielded such a rich crop of funny stories as Ireland. My
own head is crammed full of them. But I must confess
that the subject to-night is one from which I have little
heart to try to extract anything amusing. The last thing
on earth that any person of humane feeling would be dis-
posed to joke about is civil war, and that is now within
measurable distance.
I do not think it is too much to say that we stand at this
moment at as grave a crisis in the history of our race and
of our Empire as has been known since the Revolution of
1689. The Home Rule Bill has now twice passed the
House of Commons. The Asquith Government, or, as it
should properly be called, ? The Redmond Government,?
intends to bring the Bill forward again in the next session
of the Imperial Parliament. That session will begin next
February. We may take it as a foregone conclusion that
the Bill will then be carried for the third time in the House
of Commons, and will be sent to the House of Lords.
Beyond all doubt it will be again rejected by the Lords;
but, in spite of that, it must, by the operation of the Parlia-
ment Act, be immediately presented to the King for signa-


ture, and it is a practical certainty that it will become the
law of the land early in June, 1914. Many people here
who have not studied the situation closely, and who do not
read regularly the English papers, are indulging in the
extravagant hope that the Bill will somehow or other get
wrecked before next June. I do not think that there is the
smallest probability of this. I believe that nothing short
of some tremendous national convulsion, such as an armed
revolution on a great scale, or the outbreak of a European
war, in which Britain was involved, could prevent the pas-
sage of the Home Rule Bill into law next June. Some
delude themselves with the fancy that there must be a
general election before the Bill becomes law. These people
forget that British Ministers have pledged their word to
the Nationalists that there shall be no general election until
after the Bill has become law. Only a few days ago a
cablegram told us that Mr. Birrell, the Chief Secretary for
Ireland, publicly ridiculed the idea of a general election
before next June as absolutely silly. If the Ministry had
not given this pledge, they would have been summarily
turned out of office by Mr. Redmond. Again, there are
people who say confidently that the King will refuse to
sign the Bill, and will dissolve Parliament. If these people
had studied English history, they would know that there
is not the faintest chance of the King taking such a step.
Of course, it is one of those things that theoretically are
within the constitutional rights of the Crown. On paper,
it was within the power of the King to refuse in 1911 to
create five hundred Peers, in order to carry the Parliament
Act. As a matter of fact, he had no choice. The Parlia-
ment Act was a more violent constitutional revolution than
anything known in our history for the last two centuries,
and yet the King, though, as he said himself, he felt the
greatest repugnance to it, gave way, and promised Mr.
Asquith to create any number of Peers that might be re-
quired. It is, therefore, inconceivable that, in a case where
there would be still less constitutional precedent, he would


venture to flout has Ministers and to take a course which
has been taken by no British monarch within the last two
hundred years. Moreover, such action on his part would
utterly ruin the Unionist cause. There seems to be very
little hope of a settlement by consent. A possible com-
promise would be to exclude North-East Ulster from the
operation of the Bill; but there is small chance of the
Nationalists agreeing to this, for they think they are mas-
ters of the situation. We may assume, then, that the Home
Rule Bill, by which the whole of Ireland will be placed
under the control of a Dublin Parliament and an Executive
responsible to it, will within the next eight or nine months
be the law of the land. And then, what will happen in
Ulster? !
To understand the case for Ulster it is necessary to go
into some detail. First, as regards population. The popu-
lation of Ireland may be put down, roughly, at about four
and a quarter millions. Plow many of these desire Home
Rule? It is impossible to answer this question with abso-
lute precision; but the question is for all practical purposes
determined by a reference to religious statistics. A little
over three millions are Roman Catholics, a little over one
million are Protestants. So you may say, roughly, that
there are three million Home Rulers, though many of them
are only half-hearted, and that there are more than one
million who are passionately opposed to any interference
with the Union. This statement really puts the case in a
light too favourable to the* Home Rulers, for, while the
number of Protestant Home Rulers is practically insigni-
ficant, the number of Roman Catholics opposed to Plome
Rule (including nearly the whole of the educated Roman
Catholic laity, especially those who have anything like a
large stake in the country) is very considerable. Some-
thing, then, between a third and a quarter of the population
of Ireland is opposed to Home Rule. So much for num-
bers. But numbers are not everything: are not even of the
first importance in measuring the forces that go to the


making of a nation. For example, no one who knows Italy
would suggest that the Neapolitans and other Southern
Italians, however numerous, possess anything like the same
weight and importance in the making of the modern Italian
nation as do the Teutonic Lombards and Florentines. And,
measured by all the factors that make a nation strong and
progressive and respected by other nations, the Irish
Unionists have conspicuously the advantage over the
Nationalists. Almost without exception the solid interests
of the community are resolutely opposed to Home Rule.
On the whole, it may be truthfully said that those who have
contributed most to the well-being and progress of Ireland
are filled with consternation at the prospect of the country
being handed over to the control of a Redmondite Parlia-
ment. It is unchallengeable that the learning, the industry,
and the commercial enterprise of Ireland are almost wholly
on the side of the Union. The opposition to Home Rule
is, however, mainly concentrated in Ulster, and it is well
to explain at once that by ? Ulster ? in this connection is
meant more particularly the North-East part of the Pro-
vince, including the Counties of Down, Antrim, Armagh,
Londonderry, Fermanagh, and Tyrone. The opinion of the
great city of Belfast should surely have weight. It is the
largest city in Ireland. It is the industrial centre of Ireland.
It stands fourth among the ports of the United Kingdom.
Its progress under the Union has been phenomenal. Since
the rejection of the Home Rule Bill in 1893 the popula-
tion of Belfast has increased by more than fifty per cent.
Belfast receives and discharges nearly seventy-five per cent,
of the tonnage of all the ports of Ireland. Here is a still
better test of its material prosperity, as well as of its en-
lightened citizenship. The rate of pauperism in Belfast is
the lowest of any city in the United Kingdom. In Belfast
only about one per cent, of the population are paupers, as
against three per cent, in Dublin, nearly three and a half
per cent, in Cork, and over two and a half per cent, in
Glasgow. Belfast has the largest shipyard, the largest


ropeworks, and the largest linen factory in the world. Its
contribution to the Imperial revenue for Customs is more
than double that of all the rest of Ireland. And all this
has been achieved with very few natural advantages to help.
All the coal, and almost all the raw materials, such as iron,
steel, etc., have had to be imported. The city is built upon
reclaimed land, and the harbour has had to be formed with
infinite labour, unlike the splendid natural haven of squalid,
unprogressive, disloyal Cork. But the point that is
most interesting to us at the present moment is that which
has been so lately pressed upon the attention of Mr.
Asquith?s Government?that the astonishing progress of
Belfast has been made under precisely the same laws as
those controlling the rest of Ireland. With very few excep-
tions, the industrial activity and enterprise of Ireland are
concentrated in North-East Ulster, and what has been said
of Belfast is true of all that region. Of the four provinces,
Ulster, though the most prosperous, has been the least
favoured in natural resources. Do not let anyone persuade
you that Ulster Protestants enjoy any kind of preference
or privilege over the people in the other provinces. Those
who are jealous of Ulster, and who hate her Protestantism
and her Imperialism and her Anglo-Saxon civilisation, have
invented the monstrous falsehood of Protestant ascendancy,
in order to explain her prosperity. Protestant ascendancy
passed away finally many a long year ago. On the other
hand, Roman Catholic ascendancy assuredly does prevail
in the South and West of Ireland. It is notorious that
outside North-East Ulster it is almost impossible for a
Protestant, unless he is an openly-avowed Nationalist, to
obtain any public appointment. Just consider how the Irish
County Councils are constituted. Outside Ulster, out of
seven hundred and three County Councillors, only fifteen
are Unionists, as against six hundred and eighty-four
Nationalists. This is the result of a deliberate policy.
Here is a resolution passed by the Nationalist League: ?
? We pledge ourselves to support no candidate for any of


the County Councils who is not an outspoken Nationalist.?
So these County Councils, which ought to be dealing with
County matters such as road's and bridges, have, outside
Ulster, all become violent political organisations, and that
is just what Mr. Redmond, that arch-humbug who is now
masquerading as the apostle of toleration and goodwill to
Protestants, insists that the County Councils ought to be.
Except in Ulster, the County Councils are simply anti-
British and anti-imperial clubs. This is a typical specimen
of a resolution passed by one of these same County Coun-
cils during the Boer War: ?? We congratulate the gallant
Boers on their brilliant defeats of the pirate Saxon, and
we trust that, as Babylon fell, so also may fall the race and
nation whose creed is the creed of greed and whose god is
the god of mammon.?
Well, then, we find ourselves face to face with the fact
that the men of Ulster, the most prosperous, the most loyal,
and the most law-abiding, and incomparably the best edu-
cated section of the inhabitants of Ireland, have declared
their passionate resolve that, under no conceivable circum-
stances, will they submit to the rule of a Roman Catholic
and Nationalist Parliament in Dublin. As you all know,
they are preparing to resist to the death, if an attempt be
made to force this alien and hateful anti-British rule upon
them. They are arming, they are organising and drilling,
and, while they do not publish to the world all that they are
doing, it is perfectly well known that they have tens of
thousands of trained men ready at once to take the field;
that they have prepared with great care and deliberation a
scheme for the establishment of a provisional government
for North-East Ulster; and that they are determined to hold
the country for their liege lord, King George V., and for
the Empire, until such time as the eyes of the people of
Great Britain may be opened and the country be freed
from the Cabinet despotism at present fastened upon it.
Listen to the solemn words of the Ulster Covenant, which
has been signed by well-nigh every Protestant man in Ulster


over the age of sixteen. The men?s signatures number
nearly a quarter of a million, and a similar declaration has
been signed by very nearly as many women. In all, close
upon half a million of adults ?men and women of the very
flower of the British race?have joined in this momentous
compact. These are the words of the Covenant:?
? Being convinced in our consciences that Home Rule
would be disastrous to the material well-being of Ulster,
as well as of the whole of Ireland, subversive of our
civil and religious freedom, destructive of our citizen-
ship, and perilous to the unity of the Empire, we, whose
names are underwritten, men of Ulster, loyal subjects
of his Gracious Majesty King George V., humbly rely-
ing on the God whom our fathers in days of stress and
trial confidently trusted, do hereby pledge ourselves in
solemn Covenant throughout this our time of threatened
calamity to stand by one another in defending for our-
selves and for our children our cherished position of
equal citizenship in the United Kingdom, and in using
all means which may be found necessary, to defeat the
present conspiracy to set up a Home Rule Parliament
in Ireland, AND, in the event of such a Parliament being
forced upon us, we further solemnly and mutually pledge
ourselves to refuse to recognise its authority. In sure
confidence that God will defend the right we hereto sub-
scribe our names.?
This is an amazing step for a law-abiding, God-fearing
people like the people of North-East Ulster to have taken.
In the last resort it means that most awful calamity that
can befall any country ?civil war. When we think of the
unspeakable horrors that civil war involves, we have a
right to demand that those who are prepared to resort to so
dire an extremity should be able to show an overwhelming
case to justify themselves. Can Ulster do this? What is
the case for Ulster? The men of Ulster sum it up thus
briefly:?? Before God we believe in our hearts that Home
Rule would place us and our country under the domination


of the Roman Catholic hierarchy, that it would ruin our
industrial prosperity, would subvert our fundamental rights
of citizenship, and would lead ultimately to the establish-
ment of an Irish Republic.?
We must deal with the religious question first. English
Unionists, knowing nothing in their own country of the
despotic power exercised by the priesthood in Ireland, are
loath to dwell upon the religious argument against Home
Rule. But, in the case of those who know at first-hand the
manner in which the priest controls the life and conduct
of the Irish peasantry, it would be mere affectation to sup-
press the fact that the strongest among many strong objec-
tions to Home Rule is based upon the fear of religious
oppression. Not that Ulster fears that persecution would
take the form of three hundred years ago?the rack, the
thumbscrew, and the stake. The Church of Rome has
more refined methods now, but they are equally effective.
They are the methods by which, since French Canada got
Home Rule, the Protestant population of the city of Quebec
has been reduced from seventeen thousand to four thousand.
Protestants in the Province of Quebec have been gradually
edged out of all positions of influence or emolument, and
the bulk of them have now taken refuge in other parts
of Canada. The same thing would happen in Ireland. Re-
member that it is Rome?s proud boast that she never
changes her creed and her principles. I have no feelings
of hostility whatever to individual Roman Catholics, There
are many of them for whom I have a strong regard and
a great admiration. I recognise how true it is that men
are often very much better than their creed. But I must
recognise, however regretfully, that the Church of Rome
is the enemy of civil and religious liberty in every coun-
try or community where she has the upper hand. lam
going to make a very serious statement. I shall make it
with great deliberation, and with a full consciousness of its
gravity, and I am prepared to prove it if challenged. It
is still a part of the creed of Rome, just as it was in the


time of the Inquisition, that it is both her right and her
duty to enforce her doctrines upon heretics by coercion,
even at the cost of inflicting death. It would possibly sur-
prise some Roman Catholic laymen to learn that this to-
day is officially taught as a dogma of the Church of Rome.
How then can any imaginable safeguard be effective against
a Church like this? What, think you, would be the condi-
tion of the poorer Protestants of Ireland under Home
Rule, when, even under the Imperial Parliament, the Ro-
man Catholic Church has boldly invaded the most elemen-
tary civic rights of Protestants? Only a short time ago
a Papal decree (known as the Ne Temere Decree) declared
void any marriage between a Roman Catholic and a Pro-
testant, unless it had been celebrated by a Roman Catholic
priest. Without this, the partners are pronounced to be
living in sin, and their children are declared illegitimate.
Under this decree Mrs. McCann, a respectable Presby-
terian woman, was, two years ago, by the order of the
Roman Catholic Church, deserted by her husband and left
houseless and penniless on the streets of Belfast. And this
abominable outrage was perpetrated under British rule.
How infinitely worse would things be under the rule of a
Parliament which would be overwhelmingly Romish! If
they do these things in the green tree, what will be done
in the dry? Against such occurrences the supposed safe-
guards that have been inserted in the Home Rule Bill
would be utterly futile?a mere mockery. No restriction
whatever would be effective to compel a Roman Catholic
Parliament and Executive to restrain the illegal interfer-
ence of the Roman Catholic clergy. Moreover, the danger
of such interference is immensely increased by another
recent ordinance issued by the Vatican, called the Proprio
Motu Decree. This enacts that any Roman Catholic who
summons a priest or bishop of his Church before a court
of justice Incurs instant excommunication. This decree
applies equally to private individuals and public officials.
Think of the tremendous power that it gives the Roman


Catholic Church over the people. You all know what ex-
communication means to a Roman Catholic. It means eter-
nal damnation, if the offender dies without the sentence
being removed. No wonder if, in view of all this, the Pro-
testants of Ulster regard it as a certainty that their civil
rights would be trampled upon by a Roman Catholic Exe-
cutive, supported by a perpetual Roman Catholic majority
in Parliament. Their apprehensions were thus expressed
lately by a distinguished Protestant Irish Bishop:?? Our
fears are not concerned with any special dogma of the
Church of Rome, But we in Ireland recognise, as the
people in England do not, the inevitable tendency of the
consistent and immemorial policy of the Church of Rome
in relation to persons who refuse to submit to her claims.
We know that policy to be one of absolute and uncompro-
mising insistence on the exacting of everything which she
regards as her right, as soon as she possesses the power.
We know that, for her, toleration is only a temporary
expedient. We know that professions and promises made
by individual Roman Catholics and by political leaders
which to English ears seem a happy augury of a good time
coming are of no value whatever.? It is idle to maintain
that Home Rule would not strengthen the hold of the priests
upon the people. The priests are strenuously assisting the
United Irish League in all its operations. At elections the
parish priest is always the official agent of the Nationalist
candidate, and takes his stand outside the polling-booth, to
canvass his parishioners as they come up to vote. The col-
lections for the party funds are ordinarily made on Sun-
days at the door of the Roman Catholic church. The priests
themselves, whatever they may be, are no fools, and it is
little likely that they would now be urging forward the
Nationalist cause with all their might and main unless they
knew perfectly well that Home Rule would give them still
fuller control of the lives and properties of the people.
In the next place, the Ulster people fear with good rea-
son that Home Rule would bring to a speedy end the pro-


sperity which they have built up by their industry and
character. They believe that their wealth and progress are
mainly due to the good government which they enjoy as
part of the United Kingdom. Here is a statement lately
made to Mr. Asquith by the Belfast Chamber of Com-
merce :?? With our firmly established position in the Em-
pire we are perfectly satisfied. The trade and commerce
of Ireland are hampered by no conditions which do not
equally affect every part of the United Kingdom. Indeed,
it is beyond controversy that, under the rule of the Im-
perial Parliament, the country as a whole has obtained
benefits and advantages which could never have been se-
cured under any Irish Government. Therefore, as patrio-
tic Irishmen, we protest against a change more than ever
uncalled for, and, as we believe, fraught with disaster to
our country ?a change under which the peculiar industrial
interests of the North of Ireland would be at the mercy
of a permanent majority with antagonistic ideals and me-
thods.? There can be no doubt that Home Rule would
give an immediate and violent shock to financial security
in Ireland. Credit is the first essential of prosperity, and
the ruin of business-credit, which would be the certain
result of Home Rule, would be fatal to commercial pro-
gress. To show that this is not mere conjecture, let me
give just one striking illustration. Since the Home Rule
Bill has been introduced Bank of Ireland stock has al-
ready fallen from 304 to 235, nearly 70 points.
Moreover, when we consider the antagonism that pre-
vails between the Protestants of the North and the Roman
Catholics of the rest of Ireland, we shall see that it is a
practical certainty that a Nationalist majority would en-
deavour to fix the main burden of taxation upon the in-
dustries of North-East Ulster. The Nationalist majority
would be almost entirely representative of the agricultural
interest, and to quote again from the appeal of the Belfast
Chamber of Commerce:?? Through the power of taxa-
tion the manufactures and commerce of Ireland would ne-


cessarily stand at the mercy of a majority having little
direct concern in the commercial interests so vitally af-
fected.?
But another reason, and a very strong reason, why the
people of Ulster are opposed to Home Rule is this; ? That
they violently resent the attempt to deprive them of their
birthright as citizens of the United Kingdom. They are
entirely satisfied with the present form of Government.
They are passionately loyal to the King and to the Em-
pire, and they refuse to be deprived of their British citi-
zenship and handed over to the tender mercies of men
who, when drinking healths, place the Pope before the
King, or, as sometimes happens in Melbourne, leave the
King out altogether, who hate the Empire, which they speak
of as England?s ? robber Empire,? who insult and spit
upon the British Flag on every possible occasion, who have
been placarding the walls through the length and breadth
of Ireland for the last few weeks with exhortations to
the people not to enlist in the Army and Navy, but ? to
let England?s cowardly and degenerate population fight
its own battles.?
Lastly, the people of Ulster have no kind of doubt that
Home Rule is only the first step to the complete separation
of Ireland from Britain, and to the establishment of an
Irish Republic. It does not suit the policy of the Nationa-
lists just now to admit the truth of this; but their leaders
have repeatedly announced separation as their ultimate aim
when speaking in public in America, and it was admittedly
the aim of their paymaster, the notorious Patrick Ford, the
dynamiter, from whom came by far the greater part of the
money by which the Home Rule agitation has been
kept alive. The Ancient Order of Hibernians is the most
powerful society in Ireland, It is purely Roman Catholic,
and violently anti-monarchical and anti-British. It dic-
tates the policy of the Nationalist members of Parliament.
This is a resolution that it passed last year:?? Nothing


less than absolute independence can ever be considered by
our race as a final settlement of the Irish question.?
Let me digress for a moment to deal with a very falla-
cious argument which is being worked for all it is worth
by the Nationalists both in Britain and here, in favour
of Home Rule, an argument against which you may need
to be put on your guard. It consists in an assumed analogy
between Ireland and the Dominions overseas; but the ana-
logy is even absurdly unsound and misleading. ? Why,?
ask the Nationalists, ? should not Ireland have Home Rule,
when it has been given to the Colonies?? But consider
just for a moment why was Home Rule desirable and in-
deed necessary for Australia and Canada. Simply and
solely because of their immense distance from the Mother-
land, and the consequent impossibility of administering re-
presentative government from London. Melbourne is sepa-
rated from London by a journey of thirty days, while Bri-
tain and Ireland are separated by a journey of less than
three hours. The analogy, you see, is absolutely, false.
Had Australia and Canada been as near Britain as Ireland
is, there would never have been any need and never any
demand for Home Rule, It is simply the distance from the
heart of the Empire that makes Home Rule for Australia
a necessity. Australia could, of course, have no represen-
tatives in the House of Commons, while Ireland has over
100.
The opposition of the men of Ulster to a Nationalist
Parliament is utterly different from the ordinary opposi-
tion to controversial legislation. It is something far greater,
far more vital, than any political or party difference. It
is part of their religion. Only those who have lived among
Ulstermen can have any idea of the depth of feeling which
underlies this movement. Let none make any mistake
about it. Any attempt to drive North-East Ulster out of
the Union by force would, beyond all manner of doubt,
result in terrible bloodshed, such as has not been known
in the United Kingdom since the rebellion of 1798, with


all its attendant horrors. My prediction, of course, counts
for little. But hear what an ex-Viceroy of Ireland, speak-
ing with all the weight of his great authority and expe-
rience (Lord Londonderry, of the family of the great
Castlereagh), said only some few weeks ago in the House
of Lords: ?? If Home Rule is granted, it is absolutely cer-
tain that there will be civil war in Ulster.?
Ulstermen are not children nor lunatics. They do not
delude themselves with a belief that they would be a match
for the British Army. Suppose, though it is scarcely con-
ceivable, that British soldiers could be got to shoot them
down. In that case no doubt Ulster could be crushed, as
Liberty has often been crushed before now; but at how
awful a cost to Ireland, to Britain, and to the Empire!
Would the Empire survive the shock? Some timid Union-
ists (for example, a writer in the ? Westminster Review ?
for July) deprecate the Ulster preparations for war, and
urge that Ulster should wait till she is actually oppressed
and persecuted; that she should meanwhile give Home
Rule a trial, and see whether the Nationalists will really
do what is feared; that, in short, the Protestants should
wait until they have been bled white by taxation, until
every Government office in the land is filled with men who
hate them and their race and creed, until it has been made
a criminal offence to enlist in the King?s forces, until the
whole control of education has passed into the hands of
the Roman Catholic priests, until the commercial credit
of North-East Ulster is destroyed and her industries dead.
Then it will be time enough, say these craven counsellors,
to make an appeal to the Imperial Parliament to interfere.
Those who give such counsel little understand the situa-
tion. They have a poor conception, we may add, of man-
hood at all, and display a strange ignorance of human na-
ture, and especially of Ulster nature. A fine chance Ul-
ster would have of getting her claims considered and re-
spected, when she had surrendered her weapons to John
Redmond?s agents, broken up her organisation, and parted


with every one of the advantages which she now possesses
for asserting her rights. Great memories exercise a mighty
force over a nation s destinies, and the Ulster nation to-day
remembers, and keeps repeating to herself as her motto,
the noble declaration of the commander of the Protestants
of Enniskillen in 1689. Many of you, I dare say, could
quote bis words. They are these? We stand upon
our guard, but do resolve by the blessing of God rather
tc go out to meet our danger than to await it.? Those men
kept their high resolve. They went out to meet their dan-
ger; they won the battle of Newtown Butler, and helped
to save Ireland for the Empire.
It was on the 28th of September, more than a year ago,
on what will be known for ever in British history as Ul-
ster Day, that Ulster?s Solemn League and Covenant was
signed. That Covenant commits our brethren to a tremen-
dous obligation. ?In the event of a Home Rule Parlia-
ment being forced upon us,? they say, ?w e solemnly and
mutually pledge ourselves to refuse to recognise its autho-
rity, and to use all means that may be found necessary to
defeat the present conspiracy, and in sure confidence that
God will defend the right, we subscribe our names.? It
has been said that the people of Ulster have been roused
to resist Home Rule simply by the violent language of the
Unionist party leaders. None who know Ulster at first
hand would treat such a suggestion with anything but
scorn. Among the first signatures to the Covenant are to
be found the names of the Dean of Belfast, the Moderator
of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of
Ireland, the Vice-President of the Methodist Conference,
all the Bishops of the Church of Ireland throughout the
province of Ulster, a number of members of the House of
Lords, including an ex-Viceroy, many retired officers of
the Army and Navy, among them Admiral Lord Charles
Beresford. Sir Edward Carson stated publicly a few weeks
ago that never a day passes that he does not receive at
least half a dozen fresh promises of support from British


officers. It is simply ludicrous to suppose that this class
of person could become the easy prey of self-seeking agita-
tors.
Many attempts are being made to throw dust in the
eyes of the public about this Ulster question. The case for
the Ulster Unionists is so transparently just and reason-
able that, unless by cloaking the real issues and mislead-
ing the British public by falsehood and chicanery, the Bill
would never have the faintest chance of becoming law. By
a wicked perversion of the truth, British Cabinet Minis-
ters are charging the Ulster Unionists with preventing the
Roman Catholic Irish of the rest of Ireland from obtain-
ing their national rights. The charge is absolutely false.
They are doing nothing of the kind. North-East Ulster,
because she does not believe it, refuses to say that Home
Rule will be good for the rest of Ireland; but Ulster will
not offer any resistance by force to the establishment of a
Dublin Parliament for the South and West of Ireland. All
that she will resist is the tyrannically unjust and utterly
undemocratic policy of forcing free men to resign their
British citizenship and surrender to the domination of an
anti-British, anti-imperial, overwhelmingly Roman Catho-
lic Parliament in Dublin.
What kind of moral or constitutional right has any Min-
ister or any Parliament to expel a body of loyal and law-
abiding citizens from their British citizenship, and to com-
mand them, under penalty of being shot or bayonetted, to
transfer their allegiance to another ?and that an anti-Bri-
tish and anti-imperial?Government? No greater outrage
was ever perpetrated in the name of Liberty. What would
the people of Yorkshire say if they were told that for the
good of the community they must transfer their allegiance
from the Parliament of the United Kingdom to a Parlia-
ment wholly dominated by the Church of Rome and by
virulent enemies of Britain and the Empire? Would they
submit? I think they would very soon sign a Covenant,
and begin looking to the sights of their rifles.


Is not Ulster?s contention just and reasonable? The prin-
ciple at the root of the Home Rule Bill is not a sound prin-
ciple, it is not a safe principle, it is not one universally
applicable; but it is at any rate intelligible, and it is this: ?
That any united group of people within the United King-
dom, if of fairly considerable extent, has a right to de-
mand the form of Government which they desire. It is
in the strength of that principle that the Nationalist Irish,
through their eighty-four members, demand Home Rule.
Well, exactly on the same principle Ulster Unionists de-
mand that they shall be excluded from the Bill. Them
claim is at least as just as that of the Irish Nationalists.
North-East Ulster contains the most compact, united, and
homogeneous community in Ireland. It is admittedly the
most highly civilised, the best educated, the most enter-
prising and progressive, and the most generally capable
group of people in the country. ? Oh! but,? cries Mr As-
quith, ? the. majority in a nation must rule.? But we re-
ply, ? Ireland is not a nation. Ireland is occupied by two
perfectly distinct nations, marked by the strongest poss : ble
contrasts with each other, in race, religion, occupation, and
political ideals.? And, this being so, obviously the Union
is the only hope of Unity. As Mr. Monypenny says, ? In-
stead of placing the power of Great Britain at the disposal
of either Irish Nation for the subjugation of the other,
as was and would be the effect of Home Rule, it is Bri-
tish influence that neutralises their antagonism, and so en-
ables them to live together in tolerable and ever-increasing
amity and peace.? What is the answer to all this? ? Oh!?
cries Mr. Asquith, ? Ireland is an island, and therefore
must contain only one Government.? What flagrant dis-
honesty ! Great Britain is also an island, and yet within
that island Mr. Asquith proposes to recognise the nationa-
lities of Wales and Scotland, though there is far less con-
trast between them and England than there is between Ul-
ster and Southern Ireland. If an attempt be made by the
Roman Catholic Irish to coerce Ulster into obedience to


a Dublin Parliament, civil war is a certainty. It will also
be a war of a peculiarly bitter and ferocious kind, for, like
the rebellion of 1798, which began as a political struggle,
it will very soon resolve itself into a religious war, and
what that would mean in Ireland is too terrible to con-
template, Those who have read of the horrors of Dro-
gheda, of Scullabogue, and of Wexford Bridge can imagine
what it would mean.
But the point of most pressing interest to us here to-
night, as Protestants and as loyal subjects of the King and
of the Empire, keenly interested in all that concerns the
well-being of the United Kingdom, is this; ?What can we
do and what ought we to do to help our brethren at this
time of their direst need? I want you all to think over
this, and decide what answer is to be made to these ques-
tions. It is absurd to contend that under no circumstances
are citizens justified in armed resistance. Had that prin-
ciple always been acted upon, there would be no such thing
as constitutional government now, there would be no Bri-
tish Empire, and the British Flag would not wave over
Australia.
The coercion of Ulster would be one of the greatest
blunders and one of the worst crimes ever committed by a
civilised State. It is not at all unlikely that it might in-
volve the ruin of the Empire.
?What answer from the North?
One land, one law, one throne.
If England drives us forth,
We shall not fall alone.?
/d BKOWH, PRIOR I. CO, tX
Vb if-tn queen k Melbourne,cl/
