

_ B (o
cue,
William lane.
Born September 6th, 1861.
Died August 26th, 1917.
The following biographical and appreciative articles on
the late Mr. William Lane are reprinted from the New
Zealand Herald.
account here given of Mr. Lane’s life and work
will be valued by all who recognised his outstanding ability,
admired his force of character, and esteemed him for his
rare human qualities.
This pamphlet is published in order to place on record
ireer of a very striking figure in Colonial journalism.
the career of a very strik
Auckland, New Zealand,
September I st, 1917.


THE LATE MR. WILLIAM LANE.
All readers of the Herald will join
with the proprietors and staff in
deep regret at the death of Mr.
William Lane, editor of this journal.
The late Mr. Lane had a strenuous
and remarkable life. A journalist
of outstanding ability, he practised
his profession successfully in
Canada, America, Australia, and
New Zealand. The last 17 years he
spent on the New Zealand Herald
and the last four years as editor.
Mr. Lane was a man of high ideals
and great force of character.
Whatever he undertook he did with
ah his might, and nothing that he
could personally sacrifice ever stood
in the way of the attainment of his
purpose. Love of country was a
passion with him. It was he who
first suggested the formation of the
National Defence League, a body
that was afterwards able to claim
that it had aroused in New Zealand
a public opinion sufficiently strong
t~> justify the adoption of universal
military training. Since the out-
break of war in 1914, Mr. Lane’s
efforts have been mainly directed to
keeping before the public the real
meaning of German militarism and
the danger of any relaxation of
allied effort. He never under-
estimated the seriousness of the
conflict, but with optimistic vision
he looked forward to the end of the
war as the dawn of a new and
brighter day for humanity. He took
a leading part in establishing the
Auckland Soldiers’ Club, and has
never ceased to take a close personal
interest in it. Through his whole
life he worked unselfishly for the
good of others, and the community
in which he lived is poorer by his
death. This journal has lost an
able editor and the country a great
Imperialist.


The death of Mr. William Lane, editor
of the New Zealand Herald, took place
at Epsom, Auckland, on August 26,
after a very brief illness. Mr. Lane
had throughout his life enjoyed ex-
cellent health. He was at work in the
Herald Office on Friday night, August
17, but on the following evening he had
a slight attack of bronchitis, and before
morning medical aid was sought. An ex-
amination then held revealed a weakness
of the heart. On Wednesday his condition
appeared more serious, and Dr. Mackellar
was called in for consultation with
Dr. Pabst. For the remainder of the
week he was never out of danger, and
death occurred early yesterday morning.
Born in Bristol on September 6, 1861,
Mr. Lane had almost completed his 56th
year. He was educated at the Bristol
Grammar School, and there gave early
promise of a remarkable life that was
in front of him. At the age of 14 he
went to Canada alone, and had a hard
struggle in the northern provinces before
he found his true vocation in a newspaper
office. He began newspaper life as a com-
positor, but before he was 20 years of
age his literary ability had attracted at-
tention. He was engaged in journalism in
Canada and the United States for a few
years, and in the late eighties came to
Australia. Almost immediately he made
a mark in the newspaper world of
Brisbane, and very soon his de-
scriptive writing was known throughout
Australia. He contributed to most of the
leading Australian newspapers and re-
views, but was most intimately associated
with the Brisbane Courier. He left the
Courier to edit a weekly journal, the
Boomerang, of which he was part
proprietor. Later he disposed of his
interest in this property to the
late Mr. Gresley Lukin, subsequently
editor of the Evening Post, Wellington.
Mr. Lane then established the Queens-
land Worker, the first Labour paper in
Australia. He had then abundant oppor-
tunities in daily journalism, but his
course was decided by his sympathy for
those less fortunate than himself, and he
preferred the editorship of the Worker at
a workman’s wages to the lucrative em-
ployment he could command. He edited
the Worker for the first few months of
its existence, and from this time onward
he became very prominently identified
with Australian Labour organisations.
Shortly after the great maritime strike
the “New Australia” movement, of which
Mr. Lane was the founder and leader,
took shape. Mr. Lane’s plan was to estab-
lish an ideal State in the form of a com-
munistic co-operative commonwealth. He
conducted a recruiting campaign through-
out Australia, and sent forth three
trusted agents, Messrs. Walker, Leek
and Saunders, to select a site
for the new and novel settlement. They
went to South America, and chose a
tract of fertile country in Paraguay. The
Paraguayan Government agreed to hand
a hundred leagues of land to the “ New
Australia ” Association free of all charges,
and to grant local autonomy, the associa-
tion, in turn, being required to establish
800 families upon the land within four
years. Since equality was the essence of
Mr. Lane’s scheme, it was ordained that
every man who joined the association
should put all his means into the com-
mon treasury. Mr. Lane himself proved
his own belief in the movement by throw-
ing in his savings from many years of
arduous labour. On July 16, 1893, the
first band of “New Australians’" left
Sydney in the ship Royal Tar, which
arrived at Monte Video on August 31.


The second batch followed. The failure
of the scheme that was so dear to
Mr. Lane’s heart is a matter of history.
Human nature asserted itself, and
although he faithfully strove to achieve
his cherished aim, his followers one by
one became discontented. In 1894 he re-
signed the chairmanship of New Australia
and established a new settlement at Cosine,
and he remained in charge of this for four or
five years. But in 1899 he left Paraguay
never to return. A large number of the
original immigrants remain, but the
settlements soon drifted away from Mr.
Lane’s ideal and have since been con-
ducted on ordinary individualistic lines.
Many- of the settlers have thrived and
prospered, and to-day several members of
the younger male generation are fighting
for the Empire on the battlefields of
Europe.
Soon after leaving Paraguay Mr. Lane
came to New Zealand and joined the staff
of the New Zealand Heeald as leader-
writer. In a few months he resigned this
position for another experiment in Labour
journalism. He undertook to re-establish
the New South Wales Worker, and went
to Sydney for that purpose. After a short
experience he found that his ardent
Imperialism was not acceptable to his
associates, and a breach with the Labour
representatives controlling the Worker re-
sulted. This ended his intimate associa-
tion with the Labour politics of Australia,
although to the end of his life he had
many warm friends and admirers among
the patriotic section of the Labour poli-
ticians of Australia.
Mr. Lane returned to Auckland in 1900,
and rejoined the staff of the Heeald.
He was leader-writer until October, 1913,
when, upon the death of the late Mr. W.
S. Douglas he was appointed to the
editorship, a position which he held until
the time of his death.
Throughout his life Mr. Lane was a
strong and consistent supporter of every
Empire movement. His articles on all
British Empire topics attracted attention
far beyond New Zealand. This was true
throughout his life, but particularly dur-
ing the present war, when he felt that
every man was called upon to give to
liis country the best that was in him.
No man in NeW Zealand has done more
than Mr. Lane to stimulate the loyalty
of New Zealand towards the Mother
Country during the great war. The Na-
tional Defence League, which was founded
in 1906, and which paved the way for the
successful adoption of universal training
in New Zealand, originated in his brain.
He worked for it, and gave to it in a way
that was characteristic of . him whenever
he felt that an object was worth striving
for. He was one of the original promoters
of the Auckland Soldiers’ Club. He was
also one of the first vice-presidents of the
Returned Soldiers’ Association, in which
he held honorary office up to the time of
Iris death.
Mr. Lane was an exceptionally versatile
writer. His articles under the pen name
“ Tohunga,” which have appeared regu-
larly in Saturday’s Supplement since he
joined the staff of the Heeald, have
made him the weekly companion and
friend of many who never had the
pleasure of his personal acquaintance.
He was a master of the English language,
with a full store of the wisdom to be
gathered from choice books, and a keen
intuitive knowledge of human nature. It
was the combination of qualities that
•enabled him to write for, and hold the
attention of, a public much wider than
the merely clever writer can reach. The
educated appreciated his articles, the
simplest could understand and enjoy
them. He could always put into his
work that touch of nature which makes
the whole world kin.
Mr. Lane married early in life, in
Canada. His wife, who was of Scottish
birth, survives him, with a family of six.
The elder son, Corporal Donald B. Lane,
joined the New Zealand Expeditionary
Force immediately on the outbreak of war,
and was among the killed on the day of
the landing on Gallipoli. The younger
son, Trooper William R. Lane, is now on
his way to the front. There are five
daughters—Mrs. Rohan, wife of Lieu-
tenant M. D. Rohan, and Misses Nellie,
Phyllis, Joyce, and Lorna Lane.
4


MEMORIES OF “TOHUNGA.”
AN APPRECIATION.
By an Old Friend
[From the N.Z. HERALD Supplement.]
Foe many years the articles by “Tohunga”
appearing in this column have been read
and admired by a very wide section of the
public. Their infinite variety; their high
literary style; their art and their tender-
ness have given them a peculiar distinc-
tion, whilst their great range of thought;
the subtle human sympathy; the varied
knowledge they have displayed have indi-
cated that the mind of the writer stood
high above the general level. Thousands
of people in the course of,time have won-
dered what “ Tohunga’s ” real name was,
and what he was like in real life. His
identity need no longer be concealed.
“ Tohunga ” was William Lane, that bril-
liant and versatile journalist whose sudden
death last week caused such widespread
and sincere grief.
William Lane in his time wrote many
things under many noms de plume, besides
a vast number of splendid essays under the
anonymity. of the professional leader-
writer, but I doubt whether at any time
he ever revealed so much of his real self
as he did when at his best in this column.
Yet, after all, how very little does a deep
strong mind reveal itself to the public!
Those who knew only “Tohunga’s” writ-
ings only knew a tiny side of William
Lane’s many-sided character.
I first became acquainted with Lane
in the early nineties, when he flashed
like a fiery meteor across the stormy sky
of Australian labour politics. I realised
then, as many of his intimate friends
realised, that had he chosen more selfish
paths he could have won to the highest
position that the nation could offer. I
corresponded regularly with him whilst he
struggled so gallantly against such great
odds to establish his ideal co-operative
commonwealth in Paraguay, and I was
convinced, as were all who knew the real
history of the New Australia and the
Colonia Cosme settlements, that Lane
failed in those ambitious schemes not be-
cause of any fault of his hut simply be-
cause human beings had not developed
sufficiently to live up to their highest
conceptions of social organisation.
Lane’s Fine Character.
Much has been written about this great
attempt to found a new and better form
of society, and for the most part the
various criticisms have failed to compre-
hend the real ideals which Lane had in
his mind, and in most cases the writers
have approached the subject from the most
antagonistic side, but even looking upon
the New Australia scheme in its worsi
aspect, fair-minded men cannot fail to
recognise that it was wonderfully bold in
conception, and carjried out with tre-
mendous vigour and resolution.
For the last 18 years I have. been more
or Jess in intimate, almost daily, touch
with him, and nothing has ever
lessened my estimation of his great
intellectual capacities and the general
capabilities of the man. I know
that had he followed the paths that led
to self-benefit and self-advertisement he
could have won great wealth or. great
political power, but he followed a nobler
path. He gave always of his best to
humanity; to his country. No man was
more unselfish, none more generous. He
distributed freely with both hands money,
help, work, sympathy and kindness. The
worldly may count him unwise in, this,
but those who know the place he. holds in
the minds and the memories of people
know the real reward he won. He was
rich in that he found an everlasting joy
5


in life, in the beauties of nature, in ap-
preciation of art and literature. He loved
pictures and fine craft of all kinds, and
had rare intuition in recognising their
goodness or truth. He loved good books,
and few men have ever read so widely or
remembered so well the best of what they
read as he. His aptitude for quotation
was remarkable, but it was more than his
memory of books which made his conver-
sation so rich and so delightful. He had
imagination which enabled him to follow
new ideas to far and wonderful lengths
One knew him and saw him constantly
many times a week for many years, and
found him fresh and interesting always.
He never accepted a commonplace remark,
never made one. He analysed what one
said and presented a new light on it,
as if the originality were one’s own
He could be fierce and powerful in argu-
ment, and though he would denounce
meanness or pretence with destructive
vehemence he would never intentionally
say a word that hurt or wounded, and if
by chance he left an opponent sore he
would take infinite pains to soothe or
make amends.
A Man Men Loved
To me, what stood out most strikingly
in Lane’s strong personality was his love-
ableness, his innate kindness, his tender-
ness. 1 know that there are turbulent
bushmen and hardy workers who will
break down and weep unashamedly when
they hear of Lane’s death, because of
this in him; there are hardened politicians
whose voices will grow husky; there are
soldiers at the front who will bend their
heads even in battle to his memory. I
have met many men in all classes of life
who knew Lane well, and scarce one of
them but showed a real affection for him.
This was due not to his great intellec-
tual abilities, but to the love he inspired.
Lane could talk on terms of equality
with the greatest in the land, but a work-
man the wharf, a sailor, or a bush-
man, could hold his attention just as well,
and for all he had endless stories and
jokes and wonderfully infectious laughter.
His love for children was boundless, and
they came to him freely and gladly.
Almost the last remark he made in my
hearing was when his little god-daughter
toddled toward him; he said, “The
mystery of a little entity like that walking
into the world always amazes me.” It
was strength and not sentimental weak-
ness which gave this curious touch of
tenderness to Lane’s nature. He was
innately bold and resolute, and full of the
spirit of adventure. To the last he loved
riding and swimming, and had performed
great feats in both these exercises. The
story of his swimming through a dangerous
rapid in a Canadian river is well known,
and the long journeys he made on horse-
back in Australia and in Paraguay are
still remembered.
Lane loved the country and the sea.
He never forgot those holiday camps of
his on the Queensland beaches, and when-
ever he could spare a few days he would
gravitate toward salt water. He was
specially fond of the Auckland tidal creeks,
and one of his favourite haunts was an
orchard by an arm of the Waitemata
Harbour. There was a particularly shady
and sheltered avenue, bordering an
orchard, which sloped down to tidal
waters. I have sat with him many an
hour there, and listened to his unrivalled
talk.
In later years, when the more absorbing
claims of editorial duties forced him more
closely to office work, I saw much of
him, and I know well what an influence
for good he exercised over all those who
came under his control. Newspaper staffs
are notoriously difficult to handle. Lane
handled his men with the lightest touch.
From the message boys and the junior re-
porters to the heads of the composing
floor and the lino, room, Lane won loyal
devotion and good work, and gave in re-
turn splendid friendship and sympathy. I
do not think there was ever such a united
and pleasant great newspaper office as
that with Lane as its literary head.
Much more could be written about this
truly remarkable man, and no doubt will
be written, but this may be concluded
with the few- lines written by one of his
sincerest admirers ;—“ Great-hearted and
strong of purpose, passionate patriot, and
staunchest friend, he lived for others,
giving, not taking, and in humanity s
cause he never faltered.”


“LOOKING BACKWARDS.”
‘ NEW AUSTRALIA” RECALLED.
By Thos
Twenty-four years, with all their fulness
of event, are swept away by one glance
at a printed line. On the morning of
July 15, 1893, I sat in a skiff on the
gently heaving waters of Sydney Harbour,
participating in the send-off to the Royal
Tar, which was conveying the first con-
tingent of “New Australia” settlers to
Paraguay.
My business was to chronicle the inci-
dents as special reporter of the Sydney
Daily Telegraph. The occasion had par-
ticular interest for newspaper men, inas-
much as the leader of the expedition was
a journalist, whom recent events had made
well-known. William Lane, of the Queens-
land Worker, had carried the fiery cross
of his political creed to most inhabited
parts of Australia, and had touched the
hearts and imagination of many. The
spirit of adventure, the desire for change
—change of any kind —regulated the heart
throbs of a large percentage of any Eng-
lish-speaking community. And the time
was ripe for adventure. And for change.
It was William Lane who sounded the
tocsin for a breakaway from established
conditions. His magnetic manifestoes
were known throughout Australia prior to
and during the great bush-workers’ and
maritime strikes of 1890. Those who did
not approve of them admitted their lift-
ing power when applied to the proletariat.
The strikes were fought with the utmost
desperation, and ended against the
strikers. Eventually the industrial dis-
turbances were ended, but peace did
not reign. The main body of Labour
set out earnestly to follow the advice
given in the Sydney dailies: “You
all have the vote,” said the papers; “if
you are not satisfied with the laws as they
are put representatives into Parliament
Roydhouse.
to alter them.” At the next general elec-
tion after the great strikes the first Labour
Party in any Parliament in the world was
returned to the New South Wales As-
sembly. It was my task to write the
biographies of that body (quite thirty
strong), and that information, together
with the aims of the party, and the his-
tory of its first session, was embodied in
a book brought out by Swann Sonnes-
chein, of London.
The “ New Australia” Plan.
William Lane’s name will not be found
in that compilation, though he was cer-
tainly the biggest Labour figure of his
time. The political Labour movement had
no great attraction for him, for the reason
that he believed that ordinary means
would not suffice to bring about perman-
ent content. “ Progress and Poverty,”
“ Looking Backward,” “ Caesar’s Column,’ v
had stimulated many minds during the
immediately preceding years; and to these
the necessarily slow processes of evolution
and reform per medium of the Parlia-
mentary machine did not appeal. They
wmnted to go in one bound to the solution
of the great problem of the period.
William Lane announced his plan of
“a New Australia in another land,” where
all should be equal, and ideal conditions
generally prevail. His immediate sup-
porters revelled in the details of the
scheme, and soon all Australia was made
acquainted with it. It was thought that
it “would not come to a head.” But
those who held to this belief did not
know Lane. He wrote with a magic pen,
and “ ink of the heart,” and from all
over Australia came enthusiastic responses.
Men of the bush and the cities—men with
families as well as irresponsible bachelors
—took his hand, and said, “We are


with you; to the uttermost ends of the
earth if need be !”
Great Tribute to a Great Man.
It was a great tribute to a great man.
All the greater in that the plan would
not stand analysis. It was just a dream;
a grand dream, but one quite impossible
of realisation, for a reason which William
Lane discovered too late. Nevertheless,
these men backed it. And it was no mere
backing of words. All who booked for
New Australia had to throw in the whole
of their possessions, and make them the
common property of the new colony. No
ordinary man could have inspired this en-
thusiasm. And Lane was no .ordinary
man. Many men less able have held the
reins of Government. Many less worthy.
His writing was the great lever. His
words, though on paper, were alive. You
read the printed page, and as you read
you heard the voice, vibrant, inspiring,
convincing.
So men threw in their all, and that
was how it was that on that sunny morn-
ing of July 16, 1893, I sat in my skiff
by the side of the Eoyal Tar, and noted
the passengers as they chatted and joked
with their friends in many boats gathered
round the ship.
They were to sail on an uncomfortable
six-weeks’ trip to an unknown land be-
cause one man had told them that it
would be a good thing to do. He did
more than stir their imagination; he com-
manded their confidence. They trusted
William Lane. And he proved that he
merited that confidence. Through all the
dark days that followed —the days of dis-
illusionment —he held the respect of those
whose good opinion was worth having.
He was wrong, but he was straight. And
no straight man ever doubted him.
An Experience and the Sequel.
There was no need to leave Australia.
In no land in the world is there the real
freedom, all the safeguards for all, that
exist in the countries where the Union
Jack flies. That William Lane learned to
the full. There were opportunities for
all in the great island continent. But
the dream had been dreamed. The pot
of gold had to be sought at the foot of
the distant rainbow.
No need here to go into details of the
failure. The leader was sound, but bis
material was faulty. (As any other con-
tingent of men and women would be
proved if taken on a similar quest.) There
were jealousies and complaints. Most of
the men found that they did not want
to be equals, but “bosses.” There had
to be rules and laws, and rules and laws
were irksome.
So the plans of rose and gilt had but
a drear drab end.
Any other man would have been crushed
by such an experience; would have gone
down never to rise again. Not so Wil-
liam Lane. The tale of wasted years was
a bitter bite from a span of life all too
short. But Lane emerged a bigger man
as a result of that experience. He still
had confidence in his kind, but a fuller
knowledge of human frailties and incon-
sistencies. And that knowledge made his
later writing the more powerful, the more
valuable to the community in which he
subsequently found himself.
There is no need for me to say that
the old magnetism remained to him.
Those who read his patriotic editorials,
and his bright, forceful “ Tohunga” ar-
ticles, will agree with me that in those,
as in his Queensland manifestoes, the in-
spiring voice could h heard a- the
printed words were absorbed. From time
to time we have authorities tell us that
there is a lamentable loss of verve as
great thoughts are committed to cold
type. But it was not so with William
Lane, either in the beginning or later.
The reason is a very simple one. He was
a man of soul. And in the end that is
all that counts.
He was a man who tried to help his
fellow men. There was failure; but it
was theirs rather than his. And always
to his credit must be counted the Great
Endeavour. It is more than twenty-four
years since I lay alongside the Royal Tar
as she prepared to start on her long voy-
age. There come back to me the cheery
optimism of the adventurers; their declar-
ations of absolute confidence. And I
mentally visualise the alert figure, the
bright inspiring face of the leader, as he
gave his farewell message through the
press. Under other conditions he would
have made fairer history, greater history.
For he was a leader. More, in the best,
fullest sense of the word, he was a man.
Extracted from “New Zealand Herald” and printed by Wilson and Horton, Auckland.
8
