

HUTCHINSON, William (1772-18146) pioneer settler, banker and govern-
ment official, arrived in New South Wales on the Hillsborough 26 July-
-1798 on a seven year sentence of transportation having been convicted
of stealing in London two years before. Convicted of theft in the colony
he was sent to Norfolk Island where his long career as a hard working
public servant began. In June 1803 Colonel Foveaux, in charge of the
settlement, appointed him as an acting superintendent. He was already
an overseer of government stock. Hutchinson held this position next
under Captain Piper, Macquarie appointed him to complete the evacuation
of the island, a task which he performed ably enough to secure on 9 April
181 U the post of Principal Superintendent of Convicts, upon the recommen-
dation of Foveaux following the previous resignation of Isaac Nichols,
Earl Bathurst, then in charge of the colonial affairs, was greatly im-
pressed with "the conduct of William Hutchinson" in bringing the stores
and remaining people back to Sydney, As Principal Superintendent he
exercised considerable influence in inspecting, assigning and supplying
convicts to both government projects and private settlers. He was also
in charge of Public Works. When Commissioner Bigge arrived he was getting
a salary of t 75 a year and the services of two government men. In
addition, he was named Principal Wharfinger in 1817. Because of declining
health he asked to be relieved as Principal Superintendent and as Whar-
finger, being replaced in the former by F,A, Hely in lB2ii and the latter
in 1827• In 1829 Governor Darling, observing that his sentence had
expired twenty-six years previously, recommended that Hutchinson be
given either a pension or grant* The council awarded 1920 acres for
past public services


In his public capacity he emerged as the colony’s first banker#
He held the money of arriving prisoners in safe custody until they
secured permission to receive their valuables and also kept money for
people upon request. He was an active participant in the formation of
the Bank of New South Wales, attending its proprietor meetings and
serving several terms as a bank director between 1828 and 18U6, In the
former year he won a seat on the directory by a vote of 351 to nineteen,
the largest majority given the candidates in that ballot. In that year
he was backed by both Lyons and Savage# The men he helped back secured
seats in 1829# 1830, 1831 and 1832* He was a man talented in money
affairs and previously a backer of a move to reduce the bank’s rate of
discounting from a high ten percent to a more reasonable eight percent.
His prestige as a banker was so high that he arrived at a meeting in
lBUi with some 350 proxies, enough to have swamped the meeting of the
proprietors #
As a businessman he was a holder of considerable property and active
in a number of firms. In 1819 he was a partner with Edward Eagar, Francis
Forbes and William Redfern in a commercial undertaking managed by Eagar
until he departed for England, Under Forbes certain questionable trans-
actions ruined the company and ended the copartnership in 102 U after
Hutchinson secured the brig Governor Macquarie, Four years previously
he operated a flour mill and was an active partner of the firm Hutch-
inson, Terry and Company, then owners of the Waterloo property. After
Terry left the company Cooper and Levy agreed to indemnify Hutchinson
for L 5000,
Hutchinson was already a large and respectable landholder as
well as a farmer and pastoralist, Bigge observed that he owned li*oo


acres and 200 head of cattle* Forty acres had been cleared* More land
was acquired through purchase from small settlers, as a means of paying
off debts and through grants* In 1837 he owned 2165 acres at Burra in
Murray county which had been procured that year* Hutchinson operated
another successful farm near Moss Vale* He held properties in East Bargo,
Mittagong, Sutton, Bong Bong and Parish* In addition, he was owner of
houses and lots on Pitt Street, Fort Street, King Street, Campbell Street,
Bent Street, Macquarie Street, George Street and Sussex Street, not to
mention others in Liverpool, Parramatta, Melbourne and a number of rural
properties*
Still he found time to engage in other business pursuits. In 1835
he was elected as a director of the Marine Assurance Company which had
been established in 1831* He was still listed as a director in 1839#
In addition, he was a director along with Simeon Lord in the Australian
Wheat Company and in 181*0 was an initiator of the Mutual Fire Insurance,
being on its provisional committee* The objective was to secure reciprocal
indemnification from loss by fire* Hutchinson and William Bland were
among those named to form a directory* Hutchinson himself was insured
at & 10,003*
By then William Hutchinson was a well known public figure, an active
participant in philanthropic movements and a man of considerable politi-
cal significance* He was active on the committee in charge of the Sydney
Public Free Grammar School and in the Sydney College as a contributor
and member. By the twenties he had emerged as a leader in the movement
to secure divil rights* He was frequently a signer of petitions re**
questing public meetings in Sydney as irell as an active member of the


dinners held in an annual celebration of the founding of the colony.
His name appeared on numerous committees appointed to present petitions
and to welcome officials. In 1827 he backed requests for trial by jury
and assembly and three years later took part in the preliminary meeting
at Jamison ! s home* In 1833 he was named to a committee charged with
forwarding a petition for an assembly and in the same year joined with
other leading merchants and settlers to protest the way colonial funds
were being spent for services rendered elsewhere. As a landholder he
was interested in the question of how the proceeds of land sales were
utilized. In 1835 he was named to a committee designated to draw up
a bill to establish a city government in Sydney to care for paving, lights
and other necessities.
Less known but rather significant was his participation in the
forming and operation of the Australian Patriotic Association having
been named to its provisional committee in 1835 and elected to its
directing committee the following year. His reputation was reputable
enough to be presented to the governor on the Queen f s birthday in 1839,
He was still attending various public gatherings in 18U2 when he opposed
the then proposed municipal hill.
When he died at the age of seventy-three in 16U6 he left behind
numerous properties and a large family. In June 1801 he had married
his first wife Mary Cooper, alias Chapman, who had arrived as a four-
teen year transportee on the Britannia, having been convicted in Surrey
in 1797, It was an affair of misfortune though they did have eight
children. In 1825 he married Jane Roberts, widow of an early successful
pioneer emancipist but this marriage also failed. She died in 1836,


One of his daughters married a son of the first postmaster Isaac Nichols,
while he himself was an in-law of the noted emancipist Solomon Levy. One
of his sons moved to New Zealand.
Though his fame rests upon his long earlier career as Principal
Superintendent of Convicts and as a close associate and confident of
the fiery Governor Macquarie he rose to even greater heights of signifi-
cance through his successful enterprises as a businessman and as a banker
of skill* But equally important was his constant activity in backing the
emancipists rights and in demanding trial by jury and a representative
assembly* His name frequently appeared on influential committees whether
directed towards political gain, economic interest or philanthropic
endeavors* He would have to be listed as one of the most extraordinary
emancipists and pioneers.
Norton, Smith and Company, Hutchinson Estate Box 31* lUi; New South
Wales Governor Despatches A 1205$ Extracts from the Minutes of the Bank
of New South Wales supplied by the Archivist Patricia Quinns The Australian
1828-$ Sydney Gazette.
