





/o^\
' '
WILLIAM MACQUARIE CiS/PER/
M
FIRST DEAN OF SYDNEY. '.T' jjr
IT is felt to be due to the numerous friends who
inquired day after day during the Dean’s illness,
to the many who, with loving consideration, only
inquired from others, and to the larger number at a
distance, that a brief authentic account should be
published of the “passing away” of our beloved Dean.
If this should be the means of strengthening the
faith of one pilgrim while passing “through the valley
of the shadow,” or of leading one wanderer into the
path of peace, we feel its publication would have been
the desire of the Dean himself.
For several years the weak condition of the Dean’s
heart was such that members of his household were
aware that at any hour the call Home might come to
him. The last thing to be expected was a lengthened
illness. However, such was God’s way of leading him,
and of thereby teaching to those around him many
precious lessons, and of shewing the depth and reality
of his religious character.


His “passing” was no triumphant entry of a
victorious warrior. Rather was it that of a tired
worker, lying down to rest. The leading thought to
those who watched him was repose —peace —waiting.
On Christmas Day, 1901, the Dean officiated for the
last time in his beloved Cathedral, at the Holy Com-
munion. This was the only service in which his im-
paired sight allowed him to take part. He felt
ailing on that day, but joined the family circle as
brightly as usual. An attack of muscular rheumatism
had begun, but he was well enough on January 3rd
to pay a long-promised visit to the new S. Philip’s
Rectory. He gave the greeting of “Peace” to the
household there, and before leaving gathered them
around him in prayer for a blessing upon the “home
and on the Diocese.” He greatly enjoyed this revival
of old memories; it was the last time he went beyond
his own doors.
A few days later, rheumatism had so weakened him
that during one day his doctor thought the end had
come. He, however, rallied, and was again able to
be up daily, but those around him realised that he
would not regain strength. Gradually he had to give
up moving from his bed to the couch, and owing to
increased weakness, and to the rheumatism which had
now settled in his joints, he was compelled for about
three months to lie still in one position. So patient
was he that only at times did one remember that
the position was not voluntary. “Are you com-


fortable?” he was once asked. With a quiet smile, he
peplied, “As much as I can be, in a vice!” Later the
rheumatism ceased, and only weakness remained.
His heart was in fact kept at work only by his entire
calmness and repose of position.
INCREASING WEAKNESS.
The heat of March 18th, and again of the following
week greatly exhausted him, and from that time he
had no power of rallying, but the process was so
gradual, that only a comparison of one length of time
with another made the failure of strength perceptible.
He himself scarcely alluded to it. Only once or twice
did he speak of dying at all; once he asked the date,
and said, “I do not think it possible that I should live
for my birthday” (July 3rd.)
During Holy Week, Eastertide, and succeeding
days, he seemed at the lowest ebb, for many hours
lying unconscious, but rousing at times for a clear
interval, during one of which he sent a message to the
Cathedral congregation on Easter Day. “My love,
and wish them a happy, peaceful Easter,” and “God
forgive us all —God bless us all-God sanctify us all.”
Once, during the evening of Ascension Day, it seemed
as though he had actually ceased to breathe, and
frequently about this time those at his bedside watched,
especially towards dawn, to see if he were really
breathing. Again and again his pulse could scarcely
be felt.


NO EARTHLY CARE.
Throughout his illness he had no earthly care or
anxiety whatever. Once he was thought to be allud-
ing to some business, but when questioned, he replied,
“That was all settled, was it not?” His last act of
signature, and the last letter written by his own hand,
related to the removal of Broughton Chapel to the
present Moore College, in which he, as first Principal,
and Trustee, was deeply interested.
INTEREST IN CURRENT EVENTS.
Until he became too weak, his interest in current
events was thoroughly maintained. He rejoiced in
the appointment to the Gouburn Bishopric, heard
about the approaching Coronation, and was pleased to
learn of the donations of Mr. Cecil Rhodes to his own
University of Oxford. He inquired about the
progress of the war in South Africa —indeed his last
outside interest was the Proclamation of Peace. He
asked particularly about the Cathedral Services of
Thanksgiving for Peace, and when half conscious
murmured, “I must go in to the Service.” He
received many messages which touched him greatly.
These were always given him when fully conscious,
after a restful sleep. One of the last of such was that
from the Presbyterian Assembly. He spoke also of
changes and plans in the Diocese or District, sending
a special message to the Sunday School, “God bless
the teachers and taught—make you listen meekly to


His word for the salvation of your souls.” “God
bless the District and all the people, God bless you
all” “Bless the Diocese, give more of the Spirit.”
“My love to the choir boys.” Later he became too
weak, and his hearing too dull to take in more than
the old familiar words of Holy Scripture, Prayer
Book, or Hymns, and of these he never wearied, day
or night.
RESTLESS NIGHTS.
For many weeks, shortly after he was entirely con-
fined to bed, he was so frequently delirious at night that
the doctor forbade any but a very few to enter the
sick room during the day. The fancies —during
which he recognised no one —were of a most varied
character. He would imagine he was taking long
bush journeys of sixty years ago; Stroud, Bathurst
and Liverpool all crowded in his mind. “I have been
such a long journey, please let me get home!” “ I
am so tired; we shall be late; are the horses ready?
I must get home; please ask the crowd to move.”
At these times he could never be persuaded he was in
his own home, but an effectual way of soothing the
restless excitement was to remind him that others
wanted to sleep and rest. He would try to control
himself, and his voice would be gradually lowered, or,
a more powerful remedy was to begin one of his
favourite hymns or passages. He would pause —listen
with reverence —then assent —then join in—presently
drop the voice of wandering and sink to rest. Or again,


he would be attending' in fancy to Diocesan business,
giving instructions in a clear, characteristic manner
—“lf the papers are quite in order, the matter will be
carried through at once/' Now he would be preach-
ing—“ The Bible, the head of all theology is the Bible,
or rather, the head of all theology is God. It is this
that will make the Church one; its effect upon the
world will be to make it feel this is God’s book, to
make men wise unto eternal life. Read, mark, learn.
Or again, he would be administering the Sacraments
—“Take and eat this,” to one and another, or “Name
this child.” On several occasions he pronounced the
Benediction, with clear, distinct intonation. Once, in
a gentle, persuasive manner, he was catechising a little
child. “Do you love Jesus? What did He do for
you? What ought you to do for Him? In your home
to shew your love?”
THOUGHT FOR OTHERS.
His courtesy and consideration for others through
the whole illness were very touching. “Have you
comfortable chairs?” “Every muscle in your body
must be aching!” “So sorry to have disturbed you,”
when one been specially called during rest, be-
cause he himself thought he was going. His gentle
and expressive “Thank you,” or “So kind,’ was heard
for every little act of ministration. When refreshment
was offered him, he lovingly asked, “Have yon had
some?” and once alluding to his utter helplessness, he


said, “The love and tenderness makes it all worth
while.” “Such kind nursing, always !” Until too
weak he was always informed of the kindly messages
left for him. “They never forget me,” when beautiful
flowers or little delicacies were brought to his bedside,
or again, “They are true people.”
One touching scene was his receiving and blessing
a tiny infant a fortnight old, brought to his bedside
for the purpose. He sent her parents a solemn mes-
sage to train her as a “Christian.”
At times his face was illuminated with a most beau-
tiful smile, eager and utterly self-forgetful. It was
so remarkable that those who were in attendance
again and again drew one another’s attention to it.
Then again the calm expectant repose of his face
would remind them of Scheffer’s picture of the saintly
Monica, waiting her departure, but his had a brighter
expression.
SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCES.
It was remarkable to notice the stages of spiritual
experience through which he passed. Earlier in the
illness he was frequently oppressed with a deep sense
of sin, which was distressing. Such a .
“Lord, have mercy!” “A precious Saviour.” “The
precious blood of Christ.” Or in deep humility, he
would lament his little love for God. At Liese times
onlv the simplest passages of Scripture and hymns
would comfort him. “Christ Jesus came into the


world to save sinners.” “Him that cometh unto Me
I will in no wise cast out.” “My sheep shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my
hand.” Again and again he loved to hear and join
in the words of “Rock of Ages,” “Jesu, Lover of my
Soul,” “Just as I am.” When very tired, “How Sweet
the Name,” and “I heard the Voice,” were welcome,
while “Abide with Me” was his constant evening
hymn. His intimacy with the author in early life was
a special memory.
He would pray in the simplest manner. “I thank
Thee for all Thy mercies, long-suffering, and loving
kindness. Forgive all my sin, sanctify me with Thy
Holy Spirit, make me wholly Thine. Accept me in
the merits of our Saviour. ‘Clothe me in His merits.
His perfect righteousness is my only hope. Accept
me in Christ.” “O Lord, be present to my soul. Say
unto my soul, lam thy salvation; My strength is made
perfect in weakness.”
As the days went by, and weakness increased, he
longed for rest, and would murmur, “So tired.” “He
leadethme beside the still waters.” “Weary and
heavy laden.” “Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace.”
“I will give you rest.” “My peace.” “He giveth His
beloved sleep.” Or again, he would speak of going
through “deep waters,” and “proud waters.” He was
reminded “When thou passest through the waters, I
will be with thee.” “Yes— Yes,” “Thou art with me.”
“Yes.” “I will hold Thy right hand.” “Yes.” “Hold


Thou me up, and I shall be safe.” This and similar
promises always comforted him.
He would lie for hours looking up, with an expect-
ant, reposeful expression. When asked once at such
a time of what he was thinking, he replied, as if sud-
denly brought back, “Of the worship of Heaven —so
wonderful!” At another, he was heard to say, “Lord,
what will it be to see Thee as Thou art, to rejoice, to
see Thee in Thy glory. That will make amends for
all —to know Thee—to taste the riches of Thy love.”
Often after a period of apparent sleep, he would
quietly say he had been “meditating,” and would
presently voice his thought. “God seems to me
to be saying to me, ‘Be quiet and patient.’ He
is leading me a strange way, but He knoweth
the way that I take. It is all done by God
in love and leading home. It is all right that
God does.” “Pardon and Peace.” “Life everlasting!”
“I was thinking how all will be blended together
in Heaven —peace, happiness, harmony—no discord.
Like the picture of a lady working lovely em-
broidery or tapestry —both sides alike^ —different
colours, but all worked in together to make one beau-
tiful whole.”
When it is remembered that during the whole five
months of his illness, there was no period, day or night,
when, owing to the weakness of his heart, his end
night not be expected, it will be realised how carefully
rhe watchers treasured and noted his words.


FAVOURITE THOUGHTS.
He seemed continually to muse upon unity and love.
“There is no real unity unless of the Spirit.” “There
may be much divergence of opinion with real spiritu-
ality.” “Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit.”
“Continue ye in My love. If (very impressively
spoken) ye keep My Commandments, ye shall abide
in My love.” “Let not your heart be troubled.”
“His tender loving heart spoke those words to His
people in all ages—the mighty God, tender, loving,
condescending.”
The clearness of his voice until near the end, and the
manner in which he carried on a thought, was to those
who nursed him remarkable. If he had been soothed
to sleep by a repetition of the twenty-third Psalm, an
hour or two afterwards he would suddenly say in a
distinct voice, “Beside the still waters!” or again, if
the last words of which he had been conscious were
of rest or peace, these would be the first he would
again refer to —“My peace I give.” “Perfect peace.”
His thoughts seemed continually above. He was
heard to murmur, “The glory of the Godhead filling
all the earth.” When asked if soon after he left us him-
self, he would see the dear ones who had gone before,
he said, “Yes.” Messages were given him to be
borne to them; he added, “Jesus beyond all —For
ever with the Lord.” “God bless and save us all, and
grant that whether we live or die, we may live together
with Him.”


FAREWELL WORDS.
In saying farewell to a friend, he said, “We shall all
meet in a better world.” Then, in a loud, clear voice,
“I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believeth
in Me shall never die. lam the first and the last. I
am He that liveth and was dead, and behold I am alive
for evermore.”
The last laymen with whom he was able to hold
converse were Colonel Roberts, to whom he gave his
parting blessing when he came to say farewell on the
eve of departure for the Coronation; Mr. C. R. Walsh,
representing the C.M.A., with which the Dean and his
father had for nearly a century been closely associated ;
and Mr. R. Atkins, the Registrar of the Diocese, to
whom his benediction was, “The Lord bless and
prosper you in all your work.” The Archbishop was
frequently with him, and was much touched with the
constant tokens of humble tranquil faith and of
thoughtful consideration for others manifested by him
on his sick bed. His “dear friend Pain,” ministered
to him daily.
CONSECRATION OF BISHOP PAIN.
He was not told of the appointment of Canon Pain
to the Bishopric of Gippsland until two days before the
Consecration, because it was feared that in his weak
state the sense of personal loss would be severe, and
it was most unlikely that he would still be living when
the date arrived. It had not been realised that he was


too far on the border land to be troubled. He only
remarked, “I am glad for him, but it will be a great
loss to us,” and spoke of his deep affection for him.
Early on the morning of Whit Tuesday, when re-
minded that it was the Consecration Day, he quietly
said, “Yes, I know.” Throughout the whole day he was
in touch with it all. He gave the Canon his blessing
before the service, parts of which were read to him,
and then he rested until, as arranged by himself, the
Holy Communion was administered to him by his
“Son in the faith,” the Rev. J. H. Mullens,* at the
same time that the clergy were receiving. Once more
one could feel he was in reality with them in his be-
loved Cathedral. His eager, loving reception of the
newly-consecrated Bishop, with outstretched hands
and solemn, full benediction, was a scene never to be
forgotten. And in his turn he received his friend’s
first episcopal blessing. It was as if the Lord Himself
was present in that “upper room.” It was a day which
stood apart, one of perfect enjoyment, intercourse,
clearness of perception, and uplifting, such as was not
approached throughout his whole illness. The next
day and onwards he only had intervals of complete
consciousness.
LAST DAYS.
His last few days on earth were simply waiting: he
lay quietly, scarcely taking any food, and only at times
* The Chalice and Paten used on this occasion were those Presented
to Bishop Broughton in 1828, by Bishop Sumner of Winchester, afterwards
Archbishop of Canterbury.


conscious. Towards evening on Saturday, June 14th,
his breathing became distressing, with quiet intervals.
He shewed by a gentle pressure of his hand upon the
one laid in his, and by the glance of his eye, that
though too weak to speak he understood and appreci-
ated the words repeated to him from time to time. “I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee.” “Jesus Christ,
the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.” “When
thou passes! through the waters I will be with thee.”
“I will come again and receive you unto Myself.”
“Let not your heart be troubled.” “Safe into the
haven guide, oh receive my soul at last.” “O Lamb
of God that takest away the sin of the world, have
mercy upon us. Grant us Thy peace.” And, for the
last time, the words that had been repeated almost
daily by his bedside, “O Saviour of the world, Who by
Thy cross and precious blood, hast redeemed us, save
us and help us, we humbly beseech Thee, O Lord.”
Then, “Unto God’s gracious mercy and protection we
commit thee. The Lord bless thee and keep thee.
The Lord make His face to shine upon thee and
be gracious unto thee. The Lord lift up His
countenance upon thee and give thee peace, both now
and evermore.” He gradually fell into a natural sleep,
breathing gently as if in health. To the watchers it
sounded like the soft, regular fall of the wave of the
ebbing tide upon the shore. Shortly before midnight,
we noticed a slight pause after his regular breath —
then another gentle pause —then another —which was


not broken, and we realised at last that our dear one
had gently passed from earth to Paradise — “Trans-
lated.”
We laid his body to rest on the couch where his pain
and weakness had been so bravely borne. He was
robed in cassock, surplice, hood and scarf, with hands
folded in his usual attitude when waiting for service
to begin.
By his own written desire the funeral arrangements
were of the simplest character, yet accompanied by
the order and reverence which he was always careful
to observe in religious matters. The coffin was of
polished oak with silver handles. The silver plate
bore the inscription—
WILLIAM MACQUARIE COWPER,
Dean of Sydney,
Born July 3rd, 1810.
At rest,
Midnight, June 14th, 1902.
The. evening before the funeral the coffin was
reverently carried from the Deanery to rest one night
in the Cathedral. The procedure was touchingly
simple. The body was preceded by two members of
the Chapter, the Bishop of Gippsland and the Pre-
centor, who read the “opening sentences,” and
followed by six members of the family. A deeply


respectful crowd waited silently while this small pro-
cession passed in. A short service of prayer followed,
and the dead was left, guarded by angel watchers.
In the early morning his Oxford M.A. hood and
College cap were placed on the coffin, and with them
were arranged the choicest white flowers, autumn
leaves and sprays of ivy grown from his home at Bow-
rai. The plate which bore his name was framed with
violets; at the foot stood one wreath, and at the head
a large anchor of white hyacinths, fit emblem of “sure
and steadfast hope”—all simple offerings from his
dearest ones. His Dean’s seat in the Cathedral was
draped, and the entrance closed with white immortelles
and another anchor of violets.
Until shortly before the service began, reverent
crowds passed in and viewed the coffin; others of all
ranks in the community waited quietly in their places.
Never before had such a mass of reverent mourners
assembled inside, a mass which overflowed from the
precincts into the streets. Never before had so many
of the clergy moved in solemn procession through the
Cathedral, assembled willingly to shew their deep
veneration for him who had been 44 years Dean of
Sydney.
The service was perfect in beauty of music and
arrangement. All that loving thought and deepest
respect could devise was carried out. No melancholy
“Dead March”; but as the mourners waited the organ
softly gave variations of “Jesu, Lover of my Soul,”


and “O Rest in the Lord”; then the uplifting Chopin's
“Funeral March.” The grand opening sentences were
chanted while the long procession of Chapter, Clergy
and Bishops slowly filed into place. The Psalm,
“Lord, Thou hast been our Refuge,” was followed by
the beautiful prayer of “hearty thanks.” Then came
the expressive hymn, “The Saints of God.” after which
the Lesson of immortal hope was read by the Arch-
bishop. Again the organ pealed out the beautiful
hymn, “God of the Living” ; and then the remains were
slowly carried down the aisle to the soft chanting of
the “Nunc Dimittis.” Amidst a dense, sympathetic,
and deeply respectful crowd, which lined the route, he
was borne »to the little cemetery at Randwick, and laid
to rest in the family vault to the strains of his favourite
hymn, “Jesu, Lover of my Soul,” in which many
hundreds of voices joined.
“To Thee, we leave him, Lord, in trust;
And bless Thee for the love which gave
Thy Son to fill a human grave,
That none might fear that world to see
Where all are living unto Thee.”




Noth. —Any profits from this publication will be devoted
towards the purchase of an Organ for Broughton
Chapel, Moore College, of which the Dean was
Trustee.
