

WINE
FOR
HEALTH AND HAPPINESS


WINE
1788 --- 1939
(Compiled in the interests of- the
Australian Wine
Industry


PUBLISHED IN ADELAIDE
BY
THE AUSTRALIAN WINE BOARD


WINE
HE grape vine of today is the descendant of
the native wild vine of Europe and Southern
Asia. Throughout the ages cultivation has
produced many variations from the original.
They differ one from another in every conceivable
detail, but they all belong to the same botanical order.
The fermentation of grape juice into wine has gone
on for ages, but some eighty years ago Pasteur elucidated the theory of fermentation
by demonstrating that changes induced by its action were due to living organisms
known as yeasts. Fundamentally the processes of wine making have never altered,
but the application of the principles of vintaging have changed very materially.
Naturally the greatest changes have taken place since Pasteur’s research into the
origin of fermentation.
Improved methods of culture, pruning and training of the vines and selection
of varieties had an enormous influence in the development and status of the industry.
Application of mechanical devices to other industries turned the thoughts of vintners
towards the possibility of using similar methods in wine making. The earliest
mechanical crusher was probably composed of two parallel wooden rollers, turning
in opposite directions, that is both inward, and between these the bunches of grapes
were passed, falling completely crushed into a receiving vessel below. This proved
much faster than foot power, but had the disadvantage of tending to crush the seeds
and to bruise the stalks. A further step was made by having the rollers set wider
apart, but having interpassing lines of pegs on their circumference, which tore the
berries to pieces in passing. In all these operations the stalks passed into the must
along with the crushed berries.


AERIAL VIEW OF MODERN WINERY.
With the added power, supplied by a machine driven from a steam engine,
the form of crusher changed. The rollers were no longer needed and instead a
skeleton arrangement of three wooden beaters revolved rapidly in an elongated
cylinder. The bottom half of this cylinder was perforated with holes of several
sizes, ranging from one-half inch diameter up to about one-and-a-quarter inches.
The beaters were designed to act as a stalk separator as well as a crusher.
The bunches of grapes falling through the entrance to the machine were struck
violent blows by the rapidly revolving beaters. The effect was to break up the
berries and strip them from the stalks, when juice, seeds and skins went through the
perforated screen into a vessel below. At the same time the beaters were so set as to be
not exactly parallel to the axis of the cylinder, and were so adjusted that the stalks
were gradually worked to the far end, at which point they were discharged as waste.
A further development was marked when the beaters pegs were attached to
the inside of a revolving but truncated cone through which the bunches passed to be
stripped of their berries.


Thus with the development of mechanical power the scope of the vigneron
has been increased very considerably.
In a non-mechanical vintage the prime necessity was that labour should be
plentiful and cheap. Some countries, where this factor holds good, have still retained
the practice of treading the grapes with the bare feet (and legs) of the workers. In
favour of this obsolete system, it is claimed that the feet do not crush the seeds, and it
is also probably true that bodily warmth, transferred to the crushed must, has a ten-
dency to stimulate fermentation.
Other countries, and especially does this apply to thft. younger ones, have from
the outset adopted the more cleanly and efficient mechanical methods of crushing.
The efficiency of the modern machines cannot be questioned and the charge levelled
at them of breaking the pips or seeds, is not substantiated in practice.
Conditions governing wine making have changed in company with changes in
conditions of life, and the increased population of the earth. In ancient times the
demand for wines probably did not extend materially beyond the regions, or even
localities, in which they were grown. There was no teeming population in non-wine
growing countries to provide for through an export trade. World wide commerce,
improvement in means and methods of transport, and interchange of. commodities
kept pace with the rising tide in population. Throughout this development, wine
making moved from the position of a primitive and almost household operation, and
wine became one of the many items for barter or sale to people who did not grow the
vine.
Wines were made in much greater quantities because there was a demand
above the normal consumption of the country of origin. First of all, areas under
vines had to be more extensive. In keeping with increased production, wine making
establishments became more extensive. Vintage operations became more complex in
dealing with large quantities of grapes and wine. Labour-saving devices were insti-
tuted and so, in the course of time, the modern winery was evolved.


The MAKING of WINE
The process of wine making involves the fermentation of grape juice and its
change by a series of chemical and biological reactions, into wine. These reactions
entail changes in the composition and flavour of the juice, the principal one being the
substitution of a proportion of alcohol for the original grape sugar. This change is
effected by yeast and the phenomenon produced is called fermentation.
Fermentation is complete when the whole of the grape sugar is eliminated,
and the result is what is termed a dry wine, examples of which are found in Hock,
Claret, Burgundy, etc. When the sugar is only partially eliminated it becomes neces-
sary to protect the remainder from destruction by adding a proportion of spirit.
Wines so treated are known as fortified wines, such as Port, Sherry, etc., and their
prototypes.
The character of the wine depends on two principal factors—first, the variety
of grape used, and secondly, the climati: conditions under which the fruit is grown.
Australia possesses a very wide range of climate, either by reason of latitude or
altitude, and therefore conditions can be found where wines similar to those grown
in Europe can be made. The wine districts are selected accordingly, the most suitable
varieties planted for the purpose for which they are to be used, and the skill of the
vintner is then applied to creating a wine as near perfect to type as possible.
In all countries the fine wines are made in relatively small quantities, and this
applies no less in Australia than to European countries. For instance, the fine wines
of Europe probably do not amount to ten per cent, of the total production, and,
speaking comparatively, when one comes to fair, average quality, the wines of
Australia will probably compare more than favourably with those of Europe.


*' GRAPE HARVEST
The VINE IN AUSTRALIA
IN THE BEGINNING.
FEW vines were taken from the Cape of Good Hope, and planted in
Sydney Cove in 1788. They appear not to have been very successful, owing
to the climatic conditions of the situation in which they were planted. At
a later period vineyards were established at Parramatta, away from the
coastal climate, and here better results were obtained.


In 1791 Governor Phillip had three acres of vines established, while a settler
named Schaffer had planted one acre on his holding on the north bank of the Parra-
matta River.
The first really serious development of wine making was due to Captain John
McArthur, who established his vineyards at Camden Park and on the Nepean, from
which considerable quantities of wine were being made in the first years of nineteenth
century. Records show that by 1827 some thousands of gallons of wine were being
made each year. Another pioneer was Gregory Blaxland, who had planted vineyards
at Parramatta.


In 1831 James Busby toured Europe, where he made a very comprehensive
collection of wine varieties, had them carefully packed and shipped to Sydney, estab-
lishing them on the Hunter River. The influence of Busby’s collection soon began to
be felt, and there is no doubt that most Australian vineyards claim these vines as their
progenitors.
The extension of areas under vines was going along steadily in New South
Wales, and soon the preponderance of planting took place on the Hunter River.
Areas around Sydney and near to the coast were somewhat restricted by climatic fac-
tors. As settlement spread, it was found that there were ©any localities where the
vine would flourish. By 1852 in the Hunter River District there were 461 acres of
vines from which 59,000 gallons of wine were made, together with 1,100 gallons of
brandy. These wines were mostly of the light or beverage class, corresponding to
those of Bordeaux or Bourgoyne. Inland districts grew wines more nearly ak’n to
those of Southern France, Portugal and Spain. Climatic conditions were very similar,
varieties of grapes used were, in most cases, identical.
Wines were from time to time shipped to London, but it was many years
before organised export was attempted. In the interim much useful work was done
in extending vineyards in New South Wales, and into the younger colonies of
Victoria and South Australia.
DWARD HENTY took vine cuttings to Victoria, but of these there seems
to be no record at any later time.
The first vineyard of which the record survives is a small one planted
at Yering in 1838 by William Ryrie, and soon there were a number of vineyards
near Melbourne, totalling one hundred acres by 1848. The next twenty years saw
this area increased by three thousands acres.
Geelong vineyards were started in the early ’forties, but in 1877 these were
attacked by phylloxera, and the vineyards never recovered, in spite of the fact that some
£50,000 had been spent in an endeavour to eradicate the disease. It is of interest to
note that this outbreak was at approximately the same time as that at which phylloxera
was found in the vineyards of Europe.


In the mid-century at Rutherglen in the north-east of Victoria, a gold mining
field, some of the miners planted vines, following the example of Lindsay Brown at
Gooramadda, who established a vineyard in 1851. In this district phylloxera again
made its appearance in 1899, and completely exterminated the old vines. By that
time, profiting by the experience of Europe, much more was known about grafting
the European vine upon the phylloxera-resistant American stocks, so that new vine-
yards grew again upon the wreck of the old.
In the Great Western district the first vineyard was planted in 1860.
HE earliest vine planting in South Australia seems to have been in 1838
by John Reynell. Vine cuttings were brought from New South Wales.
Kelly established "Tintara” south of Reynella, probably about 1840.
Dr. Rawson Penfold took vii e cuttings from Europe when he migrated to Adelaide
in 1844. These he planted at Magill, at the foot of the Mount Lofty ranges, with
a view, it is said, to growing wine for his patients. There were several early
vignerons who began to make wine in or about the "forties” of last century. Their
tiny vineyards and vintages were the predecessors of upwards of one hundred
thousand acres of vines, with wineries today making twenty million gallons of wine
and brandy each year.


An assessment of the wine industry made a few years ago showed that its
capital value was upwards of twenty million pounds, with an extensive employment
list and heavy annual wages outlay.
It is a somewhat remarkable fact that the South Australian vineyards have
never been attacked by phylloxera, even though Victoria was affected as early as
1877. A very rigid system of quarantine is observed between South Australia and
the phylloxerated States and everything possible is done to prevent infection. In
1899 the vignerons had an Act passed whereby they voluntarily tax themselves to
provide funds to be used should the disease at any time become established.
Western Australia began wine growing about 1880, since when the
plantings have increased to about 6,000 acres. A vintage of half-a-million gallons
comprises wines of all types.
Queensland, by reason of its more tropical climate, has not become a large
vineyard centre.


THE DISADVANTAGES
of LICENSING HOURS
HE well-being of the Grape Growing Industry of Australia and the
Wine Industry is largely dependent on an extension of the avenues
of distribution to accord with those in Great Britain and the Wine
Producing Countries of the world. The important fact is not so
much to increase the number of trading hours, but to vary them so that the public
may obtain wines at appropriate times. It might be well, for instance, that hotels
should remain closed until 8.30 a.m. except in localities in which special and essen-
tial services are requisite, for example in the vicinity of markets and wharves. Hotels
that do not commence business until 8.30 in the morning might quite reasonably
be expected to close their bars at 6.30 p.m., but where proper lounge facilities are
available licencees should be permitted on application to the Licensing Court to
serve in lounges between the hours of 8 p.m. and 10 p.m.


WHEN to
DRINK WINE
Meal time is unquestionably the proper time to
take wine. The report published by the Advisory
Committee of 1 English physicians under the
chairmanship of Lord d’Abernon, and appointed
to study national aspects of the liquor trade,
explains that alcoholic injury is more to be feared
when the alcohol is taken on an empty stomach.
It concedes that "the moderate use of rlcoholic
beverages is physiologically permissible” subject to two conditions: (1) Sufficient
intervals to avoid undesirable accumulation in the blood. (2) That it be not taken
in concentrated form and without food. Both are fully satisfied by a moderate
quantity of light wine—say, up to a reputed pint —with the mid-day and evening
meal. Thus can full advantage be taken of the benefits of alcohol without fear of
the ill effects that sometimes result from other liquors, taken in a different way.
In France the staple foods are bread and wine—one solid, the other liquid—
others are accessory. In Australia, wine is almost unknown, in its proper place, which
is with meals, except by a select few. The "food wine,” as the great Pasteur terms
it, does not exist here yet.


NATURAL OR BEVERAGE WINES
HE so-called Natural or Beverage wines include such types as Hock,
Chablis, Claret and Burgundy, which are produced by the alcoholic fer-
iwßrejJrctsffl mentation of practically the whole of the sugar contained in the original
fruit without the subsequent addition of pure grape spirit, as in the case of Port and
Sherry.
HOCK and CHABLIS.
These wines are produced from the juice of special varieties of white grapes
grown in suitable localities.
The fresh acidity of Hock appeals to many palates, but some prefer the sug-
gestion of fruitiness and usually associated with Chablis.
The alcoholic content of Hock and Chablis ranges from 8-12%.
CLARET and BURGUNDY.
These types result from the fermentation of certain varieties of crushed red
grapes and always contain a quantity of natural tannin derived from the fruit
during fermentation. The presence of this substance accounts for astringency.
Claret should be astringent; Burgundy should not.
Clarets and Burgundies mature well in bottle and sometimes continue to
improve over a period of many years.
Burgundy usually contains less natural acidity than Claret and is more fruity
in character, and thus constitutes a valuable tonic
The alcoholic content of Clarets and Burgundies ranges from 11 to 13%.
PORT.
The most popular wines of Australian origin, both within Australia and
abroad, are those of Port type.
Port is a fortified wine, that is to say, one to which grape spirit is added.
This addition of grape spirit results in the abrupt termination of fermentation, with
a result that a high percentage of the natural sugar of the grape remains in the wine.
The best Ports are rich on the palate and finish with a dryness which is due
to the tannin they contain.
Port should be served at slightly below room temperature.
The alcoholic content of Australian Ports is approximately 20%.


HOW WINES
SHOULD BE SERVED
The glassware used should be clear crystal and
not tinted or coloured glass. The procedure is for the first
of the wine in the bottle to be poured into the glass of
the host to enable him to taste it and so ascertain whether
it has been affected by the cork or has any other defect.
In the absence of any defect the glasses of the guests
should, be partly filled from right to left around the
table. The quantity put into each glass should be
approximately equal to two-thirds of its capacity, and
in the process of pouring care should be exercised to see
that the wine is not aerated too much. Above all the
last of the bottle should not be poured into a glass with
the risk of spoiling the appearance.
For those who have not a range of glassware to
suit the different types of wine, the g! ass depicted in the
accompanying illustration will serve as a good "general
purpose” wine glass.
There are several factors that the person charged
with the duty of serving wines should bear in mind.
In the first place the be handled carefully
in order that any sediment in them should not be
disturbed. If it is found that the wine has developed a
crust it should be carefully decanted.


WINES for COURSES
In presenting wines at dinner it is well to bear in mind that certain types should
be associated with certain portions of the meal. These are as follows: —


WINES WITH LIGHT MEALS
Delightful as it is on formal occasions to be able to entertain one’s guests with
a full range of wines served in appropriate glassware, there are lighter meals with
which one prefers, or is compelled, to serve one wine only. In cases such as these the
type of wine served should be governed by the food supplied. The most important
factor to bear in mind is that red meat should be served with a red wine, such ar Claret
or Burgundy, and white meat, a white wine, Hock or Chablis. Claret and Burgundy
should be served at room temperature. Hock and Chablis cold (say at 50 deg. F.).


THE AGE OF WINE
HERE is a good deal of popular misconception with respect to the effect
of age on the quality of wine. It cannot be taken that the quality of
wine improves with" increasing age. In fact after a certain stage is reached
the reverse is the case.
The ages at which the principal wines are at the apex of their
quality may be set down approximately as follows: —
Hocks and Chablis *• 3 to 4 years
Sparkling Wines 3 to 7 years
Sherries (which improve in bottle and in cask) 5 years
Clarets 3 to 7 years
Ports 4 to 7 years


A MEDICAL
MANS OPINION
ALCOHOL is not taken on account of its food value, but
because of the feeling of well-being it causes. It is owing
to this action that this curious substance has ever been so
precious to civilized man; to what Dr. C. Mercier (Lancet
12/l 1/1912) terms its "euphoric” effect. It thus promotes
a feeling of contentment and reduces the irritating influence
of the pin-pricks of daily life in a way that has far-reaching results. It enhances the
appreciation of what is good and beautiful in art, literature and music. It makes us
more agreeable to ourselves and to our friends, and in this way, it tends to promote
happiness. There are dismal persons who consider this a wrong ideal; but I think
the normal, healthy-minded man will agree that there is nothing immoral or undesirable
in happiness, if it can be attained without harm to the individual and the community.
Dr. Merrier further credits alcohol with "power to unlock the store of energy
that exists in the brain . . . that, without its use, would remain in store unavailable
for our immediate needs . . . The effect of moderate doses of alcohol is to stimulate
the mental faculties of those who possess mental faculties, especially those of the
highest order —the artistic faculties. There has never been one distinguished origin; -
STORAGE VATS.
tor in any branch of art who
did not take alcohol, at least
in moderation, and many have
taken it, alas, in excess. It is
the fact that it is the great
nations, the nations that are
in the van of civilization that
are the drinking nations.”


THE LATIN’S VIEW OF WINE
HAT ' 'wine spells temperance” is recognised by all who have resided
in any Latin country; there is no abuse where light wine is plentiful, and
cheap enough to be the every-day beverage; nor is there any question of
temperance reform, for the very good reason that there is no intern-
perance. One is faced with the seeming contradiction that this desirable sobriety
should be compatible with the highest per capita alcohol consumption. The
explanation is that everybody drinks a little wine but none take too much. Wine
has become really a food, with a place in the dietary, such as Australians fail to
realise. In the shape of cheap vin ordinaire it is not a luxury, but a necessary of life,
figuring, as tea does with us, and not charged extra for m hotels and restaurants.
Seldom taken between meals, it forms an integral part of the mid-day and evening meal
of rich and poor alike. In wealthy homes, choice bottled wines are occasionally
served, but in all homes, bulk vin ordinaire is the every day drink of men, women and
children. It is invariably diluted with water for the last, and often by all, especially
in warm weather. — (Francois de Castella).
A DISTINGUISHED SCIENTIST’S OPINION.
"As a means of restoring or stimulating the powers of life in the human frame,
exhausted by disease, or weakened by a disturbed nutrition, the moderate use of
genuine wines is unequalled in nature, and cannot be surpassed by Art; whilst in
health wine acts as a
shield against wear and
tear of the system, in
assisting and making
more durable the assimi-
lation of food.”
(Liebig)
FERMENTATION
TANKS,


WINE THE BENEFACTOR
ORD DAWSON of Penn (King’s Physician), says
"Alcohol in moderation is beneficial. It aids digestion,
and revives a man’s flagging energies after a day’s toil. There
is no time in our civilisation when alcohol —properly taken—
served a more useful purpose than now.”
AN APOSTLE OF ST. PAUL.
Professor Hugh Mac Lean, M.D., D.Sc., occupant of the Chair of Medicine
at the University of London, and one of the most eminent authorities on the human
stomach, liver and kidneys, contributed a striking article to a Melbourne paper during
his visit to Australia in 1929, in the course of which he wrote: "I believe that
alcohol does no harm at all to the average man, or to the strong healthy man —in
moderation, of course . . . Sometimes when the stomach is not doing its work well,
this effect of alcohol tending to increase gastric secretions may be useful. St. Paul’s
'little wine for the stomach’s sake’ has medical justification.”
WINE AIDS DIGESTION.
Dr. Robert Hutchinson, Physician to the London Hospital, says: —-"In order
to obtain its tonic effects, it (alcohol such as in wine) should be given with meals, for it
acts mainly by increasing the patient’s appetite, and power of digestion. The red
wines, such as Burgundy and Port, are believed to be especially possessed of "tonic”
properties. It is in the building up of patients who are simply 'run down,’ who are
neuralgic, or who are convalescing from acute disease, that the tonic effects of alcohol
are of special value.”


A HELP IN THE HOSPITAL
PEAKING deliberately out of my professional experience, I do
not hesitate to assert that I have saved more lives and rendered
others healthier and happier by the reasonable use of alcohol
than by the administration of any drug in the pharmacopoeia.
I have been made the target of bitter and ignorant criticism
because I have asserted that brandy is good for babies in certain
circumstances. Any doctor in large practice and any experienced nurse is fully aware
of the supreme value of alcohol, not only in young life, but at all ages, in conditions
of ill-health and disease. While a certain very small ‘number of medical men are
opposed to the administration of alcohol to children or even to adults, they will give
freely any number of drugs which are very often deleterious and harmful, and not
infrequently if their own mixtures are of service, these often owe their usefulness to
the alcohol present in them. It would appear to most people that alcohol given in
suitable amount is a far safer material to administer than are many of the preparations
which contain a drug like strychnine in appreciable quantity, and which are given
freely and often very injudiciously to people of all ages. In prolonged delirium and
in exhausting disease the use of alcohol renders it possible to administer food with
great frequency and to ensure its digestion: thus saving very many lives.”
SIR ARBUTHNOT LANE, M.D.


CHAMPAGNE SHAKING,
[ln the compilation of this brochure extensive use has
been made of the writings of Messrs. H. E. Laffer, F.
de Castella, C. S. Panton, and others, in the full assurance
that their interest in Australian wine is such that they would
most readily acquiesce.]


SCRYMfIOUR4 SONS
PRINTERS & STATIONERS
aoelAioe
