

WINKS^
COTTRELL












’WINKS : His Book






I mu I*" '
iii T' -
£' ij amL. m~m*mrn
*1 4*. __ -•nTjr
X x
>S / / . *
i— — / ./^Issatfe^.--..:,.
v 11111. use as HiffM
lurrm 1.... _,
“ ’winks, take that fearful bone away !”


’WINKS
His Book
DOROTHY COTTRELL
Author of "Singing Gold", etc.
With Illustrations by
J. NICOLSON, A.R.E., R.W.S.
and
PAUL BRANSOM
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited 34 Paternoster Row E.C. 4
MCMXXXIV


PRINTED IN
GREAT BRITAIN,
AT THE ANCHOR
PRESS TIPTREE
ESSEX


101.^48
1 0. JUL. 133S
i. Vinks and the train-wrecker - 15
11. “greater love hath no man” - 33
111. THE PEPPERED-EGG MYSTERY - 49
rv. “the best-laid schemes ...” - - 73
V. AN AFFAIR OF THE HEART - - 100




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
‘ ’Winks, take that fearful bone away !”
(colour plate ) - Frontispiece
’Winks would deposit moist, tonguey kisses
on the feathered cheek of Bat-in-Blisters 15
‘‘Let’s play a little football, dear 1” - - 17
About five hundred feet down lay the tracks,
and a man was working at them - -23
At night he slept in a box beside Mary’s
door ( colour plate) ----- 24
The express came chuffing gently along in
the wake of ’Winks ( colour plate ) - -40
Lugged his Blue Pot to the brick inscribed :
“Bat-in-Blisters—A Hero” -47
He had crept away to sit beneath the big fir
trees - - - - - - - “5°
He swerved out of the way of the farm
wagons, smothered in dust by the occa-
sional motor-cars - - - - “5^
Sometimes he rode on the terrier’s back
(< colour plate ) --- - - - -64
He growled with a muffled fury - - 77


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
’Winks stood beneath the tree looking out
across the dreamy valleys and dark-treed
hills {colour plate ) - - _ .go
“He’s eaten the dose for seventeen mas-
tiffs _ 88
The great collie was delighted to go
dancing across the sparkling hills
[colour plate ) yfi
Deliberately, a shade scornfully, she bore
him out - - - _ _ _ -116
He made room for her on the mat - - 121


—\^ p[ j|g : * • ■ -, * V ■*^-’, i
Vinks would deposit moist, tonguey kisses on the
FEATHERED CHEEK OF BAT-IN-BLISTERS
’WINKS
’WINKS AND THE TRAIN-WRECKER
full name was Tiddley winks the
Fifth, but his family abridged him at
those times when they said reproachfully, “Oh,
’Winks, what have you done now ?” and when
they cried, “ ’Winks, leave that cat alone !” or,
“ ’Winks, stop digging up that bush !” or,
“ ’Winks, take that fearful bone away !” They


gave him his full title when they said to one
another, “Just look what that dog Tiddleywinks
has done this time !” Mary brought ’Winks home
from school, as “the parting gift of a dear friend”
—although there were those who maintained
he was unquestionably the deed of an enemy.
He was a terrier of the variety known as
“Australian”. This means that he weighed
about twenty pounds, was delightfully stocky
of body and short of leg, with a long coat of
silver-grey silk —not trailing and effeminate, as
are the coats of some terriers, but which
gleamingly plumed his stubby tail and fell in
wisps across his brown eyes.
He possessed a tremendous small-dog’s dig-
nity, but had the misfortune to live in a big
dogs’ world. Thus he supplied the main relaxa-
tion of the other, and larger, dogs of Grey Farm.
He would, for instance, be crossing the yard
with his two-inch tail very upright, his front
feet moving with great dignity, and his hind


----- V.. ... —^
’WINKS AND THE TRAIN-WRECKER
feet following them in springy sort of fashion
and slightly sideways, when Keela, the great
sheep-dog, would apparently say to her hus-
band, “Let’s play a little football, dear !” And
“let’s play a little football, dear 1”
with the destroying charge of a locomotive
they would bear down upon ’Winks.
Sometimes he did not see them coming, and
only realized that they had come when he was
sorting himself out of the dust and brambles.
But for a long while, when he did see, he
demonstrated much that “lightning get-away”
that its advertisers claim for “Spink’s Sparkling


Petrol which gives your accelerator accelera-
tion”.
Kella and Lad particularly liked this, as, when
they caught him at high speed, he usually
turned over three or four times.
So at last he learned not to run when he saw
disaster overtaking him, but, instead, to sit
down hard, shut his eyes, and howl for help.
This rather spoiled the other dogs’ enjoyment.
Still, they could roll him over, and worry his
stomach, and laugh at the way it made his legs
revolve —or else have tugs-of-war with him.
From all this it must not be thought that his
misfortunes were not in part his own fault. He
could have lived in the flower garden, into which
the other dogs were not allowed to come. But
he would go out beneath the gate, a difficult
process in itself, which involved his lying flat,
getting his head and front paws under, bulging
himself out wide, and then frantically prying
for leverage with his hind feet, to the accom-


’WINKS AND THE TRAIN-WRECKER
paniment of violent wriggles of his tail. Why
he took so much trouble to reach the humilia-
tions that awaited him on the outer side was
hard to understand.
But on seeing someone approaching the house
or passing on the highway, he would tear down
the path, bursting with growls, push desperately
beneath the gate, making it impossible to open
whilst he was there, and get outside just in
time for the big dogs to play catchers with him
. . . under the very nose of the people he had
sought to impress.
In all the household only Mary divined any-
thing of the tragedy of his situation and just
how lonely one small dog can be —the general
consensus of family opinion being that he was
“a curse”. And indeed he usually was stuck
under the gate when it should have been opened
in a hurry, or in the way when Keela was
bringing up her sheep, or scurrying past the
cows just as they were having their “cream


milk” taken—so that they tossed their heads
and refused to let it down.
At night he slept in a box beside Mary’s door,
and if Mrs. Grey tried to go in he made as
much fuss as if she had been Mrs. Captain Kidd
or Jack the Ripper.
When he bathed, he never shook until he was
somewhere wherein it would do great damage.
Even Mrs. Grey agreed with Mary’s father
that “a good home should be found” for him.
A good home meaning a place as far from
Grey Farm as possible.
Mary said defensively: “He has a noble heart
—and some day he’ll do something great that will
surprise you all ! Won’t you, Tiddleywinks ?”
Whereat, instead of being bashful, ’Winks
merely growled a little, and spurned the earth,
or set out for no place in particular to show the
smaller dogs, for which he was always vainly
seeking, just what he would do to them if they
didn’t look out.


’WINKS AND THE TRAIN-WRECKER
Grey Farm lay some five miles from Peddle,
a little country town of New South Wales lost
in hills whose gentler slopes were close-cropped
and green, and set with huge ring-barked trees,
and whose more precipitate places were still
virgin brush-tangles all veiled and matted with
sweet-scented bush things.
At the time of this tale, “Old Bolshy” Kara-
seff had just come out of the Peddle jail, wherein
he had been confined for throwing a tomato at
the Mayor. Old Bolshy had once, so at least
he said, been a Russian Something, and had
been sent to Siberia because he gave some
grains of wheat to a starving peasant—instead
of letting him go on starving according to the
best Russian traditions. Anyway, he had been
to Siberia (or, if he hadn’t, he thought he had,
and that is assumably much the same).
It had turned him “a little queer”. For
instance, he said that we were all “bourgeois”
—instead of admitting the obvious truth that we


were simple dairy farmers and growers of
turnips and carrots and pink-nosed sucking
pigs. He said we “crawled” to kings, and licked
the boots of princes, and were guilty of many
other humiliating and indigestible practices.
When Old Bolshy came out of jail, he was
quieter than he had been ; but once or twice
John Grey said that he did not like the look of
him as he went muttering and mumbling about.
Still, everyone secretly believes that things like
murder, or incendiarism, or riot, which happen
in other districts and lands, can’t really happen
in one’s own. Anyway, we said that “Old
Bolshy was looking black”—and forgot about
him.
It was, as recorded above, about five miles
from the Grey place into Peddle. That is, it
was five miles if you took the short-cut across
the hills and then chanced walking on the
railway viaduct. This latter act was illegal, but
as the village constable went home by the


■ r I ~ """TiT*" |, i| IM| T 1 * —
iC^' > V*. - • ■ r^-
-*»:* j^BwBaMEy
fr >" ' - yi
■ • j3fci -I
'- i ■’ gH^Sl
< jflVi|IH# „ ■ ; «4/l tiJFJ Ti- Tvl
*^Bf\
I. • : - - ' .']
ABOUT FIVE HUNDRED FEET DOWN LAY THE TRACKS, AND
A MAN WAS WORKING AT THEM


viaduct every evening, nothing was done about it
On a clear-blowing day, Mary set out along
the short-cut, with ’Winks—running at the front
end, bouncing behind —as her escort. They
crossed the “cleared paddock” and the “wattle-
paddock”, and then went up into the lonely
brush country of thicket and ravine.
Lyre-birds were calling, and the girl found
quite a bunch of wild violets, while ’Winks
frisked about and chased things and was gener-
ally important . . . the sort of day when death,
and evil, and hate seem just silly words.
On top of the Big Hill —below which the
deep railway-cutting ran—they turned off to get
some rosy waratah leaves, and wandered across
to the top of the cutting.
’Winks looked over the edge and cocked his
head and wriggled his tail interestedly. Mary
said : “What do you see, Tiddleywinks ?” and
looked over too.
About five hundred feet down lay the tracks.


9 til jyj B|| pdl
ll I ' I K
m :
NIGHT HE SLEPT IN A BOX BESIDE MARY S DOOR




’WINKS AND THE TRAIN-WRECKER
and a man was working at them. Or, rather,
he was working at the bank on the far side. . . .
There was something vaguely queer about it,
and Mary tried to see what he was doing there.
She knew that when the trains left Peddle,
they used to go rather slowly across the big
viaduct, and then gather speed and come singing
their power-song up the long grade—and be
“going like hell” when they came round the
bend below the Big Hill. When she was a
child, she had once heard her father say that it
was the “perfect place for a wreck”. Now she
could not get a good view of what the man was
doing, and rather wanted to know.
So, instead of going on by the short-cut, she
climbed down the embankment; slipping among
the tenderness of ferns, breaking through the
sweet, white clematis wreaths, and holding by
the young, springy gum saplings. She went
quietly, and at last came out on the tracks. She
assumed that the man would turn out to be


busy at something prosaically legitimate— most
exciting possibilities ended that way.
She was not at all alarmed, but just curious ;
for it was an unusual thing to see a solitary man
working away at an important cutting.
’Winks and Mary rounded the turn simul-
taneously, and beheld —Old Bolshy, inflamed of
face and dripping with sweat, prising at the
base of a great twenty-foot boulder !
The crazy aspect of the man and the evil
import of what he was doing startled the girl
so that she gave a small exclamation of fright.
. . . There could not be over fifteen minutes
until the express came roaring royally round the
bend. Somehow she must warn the engine-
driver.
Before her the man stood, swaying slightly,
glaring with the menace of unswervable pur-
pose ; then he ran at her savagely.
In his reddened eyes and general appearance
of insanity she saw her danger, but she wanted


’WINKS AND THE TRAIN-WRECKER
to get past him and warn the train. So, instead
of running back, she tried to spring past —and
he caught her about the waist.
“Be still, you little fool, and you will not get
hurt ! . . .” She knew it was a million-to-one
chance against anyone being within earshot.
But the express was coming in fifteen minutes !
She screamed, with the ringing clarity of healthy
young lungs, screamed so that the echoes shook
back from the soft ravines, and a grey lyre-bird
darted across a rock.
Old Bolshy tried to put his huge, dirty hand
over her mouth, but she twisted free, matching
her young strength against his crazed one.
Again she screamed, and then he struck her in
the face, and her world went out in darkness.
He flung her down, not on the fines, but with
indifference as to what would be her fate in
the crashing pile-up of speeding engine and
carriages. Then he savagely kicked ’Winks,
who was trying to tear the hem of his trousers.


And ’Winks did his famous treble somersault.
Old Bolshy went on labouring at his work of
destruction, his eyes lighted by a maniacal pur-
pose that was almost holy.
Lion hearts are not everything in this world.
’Winks set out for help, his front half running
straight and low, his hind half bounding rather
high and slightly crooked. Round the curve
between the hills he fled, faster and faster on the
down-grade to the river chasm. His ears
flapped back, his grey eyebrows were tossed by
the wind as he took the straight run on to the
big viaduct.
All his life he had crossed the viaduct, or any
other bridge, with infinite care that he did not
break it by his great weight, stepping softly and
high, that he might cause it as little shock as
possible, and taking a long time to put a foot
down when he had raised it. But now he was
not going to consider his personal safety.
There was a double set of tracks across the


’WINKS AND THE TRAIN-WRECKER
viaduct, so that if any of the townspeople were
caught on its half-mile span by a train, they just
stepped from one set to the other.
As ’Winks came on to the viaduct at one end,
the express moved out from the Peddle station.
It came chuffing deliberately forward, wriggled
its length slightly as it crossed the points,
gathered pulsing momentum of piston, whistled
self-importantly, and swept thunderously down
towards the bridge—and ’Winks.
The engine-driver, looking ahead along the
flying rails, saw, far down the bridge, on the
centre of his track, a small grey speck ... a
greyish-silver lump ... a little fat dog, with its
muzzle raised appealingly to heaven, pouring
forth inaudible wails. The engine-driver had a
schedule, but he had once possessed a dog of his
own, a dog whose death had left his world very
bleak and empty.
The bridge shuddered and the fines cried as
he applied the brakes. Passengers left their


seats unexpectedly . . . iron ground on iron
. . . the express had stopped. The engine-
driver and the fireman climbed down.
’Winks sat firmly on his tail, wailing to the
skies.
The engine-driver had great faith in portents.
“There be more to it, mon, I tell thee, than
meets the oie !” said Driver MacTavish to his
fireman. “ ’Tisn’t natural for a dog in posses-
sion o’ his moind to sit fair in the way o’ doom
for no pourpose !” He poked ’Winks with a
kindly foot. ’Winks opened his eyes and,
finding himself living, and help at hand, he
looked desperately up at the men and then
began to run agitatedly back —to where he
knew Mary was lying at the mercy of one of the
many varieties of deadly peril that inhabited the
world.
“He’s mad,” said the prosaic fireman.
“He’s a warning !” said the engine-driver
firmly. “Look at the lookin’ back o’ him !


’WINKS AND THE TRAIN-WRECKER
Look how he stopped us if it took his bonny
wee loife ! . . .”
So it was that, instead of coming roaring and
singing her power-song round the turn to the
great cutting, the express came chuffing gently
in the wake of Winks —who was running rather
low in front and galloping high and rather
sideways behind.
. . . And they found a great hurtled mass of
rock across the fines and an unconscious girl
lying where the carriages should have piled
above her, while a poor crazed creature waited
with evil glee to see the destruction he had
wrought.
“I would never have dreamed he had it in
him ! said Mr. Grey rather unsteadily as he
looked at ’Winks—who swaggered uppishly
about, seeking for the other smaller dogs whom
he never found. And on ’Winks’s neck, amidst
the grey silk of his ruff, hung glinting the


Royal Humane Society’s medal “for the saving
of human life”.
“You can never tell what’s in a dog’s heart,”
Mary’s mother said softly. “Think if we had
sent him away. . . . Why, Mary would have
been . . .”
But only the one who loved him best knew
what had been in s heart. After she
came out of the hospital, Mary had held his
fat firmness of twenty-pound body very closely,
while he rolled his whiskers and growled a
little, and into one of his silver, lopping ears
she had whispered :
“You thought it was Keela and Lad coming
when you saw the horrid ’spress didn t you,
darling ?”
But in her eyes this was no detraction, for
even the bravest must at times sit on their
tails and call for help.


“GREATER LOVE HATH NO MAN”
GREY said : “What the devil’s the
matter now, Tiddley winks ?” As answer,
’Winks led Mr. Grey out to see the parrot whose
cage swung behind the hawker’s cart. That is
to say, ’Winks, upon six-inch legs, had flounced
and bounced about the Master of Grey Farm
until he was induced to follow.
When Mr. Grey did sec the bird, he muttered
compassionately, for a tiny cage, in which the
prisoner could barely turn round without further
scraping its dilapidated tail, was chained to
the back of the slovenly wagon : chained where
the dust would trail up on dry days and the
rain splash on wet ones. . . . And in the
droving years, John Grey had seen ten thousand
thousand parrots feeding in the soft grass, out
33 c


where the plains of the Central West he silver
and rosy to the sky. Parrots feeding all across
some gently rounded hillside ; seemingly a great
river of grey stones —toddling ! He could
remember how he had cracked his whip, and
watched countless thousand discreetly capped
parrot heads rise from the rich-seeded grass,
and the river of their backs grow agitated by
little eddies. And then, at another snap of the
lash, they took wing. A hundred thousand
rose-and-grey gallahs turning and wheeling
in unison. Now a cloud of silver . . . now a
flame of rose. One of the world’s miracles
of loveliness against the free, vast sky.
And here was a grey, snow-capped, rose-
breasted, and knowing parrot, all worn and
draggled, and, unless something was done
about it, a prisoner for life. As he looked at
the time-worn cocky, it spoke, after the manner
of its kind, cheerful in face of fearful odds :
“Bat-in-Blisters, that’s my name !” A small,


raucous, valiant voice, still vaguely hilarious,
still oddly friendly.
Poor cocky —but he would be a pest !
Mr. Grey hesitated, a great hand on his beard.
It was a terribly small cage. And then, too,
the parrot had apparently belonged to someone
who had loved him and read Dickens—for men
only give absurd, whimsical names to the things
they love. And anyone who has read Pickwick
Papers knows about the bat in blisters in the
famous cricket match.
“How much will you take for that bird ?”
asked the Master of Grey Farm. And, after
being duly swindled, he carried the worn
traveller inside.
Accompanied by ’Winks, who was bouncing
with a terrier’s self-importance, he took the
cage to the paved court between the two wings
of the old house, and there he undid the door.
Bat-in-Blisters rocked from one foot to the
other, emerged tentatively, looked uncertainly


about him, then flapped his clipped wings and
exclaimed : “Damn my socks !”
For some unknown reason ’Winks was fas-
cinated. With dancing steps he approached
the small courageous thing ; actually touched
it with his own small ebony nose. Cocky
fluffed his white cap and chuckled throatily.
After having made sure that ’Winks’s in-
tentions were honourable, Mr. Grey left them
together.
And the strange friendship ripened with the
days. ’Winks would deposit moist, tonguey
kisses on the feathered cheek of Bat-in-Blisters.
Bat-in-Blisters greeted the little dog’s appearance
with shrill, joyous cries of “Damn your
trousers !” or more wheedling pronouncements
of his name —“Tiddelinks, Tiddelinks !”
In a certain measure their affection was
perhaps that of exiles, for ’Winks was the one
small dog in a big dogs’ world, and Bat-in-
Blisters was a still more lonely parrot.


Now, of all ’Winks’s earthly possessions, and
in his own mind these included the homestead
of Grey Farm, the front gate under which he
stuck so ignominiously, the big barn where he
hunted mice, and quite a number of other
things, the dearest possession of all was his
Blue Pot. He had been fed in it when Mary
brought him home as a pup, and Mr. Grey was
in the habit of saying that he believed ’Winks
regarded it as his mother. Whether his devotion
was filial or no, he loved his aged saucepan, and
would spend aimless hours rolling its battered
form from side to side. He was also in the habit
of taking it to bed with him, in case it should
be stolen while he slept.
There was plenty of room in his sleeping-box
for himself and perhaps a bone. There was no
room for ’Winks and the pot, so that when he
got it in, he had to remain sitting on top of it.
He would maintain this uneasy attitude until
the household had retired : when he gently


lifted the precious bit of enamel-ware on to the
floor, and settled to rest.
It was, however, only necessary for Mr. Grey
or one of Mary’s cousins, Tom and Bill, to
exclaim, “Well, I think we’ll go and get ’Winks’s
pot now !” or, “What-ho ! The Pot of Tiddley-
winks !” for the night to be rent with hasty
bumps and bangs and whimpers as ’Winks got
it back into bed again.
If the other dogs dared even to walk near it,
he flew at them like a fury.
To the general surprise of the family, Bat-in-
Blisters loved the Blue Pot as dearly as did
’Winks himself. But while ’Winks’s affection
for it was unexplained, to Bat-in-Blisters it
seemed to carry a promise of the domestic
joys he was never to know. It is the habit of
the gallah parrots to nest in the hollows of
trees. When Bat-in-Blisters saw the Blue
Pot, it apparently personified his ideal of a
little grey home in the West.


He advanced upon it with clicking, bowing
delight, his crest rising and falling, his step
mincing. He circled it, he tested it tenderly with
his bill. Then, with the seeming of blushing
like any rose, he got coyly inside.
“There’ll be a friendship gone to the dogs
when ’Winks sees that !” prophesied Mr. Grey.
“I’ll stay and see there’s no foul play.”
But when ’Winks appeared, he merely bristled
for a moment, stood hesitantly at the mouth of
the pot, while Bat-in-Blisters murmured croon-
ingly of damning his socks and blasting his
trousers, and then he very gently upended the
saucepan and turned Bat-in-Blisters out.
Bat-in-Blisters, however, refused to take the
hint.
Therefore they bickered about it interminably
—if without malice.
As soon as ’Winks went about his affairs,
Bat-in-Blisters set up housekeeping—as soon as
’Winks came back, he put him out.


Bat-in-Blisters’s nest became a standing joke—
albeit a rather tragic one. Then Tom and Bill,
with a small boy’s humour, presented the
expectant father with a china nest-egg. And the
problem of keeping the shiny globe in the
equally unyielding saucepan until he could sit
on it, kept him busy for the rest of the summer.
In his spare time he got thorns out of’Winks’s
pads —perhaps as a peace measure, as the nest-
egg apparently rankled deeply in the pot-
owner’s bosom—or straddled laboriously after
him across the paddocks, crying, c T’m
a-coming !” Sometimes he rode on the terrier’s
back. And if he was threatened by a marauding
cat, his shrieks of “Tiddelinks ! Tiddelinks !
Oh, Hell !” brought the small dog flying to
his rescue. For apart from the pot and egg
trouble, their love was in no wise diminished.
That autumn, Mrs. Grey began to lose her
fowls. Their disappearances were as silent as
the work of a night-raiding fox, but the fowl-


4 f SiMa to fcfli
w ■« SrrT fiV ■
-* v %^feS-v . t. ■■„ ■•>^-^->0^
THE EXPRESS CAME CHUFFING GENTLY ALONG IN THE WAKE OI
WINKS




house was fox-proof. No trace of their bodies
could be found to suggest that they were dying
of snake-bite or disease. No gypsies were
about.
’Winks was the first to solve the mystery.
The fowls ran in a wide grassy paddock tufted
with blackberry vines and bordered at its
farther end by a mass of dense grass and low
bushes, screening a post-and-rail fence, beneath
whose lower rail passed a tiny path down which
the fowls went to water at the pond.
The big dogs were usually chained up at
night, lest they yield to the temptation of
kangaroo-hunting in the hills along the river.
Therefore in the early mornings ’Winks was
the only dog loose, and he was more self-
important at this hour than at any other period
of his day : people who had only seen him in
afternoon or evening were disinclined to believe
this possible, but it was so.
One morning, when the blackberry leaves


were becoming wine-and-bronze hued, and the
dock-weeds had turned henna, ’Winks arrived
at the tangle by the pond just as a modest white
hen was slipping under the rail. To his surprise,
her progress was suddenly checked. She writhed,
she strained soundlessly, her feathers were
convulsed, and then a large hairy hand shot out
from the bushes and drew her in on the little
copper snare noose which had closed about her
neck !
’Winks was horrified. He flew up and down
the line of bushes, crying that sacrilege had been
committed. He tried to make his way into the
tangle, but his short legs became hooked in
the vines. His chubby stomach was scratched
on the thorns. He clamoured desperate alarms !
For the fact that no one took any notice, he
was largely to blame, having frequently taken
members of the household for great distances
to show them a beetle or lizard—with stringent
warnings that they be careful of the brute.


In his own mind, however, he knew that this
matter was serious, and at last, having failed to
attract attention, he tore back toward the
house to proclaim his discovery at closer
quarters.
While he was gone, the tramp made his way
out of the bushes and beat a rapid retreat —
pausing only to shake a menacing fist at the
remote ’Winks. By the time Mr. Grey followed
the little dog to the fence, there was nothing
there, and Mr. Grey rudely remarked that there
had not been.
“Tiddleywinks,” he said, “you are a liar.”
Next morning, very early, ’Winks was on
guard by the fence. But no one came.
The next day and the next it was all right, but
on the fourth morning his nose told him that
the tramp was in the bushes again; ready for
another fat hen !
Winks made such a fuss that no fowl ventured
down to the pond, and when again he rushed


back to the house to try to “make someone
listen”, a hungry, and therefore wrathful, man
sneaked away.
“Why does Tiddleywinks look so extra
specially conceited ?” asked his family.
For ’Winks was delighted with the result of
his effort, and on the following morning he
charged down to the scene of his self-appointed
vigil with an especial flourish, dashed under
the rail—and felt a stinging, biting jerk about
his neck ! It threw him up on to his hind feet;
he was rent with a growl of bitter rage. But
the growl was silent, for the snare wire was biting
into his throat I
He shook and twisted and turned. But the
horror held.
There was pain in his ears and a film on his
smarting eyes. He struggled more wildly still,
and the snare wire tightened !
. . . Through roaring tides of darkness he
heard the man scuffling in the bushes, half saw


him raising an evil club. Then there came a
harsh, familiar voice:
c Tm a-coming ! I’m a-coming !”
A hopping, straddling, draggled parrot
clambered up the fence rail, took in what was
happening, and screamed : “Murder ! Blue
murder ! Oh, hell !”
Mr. Grey, working at the wood-heap, looked
The man in the bushes, crouching on his
knees, swore and raised his stick to strike at the
feathered warning on the post. Cocky knew
the meaning of sticks. He could have fluttered
out to safety, but he knew that if the stick was
not busy after him, it would descend on the
head of the smothering ’Winks.
“Murder ! Blue murder !” shrieked Bat-in-
BHsters.
Mr. Grey began to run toward the scene of
the trouble, but the man in the bushes did not
see him coming, he saw only the pesky bird


that he was going to finish before he finished
the dog. He hit once, and Bat-in-Blisters
dodged.
“Murder ! Blue murder !”
Another blow fell wide.
Out of the tail of one parrot-eye, Bat-in-
Blisters saw Mr. Grey coming. But the club
was still dangerously near his friend. He hopped
up and down, defying death, and screaming
warning. The man steadied himself, and
struck. . . . And Bat-in-Blisters of the valiant
heart was a crumpled ball of feathers on the grass.
As the tramp raised his club for ’Winks, Mr.
Grey’s fist landed on his jaw.
Shouting to the farm hands to come and make
a captive of the man, John Grey freed the
unconscious dog and laid him on the grass,
then very tenderly he lifted Bat-in-Blisters.
The dilapidated crest rose once, with a travesty
of its usual knowingness. The valiant eye shone
bright.


HWJW 'Mm
“GREATER LOVE HATH NO MAN”
“Damn your trousers !” said Bat-in-Blisters
cheerfully, and then shivered and was still.
Next morning they buried him beneath the
largest fir tree, ’Winks looking on, puzzled
and questioning, the while.
LUGGED HIS BLUE POT TO THE BRICK INSCRIBED :
“BAT-IN-BLISTERS A HERO”
In the days that followed, his customary
terrier jauntiness deserted him. He was looking
for Bat-in-Blisters. . . .
Then Mr. Grey and Mary saw him laboriously
lugging his Blue Pot toward the fir tree. He
set it near the brick upon which Bill and Tom


had inscribed “Bat-in-Blisters —A Hero”. Then
he sat down and waited. Once or twice he
made little skips and suggestions of play. Then
his tail drooped and he sat down again. . . .
Suddenly an idea came to him : he tore back
to the old courtyard and in a moment returned—
carrying the china egg. Carefully he put it
in the pot. Then, smiling and with twiddling
tail, he waited.
But Bat-in-Blisters was gone to that land
whence a man may not return, even for the
things he held dearest. He had laid down his
life for his friend.
“Anyway,” said Mr. Grey, fiercely pushing
up his grizzled beard and wiping his hand across
his eyes, “anyway, I had the satisfaction of
flogging that damned Thing before he went to
the lock-up ! . . . I ... I’ll do it again when
he comes out !”


THE PEPPERED-EGG MYSTERY
W INKS was in deep disgrace, and for
once this was unjust. For, although he
habitually did almost everything that he should
not have done, he did not steal eggs, and it was
°f egg-stealing that he was accused.
Eggs, in large quantities, had been dis-
appearing from the nests in the fowl-yards.
Even the setting hens had been disturbed, and
their eggs broken—and ’Winks had thrice been
found in the fowl-yards with egg smeared
incriminatingly in his whiskers.
No one had actually seen him steal or break
an egg, but the evidence of his guilt seemed
positive. Even Mary said, “Em afraid, Tiddley-
winks, that you must have done it !”
The first time he was reprimanded. The
49 d


Esg^^L V *r~ ' *- -'- — , I rt- - : , .-^tiSfl^B
next time he was spanked, and this morning
Mr. Grey had given him the first really severe
whipping of his life. He had not cried out,
but after it was over he had crept away to sit
beneath the big fir trees, and all the cock was
HE HAD CREPT AWAY TO SIT BENEATH THE BIG FIR TREES
gone from his ears and the bouncing, sideward
swagger from his walk.
He was hurt as only a little dog can be who
has been given a whipping for something that
he has not done. His world had gone to pieces ;
there was no justice in things. Mr. Grey had
taken him down to the nests and shown him


the broken eggs—and then cruelly beaten
him because they were broken ! And all the
while ’Winks knew that it was the big hired
girl who had been breaking and stealing them.
He was the more hurt in that he had protested
over her actions at the time. He had also
growled loudly when she rubbed egg into his
fur —not because he realized that she was trying
to fix the crime upon him, but because there
was something guilty about her that told ’Winks
very plainly that she should not be in the fowl-
yards at all.
And then he had been whipped. Whipped
about the broken and missing hens’ eggs when
the hens were his particular pride and care.
When last year he had discovered the tramp
snaring them. When he always came in to
report the hatching of chickens, and even took
a fatherly interest in the laying of eggs !
And he really had a justifiable grievance
against Fate. For, while ’Winks was notoriously


greedy and would have stolen almost anything
edible, he regarded the hens as his special
charges and would have literally starved before
he raided their nests. And still he had been
whipped.
He lay under the fir tree with his muzzle
between his stubby paws, and would not eat
when Mary brought him food. Neither would
he come in to sleep at her door that night.
His box was reproachfully empty—looking a
very small box—and his precious Blue Pot stood
unguarded beside it.
Mr. Grey said : “He simply must be stopped
raiding the nests. ...” And even Mary could
not deny that this was necessary. Neither of
them, however, liked looking at the empty box.
“He will,” said the Master of Grey Farm,
“have forgotten all about the whipping by
to-morrow.”
But ’Winks did not forget. His world was no
longer sunny and right and peopled by remark-


able and adorable humans for whom it was a
pleasure to look after the place.
The very people he loved had unmeritedly
punished him. His love and pride were hurt so
deeply that the hurt was slow in healing. His
sense of security was gone.
Some undefined instinct warned him to avoid
the big hired girl. But very early one morning,
about a week after the whipping, he was
trotting past the kitchen when the girl dropped
her broom and suddenly picked him up. He
did not like the girl, but a gentleman cannot
bite a lady, and, also, he was less sure of himself
since he had been in disgrace, and therefore he
did not make the noise that he ordinarily would
have.
The girl’s big red finger rubbed egg into his
whiskers, and although he had not reasoned it
all out very clearly, ’Winks’s heart went down
into his boots —or at least down where his boots
would have been if he had had them on. He


knew that in some way the egg in his fur was
the beginning of his trouble. With a sudden
writhe he kicked out of the girl’s arms and ran
away. His bud of a tail was tight against his
silver rump, his whole mien was guilty and
slinking.
The girl, who for purposes of her own had
just taken all available eggs from the nests,
called loudly :
“Look, Mrs. Grey ! That dog Tiddleywinks
has been at the eggs again !”
Mrs. Grey looked out and saw ’Winks slinking
away, and could not doubt that he had been
stealing. When John Grey inspected the nests,
he was really angry.
“Beating doesn’t seem to do any good, but
he isn’t going to get away with that !” he said
furiously.
So, with the aid of Tom and Bill, who entered
into the plans with all a small boy’s zest, he
prepared a devilish concoction of Holbrook’s


sauce, cayenne pepper, and Keen’s mustard.
A brew calculated to sear the soul of ’Winks
and leave him for ever purged of a desire for
eggs-
He then stuffed the shell of an egg with the
mixture and put the egg in ’Winks’s box.
’Winks sneaked in very late that night, and
they expected him to fall upon the egg. But,
instead, when morning came they found the
egg lifted carefully out of his little box and put
on the floor beside it.
“He smells a rat !” said Mr. Grey. Mrs. Grey
and Mary were troubled.
“Can he be trying to be good ?” they
questioned. But Mr. Grey was determined to
cure ’Winks of his egg-eating. The little dog
himself had crept out as soon as the front door
had been opened, for he still felt that there was
trouble coming to him over the egg on his face.
Now Mr. Grey carried the peppered egg to the
door and called the terrier.


“I would sooner he had taken it without my
telling him to, but that can’t be helped,” said
the man. Tom and Bill stood by, tittering with
excitement.
As soon as ’Winks was called, he came slowly,
ears alternately pricked and lowered in question.
Assured that he was simply being called to his
breakfast and that therefore things were
apparently all right, he came curvetting with
pleasure, his stubby tail wagging so fast that
it was almost invisible. . . . Evidently his
family had given up the habit of whipping him
because the girl put egg on him.
He was also very hungry. He dashed up to
his dish, his hind legs actually lifting off the
ground with his eagerness. He hesitated at
sight of the egg : looked up.
“Go ahead,” said Mr. Grey.
’Winks took a gurgling bite and fire gripped
him by the throat. He pawed at his mouth,
looked up in bewilderment, and was greeted by


roars of laughter from the man and boys. He
sat back for a moment and looked at them, lifting
one silver paw. His eyes and mouth ran with
the burning of the horrid substance he had
bitten. Then he realized that this was a new
and more treacherous cruelty his people had
practised upon him. Not content with whipping
him, they were trying to poison him and laugh-
ing at his distress. They did not want him any
more.
With his tail between his legs and his head
low, he turned and ran out of the house, pausing
only to wipe at his stinging mouth and eyes as
he went. On down the path, under the gate,
and across the paddock. A forlorn little silver
figure that never once looked back.
“Father,” said Mary, “I wish we hadn’t—he
looks as if he were running away ! ”
“He looks to me like a dog that won’t steal
e ggs a gain !” said Mr. Grey grimly, and the
boys were still convulsed with laughter.


t. 1 1 (ji'i
“I am going to call him !” cried Mary.
“ ’Winks, come back !” But ’Winks did not
stop. He was leaving his little world. The
world of his box at Mary’s door, and the micc-
filled barn, and the fowl-yards of which he had
taken such care.
HE SWERVED OUT OF THE WAY OF THE FARM WAGONS,
SMOTHERED IN DUST BY THE OCCASIONAL MOTOR-CARS
His mouth was burnt and painful, but it was
nothing to the hurt in his heart.
He emerged from the grassy fields and came
out upon the white, dusty highway. All through
the scented morning, across the hot noon and
into the blue-and-lilac twilight he padded on :
swerving out of the way of the farm wagons.


being smothered in dust by the occasional
motor-cars. His walk had nothing of its terrier
spring, his tail hung straight down in an inch
and a half of forlornness. He was the most
wretched thing in the world —a little dog without
anywhere to go. . . .
Meanwhile, at Grey Farm was consternation ;
growing anxiety. By dusk even John Grey was
alarmed, although he stoutly denied it.
“He will soon be back,” he said. But ’Winks
did not appear. They called, “Tiddleywinks,
Tiddleywinks !” far into the night, but he did
not come.
By the next day the household was desolated.
Mary had gone out upon her pony to search the
roads toward Peddle. Mr. Grey had become
sullen and gone along the great main road
toward the Victorian Border. Mrs. Grey had
gone to see if ’Winks had perhaps paid a visit
to his friend the Rector in the old Manor
House. Bill and Tom, with self-reproach for


the joy with which they had stirred in cayenne,
were searching the brush-tangles along the
river. They were the first to return.
As they neared the house, they saw the hired
girl coming back from the road. She was
carrying a large mug. When they asked what
she had been doing, her face became red and
sullen, and so they teased her and suggested
that she must have a beau.
The girl slammed into the house and banged
the door. The boys ran down to the road and
saw the town carrier driving away, wiping his
mouth as he went.
During the next days they noticed that the
carrier always passed at about the same time and
that the hired girl always took him down a
brimming mug. Partly because it took their
minds off the painful subject of the missing
Winks, they developed a feverish desire to
know what was in the mug.
“She brings it down mixed from her bedroom


—and when she is out of her room she locks
the door,” said Bill. “If,” he added, “we hung
head down over the eaves we could see what it
is. The mug stands on the window-sill.”
At frightful risk to life and limb, they climbed
across the old shingled roof, and at the edge
even their stout hearts were rather appalled by
the drop to the flagstones thirty feet below.
They held a whispered conference as to which
one should do the hanging over, and finally
flipped a penny. Bill lost. So Tom braced
himself in sitting posture on the roof, legs
wide apart and feet planted in the age-worn
guttering. And then he grasped Bill’s legs
while Bill gradually lowered himself over, and
looked into the girl’s room.
By stretching he could reach the covered
mug on the window-sill. He removed the cloth
and looked into it. Then he whispered hoarsely
to Tom to haul him back.
Through the special Providence that watches


over little boys and drunkards, be was safely
retrieved, and the conspirators sat side by side
and recovered their breaths.
“It’s eggs,” said Bill. “Eggs all mixed up with
cream, and it smells a bit of brandy.”
It was inevitable that having thought of eggs
they should think of ’Winks. They were torn
to the heart over ’Winks’s departure, and
considerably troubled by their part in it. But
no one could deny that the mixture of cayenne,
mustard, and Holbrook’s sauce had been artist-
ically effective. The longing to try it on some-
thing else had surged within them for days.
What more desirable subject could there be
than the huge German carrier ?
Their hands met in the peculiar shake of the
Bloody Brigands of the Spanish Main (to
which Order most of the small boys of Peddle
belonged).
“Let’s do it !” they said. They brought
the frightful ingredients up to the roof, and


blended them with loving care. Then Tom
made the perilous descent for the mug, and,
while hanging upside down, emptied out about
half its contents and inserted the patent Hell
Fire. Then he re-covered the mug with the
embroidered doily. . . .
About the time that the carrier was due, they
went down to the roadway and hid in the
dock-weeds.
The carrier halted his truck in the shade, and
the hired girl came down, bearing the covered
mug in her hands, and smiling simperingly at
the carrier. She held the mug behind her and
simpered audibly. She retreated coyly as the
carrier advanced.
He ogled her, and then made a Gargantuan
rush and enveloped her stalwart form in his
arms. His kiss resounded on her check. Then
he whirled her about and seized the mug. The
doily fluttered to the earth.
Johann Otto Smitt takes what he wants !”


he said, and, smiling, he lifted the mug and gave
a swallow such as only one of the Sons of the
Fatherland can accomplish.
For a moment there was silence. Such silence
as may have preceded Satan’s fall from Heaven
or may forestall the notes of the Last Trump.
Then the carrier dropped the mug in the dust
at his feet, raised his hairy fists aloft, and there
arose from his vast throat a bellowing such as
a wounded bull might give. In addition, his
face went a deep, rich purple, while his hair
appeared to move about on his scalp and his
eyes to work independently of each other.
“Gott in Himmel !” whispered the girl. Then
she turned and fled, holding high her skirts,
her stalwart Teutonic legs taking the tussocks in
their stride. Behind her sped the carrier, still
bellowing and purple. She held her lead across
the clover, but he gained in the lucerne. In the
sweet corn he overtook her.
He was weakened by the frightful draught he


l xf x IL * 4 '^
SOMETIMES HE RODE ON THE TERRIER S BACK




had taken. His breathing was hoarse, he
coughed terribly, but he grasped the two-
hundred-pound hired girl as if she had been a
straw. There amongst the sweet corn he
spanked her brutally and long with resounding
German spankings and most terrible profanity.
Then, with his rage still unappeased, he caught
her up beneath his hairy arm and bore her
shrieking toward the house.
Like a picture of prehistoric man, he burst
into the quiet kitchen. A succession of roars
still broke from his throat. His eye was wild,
and beneath his arm hung the shrieking form of
the servant-girl.
As the family, returned, dogless, from their
searchings, rose horror-stricken to confront the
madman, he cast the girl into a chair and began
to pour forth a torrent of German.
Then he recollected himself and spoke
English. As he narrated it the “human swine”,
the Delilah , the “snake”, had been making
65 E


love to him, Johann Otto, for many weeks.
She had plied him with wiles and with eggnogs !
She had told him how she stole the eggs for
love of him, even how she put egg upon the
face of the fool small dog so that no one should
know. He had believed in her protestations of
love. But this morning she had tried to poison
him with fire and brimstone. . . . He fell
into German again. Roaring and wild-eyed,
he strode from the kitchen. Shaking his
fists aloft, he recrossed the fields.
The girl cowered in the chair, wailing of a now
useless bottom drawer, and then exclaiming :
“How could it be ? I mix myself Otto’s egg !
How could it be ?”
Mrs. Grey, who was usually very gentle, rose
from her place with a stiff-looking white face.
“You may get your things packed and go—at
once !” she said to the blubbering, hysterical
girl. “At once ! Do you hear me ! Oh, you
wicked, wicked woman !”


Tom and Bill, who had remained in the dock-
weeds, naturally knew nothing of all this. They
had seen the carrier go, roaring and berserk,
toward the house, dragging a helpless female
beneath his arm. They grew a little pale at the
thought of what might have happened within
the house. They looked at each other, with
their eyes rather too large for their small,
freckled faces.
“What shall we do ?” said Tom.
Bill said, “Dunno,” rather faintly.
When, a little later, they saw the hired girl
come out of the house carrying her bags, they
grew more thoughtful still.
“She must have give’ notice,” said Tom.
‘We had,” said Bill, “better leave home.”
“We better,” said Tom.
They shook hands with the shake of the Bloody
Brigands, and rose from out of the dock-weeds.
We better start,” they said hoarsely; “no
good putting it off.”


“We’ll find ’Winks,” they added.
During the days since he had left home,
’Winks had been seeing life, but eating very
little. His paws were very sore, all his twenty-
pound body was very sore, his stomach very
empty.
He had approached a tramp on the evening of
the sixth day and politely asked for a little to
eat, and the tramp had kicked him hard. In
all the days since he had left Grey Farm, he had
only eaten two mice and half a dead snake which
had been opportunely bisected by a motor-truck.
Altogether, ’Winks was in a bad way when he
came to the gate of Miss Clementine Williams’s
house, which fronted on the great Sydney to
Melbourne road.
The gate attracted ’Winks’s attention. It was
a white wicket like the gate of Grey Farm.
There was no large inhospitable dog raging
upon its inner side —apparently unable to wait
to wet its lips with ’Winks


This was a quiet gate. ’Winks sat beside it for
a long while. Sitting tightly upon his stub of
tail and holding up one paw —which was more
sore than the others because the tramp had hurt
it. Presently he squeezed under the gate and
trotted questioningly up the flower-edged path,
his tail still tightly down, and making many
stops to listen.
At the veranda he met Miss Clementine, who
was eighty and wearing white muslin ruffles.
Miss Clementine had watched his progress up
the path. At the foot of the two veranda steps
he stopped, and they looked at each other.
“Good evening, little dog,” said Miss
Clementine ; it was the sort of voice that a little
dog likes. Not over-familiar, nor condescend-
ing.
’Winks came up the steps, which were tall
and caused a little embarrassing difficulty with
his short hindlegs —but the old lady did not
laugh. He stood before her with his head on


one side, looking at her very earnestly. Then
he sat solemnly down and extended his stubby
forepaw. The old lady shook it as one who
fully realized the position of a little dog who
needed help if it could be given as between
gentlemen, but who had no intention of fawning
for it.
“We will,” she said, “go and see what we can
find for supper —please hang your hat and coat
in the hah.”
It was at about noon next day that two
very battered little boys looked over the fence
and gave a simultaneous shriek of “ ’Winks !”
For a moment ’Winks stood still in the middle
of the path, and then his tail became an almost
invisible quiver with its wagging. He flew down
the path, and the two boys fell on their knees in
the dust to embrace him. And then they
writhed and rolled and wagged in an inextricable
mixture of small boy and smaller dog.
The old lady rose and went to her telephone.


When she received her number she said : “When
I rang you this morning in answer to your
advertisement for your little dog, I only had
your dog. Now your two lost boys have just
come through the gate. ... Yes, I know
they are your boys. You told me this morning
that the little dog left home because he was
punished for something he had not done.
I could see that he remembered it when he met
the boys. Now he is rolling with them in my
prize petunias—forgiving mankind.”
Later, when John Grey came to retrieve his
property, and pressed the reward upon her,
she shook her head.
“No. But you can send boys and dog to see
me now and then—l have petunias to spare,”
she said.
John Grey laughed. Then, roughing up his
beard with one great hand, he said : “Em never
going to whip a dog on circumstantial evidence
again, as long as I live.”


He shook Miss Clementine’s hand and added :
“Well, that’s everything cleared up now —
except the mystery of who peppered the pep-
pered egg our friend the carrier swallowed !”


GREY wore her hair drawn back
in soft, silvery waves, her dresses in-
variably had muslin collars at their throats, and
their bodices were usually fastened with a
grey “Scotch pebble” brooch. She was deeply
interested in movements for World Peace, and
believed in the fundamental goodness of human
nature.
Mr. Grey wore a rather fierce-looking curly
grey beard, faded blue overalls which were
usually left open a little so that they exposed
part of his immense and grey-haired chest, and
he believed in “Bigger, Better Armies” and
“Keep Up Our Navy”, and that “They can’t
build the boys of the Bulldog Breed” who had,
according to the same popular song, “made


Old England’s Name”. He believed that all
men were born in sin and that most of them
stayed that way.
Mrs. Grey belonged to the Society for the
Abolition of Capital Punishment, and had tried
to convert Mr. Grey to its ranks.
“It has been more than proven,” said Mrs.
Grey, in her sweet, soft tones, “that crime is
most rampant where punishment is most severe.
Capital punishment, John, has never been a
successful deterrent of murder.”
“Maybe not,” said John Grey, holding a
small new potato poised on the way to his
bearded lips. “But it does successfully deter the
murderer who s hung—and I always thought
that was the principal object of the function.”
He then laughed with deep-chested rudeness at
his own joke, and ate the potato.
Mrs. Grey gave him up, but she remained an
incurable optimist. Thus, when the woman
who helped with the family wash told Mrs.


Grey a moving story of an eldest son “gone
wrong”, Mrs. Grey was filled with swift pity.
“He was,” said the woman, rubbing a red
fist across her eyes, “he was took up with bad
company, an’ then he got arrested . . . an 5 him
not seventeen.”
Mrs. Grey’s gentle face had flushed with
sympathy. She had not, it should be recorded,
read of the case. It was her habit, when con-
fronted with a printed account of crime, to
murmur, “Oh, that’s another of those dreadful
things !” and hastily to turn over the page.
If she had read of young Stewart’s case, she
would have learned of a particularly hardened
young criminal’s brutal assault upon a helpless
man —whose face would bear the marks of
young Stewart’s boots all his life. She would
also have learned that young Stewart had a
record of house-breaking, and that his mother
had been strongly suspected of finding many of
his “marks” for him.


“What I would like,” said the woman, “would
be to get him into a good clean home—where
he’d have a woman to watch over him.”
Mrs. Grey had great faith in woman’s influence,
and her pity was wide as the world. She said :
“I will talk to Mr. Grey.”
“Perhaps,” said the woman, without looking
up, “perhaps no one but you need know about
him being who he is ? . . . Men don’t under-
stand.”
So all that Mr. Grey learned was that his wife
had heard of a promising young man in need of
work, and would like to employ him for general
cleaning up about the farmhouse and its old
garden.
Young Stewart arrived by the mail car, and in
all the splendour of a rather vividly striped suit,
a red tie, a crystal pin, and permanent-waved
hair. As he moved across the pasture toward the
white gate of Grey Farm, he was not pleased


with its simple aspect. It strengthened his con-
viction that, despite the “mater’s” assurances,
he was wasting his time in the society of what
he termed “a bunch of hicks and hayseeds”.
He was hot and bored and bad-tempered.
HE GROWLED WITH A MUFFLED FURY
At the same moment that young Stewart
reached the gate from without, ’Winks, a fleeing
rush of self-importance, growls, and writhing
whiskers, reached it from the garden side, and
prepared to squeeze beneath.
As always, ’Winks stuck.


The pressure of the lower gate-bar bulged him
out wide in the middle. His front paws moved
with a futile swimming motion, his hind feet
pried vainly for leverage, the while he growled
with a muffled fury intended to strike terror
to the heart of the intruder at the thought of
what ’Winks would undoubtedly do if he ever
came unstuck again.
Young Stewart said, “Get out of here !” and
swung a menacing boot back and forth before
’Winks’s nose.
’Winks could not possibly have gone back
from his position, and in any case he was not
easily intimidated by threats. He continued to
forward. Whereat young Stewart
laughed and kicked the helpless small dog most
painfully on the moist black tip of his nose.
’Winks gave a snarling shriek of rage, and Mrs.
Grey looked out.
“What is it, Tiddleywinks ?” she called.
Then, perceiving his position, she added, “Oh,


is that silly little dog stuck ? Just step over the
fence and come in.”
Young Stewart got over with a bad grace, and
’Winks was left to worm his way out —and then
in again—in his own time.
If the Stewart boy was flashily dressed, Mrs.
Grey decided that this was due to the poor lad’s
attempt to make himself “nice-looking”. His
loutish sullenness she mentally described as
“embarrassment”.
Presently she fed him of the household’s best.
Juicy cold chicken and brown potatoes. Then
fresh apricots brought in from the orchard by
Mary, and served with thick, self-supporting
cream.
Under the stimulus of food young Stewart
talked loudly in an idiom strange to Grey Farm.
But at least he seemed more “at home”.
After the meal the old lady took the young
man through the house.
He was shown the old inlaid whatnot: the


miniatures of the great-grandparents : “Bust
of Psyche” : the “very valuable” old lace shawl
on the piano. Simple things—the carefully
preserved, small-valued treasures of an old
farmhouse. Another nature than Stewart’s
would have found them touching. As he saw
them, he winked at an invisible audience —
demonstrating to his own satisfaction his
superiority to these foibles of the country
“hick”.
One old black box, however, caught his
interest. It was clasped with wrought-silver,
and set with silver and mother-of-pearl in a
pattern of strange flowers, and it stood just
inside Mrs. Grey’s door.
“What’s in there ?” he asked roughly.
“Oh, just old things,” she said. “It’s my
scrap-box.”
“Let’s see ’em,” he suggested. The old lady
opened the box, and together they looked over
an assortment of old ribbons, “hair-lockets”,


*4 f)ig+'s* ■1i|I|/mHHk jKii
' *•, ' • 't -. |E
. I S£f ■ - - --v JHlB^UB
WHk | . t, j, - -w.--.jTj , 5 fll -’ j^Jfn
•■ - --*: • * , :* L.
Vinks stood beneath the tree looking out across the
DREAMY VALLEYS AND DARK-TREED HILLS




spools of silk, faded photographs, and jet
beads and buckles. At the bottom was a great
black pearl pendant.
“That came from India —my great-grandfather
brought it out a hundred years ago and my
grandmother left it to me. I have never liked
it, for the pearls have all turned black,” she
said. But young Stewart’s eyes were shining,
and he showed a disinclination to leave the
box.
He had seen a treasure whose richness made
him gasp—and the old fool didn’t know its
value !
After that he suddenly became attentive and
eager to please —and the old lady thought that
he was “becoming really at home”.
In the next days young Stewart went about his
duties, if not with enthusiasm, at least with
more application than he had ever shown
before. His only trouble was with ’Winks.
This little animal, although severely scolded
81 F


by Mrs. Grey, displayed a fiercely smouldering
resentment whenever he saw the new assistant.
“I guess I accidentally hurt him trying to open
the gate,” said young Stewart innocently. “I
didn’t realize he was stuck.”
He wished he had a private chance to settle
things with the little dog, but there was no op-
portunity, and it was policy to silence ’Winks’s
protests. With this end in view he seized every
opportunity to feed the terrier with the things
which he found that ’Winks liked best, and
’Winks —who had no pride in the matter of
edibles—accepted the titbits without a qualm.
Indeed, the little dog soon perceived that he
could embarrass the youth by growling at him
and thus exact a tribute in the form of stolen
scraps. Possibly ’Winks reasoned that if
Stewart was to be kept on the place in spite
of all that he, ’Winks, had said, the man might
as well be of some use.
By the end of a week Stewart had learned all


he wished to know of the ways of the household.
He had also decided that it would be easier to
come back for the pendant rather than to face
the questioning its disappearance would occasion
while he was in the house. Therefore he stayed
in bed until ten one morning and thus incurred
the wrath of John Grey, and was sent about his
business.
’Winks was gratified by the man’s departure
—his advice had at last been heeded.
But now we must come to one of the less
pleasing aspects of ’Winks’s make-up.
As hinted in previous tales, ’Winks was not
refined : the niceties of life meant little to him.
His pedigree was considerably larger than he
was, and for generations back his sires had worn
the bluest of ribbons. And yet ’Winks was not
one of Nature’s gentlemen, nor had he “acquired
polish”. This blemish upon his character was
perhaps most marked in his table manners.
He ate with vigour, with gurgling, with


threatened suffocation, and if the food happened
to be soft he operated in a halo of fine spray.
As he dined, his legs were planted well apart,
while at moments his hind ones were actually
lifted bodily from the ground and at others
they clawed for leverage : his whiskers writhed,
and he growled in a muffled manner during all
his eating.
He ate almost anything in unlimited quantities.
He would imbibe milk until his silken stomach
produced a ringing, drum-like note if patted.
He ate in haste, without thought and without
shame. He practised the lowest deceptions in
order to eat—once having been severely burned
in an effort to steal steaming fragments from the
great iron pot in which the meat was stewed for
the working dogs.
As a general rule the more certain he was that
he was not supposed to eat something, the
better he liked it.
Now, in Australia, as elsewhere, dog medicines


are frequently necessary if a dog is to be kept
in good health. These medicines are usually
mixed with milk or butter and applied in small
quantities to a dog, who later has a fearful pain
for his own best good.
On Grey Farm there were in all twenty-one
dogs ; twenty being splendid collies, and one
a small, fat, and very disreputable terrier—
’Winks himself.
Once in every three months every dog was
dosed with “A Dog’s Best Friend Sprit s
Sprightly Dog Strips. Dissolve in Milk.”
The callow babes of the collie kennel imbibed
the mixture of their own accord. The striplings
took it with hesitance and twinges of painful
memory. The elders took it with three men
holding them and the neck of a bottle firmly
inserted far down their throats.
Now, upon one particularly lovely autumn day
shortly after Stewart’s departure, it so chanced
that the chemist in Peddle was out of Sprit’s


Strips, and substituted “Perkins’s Pedigree
Painless Powders. A teaspoonful for mastiffs
and very large dogs, half a small saltspoon for
toys. Mix in butter.”
This was seemingly unimportant, but while
it is a comparatively easy matter to put liquid
down an unwilling canine throat, it takes a
strong man and true to send butter along the
same route after an athletic collie has shut his
eyes and his jaws, taken his last look at the sun,
and seemingly prepared to die before he will
swallow.
After Mr. Grey and his assistants had dosed
Keela and Lad, they sat down to rest and wipe
the perspiration from dripping brows.
They sat on an old log under a giant whisper-
ing fir tree. At the back of the log stood the
plate with four pounds of butter and eighteen
doses of Perkins’s Powders “for mastiffs and
very large dogs”.
’Winks rounded the fir tree, intent upon trail-


ing a lizard. He saw the plate, and stopped so
suddenly that his feet skidded a little on the pine
needles. His nose quivered and his whiskers
worked. He sat down.
There, not two yards away, was more butter
than he had ever expected to see out of a
churn ! He particularly loved butter. His tail
made small motions amongst the dry needles.
The men were talking, with their backs toward
the plate.
After a few moments of indecision, ’Winks
made a cautious dash for it. The butter was
firm, he seized a pound or so and swallowed with
creditable silence. Butter oozed from his jaws,
butter bathed his whiskers : one stubby foot
got into the butter on the plate : his tongue
lapped in swift pink scoopings.
True, it was not as nice as he had expected it
to be, but it was undoubtedly butter, and it was
also stolen.
An extra large mouthful produced an in-


involuntary gurgle, which betrayed him. Mr.
Grey wheeled, and with wrath mingled with
horror he saw the depleted plate.
“Damnation, look at that !” cried the Master
“he’s eaten the dose for seventeen mastiffs I”
of Grey Farm. “He’s eaten the dose for seven-
teen mastiffs !”
’Winks was unaware that the cry was one of
real concern for himself. He made for his
friend the blackberry hedge, licking his butter-
besmeared whiskers as he went.


“Catch him !” roared Mr. Grey. “Bring him
here !” But ’Winks was not to be caught.
Mary, the only person in the world to whom
he accredited unfailing obedience, was away from
home. As Mr. Grey and Tom and Bill reached
one side of the great blackberry hedge, ’Winks
squeezed along a rabbit run-away and came out
on the other. When they posted both sides of
the twenty-foot hedge, he made his rustling,
laborious way down the centre.
Thus he deprived himself of the salt and water
which alone could have staved off the agony
to come. For while ’Winks was not a “toy”,
he was more certainly not eighteen mastiffs,
and, while he had not eaten the full number of
portions on the plate, he had gathered in a good
dozen or so.
It was as, on a brief sortie from the hedge, he
whirled grinning pantingly round the pump
that the first pang smote him. His mental
processes were quite apparent. He did not


believe that it was possible to have such a pain
as he had. He was torn with growls, then he
remonstrated with himself—this thing could
not be ! And then he was seized with another
spasm . . . only again to think that he must
have been mistaken.
And then the thing passed the comic stage.
’Winks was a deadly sick little dog. And all that
night, as he toiled through the shadows of death,
the family, who ordinarily and justifiably berated
him, sat by him with drawn faces—for, although
’Winks was not a gentleman, he had the
personality which enslaves the heart as the
Secrets of Alluring Femininity” booklets state
that they can teach their female readers to do.
And it looked as though ’Winks had spent his
last sinful, doggish day.
To be touched apparently gave him agony
which set him snarling weakly —then in shame
his small tongue licked Mr. Grey’s hand, and
his plump bud of a tail quivered a trifle.


“You’ve got to live, little man,” said John
Grey unsteadily. “We’d never find another
pest like you !”
’Winks gave a little growl—and lived. By
the time that Mary came back next day, he was
in a state which in humans would have been
called pale but composed.
But for once something was really impressed
upon ’Winks’s memory. He blamed the butter
for his disaster. Never again would he touch
anything which suggested butter.
It was only necessary for Tom or Bill to rub
a dab of it upon his whiskers to reduce him to
the most frozen dignity for hours. If, with like
treachery, they buttered one of his forepaws,
he would try to free it with agitated shakings,
instead of licking it. In modern phraseology,
’Winks had a butter complex.
In the weeks which followed his departure
from Grey Farm, young Stewart laid his plans
carefully. Every Wednesday, Mr. Grey, Tom and


Bill, and the hired men went into Peddle with
the week’s supply of butter, fat chickens, sucking
pigs, and lambs for the Sydney market. The
train upon which their products were despatched
was a late one. They did not return until
dawn.
Thus each Wednesday night the young girl
and the old lady were in the house alone. No
dog slept in the house except ’Winks—and for
’Winks young Stewart had a bottle of powdered
strychnine. . . , He would, according to his
programme, creep up to the front door and drop
in some of the mixture through the letter-chute
—then wait until it had taken effect. Then he
would unlock the door and be away with the
pendant before the women were properly awake
—if they were disturbed at all. If he was lucky,
they would not be woken. But he wasn’t
worried. To use his own terms, without ’Winks
to give them warning, neither the “old skirt”
nor the “tart” could give him any trouble.


Anyway, they had better not try ! He had a
good club.
He arrived early to make sure that the men
were away, and then sat down to wait for the
women to go to bed.
The night was windy and the trees made a
loud noise. Stewart resented the coldness of the
wind. Periodically he saw the slender shadows of
the woman and girl upon the blinds of the
kitchen. Then the women went upstairs, and
the lower house was in darkness.
Stewart waited for an hour longer, then crept
across to the front door and listened.
There was silence, and he knew just how
things were. The women were placidly sleeping,
with their doors shut but not locked. ’Winks
was asleep in his box at Mary’s door. During
his stay at Grey Farm, Stewart had been
annoyed by the self-importance of ’Winks’s
vigil. But he had experimented carefully to
ascertain just what ’Winks would do if dis-


turbed from slumber . . . the terrier didn’t
make a loud staccato racket; instead, he always
moved, growling, with what he imagined was
diabolic stealth, along the passages, sniffing
piercingly beneath doors, and setting his feet
down with care.
Stewart was glad of this, as it would not have
done to have the women woken before he got to
the pendant. There were some old guns
hanging in the hall and at the turn of the
stairs. . . .
Very softly, Stewart put his lips to the slot
of the letter-chute and gave a clear, piercing
“mew”. Then he listened, and from above there
came a faint sound of a small dog drowsily
awakening from sleep.
“Mee-ow,” said the man. There was a sharp
scutter of dog-feet on the oilcloth : a low growl:
soft sounds on the carpeted stairs. Then silence
as ’Winks stood listening in the hall.
The man scratched, ever so lightly, on the


door. He knew that the little dog was doing his
absurd stalk down the hallway. Then a loud
sniff beneath the door told him that ’Winks
was immediately within.
“Hullo,” said Stewart. “ ’Lo, Tiddleywinks.”
And ’Winks snarled, but still gave no loud
warning : his reasoning being that this person,
although unpleasant, had been tolerated by the
family. He had been spanked more than once
for unnecessarily awaking the household, and
he would make no outcry so long as Stewart
stayed outside.
Stewart smiled. Everything was going just
as he had planned. Obviously, so long as he
didn’t open the door, ’Winks was not going to
do anything more than express reserved dis-
approval—also a part of the dog’s mind was still
absorbed with the problem of what had become
of the cat. Stewart slipped the poisoned food
through the letter-slot, and heard the little
plump as it fell to the floor. Intently he


listened for the sounds of ’Winks’s vulgarian
eating which should have followed this
fah.
Instead there was a loud sniff. . . . Then a
perfect shriek of rage ! A snarling : a scuttering :
a clawing at the panels ! A frantic outraged
barking !
Astonishment was succeeded in Stewart’s
brain by savage anger against the raging little
dog. Grasping his ugly club, he unlocked the
door and swung for ’Winks. ’Winks dodged,
still raising his wild clamour.
The man ran past him along the hall—he had
wanted to do this without fuss, but he was not
going to have had all that wait for nothing.
As he moved toward the foot of the stairs,
Mrs. Grey appeared at their head carrying a
lamp.
‘What—what is it ?” she stammered. “Oh,
no !” —as he kicked savagely at ’Winks.
In common with most brutes, Stewart was


... —
iu' v , -. //MiiHsL—' A * "V
1 /; ■
THE GREAT COLLIE WAS DELIGHTED TO GO DANCING ACROSS THE




a coward. He was getting rattled. Pure noise is
an unnerving thing, and ’Winks was noise
incarnate. He flew in and pricked the intruder’s
leg—drawing a shout of rage from the man.
He was dancing back with blazing eyes and
withdrawn lips. Now he was underfoot as
Stewart ran for the stairs. His bud of a tail
quivered rigidly, he danced with rage and
excitement.
From above came Mary’s voice : “Stand still,
or I’ll shoot you !”
And Stewart looked up into the barrel of a
shotgun shaking erratically in the girl’s young
brown hands. Her hair was fluffed up in a soft
brown halo, her eyes wide with terror. But she
said loudly, “I’m a terribly good shot !”
Slowly the man raised his hands.
“Now,” said the girl, “you can go into the
cupboard under the stairs till morning ! . . .
Mother, go and let the big dogs loose !”
Next morning, after the unsatisfactory example
97 g


of woman’s influence had been removed, John
Grey looked quizzically at his wife.
“In the process of reforming that young man,
did you ever show him your bits of jewellery ?”
Mrs. Grey blushed deeply. “I may have been
a little foolish, but I never showed him where
I kept any of my good jewels.”
“What did you show him ?”
“Only the old pearl pendant,” she said. “He
did seem a little interested in that, I remember.
He said that if it had not changed colour it
might have been valuable : that it was a pity it
was spoiled.”
“I think,” said John Grey, “that maybe we
don’t know as much about pearls as that lad
did. We’ll send the pendant down to be
valued.”
Which story proves that the best-laid schemes
of mice and men are subject to unexpected
disasters. Young Stewart, who had studied
’Winks’s tastes, and who knew nothing of the


episode of “Perkins’s Painless Powders”, had
made the perfectly natural, unforeseeably fatal
mistake of trying to poison ’Winks with part of
a pat of strychnined butter.


AN AFFAIR OF THE HEART
was through. He had had enough.
In the words of one of Mr. Grey’s old
shepherds, he had “come to the end of his
blanky termination” !
Every silver-grey-coated inch of him expressed
injured dignity. His tail was stiffly vertical, his
hind feet moved with a springy, slightly
sideward motion which in itself expressed
disdain.
His morning had begun with disappointment,
progressed through betrayal, and ended in
humiliation. To begin with, he had wanted the
heart —the sheep’s heart. He always wanted it
—excruciatingly. But it was, as unfailingly,
given to Keela or Lad or one of the working
dogs. No matter how good ’Winks was, the


farm butcher never gave him anything better
than the liver.
Yet ’Winks always hoped, and therefore was
always disappointed. This morning, as ever,
his mouth had worked and his tail wriggled
when he saw the titbit, but that was the nearest
he got to it.
Then, hardly had he forgotten the heart, when
Mary and Mrs. Grey decided to drive into
Peddle, and Mary told ’Winks that he could go.
And on the strength of it he had made a point of
visiting the kennels where Keela and Lad and
the other big sheep-dogs were tied, and had
spent a few minutes flourishing about just
beyond their chain-reach, ostentatiously kicking
a little earth, and moving with a springy swagger
which always particularly annoyed them.
He had then proceeded to the horse vehicle—
where his friend Nell the mare was tossing her
aged head with a pretence at girlishness —and
had stood beside the wheel waiting to be lifted


in : good as a terrier could be, his two-inch stub
of tail vibrating with minute agitations.
Then, at the last minute, Mr. Grey determined
to go too, and said very finally that there was
no room for ’Winks.
Mary sat on the ground beside ’Winks and
apologized, but this was no compensation,
more particularly as from the tail of his eye he
could see the dogs at the kennels laughing about
it* Mary also told him that there was “a lovely
surprise” coming for him, but this information
was, of course, wasted upon his silken ears.
Then hardly had the vehicle gone when
Mary’s cousins, Tom and Bill, enticed him into
the drawing-room, with murmurs of “Mice,
Tiddleywinks, mice !” and, locking the door,
began to play “Home, Sweet Home” on the
grand piano. As their ages were respectively
twelve and seven, the recital would doubtless
have been harrowing to the majority of listeners,
but to Winks it was refinement of torture. He


had never heard the piano, even from afar,
without tears or flight, and here he was pinned
in with the horrors of sound, drowned by them,
torn asunder.
He realized the evil motives actuating the
musicians, and he strove for calm—sitting hard
on his tail with his eyes shut. But it was useless ;
as they roamed through “pleasures and palaces”
his courage broke. He wailed. The more he
wailed, the more they played. The more they
played, the louder wailed ’Winks.
When at last they released him, he was a
harder and more evil dog. Human ties mat-
tered little to him : old associations had lost
their power.
With the springy, slightly sideward gait of
disdain, he set out to go to the Devil.
He had only once before been away from the
house and its yards, completely alone and by
himself. Now, despite the fact that the last
excursion had been most painful, the excitement


of springtime began to sing in his heart. The
wide paddocks were sparkled with orange
buttercups ; sticky, brown-faced sundews were
busy catching gnats. There was a tenderness
of ethereal shimmering blue over the distant
hills —not that the hue of the distant hills con-
veyed anything to ’Winks. But the soft new
grasses tickled his nose so that he sneezed, and
then he ran plump on to the freshest rabbit
trail he had ever met.
He stopped in his tracks, sniffed deeply, and
then, with twiddling stub and rolling whiskers,
set out down the trail —through a slight error
of judgment, in the opposite direction to the
rabbit.
Later he dug out some beetles from beneath
a rotting log. Then he came out on the crest
of a high, bare hill, where flat grey rocks broke
through the close-cropped turf, and a great
dead tree stood silvered by the seasons. ’Winks
stood beneath it, looking out across dreamy


valleys and dark-treed hills. The homestead of
Grey Farm lay behind him like a mere handful
of pebbles sinking in tender haze. ’Winks, by
the way, matched the great tree in colour, but
not in size ; as he stood beneath it he looked
about as large as the puff-balls bursting up from
the grass.
He did not feel quite as large as he might have,
either. . . . He was a very long way from
home.
And he had no misconceptions about the
world he lived in. Keela and Lad had literally
knocked them out of him long ago. Caution
said that when you were no bigger than ’Winks,
it was well to go home. . . . But think how
they treated him there ! And there was another
thing: ’Winks felt the stirring of romance
beneath his grey silken waistcoat.
He skipped suddenly upon his six-inch
legs and then looked down the hill towards
Peddle.


At about the same time that ’Winks had
taken his final high C in the drawing-room,
Mr. Grey was asking the Peddle Stationmaster
when he might expect the train. And was,
incidentally, gratified to learn that it was only
an hour late—which, in a country like Australia
where the railways are operated “by the people
for the people”, is almost equivalent to being
on schedule.
“I believe your new dog’s coming to-day,”
said the Stationmaster.
John Grey was very proud of his dogs—•
particularly of the prospective arrival.
“She’s come all the way from Scotland —a
Killdonan. She’s the daughter of champions,
all right. ... A sort of dog princess. Her
name’s Princess o’ the Heather.”
“How much did she cost ?” asked a porter
reverently.
At this Mr. Grey winced slightly, for certain of
his own forebears had also hailed from Scotland.


“A hundred guineas.”
This was greeted by surprised exclamations.
“An awful price for a dog,” said the Station-
master. “A dreadful price for a bitch !”
“Still, I expect to get it back with her first
fitter —I’ll see she has a champion mate !” said
her owner complacently. He added : “Ell be
back in time to get her out of the dog-box.”
When the train drew puffing into the station,
there was considerable public interest in the
great black-and-gold collie crouching in the
box. But Princess o’ the Heather was in no
friendly mood. Like many dogs from great
kennels, she had been well cared for and
groomed, but she had never possessed anyone
to love, nor had anyone loved her. Then it
had been her misfortune, on the long journey
from Scotland, to be entrusted to the care of a
ship’s butcher, who, when she did not fawn,
made her fife at sea a misery by small torment-
ings : offering her meat and taking it away for


another of his charges ; or prodding her with
sharp, if harmless, things, until she had raged
behind her bars like a she-devil.
The memory of these insults was clear in her
mind. She bit at the men who tried to release
her : a lovely, feminine fury—utterly cowing the
small, fat, silver-grey dog who was her train
companion.
The men had undone the latch, but were still
debating as to the next move, when the train
shunted ponderously.
“It’s all right,” said the Stationmaster.
“They’ll pull in again in a minute.”
The train fulfilled his prophecy, but Princess
o’ the Heather did not. She had noticed the
loosened latch.
As the train grated to the end of its shunt, her
long, sensitive nose was quivering at the bar.
The little fat, grey dog watched her admiringly,
but dared not leave its corner. A moment, and
the collie had the bar up and was free, standing


poised irresolutely among the tall evening
primroses and ruddy dock-weeds by the line.
Vaguely she had expected to find herself
amid familiar Scotch fields. The rich spring-
drowned Australian world confused her. Then
she heard Mr. Grey shout. Princess o’ the
Heather was tired of men. She ran, keeping to
the tall grasses by the track for a time, and then
striking away across a green hill where cows
were grazing.
The shouts died down behind her, but she did
not abate her speed : a lovely, running thing of
black and golden-orange, seemingly light as
down, but in reality strong as a wolf. As she
went, she sniffed the wind, and her face lost its
hunted look, while her ears began to quiver
expectantly. Her tongue was ready for laughter
when at last, topping the highest rise in sight,
she came upon ’Winks and the puff-balls !
She dropped to her haunches and smiled
tongueingly.


’Winks was thrilled. He stiffened from his
ebony nose to the quivering tip of his small
silver tail. He seemed barely to touch the earth
as he circled slowly and with great dignity about
the Princess. He spurned a puff-ball. At last
they touched noses—which involved ’Winks
standing even more erect, as his silver-
grey back came scarcely to her golden
flank.
He was adoring, gallant, and at the same time
masterful and protective.
All at once she sported away in a gleeful
gallop, spun about, and delivered a love-tap of
one dainty foot which spilled ’Winks, and
rolled him some yards down the hill. He rose
hastily, trying to look as if he had meant to do
it. Somewhat to his relief, she did not return
to the charge, but was all dancing to be off across
the sparkling hills.
So they set out together : she at the tireless
collie run handed down from a wolf pack of


long ago, ’Winks bouncing proudly at her side
in a manner peculiar to terriers.
Now that she had a companion, the great
collie was wholly delighted with her new world.
’Winks put up a rabbit, but while he was spy-
hopping to try to see where it had gone, she
passed him like a flame . . . and was upon
poor bunny before it could gain the shelter of
the hilltop warren. She feasted daintily while
’Winks sat panting and admiring her.
Then they went on again, and came at last to
the wild land along the river.
Princess o’ the Heather was entranced. Here
were great rocks, vast as houses, overhung with
roofings of green clematis and devil-vine ; here
secret trails of fox and cat; rabbit-riddled
banks ; great red-trunked gums, with odours of
’possum coming from their hollows.
To ’Winks it seemed the ideal place for a
romantic courtship. He was very short of
breath, but he placed a tonguey kiss upon his


lady’s cheek, when, her mind being intent upon
a rustling in the vines below their rock, she
rewarded him with a silent, vicious snap !
He drew off and studied her with tilted head,
was freshly overcome by her beauty, and gave
a couple of short barks, accompanied by several
particularly fascinating bounces. His efforts
merely startled a lyre-bird which Princess had
been watching, and as it fled, she launched
herself into space like a gold-and-black arrow,
landed lightly upon her feet, and was off in
pursuit.
’Winks could not risk losing his life’s only
love in this way; he teetered upon the brink,
gave a short cry of despair, and hurled himself
after her into the ferny gulch, lost his balance,
and, because of the fatal rotundity of his figure,
rolled ! Rolled through the tangles of devil-
vine and clematis and ferns, smacked over rocks,
gathering momentum as he went, and landed
in a net of tangled creepers fifty feet below.


As he squirmed in terror, he looked up and
saw Princess sitting on a ledge above —laughing
at him! He was humiliated. His short legs
windmilled with his anguish, and suddenly he
fell free, landing in the ferns with a loud thump.
But now Princess o’ the Heather descended
daintily to his side and touched him affection-
ately, so that again his heart was prone before
her in adoration.
Yet hardly was he upon his feet than she was
laughing back and leading the way to new
adventures. Adventures that went on for hours,
and included ’Winks disturbing a hornets’
nest and getting one eye stung shut, treading
on all makes of thorns, and falling down all
designs of cliffs.
About five in the afternoon Princess led down
to the river itself.
’Winks dreaded water in any large quantity ;
he tried to lead her from it, but she was entranced
by the bubbling brown shallows and the dark
113 H


pools. While ’Winks drank from the shallowest
place whereat it was possible to lap, she plunged
in, swimming joyously into the current, lapping
and lopping her tongue in the dark, sweet eddies
as she swam. He sat chubbily down, waiting
for her to come ashore. He was out of breath.
He was bruised by his falls. He knew that
they were cjuite a terribly long way from home
which seemed a nicer place than he had thought.
Being in love with an Amazon, even if she
be fair as Diana, is no joke.
Still, she must get tired presently !
She showed no signs of it, however; she
ducked her beautiful head into the ripples, and
snapped playfully at the foam. Winks collapsed
with a suppressed grunt of exhaustion, and
closed his still movable eye for a second when
he opened it, he saw what she was going to do !
She was swimming for the farther shore where
the wild myrtle overhung the water : overhung
a dark, dreadful, strong-flowing current.


’Winks’s heart grew cold.
He sprang up and bounced imploringly upon
his short legs. He pretended to see rabbits in
the ferns and brush behind him. He even
started to chase one phantom beast. . . . But
it was no good. She drew herself on to the
remote rocks like a svelte seal, shook out her
coat, and turned to wait for him !
For all his stiffness, he played a little game
with himself, hoping she would come back to
join in it. She didn’t !
She laughed and looked into the dark
shadows of the scented myrtles. Faint
heart never won fair lady ! ’Winks plunged
in.
Most animals swim well by instinct, but
’Winks was not one of them. His minute legs
went too fast in the futile effort to lift his plump
person bodily from the stream. Before he was
half-way across, he was exhausted. Then,
instead of going with the current, he turned


i V \ mr ■
I « *W|r ' ■‘•^
a ’ USf * ’ a ,iU i fjj v v
UliJ tcHRrM | M JJ'l ’ W !
up it. And the little ripples ran down his
despairing throat.
His world grew dark with terror !
He thought of the garden at Grey Farm, and
the barn where the fat mice were. He thought
DELIBERATELY, A SHADE SCORNFULLY, SHE BORE HIM OUT
of Mary with no one to guard her door at night:
thought of the wicket gate under which he was
always stuck when people wanted to open it.
His small, stocky front paws went faster,
futilely clawing the water !
If Princess had not come to the rescue, he


would in a moment have been numbered with
the “splendid lovers who for love’s sake died”.
With one silk-plumed shoulder, the collie
bumped him round downstream. Swimming
beside him, she kept him going that way. As he
foundered in the shallows, she reached across
and closed great jaws upon the scruff of his
gurgling neck—as a collie mother carries her
puppies. And then, deliberately, a shade scorn-
fully, she bore him out and dropped him on the
moss with a wet sort of plop.
’Winks lived, but by the time he had coughed
and staggered his way back to life, love was dead
in his breast.
Love may suffer : ’Winks had been doing it
for the last five hours. Lovers may risk the
Valley of the Shadow and still adore. But it is a
passion of passions that will stand being carried
out by the scruff of its neck, and dropped with
a wet flop in the moss, to dispose of an in-
advertently swallowed river.


’Winks wanted to go home. He wanted Mary
and Mrs. Grey, and Mr. Grey—and even Tom
and Bill. A sinner who had reached that state
of batteredness and discomfort commonly
described as repentance, he set out for home :
following the river until he found a shallow
across which he dared to venture; then
with small worn feet toiling over the
hills. . . .
And with the perversity of women, Princess
o’ the Heather, being no longer wanted, trotted
at his side.
The lilac twilight was mated with the tender-
ness of the rising moon, the stars floated in a
misty spring sky. Princess wanted to lure
’Winks away after ground birds and ’possums,
but, resistless as the workings of minute pistons,
’Winks’s aching front legs ran on and on, and
his small hindlegs bounced after them, just
slightly sideways. He was sore with so many
different sorenesses that he was all one sore.


He believed that he was dying, but he wanted
to die at home.
At Grey Farm, the Master was lamenting.
“The loveliest collie bitch I ever saw ! . . .
By Jove ! I’ll offer such a reward for her that
someone will bring her back ! Don’t expect
they ever will, though.” He rumpled his grey
beard wrathfully. “I’d give anything to get
that dog back. . . . Such a forehead as you
never saw. Such a flank . . .”
His daughter Mary stood in the doorway, and
asked :
“A really good reward, Father ?”
“Of course I’ll give a good reward. I just
said so ! Lord, there’s no better-bred dog ever
came out of Scotland !” He rubbed up grey
hair with one great hand. “If something had
to get lost, I don’t see why it couldn’t have been
that useless terrier-wife you bought for Tiddley-
winks. .. . One thing, he isn’t going to


enjoy any wedded bliss. He s dead before this,
I expect ! Can’t say I m worrying. . . .
“Now, Daddy, don’t grumble and be nasty
about poor ’Winks. To get back to that
reward ”
“What about it ?”
“Well, suppose the person who brought
Princess home would like to have the sheep s
heart for his supper every day for a whole
year ? Would you give it to him ?”
Mr. Grey looked at her perplexedly
“No, I’m not mad, Daddy. . . . Look !”
Into the room she pushed a swollen, tangled,
haggard ’Winks, and then drew forward on a
leash a great black-and-golden collie with
quivering, frightened ears, eager for love and
afraid to look for it.
“Good Lord, it’s Princess !”
“Don’t frighten her, Daddy. She’s never
been handled, but she’s going to love me—
aren’t you, Princess ? And now, how about


those sheeps’ hearts ? . . . He brought
her home while I was rubbing the sick
i »
cow !
“For two years !” shouted her father. “He’ll
have every heart for two whole years ! And
good luck to his married life !”
HE MADE ROOM FOR HER ON THE MAT
With the curious jerky motion occasioned by
agony, ’Winks moved to the mat by the fire
and slowly lowered his racked body to the floor.
Dimly, he saw a small, fat, silver-grey dog
creeping forward out of the shadows beyond
the coal-scuttle. But he was through with


women. He’d tried to please them, and look
what came of it !
But this was not an aloof, regal dog. It
twiddled its stub of a tail apologetically, and
came a little closer, patting before it with one
stubby paw. Then, with tilted head, it gazed
upon ’Winks —a gaze of maidenly reverence for
manly strength.
He growled sternly.
Then its small pink tongue touched his
tortured side : a warm, wifely, healing touch.
The touch of a woman who knew her place.
’Winks felt sudden balm. He feared that he
was dreaming, but the licking continued. . . .
He made room for her on the mat—and two
small grey dogs slept side by side.
The End










3 1508 02085866 3


