

[BURris.PHfi.pj; '
SLAND Üb l - s
| AUSTRALASIAN SGSKISIJ* 'H
U/eslevan (Tjetfyodist /T\ issi 09ary~^oote^-swin
L i
? 7
I
II
381 Qeorge Street, Sydney,
December , 1898 ,
\Winter (excursion
Dear Sir or Madam,
OR several years I have had the conviction that great good would result to the work
in which we are engaged if it were possible to arrange for a visit to some of the
fields occupied by us and by kindred societies, so that some of those who
are interested in Christian Missions could see for themselves the work which is
being done and could also be made to realise how much yet remains to be accomplished before the
heathen, in the large groups lying so close to our Australian shores, are won for Christ. With much
to encourage us in our work, we have to contend against an amont of indifference, which, in my
opinion, is largely the result of ignorance. Our people, as a rule, have no true conception of the
real work which is being done on our latest Mission Fields in New Britain and New Guinea, and are
equally ignorant of the immense number of heathen for which we as a Church are responsible (and
amongst whom no other Protestant Church can labour) who have never as yet heard the name of
Christ. God has wonderfully blessed our labours in the older districts of Tonga, Samoa, Fiji, and
Rotuma. No other branch of the Church of Christ can point to a more successful mission than our
grand liji Mission, and it is from this and the other Eastern Districts that we receive not only large
contributions to the general work, but also, what is of far greater value, the good men and noble
women who, as Native Ministers, Catechists and Teachers, are labourers in New Britain and New
Guinea. The imperative obligation of steadfast loyalty to Christ’s command, resting upon all who
profess to love and serve Him, need not be insisted upon here. What lam trying to do is to give
our people an opportunity of seeing the work on the field for themselves, in the assured belief that by
so doing we shall best excite a deepened interest in our Mission cause, and a more earnest sympathy
with the Missionaries and Teachers in our Island Districts. I hope, also, that as a result of this voyage,
we shall have a number of valuable helpers who will be able to disseminate some Missionary infor-
mation, from their own actual experience and observation, and so assist us in our appeals for
increased means to meet the piteous demands which are made for more labourers in the field.
■
• ,p
I have been for some time in communication with one of the large steamship companies
Sydney, and have submitted to them a proposed plan for a voyage which would provide for a visit
to some of the principal stations of tne L.M.S., Anglican (A.B.M. and Melanesian), and Wesleyan
Missionary Societies. As a result they have sent the following communication ;
*>


lAfp
fc\6UO
Island Department.
Burns
JPfji/p and Company, Xfd.,
5
/a.
Sydney, N.S. W,, 9th December, tB9B.
Rev. Dr. Brown, Sydney,
t, ~ Dear Sir, WINTER EXCURSION.
; Referring to our various conversations on this matter, we are prepared, provided that sufficient passengers are offfii
namely about 100, to despatch a first-class vessel, of about 2500 to 3000 tons register, from Sydney early in June and pur
calling at the Ports as per list enclosed herewith. • The vessel would be of the latest style, maintaining a speed througl
instructing intending Passengers to book immediately, so as to secure the best berths.
Yours very truly,
Burns, Philp & Company, Ltd.,
proposed Jfew 7{oute from Sydr\eif.
N.S.VV.— Leave Sydney Ist June
New Guinea. — Arrive Port Moresby 7th June, dTight 1700
Leave Port Moresby Bth June, dTight
Arrive Yule Island Bth June, noon 60
Leave Yffile Island 9th June, noon
Arrive Kappa Kappa 10th June, a.m. 100
Leave Kappa Kappa 11th June, a.m.
Arrive Samarai 12th June, noon 200
Leave Samarai 13th June, a.m.
Arrive Dobu 13th June, noon 100
Leave Dobu 15th June, a.m.
Arrive Bartle Bay 15th June, noon 100
Leave Bartle Bay 16th June, a.m.
Arrive Tobriands 16th June, p.m. 100
Leave Tobriands ’ 17th June, a.m.
New Britain. —Arrive New lBth June, a.m. 300
Leave New Britain 20th June, a.m.
Arrive Duke of York. 20th June, a.m. 20
Leave Duke of York 20th June, 4 p.m.
Solomons. — Arrive Ronongo' 22nd June, a.m. 400
Leave Ronongo 22nd June, p.m.
per A. Forsyth,
Arrive Savo 23rd June, p.m. 220
Leave Savo 24th June, noon
Arrive Tulagi 24th June, p.m. 60
Leave Tulagi 26th June, a.m.
Santa Cruz. — Arrive Santa Cruz 28th June, noon 400
Leave Santa Cruz 29th June, noon
Arrive Vanikoro 29th June, p.m. 100
Leave Yanjkoro 30th June, noon
Banks Group.— Arrive Port Pattesoh 30th June, p.m. 150
Leave Port Patteson Ist July, noon
NEW Hebrides.— Arrive voa 3rd July,'noon 30U
Leave Yila 3rd July, p.m.
Arrive Erromanga 3rd July, p.m. 100
Leave Erromanga 4th July, noon
Arrive Tanna or Oaba 4th July, p.m. 60
Leave Tanna sth July, p.m.
Norfolk. — Arrive Norfolk Island Bth July, a.m, 600
Leave Norfolk Island Bth July, p.m.
Arrive Sydney 14th July, a.m. 1050
Total number of miles 6120
the voyage of about 12 knots.
We purpose charging for the round trip in the saloon £3O, and for accomodatioh in the open berths £2O each
We will start to book passages at once, and tickets may be procured and passages paid. And, further, tickets
will be endorsed that the passage money will be refunded in full should, by any unforeseen circumstances,
the trip not come off.
Further, there will be no preference in berths, which will be allotted as the Passengers book, i.e., the first that
will get the best berths.
We understand that you will have a large party going and will, in all probability, fill the ship. We will, therefore,
allow you up till the end of February to induce your passengers to book, and after that time, if the ship is not full, we will
advertise the vessel publicly to fill up. It will be necessary, therefore, for you to get your circulars out without delay,
May be modified or added to should it be found necessary, as it may not be safe to navigate the Steamer to some
of the ports mentioned.
You will notice from this that the proposed route will not only include the field at present occupied
but also such places as the great Solomon Group, which is still practically heathen, except in a few
stations occupied by the Melanesian Mission ; Santa Cruz, where Bishop Patteson and Commodore
Goodenough were killed; Vanikoro, where La Perouse was lost, and Norfolk Island. There is absolutely
no danger whatever from the natives in these places. The entire risk will be taken by the Company,
and also any profits which may accrue, and as you will see, the fare for such a voyage is exceptionally
low. Steam launches, boats, &c,, will be provided, and every possible provision will be made for the
comfort of the passengers. The Board of Missions has sanctioned my going with the party to give the
members of it the assistance of my experience. You will please notice the intimation given in the
Company’s letter as to the necessity for early application. I have already received a good number of such
applications, and would suggest that if you decide to go you should communicate with me as soon as
possible.
Yours sincerely,
GEORGE BROWN,
General Secretary A. W. M. Missionary Society.
