





Australian Prohibition Year Book,
With Introduction by
Hon. S. MAUGER.
COMMONWEALTH
TEMPERANCE
COMPENDIUM
“Now, when we are up against serious things, when
the verities are being revealed, the new advocates of
temperance have discovered what we taught long ago.
We cannot win with drink, for drink and the best are
incompatible. The world’s tragedy and the world s
need have led great folk to see what drink really is and
does. What temperance people have long and truly
taught war is publicly demonstrating, shouting from it
from the house-typs. Man cannot be best in body,
brain, or soul with alcohol. Alcohol wipes out the
best bit! The keen edge of muscle and nerve, the
fine impulsive processes of thought, and those highest
powers whereby all communicate with and become
part of the divine and the highest.
—Captain Arthur Evans, MS. (a distinguished
surgeon serving at the front)
AUSTRALIAN ALLIANCE
PROHIBITION COUNCIL


PRINCIPAL CONTENTS.
America, U.S. Advancing 55
America, U.S. Prohibition Results .. 50
America, U.S. Whitening Map 54
Australian Alliance Prohibition Council 5
Australian Authorities on Alcohol 22
Canada Conquering ... 23
Canada Map 24
China’s Condemnation 21
Control in Britain . 11
“ Don’t ” Let Her Sign 52
Drink Bill of—
Australia
Queensland 2/
South Australia 22
Tasmania ® 2
United Kingdom
Victoria * ® 7
Victoria, 75 Years "
West Australia .. ®2
Drink Helps the Enemy (Tug-or-War)
Drunkenness in Australia ®
Education, Science and Art, Expenditure 96
Evans, Capt. Arthur
Famine, Drink loading on 15
Foreword (by Hon. S. Mauger) 3
Prance, Facte About
Gold Yield, Swallowing the
Health Congress for War-time Prohibition -• •• 76
Hearst, Hon. W. H., 29
Licences—
South Australia 22
Victoria
Newfoundland 28
New South Wales "3
New Zealand
Periodicals, Australasian Temperance 95
Prohibition Advance .1®
Queensland .... 77
Revenue from Drink
Revenue from Vice 21
Roumania, Roused 20
Russia, Prohibition Results 37
Russia’s Redemption 31
Six o’Clock Closing—
New South Wales . 24
South Australia 20
Six the People’s Hour (Voting Results) 26
South Australia
Soldiers, Where Are Safe .. 55
State Hotel, Queensland .. 29
Tasmania
Temperance Organisations of Australasia 93
Victoria **
Vodka Reigns; Vodka Expelled 30
Wine Industry
Wiser Through the War (Intro.) 7
Workers Employed in Breweries and Distillers 91


FOREWORD
IT is necessary to preface this little book with an explanation,
uring 1917 there has been established in Australia - a United
Council, representing: the various State Temperance Alliances.
It has been named the Australian Alliance Prohibition Council,
and it has for its object the Prohibition of the liquor traffic throughout
the Commonwealth. This it hopes to accomplish through Local
Option, State Option, and finally by means of a national referendum
for the Commonwealth. United action has (since the inauguration of
the Council) been taken in support of “ Dry ” Canteens, " Anti-Shout-
mgv’ a “ Dry ” Western Railway, and the issue of Australian Prohi-
bition literature. It was also decided to publish an Australian Prohi-
bition Year Book. This important task was entrusted to its honorary
secretary, Mr. John Vale. Under that name and authority its first
issue appears between these covers. John Vale’s name guarantees its
reliability and thoroughness. Each year it is issued he hopes to see
it improving in circulation, influence and value. All who know him
will join in the wish that he may he spared manv vears with health,
time, and strength to continue its Editorship. Meanwhile, our work
is that of fostering where it exists and creating where it does not
exist, that living mass of belief and custom out of which law grows
and out of which we hope ere long will grow a referendum prohibition
law for Australia. To that we should bring our contribution day by
day. The great injunction, therefore, is "preach the word ” ; tell
the truth; lift up the flag of total prohibition of the liquor traffic;
never take your eyes off the goal; give no quarter to the foe; do not
compromise for a moment on a question of principle; make Aus-
tralians aware of the evil; keep in sight the great saying of Burke,
“ The only thing rtecessary for the triumph of evil is that good men
should do nothing.” Leave the drink trade alone and it will
“ throttle ” all that is good in Australia. Let it alone, that is all
that is required—cowardice will suffice for its triumph. Courage will
suffice for its overthrow. The patriotism of the good citizen must be
as sleepless as the selfishness of the liquor trade. Eternal vigilance
is the price of liberty. A New York bmver said, "The Church and
Temperance people can drive us when they try and we know it. Our
hope is in working after they grow tifed and continuing to work
365 days in the year.”
Who does not exclaim with Dr. Parkhurst, " Oh, what a world this
would be if the perseverance of the saints were, made of as enduring
stuff as the perseverance of the sinner.” To this end we need a new
patriotism, stronger than partisanship, a patriotism that will recog-
nise party as only a means to good citizenship and good Government,
and sees that the sacrifice of public interests for the sake of party
is obvious inversion and perversion. Therefore, of all men, we tem-
perance men must get to the front in the army of progress. It is


not vanity, it is calm and sober reason which says our regiment is
more necessary than any other. The front is our right place and woe
to the Commonwealth if it lags in the rear. By our principles we are
pioneers. Lord Morley being witness “ w'e have to lead for all the.
progress of social reform, taken together, would not do half so much
for improving the material prosperity of our country and the well
being of our countrymen as the progress of the Temperance Cause. ’
We have to go to the front and keep to the front in the glorious
company of those who are called to keep the soul of Australia alive.
Never, then, lose sight of the grand idea of a nation and of a world
free altogether from the dreadful yoke of strong drink- and rejoice in
the strength, the purity, the happiness, the liberty of universal
sobriety. Look after your representatives in all public institutions;
see that existing laws are not broken, or if they are, bring the law-
breakers to justice. Log after log is being pushed out of the way
of the chariot of progress. The walls of tyranny and folly are falling
down, an enlightened democracy is coming to its own. Ihe patrons
of ascendancy and of privilege and autocracy arc passing off the field.
Life has no use for them, the reign of the people is at the door in
one of the most emancipating of all blessings, the granting to the
people full power over the liquor traffic.
Some 15 months ago, in the Melbourne Town Hall, when facing
angry opponents representing the liquor trade, the President of the
Council said :—“ The King is against you, Kitchener is against you,
Joffre is against you, the Admiral of the Grant fleet is against you,
the Christian Church is against you, science is against you, history
is against you, and by and by the democracies of the wmrld will crush
you out.”
This consummation so devoutly to be wdshed can be reached only
through patient education and complete organisation. We dare not
rely on campaigns of enthusiasm or on the victory of a mere cry. If
tidal-waves come, they also go ; if our liberties are to be secure, our
patriotism must not be a mere impulse, but a fixed principle rooted
in the heart, informing the mind and inspiring the life. Such a
patriotism and such a crusade will made this “ the heroic age of
which Richard Walter Gilder nobly sings:
“ He speaks not w'ell who doth his time deplore.
Naming it new and little and obscure,
Ignoble and unfit for lofty deeds.
All times were modern in the time of them,
And this no more than others. Do thy part
Here in the living day, as did the great
Who made old days immortal! So shall men,
Gazing back to this far-looming hour.
Say ; “ Then the time when men were truly men
Their spirits met the test
Of new conditions; conquering civic wrong;
Saving the State anew by virtuous lives;
Guarding the country’s honour as their own,
And their own as their country’s and their sons’;


Defying: leagued fraud with single truth;
Not fearing loss; and daring to be pure.
When error through the land raged like a pest.
They calmed the madness caught from mind to mind
By wisdom drawn from old, and counsel sahe;
And as the martyrs of the ancient world
Gave death for man, so nobly gave they life;
Those the great days, and that the heroic age.”
SAMUEL MAUGER.


Australian Alliance Prohibition
Council.
President —HON. S, MAUGER, J-P.
Vice-Presidents—LADY HOLDER, J.P. (South Australia), REV. R.
B. S. HAMMOND (N.S.W.), Mr. SYD. CUMMINS (Tasmania),
REV. A. C. JARVIS (Queensland), REV. G. TREGEAR (West
Australia),
Treasurer —Mr. H. R. tRANCIS.
Hon. Sec.-Mr. JOHN VALE, J.P.
Federal Information Bureau —N.S.W. Alliance, 321 Pitt Street, Sydney.
Secretary—Mr. J. MARION.
Hon. Secretary's Address-EQUITABLE BUILDING, COLLINS
STREET. MELBOURNE. ’Phone: Central 2739.
COUNCIL.
New South Wales —REV. R. B. S. HAMMOND. W. C. CLEGG,
JAMES MARION.
Queensland —G. MARCHANT, Mrs. J. WILLIAMS, REV. A. C
JARVIS.
South Australia— W. C. BROOKER, W. J. MANNING, V. E.
STANTON, LADY HOLDER, J.P. ,
Tasmania —W. W. OSBORNE, H. R. PINKERTON, D.
CUMMINS, F. H. RALPH.
Victoria— HON. S. MAUGER, J.P., H. R. FRANCIS, FRANCIS
WTLSON.
West Australia -Miss JESSIE FORSYTH, REV. G. TREGEAR.
THE AUSTRALIAN ALLIANCE PROHIBITION COUNCIL
Is a Federation of the State Alliances.
ITS OBJECTIVE IS
Prohibition of the sale, manufacture and importation of alcoholic
liquors as beverages. It will use Local Option laws to the extent
that they are available to secure No-Licence. It seeks State-wide
Prohibition through a State referendum, and aims at an amendment
of the Federal Constitution which would enable Commonwealth Pro-
hibition to be achieved
THROUGH THE WILL OF THE PEOPLE.
It seeks Prohibition for the period of the war, and of repatriation by
Federal authority.


WISER THROUGH THE WAR.
EXPERIENCE may be the best teacher, but her terms are high.
In one of the cheer-up speeches, which have done much to
hearten the British people and their Allies, Lloyd George de-
clared that we are “ a thousand years wiser through the war.”
The reference was not to social reform, but it may be applied to it.
That the wisdom of a thousand years can be concentrated into three
years of stress and trial may be an over-statement. That we have
learned much during these dark years may be conceded. We have paid
dearly for the wisdom acquired.
We cherish the hope that the return of peace to the sorely stricken
world will bring the dawning of a better day for humanity. In order
that it may do so we are willing to wait for the boon. Yet the realisa-
tion of this dream will not come as a matter of course. It is de-
manded of those who have higher aims than spoils for the victors and
fortunes for exploiters that they begin to make ready for the antici-
pated brighter day. It will not come from heaven as John beheld the
new Jerusalem, descending from the clouds “ as a bride adorned for
her husband.” We sometimes wonder at the barbarous character of
British laws during the early part of the last century. The brand of
Cain was upon the brow of justice. The death penalty was provided
for about 160 offences, including such petty grimes as the theft of
goods to the value of five shillings and catching a rabbit. We marvel,
too, at the callousness of society and even of the church. An explana-
tion is that the nation had emerged from a long period of war, during
which the people w r ere impoverished, and society was brutalised.
Happily there are indications that the present colossal adversity will
have some sweet uses. So far as the temperance cause is concerned
there are more than promises. Victories have been achieved which
before the war would have been regarded as beyond the possibility
of attainment. Reforms which were in the clouds are concrete accom-
plishments. “ A thousand years wiser through the war,” said Lloyd
George. In respect to alcohol we are nearly three thousand years
wiser—counting backwards. We have got back to the wisdom ot
Solomon the Wise, w r ho proclaimed wine to be “ a mocker.”
British society is learning in the crucible of experience how the
well-being of all depends upon the well-doing of each. When society
stretches out its strong arm to protect the weak it does more —it saves
itself. The munition and transport workers, whose indulgence in
drink has delayed victory' have properly been visited and severely cen-
sured. But there is more blame due to many highly-placed people
who lead the chorus of disapprobation, and to successive Governments
who have feared to apply an effective remedy.


The well-off and influential classes in Great Britain have been
taught the lesson that all the members of the nation, not excluding
the dwellers in the slums, are one body, and if one membei suffers
the whole body suffer with it. During the five years ended Decembei
31th, 1915, the children born in England and Wales numbered
4,329,090. Scotland and Ireland are not embraced in these calcula-
tions. “It is not the will of your Father in heaven that one oj
these little ones should perish. \et nearly half-a-million, actually
474,000, of these little ones died before they had completed the fixst
year of life. Authorities declare that an equal number perish in the
ante-natal period. The deaths of children under five totalled 720,000.
The chief factors in the excessive mortality are drink, venereal disease,
slum dwelling, and ignorance. Drink, in itself a prime cause, is the
ally of all the rest. Authorities declare that more than half-a-million
of the lives prematurely ended might have been saved. It would
be true to say that nothing had been done to save, infant life before
the war. An official report on infant welfare declares that if the
wastage of. male infant life in past years had been reduced even to
the present appalling level, at least 500,000 more men would be avail-
able for the defence of the country to-day. But it took the war to
show the priceless worth of the lives that were sacrificed, and so it
came to pass that the first week of July, 1917, "as celebrated as a
National Baby Week. In the realisation of the value of child life
Britain is “ wiser th'.ough the w ar.
The bitter price we pay for neglect is seen not only in the myriad
dead babies, but in the vast army of those who have struggled to
reach manhood’s years without attaining to manhood’s vigour.
Reared in freedom’s fortress, and yet unfit to fight for their heritage.
We have borrowed from a past king of Spain the boast, The sun on
my dominion never sets,’’ but multitudes of well-off people were in-
different to the fact that children were reared in cellars, courts and
alleys into which the sun never shone. The well-to-do sat down to
over spread tables, unmindful of the fact that a number more than
equal to double the population of the Australian Commonwealth were
daily tottering upon the brink of the abyss of starvation. In some
fashionable London thoroughfares at midnight the roads were thronged
with conveyances, taking smart people from one society function to
another, while, in the frost and fog, the seats beneath the trees were
crowded with the homeless to whom society’s only message was the
gruff “move on” of the policeman. “-dove on ”—to where? Any-
where out of sight. The social reformer cried, “Is it nothing to you,
all ye that pass by?” and to the mass of the fashionable throng it
was nothing. At the. time of the great Dublin strike it was stated
that many of the labourers dwelt in horrible slums so infested with
vermin that their only chance of getting the respite of even broken
sleep was to go to bed diugged with drink. The influence of a
Larkin represents the failure of Christian citizenship. Society was
unmindful of the stunted bodies, the weak muscles, the feeble brains
of the slum children. But, the time came when Britain needed all
her man power. Then it was found that a vast army of men of mili-
tary age had been spoilt in the making. The landlords of the drink.


and the landlords of the slums had knocked out more than the Ger-
mans. Trying- to visualise the broken ranks of over a million weak-
lings, Britain became “ wiser through the war.”
When Lloyd George said that drink was “ a greater menace than
all the German submarines,” and, later, “ we arc fighting Germany,
Austria and Drink, and so far as I can see the greatest of these
deadly foes is drink,” he was not thinking of the great army which
alcohol had kept out of action, but of the interference with munition
making, shipbuilding, and transportation. Wages were high and work
was plentiful. Many of the steady men who could have been more
usefully employed in war industries had volunteered, and had been
accepted for active service. The tipplers who in normal times were
the last to be taken on and the first to be sacked, were having the
time of their lives. In three days they could earn an ordinary week’s
wages. The liquor trade has a joke—“ If drink interferes with work
give up work.” This is what its customers did at frequent intervals.
From one industrial area it was reported that the time lost through
drinking was three times what it was before the war. The men in the
trenches w-ere calling for ammunition, and the men at the guns for
shells, while drink delayed the output. Battleships were in dock' for
repairs, and the men who should have been fitting them for service
were singing ribald songs in public-houses. Men were urgently needed
at the front, and transports were delayed while firemen were getting
drunk. The shell and ammunition famine which delayed operations
in iqi 5 was partly due to the super-abundance of alcohol. Many of
the leaders of the nation who in times of peace had lent their great
influence to the defence of the liquor traffic realised that they had
cherished an enemy within the gates, which in the hour of trial had
become the chief ally of the foe without. They w-ere “ wiser through
the war.”
In the following pages I have summarised the gains from the new-
born wisdom. The story is at once an inspiring and a melancholy
one. It is inspiring as it tells of the application of Prohibition, the
only effective remedy. It is cheering as it tells of drastic regulations
and of constructive reform. It is melancholy because of the failure
of the British Cabinet and Australian Governments to rise to the
heights of a momentous occasion. Wisdom may cry aloud, but
brewers’ and distillers’ gold, and the acquired' appetite for alcohol
may speak in more convincing tones.


WISER THROUGH THE WAR!
Prohibition Advance.
U.S. AMERICA.
THE FOLLOWING STATES ADOPTED PROHIBITION PRIOR
TO 1914 s
MAINE GEORGIA NORTH CAROLINA
KANSAS OKLAHOMA TENNESSEE
NORTH DAKOTA MISSISSIPPI WEST VIRGINIA
CANADA
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND.
EUROPE.
GREENLAND (Arctic Circle), NORTH SEA FISHERIES,
FAROE ISLANDS.
PROHIBITION OF ABSINTHE.
SWITZERLAND, BELGIUM, DENMARK, HOLLAND.
VIRGINIA
COLORADO
OREGON
WASHINGTON
ARIZONA
ALABAMA
ONTARIO
ALBERTA
MANITOBA
RUSSIA
POLAND
SIBERIA
SINCE 1914.
AMERICAN STATES.
ARKANSAS MONTANA
lOWA SOUTH DAKOTA
IDAHO UTAH
SOUTH CAROLINA INDIANA
NEBRASKA NEW HAMPSHIRE
MICHIGAN ALASKA (Territory)
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
PORTO RICO.
CANADA
SASKATCHEWAN BRITISH COLUMBIA
NEW BRUNSWICK LABRADOR
NOVA SCOTIA
EUROPE.
BALTIC STATES ROUMANIA
ICELAND FINLAND
ASIA.
CENTRAL ASIA TRANS-CAUCASIA
TRANS-CASPIAN
PROHIBITION OF ABSINTHE—FRANCE
PROHIBITION OF SPIRITS.
NORWAY, DENMARK. U.S. AMERICA.
AMERlCA.—Prohibition of Distilling.
AUSTRALIA!
9 9 9
■ ■ ■


CONTROL IN BRITAIN
A PREACHER once remarked that the devil was chained, but
the chain was so long that the prisoner could 'travel all
over the world. “ Begorra,” said an Irishman “ the baste
might as well be loose.” The liquor traffic has been on
the chain of regulation, which has restrained it so little at times that
some have thought it might almost as well have been loose; but now,
in Britain, the chain has been shortened. The Board of Control for
the munition and transport areas came from the wreck of the Govern-
ment Bill when the British Cabinet capitulated to distillers, brewers,
and publicans, who put their trade interests before the safety of the
realm.
When Lloyd George declared drink to be the most deadly of Bri-
tain’s foes the logical inference appeared to be Prohibition. The
nation, prepared to sacrifice the flower of its manhood in order to
cursh the lesser enemies, should have been ready to give up its habits
and indulgence in order to conquer the greater foe. What Lloyd
George really had in view was the nationalisation of the liquor traffic.
In his preliminary negotiations he easily won over the brewers. They
were* quite willing to be bought out at a price satisfactory to themselves.
But he tailed to carry a majority of the Cabinet with him. Ministers
could not see that the purchase at a pre-war valuation of a business
which was on the down-grade would be a prudent investment. It
was recognised that the proposal would provoke violent opposition
from some of the best elements in the nation at a time when domestic
controversy was specially undesirable. It was feared, too, that people
who were making sacrifices in order to lend the sinews of war to
the Government would feel aggrieved if their money were used for
acquiring the ownership of a degrading and destructive traffic. The
purchase scheme never got to Parliament. Lloyd George then sought
power to prohibit the sale of spirits, but was baffled in this better-
aimed endeavour also. Finally, he tried to impose really heavy duties
on liquors of all kinds, and to create a special liquor traffic control-
ling authority in munition, ship-building and transport areas. On
the first point the Government and Parliament surrendered to an
enraged crowd of liquor makers and liquor sellers. The name of
Australia being one with which to conjure it was used to defeat
Lloyd George. Our total wine exports to all parts of the world
were of the value of ,£lOl,OOO, and this petty interest was employed
to block reform which aimed at shortening the war. The Chancellor
said, “ No Government has touched the flame of alcohol without
getting its fingers burnt,” and he took the pledge never to touch
it again. The special control was conceded by the liquor trade
without realisation of what it would eventually mean. It now covers
about 93 per cent, of the population of Great Britain.


A Board of Control
of twelve members was established, with Lord D’Abernon as
chairman. The Board has practically unlimited powers of control
and enjoys immunity from the provisions of the Licensing Act. It
has power to establish refreshment rooms, and to carry on the sale
of liquor at them. It may acquire licensed premises, and conduct
the business. The most drastic restriction imposed is the curtail-
ment of the hours of sale. Generally these are two-and-a-half hours
in the middle of the day, from 12 noon to 2.30, and two or three
hours in the evening, usually from 6 to q. The sale of spirits for
■consumption off the premises is prohibited in the evening and on
Saturdays. The “ off ” sale of spirits is only allowed in quart
bottles. The point is to prevent workmen carrying small bottles
in their pockets to their place of employment. Public-houses are
allowed to be open for the Sale of food and non-intoxicants during
the ordinary hours of trading for such places. A practice which was
hitherto an offence has now become a virtue. Liquor sellers may
reduce spirits by the addition of water to 50 degrees under proof.
The old joke concerning the resemblance of the publican to Pharaoh’s
daughter in taking a little prophet (profit) out of the water may lose
its point. The profit has now grown big.
Anti-Shouting.
Treating, or as we say, “shouting,” is prohibited as follows:
“ No person shall, either by himself or by any servant or agent, sell
or supply any intoxicating liquor to any person in any licensed pre-
mises or any club to be consumed on the premises unless the same
is ordered and paid for by the person so supplied nor shall any
person order, or pay for, or lend, or advance money to pay for any
intoxicating liquor wherewith any other person has been or is to be
supplied to be consumed on the premises ; nor shall any person con-
sume in such premises or club any intoxicating liquor which any other
person has ordered, or paid for, or agreed to pay for, or lent, or
advanced money to pay for.”
If a person is paying for a meal for another the meal may include
the customary liquids.
The penalty tor the contravention of any of the regulations of the
Hoard may be six months’ imprisonment, with hard labour, and a
fine of £ lOO. That is the maximum.
Other Restrictions.
Medicated wines may not be sold without a label on the bottle
stating the quantity of alcohol contained therein. Sunday closing
being the law : in Scotland and Wales, it has been extended by the
Board to the border county of Monmouthshire, and to the borders
of Cumberland, including Carlisle. The prohibition of the sale of
spirits has been enforced over the north and north-west of Scotland,
the Northern Hebrides, Orkney, Shetland, and a part ,of Argyll. Let
the old-time Scotchman think of a large area of his native land with-
out whisky and then realise that the world moves.


Drunkenness Diminished.
The Control Board issued the following table showing the con-
victions for drunkenness in the sixteen English cities and boroughs
with populations over 200,000 for the last four years ;
District iQi3- i9>4, 1 9 1 5- 1916.
Greater London —Metropolitan
area and city 65,488 67,654 51,836 29,453
Birmingham 4)764 3»746 2,309 i,33 2
Liverpool >4)894 12,289 9> I SS ’ 5)826)
Manchester 7>699 7,05° 4>3°4 2,631
Sheffield L 497 M 73 i,m 651
Leeds 1,885 L 730 1,236 617
Bristol 762 731 622 416
Bradford I ,°°S I ,°4S 75 2 528
Hull 2,030 1,995 1,468 630
Newcastle 2,265 2,940 2,949 1.963
Nottingham 645 682 510 330
Stoke-on-Trent >,033 1,162 593 310
Salford 1,706 2,181 1,769 1,094 .
Portsmouth 956 77 1 613 377
Leicester 461 553 429 243
Plymouth 226 295 435 237
107,316 106,297 80,091 46,638
T otal
The Constructive Side.
The great employers of Britain, with some outstanding exceptions,
have hitherto neglected attentions to the social and physical require-
ments of their work people. The Control Board has promoted the
institution of refreshment rooms and canteens in connection with
large establishments engaged in war work. At the instigation of the
Board many firms have established refreshment rooms for their work
people. The workers are expected to work at high pressure during
long hours, and to enable them to keep up their tasks the supplying
of nutritive and appetising food is necessary. In works which had
less than 100 refreshment rooms in 1915, there were in the early part
of this year 570, together with 60 for transport workers at the docks.
The canteens are, with a few exceptions, “ dry.” At those which are
not “ dry ” the sale of liquor is restricted to a pint of beer supplied
with a meal. The Board fn its last report says of these (probably
with special reference to the “ dry ” ones) “ They have increased
sobriety, and have done much to reduce industrial drinking. They
have served in part as a counter-attraction to the public-house, and
in part as supplying an improved nutrition which has reduced the
temptation to drink. They have contributed substantially to the
better health of the worker.”
The Test of Consumption.
There is a homely adage to the effect that “ the proof of the pudding
is in the eating.” It may be said that in this connection the proof


British spirits (gallons)
in 1914.
in 1915.
in 1916.
2 5,94i,ooo .
. 28,378,000
22,503.000
Imported spirits
S,7S3,ooo .
6,642,000
5,660,000
lotal spirits
31,694,000 .
• 35,020,000 .
28.163,000
Beer (bulk barrels)
Wine (gallons)
35.741.000 .
10.686.000
• 30,960,000 .
10,226,000 .
• 29,855,000
10,001.000
British wines, cider, etc.
15,000,000 ..
- 15,000,000 ..
■ 15,000,000
Year.
Drink Bill.
Per Capita.
iQM
,£164,463,000
... £3 10 10
1915
181,959,000
3 18 11
1916
203,989,000
486
is in the extent of drinking:. The volume of alcohol poured down the
throats of people in Britain has been lessened somewhat, but not to the
extent which might be inferred from the diminution in the arrests for
runkenness. Ihe actual expenditure on intoxicants in iqi6 was 24 per
cent higher than in 1914, and constituted a record for the United
Kingdom. For the first time it exceeded 200 millions. But the increase
was due to higher prices.
f ° llowin £ table is compiled from the Annual Drink Bill letters
of Mr. G. B. Wilson:
Q uan tities Quantities Quantities
Llquors - Consumed Consumed Consumed
PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION (GALS.).
Year. Spirits. Wine. Beer.
1914 68 ... .23 ... 27.6
76 ... .22 ... 24.18
191 6 61 ... .22 ... 23.32
In terms of absolute alcohol, the consumption in 1916 was 12 per
cent, less than in 1915, and 18 per cent, less than in 1914.
1 he following are Mr. G. B. Wilson’s estimates of expenditure, which
are arrived at on a conservative basis :
In estimating quantities, spirits were taken as at proof, whereas the
retailers took advantage of the concession to add water to an extent
which might have made the milkman turn green with envy. Beer was
taken as at its standard strength, but the brewers being restricted
during nine months of 1916, to the use of 85 per cent, of the materials
used in the previous year, managed to get more beer from the same
of foodstuff, so that the actual barrelage w'as only 3 per cent,
less. Higher prices and added water, combined with the hope of State
purchase, account for a boom in brewery shares
In view of the extent to which consumption has kept up—that is,
liquor has continued to go down the people’s throats, it may be asked—
Does Control Control?
\Ve never said it would, effectively, but while in Britain it has done less
than the decrease in drunkenness cases indicates, it has done more
than would appear from the indisputable evidence of continued drink-


DRINK LEADING FAMINE ON.
(From book by Arthur Mee.)


iiiß - . Ihe liquoi sent to soldiers in France and elsewhere is not in-
cluded in the foregoing- estimates, and it may be thought that the men
away would account for the extent to which consumption has fallen.
Against this, the men in the training camps with their wet canteens,
probably, on the average, drank more than they did in civilian life. It
is estimated that 54,000,000 gallons of beer were served in the canteens
duiing iqi6. Soldiers on leave in England, and oversea troops sojourn-
ing there, would also account for some of the liquor consumed. But
the biggest factor was the increased spending power of the people. It
is a humiliating fact that prior to the war period the national drink
bill served as a trade barometer. When trade was good, work abun-
dant, and wages high, the drink bill went up, with its concomitants
of increased drunkenness, sickness, crime and insanity. Higher wages
even meant an increase in tjpe number of infants overlaid by drunken
mothers. Ciod smiled upon the nation the story of its pros-
perity was wiitten in the statistics of its national vice. During the war
the proportion of people in employment has been greater, probably,
than ever it was before. Wages were higher, also, and the increased
cost of living had not neutralised the benefit of enhanced earnings to
the extent that it has since done. Ihe unskilled casual labourers, men
largely who were casuals because of their fondness for beer, have been
able to command employment whenever they were disposed to work,
earning such wages as they never dreamt of before, and spending
large proportion on their customary indulgence. Evidence points to
the sad fact of increased drinking by women. Some drink more
because they have “ money to burn,” and some to forget their
sorrow. The Control Board admits this by the following statement
in its last Annual Report:
“ That in some districts women are frequenting public-houses more
than they used to do, and that the increased independence and earning
power of women have placed intoxicating liquor within their reach to
an extent unknown before, appears unquestionable.”
The Board is proud of its work, and would not make this painful
admission were it not compelled by inexorable facts to do so. The
measure of the Board’s success is this—if the liquor traffic had been
left in the enjoyment of its pre-war licence the drink bill would have
soared, and drinking would have increased to extents unprecedented.
“ What's done we partly may compute,
But know not what’s resisted.”
Some of the evil growths have at least been prevented, and a
measure of positive good accomplished. In a recent address, Lord
D’Abernon, chairman of the Board, claimed that—“ The experience of
the last two years has definitely established two facts of very great
importance; it has shown that an enormous amount of preventable
injury has been done to the community by the absence of fitting regu-
lation of the drink traffic; and it has shown also that, contrary to the
current dictum, it is possible, in a very considerable degree, to dim-
inish intemperance by legislative and administrative action.”


In other words, that man may be “ made sober by Act of Parlia-
ment.” Before the war a majority of the worldly wise declared that
this could not be done.
I have given control its due. and yet, after all its accomplishments,
the work of the liquor traffic in Britain is so dreadful in its result.-,
that it is forbidden to publish the truth in outer parts of the Empire.
By this the failure of control is writ large.
This review of the Bqa:d of Control's work would be incomplete
without reference to the experiment in
State Ownership at Carlisle,
Annan and Gretna. The latter, the one-time scene of run-away mar-
riages, to-day beholds the union of the State and the Liquor Traffic.
Xot “ whom God hath joined.” There is a conflict of testimony as
to results, due partly to the errors into which people fall through
handling figures without regard to the associated facts. Before the
war Carlisle was a quiet, old-fashioned city of 50,000 inhabitants,
with a Cathedral, slums, narrow lanes and an excessive number of
public-houses. Early in 1916, from 12,000 to 16,000 men of the navvy-
type came to the city from Gretna, doubling the adult male popula-
tion. and brewers and publicans laid themselves out to get all they
could out of the earnings of these men. Later there was an exodus
of navvies, but the nonpai population was increased fifty per cent,
by munition workers. Further, while the purchase was inaugurated in
the middle of 1916, the public-houses were only acquired gradually,
and the new order of things introduced by degrees. It will be under-
stood that cases of drunkenness would be affected by these varying
conditions. The monopoly is now complete except for two residential
hotels and a restaurant, which cater for the better-off classes. Four
breweries were bought, and two of them closed. The Board has
closed 45 public-hous.es out of nq in Carlisle, and 25 out of 84 in the
neighbouring districts. There were to grocers’ licences, of which
seven have been abolished. The remaining three are used for wine
and spirit stores, at which groceries are not sold, so that actually
grocers’ licences have ceased. The sale of spirits is not allowed on
Saturdays, and on Sundays only refreshments and temperance drinks
may be sold. No advertisements of liquor are allowed. Provision is
being gradually madp for the sale of food and soft drinks, the man-
agers being allowed a commission from the profits on these. Spirits
may not be sold to persons under 18. The sale of spirits for consump-
tion off the premises is limited to 17 houses, whereas it was previ-
ously conducted in ici. Now it is to be expected that reforms such
as these, and others, would result in decreased drunkenness, and they
are doing so. The point is that most of them could have been
enforced without State-ownership. The convictions for drunkenness
in 1915 were 277. The first half of 1916 yielded 564 convictions. The
second half, during which purchase and control were being effected,
produced 389. The first five months of 1917 yielded 224 convictions.
The Rev. Wilson Stuart, M.A., of Birmingham, w r ent round Carlisle
early this year minus his clerical garb, and with a camera. He took
snapshots which have been reproduced in a pamphlet. Each depicts


a scene of shameful drunkenness. Two drunken women are seen
engaged in a savage fight, with men, including a soldier looking on.
Two females are taking charge of a drunken soldier not for his good.
Two women are outstretched upon the footpath, gazing with pity at
each other, too drunk to rise. A policeman and a railway porter are
struggling to get a drunken man on to an ambulance. Two stalwart
policemen are filling a taxi with the finished work of the Government
bars. A dozen constables are seen trying to quell a drunken riot. The
twelve scenes reproduced by Mr. Stuart are but a few of those he wit-
nessed. There were relatively few arrests. The contention that when
the liquor sellers become State servants they will not push trade is
futile. Once the liquor trade has created appetite it pushes itself.
Admitting all the good accomplished by the special regula-
tions, there remains the fact that the Board has not discovered a way
to carry on the sale of intoxicating liquors without producing intoxica-
tion.
James Russell Lowell has a verse in “ The Present Crisis ” which
is familiar:
“ Once to every man and nation comes the moment to decide
For the strife of Truth with Falsehood, for the good or evil side;
Some great cause, God’s new Messiah, offering the bloom or
blight,
Parts the goats upon the left hand, and the sheep upon the right,
And the choice goes by forever ’twixt that darkness and that light."
Britain faced the choice early in April, rqx5, when the King set the
example of personal abstinence, and of Prohibition in the Royal house-
holds. It is understood that His Majesty led the way in the full
expectation that the nation would follow. It is believed by many that
had the Government and Parliament risen to the heroic heights
demanded they would have been supported by a majority of the
people.. But the “blight” and the “ darkness” were chosen, and the
choice went by. The psychological hour passed—but not “ forever.”
It returned early in 1917, when the people were faced wdth the cer-
tainty of food shortage, and the possibility of famine. The
Starvation Weapon,
which was aimed so confidently and cheerfully at Germany at the
commencement of the war began to develop boomerang qualities.
The prospect of starvation appeals quite differently when faced at home
instead of being held before an enemy people. Lord Devonport, the
Food Controller, officially told the nation on January 24th that the
foodstuffs used in brewing were needed as food. “In fact,” he said,
“it is really a question of bread versus beer.” The issue “ Bread or
Beer?” was thus officially placed before the nation. As between
“ Truth and Falsehood,” the wrong choice had been made. Here
was a purely material issue, appealing not to high moral sentiment,
but to common sense and physical need. Given the alternative of
bread or beer it may be believed that a majority of the people would
have chosen bread. The decision of the Government was that the


waste was to continue on the then huge scale for another 66 days,
and then—on “ All Fools’ Day ” —it was to be lessened. The Gov-
ernment was inspired with a sense of fitness when it dated the new
order for April ist. Up to April 30th, from the commencement of the
war, there were destroyed in making drink 4,400,000 tons of grain
and 340,000 tons of sugar. These foods would have yielded flour,
or its equivalent, for the whole United Kingdom for 43 weeks, and
sugar for 33 weeks. The new order limited the production of beer
for the year to 360,000,000 gallons of standard strength, w’hich w r ould
mean much more in bulk. During the celebration of National Baby
Week, when the people were exhorted to turn their thoughts to the
causes of preventable infant mortality—which every week “ out-
Heroded Herod,” drink being a master cause, and at a time when
children were suffering from the lack of sugar, the Government an-
nounced that for the quarter ending September 30th it would permit
the brewers to use an additional 10,000,000 lbs. of sugar in order
to produce more beer. The reasons, or excuses, advanced differed,
in fact conflicted, from the lips of different Ministers, and some would
have provoked smiles from intelligent junior Rechabites; but .in the
main they echoed the old familiar cry, “ Why rob a poor man of his
beer?” The working man was made the scapegoat. The men who
had submitted to conscription, who had given up the sacred right
of conscience, and surrendered the privileges which had been won
during years of sacrifice and effort, drew the line at beer! This may
be admitted, that arhongst the workers the measures which created
scarcity provoked resentment which Prohibition would not have
caused. The rising prices of necessary things were making the
poor in effect poorer, and many of the rich richer. Scarcity meant
higher prices, which did not affect the well-to-do. They could indulge
as before. The creation of scarcity was in effect a class measure.
The “ dark forces ” included brewers who subscribed great sums to
party funds, and it was suggested that the following amongst Brewery
shareholders accounted for some influence. Eight Dukes, seven Mar-
quises, 53 Earls, 16 Viscounts, 77 Lords, 880 Knights, 1000 Army and
Navy officers, and over 1200 Clergymen. To make the excuse for
pandering to these the allegation that the workers would suffer from
“cramp” if they drank water was certainly playing, low.
The second time of choosing passed.
What Next?
The indications are that Britain will emerge from the war .com-
mitted to the policy of State purchase and control of the liquor traffic.
Three committees have been appointed by the Government to enquire
into the financial practicability of the schemes.; one for England and
Wales, one for Scotland, and one for Ireland. The committees received
the following direction:
“ His Majesty’s Government being of opinion that it may shortly
be necessary as an urgent war measure to assume control of the manu-
facture and supply of intoxicating liquors during the war and the
period of demobilisation, and that such control would involve' the


purchase after the war of the interests concerned in such manufacture
and supply, - ’ charge the committees “to inquire into and report upon
the terms upon which those interests should be acquired and the
financial arrangements which should he made for the period oi
control.’’
This suggests compensation for the war-period and purchase after.
A humiliating outcome of the heroic fight for the world’s freedom !
ROUSED ROUMANIA
When Roumania entered the war all authorities on our side agreed
chat the turning point had been reached. As had come to be usual,
authority was wrong. Roumania suffered the hard lot of the little
countries, but she boldly met and conquered the drink enemy.
Roumania was not a specially drunken country. In iqoB an Act was
passed which closed without compensation all the liquor bars over the
statutory number of one to each 250 householders. Liquor was not to
be sold on credit, or exchanged for farm produce. The sale was for-
bidden to young persons under 16. Gambling on licensed premises
was prohibited. Thousands of liquor shops were closed as the result of
this law.
Roumania did not enter the war soon enough to please some people.
Arm-chair critics are impatient. She was getting ready. One of the
last things she did in the way of preparation was to prohibit the liquor
traffic. Members of the Cabinet were financially interested in the pro-
duction of liquor. They grew grapes for wine-making, and plums for
the manufacture of the national spirit. This was their ordinary source
of income. But they said, in effect: “ Prohibition is for the glory of
our country, and will aid in perfecting our plans; our pecuniary in-
terests must not stand in the way.” There was this further reason;
they were not aware of the dark forces which were beginning to
paralyse the strong arm of Russia. They expected to see Russian
hosts marching through their country to meet the foe, and they said ;
“We must not subject our Russian brothers to the temptation from
which the Czar has saved them in their own country.” And so these
simple people did for the sake of Russian soldiers more than Australia
has dared to do for her own boys.
Roumania suffered the hard lot of the little countries in the war.
Prohibition might do much. It could not enable Roumanian soldiers
to arrest the march of three Teutonic armies on Bucharest, with forts
constructed to withstand the artillery of the eighties and nineties.
The hope may be cherished that she will come to her own again.
Whatever her future may be, there will surely be a halo of glory
around the name of the country whose statesmen sacrificed their own
pecuniary interests, and whose people gave up their indulgence in drink
for the sake of the friendly soldiers from a foreign land.


REVENUE FROM VICE.
i
China s Condemnation.
In refusing the request of a large and representative deputation for a
referendum on the question of Prohibition, on September 17th, 1917,
the Premier of South Australia, the Hon. A. H. Peake, gave revenue
as one of the objections. The Hon. Sir Joseph Ward, New Zealand's
Treasurer, stated the same consideration as a reason why the Govern-
ment could not adopt the recommendation of the Dominion’s Efficiency
Hoard in favour of Prohibition. The prohibition of the importation of
luxuries was made a sham so far as liquor was concerned by our own
Federal Government for the same reason. In the judgment of our
legislators revenue stands as a supreme consideration.
And yet revenue from vice never pays. The direct and indirect
burdens which the vice imposes outweigh even the mere financial
gains. Moreover, the people pay. In the case of liquor the consumer
pays, not the dealer. That, of course, applies to all duties.
We have to look to a pagan people for the most notable example of the
nobler reason thait revenue from vice is inherently wrong. Up to the
time of the Indian Mutiny the East India Company was a great power.
It found positions for the sons of many of the well-to-do, and opened
the road to fortune to many Englishmen. Under the company’s rule
India was regarded as a country to be exploited. The company grew
immense quantities of opium, and saw in China's teeming millions an
unlimited market for it. The Chinese Government objected. The
British Government stood by the East India Company, as it usually
did, whether the company was right or wrong, and Sir Henry
Pottinger, the Minister at Pekin, urged the Emperor Tankwang to
-give way. He intimated that opium would be smuggled in if its
importation were prohibited, and urged that it would be better to im-
pose a duty and admit it. The reply of the Pagan Emperor is re-
corded in the British Blue Book dealing with the opium waits. It was
as follows; —
“ It is true that I cannot pievent the introduction of the flowing
poison ; gain-seeking and corrupt men will, for profit and sensuality,
defeat my wishes; but nothing will induce me to derive a revenue from
that which causes vice and misery amongst my people.'”
The answer was the Opium War. We won the island of Hong-Kong.
and the right of India to send opium into China. After a long
campaign of agitation carried on by Christian men at home, oppressed
by a sense of shame, and by successive Chinese Governments, ten
years ago the British Government agreed to the ultimate cessation of
forced imports from India. The long-looked-for day of redemption
arrived at the end of March, iqi/- The Chinese Government took
over the balance of the opium stocks held by British merchants. The
quantity would have been worth about ,£300,000 when the agreement
to do so w-as made. The merchants claimed, and got, nearly
.£3,000,000. Thus did they gain by the death of their nefarious traffic.
China now prohibits the importation, growth and sale of opium. Sale
for strictly medicinal purposes is alone permitted. We may well applaud
China, and commend her example to our own legislators.


AUSTRALIAN AUTHORITIES ON
ALCOHOL.
SIR THOMAS ANDERSON STUART, DEAN OF THE FACULTY
OF MEDICINE AT THE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY—
Speaking entirely personally, I might be permitted to earnestly coun-
sel all who value individual and national efficiency to avoid the use of
alcohol in any form, even in the smallest quantities, except on the written
prescription of their medical attendant, for, as events of the day in
connection with the great war prove, it is the most soul-destroying,
body-destroying, nation-destroying substance ever known.”
ALCOHOL SPOILS SOLDIERS.
SIR THOMAS ANDERSON STUART said;
1 say it will, and I will proceed to prove it. Alcohol is subversive
of discipline, and robs a man of his prudence, judgment, conscientious-
ness and higher morality. The development of the human brain took
countless years, but alcohol wrought a change quickly, and brought
a man to the level of a beast in a few minutes. Alcohol had also had
a great influence on the sexual passion, and the diseases which resulted
were the shame and bane of the military authorities. I have seen 4qq
men in one day in one place. They all came from one military camp,
and alcohol was the indirect cause of all their misery.”
DR. W. A. OSBORNE, PROFESSOR OF PHYSIOLOGY IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE—
“ The time has come when the members of the medical profession
have satisfied themselves, after careful experiment and exhaustive
enquiry, that alcohol is no longer to be regarded as a food of any value.
Alcohol is, in fact, a narcotic poison; it stimulates because it paralyses
the sense of fatigue and weariness, which is nature’s warning signal.
It abolishes self-restraint, which is one of man’s highest attributes ;
and the only courage which it gives is a misdirected and useless reck-
lessness. There is not an organ of the body with which alcohol comet-
in contact which is not irritated and injured by it. As for the effects
of excessive drinking, little may here be added; they are, unfortunately,
too obvious in our hospitals, asylums and gaols.”


CONQUERING CANADA
The Temperance victories of Canada may be regarded as the best
inspiration to Australian reformers, the Canadian Dominion and the
Australian Commonwealth having many conditions which bear-resem-
blance, though they cannot be said to be in common.
Canada looms large on the map. It includes 3,654,000 square miles
of territory - . Seventeen countries the size of Germany could be carved
out of it, and there would still be a bit left. It is about the equal of
the United States in area, and is 755,000 square miles bigger than
Australia. In extent of territory it is nearly the equal of Europe, and
to the average native-born Canadian is more important. From Halifax,
on the Atlantic, to Vancouver on the Pacific, is a journey of 3656 miles.
The total population is 8,07.5,000, of whom about 1,700,000 are of French
extraction.
The Dominion has a Governor-General, and appointed Senate, and
an elected House of Commons. There are nine Provinces, each with
its own Parliament, and a wide area of unorganised territory. The
Dominion Parliament could prohibit the liquor traffic, but has not done
so. The Provincial legislatures have authority to license, and to
regulate the liquor traffic, and also to prohibit the common sale of
liquor. They cannot prohibit the importation of liquor, or its manu-
facture. Going “dry ” under provincial laws does not mean absolute
aridity. For upwards of forty years the objective of reformers has
been prohibition of importation, manufacture and sale by Dominion
legislation. While aiming at the ideal, they have used the weapons
which faltering politicians have placed in their hands.
Canada Was Wise Before the War.
Through the Dominion, and also the Provincial, Local Option laws, a
vast number of areas were freed from the contamination of liquor bars.
A liquor seller could not be a member of a municipal council. That
showed Canada’s estimate of the social status of the trade. Compensa-
tion in Canada took this form—if a man met his deatrh through drink-
ing at a saloon the widow, or other dependants, could recover com-
pensation from the saloon-keeper. Liquor bars were closed on election
days. Abstainers were numerous. The churches toed the straight
line of righteousness. They were out to destroy the works of the
devil, and were not afraid to include the liquor traffic amongst them.
The great uprising which the war-time has witnessed was not the
expression of suddenly developed enthusiasm, but the culmination of a
long campaign of education and agitation. The dearly bought lessons
of the war brought things to a climax.
If the democratic majority which could make or unmake a Govern-
ment, and decide the fate of a party as between the sunshine of office
and the cold shades of opposition, had been permitted to disestablish
the liquor traffic, the twentieth century might have dawned upon a


\ 'Xsa-ssst,
,
PROHIBITION MAP
4^^°om,n,on ofcanala
tjL Jjj ft Y 1 _ While — Pr*hiWiti»« Pr*v L m»s
3 OP Mark— Pravmres
'fv 974
Jl ''** ,8? Nuni <'P«lltl*S
Ontario iR* 0/t <y
Dry \ 84 /S Dry 0^JT 7
s«p(. I7 ,k 1916 1 tf -kPv
V firy 4
77 (^' 19, 6 1 Dry 1 ™irOBA
to
4^
/
jrf f
1
1
II
PRINCK r.DWAAD
ISLAND
>ry kina 4* 14*1
■ •
'The big- blacH spot at the top left-hand corner looks worse than it is. \ ukon is not a province, bin a
territory sparsely populated by about 8500. It includes Klondyke.
-
-
"


!< dry ” Canada. In 1898 the Dominion Parliament provided for the
taking of
A Prohibition Referendum.
All the provinces but one, and the North-West territories, voted
“Yes.’' The exception was Quebec, whose mainly trench population
voted “ No.” Apart from Quebec there was a “dry majority of
108,011. The “wet” majority of Quebec was 94,324, so Prohibition
had a net majority of 13,187. This was not accepted as sufficient to
justify legislative action. There was “ nothing doing ” in Parliament,
but the anti-alcohol sentiment contmued to grow. Before the war a
Canadian paper declared that the Dominion w ; as rapidly “ turning
white.” A “ White Canada” means not wnat we mean by a “White
Australia,” but a Canada free from the black stain of drink.
Quebec Queer, But Quickened.
Canada was w rested from France by force of arms in the days when
Britain and P rance were not allies. Ihe population of the Province
of Quebec is composed mainly of descendants of the early F rench
settlers. They have not made a homogeneous whole with their British
and Irish fellow’-colonists. They are loyal to Canada, but the watch-
word of Empire does not appear to appeal to them. One might have
thought chat in the present colossal struggle, even though they were
deaf to the trumpet-call of Britain, the needs of France would appeal
to them, but the France of to-day is not their France. Prior to the
war, Quebec did not join in the movement for Dominion Prohibition.
If in 1898 the people had voted as other Canadians did, the Dominion
would in all probability have entered the war strengthened by years of
Yet, on the Temperance issue, we have no right to throw
stones at Quebec. There are in the Province 1158 municipalities, and
under the Local Option laws 975 °f these, or 84 per cent., have adopted
No-licence. Of her fifteen cities all but Montreal and Quebec have
abolished the common sale of liquor. Since 1898 there has been a
great - advance, and the war has given it momentum. 1 reating has
been prohibited, and the hours of sale reduced to 12. The churches
Roman Catholic and Protestant—and the best people of all classes, are
demanding the complete Prohibition of the liquor traffic. Now that
this historic Province is falling into line, the realisation of the dream
of a “ dry ” Canada appears to be getting very near. It is a tribute
to Canada that its backward Province in Temperance legislation is one
which has driven the common sale of drink from 84 per cent, of its
municipalities.
Prince Edward island s Princely Part.
Prince Edward Island, the smallest of the Provinces, is the Maine, of
Canada. It led the way. The referendum in 1898 gave an eight to
one majority for Prohibition, with a few hundreds to sp ire. Local
Option was used to secure No-licence. In 1907 Prohibition was passed
tor the Province. So far as the sale is concerned, Prince Edward
Island is wholly “ dry,” and attained to that happy condition in times
of peace. Before Prohibition went into force the gaols had 451 inmates.
Four years after there were only seven prisoners in the whole Province.


Prohibition had reduced crime by more than 98 per cent. We never
said it would abolish all crime.
New Brunswick Becomes Newer.
There are 15 counties and three cities in New Brunswick. Ten of
the counties and two of the cities adopted No-licence under the Local
Option laws. A commission was sent from the Province to enquire
into the working of Prohibition in Prince Edward Island. Its verdict
was a favourable one. On June Ist, rgi6, the Prohibition issue was
submitted to the electors, who decided to follow the example of their
neighbours. The law came into force on May Ist, 1917.
Nova Scotia Scores.
Prior to the war, the liquor traffic had been wiped out of this mari-
time province, except in the capital city of Halifax. Here licences
were permitted in the ratio of one to each thousand inhabitants, which
would mean about 46 licences. Reformers*were out to capture liquor’s
only stronghold, and they finally succeeded. On Junfe 30th, 1916, the
Halifax licences went out of existence as the result of a popular vote.
A total abstinence society established in Nova Scotia in 1828, four
years before the seven men of Preston signed the pledge is said to be
still in existence. The legislative advance can be traced back to educa-
tional work.
Ontario’s Offensive.
In point of population, and most other things, Ontario is the fore-
most of the Provinces. Before the war saloons were rapidly diminishing
through the operations of Local Option. Ten years ago the liquor
interests secured the handicap of a three-fifths majority on reformers.
This checked the advance, but did not stay it. More than two-thirds
of the municipalities were freed from the retail sale of liquor. In the
1898 referendum, Ontario gave a majority (with a male franchise only)
of 39,214 for Dominion Prohibition. When the war came the Prohibi-
tion majority was largely reinforced by multitudes who before the war
were indifferent or hostile. The first response to the demand for
drastic action was eight o’clock closing, but this did not satisfy re-
formers. A petition in favour of Prohibition was signed by 348,166
electors, and 477.396 non-electors, who included women. The electors
who signed represented about 75 per cent, of those who cast ballots
on both sides at the previous general election. This petition was borne
to the Government by a deputation of 25,000 persons, who came from
all parts of the Province for the purpose. As a result the retail sale
of intoxicants ceased on September 16th, 1916. No vote to repeal the
law' will be taken prior to 1919. On the basis of previous voting, it is
safe to say that a referendum would result in the re-enactment of the
law. Indeed, the Ontario sentiment favours abolition of importation,
manufacture and sale. Toronto, the capital, which is said to be the
most British city in Canada, with its population of half-a-million, is
the largest “ dry ” city in Christendom, outside of Russia. The
Toronto merchants noticed a marked increase in business as soon as
the bars were closed. On the other hand the police found their business
falling off. A judge, Sir John Boyd, remarked that the best use of
a gaol is to keep it empty, and that was what Prohibition was doing.


Here is the testimony of John S. Dennis, one of the heads of the
Canadian Pacific Railway, given to the American press:—“ Prohibition
has meant more business for our small merchants. It has added money
to the savings in our banks, which have increased tremendously. It
has put money into meat and clothing and household needs where
these were neglected before. The value of Prohibition in war time has
been proved for you by our experience in Canada. In war you need
all your money. In Canada we have found that money that was wasted
on booze is now put to legitimate uses.”
Sagacious Saskatchewan.
Saskatchewan is one of the newer Provinces, carved from the North-
West territory. The whole of Germany could be put into it, and there
would be a fringe of over 43,000 square miles to spare. The first war-
time liquor measure was seven o’clock closing. This cut commitments
to gaol by one-half. The Anglican Archdeacon then sought and
secured the co-operation of the Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist and
Roman Catholic Churches, and went in the name of all united to the
Premier. Prohibition of bar trade was conceded, but twenty-three spirit
merchants’ businesses, similar to our licensed groceries, were taken
over by the Government, and the sale of liquor for consumption off
the premises allowed. With 23 liquor stores in a country 43.000 miles
bigger than Germany there was a long way between drinks, but it w r as
not long enough for Saskatchewan. The Government dispensaries
were subject to local veto, and last December a ten-to-one majority
gave the last of them the happy despatch. Saskatchewan is wholly
on the “ w'ater waggon.” The Hon. Walter Scott, the Premier, writes:
—“ The measure has proved decidedly beneficial to the Province, and
the results more than reach my expectations. Indeed, the new system
is operating beneficially to such a marked degree that the opinion
expressed against any possible return to the licence system is almost
unanimous.”
Alberta’s Achievement.
Alberta is another of the new Western Provinces. From the outset
there were stringent conditions attached to the issue of licences, an
applicant having, amongst other things, to secure the written consent
of a substantial number of electors. On July 21st, 1915. a Prohibition
Bill was submitted for approval by referendum. Lt was adopted by
a large majority. On March 6th, 1916, the Bill, with the stamp of
popular approval upon it, again passed the legislature, and went into
operation on July Ist. The results were immediately manifested. In
the capital city, Edmonton; there were 45 arrests for drunkenness in
the last month of licence, and five in the first month of Prohibition.
The Fair Week of 1915 yielded 35 “ drunks,” and that of 1916 none.
The Mayor said, “ Business conditions have improved.”
Manly Manitoba.
On March 13th, 1916, the men of Manitoba voted upon the question
of Prohibition. A blizzard was raging, which affected the attendance
at the polling booths, but the biggest blizzard was that which struck
the liquor traffic. The vote for Prohibition was nearly two to one.
In every military camp the men in training to fight the foe abroad,


voted against the enemy within the gates. The drink sellers were
not allowed much time for making other arrangements, for the law
took effect on May .31st of the same year. Most of the liquor traffic
had been banished before by the Local Option route. When Prohibition
came in drunken cases were reduced 80 per cent., and all crime by
58 per ant. In the city of Brandon the last fair Week under licence
yielded 71 cases of drunkenness for the court; the first similar period
under the new regime only 15.
Sir James Aikens, Lieut.-Governor of the Province, said ; “ The
result of the Prohibitory Temperance Act in Manitoba is beneficial be-
yond best expectations.” The Premier said “ Prohibition is work-
ing up to the fullest expectations of the strictest Temperance people
of the Province. It is giving general satisfaction. There have been
a few violations, but even the gentlemen who were engaged in the
traffic have accepted the judgment of the people remarkably well, and
Prohibition is a success in Manitoba.”
Hail, British Columbia!
. This Pacific Province had been backward in Temperance legislation,
more because of its politicians than its people. It includes the city ,qf
Vancouver, at which steamers from Australia connect with the Cana
dian-I acific Railway. In September, tqi6. the question of Provincial
Prohibition was submitted to the people by referendum, in conjunction
with that of votes for women. Provision was made for the soldiers
to vote. The Prohibitionists carried every district. Their majority was
so large that victory was regarded as certain, and British Columbia
was shown “ white ” in Canada's “ black and white ” map. The
counting of the soldiers’ votes was extended over six months. The
result was so favourable to liquor as to suggest rascality. At the
beginning of December there were 2533 soldiers who had not voted.
Their votes one each—totalled 4132, and were almost unanimously for
liquor. A commission was appointed to enquire into the whole
matter. It went to England and France, and found that votes had
been recorded for dead and missing soldiers, and that living soldiers
had voted two or three times. The Legislature decided to ignore the
soldiers’ votes, and Prohibition took effect on October Ist.
Newfoundland Old But Up To Date.
It appears fitting to include Newfoundland in this review, though it
is not connected with Canada. Established in 1583, it is the oldest
of the self-governing British colonies. It is the first colony to adopt
absolute Prohibition. It did it by the vote of the people—that is the
male half. The Canadian Provinces cannot prohibit the importation
of liquor. The Dominion as a whole could, and some day will. New-
foundland has provided for it already. Prohibition of importation,
manufacture and sale came into operation on January Ist, 1917. Being
an island, the control over imports can be absolute. Before, through
Local Option, the drink evil was reduced to a minimum. A single
prison with accommodation for 50 persons more than served the needs
of the colony. Newfoundland was the first country to adopt 6 o’clock
closing for saloons. Having captured the first line of trenches, re-
formers went on until the whole stronghold of the enemy was in their


hands. Let this be a good omen for Australia. Bars closed at night
strengthen the desire for rest, from the deadly work of the liquor traffic
all through the day.
This review of progress in Canada and Newfoundland should be an
inspiration to Australia. “What man has done man can do.” I hat
which has been accomplished by our fellow-Britishers in tne Dominion
of Canada can surely be repeated by the people of the Australian Com-
monwealth. It must be remembered that Canadian reformers are still
contending for their long-sought objective—Dominion Prohibition.
Australia Needs a Man Like This
in introducing the Bill under which Ontario
now enjoys Prohibition, the Premier of the
Province (Hon. W. H. Hearst) said:
“ In this day of national peril, in this day when the future
of the British Empire, the freedom of the world, and the
blessings of a democratic government hang in the balance,
if I should fail to listen to what I believe to be the call
of duty, if I should neglect to take every action that In my
Judgment will help to conserve the financial strength and
power and manhood of this Province for the great struggle
in which we are engaged, I should be a traitor to my
country, a traitor to my own conscience, and unworthy of
the brave sons of Canada that are fighting, bleeding and
dying, for freedom and for us.”




RUSSIA’S REDEMPTION
RUSSIA promised to be the brightest luminary in the Prohibi-
tion constellation. As a matter of fact she is, but she is
under a cloud which obscures the glory. Russia does not
appeal to the man in the street just now, nor the easy-
chair critics. They expected her to accomplish her new birth without
travail pains, and to forthwith resume the “steam-roller progress to
Berlin which was interrupted in the autumn of 1914- Was not the
revolution to win the war?" The men valiant with tongue and pen aie
sadly disappointed with Russia.
Yet bad as things appear to he, from a win-the-war point of view they
would have been far worse had there been no revolution. The evidence
available forces us to the conclusion that had the Czar and his Minis-
ters remained in power the Allies would have been deserted, and a
separate peace made with Germany. The disturbances which culmin-
ated in the Czar's overthrow were deliberately organised to create
an excuse for withdrawal from the war. The weapon loaded by the
agents of the Bureaucracy went off at the wrong end. And one
reason for that was that Russia kept sober.
The impressions we get of a people are largely dependent upon our
own feelings tow r ards them. Up to recent years Russia was regarded by
British people as an enemy country. Sixty odd years ago Britain
was pouring out blood and treasure in order to support Turkey against
Russia. At that time to fight for “ God and Queen and Country was
to fight for the Turk, and there was a bad lookout for the man who
said it was not so. The policy which caused the Crimean War was
continued for many years, and, within the memory of the middle-aged,
brought Britain right to the verge of another war. The popular hatred
which war engenders lingered long after. Thus our view’s of things
Russian were biassed. When the diplomats realised that the menace to
British supremacy came not from Russia but from Germany, and the
war found us allied with our former antagonist, public feeling perhaps
swung to the other extreme. Everything in the Russian garden was
lovely. The Czar was the “Little Father,” beloved of all. His wife
and daughters were ministering angels, lavishing tender care upon
the wounded soldiers. Banishment to Siberia merely meant sojourn
ing in a pleasant country, following some congenial occupation, and
earning the current wages. The common people in their noble sacri-
fice for the nation’s weal were only a little low’er than the angels.
Just now the tendency is to again over emphasise the sombre things.
Even some stories of soldiers who retired without firing a shot were
made up to serve political ends.
One may hail the Russian Republic, and rejoice at the downfall of
the Bureaucracy, and its cruel, corrupt police agents, and yet question
the accuracy of the descriptions now applied to the Czar. “ A garru-
lous, unstable, unreliable drunkard,” is one, recently quoted, with
evident approval by our own “ Argus.” When the story of his life is


told it will surely reveal redeeming features, and one will be that he
gave Prohibition to Russia. The Bureaucracy knew that from the
standpoint of self-interest he had blundered. They had pushed the
sale of vodka not merely for the sake of easy revenue, but also to keep
the people down. Making Russia sober was the first step to making
hei free. The Czar helped to do that. In telling the story of Russia's
redemption 1 prefer to retain a charitable view of the Czar. A weak
man with a strong man's job. The visible head of organised oppres-
sion, and yet somewhere in the poor little soul a desire to play a
fathers part to 170 millions of people. He was the “ Little Father.”
Little, perhaps, in the sense that the fatherhood was small.
I he transformation of Russia in respect to drunkenness is associated
in the popular mind with the war.
The Czar Waved a Magic Wand,
and lo! the darkness of intemperance disappeared; the vodka devil
dropped into the bottomless pit from which it came. The light shone,
and brightened with its genial rays the myriad homes of the people;
in war time peace, prosperity and love reigned throughout the land.
In a general sense that is a statement of fact, but the way had been
prepared for the transformation. Prohibition was preceded by
nationalisation. The State ownership of the vodka traffic was
in the main a failure. We can quote Russia as a warning against
nationalisation as safely as we can now appeal to her as a bright
example of Prohibition. And yet associated with nationalisation were
conditions and circumstances which helped to make Prohibition pos-
sible. The freeing of Russia from the tyranny of alcohol began in
iScjs, when the Government commenced to take over the vodka traffic.
Such a harvest as Russia is reaping now could not come without seed-
sowing and cultivation.
As far back as 1838 an attempt was made to establish Temperance
societies in Russia, but the Government declared against them. About
thirty years ago Count 1 olstoi formed a Temperance society, but at
first he was not allowed to print the rules, or a list of the members.
He lived to see his own Temperance tracts published at the Govern-
ment’s expense. It was not until 191 1 that the Good Templar Order
was allowed an entiy into Russia. A White Cross Temperance Union
was established at Riga as far back as 1891.
The Russian people were
Not the Champion Drinkers
of the world, taking the test of per capita consumption. The British
people, the American people, and most of the Continental people
drank more than they did. In producing drunkenness much depends
upon how the liquor is consumed. A man accustomed to the daily
use of alcohol may drink three or four times a day, and pass' as a
pattern of sobriety. Another man crowds his drinking into the week-
end, and gets beastly drunk. When the Germans made their drive
through Belgium they found well-stocked wine cellars in the beautiful
homes of the well-to-do classes, most of which probably had not been
the source of actual drunkenness. The invaders gulped down the wine
as though it were their customary beer, with results which have left


the indelible brand of shame upon the German name. The popular
idea that Australian wine sold in the Mallee, in places where beer is
not obtainable, is more deadly than ordinary wine is chiefly due to the
fact that men accustomed to beer drink the wine as they would drink
beer if they could get it. The Russian peasants and working: people
were vodka drinkers. W hile many had acquired the habit of the daily
dram, several times repeated, most of the drinking- appears to have
been done at week-ends, on holidays and during- festivals. The drinker
crowded his drinks, and so obtained the maximum of headaches for his
kopecks. Russia appears to have been far more drunken than other
countries which consumed more liquor. A conservative estimate made
vodka responsible for 200,000 deaths a year. The Temperance leader
in the Duma, Michael D. Tcheltcheff, declared that the annual toll of
lives was a million.
When nationalisation was decided upon, there were in European
Russia 114,903 spirit shops. In many instances the business was car-
ried on by Jews. A system of pawning- was in vogue. The labourer
pledged his wages, the peasant his crops, the small holder his land, for
vodka. An investigation showed that in the space of twenty years two
million men had forfeited the whole of their possessions to these pawn-
broking drink sellers. Serfdom had been abolished, but men no longer
bound to the aristocratic lords of the soil found themselves enslaved
by the mean landlords of the spirit shops.
The Government monopoly began on January 12th, 1895. It was
first established in the provinces east of the Volga, and was gradually
extended until it covered European Russia and Poland. In the Govern-
ment shops vodka was sold in bottles only, and no drinking was allowed
on the premises. The smallest bottles cost 15 kopecks, or 3fd., and
two kopecks were allowed for each returned empty. Every bottle bore
a Government guarantee of purity. Nowhere has the “ pure ” liquor
theory had a better 4rial than in Russia. The producers were private
distillers from whom the Government purchased at a price which did
not permit of any excessive profits. All the spirits were taken to
Government factories in which they were reduced to a uniform strength,
and rectified until they were absolutely pure. But after all, pure
alcohol is
Pure Poison.
The spirit may be rectified, but its works cannot' be. The literal
meaning of the word vodka is “ bad water.” The Duma actually
passed a Bill which included the provision that the purity label on
every bottle of vodka should bear the following:—“Man! Although
thou hast bought this spirit, yet know that thou drinkest poison which
destroys thee. Before it is too late, never buy another bottle!” But
this w'as too much for the Upper House, which had distillers in its
membership, and the truthful inscription was censored. Permission
was given, however, to remove the arms of the Empire from the label.
The Monopoly Was Incomplete.
It may be difficult for Australians to understand that a system of liquor
traffic control is designed only for the working classes. This is the
case with the Gothenburg system, and was the case with the Russian


vodka monopoly. The Gothenburg- Company’s public-houses close at
6 p.m. in winter and 7 p.m. in summer, but the man who is sufficiently
well dressed to have the entree of the upper class bars may drink till
midnight. There were 54.917 places in which vodka was sold in Russia,
but of these only 26,971 were Government shops. The rest were
restaurants, hotels, cafes, and wine and spirit stores, catering for
the better-off classes. The proprietors of these purchased vodka from
the Government, and sold it on commission so trifling that there was
no inducement to push the sale. The highest rate of commission paid
was 4d. per gallon. The profits must have come from wine, beer and
imported spirits. The working man was not permitted to drink in the
Government shop, but there was no such restriction upon the patrons
of the high-toned establishments. They could be, in a double sense,
the “ elevated ” classes.
The Russian Government wanted to get revenue from vodka, but at
the outset
Revenue Was Not Paramount
as a consideration. Along with the monopoly were established State-
aided Temperance committees whose mission was to endeavour to wean
the people from habits of intemperance by the provision of counter-
attractions to the drink shops, and by Temperance instruction. By
the time that the monopoly had covered the ground, 800 of these com-
mittees were established. The Government ear-marked a portion of
the vodka profits to fight vodka. At one time the Government gave
the committees ,£500,000 a year. In Petrograd a People’s Palace was
built with a special and additional grant of ,£lOO,OOO, After the
Japanese war, when the pruning knife was applied to expenditure, the
Temperance grant was cut down to £ 250,000. At one Workmen’s Inn
a man could get a hot bath, a bed and a separate drawer for his per-
>onal effects for live kopecks (ijd.). This was constructive Temperance
work. The Government paid for Temperance literature and Temper-
ance lectures. From this point of view, where is the British community
which can throw a stone at Russia? The authorities did not see the
light as the Czar saw it afterwards. They saw “as through a glass
darkly.” But they acted up to the full measure of their light. It
cannot be said that all Governments do that.
At the start of nationalisation there was
A Vast Improvement
This was anticipated, for priests blessed the vodka tdiops, and high-
born ladies acted as barmaids at some of them on the opening day.
The number of spirit shops was reduced, and conditions were im-
proved. But even the improved state of things was bad, and from the
starting point it steadily got worse. The vodka appetite was estab-
lished, the Government shops offered the opportunity of indulgence,
and appetite and temptation combined more than counteracted the
influence of Temperance tracts and counter-attractions. The war with
Japan gave nationalisation a set-back from the reformer’s point of
view. The lesson that vodka had helped materially in the defeat of
Russia by the sober, resourceful Japanese was lost upon the authorities.


Money was urgently needed, and Ministers, keen on revenue, saw that
an easy way to the people’s pockets was down their throats. At the
outset of nationalisation the Minister of Finance wrote to the officers
concerned in administration :—“ If there should be a deficit in the
State revenue because the consumption of alcohol has fallen, the
1 reasury will gain all that it loses in other ways, while at the same
time the morals of the people, and their material welfare, will be
greatly improved.’’ In 1907 the Finance Minister wrote :—“ If is neces-
sary to increase the number of places for the sale of vodka, and no
restrictions must be placed upon fresh dram-shops being opened.”
“ Oh. what a falling off was there !”
In the early part of 1914 Count Sergius VVittee, who was regarded
as the father of the vodka monopoly, and who had retired from the
Ministry, made a dramatic appearance before the Council of the Em-
pire to appeal for measures to lessen the growing evils of intemper-
ance. In the course of h>s address he said:—“ The chief object in
establishing the monopoly was not to strengthen the liquor traffic,
but to suppress the great national evil of alcoholism. This has been
thrust into the background, and the monopoly has been used as a
means of pumping the people’s money into the Government Treasury.
During the war with Japan, owing to the great need of money, special
stress was laid upon the necessity of deriving large profits from the
vodka monopoly, apd the receipts were doubled. As a consequence,
this traffic has developed enormously.” Herein is
A Warning to Democracies.
Already in the Northern Territory, in Western Australia and in Queens-
land, State ownership of the liquor traffic has gained entry. Assuming
that the system were made State-wide, and that the need for revenue
became urgent—the latter contingency is now inevitable—would there
not be a real danger of the liquor business being pushed for the sake
of the profits ?
The Temperance leader in the Duma was Michael Tcheltcheff. By
birth a peasant, self-taught, he rose to be Mayor of Samara. The
Samara City Council offered to make up all the Government would
lose by closing the vodka shops. The offer was'refused. It then
dawned upon the Mayor that Russian officialdom did not want a sober
people. A people drugged with vodka could be more easily kept
down. Michael Tcheltcheff was elected to the Duma on a Prohibitionist
ticket. The Imperial Council, the Upper House, blocked the reforms
which he initiated. He then resigned his seat in the Duma, and made
a personal appeal to the Czar. The "Little Father” developed an
uncomfortable way of looking into the condition of his people. He
paid visits unannounced. In a journey to a country fair, at which he
was expected, he counted on a two-mile srtetch of road forty-seven men
who had go" drunk in his honour. The Duma had demanded reform.
It had more of the shadow of power than the substance. The Czar
demanded reform, and even then the Prime Minister said that to inter-
fere with vodka revenue was 11 impossible.” But when the Czar took
a hand there was


Something Doing.
The story goes that in a few days the Minister who blocked reform
received a personal letter, written in the Czar’s own hand. It said
that “ His Majesty was extremely sorry that the continued ill-health
of the Prime Minister made it impossible for him to serve longer,”
and expressed the hope that in “ the retirement from official duties his
personal life would be happy.” Up to the moment of receiving the
letter the Minister did not know that he was ill. He doubtless felt
sick when he realised that he was “ fired.'’ Might all shuffling Pre
miers be so relieved !
A new Minister was appointed with a mandate from the Czar to
put the people’s welfare before revenue. The people were given
power to petition for the renewal of licences. In five months, ending
June 30th, 1914 (before the war), 800 petitions were received, and 11 4 Q
liquor shops were closed in response.
Then the war clouds lowered. Germany began to threaten ; Russia
began to mobilise. The Grand Duke is credited with telling his
nephew the Czar to strike his blow, and on the same evening a man-
date went forth closing up the vodka shops during mobilisation. Then
the closing was made to last longer—then on the basis of results it
was proclaimed by the Czar to be “ for ever.”
The first Prohibition order was for the period of mobilisation only.
It was for
The Closing of All Drink Shops,
whether vodka, beer or wine was retailed at them. An exception was
made in favour of certain eating houses, known as first-class
restaurants; places patronised by the well-off classes. On August
22nd, igi4, the order was extended to cover the period of the war so
far as the sale of vodka was concerned. But about a month later the
Czar confirmed a decision of the Council of Ministers to the effect that
on receipt of a petition, asking for Prohibition of all intoxicants from
any local governing body, all places for the sale of liquor within the
territory of the petitioners, and within a limit of 300 yards off their
boundaries, should be forthwith closed. Local councils were only to
ask in order to receive the boon of Prohibition. Within twelve days
of the promulgation of this order 52 cities and towns petitioned for
permanent Prohibition, and 15 asked for it for the period of the war.
The movement spread throughout the vast Empire with marvellous
rapidity, as though winged messengers of Heaven were conveying
the inspiration. Russia, comprising one-seventh of the earth’s land
surface was soon nearly as wholly “ dry ” in respect of beer and spirits
as she was in regard to vodka. Petrograd, the capital, had for its
Mayor, a distiller, in the person of Prince A. N. Obolensky. He proved
to be a Prince indeed. Said he : “ Serious as the matter may be to
us, if drunkenness can be eradicated, we distillers are in duty bound
to make every sacrifice for it.”
Russia First; Business Second.
Under this Mayor, Petrograd, with a population of 1,700,000, went
wholly “dry.” At first an exemption was made in favour of forty-
nine first-class restaurants, for the convenience of first-class people,


but even in Russia this class distinction was not long - tolerated, and
these places, too, were brought under the “ dry ” regime. Moscow,
the second city of the Empire, and the former capital, with a popula-
tion of a million and a-half, was one of the first to catch the flame of
enthusiasm in which the whole drink trade disappeared.
A fact which adds glory to the Russian Municipal Councillors is that
the licence fees from all beer and wine shops, restaurants and cafes
went to the municipal coffers. When the councils petitioned’ for Pro-
hibition they rut off a considerable portion of their revenue. They put
the well-being of the people first. And later they found that it'paid
to do so.
f rom the commencement of mobilisation in July, IQI4, wherever
the Russian armies have been, absolute Prohibition of all intoxicants
lias prevailed. I have read the testimony of several newspaper corre-
spondents to the effect that all through the war they had
Not Seen a Russian Soldier Drunk.
Mr. Stanley Washburn, for instance, wrote in “ The Times,” Lon-
don In nearly six months’ association with the armies in many
different theatres of operation, 1 have not seen a single drunken or
tipsy officer or soldier. Let us think of the vast armies of men to
whom this testimony applies, and then of what we have witnessed
amongst our comparatively small number, and bow our heads in
humiliation.
There was an early ou'comp of Russian Prohibition which was
momentous in its results. The Russian army was mobilised in half
the time the German staff thought possible. The heroic sacrifice of
Belgium, when she laid down her life to save her protectors, upset
the German time-table, and delayed the drive to Paris. But that
terrific drive was near its consummation when German troops had to
be called off to meet the menace of Russia in East Prussia. The
pressure on the Allies in France was relieved, Paris saved, and the
whole course of the war altered in our favour.
Early in July, 1916, the Russian Duma passed a measure
Permanently Prohibiting
the manufacture and sale of intoxicants. Beverages which contain
not more than one and a-ha]f per cent, of alcohol are to be allowed.
These are classed as non-intoxicants. Our excise limit for non-in-
toxicants is two per cent, of proof spirit. The manufacture and sale
of spirits, wine and beer of the intoxicating type are to be prohibited
for ever. An effort was made to allow liquors containing up to thirteen
per cent, of alcohol to be sold after the war, but this was defeated
oy an overwhelming majority. The members from all parts of the
country bore eloquent testimony to the good results of Prohibition.
The action was taken as the result of experience covering nearly two
years.
The Voice of the Church.
During the early stages of Prohibition, appeals came from the clergy
and laity throughout the Empire to the Holy Synod, begging the
Church to use its mighty influence to make Prohibition permanent and
complete. As a result there was handed to the Czar on the 27th of April,


igls, an appeal, signed by the heads of the Greek Church, including
the Metropolitans of Petrograd, Kiev, and Moscow, four Archbishops
and three Bishops, of which the following is a part;
“ Your Imperial Majesty. Great Emperor,
“ The carrying out of Your Majesty’s will in the Prohibition of the
sale of alcoholic drinks has put Your Majesty’s loyal subjects in the
unusual circumstance of a new temperate life, and has given to Russia
innumerable blessipgs. It has brought back to the Russian nation
the full consciousness of its divine duty before God and history. The
Church authorities in the person of the Holy Synod appointed to guard
the mighty spiritual treasures of the Russian nation, cannot notice
this fact of the great moral regeneration of Russia without a feeling
of deep satisfaction. By the decree of Your Majesty, the Russian
people, from whose weakened will the chains of alcoholism have fallen,
are now reaching up towards the temple of the soul —that soul which
Your Majesty has indeed brought out of a prison of misery by the
Prohibition edict. Fear to God has been awakened. Respect to the
law's and ordinances of the Church have been strengthened, b aith
and old Russian godliness have been revived. The people’s capacity
for useful work has been noticeably increased. Criminality has
lessened. Happy holidays are no longer darkened by debauchery.
Quarrels have ceased. All the people of many-tongued Russia, united
in one large and peaceful family, are ready to fight the impudent
invader to the last drop of their blood. Moral standards have developed
in the people’s intercourse. Peace and quiet have been established
in the homes. Fathers and mothers have found again their lost chil-
dren, wives their husbands, and children their parents. In one word
the whole face of the Russian Empire is changed. The sense of
morality amongst the people has arisen, and a serious and pure religious
sentiment has been awakened in them to face the trials sent of God.
It is difficult to enumerate all the blessings coming from this great
historic act of the sobering of Russia.
“ In view of all this, the Holy Synod cannot keep silence before
Your Majesty, because of the fears which those self-styled sponsors
of public interest awaken among us, the men who are seeking to open
Up again the sale of wine and beer. At the time when most men are
rejoicing in salvation from that alcoholism which has been stopped
in its pernicious course by the powerful action of your royal word,
certain persons, interested in the distribution of alcoholic drinks, are
seeking to make a breach in the defences through which alcoholism
may quicklv again get at the people and take hold of them with
greater power than ever. The danger of this is especially great i»
view of the pleasing taste of those drinks, although their use is followed
by no less destructive consequences than the use of spirits. Accord-
ingly, neither beer nor wine can be considered useful agencies in the
fight against alcoholism.
“ Therefore, the most Holy Synod, speaking for both pastors and
flocks, bowing before this great historic act of Your Majesty, directed
to the sobering of Russia, considers it to be its sacred duty to apply
to you, great monarch, with a common prayer that the restrictions


upon all alcoholic drinks may, in the future, retain their active power
for the good and salvation of your subjects in Russia.”
I have quoted this eloquent appeal at. considerable length because
it is the voice of authority, which cannot be questioned, and is one
of the most powerful pleas for Prohibition ever penned.
Statesmen Convinced,
In the course of a budget speech on February 15th, 1915, Lloyd
George said:
" Russia has, since the war began, enormously increased her re-
sources by suppressing the sale of all alcoholic liquors. It is hardly-
realised that by that means alone she has increased the productivity
of her labour by something between 30 and 50 per cent. It is as if
she had added millions of labourers to her labour reserve without even
increasing the expense of maintaining them. Whatever the devastation
° J ie coun try may be, Russia has more than anticipated its wastage
by that great act of national heroism and sacrifice.”
Ihe “ Argus chided Mr. George, and assumed that he was merely
anticipating these results. As a matter of fact his statements were
based upon a paper issued by the Russian Finance Minister, M. Barack.
1 his eminent statesman has been convinced bv results. He recently
said:
Under the difficult conditions of war-time we ventured to forego a
huge drink revenue and thereby most clearly demonstrated that, with a
return to peace when the State Exchequer recovers all its former
sources of revenue, and a sobered people fully develops its greatly-
increased productivity in the peaceful field, of 'labour, Russia calmly
and confidently will be able to live with a Temperance Budget.”
In February, 1916, he said:--
“ There is nothing illusory about Russia’s prosperity. It is incon-
trovertible, resting on increased earnings and savings. When a year
ago the savings banks showed a monthly increase in deposits of
£5.286,767, it was regarded as phenomenal. During January the sav-
ings banks alone showed an increase of £12,688,242, accounted for
principally by the growing thrift and economy of the peasants since
the enforcement of Prohibition, their greater earning power, and higher
wages they command, and by the Government provision enabling
the families of soldiers to increase materially the income earned before
the w-ar. ”
Travellers’ Testimony.
The evidence of the man who has “ been there ” is not always
leliable. The traveller is apt to make general statements upon isolated
tacts. The famous John Foster Fraser did this in describing con-
ditions in No-licence areas in New Zealand. He clearly showed pro-
liquor bias. When he testifies to the success of Russian Prohibition
it should be safe to accept his evidence. In the “ Sunday School
Chronicle” of August Ist, 1915, he wrote:—
“ As one who has travelled all over Russia, knowing it in peace
time, time of revolution, and time of war, I have to report that Prohi-
bition has been good for the country. I do not imagine there is one
person in a hundred thousand who could raise his hand to return
to the old condition of things. There has been a considerable decrease


January
72
February
.. 114
65
March
57
April
... 144
67
Mav
64
June
I 2Q
55
ig 15
Without Vodka.
Men.
Women
January
33
3Q
February
24
25
March
35
49
April
26
22
May ...
28
17
June ...
... 27
21
in crime since Russia became teetotal; the number of cases of insanity
has declined ; the suicides are reduced in number. Manufacturers tell
me that enforced abstinence has increased industrial efficiency by 25
per cent. Working men earn more, and though the war has increased
the cost of living, their families are better off than before the war,
because none of the hard-earned roubles go in vodka.”
At Leeds, on July Ist, 1916, Mr. Fraser, having just returned from
another visit to Russia, said that though he was not a teetotaller, he
declared that under the change Russia had enormously improved,
mentally, “ morally, physically, industrially, and economically.”
To show that Mr. Fraser was speaking by the book, I quote the
following remarkable figures of suicides and attempted suicides in
Petrograd during the first six monffis of 1914 with vodka, and the
corresponding period of 1915, without. A fact, too, to be borne in
mind is that Temperance reforms bad been introduced early in 1914,
so that the figures of that period are not so bad as those of years
before.
Suicides and attempted suicides in Petregrad.
1914. With Vodka. Men. Women.
The Tributes of the Press.
Before the war the new spaper press generally, and the leading reviews
were in the main critics of Prohibition, and usually unfair. When the
join in the paean of praise it may be inferred that they have been won
by irresistible facts. From many press tributes, I cull the following:
Mr. Hamilton Fyffe, Petrograd correspondent of the “ Daily Mail,”
London, in the issue of February 22nd, 1915 —
“ The Prohibition argument is strong. Crime has become rarer. The
records of the courts prove this. Savings bank deposits have increased
enormously. The number of patients in Petrograd hospitals has fallen
off in a surprising degree. In the towns, workmen who used to spend
their wages as soon as they got them are setting up in business for
themselves. Peasants, who in vodka days, never put by a kopeck, are
buying good ploughs and drills and harvesting machines. There is
good work for all, and wages are rather higher than they were before
the war. In all ranks there are many (women as well as men) who are


the better for their enforced abstinence. Brightness has come back
to eyes dulled by over indulgence. Cheeks which were grey and flabby
have colour in them again.”
Mr. Ivan Zhilkin, wrote in the New York, Russian Review, “ Russkoye
Slovo,” March 15th, 1915 —
“ All -Russia is filled with enthusiasm and gratitude. As if by the
waving of a magic wand, drunkenness, debauchery, wild cries, disput-
ing and fighting has ceased in the streets of both villages and towns.
Factories and workshops are filling their orders with promptness and
accuracy. In households long accustomed to poverty, strife, drunken
quarrels and blows, there are now peace and quiet. The peasant
families are even making pecuniary savings, which, although small,
are as welcome as they are unexpected. The very face of Russia, long
disfigured by the alcoholic excess, seems to have been transformed and
ennobled. ”
In the London “ Times,” of January 15th, 1915, the following ap-
peared from its Moscow correspondent—
“ Without a murmur of protest the most drunken city of Europe was
transformed into a temple of sobriety, and we felt that if Russia could
thus conquer herself in a night, there was indeed nothing that might
not be accomplished.”
Mr. Samuel G. Blythe, the Russian correspondent of the “ Saturday
Evening Post,” wrote, in the issue of September 4th, 1915 —
“ Russia at warv—as Russia is—is a far stronger Russia, a far more
prosperous Russia, a far more lovable Russia, a far more civilised
Russia than before the war began and before the prohibition of vodka.”
The People Speak for Themselves.
During xq 15, the Government of Kostroma, a province one-sixth the
size of Victoria, with a population of two millions, issued questions
to 600. correspondents dealing with the effect of Prohibition in the
Province.
Of 532 replies to the question whether Prohibition had produced
any improvement in homes previously ruined by drunkenness, 460
out of 532 answers were in the affirmative. Said on'e peasant: “ Won-
derfully good 1 Joy everywhere. Quite habitual drunkards are well
dressed now, and have repaired their houses.”
That Prohibition has not destroyed the joy of living is shown by
the testimony of 502 out of 539 answers which said that their holiday
gatherings are “good”: “ quite good ” : “quiet”: “reasonable,”
and “ much better without vodka ” ; and their village business as-
semblies gain also in effectiveness, for, as one remarked, “ those who
formerly shouted, being full of vodka, but empty of ideas, are now
quiet.”
A priest wrote: “ All are as if they were born anew. Before Prohibition
there were thirty to fifty cases every month in the district court; now
there are none. I (who wrote) am the judge.” “ Nobody on earth ever
had such rejoicing before as the women have now.” “ Even the atten-
dance of the children at school is better.” “ Children have better
things to eat and sweeties in their pockets.”


The Peaceful Revolution.
Ernest Gordon, in “ Russian Prohibition,” quotes from Dr. Hjalmar
Sjogren, a Swedish professor who visited Russia in the latter part of
1914. He is intimately associated with Russia:
One knows the Russians no longer since the vodka traffic has
closed down. Ihe Russian workman and peasant are now a wholly
different type from that which one was accustomed to see before. The
people, hitherto, have .carried an unmistakable stamp of poverty. Now
the working- people are well-clothed and well-fed. During the four
months prohibition has existed they have succeeded in repairing both
the inner and outer w-orkman.
“ Formerly workmen seldom came to work on Mondays. Now' they
are in their places daily. Then they went with their wages Saturday
evening to the saloon. Now they buy food and clothing. The result
has been a magnificent and wholly unexpected boom both in the cloth-
ing and food-stuffs industries. This in spite of the war. Formerly
a Russian worker could not buy eggs and butter, wear good clothes
on Sundays, possess good shoes and rubbers. Now r he is able to
procure them all. This is a peculiarly gratifying result of the severe
prohibitory decrees. This strikes one immediately. As a result, sym-
pathy for the new' order grows day by day. The protests of brewers
and distillers are remarkably weak since they know their petitions, under
the present conditions, will be without effect. Public opinion among
the masses, in the city governments, in the country zemstvo, is so
universally favourable to the new order that it would be difficult,
indeed, to oppose it. The blessings which abstinence brings with it
are too* obvious. Prohibition has revolutionised Russia, and no one
who has not seen it can conceive how advantageously it w’orks.”
Some Striking Facts.
A Temperance Society in Kasan ran a hospital for alcoholists. In
the course of a year 1421 cases were treated. It is now closed because
no patients came.
That Prohibition is “ bad for business ” was proved by the pawn-
brokers. Their businesses experienced a decided slump. But the
savings banks had to take on extra assistants to cope with the rush of
depositors, and some discharged pawnbrokers’ clerks found openings
in them. The Russian Baptists have a Mission Church in Petrograd,
known as the Dom Evangelia. It is the custom in Russia to hold
services on Easter Sunday morning “ when it is yet dark.” The
worshippers then go to their homes and break the Lenten fast at
well-spread tables. At the Dom Evangelia Mission tables W'ere spread
for the tramps and drunkards of the locality. At Easter, 1913, and
again at 1914, the accommodation for over 700 guests was over-taxed.
At Easter, 1915, no one came. Mr. Ernest Gordon quotes this report.
Professor Simpson, of Edinburgh, in the course of an investigation,
was furnished with statistics w'hich showed that during the first three
months of Prohibition there w 7 as a diminution of 47 per cent, in the
number of fires, and of 56 per cent, in the value of property destroyed.
Drink often puts out the fire on the hearth. It appears to be an
auxiliary in starting the fires which destroy.


Secrets of Success.
Prohibition could be best enforced by a wise, benevolent and all-
powerful autocrat. In Australia we look for it through the will of an
enlightened people. Public sentiment behind the laws should make
it effective. Russia has enjoyed the advantage of both these influences,
because the action of the Czar and his Ministers was in harmony with
the aspirations and wishes of the great mass of the people. No doubt
most of the victims of vodka felt the craving which alcohol creates
for itself, but a powe: ful moral impulse helped them to overcome it—
the desire to remove every obstacle to victory in the war. The absence
of temptation completed the cure. “ The sight of means to do ill
deeds 55 being removed, the “ ill deeds ” were no longer done. There
is a notable illustration of the moral factor in overcoming intemper-
ance in the case of the German commander Hindenburg, though some
may question the aptness of the term “ moral ” in this connection.
Hindenburg was thought to be drinking himself to death in his
favourite taproom, when the Kaiser called him to save the Fatherland
from the Russian invasion. Some may wish that the process had
been completed. The General certainly pulled himself together, and
that is what the Russian vodka drinkers generally did. There were
exceptions, of course. These have been multiplied by the liquor press
agencies until the exception was made to appear to be the rule. Some
victims of alcoholic thirst drank themselves to death with methylated
spirits, and “ deaths from alcoholism,” under Prohibition were glee-
fully proclaimed. The Russian verdict was that men so degraded
could be well spared by Russia. Anyway! they were the products of
the licenced liquor traffic. Russia has ceased to manufacture such
weaklings.
Post-Revolution Testimony.
It may bo thought that the revolution has contradicted the stories
of the well-being of the Russian people, but the history of the uprising
has confirmed them. Mr. Stinton Jones, who lived in Russia from
iqos to iQiy, who travelled much and was an eye-witness of many ot
the stirring events, thus describes the improvement in the condition of
the people in his book, “ Russia in Revolution.” At chapter 111.,
page 55, he writes: —
“ It is hardly possible to estimate how much tjie abolition of this
national drink has contributed towards the saving of Russia, for the
good effects of its abolition soon became apparent. Where previously
the lower classes had spent all, or the greater portion, of their earnings
upon drink, and thereby sacrificed the health and comfort of them-
selves and their families, now they are able with their minds clear
to realise the terrible effect which it had had upon them. They also
had the great comfort of saving money to spend upon their personal
requirements.
“ The abolition of vodka, however, was to have the most far-reach-
ing effects. Having more money to spend on their personal comforts
has opened the eyes of the peasantry and working-classes to the ter-
rible state in which they have been living for generations. Their first
impulse on finding they had money to spare was to buy new clothes.
When they saw that these new clothes were rapidly getting spoiled by


Last eight months of vodka—net loss of .£11,000,000
First four months of Prohibition—gain of 14,000,000
first full year of Prohibition—gain of 81 000000
First nine months of 1916— gain of 150000000
It may be asked— .... „
Why the Revolution?
The answer to that is fully contained in Mr. Stinton Jones’ book.
The revolt was deliberately worked up by the agents of the Govern-
ment to create the excuse for a separate peace. Chapter III. of the book
is entitled, “The Starving of Petrograd.” With abundance of food
in the country, supplies for the capital were held back, or if they
reached the city, were cornered by the police. Mr. Jones describes
queues of people, mostly women, four deep, and sometimes extending
over a mile, waiting for the miserable dole of black bread. The tem-
contact with their uncleaned habitations and general surroundings, it
became obvious to them that still greater comfort in life could he
obtained by taking a little care as to personal and domestic cleanli-
ness. They were able to buy more articles of furniture and further add
to their comfort. In consequence, during the last two years, the
majority of the villages have taken on a different aspect, in particular
as regards cleanliness.
“ Again, while they were slaves to the vodka habit and always
craving for further supplies, they were willing to sacrifice the pro-
duce of their land at a low price, or even mortgage their homesteads,
to enable them to satisfy their cravings. Now they are saving money,
are more shrewd in their dealings with the middleman, and are in-
creasing their holdings of land.
“ In fact, last year not only did the peasants begin to realise the
advantage of saving money, but from all over the country there was
a cry of ‘ What are we to do with our money now ?’ This appeal was
immediately answered by the inauguration of banks, which accepted
the peasants’ small saving on deposit at a reasonable interest. Such
banks the State was forced to start, and now there is hardly a small
town or village throughout the whole of the country without a bank of
its own. There are, of course, still extremists who have not yet lost
the craving for the spirit, and they resort to numerous and curious
methods for obtaining their beloved vodka.”
All this was written after the revolution. It throws light upon the
Budget figures of _ „ . , „ .
Russia’s Savings.
In iqi2 the Russian people put into the savings banks, or deposited
in securities, a little over ,£4,000,000 more than they withdrew. In
1913 their savings were a little less. In the eight months of 1914,
before the war, the withdrawals exceeded deposits by ,£11,000,000.
During the laist four months of the year, with war begun and vodka
prohibited, they recovered the lost ground, and gained some for the
year, by depositing ,£14,000,000 more than they withdrew. In 1915
the savings grew by ,£81,000,000. The 1917 Budget stated that the
savings for the first nine months of 1916 w’ere over ,£150,000,000. As-
suming that this rate was continued for the year, the total exceeded
,£300,000,000. Note that lam writing of pounds, not roubles. Here
is a summary:


perature 70 deg. to 80 deg. below freezing point, a cutting wind blow-
ing. The Government agents whispering revolt, but the people suffer
mg with patience because they thought that their want was necessary
in order that the men at the front might have enough. At the end ot
a day’s tedious waiting many might be told that all the bread was
sold, and poor women had to return empty-handed to their famished
children.
The following is quoted in Mr. Jones' own words, he being an eye-
witness :
“ There were in Petrograd stores of vodka, it being used tor various
munition purposes. These stores were all guarded, but with dia-
bolical intent the Government arranged that the guards should be
removed. This would permit of the people, when worked up to a
frenzy by the paid agitators, being easily induced to creak into these
stores, and thus fill the streets with drunken and uncontrollable mobs,
and so still further increase the Government’s chance of success.
(Page 77.)
■* On several occasions the police agitators had endeavoured to
induce the mobs to break into the vodka stores, but were unsuccessful,
owing to the foresight of Mr. Rodjanko, the President of the Duma,
who, knowing that the guard had been removed by the orders of the
Government, had caused them to be securely guarded by armed men
dressed as civilians. This precaution on the part of Mr. Rodjanko,
who has always had the welfare of the nation at heart, was one of the
principal causes of the failure of the devilish plans of the Govern-
ment.’ 5 (Page 90.)
“ Some of the mobs, led by criminals or hooligans, attempted to
break into the vodka stores, but, thanks to Mr. Rodjanko, they weie
prevented from doing so. Without using violence the revolutionary
guards simply explained the situation, pointing out that if the crowds
availed themselves of the large stores of vodka they would be cutting
their own throats and furthering the interests of the old regime. The
crowds, who had amongst them many of the revolutionary agents, were
quickly convinced on this point and left the vodka stores in peace,
which was a good illustration of the wonderful control which the
people kept over themselves. In cases where large stores of vodka
had been found in police stations, the crowd invariably broke the
bottles and poured their contents into the canals. Some of the worst
characters among them drank large quantities of the fiery spirit, and
were soon incapable of taking further part in the proceedings. There
were instances even of such men being shot down by the people them-
selves.” (Page 121.)
The greatest revolution in history was made possible by Prohibi-
tion. The same influence aided its accomplishment with comparatively
little bloodshed. Think of what followed when France freed herself
from the tyranny of the Bourbons. Russia may not recover herself as
a fighting power in the present war, unless external danger restores
order from chaos, as it did when the armies of Europe’s allied mon-
archs were thundering at the gates of France. But the hope that
Russia will eventually make good as a peace-loving democracy is one
of the best promises of a better day f6r humanity.


FACTS ABOUT FRANCE
FRANCE made a name for herself by the Prohibition of
absinthe during the early stage of the war. She appeared
to take her place in the van of Temperance reform, and her
example has been freely quoted as an incentive to Britain
and Australia. British, reformers have tried to bring the blush of
shame to the faces of their own faltering statesmen with the name of
!■ ranee. et, with absinthe eliminated, our gallant Ally was still con-
fronted with a drink problem greater than that of any other one of
the warring nations. When the war began no other country was so
tirmly held in the deadly grip of alcohol as France.
Wine and spirit merchants in Australia are seeking to make capital
from the statement that 2,000,000 bottles of wine are daily served to
the soldiers who are bravely fighting to expel the invader from their
much-loved land. Nothing is said by these vendors of “ Johnny
Walker ” of the French restriction of spirits because they were “ going
strong ’in the enemy’s interests. The free use of wine is admitted,
but what then ? Ihe world, lost in wonder at the heroism of the men
who withstood the German onslaught at Verdun, is expected to in some
way connect their tenacity of purpose—their doggedness and dash—
ivith the spirit of wine, rather than the spirit of patriotism. “ French
soldiers drink wine, and look at them,” is the inference of the spirit
merchants' placard. Frenchmen have drunk wine, beer, aperitives,
brandy, liqueurs, absinthe—and now look along the far-flung battle line
thinking of the men who are not there. It is a reasonable thing to say
that the man power lost to France through alcohol might have made
the difference between an invader driven out and an invader still in
possession.
The Prohibition of absinthe by France, and restriction of spirits,
were braver deeds than any of our Australian Governments have dared
to perform to help win the w>ar. The statesmen who were responsible
for these reforms are worthy of honours yet to Australia
FRANCE IS A WARNING
more than an exemplar. We have been told times without number by
vignerons, wine merchants, politicians, the press, and many persons
who claim superiority over the common run of folks, that the way to
combat intemperance is to encourage wine drinking. A wine-drinking
Australia, we are assured, wou'd be a sober and prosperous Aus-
tralia. We are asked to believe that the way to stop intoxication
caused chiefly by beer is to encourage the use of wine of threefold
intoxicating power! The tendency of the drinker is to go from the
weak potion to the strong, and then to the stronger. The pleasant
land of France—the sunny home of the vine—came to be the country
of the most heavily alcoholised nation in the world. Wine, brandy,
absinthe were the fatal order of progression.
The population of France is almost stationary. The liquor traffic
has not been. In 1881 there w'erfi 367,000 drink shops in the land. In


1907 there were 477,000. Every day saw more than half-a-dozen new
saloons opened, on the average. In 1914 there were in round numbers,
HALF-A-MILLION DRINK SHOPS
in France. The patriot statesman, M. Joseph Reinach, is my authority
for the statement that 50,000 of these provided the means for immorality
as well as intemperance. Alcoholism and prostitution, the two chief
factors in national deterioration, went hand in hand. Whom the devil
had joined the State did not put asunder. 1 write in the past tense,
because war-time reforms may have improved things. A street in Rouen
contains 150 houses, and 75 of these—just one-half—were drink shops.
In Paris there were 30,000 saloons. In the whole of France there was
a drink shop to each 30 adults. Hut the half-million places for the
sale of liquor only represented a part of the vast machinery for pan-
dering to vice. The French worship of persona] liberty led to the
toleration of the worst system ever devised for the demoralisation of
the home and family life. It was held to be the inherent right of
every man who grew spirit-making materials to distil spirits for the
use of his household without the payment of any duty, t orty years
ago 300,000 persons exercised this dangerous privilege. By 1914 the
number had risen to over a million. Their known output of potable
spirits was 19,800,000 gallons for the year, but supervision was im-
possible, and there were further quantities unknown. A French
authority described domestic distilling in France as “the most vast
organisation of fraud in the world.” Many growers distilled all their
crops, and bought industrial alcohol to redistil. The one-time scene of
domestic innocence, the farm or orchard home, became the sly-grog
shop. Duty free brandy could be sold at half-penny a glass. The
labourer received a liberal share as a part of his wages. In Normandy
it was a common practice for mothers, going to work in the fields, to
put brandy with the milk in the baby’s feeding bottle. The little
innocent, supposed to be soothed, was really drunk and incapable.
Usually to the over-crowded cities of the old world the country is the
source of purification of the life blood, and the renewal of vitality.
Through the more-than-a-million stills in as many country homes in
France the source was tainted and vitiated.
The mastery of alcohol appears to have been at its worst in Nor-
mandy. This province provided big men for Napoleon’s armies. They
are not to be found now. In the industrial city of Rouen it was found
that only 15 out of each 200 workmen were not injuriously affected by
alcohol. They began with the early morning dram and through the
day worked—more or less —between drinks. In addition to copious
quantities of wine and beer, each man in Rouen consumed a daily
average of eight glasses of spirits. A teacher in a public school having
63 pupils in her class, whose ages ranged from six to nine, found that
24 of them drank spirits every day. Many school children could not
learn their lessons on Monday because of their Sunday drinking.
M. Tourdot gives this picture of Rouen saloons; “ Anyone can
see in Rouen in the saloons which the longshoremen frequent, swarm-
ing masses of ragged men, pressing up to the bar, while the women
wait at the door with the children. I know nothing more revolting


than the sight of these men, drinking and pushing around the saloon-
keeper, who sits enthroned before the counter, taking in the money,
while hungry women stand on the sidewalk outside. Some, however,
come in to drink with the men, as Gervoise with Coupeau.”
ABSINTHE WAS THE MASTER CURSE.
Composed of alcohol and the leaves and tops of wormwood, usually
with vitrol added, it was the most deadly liqueur made. A foul de-
coction, bitter, burning, nauseous at first, it came to be a veritable
ambrosia to its unhappy victims. In IQI3 France consumed 6,322,588
gallons of this hell-broth. The child, accustomed to wine as a daily
beverage, grown to maturity, wanted something more pungent and
burning, and found it in brandy. Then various liqueurs and aperitives
with fancy names were available. As a final resort there came the
devil's elixir absinthe. The wine interests joined with the Temper-
ance Party in the movement for 'Jie suppression of absinthe. The
Temperance Party in France is comprised mainly of men who drink
wine and beer. When they demand the suppression of alcohol they
mean in the form of distilled liquors. The distillers of brandy and
other spirits generally supported the absinthe interests. They were
shrewd enough to see that the interests were common. But for the
distillers' money absinthe would have been suppressed before the war.
It is reckoned that the war only hastened its extinction by a few
months. It had already been prohibited in Switzerland, Belgium. Den-
mark and Holland.
Prior to the greater deed of restricting the sale of spirits, the
Government ordered the publication of an appeal signed by the Pre-
sident, which was exhibited at every post office in France. It read :
TO FRENCH WOMEN AND TO YOUNG FRENCHMEN.
Drink is as much vour enemv as Germany
Since 1870 it has cost France in men and money much more than
the present war.
Drinkers age quickly. They lose half their normal life, and fall
easy victims to many infirmities and illnesses.
The seductive drinks of your parents reappear in their offspring as
great hereditary evils. France owes to alcohol a great many mad men
and women and consumptives, and most of her criminals.
Drink decreases by two-thirds our national production; it raises
the cost of living and increases poverty.
In imitation of the criminal Kaise~. drink decimates and ruins France,
to the great delight of Germany.
Mothers, young men, young girls, wives! Up and act against drink-
in memory of those who have gloriously died or suffered wounds for
the Fatherland! You will thus accomplish a mission as great as that
of our heroic soldiers.
This official placard may come as a somew'hat rude shock to those
who have so often declared that in France everybody drinks wine,
and drunkenness is never seen.
It was widely reported that the French Government had prohibited
entirely the sale of spirits.


British writers evidently transformed good intentions into deeds.
It has to be confessed, with sorrow for our gallant ally, that t :, o
French Government capitulated to the distillers, as the British >,b;-
net and President Wilson did to the brewers. But it was ra . un-
conditional surrender. The sale of spirits to soldiers, to ail women,
and to persons under 18 is prohibited. To others the reta I salt is
limited to meal hours. Sale for consumption off the premises is
forbidden except in quantities of not less than two litres (about 3}
pints). These special restrictions do not apply to wine or beer, or to
fruit liqueurs of a strength not exceeding 23 degrees of alcohol.
The Shameful Cause of Failure.
Addressing the annual meeting of a section of the French National
League against alcoholism, Joseph Reinach, whose authority I have
already quoted, and who is the leader of the Temperance party in
the French Parliament, told of the influences which had delayed
victory. The report states that he drew an impressive picture of the
ravages alcohol has produced in the army, in the fields, and in the
factories; be described the Deputies and Senators as convinced in
their hearts of the harmfulness of the poison, patent to all, unable
to question either the accursing figures furnished to the Assembly by
the militant anti-alcoholist or the unsparing conclusions of the
academies, but nevertheless shrinking from applying the remedy.
He paid a tribute to the Government for proposing to the Chamber
the suppression of spirits, and regretted that it had not existed.
“The cause of this failure? Do we not all know?” said M.
Jfeinach. “It is political interest. The brewers and distillers
and their clientele of slaves of alcohol, are they not all spectres
against whom it is only necessary to advance in order to make them
vanish ?”
The French Government found the distilling interests, backed by
appetite, a very substantial spectre. Here is the sad fact that even
in France when the leaders of the nation’ said in effect, distilled
spirits obstruct the way to victory and hinder the driving of the
German hosts from our beloved land, vested interests cried, spare
our gains! and appetite pleaded, leave us our indulgence! And vested
interests and appetite stood before victory.
I am not overlooking the hopeful aspects of the situation. The
prohibition of absinthe, and the partial prohibition of spirits, are
immense victories, especially for France. M. Reinach told his
hearers that they “ must stir up a big agitation against the re-
election of those Senators or Deputies who. whatever their merits,
their deeds in the past, their titles, their eloquence or their service,
refuse to vote for the suppression of spirits. It is not enough that
you w'ho are here, who have been militants, should refuse to vote for
them,” he said. “ You must get others to join you all over the
country. You must choose between alcohol and the nation and the
race.”
But France is not awake to
The Menace of Wine.


1 he deputy who led the successful fight against absinthe, a French
patriot with a German name, Henri Schmidt, said : “ vVe have nothing
against wine and light beers. I drink them, and so do the other
members of the Assembly who are fighting alcoholism.” The per
capita consumption of wine is over 34 gallons annually, counting the
babies.
When Bastile Day was last celebrated there was an American army
in France. The soldiers came from Prohibition camps, and from a
country which has made giving liquor to a soldier a crime. Yet
1- rench authority saw no better way of honouring the men who had
come to save France than by gifts of wine for all. The American
staff took a week to consider the matter, and then decided to allow
the men to break the law of their own country. So a week after the
anniversary date the fall of the Bastile was celebrated as “ Cham-
pagne Day ‘ by the American army. The American censor has not
prevented this intelligence reaching American mothers.
Already the French wine trade is organising to take advantage of
the friendly relations with the United States to open an extensile
propaganda for the introduction of French wines in the great country
which cherishes the hope that it is going “ dry.” The wine interests
are wealthy, and their power is not to be despised. Before the war
the French Government refused to Finland, Denmark, Sweden and
Norway access to the Paris Bourse to compel a lowering of the tariffs
in favour of French wine. Only little Finland stood out, the other
countries yielded to the big Power. The people of Norway, striving
f or national sobriety, found that there was some hidden obstacle to
fheir advance. It subsequently transpired that the French Govern-
ment in iqoq had compelled the acceptance of a secret proviso bind-
ing Norway not to adopt legislation which would interfere with the
French export trade in wine and spirits. When later on Christiania
proposed to adopt earlier closing, the French consul protested that
this would be a breach of the agreement. The Norwegian liquor in-
terests had combined with the French to secure this embargo. The
pathetic attempts of the Christian Queen Ranovalomanjaka, of Mada-
gascar. to keep wines and spirits from her people was one of the
prime causes of trouble with French traders, and of her ultimate
overthrow and the seizing of her country by France. The United
States has nothing to fear from coercion, but she may be alarmed at
the prospect of her soldiers returning as drummers for French wines.
A sadder possibility is their going back with the alcoholic appetite
crying for satisfaction.
The Wastage of Man Power.
Before the war an ever-increasing proportion of conscripts were
rejected because of drink-caused defects. It was stated that 30 per
cent, of those who actually entered the army were incapable of service
through the effects of alcohol. France suffered severely from tuber-
culosis, and alcohol was its powerful ally. Dr. Jacques Bertillon,
wrote: “Are you fighting tuberculosis? Alcohol appears to be the
most deadly cause of the weakening of the organism in preparation
for tuberculosis. It is the master cause. Dr. Roubinavitch wrote:


—“ They talk about the great scourge, tuberculosis, which decimates
France and ordains her decay. The greatest scourge, however, is
alcoholism. It is this which gives up the key to the house, and
permits the sacking.” Dr. Landouzy pertinently says:—“Alcohol
prepares the bed for tuberculosis.” Until recently France bore the
brunt of the war on the western front. She has been greatly weak-
ened by enormous losses. The great white plague has added to them.
Up to February, 1917, 150,000 men had been sent back to their
homes fi'om the army with active tuberculosis disease. With a pre-
disposition to the disease the conditions have been such as to develop
it. Living in trenches, always damp and often worse than damp,
or in dug-outs which are cold and damp, and when re-
lieved from duty for a blessed respite, being billeted in cottages
and out-buildings which are crowded and ill-ventilated, most of the
conditions for the development of the disease exist. Britain raised
an army of 5,000,000, and it is stated that from it there have not
been 5000 tuberculosis cases since the war began.
We may yield to none in admiration of the magnificent defence
made by the gallant soldiers of France, and in wonderment at their
unparalleled sacrifices for their native land. The sad might-have-
been is how much more effective these efforts would have been if,
when preparing years ago for the coming conflict, France had grap-
pled with the enemy within her borders.
The facts about France should convince all who can heed the les-
sons of experience that the way to national sobriety is not through the
wine industry. It may be true that people trained to drink wine from
infancy may, as adults, be able to consume large quantities without
displaying the outward and visible signs of drunkenness. The
physical injury resulting may, however, be much greater than in the
case of a man who is normally sober, but gets drunk at intervals.
Drinking light wine may create the desire for something more burning
to the palate, and more potent to the brain. The average Australian
wine is not light. When exported it is chiefly used to blend with Con-
tinental wines to make them stronger. When the seasoned drinker
goes “ to seek mixed wine ” Australia may supply the stronger
element. Intemperance caused chiefly by beer will not be overcome
by the use of wine of three-fold intoxicating power.
A GREAT (?) TRADE.
The Wine Industry in Australia has always been pampered
by the States. With what result in trade ?
Year 1913-Normal pre-War Year.
Value Total Exports, Australian Products,
£75,138,147.
Value Wine Exports, £106,030!!!
It would not be missed !


Don’t Let Her Sign!
If you believe that the traffic in Alcohol
does more harm than goo &- help stop it!
The above is a reproduction of poster advertisement used in Wash-
ington during- the fight for War time Prohibition. The figures used
2,000,000,000 dollars in cash, the labour of 300,000 men and
7,000,000,000 pounds of food stuff—do not allow for reductions on
account of States recently, or about to, become “ dry.”


ADVANCING AMERICA.
Ihe illustrations which accompany this article create what our
American cousins must call “ some ” paradox. So far as 1 know,
they have not been published in proximity before. We gaze with
exultation upon the ever whitening map, the final predominance
of white showing America to be nearly all “ dry.” But exultation
turns to somewhat painful bewilderment as we look at the latest
representation of “ Miss Liberty ” hesitating to sign a promissory-
note which would commit her to the continuance of the liquor traffic
during the war. The figures quoted represent a relatively greater
drink waste than that which we deplore in Australia. For the time
being, with qualifications, the note is signed.
When we get into the fighting line in our Australian Prohibition
campaign we shall encounter a skilfully directed defence which will
be largely based upon the alleged failure of Prohibition in the United
States. The hardest lies to meet arc those which have a bit of truth for
a foundation. We shall be better equipped for the conflict if we
know where the truth lies. My task is to reconcile a nearly-all
“ dry ” map with an annual drink bill of over ,£400,000,000. Clearly,
dryness has so far not meant absolute aridity.
The Wasting Which Seemed to Strengthen.
Before the war one of the strongest defences which the liquor traffic
had was the support it gave to essential industries. In order to manu.
facture its products it required yearly some 52 million bushels of
barley, 42 million bushels of corn, and 12 million bushels of rice. At
the average yield per acre the land required to raise these foodstuffs
was about three million acres. '1 hese materials do not include sugar
and molasses. The distillers used molasses yearly to the extent of
100 million gallons. The breweries in 1916 numbered 1313, the
distilleries 605, the saloons and beer shops over 200,000, and whole-
sale liquor dealers more than 17,000. An army of some 300,000 men
was employed in breweries and distilleries, as bar-tenders, and in other
liquor trade activities. The railroads carried 7,000,000 tons of freight
annually to and from liquor-making establishments.' These figures
—huge, in fact—were exaggerated to show the country’s dependence
upon the parasitical traffic.
War Has Changed the Viewpoint,
Moral sentiment counts less than before, but economic and physical
facts have joined in driving force. The greater part of the world is
short of food. America has wasted in the production of liquor the
yearly bread supply of 22,000,000 people. The employment of 300,000
men in pursuits which are at least non-productive, the immense
railway traffic, the enormous drink expenditure, all appear different
when men are urgently wanted for the army, and for war industries,
and all the resources of the nation are needed for the prosecution of
the war. The breweries now try to show that the little foodstuffs they
use really does not matter.


THE WHITENING MAP
Prohibition States.
Year when law took
or will take effect.
Maine.
Kansas.
iBBq
North Dakota.
1907
Oklahoma.
I Q.
Georgia.
Mississippi.
igoQ
North Carolina.
Tennessee.
IQI4
West Virginia.
South Carolina.
Washington.
Idaho.
South Dakota.
Utah.
iqiB
Michigan.
Montana.
Indiana.
New Hampshire.
Alaska (Territory).
Dist. of Columbia.
Local Option States
More Than
Half “ Dry.”
Florida.
Kentucky.
Louisiana.
Missouri.
Minnesota
Texas.
Vermont.
Of a total of 3012
counties in the
United States,
having more than
half the nation’s
pop u 1 a tion, are
“ dry.”
iqi S
Arizona.
Alabama.
iqi6
Arkansas.
lowa.
Colorado.
Oregon.
Virgina.
iqi;
Nebraska.


When the Brewers Beat the President.
During the month of July the greatest struggle ever witnessed be-
tween the “ wet ” and “ dry ” forces took place at Washington. Both
sides assembled in strength at the national capital. On the one hand
was represented the interests of human welfare, and the vital interests
of the nation in the great task to which it had dedicated itself on
entering the war. On the other were greed, appetite and organised
financial interests. The House of Representatives passed an amend-
ment to the Food Bill, by a vote of 365 to 5, absolutely prohibiting
the manufacture of all kinds of intoxicating liquors during war time.
Such a vote should have settled the issue beyond recall. But the Bill
was delayed by stone-walling. Finally the President interfered with
a compromise. The conservative Prohibitionists bowed to his wishes.
The Bill was urgent. The brewery interests were strong enough to
keep it back. The man who in the end stood up so bravely against
the Kaiser felt compelled to yield to them. They used twice as much
foodstuffs as the distillers, but they were to be allowed to go on.
The prohibition was limited to spirit-making. Distilling is prohib-
ited. The distillers have two years’ supply in bond. The President
has power to commandeer this. If he does not exercise it the stocks
will yield profits “ beyond the dreams of avarice.” An advance of 2s.
per bottle on normal prices would be an added gain of about
£150,000,000. That would be “ some ” profiteering. Against this there
is the possibility that the embargo on distilling will never be lifted.
There is one thing which America has done splendidly
Protecting the Fighting Men.
Abraham Lincoln said to a young soldier whom he saw about to
enter a saloon: “ I don’t like to see our uniform going into such
places.” America came into the war with a “ dry ” navy. All mili-
tary camps are “ dry.” In locating them preference is given to No-
Licence districts. Tf saloons exist, a “ dry ” zone, usually of five miles,
is declared round the camps. It is an offence to sell or give liquor to
a soldier.
Writing to the Governors of the several States, asking their co-opera-
tion in making morally clean conditions about army camps, the Secretary
of War said : “We cannot allow these young men to be surrounded
bv a vicious and demoralising environment. The greater proportion
of this force probably will be made up of young men who have not
become accustomed to contact with either the saloon or the prostitute,
and who will be at that plastic period of life when questionable modes
of indulgence easily serve as outlets for exuberant vitality. Not only
have we an inescapable responsibility in this matter to the families and
communities from which these young men are selected, but from the
standpoint of our duty and our determination to create an efficient
army, we are bound as a military necessity to do everything in our
power to promote the health and conserve the vitality of the men in
the training camps. I am determined that our new training camps
as well as the surrounding zones within an effective radius, shall
not be places of temptation and peril.”


Mayors and other local authorities have been notified that the law
must be enforced, and that where it is not the camps will be re-
moved.
“ And Thereby Hangs a Tale.”
The history of the liquor fight in America shows that strong Federal
action is necessary to secure law' enforcement. The States have been
left free to work out their own salvation, with the exception that until
recently there has been no effective restraint upon freedom of Inter-
State traffic. The Federal Government taxes liquor, and imposes in-
ternal revenue fees upon liquor makers and sellers. These are plus
the Slate licence fees. Lists are published showing the number of
licensed liquor sellers in Prohibition territories. These include those
who are privileged to sell liquor for medicinal and sacramental pur-
poses, and may also embrace sly-grog sellers. The individual who
sells, perhaps, half-a-dozen bottles of whisky a month in a low,
“ speak-easy,” takes out a Federal licence, for Federal authority is not
to be trifled with. State authority is another matter; it depends in
whom, for the time-being the authority is vested. There may be a
conflict of testimony as to the results of No-Licence in some town, or
district. One writer who was there is quite enthusiastic over the
success. Another who also writes from observation declares it to be
an unmitigated failure. Each regards the other as untrustworthy.
Even a stronger adjective may be used. In the main both are right.
Perhaps one looked for evidences of success, and the other of failure;
but the main reason for the conflict of testimony is that one went
w'hen there was in office a mayor, or other local authority, pledged to
enforce the law, and the other w'hen the official had been elected for
the express purpose of making the law as much a dead letter as he
could. A man in this position does not necessarily w'holly ignore
his oath of office. A raid may be made upon the unlicensed saloon-
keepers once or tw'ice a year, and the resulting fines become the
equivalent of licence fees. The honest sheriff may go to a lot of
trouble, and get a bare living salary. The one who is prepared to
take things easy may find his term of office handsomely remunerative.
The system of making law enforcement dependent upon men elected
to office for a short term is a rotten one.
Whatever stories may be told of Prohibition failures under this
system, they can be capped by
The Failures of Regulation
Booth Tarkington has a story concerning the city of Vreedersburgh.
The name is coined, and the narrative is fiction, but descriptive of
fact. The city is a flourishing railroad centre and has all the features
of modern civilisation, including black smoke from hundreds of chim-
neys, two breweries and a “ red light ” section. The two breweries
always fought each other for the “mayoralty.” If the Goritz brewery
won, all saloon-keepers who drew its beer were allowed immunity
from the law. They could sell at all hours, and on Sundays, without
interference. Those who sold the Hanlon brew found the law so
rigorously applied against them that they could not live. Any charge
of laxity could be met with a long list of convictions. The “ red


light” houses were similarly treated. 1 hose who stocked Goritz
beer for their clients were allowed to carry on. The others were
raided, and made the victims of what appeared to be moral reforming
zeal. By and by the banks took a hand to “boost” the city, and secure
the election of a leading business man. The breweries acquiesced
without bitterness. They knew that the new mayor was no crazy re-
former. “He was a patriot, and would not do anything to hurt the
Full allowance may be made for the fact that the description iS con-
tained in a story, but the story is designed to set form actual con-
ditions in a city which has no ideal beyond material progress. We may
read of an American city which has been seized with a moral spasm
and has closed its saloons on Sundays. The State law never provide
for anything else, only its existence had been forgotten. Cities wine i
are large enough to cultivate “ night life” may allow saloons to be
open till daybreak, or through the whole twenty-four hours Ihe Stat,
law provides a closing hour, but it is ignored . that sa • 1, 6 ™
that in some instances under American conditions Prohibition does
prohibit, it is true in a wider extent that regulation does not regulate.
When Chicago Repented.
After Sunday, October 10th, 1915, Chicago citizens stood up and
demanded the admiration of the world. The city s more than 7-
saloons were closed on that day. Such a thing had not happened be-
fore within the memory of the oldest inhabitant. Irue, te aw sau
that they should be closed, but nobody enforced the law Sunday
suicides'had averaged three; there was not one on the day whin
saw the bars closed. With pride the papers recorded that the day
passed without a murder, and that the picture shows were crowded.
The Saturday and Sunday arrests for drunkenness had averaged z^o,
they fell to 63, of which all but 16 took place on the Saturday night.
The religious institutions of Chicago had sent forth evangelists to
speed the coming of the Kingdom of God, and its press hailed as a
moral triumph that a Sunday passed without a murder, and the citizens
crowded picture shows instead of saloons. AH because the Mayor
gave orders that the law was to be enforced.
America has given us the words “ wet ” and “dry*” in them appli-
cation to the liquor question. There is a third term needed, at least
to cover past conditions.
“ Dry ” May Mean “ Moist.”
The term “dry,” applied to some States in the past, has been
misleading. There may have been a sentiment not against the use of
alcohol, but against the licensed saloon. The hotel providing accom-
modation is one thing, the saloon is another. It is a mere aniiK
shop; the source of public drunkenness, and the centre ox municipal
and political corruption. The best citizens may have joined in a
crusade to burst up the saloon. They did not wish to interfere more
than is necessary with the home consumption of liquor. This posi-
tion has given rise to the singular saying: “ 1 am in favour of Pro
hibition, but agen its enforcement.” In some instances specific pro-


vision has been made for the bringing in of liquor for home con-
sumption. Georgia has been in the “ dry ” list for ten years. On
July ist, igiy, a “ bone-dry law ” took effect. Prior to this date the
individual could have shipped to him each month two quarts of whisky,
a gallon of wine, or five gallons of beer. He was not permitted to
have all, but had to say which. T n the capital city, Atlanta, a carry-
ing company had to establish a branch to deal exclusively with liquor
shipments. 1 here were five delivery windows—four for negroes and
one for whites. In December, iqi6, the express companies brought to
Atlanta, 65,000 packages of liquor. Washington is a “dry ” State,
with a law which permitted the thirsty citizen to import two quarts
of whisky, or twelve quarts of beer, each twenty days. The allowance
of nine g'allons of whisky, or 55 gallons of beer, per annum, was
certainly liberal enough to make the droughty citizen feel that life was
still worth living. We may complain of looseness which has classed
.States with laws such as these as “ dry.”
Still they were getting on, and now they have got an impetus from
Federal law.
Prohibition is Prograssive.
Reformers demand all they want. Their opponents may gain points
which make the law partly ineffective. Then the reformers come again
and keep coming until their objective is realised. The shipment of
liquor for home consumption into a State may be by far a lesser evil
than open saloons at every corner. The saloons are a source of temp-
tation. Temptation creates appetite. When the appetite is acquired
the victim may go to a lot of trouble in order to satisfy it. Candour
compels the admission of this possibility. Ihe Atlanta negro, for
example, getting delivery of his half-gallon of whisky may have
consumed it rapidly, with deadly effect. Absolute Prohibition is the
only effective remedy, and recognition is given to this in the new
American phrase, a
“ Bone-Dry Law.”
As dry as a bone ” is proverbial, though there are many things
drier than bones. The pioneer Prohibition States were hampered by
the law relating to Inter-State commerce. In the eighties it was ruled
by the Supreme Court that liquor forwarded in its original package to
a Prohibition State was not under the jurisdiction of the State law.
The State could prohibit sale, but could not cut off the source of
supply. 'I hus the national Government became, in effect, the protector
of the “ boot-legger,” the “speak-easy,” and the “blind tiger.” In
I DI 3 a law known as the Webb-Kenyon Law, was passed over the veto
of President Taft, who held it to be unconstitutional. It sought to give
States the right to prevent consignments of liquor coming in. The
law has occasioned much litigation. On January Bth, 1917, the United
States Supreme Court declared it to be constitutional. Following this
decision, there came into effect on July ist last a law which prohibits
the posting to Prohibition States, and districts which enjoy No-Licence
through Local Option, newspapers, or other publications, which con-
tain liquor advertisements, letters, postal cards or circulars advertis-
ing liquor, or soliciting orders for liquor. In the Senate there was


added to this an amendment, moved by Senator Reed, which makes iv
an offence to transport liquor into any State which has prohibited
the manufacture and sale of liquor, except for scientific, sacramental,
medicinal and mechanical purposes. This is now the law of the.
United States. The effect is to make all States which have adopted
Prohibition “ bone-dry,” irrespective of their own laws.
That well-known American journal. “The New Republic,” says;
“ Prohibitionists have very little reason to feel downcast even if one
attempt to introduce nation-wide Prohibition has failed. Now that the
Reed amendment to the Inter-State commerce law is in effect, every Pro-
hibitionist State becomes ‘ bone-dry ’ unless it chooses to manufacture
alcoholic beverages to defeat its own law. We are through with tin
scandal of prohibitory law's applicable only to those who have not the
foresight to secure shipments from across State lines. Very little ought
to be heard in future of the argument that Prohibition doesn t pro
hibit. Twenty-three States, well distributed over the country, repre
sent a pretty wide area of experimentation with unqualified Prohibi-
tion. 1 ”
And now I am prepared to
Grapple with the Paradox
created by the almost T white map, and the estimated war-time drink-
bill of ,£400,000,000. The following comparison of per capita liquor
consumption shows the difficulty squarely;—
PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION (GALS.).
Year. Spirits. Wine. Beer.
United States iqi6 1.35 .46 17-59
Great Britain 1916 .61 .22 23.32
Australia 1916-17 .61 .26 n. 71
The above has to be considered in relation to the following compari-
son of
“ Wet ” and “ Dry ” Areas and Population
Area under State Prohibition or local No-Licence, 2.614,071 square
miles; 87.8 per cent.
Population of above, 55,956,698; 60.7 per cent.
Area under licence, 359,819 square miles; 12.2 per cent.
Population of above, 36,015,268; 39.3 per cent.
The population is taken as at the 1910 census.
There is an important qualification of the above. Every State which
has adopted Prohibition is reckoned as “ dry.” whether the law' has
taken effect or not. In respect to about gj millions of the population,
the law' did not operate prior at the end of June, 1917. In regard to
many more it was not in operation in time to materially affect the
drink consumption of 1916. The framers of the ,£400,000,000 estimates
evidently wanted to appeal with big figures, and assumed that the pre-
war waste would continue on the same huge scale. Not only did they
make no allowance for immense areas of added “ dry ” territory, but
also ignored the probable effects of the Federal “ bone-dry ” law'. The


I T I Z S tT T £ trade has nOW t 0 reckon ' vith Uncle Sam - The estimate
should be far from being realised, unless enhanced cost neutralises the
saving from reduced consumption.
The actual population under No-Licence at the early part of 1017 mav
e taken as about one-half. These were mostly dwellers in the cities,
mere has been a wave of prosperity, resulting in high living and ex-
ravagance. including increased drinking by city populations. Had
there been no Prohibition advance to counteract boom-time city spend-
ing, the United States Drink Bill would have risen enormouslv. Prohi-
bition has lessened the consumption of liquor, but the effect'has been
partly (not wholly) neutralised by increased spending in the great cities
where the liquor traffic exists.
, 3 kerC ’ S ° ne pleasin B aspect of the consumption of liquor in Pro-
hibition territory which deserves mention. Liquor is frequently seized
and destroyed. Duty was paid upon it, and it is recorded as having
gone into consumption. Perhaps it went down a dirty sewer. Phoenix
Uty Arizona had a “ dry celebration at which the city streets were
sprinkled from the civic water waggon with seized liquor The
waggon bore the inscription; “ Arizona knows what to do with booze.”
f aking the Prohibition areas all through, large quantities of liquor
isappear in these ways. It is all reckoned in the per capita consump-
tion and cost, but it never enters the throats of men to poison their
bodies and endanger their souls.
The recent and impending expansion of Prohibition territorv, and the
operation of the Federal “bone-dry ” law promise a slump for Ameri-
can breweries and distilleries in the immediate future.
The extravagant spending of the boom years of Victoria-—the later
eighties— sent the drink bill per capita over the £6 level. Evidence
points to spending in the American cities at least equal to the Vic-
torian boom-time waste. Reckoning one-half of the population of the
United States as being in “ wet ” areas for the period covered by the
liquor statistics, and spending at a boom-time rate, a proportion of
the rest in areas described as “dry,” but really “ damp,” and the
balance as in districts as “ dry” as they could be in view of the in
ability, at that time, to effectively prevent liquor entering for home
consumption, and the seemingly contradictory figures can be recon-
ciled.
I propose to conclude with samples of evidence from reliable
witnesses to prove that—
Prohibition Can Prohibit,
and, given honest enforcement, does. Further, that even if enforce-
ment is not absolute, conditions may be transformed as compared with
licence. Even weak Prohibition may be better than strong regulation.
Walt Mason, in the “ Daily Chronicle,’ London, s th May. iqt s :~
(t My home is Kansas, where the most drastic prohibitory laws in the
world are in effect, and, as I have no prejudices, my testimony should
be worth considering. Until recent years T was opposed to all prohibi-
tory laws. I had the old-fashioned notion that personal libertv is a
sacred thing, and I held that if a man hasn’t the right to get drunk


and go home and beat his wife, and break the furniture, then our
fathers died in vain, and Magna Charta and the Declaration of Inde-
pendence are mere ‘ scraps of paper.’ ”
Early failures are described, then Walt Mason says :
“About seven years ago the State elected a governor composed largely
of backbone. He was a fanatic on the question of Prohibition, and his
campaign was based upon the promise that he would, if elected, close
every ‘ joint ’in the State, and keep it closed. He was elected, and he
lived up to his pledge. Never in any country was there such a cam-
paign against liquor sellers. The governor was supported by a Legis-
lature thoroughly in sympathy with him, and this Legislature closed
up every hole through which the jointists and fake druggists used to s
escape, and made liquor selling a penitentiary offence.
“ Under this administration Kansas learned what genuine Prohibi-
tion means, and was pleased with it. She is so well pleased that no
man can hope to attain office in the State unless he is pledged to an
absolute enforcement of the Prohibition law.
“ The drunkard factories arc closed in Kansas. The boys are grow-
ing up without knowledge of, or desire for, liquor. They have acquired
a profound contempt for drunkards and for drinking. Kansas boys are
distinguishing themselves everywhere; ‘ the man from Kansas ’ is so
conspicuous in all lines of worthy endeavour that the matter has become
a national jest. The young man who recently won the heavyweight
championship of the world came from a Kansas town, where he had
never seen a saloon and had never taken a drink. - '
A Mayor’s Testimony.
Robert W. Speer, Mayor of Denver, the capital city of Colorado,
says :—“ 1 voted against Prohibition when the question was before the
people. . . . Yet if the question were submitted again I would
vote for it. The success of no city depends upon the sale of liquor
and Denver to-day is better off than it was when saloons were running.
The sun is now shining in many homes where gloom and fear for-
merly shut it out. A majority of our business men were opposed to
Prohibition for business reasons, but I feel certain that after a year's
trial a large majority have changed their views and would to-day vote
for it.”
A Kansas Contribution.
Writing to the “ Literary Digest,” New York, May 26th. iq 17, Mr.
William Allen White, editor of the “ Emporia Gazette,” Kansas, thus
summarises the benefits of Prohibition:
“ The last time anyone had the courage to run before the people ol
Kansas on an anti-Prohibition declaration he got one vote in twelve
of those polled at the election. The unanimous Supreme Court, the
Governor, and the unanimous vote of both Houses of the Legislature
recently were registered for Prohibition. A public declaration that Pro-
hibition has made business better was made by the State Retailers’
Association at their State Convention; the chairman of the commercial
clubs of the State has declared he believes Prohibition has made
Kansas land more valuable than it would be otherwise. The chairman


of the State Medical Society is recorded as declaring- that Prohibition
is our 'best hygienic statute, and the president of the State Bar Associa-
tion recently declared that Prohibition had decreased crime. The Presi-
dent of the State Federation of Labour a few years ago declared that
Prohibition had made labouring conditions better for labouring men
than saloons, and the State Grange has gone on record as declaring
that there is more money for the farmer raising grain for food and
grapes for grape-juice than there is in raising farm produce for
liquor.”
Labour Journal “ Boosts ” Prohibition
The Denver “ Labour Bulletin ” is the official State Labour paper.
It came out in a special convention issue of 120 pages, and devoted
a section to Prohibition. This is the
Foreword.
THERE WAS a time
WHEN THE dry question
DID NOT come in for
ANY SPACE in the
LABOUR BULLETIN’S special
EDITIONS, BUT that
WAS WHEN Denver had
SALOONS AND The Bulletin
AND MOST of the
ORGANISED LABOUR forces
HONESTLY BELIEVED that
SALOONS MADE business and
KEPT MEN employed and
FURNISHED REVENUE to run
THE CITY’S government,
BUT NOW since Denver
HAS NO saloons and
DRUNKENNESS has disappeared
AND LOAFERS and vags
ARE AS scarce as
HEN’S TEETH and
EVERYBODY IS sober
AND BUSY and happy
THIS HALF page has been
"SET ASIDE so that
THE THOUSANDS of readers
OF THIS special edition
MAY KNOW just exactly
WHAT HAS happened since
DENVER AND Colorado went
DRY AND what folks
IN GENERAL think about
STATE'WIDE Prohibition.
WE THANK you.


The following- is a summary of some of
The Good Things Brought About.
“ Prohibition became effective in Colorado on January ist, iqi f),
closing 1615 saloons and 17 breweries.
Denver, the capital city, has a population of more than 250,000
people. v
Arrests for drunkenness in Denver slumped from 3219 in 191-5, to
1549 in 1916.
Arrests for vagrancy in Denver dropped from 3714 in 1915, to 1148
in Iql6.
Arrests for gambling in Denver decreased from 515 in 1915, to 252
in 1916.
The average number of arrests for all offences in Denver for the six
years preceding was 13,922. The total number of arrests for dry 1916
was 9985.
Before Prohibition, Denver’s county gaol with its 402 cells was nearly
always filled to capacity. Since Prohibition the daily average number
of prisoners has fallen to approximately 75.
Since Prohibition the commitments to the State Penitentiary at
Canon City have dropped 40 per cent. The prison population dropped
from 782 on May sth, 1916, to 676 on April nth, 1917. One entire wing
of cell houses has been closed. The number of returns for breach of
parole has dropped 90 per cent., and Warden Tynan says; “ I expect
the count to decrease fully 100 more this year.’
There was an increase of 26 per cent, in the amount of savings bank
deposits in Denver for the first nine months of dry 1916, compared
with the same period of wet 1915. Almost 20,000 new savings bank
accounts were opened in Denver the first dry year, a larger number
than in any similar period of the city’s history.
There was an increase of more than 16 per cent, in the deposits in
the banks and trust companies of Denver compared with the same
period the previous year, the total increase over 1915 being more than
29,000,000,000 dollars.
The first dry month the Denver Gas and Electric Tight Company
increased its gas and electric current sales more than 10,000 dollars,
whereas they had figured upon a probable loss of 15,000 dollars.
Denver’s building permits for 1916 showed a value of 4,037,440 dol-
lars, an amount almost double the value of the permits taken out in
1915.
The financial transactions of the Denver post office during dry 1916
show'ed an increase of 1,258.000 dollars over wet 1915.
Experts place the total value of automobile sales made in Colorado
the first dry year at 13,600,000 dollars. One out of every 23 persons in
Denver owns an automobile.
In wet 1915, 31,000 tourists visited the Rocky Mountain National
(Estes) Park. In dry 1916 the number jumped to 51,000. Colorado in
191 G enjoyed the greatest tourist year in her history. Every hotel in
the State reported the greatest volume of busytess ever done.


Denver's business houses, grocery stores, department stores, etc.,
report an increase of business ranging from 10 to 45 per cent. Collec-
tions, they report, have broken all previous records.
1 he public trustee for Denver county reports that during 1916 mort-
gages were “lifted at an unparalleled rate, indicating that proper-
ties are being paid for and incumbrances liquidated.
Ihe whole moral and economic order of things has completely
changed since Prohibition became effective. Those who opposed Pro-
hibition most bitterly are now its principal defenders.
The books of the moving and transfer companies of Denver show
that where one family moved away during the past year, four families
have moved in.
The State Labour Commissioner reports the greatest scarcity of
labourers’, skilled and unskilled, ever known in Colorado. Every em-
ployment office In the city of Denver is calling for men. Colorado's
jobless population is practically nil.
Every realty firm in Denver has a waiting list of prospective tenants
for residence properties. At the present time there are fewer vacant
houses than ever before. Office buildings are from 95 to 100 per cent,
capacity filled.”
Open Confession of an Editor.
Mr. C. B. Blenthen, editor of the “ Seattle Times,” contributes an
article to “ Collier’s Weekly,” of March 24th, 1917. lie confesses that
he was a “ wet,” but through a year’s experience of Prohibition is now
a “ dry.” He writes:—
“ Crime has been reduced almost one-half. The money formerly
passing over bars is almost entirely spent for better living, benefiting
every person it reaches, beginning with man, wife, and children, and
running through all the lines of trade and particularly through the
middle-size and smaller shops, and all of it staying at home and much
of it going into savings deposits. With the rising of the living
standard comes a series of other benefits. Efficiency in all lines of
business has been greatly increased. This begins in the lumber and
construction camps, where from 30 to 50 per cent, more work is now
accomplished with the same crews. It appears on the docks, where
a full day’s labour is had every Monday instead of practically none,
and a full day s labour is had Tuesday instead of the former half. It
is visible in the records of industrial accidents, now cut down to less
than half the average of £ wet 1 years. It shows up in every business
house in the large cities in the efficiency and contentment of clerks and
workmen.
“ I am sure I was absolutely the first of the ‘ wet ’ leaders to make
up my mind of the fact that business was better, commercial conditions
improved, with the saloon knocked out and booze difficult to get. With
the growth of this conviction came the certainty that the people would
never permit the saloon to come in again, and in fact they would
probably make the Prohibition laws more stringent.
“ The sum total of human happiness has been increased immeasur-
ably. When women and children have more and better food and
clothes, and thousands of men, formerly sent to gaol as the result of


booze every year," no longer get into scrapes and crimes that cause
mental and physical anguish to themselves and all depending upon
them, no one can dispute the fact that this is becoming a better world
for many.
“ Out here in the State of Washington we are pretty dry now, but
we’re going to be drier. And the drier we get the better business will
be—that has been proved ‘in this first great year! More and better
clothes and more and better food for the wife and kiddies! More and
better business for everybody! Fewer and fewer people in the gaols
or behind on their bills! Can you beat it?”
The Secret of Industrial Peace.
The “Boulder Camera,” Colorado, says:
“ Our licensed saloons had inflamed the passions of ignorant men to
the point of vengeance for wrongs real and fancied, and the end of
the strike was but a truce all felt could not be enduring. There was
much fight left in the bottle. Colorado smashed the bottle. It went
out of the saloon business. It saved the situation. Now we have indus-
trial peace because we have sobriety; now we have two hundred fewer
convicts in our State Pen ; tentiary, though Colorado is larger by
150,000 citizens than it was when Colorado was ‘ wet.’ Our banks are
bulging with the deposits of the thrifty. Old saloon buildings are
filled with the stocks and machines of useful business and industry.
We are saving millions annually on our drink bill.”
A “ Striking ” Testimony.
Thfe “ Boulder News-Herald” says:
“ Since the saloons have gone there has not been a strike in Colo-
rado, The Industrial Commission, established in 1915, settled seventy-
five controversies satisfactorily during 1916. Seven labour disputes
were formally investigated and awards given without the industrial
peace of the State being disturbed. The members of the Commission
say that if the open saloon had been in existence several of these dis-
putes would surely have ended in strikes, accompanied by violence
and crime. Prohibition, supplemented by wise industrial'legislation,
has kept Colorado in peace.”
Where Soldiers are Safe.
“ There are 7000 men in training at the Fort Riley Camp in
Kansas,” says “ Capper’s Weekly.” “There will soon be 48,000. So
far there has not been one case of drunkenness since the camp was
opened, more than a month ago. No other army camp in the United
States has such a record, because it isn’t possible to do this without a
‘ bone-dry ’ law. Fort Riley is well within the borders of Kansas, and
booze-sellers cannot get at the men.
" “By order of the War Department selling liquor to a soldier is
punishable by a fine of 1000 dollars or a year in prison. Yet severe
as this penalty is, it does not prevent saloonists from selling liquor
to soldiers in other parts of the country.”


Year.
Continuance.
Reduction.
No-Licence.
1894
48,429
16,906
48,993
1896 ...
139,580
94,055
98,312
1899
143,962
109.449
120,542
1902
148,449
132,240
151,524
1 QOS
182,484
151,057
198,768
1908
189,241
162,759
223,466
NEW ZEALAND
National Efficiency Board Declares for Prohibition
The advancing - tide of Prohibition sentiment in Maoriland appeared
to receive a set-back at the outset of the war. The last Local Option
and Prohibition poll was taken at the latter part of 1914. Had it been
taken six months later, when the traitorous part played by drink in
the war had been revealed, New Zealand patriotism would probably
have risen to the height of endorsing Prohibition by an effective
majority. As it was, the war adversely affected the Prohibition vote.
The First Local Option Poll.
was taken in 1894. Subsequently the law was amended so that the
conditions of the first fight were different in some respects to those of
the polls which followed. The women had been enfranchised prior to
the advent of Local Option, and participated in the first poll. Reduc-
tion was carried in some districts, including the city of Dunedin, which
had been regarded as whisky-loving because it was largely Scotch. In
several districts there was a bare majority of votes for No-Licence, but
only in one was there th'e effective three-fifths majority. That was the
now celebrated electorate of Clutha. Portions of this electorate had
banished the bars before. The rest of the district was adjacent to
these areas. When the people voted the liquor traffic out under the
new law, some voted to retain a boon which they already enjoyed,
and the rest voted for something which, as neighbours, they had been
able to witness, or to hear about at first hand- The success in the small
areas won the whole of the large electorate for No-Licence.
Catching the Flame.
One of Clutha’s next-door neighbours is Mataura, which has the
important town of Gore as a centre. In 1899 Mataura recorded a
majority of about 400 for No-Licence. This was magnificent, but not
enough. In 1902 Mataura obtained more than the three-fifths majority
and so joined her neighbour. In the same year Bruce, another neigh-
bour, secured the requisite majority. The vote of the people was de-
clared void on account of alleged irregularities in the taking of the
poll, and the bars were re-opened. Later, at the 908 poll, Bruce was
won again. Meanwhile, in 1905 Invercargill, near to Clutha, the fifth
largest city in New Zealand, went “ dry.” The other No-Licence
districts were Oamaru, Ashburto weflington suburbs, Wellington
South, Masterton, Obinemuri, Eden and Grey Lynn, making twelve in
all, out of a total of 76 electorates.
The Rising Tide.
The following are the results of the first seven polls :
Votes Recorded for—
IQII 234,834 ... — ... 234,676


For National Prohibition
Against National Prohibition ... ... ... .
Year iqii
259,943
205,661
Majority for Prohibition
For National Prohibition
Against National Prohibition
1914.
Majority against Prohibition
5,928
At the 1911 poll Reduction was eliminated as an issue. Nearly the
whole of the votes recorded for it at the previous polls were the second
votes of those who voted No-Licence. National Prohibition was intro-
duced as an issue, and received stronger support than No-Licence in
electorates. Out of 76 electorates a majority for National Prohibition
was recorded in 67. It is a somewhat remarkable fact that many of the
liquor trade leaders favoured the submission of the National Prohibi-
tion question. They thought that once the people realised that the
ultimate aim of the Temperance Party is the prohibition of the manu-
facture, importation and sale of intoxicating liquors, there would be a
stampede. The “ wowsers ” would be left by themselves—an insigni-
ficant minority. And, lo! the thorough plan proved to be the most
popular.
When the war broke out the proposal was made in the liquor interests
that the licence poll should go by default. The liquor traffic had every-
thing to gain by the adoption of this suggestion, and made capital out
of its rejection. The men who w r ave flags and make soldiers drunk
were enabled to pose as being specially patriotic. In war time the
people are peculiarly subject to scares. New Zealand got somewhere
about £900,000 yearly as revenue from liquor. In the interests of
efficiency Russia wiped out its revenue of £93,000,000 from vodka, but
many New Zealanders were scared by the alleged upset of finances at
this time of increased expenditure which would ensue if Prohibition were
adopted. The Empire’s cause demands the assistance of the people’s
throats! The Pquor trade had the assistance of a powerful ally, which
protested that it had no connection with the makers and sellers of beer,
while fighting their battle. This was the Moderate League. Its
voting platform was identical with the brewers’. The New Zealand
Alliance devoted itself to an election campaign to secure the rejection
of candidates who w'ould not pledge themselves to reduce the three-
fifths majority handicap. This was so far successful that it was
claimed that 51 out of 80 members returned had either promised to
reduce the handicap to 55 per cent., or to remove it altogether. But
there was a temporary disadvantage in this activity. Nothing is more
blinding than political prejudice. Prohibitionists are found in all
parties, and some whose candidates were being opposed by the Alliance
are credited with voting “ wet ” in revenge. This savours of the
folly of “cutting off your nose to spite your face,” but illogical voters
are unfortunately not rare. Another factor was the divided interest


of the Churches. Much of the enthusiasm which at previous polls
had helped to win No-Licence was diverted to another issue. The moral
forces were split and interests and energy divided. Had the battle
taken place when alcohol had been found out as the enemy it is, the
result would surely have been different.
War-Time Legislation
on the drink question took the form of an “ Anti-shouting - ” amend-
ment. The liquor traders have declared that the effect has been to
reduce their trade by 25 per cent. They are so in the habit of over-
stating - things that they may have exaggerated the -good results of
making illegal the invitation to “ Come an’ ’ave a drink.” New Zea-
land reformers demanded six o’clock closing. The Government tried
to compromise with eight, but a Six ©’Clock amendment was carried
against it, and appears likely to become law. Mrs. llee-Cowie, better
known to Australians by her former name (Mrs. Harrison Lee) is
leading a “ Strength of the Nation ” movement, by which it is hoped
to win War-time Prohibition. The general election, Local Option poll,
and poll on Dominion Prohibition were due at the end of 1917, but the
Government, wishing to retain office—to win the war—extended the life
of Parliament for at least twelve months. This involves the postpone-
ment of the Local Option and Prohibition polls.
The Government appointed a
National Efficiency Board,
It was to consider the whole question of war-time efficiency. Politi-
cians were left out, and five successful business men appointed. They
were in no way associated with the Prohibition Party. On the liquor
question the board took evidence from brewers, hotelkeepers, wine and
spirit merchants, chartered clubs, employees in hotels and in clubs,
hop and barley growers, and merchants, vine-growers and wine-makers,
the New Zealand Alliance, and other Temperance organisations; there
were also independent Temperance advocates, merchants, manufac-
turers, farmers and others. Judicial, medical and military evidence was
also taken. The report of the board, based upon evidence from all
these sources, fell like a bomb in the liquor camp. Its main conclusion
was “ The board is satisfied that the greatest efficiency would be
attained both for the nation and the individual by a state of complete
Prohibition, but the board recognises that Prohibition is a people’s
question, and should be determined only by an expression of the voice
of the people. It therefore recommends that -legislation be passed
submitting the question of National Prohibition to a vote of the people
at the earliest possible moment, and that such vote should be upon
the basis of immediate Prohibition, accompanied by reasonable com-
pensation to the interests affected. Any compensation paid to those
engaged in the liquor trade would for the greater part remain and be
invested within the Dominion, and thus be used for production and
trade.”
It should be mentioned that under the present law, if National Pro
hibition is carried the traffic would have a four years’ lease of life in


lieu of monetary compensation. The board’s opinion is that it would
be good business to pay compensation for the sake of ending the traffic
at once. On this point the report says:—
“ The board is of opinion it will be found that no compensation
need be given to individual employees, as all male and female em-
ployees could be absorbed in other occupations. In its judgment, all
interests having been considered, the parties to be compensated are
represented by the breweries, wholesale and retail licensed vendors,
vignerons and wine-manufacturers, hop-growers, and the owners of
properties to which a retail licence is attached.
“ The board believes that the compensation to be paid for the
immediate closing of the liquor trade should be based upon the differ-
ence between the market value of the assets as used at present,
taking into consideration the present licensing laws, and all the other
circumstances and conditions associated with the trade, and the value
of such assets without a licence.
“ The amounts to be paid by way of compensation need not neces-
sarily be found in cash, but, the board suggests, might be paid in
Government securities bearing the same rate of interest and with the
same currency as the war loan debentures.
“ The board is satisfied that compensation based on the foregoing
lines would be a sound investment for the State, and that the cost
would be recouped by increased national efficiency.”
It may be stated that the board’s recommendations were based partly
upon the evidence of success in the twelve electorates at present under
Nd-Lkence. The-concluding paragraph declares in favour of Prohibi-
tion after the war. It reads:—
“ In conclusion, the board places on record that whilst at first it
looked into this matter from the point of view of war conditions, yet
as the inquiry proceeded it became apparent that in the interests of
national efficiency, the board had to consider the liquor question also
from the point of view of the efficiency of the State and of the indi-
vidual, both during the war and afterwards, and it has sub-
mitted its recommendations so as to promote permanent national
efficiency.”
The Government appointed the board to show the way to national
efficiency. The board has done so, and the Government declines to
take it. Like some other Governments, it appears to be incapable of
doing the heroic thing needed in the Empire’s hour of stress. But it
is only a question of time when the reform forces of New Zealand will
again be engaged m a death grapple with the liquor traffic. When that
time comes the Efficiency Board’s report will be such a weapon as the
reformers never had before.
The limited compensation proposals should afford but cold comfort to
those whose craft, is in danger. They were made to hasten the happy
despatch.


Sly Grog Cases
7
Public-House Cases
IQ
Total
26
Twelve Months Ending March, 1917
(During Six o’Clock Closing.)
Sly Grog Cases
13
Public-House Cases
295
Total
308
STATE SECTIONS.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Victor E, Stanton.
TWELVE MONTHS OF SIX O’CLOCK CLOSING OF BARS.
Six o’Clock Closing - came into force in South Australia on March
27th, iqi6, as a result of the overwhelming- vote in its favour taken
just 12 months before.
The data here supplied—most of it from official sources —will suffice
to show that, notwithstanding strenuous efforts on the part of the
defiant liquor traders to nullify the effects of the reform by wholesale
evasions of the new law, there has been much good come from its
introduction.
Police Vigilance.
That the police have been working hard against those who are defy-
ing the law is evidenced by the following figures:
Cases under the Licensing Act brought before the Police Courts in the
Metropolitan Area Twelve Months before and after Six o’Clock
Closing.
Twelve Months Ending March, 1916
(Before Six o’Clock Closing:)
The police officials are unanimously of the opinion that the soft
drink bars must be abolished in licensed premises to stop the illicit
selling of liquor therein.
Sly Grog Selling.
The police are finding it easier to suppress this under the new
legislation. As was to be expected, there has been an increase of this
class of traffic, but not one-tenth of the increase that there has been in
illicit selling on licensed premises. When once the police, by more
effective laws, are relieved of the tax on their time and men in watching
public-houses, private grog-shops may be expected to have much less
chance to exist.
Sales of Liquor.
Figures for all classes of liquor are not yet available, but the output
of the various breweries in S.A. has been procured from the Excise
Department.


Quantities of Bulk and Bottled Beer respectively delivered from
Breweries in S.A. during- the period? stated.
April, 1915, to March, 1916.
Bulk (gallons) 4,221,881
Bottled (gallons) 827,309
Total gallons 5,049,190
April, 1916, to March, 1917.
Bulk (gallons) i.SS^^o
Bottled (gallons) 966,346
Total gallons 4,525,056
Decrease, for 12 Month, 524,134 gallons.
Home Drinking.
The “ Trade ” for months past has sought to impress the public with
the idea that there has been an enormous increase in bottled trade,
which they claim means that drink is being taken into the homes.
Assuming that there reside in half the homes in this State one or more
drinkers, the increase in bottled trade works out three-quarters of a
bottle of beer per month more this year than last, but the reduction
in bulk beer works out at 3$ bottles less per home per month than
during the previous year.
Decreased Drunkenness.
The Commissioner of Police, Mr. Edwards, in his annual report
shows a decided decrease in drunkenness throughout the State. He
attributes it chiefly to Six o’clock Closing. The figures are as
follow for Adelaide :
Year ending June 30th, 1916 1522
Year ending June 30th, 1917 1128
The decrease for the metropolitan area was 25.9 per cent.
The police officials, without exception, declare that there is a marked
improvement in the good conduct in the streets of Adelaide. Perhaps
the most striking feature in this connection is the almost entire absence
of drunkenness on the last cars and trains from the city. “ Drunks ”
trains and cars were previously recognised as a regular institution.
“ Business Phenomenal.”
This is the general testimony of the retailers of the city. This may
be partly due to the amount of soldiers’ pay there is in circulation, and
partly due to the splendid harvests of the last two years; but against
this it must be borne in mind that the spending power of the people has
been greatly reduced by the war. Gouger Street merchants declared
from the beginning that early closing of bars has been one of the main
factors in the business boom.
It is evidenced that the people are not spending all this extra money
by the manner in which the Savings Banks deposits have materially
increased at a time when the saving power of the people has been
greatly reduced through the high cost of living.


South Australian Savings Bank Returns.
Year ending- June 30th, 1917
Increase of deposits over withdrawals ,£1,005,809
Increase per depositor £2 145.-ad.
Increase in number of depositors 14,009
The Benefits Summarised
Less beer produced by the breweries.
Home comforts rather than home drinking.
Drunkenness decreased by 24 per cent.
People spending more and yet saving more.
No one except the “ trade ” itself affected detrimentally by the
reform.
South Australian Local Option Laws.
The licensing legislation of South Australia provides for the taking,
at the time of a general election, and by petition, of polls in the
respective Local Option districts, of which there are 32, on the reduc-
tion issue. In the event of a majority of votes being cast for reduc-
tion, the licences’ are, by a specially appointed bench, reduced in that
district by one-third. The ballot paper also contains provisions for two
other alternatives, viz., “Increase” and “No Reduction and no In-
crease.”
Reductions have taken place in four districts, and in 28 of the 32,
as the result of polls, no new licences may now be granted, unless the
decisions are reversed by subsequent polls.
It is the policy of the South Australian Alliance, however, to be
satisfied with nothing short of a state-wide vote on the Prohibition issu°,
on a simple majority; and petitions praying for a referendum accord-
ingly are being widely circulated for presentation to the 1917 session of
Parliament.
LIQUOR LICENCES IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The following are the numbers of licences issued by the Licensing
Court of South Australia at the annual meetings in March, 1917
Publicans’ 631 }
Registered Clubs 15 I
Storekeepers’ 48 V Subject to Local Option.
Wine 25 1
Australian Wine 76 J
Railway Refreshment Rooms ... 16
Total Retail Licences ... 811
In addition there are seven brewers and nine distillers’ licences,
making a grand total of 827.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DRINK BILLS—I9OI —1916
£ Per Head.
Average, 1901-5 1.180,710 3 4 0
Average, 1904-8 950,200 2 9 5
1909 1,141,431 2 14 6
1910 1,265,064 3 1 5
1911 1,366,298 3 4 6i
1912 1,492,532 3 9 41
1913 1,502,958 3 9 3?
1914 1.551,730 3 10 Ah
1915-16 1,257,697 2 17 5
The Customs authorities were unable to supply the data for the
1916-17 Drink Bill in time for publication.


NEW SOUTH WALES.
James Marion.
The New South Wales Liquor Act provides for a vote of the electors
at each general election which comes on automatically every three years.
The issues are Continuance, Reduction, and No-Licence. Three-fifths
of the votes must be in favour of No-Licence before it can be carried,
and owing to this unjust handicap no electorate has yet been able to
carry No-Licence. Several have secured a majority, but not the statu-
to:y majority required. In the event of No-Licence not being carried, the
votes given for No-Licence are added to those recorded for Reduc-
tion ; and if the combined vote constitute a majority, a reduction from
12 to 25 per cent, of the number of licences in the electorate may be
effected. Under the Reduction provision, over 400 licences have been
cancelled within the past ten years.
The Alliance is offering vigorous opposition to the three-fifths re-
quirement and is also conducting a campaign in favour of State
Option. Many of the Local Option provisions are unpopular, and the
operation of the Reduction clauses has diverted many votes from No-
Licence. There is accumulating evidence that the electors of N.S.W.
are ready for a vote on the question of Prohibition, it being felt,
especially in the large city area, that the law should have general
application.
While State Option is being contended for, there is no desire to
abandon Local Option, but unless all efforts for electoral No-Licence
are to be rendered abortive, it is imperative that the issue should be
settled by a bare majority of electors.
The two outstanding features of the past year have been the over-
whelming six o’clock closing victory and the return to Parliament of
men sympathetic to the Alliance platform.
When the year opened, after many strenuous and convincing efforts,
an assurance from the Premier was given that the question of the clos-
ing hour of liquor bars would be referred to the people. The Bill
was passed through Parliament and after some delay the date of poll-
ing was fixed for Saturday, June 10th, iqi6.
In the meantime organisation, so essential to victory, was under-
taken, it being recognised that in a contest over the whole State,
every part should be organised. The N.S.W. Alliance controlled the
campaign which involved the reaching of over i,000,0b0 voters.
Allied with and encouraged by the Alliance were other forces that
nobly supported the propaganda, the foremost being “ The Women’s
National Movement for the stoppage of the sale of intoxicants at 6
p.m.” Mrs. Edgeworth David was leader, and was enthusiastically
supported by hundreds of splendid women. .“ The Citizens’ Six
o’Clock Closing Association ” under the presidency of Hon. L. F,
Heydon, M.L.C., was a great force in influencing the “ moderates.”
This association raised nearly ,£lOOO
“ The Workers’ Anti-Liquor League,” composed entirely of trades’
unionists and members of labour leagues, influenced many votes on
1 - 1


the score of industrial efficiency. The work of this organisation in
industrial circles was very effective..
It is questionable if ever a greater platform combination participated
in any Australian Campaign for a moral reform. The speakers were
as numerous as they were varied. Practically every B.shop in the
State spoke out strongly for Six o’Clock Closing. Ihe Archbishop
of Sydney gave a clear lead. Ihe most notable addresses, however,
were given by Bishop Long, of Bathurst, ■whose great lecture on
“ Drink and the War ” swayed thousands of votes, especially in the
Western District—a naturally tough field. Sir Thomas Anderson
Stuart (Dean of the Faculty of Medicine), Messrs. E. J. Loxton, K.C.,
Walter Bentley (the veteran actor), were prominent citizens not usually
associated with temperance propaganda. This campaign has made
■ many of such citizens enthusiastic supporters of Prohibition.
' Amongst the- members of the State Council every man and woman
who had a voice used it for the cause.
Standing out amongst the meetings held was the great gathering
in the Sydney Town Hall, on Monday, May 22nd. At this meeting
the speaking reached the highest level. Ihe collection and promises
reached £650, including the returns from the overflow meeting held in
the Congregational Church, Pi't Street.
Another memorable gathering was that held in Martin Place at mid-
day on the day before the poll.
The effective press campaign was made possible by the unique as-
sistance rendered by the Sydney daily papers and several of the
weeklies.
The “ Sydney Morning Herald ” published daily campaign notes,
whilst the “ Telegraph ” gave splendid reports. The “ Sun ” in a
bright and crisp manner effectively analysed the arguments from day
to day, much to the discomfort of the supporters of the later hour.
Too much credit cannot be given to the “Worker ” for stirring articles
and striking cartoons, several of which were reproduced and widely
circulated.
Letters to the press were written by the score. The former Presi-
dent, Archdeacon Boyce, sent out a notable appeal to 300 country
papers, the majority of which published the same. Many country
papers gave fine editorials. “ Grit.” as usual, kept all workers well
supplied with arguments and effectively rebutted the fallacies of the
Hquotvfpen.
The.Vwhole fight wjis the greatest ever put up by the moral forces
of the lt indicated what is possible when the people are roused
nn opS^at 1 issue. 'The result of the poll was as follows:
‘^rw|p. m * 7 p.m. 8 p.m. q p.m. 10 p.m. 11 p.m,
a \ 4)830 21,134 178.842 i,4OS 3A93
• '..-I \ £The Reform in Operation.
;<j:£i*4 o’Clock closing came into force on July 21st, 1916. and immedi-
'.fijdyl ther£ was nojt(sceable and beneficial change in social conditions.
The mfjnber of convictions for drunkenness at the Central Police
Court, Sydney, on tie last Monday morning prior to six o’clock clos-
ing was 52, The first Monday after six o’clock dosing it was reduced
/to 30.


Crimes that may be attributable to drink have greatly decreased.
Mr. McCauley, Comptroller-General of Prisons, in his report of 1916,
gives prominence to the decrease in crime. He states: —“ During the
year 9,999 persons were received in the gaols of the State, represent-
ing a decrease of 929 compared with 1915. Of this total 6985 were
received on conviction from the police courts, or 826 fewer than 1911.”
“ This,” says the Comptroller, “ may be attributable to the effect of
early closing of hotels.”
The deciease of liquor consumption is officially vouched for by the
Collector of Customs, at Sydney, who, in a return, shows that for the
first six months under six o’clock closing ,£188,681 less was collected
on intoxicants than during the same peiiod of 1915 —under 11 o’clock
closing. As customs and excise duties represent approximately one-
fourth of the selling value of drink to the public, it means that in
six months the drink bill for the State has been reduced by £,'750,000,
or at the rate of ,£29,000 per week.
The accumulation of unmistakable evidence of the beneficial effects
of six o’clock closing should put the question of its permanency be-
yond the shadow of a doubt.
Early after the inception of the reform, the publicans discovered that
there was nothing to prevent them from selling soft drinks after 6
p.m., and on Sundays-. This provided a cover for illicit selling. The
Attorney-General was deputationised, and it was pointed out that the
referendum vote was to close licensed premises. Subsequently the
Alliance was successful in securing an amendment of the Liquor Act,
making it illegal to supply soft drinks after 6 p.m. on licensed pre-
mises, except with meals at meal time. An offence against this sec-
tion being punishable with a fine up to ;£ioo. The same penalty is
also applicable in the case of a bar door being open to the public
during prohibited hours.
The vote taken on six o’clock closing only operates during the
period of the war, and not more than six months after. Before revert-
ing to any other hour, the Government has definitely promised that
the matter shall be again remitted to the people.
In accordance with its declared policy the Alliance participated in
the State Parliamentary elections, held in March last, and vigorously
supported those candidates who were sympathetic to liquor reform.
The intrusion of the Alliance did not please everybody, and the fact
that extraordinary feeling was worked up over the war made the posi-
tion even more difficult.
Whilst the national issue placed before the electors may have justi-
fied the Alliance in keeping out of politics, it was felt that, the safety
of the nation depended a great deal more upon the liquor issue
than upon many other of the party cries raised, and that where a
Nationalist claimed to be placing the interest of the Empire before
everything else, and at the same time opposed the reasonable demands
of the Alliance, that such a candidate was not bona fide and was un-
worthy of the support of patriotic citizens.
The fact that the elections were sprung upon the country gave very
little time for organisation, otherwise greater results may have been
achieved and a different decision reached in several electorates where
the contests were very close.


- v .A
S. Australia
> Tasmania
Six p.m.
100,405
42,713
347,494
Seven p.m.....
839
427
4,830
Eight p.m. ...
2,087
1,093
21,134
Nine p m.- ...
9,865
1,871
178,842
Ten p.m
1,966
26,153
1,405
Eleven p.m.
61,530
560
3,193
The two questions submitted to Parliamentary candidates were:
(i) Will you support legislation giving permanency to six o’clock
closing prior to the expiration of the present Liquor Referen-
dum Act?
(2) Will you support the substitution for a bare majority to the
present unfair and undemocratic three-fifths majority in the ex-
isting Liquor Act?
The Alliance stands for the settlement of the big issue by the vote
of the people, but will absolutely repudiate any proposal to have such
issue settled on any other than a simple majority vote.
Vigorous opposition has been offered to the granting of new
licences, and with marked success. Two notable victories were won
on appeal when licences to the Hotel Sydney, and the “ Great Western
Coffee Palace,” were finally defeated.
SIX— THE PEOPLE’S HOUR.
The Voting in Three States.
In South Australia the liquor trade supported n, in Tasmania 10,
and in New South Wales q. As the trade hour goes down the majority
against it goes up.
Victorian legislators were convinced by the votes of other States,
and enacted for closing without a referendum.
HEALTH CONGRESS FOR WAR-TIME
PROHIBITION.
SYDNEY, July 25th.—The Health Congress decided to
forward to the Prime Minister (Mr. Hughes) the following
message:— 11 Owing to the grave emergency, the Health
Congress to-night unanimously and enthusiastically passed
a resolution urging you, under the War Precautions Act,
to proclaim the prohibition of alcohol immediately for the
duration of the war and demobilisation, and affirming that
alcohol is a grave hindrance to recruiting; also urging
you to cable to the Prime Minister of England to protect
our soldiers from alcohol.” — “ Argus,” July 26th, 1917.


(QUEENSLAND.
By W. Tyler.
Queensland Temperance Alliance.
The Allia&ce stands for the unifying- of the Temperance organisa-
tions, the Churches, and all interested in social reform, with a view
to —
i. Educating the public mind on the liquor question.
-• Ihe more effective control and restriction of the liquor traffic.
3- Ihe ultimate suppression of all liquor by the will of the people.
The membership fee is not less than 3s. per annum, which secures
the “ Alliance 'News,” post free, monthly.
The Queensland Drink Bill. 1915-1916.
Through the kind offices of Mr. Arthur Toombs, we are able to
publish the Queensland Drink Bill for year ending June 30th, 1916.
The following is the estimate: —
Spirits, imported, 443,612 gallons at 40s ... ,£887,324 0 .0
Spirits, excise, 106,202 gallons at 40s. ~ ~. ... 212,404 o o
Wine, 342,109 gallons at 10s 171,054 10 o
Beer, imported in bulk, 14,773 gallons as ss, . ... 3,693 5 o
Beer, imported in bottle, 282,124 at 7s 99,793 8 o
Beer, excise, 3,654,440 gallons at 3s 848,166 o o
£2,222,435 3 o
This is a decrea.se on the previous year of £423,993.
The amount per head of the 684,219 population works out at £3 4s.
iijd., or a reduction of 15s. 2*d. per head.
Queensland Police Court Statistics.
The police report for eighteen months ending June 30th, 1916, is a
sad record of our social life in the State.
The criminal statistics show the number of persons taken into
custody during the period was 33,392, while 1082 persons appeared on
police summons, making a total of 34,474 (31,622 males and 2852
females).
The number of persons brought before the police courts for drunken-
ness was 20,505 males, 1943 females a total of 22,448.
Drunkenness stands the highest on the list of charges. Obscene,
profane, indecent, or insulting language comes next, with 3033 males,
264 females; a total of 3297. Add to the list 1420 persons charged with
disorderly conduct, we get some, idea the part drink plays in the social
life of Queensland.
Queensland prisons’ Record, 1916.
It is a most distressing fact, in view of our Queensland Liquor Act,
which does not allow females in any bar or in any room adjacent to a
bar which is set apart for drinking purposes; the penalty for breaches
being from £5 to £2O, yet the-records show'an increase of drunken-
ness amongst women.


The Comptroller of Prisons, in his report, states:—“ It is regret-
table to notice that the number of females confined during the year
1916 upon charges of drunkenness has considerably increased in com-
parison with previous years.” A tabulated statement shows convic-
tions for drunkenness— 230 in 1913, 242 in 1914, 315 in 1915, and 459
in 1916. “During the year 1916,” he says, “97 female prisoners
were convicted 459 times on a charge of drunkenness, being an average
cl about seven times for each female.
Reduction of Licences.
Previous to the “Denham Liquor Act, 1912,” the Temperance Party
in Queensland had good grounds for complaint, as progress in reform
was too slow, and the Local Option machinery too cumbersome, the
franchise being a property vote only. Now the Local Option provisions
give the right to every elector, male and female, to vote at any Local
Option poll in their respective divisions. The poll for reduction
provided for in Part VIII. of Liquor Act, Section 167, under Resolu-
tion A: “That the number of licences in this Local Option area
shall be reduced by one-fourth of existing number.” A bare majority
decides the issue. The Act provides for this reduction vote of one-
fourth every third year up to 1923.
The First Poll on Reduction.
The first poll was taken on May sth, 19x7, at the Federal elections.
There were 55 Local Option areas and 179 licences stood to be
affected. While a good deal of public interest was shown, there was a
lack of organisation by the Temperance Party, and of financial support.
The “ Trade ” was well organised and showed no lack of funds. Their
full-page advertisements in the daily press were made to appeal to the
electors. Their battle cry was confiscation, “To be fair, just and
equitable, you must vote against reduction. Reduction means dis-
possession without compensation, and shows you are in favour of con-
fiscation.” There is no doubt the appeal was most effective. The
result of the first poll was not all we hoped it would be, but 19 licences
will cease, namely: At Ipswich, 5; Maryborough, 10; Toowong, 1;
Biggenden, 3.
Prohibition Vote, 1928.
The “ Denham Liquor Act ” provides for two more polls on one-
fourth reduction—viz., 1920 and 1923, when in 1926 the following resolu-
tion can be submitted to the electors:—D. “ That the sale of intoxi-
cating liquors shall be prohibited.” To carry this resolution a three-
fifths majority will be necessary, and to make the poll effective, 35 per
cent, of electors must vote. In order to be ready for this vote we
earnestly commend the “ Young People’s Prohibition League,” re-
cently inaugurated by the Women’s Christian Temperance Union of
Queensland. The object being to train the young people in principles
and practice of total abstinence, and prepare them for full citizens’
rights and duties by the year 1926. The boys and girls of 12 years
to-day will be the electors when the Prohibition vote is taken.


Licensing Fees.
In Queensland the licensed victualler’s fee is from ,£l5 to ,£lOO,
according to annual value assessed 'by the court. For second bar,
£2O. Wine-seller’s licence, ,£lO. Packet licence, £5 to £2O. Booth
licence, £2 for every day. Spirit merchant’s licence, within five miles
radius of Brisbane G.P.0., £5O; elsewhere, £25. Clubs, within a
radius of ten miles of G.P.0., ,£l5; elsewhere, ,£lO. Railway refresh-
ment bars are now' solely in the hands of the Government.
The Revenue Conies and G
The argument used by the “ Trade ” against any restriction, is the
loss of revenue, which would mean further general taxation. This is
not borne out by results. The Queensland Comptroller-General says
that the total expenditure of the Prisons’ Department for the year 1916
was ,£32,246 13s. id. We do not say drink is responsible for all this,
but we do believe fully 50 per cent, of prison expenditure is the result
of drink. The average gross cost per head of the prisoners was £77
13s. gd. for tne year, including the total expenditure for maintenance,
supervision, -etc. In 1912 the annual cost per prisoner was £55 195.•
6d. ; in 1913, .£59 2s. sd. ; in 1914, £59 7s. 4d. ; and in 1915, £63
12S. 3d.
The upkeep of the Police Department runs into many thousands per
annum. Add drink’s share to the cost and there would be very little
drink revenue left.
Slate Hotel.
Queensland has a political party in power whose policy is nationali-
sation. During their short term of office they have experimented with
this daring policy. The attitude of the party on the drink question is
“ Nationalisation with a view to Prohibition.” A start has been made,
and not with flattering results. On May 28th, 1917, at Babinda, the
Home Secretary (Mr. J. Huxham) officially declared the first State
hotel open. This hotel is built near a central sugar mill, where a
previous Government had closed an existing hotel, and established a
Savings Bank, and also made a five-mile radius a Prohibition area.
Our present law-makers have thus become law-breakers. Strong pro-
tests reached the Government from all parts of the State against such
action, but was of no avail. The plea put forward by the Home Secre-
tary was the need for. accommodation and the supply of pure liquor
to prevent sly-grog selling. The liquor traffic in the hands of the
Government, he declared, are stepping-stones to the ultimate goal of
Prohibition. We are told when the Home Secretary had declared the
hotel open he said to the assemblage of 200 thirsty souls present:
“ I invite you all to come and have a drink.” They did so with a rush
to see who could be first, when, lo! this pure liquor was freely dispensed
by a beneficient Government, and in less than two hours the little town-
ship was overrun w'ith drunken men. The questions answered in Parlia-
ment recently did not place the Government in a very favourable light
with reference to their plea of accommodation. The cost of the hotel
was ,£17,551 18s. 2d. The average cost of maintenance was £299 2s. 6d.
a week, and the average income was £391 ss. 7d. a week. The weekly


takings were made up as follow: Bar, £2 77 19s. id.; dining and
coffee rooms, £BS qs. lod.; accommodation receipts, £ls 17s. gd. ;
billiards, £ll 18s. 7d. What a revelation! Two hundred and seventy-
seven pounds per week from liquor, and fifteen pounds from accommo-
dation, representing about ten persons accommodated. In view of the
strong protests made against the Government entering the liquor
business, the pressing need for economy here is absolute proof on the
ground of accommodation, the spending of ,£IB,OOO was not justified
and should be resented by every right-thinking citizen.
Six o’Clock Closing.
Queensland has the unenviable notoriety of being the only Aus-
tralian State where curtailment of hours of sale has not taken place
during the period of the war. For two full years the Temperance
Party have laboured for six o’clock closing of liquor hars, but so far
without result. Appeal after appeal has been made in the interests of
our soldiers on the ground of efficiency, economy, and all that stands
for the best in our social life. The “ Trade ” is in a position to hold
up its hand where danger threatens, and the Government dare not
proceed. The Citizens’ Six o’Clock Closing League have got together
on four different occasions large deputations, both representative and
influential, requesting a referendum on the subject. Each time the
request was refused on the plea of Parliament passing the “ Initiative
and Referendum Bill,” which the Premier said would give them all
they were asking. This Bill, which is a distinct party measure, is
not acceptable to the Citizens’ League. The measure was refused by
the Upper House in 1016, for which the Government threatened that
House with extinction. The'Government still hide behind this mea-
sure, having passed it again this year in the House of Assembly,
but there is no hope of it becoming law without drastic amendments
from the Upper House. The party for a consideration are pledged not
to interfere with the “Trade” during a specified time, so the Gov-
ernment seeks to avoid responsibility on this most contentious ques-
tion. The leaders of the Six o’Clock movement (a citizens’ movement)
have tried hitherto to keep the matter a non-party question, but the
action of the Government is forcing the matter to a party issue, and
already the position is creating widespread interest, and savours of a
strong political fight pending at the coming elections in 1918.
“ The Alliance News.”
The “ Alliance News,” a monthly journal, is published by the
Queensland Temperance Alliance on the third day of each month, and
is the official organ of the Temperance Societies throughout the State.
It will be posted free to any address in the Commonwealth for 2s. per
annum, in advance. Its policy is absolute prohibition of manufacture
and sale of intoxicating liquor, by the will of the people, under Local
Option and State Option laws.


Place.
Secretary.
Middleton
Mr. Sayer
Kingston
Miss Lucas
Judbury
Mr. H. J. Skinner
Huonville
Miss Walton
Ranelagh
Mr. N. Goldsworthy
Glen Huon
Miss Watson
Southport
Mr. Robt. Hay
Hastings
Mr. James
Strathblane
Mr. Purves
Dover
Queensborough
Mr. F. G. Robinson
Ulverstone
Mr. H. Skipworth
Penguin
Miss Elsie Hales
Yolla
Mr. Herman Murfett
Wynyard
Mr. G. N. Sargent
Sorell
Mr. Blower
Hobart
Mr. Syd. Cummins
Launceston
Mr. F. H. Ralph
Burnie
Mr. A. W. Tattersall
Devonport
Mr. C. L. Cross
Latrobe
Mr. W. Thirkell, Gilbert St.
Lilydale
Mr. H. E. Sulzberger
Scottsdale
Mr. Thos. Saunders
Woodbridge
Mrs. Rose Dear
TASMANIA.
Syd. Cummins.
Temperance work began very early in Tasmania, as Mr. George
Washington Walker, a member of the Society of Friends, fprmed a
society called Van Dieman’s Land Temperance Society in 1832, with
a pledge of abstinence from spirits only. Ten years later this became
a Total Abstinence Society. In 1846 the name was changed to the
Van Dieman’s Land Total Abstinence Society. In 1856 Mr. George
Washington Walker, with some other friends, decided to alter the name
and methods of work, and it became the Tasmanian Temperance
Alliance.
The Tasmanian Temperance ’ Alliance has always ijmposed the
pledge of total abstinence on its members, and although several at-
tempts have been made to obtain an alteration, it has kept its original
standard intact. The Tasmanian Alliance is now well established
throughout the State, and has a State Council composed of representa-
tives of all the branches.
The present Executive consists of Alderman D. Storrer, as president;
Rev. C. C. Dugan and Mr. A. W. Tattersall, vice-presidents; Mr. W.
W, Osborne, treasurer; and Mr. Syd. Cummins, secretary.
The local branches are as follow:


Branches of Alliance Prohibition Leagues.
Place.
Exton
Secretary.
Mr. F. A. Masters
Miss Elsie Vertigan
Mrs. Fleming
Forth
Lower Longley
Richmond
Rev. Gamble
Mr. Alf. Page
Upper Castra
The Alliance prints a monthly paper, “ The People’s Friend,” which
has been issued every month since iB6q. The subscription is is. 6d.
per year. Mr. G. G. Pullen, a former member of Parliament, has just
been appointed organiser, and will shortly take up his duties and set
aibout linking up every town and district in Tasmania.
Temperance principles and ideals have made great headway in
Tasmania of late years, and the establishment of permanent six o’clock
closing is checking the drink evil splendidly.
On the 28th May, 1917, Mr. R. M. Johnston, Tasmanian Government
Statistician, supplied the following figures for the year ending 1915
(the latest figures available) Total consumption of spirits, wine and
beer, 1,563,363 gallons, being a decrease on previous year of 390,384
gallons, or 19.9 per cent. Total cost (bar price):—Spirits, .£165,994;
wine, .£43,s9lbeer, £338,024; making the Tasmanian Drink Bill for
1915, £547,609, a decrease on previous year of ,£139.733. °r 20.3 per
cent. Per head of population, £2 14s. sd., or per bread-winner, £6
18s. id.
Mr. Johnston states that the above figures are estimated, as it is
impossible to exactly locate the total consumption of any article for
each separate State, owing to the Commonwealth having given up
taking statistics of Inter-State exchange.
Tasmania and Prohibition.
The Prohibition movement is making great strides, and a Bill has
been prepared by Mr. Fullerton, providing for a vote of electors on
the adult franchise on the question of Continuance, Reduction or Pro-
hibition, the voting to be on the preferential system, and the decision
to be a simple majority. The Hon. Samuel Mauger, President of the
Alliance Prohibition Council, and Mr. VV. C. Clegg, Acting-President
of the New South Wales Alliance, have both visited Tasmania duriqg
the end of September and beginning of October, and received enthu-
siastic welcomes from magnificent audiences.
As a great portion of the Licensing laws of Tasmania are at pre-
sent in the melting-pot of Parliament, it would be futile to give any
statement of the principal gains made, but there is every indication
that Tasmania’s liquor laws will be vastly improved and drinking either
abolished or tremendously curtailed after the present Parliamentary
session.
West Australia Drink Bill, 1916.
,£2,334,890 ... .... ... Per head, £7 Bs. 3d.
Total, 20 years ... ... ... £48,405,414


VICTORIA.
A Story of Betrayal.
Fur ten years we who long- to get into death-grips with the liquor
traffic had wandered in the wilderness of Deferred Hope. As we
drew near to the promised land our heart-beats quickened with
expectation, and our faces brightened as with the dawning
light of a better day. The dearly bought lessons of the war hardened
our hearts, and strengthened the conviction that the enemy
must be destroyed. The declaration of the statesman who is generally
regarded as sanest and ablest of our civilian leaders, now
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, that of all the Empire’s
relentless foes, drink was the most terrible, could point to no other
logical conclusion. But in Victoria our politicians have taken ad-
vantage of the emergencies of the war to give the worst enemy a
further, lease of life. In 1906 a solemn promise was embodied in
an Act of Parliament that Local Option should take effect at the
first general election, after January xst, 1917- Had the intervening
Parliaments been permitted to complete their allotted span of life
there would have been a general election in 1907, 1910, 1913, and
had those members of the State Parliament who regard manoeuvring
for office as their contribution to winning the war been able to
secure a leader in time they might have brought about a dissolution
in 1916, and so automatically put off the Local Option poll to 1919.
But the rank offence which “ smells to heaven ” is this—that with
.the Local Option poll due in the earliest year which the law made
possible, and the demands for economy and efficiency during the
war—and after—making the opportunity appear to be providential,
Parliament put the preservation of the enemy within the gates before
the welfare of the people and the defence of the Empire. The waiting
period fixed in 1906, from ten to thirteen years, was regarded at
the time as
Outrageously Long.
Speaking at the Rechabite annual meeting demonstration in 1907,
our sainted brother, W. H. Judkins, exclaimed: “Local Option in
ten years ! Why, some of us will be in the Glory Land before then.”
That has proved true of many besides the speaker. They have
passed to the great beyond, leaving the harvest of years of patient
labour to be reaped by other hands. But the ten years is only a
part of the dubious story of delay. The procrastination of 1906 fol-
lowed many years of hope deferred which had made the heart sore,
if not sick. The fight for complete Local Option in Victoria extended
over a long, long period. Some who entered upon it with all the vigour
and optimism of youth now enjoy the distinction of being grey-haired
veterans. They in their youthful days were privileged to be associ-
ated with men who had consecrated themselves to the fight with the
liquor traffic in youth, or early manhood, and who had then growm
grey in honourable service. The light of hope from the State of
Maine flashed across the great Pacific more than sixty years ago,


and ignited the flame of enthusiasm for colony-wide Prohibition. “ A
Maine Law for Victoria,” was then the battle cry of reform, which
at one period was voiced by the “ Argus,” then in a double sense
greatly in advance of the “Age.” In the seventies, Temperance
agitation centred round the Permissive Bill, which proposed to give
municipal ratepayers power to veto licences in their own localities,
without compensation. Three times the measure passed the Legis-
lative Assembly. Upon each occasion it was blocked by the Legis-
lative Council, which had not then been itself “ reformed,” and which
consistently opposed every kind of reform for the State. The Per-
missive Bill in the Legislative Council of those days was a pearl cast
before the pig-headed, and after being trampled upon the third time
it was not cast again. Out of the long agitation for power to pro-
hibit all licences, came the first instalments of Local Option in 1876,
whereby the ratepayers were able to veto the issue of new victualler’s
licences, with some exemptions even from that. This veto accounts
for the few hotels in districts which have been settled under its pro-
tection. The exemptions account for any which have been estab-
lished. The wide metropolitan area has this record, that during the
past forty-one years not one hotel has been licensed with the people's
consent. In iBBt, the Victorian Alliance was formed. Its full name
was the Victorian Alliance for the total .and immediate ‘ / J
Suppression of the Liquor Traffic.
This was too much of a mouthful for daily use, but the title in-
dicates clearly the goal which the founders of the Alliance had in
view. In 1884, the Alliance-furnished the Government of the day with
a draft Local Option Bill. When the Bill of 1885 made its advent
into Parliament we were not able to trace any resemblance in the
Local Option provisions to those contained in the model which had
been supplied. We demanded complete Local Option without compen-
sation. The Bill provided for a limited power to reduce licences,
with compensation. One point we keenly contested and won—that
the only compensation should be that provided by the liquor trade
itself. The measure was crippled and deformed at the hour of its
birth, and loaded with the incubus of compensation. When compari-
sons are made between the results of Local Option in Victoria, and
those from the work of the Licences Reduction Board, the fact should
be borne in mind that the comparison is not with the virile measure
which we demanded, but the feeble offspring of political compromise.
There is a long story which might be told of difficulties encountered
and overcome one by one in trying to use the poor instrument of re-
form which Parliament had placed in our hands. Let this be written
large. Parliament had enacted that hotels could not be closed with-
out compensation. We closed enough to make the compensation
fund bankrupt, , The exhaustion of the fund was the final reason
for stopping reduction polls.
In iBq4 the Alliance issued another model Local Option Bill. It
provided for the submission of 1 the following question to the
electors : •
Shall the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors be pro-
hibited within this electoral district?”


.The Alliance did not suggest the inclusion of Reductions as a
Local Option issue. In 1906 the agitation, of which the sainted W.
H. Judkins was the foremost leader, reached its climax. The country
was aflame with enthusiasm for social reform. The Act was passed,
which contained the promise of
Local Option in 1917.
The principle was an act of justice to which the people were
entitled immediately, but justice was promised in ten years—possibly
thirteen, according to the date of the general election. Why the
waiting? It was the outcome of the demand for compensation to be
continued. Parliament said in effect: “We will give time instead
of money. For ten years, at least, there shall be security of tenure.
During that time compensation shall be paid on account of licences
cancelled, but after that there will be a clean slate upon which the
people may write the doom of the liquor traffic if they so will.” The
long, weary waiting was the price fixed for Local Option without
compensation. But, in the end, Parliament, having exacted the price,
took back the thing paid for, and conceded that compensation should
continue in the Local Option period. That was not honesty—it was
politics. But the main undertaking of the promissory note was kept
inviolate—the people would come to their rights at. the first election
after January xst, 1917. To the dying Parliament belongs the shame
of'repudiating that promise.
, Have we any Compensation?
Six o’clock closing for the period of the war and the session of
Parliament following is a great gain, though Parliament has de-
liberately opened the way for evasion with its drink-with-meals-up-to-8
o’clock, and the so-called “ Temperance ” bar concessions. But it
does not free any district from the blight of the drink traffic. The
Reduction Board is to go on reducing licences to the extent that the
compensation fund allows, which, in the three years, may be equiva-
lent to a State-wide determination for reduction. Again, this is merely
another turn of the regulation screw. It is claimed that six o’clock closing
has hit the liquor trade so heavily in its most tender spot, namely, the
pocket, that it would be unfair to attack it further just now. The
question is, are we to consider the welfare of the people or the in-
terests of the liquor trade? If the publicans are really carrying on
a losing trade, it would be kindness to arrest the process of im-
poverishment. The statements as to the .poor results of Local Option
in New South Wales are exaggerated, but they emphasise the need
of getting
Democratic Majority Rule.
We have never disguised the opinion that Local Option with the
three-fifths handicap in the form applied in New South Wales and
copied here is a poor instrument of reform. It gives more of the
shadow of promise than the substance of performance. There are
three issues—Continuance, Reduction, and No-Licence. Each elector
can vote for any one of the three. To win . No-Licence, the party
wanting it. must secure as many votes as the other two parties to-
gether, and then half as many again. Here is an illustration applied
to an electoral district, though the Amending Act makes the division


of an electorate a Local Option area. Total rotes cast 10,001 divided
as follows :
Continuance 3,00 c
Reduction - ••• i.ool
No-Licence , 6,000
No-Licence would just lose. The votes recorded for it would be
added to those given for Reduction, and Reduction would be carried.
The papers would be able to announce the defeat of the <c little band
of extremists,” and the triumph of the “ great moderate party.” The
splendid vote for reform might result in wiping out two licences. In
the most licence-ridden district it might only eliminate four. 1 hen
in later years time-serving politicians could point out the poor results
of Local Option. This is an illustration of what has really happened
in relation to New South Wales. A bare majority could have carried
conscription. A small majority has rejected it. It cannot be pre-
sumed that the interests of the beer business are more momentous
than life and liberty on the one hand, and the needs of the Empire
on the other. Condemned to wait longer, we must work while wait-
ing, and one objective should be No-Licence by the democratic
majority.
When Local Option was proposed more than forty years ago, it
was not accepted as the means of the ultimate triumph. It was hoped
to secure through it bright object lessons in localities which would
win the whole country for Prohibition. While waiting, we have been
securing the object lessons elsewhere. Moreover, the world-view of
alcohol has been revolutionised. The time is ripe for demanding.
Another Option.
When the people cast their votes for or against licence in their
own localities, they should also be permitted to vote for or against
licence in the whole State. New Zealand has won the right of voting
for Dominion Prohibition, and if the democratic majority had pre-
vailed would to-day be wholly free from the drink curse. Eight out
of nine of the Canadian Provinces have adopted Prohibition. New-
foundland has achieved the same victory. What Britishers in other
parts of the Empire have done can be accomplished by Britishers in
Australia if they are given the same opportunity.
The Number of Licences
in force on the Ist January, IQI7, and the former fees payable there-
for, were:—
2433 Victuallers .£64,630
33 Railway refreshment rooms 825
12 Packet 2 40
284 Grocers 9.94°
273 Australian wine 1.36 s
121 Clubs 2 42
82 Wine and Spirit 2,050
25 Brewers ••• 25
21 Vignerons 10S
£79.422


THE VICTORIAN DRINK BILL, 1916.
J. D. Merson,
I beg - to lay before your readers the Drink Bill of Victoria for the
year 1916.
The quantities are—with the exception of Australian wine—from
official sources, the Customs and Excise returns. The estimated retail
prices are higher than those of last year, in the case of spirits, 2s.
6d. a gallon; imported wine, tos. a gallon; Australian wine, ss. 6d. a
gallon; and imported beer, 2s. a gallon.
Excise beer is left at the same price, but it is understood care is
taken by the retailers as to the measure of the quantity supplied.
The population is less than in 1915 by 18,777. Had the quantities
been computed' at 1915 prices, the cost would have been ,£4,430,611,
instead of ,£4,614,658. The Inter-State transfers are not accounted
for. The spirits are proof spirits. The Bill is as follows
No. of Gal. Price. Cost.
Spirits, Imported 521,580 ,£226 ,£1,437.607
Excise 154,941
Wine, Imported 13,596 250 30,59*
Australian 250,000 o 12 6 156,250
Beer, Imported 239,341 080 . 95,736
Excise ... ... 19,296,496 o 3 0 2,894,474
,£4,614.658
The estimated mean population being 1,407,638, the cost per head
was £3 ss. 6d. There was thus an increase in the total cost of
£194,122, and in the cost per head of 3s. 6d., as compared with the
previous year. The Commonwealth revenue from this liquor was
£1,064,050. Spirits cost 31.15 per cent, of the total; wine, 4.05 per
cent.; and beer, 64.80 per cent. The consumption per head was:
Spirits, 0.49 gallons; wine, 0.18 gallons; and beer, 13.87 gallons; and
the cost per head was: Spirits, £1 os. sd. ; wine, 2s. Bd.; and beer.
£2 2s. sd. The quantity of alcohol in these liquors, reckoning spirits
at a strength of 50 per cent., wine at 12J per cent., and beer at 5 per
cent., was 1,348,000 gallons.
How the Drink Bill Grew in Victoria.
Larger leisure and increased spending power of the people, com-
bined with late hours of trading, made the Drink Bill grow, thus:—
Year. Total. Per head.
1909 £4,005,571 £324
1910 4,430,805 3 7 9
1911 4,853,666 3 13 5
1912 5,151,215 3 16 1
1913 5.30Q.273 3 16 2
1914 6,005.042 444
In 1915 there was a drop, and not tc a drop too much.”
1915 4,420,536 3 2 o
1916 (higher prices) 4,614,658 3 5 6
The last two years, taken in conjunction, show a substantial do
crease, due in part to earlier closing.


AUSTRALIAN DRINK BILL
FOR THREE YEARS.
Consumption and Cost of Alcoholic Liquors.
COMPILED BY J. D. MERSON.
1914-1915. 1915 1916.
Cost to Cost to
Gallons Price Consumer Gallons Price Consumer
£ s. d. £ £ s . d. £
Spirits, Imported... 3,399,520 1 „ ~ Q Q . c „ Q - 2,641,230) „ p
Excise 658,163 1 ' ® ® 773,829 1 210 0 ... 8,537,647
Wine Imported,
x s P ar kling... 44,077 ... 4 0 0 ... 176,308 21,371 ... 410 0 ... 96,169
Wine Imp’ted, Still 71,987 .1 10 0... 107,980 49,492 ...1 15 0 ... 86 611
Wine, Australian.. 1,235,238 ...0 12 6... 772,078 1,232,997 ...0 12 6 ... 770 622
Beer, Imported ... 2,551,860 ...0 8 0 ... 1,020,744 1,564,746 ...0 10 0 ... 782 573
Beer, Excise ... 62,424,302 ...0 3 0 ... 9,363,645 59,669,237 ...0 3 0 ... 8,950,385
Total Cost 20,908,682 19,224,007
Cost per head £4 4 7 ■ 7 £3 17 n
1916-1917. A DROP.
Cost to _ . _
Gallons Price Consumer But not A Drop too Much.
£ s. d. £
Spirits, Imported... 2,145,281 1 n „ „
Excise 824,760/- 0 3 0 - 8,910,093
Wine Imported. Had the prices adopted for the
Sparkling... 18,431 ... 4 15 0 87,546 1916-17 year been applied to the
Wine Imp ted, Still 41,822 ...2 0 0 ... 83,644 two previous years, the bill
Wine Australian.. 1,218,831 ... 012 6 ... 761,768 wnilM hav . Sppn ._
Beer, Imported ... 772,355 ...0 12 0... 463,412 would have Deen.
Beer, Excise ... 55,849,366 ...0 3 0 ... 8,377,404
L 1914-15 £24,184,227
Total Cost 18,683,867 1915-16 £21.105,725
Cost per head ... ... £8 16 8 1916-17 £18,683,867
The quantities are all from official sources, excepting in the case of
Australian wine only, which is roughly estimated.
Spirits are for the most part bulk proof spirits.
It will be seen that the consumption was as follows
1914-15. 1915-16. 1916-17.
Spirits ... 4,057,683 ... 3,415,059 ... 2,970,031
Wine Imported 116,064 ... 70,863 ... 60,253
Beer 64,976,162 ... 61,233,983 ... 56,621,721
The consumption was less in 1915-16 as compared with 1914-15.
by 642,624 gallons of Spirits
by 45,201 gallons Wine imported
and by 3,742,179 gallons Beer.
and it was less in 1916-17 as compared with 1915-16.
by 445,028 gallons of Spirits
by 10,610 gallons Wine imported
and by 4,612,262 gallons Beer
Comparing 1916-17 with 1914-15, the consumption was less.
by 1,087,652 gallons Spirits
by 55,811 gallons Wine imported
and ,by 8,354,441 gallons Beer
which was a drop of
26.81 per cent. Spirits
48.10 per cent. Wine imported
and 12,82 per Cent. Beer


1901 •••
... 23,921
... 17,360
... 9,791 •
2 ...
... 24,437
... 14.540
... 8,123 •
3 ...
... 24,703
... 12,630
... 7,190 .
4 ...
... 23,069
... 13,881
... 6,854 .
5 ...
... 14,458
... 6,638 .
6 ...
... 25,399
... 14,029
... 7,493 .
7 ...
... 28,255
... 14,183
... 9,066 .
8 ...
... 27,976
... 13,102
... 9,203 .
9 ...
... 27,495
... 12,436
... 9,109 .
1910 ...
... 27,542
... 12,719
... 10,870 ■
1 ...
... 13,603
... 12,824 .
2 ...
... 32,915
... 13,524
... 14,225 .
3 ...
... 32,676
... 14,782
... 14,852 .
4 ...
... 33,393
... 14,437
... 16,510 .
5 ...
... 26,010
..f 13,458
... 16,260 .
2,049 •
. 3,348 ..
743 ...
~ ...
57,212
2,431 •
. 3,347 ..
636
...
53,514
2,340 .
. 3,572 ..
526 ...
...
50,961
2,387 .
. 3,597 ..
580 ...
...
50,368
2,362 .
. 3,509 ..
539 ...
...
51,641
2,483 .
. 3,588 ••
459 ...
—
53,451
2,838 .
3,591 ..
632 ...
— ...
59,068
3 063 .
. 3,506 ..
543 ...
— ...
57,393
3,481 .
. 4,007 ..
709 ...
— ...
57,237
4,383 .
4,550 ..
761 ...
— ...
60,825
4,673 .
. 4,857 ..
756 ...
34 ...
66,145
5,470 ■
. 4,908 ••
614 ...
80 ...
71,766
5,994 .
. 5.353 ..
729 ...
61 ...
74,447
5,282 .
. 5,795 ..
685 ...
64 ...
76,166
The prices per gallon are estimated to be average retail prices.
For the three years the total cost was ,£58,816,556. This purchased
about 14% million gallons of alcohol (a narcotic poison), and some 170
million gallons of water (quite high-priced water).
For the year 1916-17, the drinks were consumed in the proportion of
—spirits, 0.61 gallon per head; wine, 0.26 gallon; and beer, 11171
gallons, at a cost per head of £1 16s. 7d., 3s. iod., and £\ 16s. 2d.
respectively (in the ratio of 47.69, 4.99, and 47 32 per cent.).
The revenue from these drinks for the year 1916-17 was £3,911,505.
The data for the following calculations is from the official publica-
tions issued by Mr. G. H. Knibbs, C.M.G., Commonwealth Statisti-
cian :
DRUNKENNESS IN AUSTRALIA.
The Record Since Federation—a Million Cases.
New S’th Queens-
Year Wales Victoria land
South West Tas- N. Ter- Common-
Aust. Aust. mania ritory wealth
4,060 ... 4,336 ... 628 ... 158 ... 65,40§.
905,599
•b
The cases for 1916 and nine months of 1917 would make the whple
exceed a million.
The cases of drunkenness, taken by themselves, are not altogether
reliable, as a test of relative sobriety. Strictness on the part of the
police increases arrests and laxity diminishes them. It is not to be
assumed that twice as many people get drunk in New South Wales
as in Victoria. What appears to be the case is that the risk of being
locked up is greater in the Mother State.
Cases are given in preference to convictions because in Victoria
it is usual to discharge first offenders, and those locked up from Sat-
urday to Monday, without conviction. This happens in an average of
over 6000 cases yearly.


1 . — - — — — — — -V’—
The (Great?) Wine Industry of Australia!!!
Comparison with Other Industries.
Would We Miss It If It Were Abandoned ?
WOOL—£28.588,000.
WHEAT—£18.769.000.
BUTTER— £9.017.300. THE VALUE OF THE WINE INDUSTRY is approximately :—
POULTRY AND EGGS—£4,528.600. ONE-FOURTH of the BACON Industry.
BACON AND HAM—£1,945,800. ONE-NINETEENTH of the BUTTER Industry.
ONE-FORTIETH of the WHEAT Industry.
WINE—£500,000. ONE-SIXTIETH of the WOOL Industry.
CO
o
This Diagram Shows the Relative Value of the Wine Industry as Compared with Recognised Staple Productions
of Australia. Figures based on Returns in Commonwealth Year Bock (No. 9).


Workers Employed in Breweries and Distilleries in Australia
Compared with those in Some Leading Industries.
(Each cipher represents 250 workers).
Distilleries, 231
Breweries, 3295
0000000000000
BiSCUitS, 3737
000000000000000
Confectionery, 4411
000000000300000000
Sugar Mills, 4657
0000000003000000000
Bricks, Tiles, Pottery and Earthenware, 7007
0000000000000000000000000000
Meat and Fish Preserving, 7024
0000000000000000000000000000
Joinery, Boxes, Cases, etc., 8912
000000000000000000000000000000000000
Shirts, Ties, Scarves, etc., 11,260
000000000300000000000000000000000000000000000
Boots and Shoes, 13,175
00000000000000000000000000000000000030000000000000000
Dressmaking and Millinery, 15,616
00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
Electrotyping, Stereotyping, Printing and Binding, 21,302
00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
00000000000000000
Railway Carriages, Railway and Tramway Workshops, 22,224
00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
000000000000000000000
Engineering, Ironworks and Foundries, 25,219
000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 00000000000
000000000000000000000000000000000
Clothing (Tailoring and Slop), 28,616
00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
00030000rXK)00000000000000000000000000000000000


REVENUE FROM DRINK
And Some Charges Which Drink Helps
to Cause.
Revenue from alcoholic liquors, year ended June,
1917 ... £3,911,505
The following- expenditure is for 1915: —
Public Hospitals and Charities ... £3,370,240
(The Government and municipal share of
the above was £2,135,401.)
Police ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...£1,590,031
Gaols and other costs of- crime (year 19 j 4) 948,641
Old-age pensions (including administration) 2,780,346
There were in Australia in 1905, 31,421 children classed
as “ neglected,” under the care of the States, at a cost of
£451,856. This sum is included in the charities’ expendi-
ture above.
The proportion of the cost of charitable institutions,
police and gaols, old-age pensions, etc., due to intemper-
ance. cannot be stated, but it, with the indirect costs,
should be sufficient to absorb the revenue. The Federal
Government gets the revenue, the States bear the costs.


Principal Temperance Organisations
of Australasia
AUSTRALIAN ALLIANCE PROHIBITION COUNCIL.
(See page 6.)
STATE ALLIANCES.
New South Wales— President: REV. R. B. S. HAMMOND. Secretary:
Mr. JAMES MARION, 321 Pitt Street, Sydney.
New Zealand (Dominion)— President: REV. P. S. SMALLFIELD.
Secretary: REV. J. DAWSON, 42 Manners Street, Wellington.
Queensland— President: REV. A. C. JARVIS. Organising Secretary:
REV. H. E. SAUNDERS. Assistant Secretary: Miss L. A.
STOCK, Temperance Hall, Edward Street, Brisbane.
South Australia— President: PASTOR W. C. BROOKER. Organisers;
Mr. J. S. PHILLIPS and Mr. A. KEELING. Secretary: Mr.
VICTOR E. STANTON, 72, 73 Royal Exchange, King William
Street, Adelaide.
Tasmania —President: Mr. D. STORRER. Organiser: Mr. G. G.
PULLEN. Secretary : Mr. SYD. CUMMINS, Temperance Hall,
Melville Street, Hobart.
Victoria— President: HON. S. MAUGER, J.P. Organiser: HON. J.
G. BARRETT. Secretary: Mr. FRANCIS WILSON, 136 Swan
ston Street, Melbourne.
West Australia— President; REV. JOHN W. CREAN. Secretary; Mr
JAS. MATHER, Temperance Hall. Museum Street, Perth.
WOMAN’S CHRISTIAN TEMPERANCE UNION.
Australasian— President: LADY HOLDER, J.P, Sydenham Road,
Norwood, South Australia. Corresponding Secretary: Mrs. W.
H. CARVOSSO, Arthur Street, New Farm, Brisbane, Queens-
land. Treasurer: Mrs. THOMSON, Gray Street, Hamilton,
Victoria.
New South Wales— Miss EVA G. BOWES. W.C.T.U., Office, 130 Castle-
reagh Street, Sydney.
New Zealand— Miss HENDERSON, 8.A., 26 Tui Street, Fendalton,
Christchurch.
Queensland —Office Secretary: Miss PAYNE, Willard House, Ann
Street, Brisbane.
South Australia— Miss LOCKWOOD, Headquarters, Wakefield Street,
Adelaide.
Tasmania —Mrs. BREODEN, Launceston.
Victoria —Mrs. E. REES, Headquarters, 96 Elizabeth St., Melbourne.
West Australia— Mrs, B. JONES, Headquarters, Barrack Street, Perth.


INDEPENDENT ORDER OF RECHABITES.
District Secretaries. (The number is that of the District.)
85, New South WaIes— IRVINE GREENSTREET, 85 Campbell Street,
Sydney,
84, New Zealand (North)— J. W. FOSTER, 8 Disraeli Street, Grey
Lynn, Auckland, N.Z.
86, New Zealand (Central)— THOMAS FATHERS, Kilbirnie, Welling-
ton, N.Z.
87, Queensland —F. W. HOSKIN, Temperance Hall, Edward Street,
Brisbane.
81, South Australia— E. E. ALCOCK, J.P., Rechabite Hall, Grote
Street, Adelaide.
83, South Australia (Albert District)— FREDERICK PENHALL, Vic-
toria Square West, Adelaide,
79, Tasmania— JESSE LLOYD, Wellington Road, Launceston.
80, Tasmania (Southern Cross District)—]. B. STEVENS, 380 Murray
Street, Hobart.
82, Victoria— JOHN VALE, J.P., Equitable Building, Collins Street,
Melbourne.
88, West Australia— WALTEß SIMPSON, J.P., 128 Charles Street.
Perth.
SONS OF TEMPERANCE
New South Wales —W. J. WALKER, 28 Percival Road, Stanmore.
New Zealand— J. H. JONES, Box 92, Christchurch.
Victoria and South Australia— H, R. FRANCIS, 136 Swanston Street,
Melbourne.
West Australia —C. WINTER, 39 Mandurah Road, South Fremantle.
INTERNATIONAL ORDER OF GOOD TEMPLARS.
GRAND SECRETARIES.
New South Wales ARTHUR TOOMBES, Daking House, Pitt Street,
Sydney,
New Zealand— GEO. PETHERICK, 157 Ingestre Street, Wellington.
Queensland— W. L. DUNCAN, Temperance Hall, Brisbane.
South Australia— C. VEILGAARD, 12 Willis Street, Norwood.
Tasmania —J. C. RANDALL, 22 Charles Street, Sandy Bay, Hobart.
Victoria— GEO. ROBERTSON, Gowanlea. Sendee Street, Hampton
Melbourne.
Western Australia— W. J. BROWN, 19 Coolgardie Street, West Perth.


OTHER ORGANISATIONS.
Australian National Prohibition League— President: W. F. FINLAY-
SON, M.P. Secretary: Miss JESSIE FORSYTH, 430 Bourke
Street, Melbourne.
Melbourne Total Abstinence Society and Temperance Book Depot—
A. E. J. QUICK, Temperance Hall, Russell Street, Melbourne.
North Coast Temperance Council, N.S.W.— Secretary; REV. J. H.
BAKER, Box 144, Lismore, New South Wales.
BAND OF HOPE UNIONS.
Victoria —Secretary: C. H. CARTER, Temperance Hall, Russell
Street, Melbourne.
South Australia —Secretary: A. KEELING, Alliance Office, 73 Royal
Exchange, Adelaide.
AUSTRALASIAN TEMPERANCE PERIODICALS.
Unless otherwise stated, published monthly.
NEW SOUTH WALES—
“Australian Temperance World,” 2d. 1.0.G.T., Daking
House, Sydney.
“ Grit,” Weekly, id. 33 Park Street, Sydney. 'Box 390, G.P.O.
“ N.S.W. Rechabite,” id. 85 Campbell Street, Sydney.
“Son of Temperance,” id. no Bathurst Street, Sydney.
“White Ribbon,” 139 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
NEW ZEALAND—
“Vanguard,” Fortnightly, 2d. New Zealand Alliance, Manners
Street, Wellington.
“ N.Z. Rechabite.” Quarterly, free. J. J. Wesney, 161 Yarrow
Street,, Invercargill. •
“White Ribbon,” 3d. Mrs. Perryman, Port Chalmers.
QUEENSLAND—
“ Alliance News,” 2d. Temperance Hall, Edward Street, Bris-
bane.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
“ The Patriot,” 2d. South Australian Alliance,'Royal Exchange,
King William Street, Adelaide.
TASMANIA—
“The People’s Friend,” id. Tasmanian Alliance, Temperance
Hall, Hobart.
VICTORIA—
“ The Advance,” id. Victorian Alliance, 136 Swanston Street,
Melbourne.
“ The Rechabite,” id. Equitable Building, Collins Street,
, Melbourne.


Band of News,” Quarterly, id. Temperance Hall, Melbourne
Son of Temperance,” id. 136 Swanston Street, Melbourne.
White Ribbon Signal,” id. Woman’s Christian Temperance
Union, 96 Exhibition Street, Melbourne.
WEST AUSTRALIA—
The Reformer,” id. West Australian Alliance, Museum Street,
Perth.
SWALLOWING THE GOLD YIELD.
SINCE, FEDERATION. 1901-16.
(Sixteen Years.)
Australia’s Gold Yield ... £213,864,134
Australia’s Drink Waste ... £242,000,000
(The latter is a conservative estimate).
VICTORIA’S DRINK EXPENDITURE
From 1842 to 1916.
Total for 73 Year5£311,492,023.
£31 1,492,023.
Total Annual Expenditure ly the States of the
Australian Commonwealth.
Year ending June 30th, 1916.
Education, Science and Art ... £4,396,886
Intoxicating Liquors .... £19,224,007
From the Commencement of the War
to April, 1917,
GREAT BRITAIN SPENT ON DRINK
£S 10,000,000
