

WITHOUT APOLOGY




Without Apology
BY
LORD ALFRED DOUGLAS
London.
MARTIN SECKER
Publisher to The Richards Press
8 Charles Street
St James’s Square


First published igjB
MADE IN GREAT BRITAIN
LONDON: THE RICHARDS PRESS LTD.


WITHOUT APOLOGY


CHAPTER I
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?
Romeo and Juliet, Act I, Sc. 4.
I HAVE JUST LOOKED UP THE WORD “APOLOGY” IN
the dictionary, and I find that its first meaning
is given as: “something spoken to ward off an
attack,” and that its second meaning is: “a
defence or justification.” It is only in its third
sense that it means what it is generally taken to
express in modern usage—namely, “a frank
acknowledgment of offence.”
It was in the first two of these senses that
Newman used it when he wrote his Apologia; and
if I reject it, even in those senses, as a description
of this book of desultory memoirs, this does not
imply that I have not done a lot of things which
I regret and which I would avoid doing again if
I had the chance to re-live my life. It simply
means that in this book I am not “climbing
down” on the main issues. I have often behaved
badly and I have often behaved foolishly; but,
as it happens, I find that, on the whole, the things
that I have been most blamed for are exactly the


things I would do again to-morrow if I had the
chance. The things I regret are, generally
speaking, the occasional compromises and the
(infrequent) runnings away from high attitudes
which I failed to carry right through to their
ends. In short, what I regret in my life is just
that part of it which worldly wisdom applauds.
Spiritually speaking, of course (and inevitably),
one is bound to realise and to admit that one has
failed to do what one ought to have done. Unless
one is a saint—which happens only in the case of
one man or woman in a million—one cannot
possibly avoid realising that one has often failed
miserably. But that is a matter for oneself and
one’s conscience, and does not concern the
“gentle reader” of memoirs, however gentle he
or she may be.
All one is constrained to do in relation to the
aforesaid gentle reader is to say: “This is what I
did, and this is why I did it.” Life lands one in a
certain position (whether by one’s own fault, or
merely by fatality or the fault of others, really
matters very little); and finding oneself in that
position, one acts according to one’s tempera-
ment, one’s convictions and one’s courage or lack
of it. On the whole, I think that it is a mistake
to allow the opinion of the world to influence one.
A thing does not become right because the world
says it is right, any more than it becomes wrong


because the world says it is wrong. One can
act only according to one’s lights, and if one is
in good faith, one may hope that in the long run
justification will result, even if not in this world
or in one’s own lifetime.
I make a present of this preamble to the un-
friendly, not with any expectation that it will
ward off attack, but, on the contrary, if it comes
to welcome it. I have been attacked, on and
off, all my life, and I have learnt that at the end
of one’s life one finds even greater satisfaction
in looking back at the attacks and the abuse that
one has weathered, than in remembering praise
and prosperity and halcyon days. I find it very
difficult to say what I mean on this point, in prose.
I have expressed it in my poem In Excelsis, which
I wrote in prison, and it is just one of those ideas
that can be fully expressed only in poetry.
I suspected that I was a great poet when I
was twenty-three, and as the years went by my
suspicion became a conviction. Now at the age
of sixty-six, and being probably “not long for
this world,” I think I am entitled to say this,
however much it may annoy certain people.
Not to say it would be merely affectation, and a
concession to conventional “modesty” which
strikes me as being futile and' paltry. I would
not venture to say it, even now, if I were not
fortified by a very large and very powerful body


of opinion among the best judges of poetry who
have lived in my lifetime. Denigration or abuse
proceeding from those whose judgment one
despises is almost as heartening and encouraging
as praise from those whom one admires and
respects, and it is one of the tricks of detraction,
with which innumerable damners with faint
praise have made me familiar, to describe me as
“a poet who has never received the praise which
he deserves,” implying that my poetical work is
neglected and unappreciated, whereas the plain
truth is that scarcely any qualified critic or judge
of poetry for the last forty years, beginning with
Henley and Mallarme in the ’nineties, has ever
failed to praise me. And, what is even more to
the point, my poems go on selling steadily, after
being reprinted over and over again in various
editions, to the extent of many thousand volumes,
not counting pirated editions in America.
I have written very little poetry, but all that I
have published is on a very high level, and when
I die no raker out of my drawers will be able to
dig up a lot of inferior stuff (as happened in the
case of Keats), because I have always destroyed
any poetry I have written which did not come
up to my own standard for publication.
I began to write poetry in my second year at
Oxford. I had before that written rhymes and
parodies, but my first serious poem, called


“Autumn Days,” appeared in the Oxford
Magazine, the official organ of the University, in
my second year at Oxford. The President of my
College, Magdalen, wrote me a letter of con-
gratulation on this effort, and it has since then
appeared in numerous editions of my poems, the
last of which, in two volumes ( Lyrics and Sonnets) ,
appeared in November 1935.
A year or so after the appearance of my first
poem I took over a monthly magazine called
The Spirit Lamp , of which I edited altogether six
numbers in my last two terms at Oxford. It was
a sixpenny magazine when I took it over, and I
doubled the price, cut out all advertisements, and
more than quadrupled the circulation. I have
a right to be proud of this achievement, because
I can say truthfully that it is generally agreed
that The Spirit Lamp was the most distinguished
undergraduate paper ever produced at Oxford.
Among my contributors were John Addington
Symonds, Oscar Wilde, Pierre Louys, Lionel
Johnson, E. B. Osborn, his brother Percy, and
Max Beerbohm, then an undergraduate at
Merton, who contributed an article called “The
Incomparable Beauty of Modern Dress,” which
was the first article of his ever to be published
and was signed “H. M. Beerbohm.” The
magazine also contained a few of my own early
poems, and one by my father, the eighth Marquis


of Queensberry. Yes, my father, the author of
the Queensberry Rules, really did write a
“poem” for The Spirit Lamp ; not very good, I
fear, but years before, when his brother, Lord
Francis Douglas, was killed on the Matterhorn,
he wrote a poem in blank verse called “The
Spirit of the Matterhorn,” which had a lot of
good lines in it.
The complete set of the six numbers of The
Spirit Lamp under my editorship is now worth
quite a lot of money (twenty to thirty pounds),
and is almost impossible to obtain. I have not
seen it advertised in a bookseller’s catalogue for
more than twenty years.
My system as an editor in those days was
simple and cool. If I wanted a contribution
from anyone, however distinguished, I just wrote
and asked for one (there was never any ques-
tion of anyone being paid for contributions to
The Spirit Lamp), and I invariably got what
I wanted. I tried this system with complete
success on John Addington Symonds among
others. Years later, when I was editing The
Academy in London, I found that the same method
of getting contributions for which (as I was then
running the paper which had formerly belonged
to a very rich man at my own expense) I could
not afford to pay, acted quite as well as it did in
my undergraduate days.


Still later, in 1921, I ran a paper Plain Speech
(the successor to Plain English when I was pushed
out of its editorship) on, literally, nothing at all.
I not only got all my extraneous “copy” for
nothing, but I got from the public, week by
week, the money in voluntary contributions to
run the paper. One patriotic English merchant,
Mr Ernest Brown, sent me fifty pounds a week
to keep the paper going during the whole time
it lasted (about four months), and many others
contributed to the expense. The paper came to
an end only because I had a serious illness which
completely incapacitated me for work and forced
me to drop it. If these facts do not prove that
I had a drawing power and a following, and that
I would have been a valuable asset to any paper
on which I wrote, then nothing can prove any-
thing. Yet such is the astounding stupidity of
newspaper proprietors and editors that I have
hardly ever been able to get any of them to let
me write for them.
Only about a year ago, encouraged by the fact
that Lord Beaverbrook had written to me more
than once saying that he considered I was by
far the greatest living English poet, I asked
him to let me do a few articles for one of his
papers. Lord Beaverbrook, by return of post,
assured me that he never interfered with the
editors of his papers, but that if I would send


him one or two articles he would be delighted
to see that they were considered by the editor
of the Evening Standard. I sent the articles, which
were promptly “turned down” by the editor
of that celebrated “Conservative” paper which
for years past has done more to encourage
Bolshevism and extreme “Left” views, through
the medium of “Low’s” cartoons, than the Daily
Herald , Star , Daily Worker and News-Chronicle
combined. Naturally I was not at all surprised,
because when Lord Beaverbrook told me, in
effect, that he had no influence over his own
editors, I would have been more than an optimist
if I had expected any other result, even though
the Evening Standard has always been most kind,
and even flattering, to me as a poet and an
author.


CHAPTER II
I KNOW PERFECTLY WELL, OF COURSE, THAT THIS
strange attitude on the part of the Press towards
a man for whose work it has constantly expressed
the greatest admiration is due to the fact that
when I was a boy I was “mixed up in the Oscar
Wilde affair.” I was originally boycotted on
account of the scandal which took place in 1895,
and even years afterwards, when the scandal had
completely died down, the boycott went on in a
modified degree, and will doubtless go on as long
as I am alive.
I can give a striking example of this in the
following way. When my first collection of
poetry to be published in England, The City of
the Soul, was brought out by Grant Richards in
1899 (there was a prior collection published by
the Mercure de France in Paris in 1896), it appeared
anonymously. No clue as to its authorship was
given, and I think that hardly anyone among
my reviewers, except Lionel Johnson and George
Street, knew that the work was mine. It had a
wonderful “press.” The first review to appear
on the day of publication was two columns in


the Star written, but not signed, by James
Douglas, who, of course, at that time was not
either as well known or as cautious as he is now.
It was not till twenty years later that I knew he
had written the review. It was a tremendous
eulogy, and hailed the anonymous author of
The City of the Soul as a great new poet. Review
after review followed in the same strain, and the
first edition of 500 copies was sold out in a few
weeks. Then I made a fatal mistake. Grant
Richards told me that he was bringing out the
second edition, and he begged me not to insist on
putting my name to it, although we had both
agreed that if there were a second edition this
should be done. Grant Richards said: “If you
put your name on the book it will stop the sale.”
I refused to believe him. I insisted on putting
my name on the title-page, and the sale stopped
dead. It took several years to sell the second
edition, and it was not till 1909 that a third
edition was brought out by another publisher,
John Lane. I think it is worth while to re-
count this story now because it shows, in a way
which hardly anything else could show, what
was the force and extent of the tyranny of the
“Nonconformist conscience,” or as the French
would call it “ Vhypocrisie Anglaisef in those days.
Although The City of the Soul was a quite blame-
less production without the faintest touch of


immorality about it, and though it had been
praised almost ecstatically for its “purity and
beauty,” it was, from the day I put my name on
it, relegated to limbo, or very near it, simply on
account of my connection, four years earlier,
with the Oscar Wilde affair.
I have had a lot of generous praise from leading
papers since then for various editions of my
poetry, but rarely have I had anything like what
I got for that first little anonymous volume. I
was foolish enough to think, and to say at that
time to Grant Richards: “My poems have been
received with a chorus of praise and admiration.
I am accepted as a great poet in the line of
succession from Keats and Shelley and Tennyson
and Swinburne. The reviewers have committed
themselves, and they cannot possibly now take
back what they have printed, even if they wanted
to do so. So why should I hesitate to put my
name on my own work? I regard the book as
my vindication, and as the most powerful answer
I can make to those who have defamed me. It
would be idiotic not to put my name on the
book.”
Alas, poor foolish youth that I was! How
httle I understood my own countrymen! I
think the reviewers who had so generously
Praised my poetry, without having the least idea
w ho had written it, were furious and felt that


they had been tricked. They never mentioned
me again as a poet for at least ten years, and
I was rigidly excluded from every anthology.
Undoubtedly this treatment dried up my poetical
output and dealt a felon blow to my young
lyrical impulse. I gave up writing poetry, and
went in for racing and riding and shooting,
and in my disgust at the way I had been treated
I used to make a habit of refusing permission
for my poems to be included in anthologies
when at last anthologists began to ask for them.
I took up the attitude that I was superior to
anthologies. I remember writing what was
almost a rude letter of refusal when Sir Arthur
Quiller-Couch asked my permission to include
some of my poetry in his Oxford Anthology. I
think he must have guessed the wounded feelings
at the back of my somewhat discourteous reply
to his amiable invitation, for with great kindness
and sweetness he wrote again and begged me to
reconsider my decision. Naturally that settled
it, and I relented, and from that time I adopted
a more “coming-on” disposition towards com-
pilers of anthologies.
I think I owe this explanation to a great
number of kind admirers all over the world who
have from time to time written in appreciation
of my poetry, because a great many of them
have indignantly commented on the fact that I


scarcely ever figured in anthologies. I sup-
pose I must have refused permission to include
my work to at least twenty anthologists, and
naturally after a time it became known that I
was not a poet who welcomed that sort of
approach. I hope compilers of anthologies will
not take all this as an indication that I am
now panting to be approached. On the con-
trary, what was at one time a pose engendered
by wounded feelings has now become a perfectly
natural feeling. Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch in-
cluded me in his Anthology of Sonnets {ISOO-1935)
as one of only three living poets in his collection,
and made special mention of me in his preface,
and I have been in quite a lot of the best ones
(Mr Abercrombie’s, for instance) in the last few
years. So obviously, and without affectation, I
can now claim that such fame as a poet as I
possess would not be enhanced by inclusion in
any collection, or diminished by any exclusion.
A case in point is Mr Yeats’ absurdly named
Oxford Anthology (why Oxford?). I sent him a
sharply worded rebuke in a telegram, which was
given wide publicity in the Press, because he had
riot asked for any of my work, not because it
would have been any advantage to me to be in
his collection (on the contrary, as Sir Arthur
Quiller-Couch pointed out in a letter to me at
the time, it was a compliment to me to escape
21


inclusion dans cette galere ), but because I thought
it was a piece of impertinence on his part to
ignore a poet of my standing, and because I
strongly objected to the attitude adopted by the
Oxford University Press in bringing out an
“Oxford Anthology” without the imprimatur of
their old editor, Quiller-Couch, and under the
aegis of a minor Irish poet who never had the
slightest connection or affinity with Oxford.
Mr Yeats also left out at least two other poets
whose exclusion from an Oxford anthology of
modern poetry was an outrage: Mr Humbert
Wolfe and Mr Alfred Noyes. I do not admire
Yeats very much, and I once mentioned him in
the preface to my Collected Poems (published by
Seeker in 1919) as an example of a poet infected
with the “anti-formal heresy,” which is the plain
truth about him. But though I am not a great
admirer of Yeats, if I had been editing a modern
anthology, I would have considered it the
height of bad manners and bad taste to leave
him out.
Writing of Yeats reminds me of the only
time I ever met him, which was on one of the
numerous occasions when I stayed with my
cousin, the late Wilfrid Blunt, at his house, New-
buildings Place, near Horsham. “Newbuildings”
sounds modern, but as a matter of fact the
place is a perfect little Jacobean manor-house


which Wilfrid Blunt occupied in the later years
of his life, after giving up residence in the larger
Crabbet Park, which he subsequently made over
during his lifetime to his daughter Judith (the
Hon. Mrs Neville Lytton, now Lady Wentworth
in her own right).
The party at Newbuildings Place to which
Blunt, himself a poet, invited me (soon after my
marriage, when I was about thirty-three years
of age) was described by him as a “poets’ party.”
All the guests were supposed to be poets. I have
been racking my brain to remember who they
were, but except for Yeats I cannot remember
them at all. Neville Lytton was there, but he,
of course, is not a poet, though he is a first-rate
portrait-painter. As far as I remember there
were no women among the poets (though I met
Lady Margaret Sackville at Blunt’s on several
occasions later on). I remember that the poets
were not enthusiastic about each other, and that
for some reason they severally took me into their
confidence on this point, and that most of them
in turn confided to me his (unflattering in the
poetical sense) opinion of the others. I was
appalled on the first night of my stay at New-
buildings Place, when, after listening with grow-
ing feelings of dismay and embarrassment to
Mr Yeats’ reading in a wailing monotone of his
own poems for at least an hour after dinner, I


was called upon by Wilfrid to read my own
“Ballad of Perkin Warbeck.” I utterly declined
to do this. I loathe reading my poems aloud, and
it is only within the last four or five years that I
have done it; once, to oblige my friend Maurice
Leahy, to the “Catholic Poetry Society,” twice
to oblige a charming lady whose guests, my
audience, were nearly all men and women of
letters, and once, quite recently, to a Co-Ed.
School, St Christopher’s School, Letchworth,
which I really enjoyed because I love children
of both sexes, and because I can truthfully say
that the children (they were boys and girls from
thirteen to eighteen) were the best audience a
poet could wish to have, and their questions,
which I invited after the reading, were amazingly
intelligent and, in some cases, difficult to answer.
But at that time at Wilfrid’s poets’ party I was
firmly resolved that I would rather die in great
agony than read any of my poems to the poets
assembled. Not that I minded them at all (they
were most amiable and friendly to me), but
simply that in those days I disliked the idea of
reading poetry aloud at all, except perhaps
privately to one or two friends.
lam not at all proud of this. I think it was
rather foolish of me, and on this occasion I paid
a severe penalty for my folly, for Wilfrid said,
as soon as he realised that my refusal was serious


and not merely a desire de me faire prie, “Never
mind, Alfred, I will read the ballad myself.”
This he proceeded to do, and as he was without
exception the worst reader of poetry I have ever
encountered, my sufferings were terrible. I sat
and listened to my poor ballad being murdered
in a mumbling voice, with about three “ers” in
every line, and as soon as it was over I hastily
left the room, and did not return till the poetry-
reading was quite finished.


CHAPTER III
IT MAY SEEM RATHER UNKIND TO WRITE IN THIS
way about Wilfrid, my host on that occasion,
and who was extraordinarily kind to me for many
years right up till the time when I became a
Catholic ten years later. Then he turned against
me violently, and never spoke to me again,
although his wife, Lady Anne (Byron’s grand-
daughter), and his daughter, before mentioned,
were Catholics, and he himself was also one (I
mean in the sense that “once a Catholic always
a Catholic”).
When my son Raymond was born (I being at
that time an Anglican) I asked Wilfrid to be his
godfather, and I was much surprised to get a
letter in reply expressing regret that it was
impossible for him to be Raymond’s godfather be-
cause he (Wilfrid) was a Mohammedan! I have
never quite been able to make out whether this
was intended to be serious or if it was just a joke.
I have stayed dozens of times with Wilfrid (for
several years just before and after my marriage
I used to shoot with him regularly in September
and round about Christmas), but I never re


member any signs of religious activity on his part
in the Mohammedan sense, or indeed in any
sense, though long before that, in my boyhood, on
two or three occasions when I stayed at Crabbet
Park, priests used to come over on Sunday to
say Mass.
The late Father Pollen, the Jesuit of Farm
Street, who was a cousin of Wilfrid’s, told me
that when Wilfrid was dying he was reconciled
to the Church, but I have never been able to
obtain any confirmation of this. I can only say
that I hope it is true, and I suppose I ought in
fairness to add that part of his reaction against
me was caused by the fact that when I was
editing The Academy (i 907-1910), my politics
and my views generally turned more and more
to the Right and away from his. His attitude
was very ungrateful, I must say, for during the
first year of my editorship of The Academy I not
only allowed him to write columns in my paper,
but I also defended him valiantly and forcibly
against The Times when that paper attacked him
on the question of Egypt.
Wilfrid’s politics were always violently anti-
English and pro-any country that we were at
war or at odds with. Need I say, this being the
case, that he was what is called an Idealist?
And of course he was an “Intellectual,” which
latter term I have perforce in late years come to


associate with crankiness and inability to think
clearly on any subject. As Mrs Quickly might say,
“‘lntellectual’ was a good word before it was ill
sorted, therefore intellectuals had needs look to it.”
All the same, Wilfrid was in many ways a
charming and fascinating man. He was kind-
hearted, and generous, and though so selfish
that I do not think it ever occurred to him for a
moment even to suspect that he was sometimes
grossly unfair and tyrannical, he really was full
of philanthropy, or thought he was. He would
spend hundreds, nay thousands, to support a
man or a cause, especially if the man or the cause
was in revolt against any kind of established
authority. He took me up and gave me the
benefit of his countenance chiefly, I think, be-
cause of my having come into violent collision
with “Society” over the Wilde affair. That, I
think, was greatly to his credit (in the sense, I
mean, that he was sticking up for the oppressed),
but after he gradually realised that I was not a
revolutionary and that I had ordinary bourgeois
views in favour of patriotism and religion, and
freely expressed them in The Academy , he turned
against me, and when I became a Catholic he
regarded me as hopeless, and dropped me without
any mitigation or remorse. I suppose it will
always be impossible for people who call them-
selves “Intellectuals” to realise that their
28


opponents are (more often than not) far more
intellectual than they themselves are. Nothing but
affliction cures such people. Sometimes they get
it and sometimes (more often, it seems to me)
they escape it altogether. Wilfrid never got it.
He was spoiled all his life by having too much
money and luxury, and complete liberty to in-
dulge his own whims and fancies without the
slightest regard for others. But I keep a soft
spot in my heart for the old man. He showed
me great kindness at a period when, not for the
last time, I was under a cloud, and if he turned
against me and deserted me just at the moment
of my life when I was most forlorn and friendless,
it was simply because he was incapable of under-
standing my divergence from all his standards,
and the force of the spirit which impelled me on
a road which he had never trodden himself.
He had a great love and respect for poetry,
and it is enormously to his credit that he be-
friended Francis Thompson, who died in a
cottage on his estate which Wilfrid allowed him
to occupy rent-free.
I cannot honestly say that I admire Blunt’s
poetry very much. I consider that his daughter,
Lady Wentworth, is a far better poet than her
father ever was (I published at least two fine
sonnets of hers in Plain English ), but he had a
good deal of the “make-up” of a poet, and his


striking good looks and dignity could never be
forgotten by anyone who had seen him at his
own dinner-table, where the hospitality was
much more Franciscan than Mohammedan (I
mean there was always any amount to drink and
of the very best), clad in the costume of an Arab
sheik. My mother, who, of course, knew him in
his youth, told me that he was in those days
almost the best-looking young man she ever saw.
His wife, Cousin Anne as I called her, was a
saint, and a great part of her saintliness was
acquired by the ordeal of living with Wilfrid
for so many years, for it would be impossible to
describe him as a good husband.
It has just occurred to me that my remark above
about Franciscan hospitality is liable to be seized
upon by Dr Inge, or someone of similar habits of
mind, as a confirmation of Protestant legends as
to the “luxury” in which Franciscan monks or
friars live, whereas of course they live in the
utmost poverty and self-denial, never taking
meat except on rare Feast Days and drinking, as
a general rule, nothing but water. On the other
hand, their hospitality to visitors or guests is
boundless, and whatever they have got in their
house (supplemented by occasional gifts from
the wealthier members of their flocks) is lavishly
placed before their guests, even if they themselves
have to starve to supply them.


When I went to Wilfrid’s, before the breach
occurred, I was never accompanied by my wife,
it being one of Wilfrid’s rules (occasionally
broken) never to ask husband and wife together.
My wife paid him a visit without me several
times, and on one occasion she met Alfred Austin,
the much-abused Poet Laureate, there. Really
poor Austin was not by any means a bad poet,
and he wrote at least one very fine sonnet which
Crosland (who was a good judge of poetry)
quoted in his book on the English Sonnet,
published by Martin Seeker, as one of the best
sonnets in the language. So it is; but on the
whole, of course, he was not much more than
third-rate, though a good deal better than
nine-tenths of our present “bards” and perpe-
trators of sloppy vers litres. He was a very small
man, and Wilfrid described his appearance to
me (I never met him myself) as being that of
“a little cock sparrow.” Olive, my wife, gives
a screamingly funny account of this party. She
and Dorothy Carleton (Wilfrid’s cousin, to whom
he left Newbuildings Place when he died) were
the only other guests. After dinner Wilfrid and
Austin in turn read their poems, at least Austin
got his in first, and when Wilfrid started on
something of his own, Austin, after many sighs
and yawns, said: “My dear Wilfrid, I find that
I am consumed with sleep. I must go to bed at


once,” which was hardly playing the game.
Olive is a splended mimic, and her rendering of
this scene is inimitable. I cannot hope to put it
into words as she acts it.
Raymond, my son, then about four or five
years old, accompanied Olive, and he got on
famously with Wilfrid, who was greatly amused
by his unconscious snobbery when he gravely
said to Wilfrid: “Why don’t you have a footman
on the box beside your coachman? You ought
to have one, you know.” He also watched
Wilfrid while he was showing him how to play
“cup and ball.” When Wilfrid missed the ball
several times running, Raymond said politely:
“You don’t do it very well, do you?”
Neville Lytton, strikingly good-looking, rom-
antic and withal an all-round athlete and a crack
shot, was always there every time I went to stay
for the shooting, and he was also present when
we did a “private theatricals” performance
of a blank verse “Yeatsian” play by Wilfrid
called Fand of the Fair Cheek. Lady Margaret
Sackville was an attractive Fand, and the other
parts were taken by, amongst others, Neville
Lytton (who was also stage-manager and maker-
up), Dorothy Carleton, Francis Meynell, and
myself. The play was performed in the hall in
front of an audience consisting chiefly of the
servants and estate tenants, who were under the


impression that it was a comic play (which it
certainly was as we acted it) and received it with
roars of laughter. Their laughter was aroused
chiefly by the performance of Guy Carleton, who
at the last minute was substituted in the principal
part for Francis Meynell in the cast. For some
reason which I forget, Meynell declared that he
was not capable of doing the part (I think it was
that of an Irish King, Cahulan, or some such
name, in fact Pm sure it was, because I remember
that I was another King in the play). The
servants and tenants had long known Guy
Carleton as a wit and comic entertainer, so when
he came on in this serious (and indeed tragic)
part he was received with shouts of laughter
such as would have been given to George Robey
if he had been playing the part. I myself was
supposed to be an infirm and aged King, but I
absolutely refused to wear a false beard and
came on “looking,” as Neville Lytton dis-
gustedly declared, “about fifteen,” in spite of
his having stained my face with dark umber to
counteract my “fair cheek” and to give me the
appearance of “age and envy.” Consequently
when one of the other performers referred to me
as “this aged, tottering spectre,” the hilarity
became unbounded and uncontrollable; How-
ever, it was all the greatest fun, and Wilfrid,
seated in a throne-like chair dressed up in his full


Arab Sheik regalia, looked on at the mutilation
of his play with a perfectly calm and placid
smile which was greatly to the credit of his good
nature.
Certainly as my father’s old huntsman at
Kinmount, our place in Scotland, said to me
one day when I visited him in his cottage at
Cummertrees: “They was the days.”


CHAPTER IV
YEARS BEFORE, WHILE 1 WAS STILL AT OXFORD,
Wilfrid took me with him on a driving tour in a
phaeton driven by himself and drawn by two
Arab horses. The tour lasted five or six days,
and we used to camp out in a tent every night
(Wilfrid’s servants having gone on before and
raised the tents for us and themselves), while the
horses were turned out and allowed to go where
they pleased. They were so “tame” and docile
that they just waited to be caught in the morning.
We camped out in various parks belonging to
friends, and at Wilfrid’s suggestion, I wrote to
“Sunny” Marlborough and asked if we might
do this in the park at Blenheim. Sunny and I
were great friends at Winchester, where we were
in the same House (Bramston’s) till our friendship
was interrupted, as in the case of so many of the
friends of my youth, by the explosion of the
Wilde scandal. On this occasion, Sunny wrote
at once giving permission to camp in the park
and regretting that as he was not for the
moment at Blenheim he could not entertain us.


Unfortunately I did not get his letter in time,
and when we reached Woodstock I remembered
that an old tutor of mine at Oxford, Franklin
Harvey, lived there during the vacations, and we
descended on him instead, and were received
with the greatest kindness and hospitality.
Franklin Harvey coached me for “Mods.” He
was a fine musician and pianist and used to per-
form frequently (chiefly Mozart and Beethoven)
at the meetings of the Oxford Musical Society
of which I was a member.
As I have mentioned Sunny (he was Blandford
while he was at Winchester), I may as well say
that though our friendship was interrupted for
many years, it did not altogether come to an
end. I used to see him quite often at White’s
in The Academy days and later, and I got a very
charming and affectionate letter from him only
about three or four months before his death. It
is a great satisfaction to me to know that he
became a Catholic some years before he died,
and his death, from cancer, was distinctly heroic;
for he declined, when he was dying, to have any
morphia to relieve the terrible pain he suffered,
because he preferred to bear the pain as an offer-
ing in expiation of sins. A fellow-Wykehamist,
one of the best, to whom I related this fact not
long ago said something about “mediaeval ideas”
and hastily changed the subject. It may have


been mediaeval, but it strikes me that it was fairly
splendid and noble.
I noticed that when he died, Lord Castlerosse
had some paragraphs about him in the Sunday
Express in which he said that his intimates called
him “Sonny” (that is how Castlerosse spelt it),
but that he was so conscious of his dignity as a
duke that he never signed himself as anything
but “Marlborough,” even to his most intimate
friends. Well, he certainly always signed him-
self “Sunny” when he wrote to me, and the
name is short for Sunderland, which was
his title before his father succeeded to the
Dukedom. All of which seems rather to suggest
that Castlerosse in his Sunday Express effusion was
“talking through his hat.”
But to return to the driving tour, we finished
up at Stratford-on-Avon, where Wilfrid spent
about an hour kneeling before the tomb of
Shakespeare reading to himself some of those
marvellous sonnets which, as I have said else-
where, are “the high top-gallant” of poetry. I
remember that, being at that time, I fear, some-
thing of a typical undergraduate (though, to do
myself justice, I never descended to the depths
reached by the present-day microbes of the
Oxford Union who have made the name of
Oxford stink all over the world by their recorded
refusal to fight for King and Country), I was


impudent enough to tell Wilfrid that I thought
he was making an exhibition of himself, or words
to that effect. Wilfrid squashed me appropri-
ately, though I forget now what he said, and
later I apologised and felt somewhat ashamed
of myself. From Stratford we went on to
Stanway and my cousin Mary Wemyss (then
Lady Elcho), where I met Arthur Balfour for the
first time and played croquet and golf with him.
We stayed at Stanway for two or three days, and
I left Wilfrid then and went home to my mother’s
by train. There were no motor-cars in those
days, and oh! how much pleasanter the country
was before they were invented, although I suppose
that if we were suddenly to be deprived of them,
even I would miss them. One thing there is that
I would not miss if it were suddenly to disappear
off the face of the earth, and that is “wireless,”
which is certainly, to my mind, a most poisonous
nuisance.
I was a member of Wilfrid’s “The Crabbet
Club” and actually the youngest and last to join
the Club. It was not really a club, and met only
once a year at Crabbet Park for a “week-end” of
lawn tennis and boundless hospitality, followed
by a competition for a Prize Poem. I won both
the tennis tournament and the poetry prize of my
year. Or, to be exact, I shared the prize for the
poem with Godfrey Webb. Among the members


were George Curzon, who won the poetry prize
the year before I did, Basil Blackwood, Lord
Crewe, George Wyndham, George Leveson
Gower and a lot more whose names I forget.
George Curzon was in tremendous form and
made a succession of gloriously witty speeches
after dinner. The poems were mostly of a
somewhat ribald nature, and Wilfrid rather “let
me down” over this, because when he made me
a member and said I must write a poem, he
gave me no hint as to its nature, and in conse-
quence I wrote a perfectly serious and romantic
poem which was in startling contrast to all the
rest. But as it happened, when I read my poem,
helped by youth and shyness and what looked
like innocence (O Serpent heart hid with a
flowering face!), I was accepted with acclama-
tion, and my poem was considered to be
“touching” and charming. It was an awful fraud
really, because I faked it up out of another
poem which I had already written (not then
published), and the only new part was a song at
the end “Steal from the meadows, rob the tall
green hills” which appears in all the collected
editions of my poetry.
I got a Georgian silver cup for the tennis
tournament and a beautiful edition of Surrey
and Wyatt for the poetry prize. Both, of course,
presented by Wilfrid. A year after that came
39


the frightful catastrophe of the Wilde scandal
(Oscar was also a member of the Crabbet Club,
though he was not present on the occasion when
I was there), and the Club, partly no doubt
owing to this, never met again. I was abroad
after that for several years.
Here I take leave of Wilfrid Blunt, and I find
that by writing about him and digging up all
this “bitter sweet remembrance of past days” I
have got back a good deal of my old affection
and admiration for him. But I will not alter
what I have written about him even where I
have been hard and critical. I leave the rough
and the smooth to speak for themselves.


CHAPTER V
MY FIRST MEETING WITH OSCAR WILDE TOOK PLACE
when I was in my second year at Oxford.
During the “Vac” Lionel Johnson, who had
been at Winchester with me and with whom I
formed a great friendship at Oxford when he
was at New College (two years senior to me),
took me to Wilde’s house in Tite Street. It was
Lionel, a great scholar, who took a “double
first” at Oxford, and who was also a poet of
a very high order, who originally lent me The
Picture of Dorian Gray to read just before I met
Wilde. I read it at Magdalen and was passion-
ately absorbed in it. It is the foolish fashion to
run it down now, but the truth is that it is a work
of great genius. The objection brought against
it in the present time is that it is melodramatic
(just as if Life were not more melodramatic than
any novel or play ever written), whereas at the
time when I read it it was attacked in a section
of the Press because it was supposed to be im-
moral, and a very wicked book. As a matter of
fact the book is entirely moral, and that is
probably why the feeble and sheep-like critics


of to-day affect to despise it. Any book or play
with a moral is what they call melodramatic.
The pose nowadays of the “Intellectuals,” as
they choose to call themselves, is that it is
bourgeois ever to be shocked by anything, while
on the other hand a really immoral or wicked
book is exactly what delights them and commands
their admiration. What they do not like about
Dorian Gray is precisely that it is the moral story
of a man who destroys his own conscience and
thereby comes to a terrible end. If Dorian Gray
had been presented as triumphant and “happy”
to the last, they would probably hail it as a great
work of art, whereas Oscar Wilde, just like
Shakespeare or any first-rate writer, knew that a
play or a novel without a moral is, from the
artistic point of view, a monstrosity.
I once said in the witness-box (at a time when
I first got the revelation of the “attack” Wilde
had made upon me in the unpublished part of
the letter he wrote to me from prison which
never reached me till twelve years after his death
because Robert Ross misappropriated it and
faked it up later into the book called by him
De Profundis) that while Dorian Gray was on the
surface a moral book, there was in it “an under-
current of immorality and corruption.” I said
this out of the bitterness of my heart, but it was
not a fair criticism, because the “undercurrent”


is part of the legitimate atmosphere which the
author creates for his story. At the time I said
this I was deeply incensed against Wilde because
I imagined that he had been a party to Ross’s
intention of keeping secret the attack on me in
the unpublished part of De Profundis and explod-
ing it on my memory after I was dead, which of
course would have been a damnable thing to do.
As I explained in my Autobiography (1929), I
gradually in the course of time arrived at the
conclusion that in this respect I had done Wilde
an injustice, and that Ross’s dark and treacherous
manoeuvres were utterly unsuspected by him. I
also realised, though it took me more than ten
years to do it, that Wilde’s “attack” on me,
though it was certainly very unfair and in the
worst possible taste, was really harmless enough
and, as Mr Robert Harborough Sherard has
pointed out in his recent book, was really a
thing I ought to laugh at. It is too silly to be
taken seriously, and to anyone who looks at it
now without prejudice, and not being under the
influence of the desire which prevailed at the
time when it was first made public, to “score
off ” me at any cost, it is perfectly plain that it
was simply the result of poor Oscar’s cruel
sufferings in prison and his urge to vent his
quite natural spleen on someone. As Sherard
acutely points out, while Wilde was in prison


and when for the first time (to prevent him from
going right out of his mind altogether) he was
allowed the relaxation from suffering of a pen
and paper with which to express himself, he
could not “let out” as he would have liked to
do at the Governor of the prison, or the warders,
or the Judge who had given him the monstrously
excessive sentence of two years’ hard labour, or
even at my father, the original cause of all his
sufferings. The one person he could abuse to
his heart’s content, without incurring the penalty
of having his writing materials taken away from
him, was poor me, who had done nothing but
stick to him valiantly and against all self-interest
through thick and thin, and with whom he re-
newed friendship within a few weeks of his
release. So he attacked and abused me, which
was not a very noble thing to do, certainly, but
was very far from being the result of deliberate
malice and wickedness, as in my first shock of
bewildered indignation I believed. No, he was
simply carrying on the process which, according
to him in his Ballad of Reading Gaol, is the usual
one —namely, killing the thing he loved. It was
borne in on him when he had been a year in
prison that there is a terrible fatality about loving
anyone very much, and that great love is almost
invariably attended by tragedy in one form or
another. Being essentially a poet, and at his


best a fine poet, he progressed from the marred
and occasionally “sloppy” prose of De Profundis
to the great artistic achievement of The Ballad
of Reading Gaol.
His grievance against me, imaginary and un-
founded in real fact, and his grievance against
society as a whole, which was a very real and
justifiable grievance, for the treatment he had
received was cruel and uncharitable in the
highest degree, seethed in his mind, and after
he had first purged himself of the rancour and
unfairness and sheer malice which darken the
real De Profundis (I mean the whole letter and
not the elegant extracts made by Ross), he
sublimated that grievance into The Ballad of
Reading Gaol, which is really a magnificent poem
and far the best thing he ever did in poetry.
The same dullness which exhibits its “in-
tellectual” snobbery by depreciating Wilde’s
plays and his masterly prose (in Dorian Gray and
Intentions) now shows itself in an attempt to
belittle his best poetry; and the absurd but
characteristically English situation has arisen that
you have to come to England to hear his great-
ness denied and his achievements in letters
sneered at. All over Europe he is regarded as a
master; but in England, where real criticism no
longer exists and where there is no longer hardly
a reasonably competent weekly review which


could be trusted to tell the difference between
good and bad work in any branch of art, he is
treated by persons who, artistically speaking, are
not fit to black his boots, with an affectation of
“superiority” which is pitiable and imbecile.
Apart from myself (and I am never allowed to
write my views except in my own books), there is
not a single writer in England at the present day
who would dare to come out and say that he
considers H. G. Wells a third-rate fictionist, that
Yeats is a very minor poet, that Epstein is an
indifferent sculptor who has obtained notoriety
simply by insulting the public intelligence or
exploiting its lack of it, and that when you come
to “poets” like T. S. Eliot and Auden, they are
simply not poets at all and are utterly incapable
of writing poetry; but any twopenny-halfpenny
little playwright or reviewer thinks he can safely
sneer at Oscar Wilde. Yah! The imbecility of
the whole set of them! as Betsey Trotwood said.
But to get back to Wilde and The Ballad of
Reading Gaol ; it may interest Mr St John Ervine
to know that I once, at Naples, when Wilde was
living there in my villa, asked him what exactly
he meant by saying repeatedly in The Ballad of
Reading Gaol that “all men kill the thing they
love.” Oscar replied: “It’s a mistake to ask a
poet what he means by any obscure phrase in a
poem, because he may mean one thing or several


things. The answer is that it means just what
it says in the poem.” I knew exactly what he
meant, because when my poems were being
translated into French by Eugene Tardieu for
the first edition of my poetry published in 1896
in Paris by the Mercure de France, on several
occasions Tardieu had asked me to explain, for
the purposes of translation, exactly what I meant
by some phrase or other, and I had found it
almost impossible to convey my meaning to him.
I found that I did not consent to be nailed down
to one definite meaning. More than once I
answered him very much as Wilde answered me.
I said, in effect, “It means so-and-so, and of
course it might also mean such-and-such; the
only way I could say what I wanted to say was
by putting it as I have done in a poem. If I try
to say it in prose, part of the meaning evaporates.”
Tardieu complained, not unnaturally and I be-
lieve quite correctly, that the English language
was much more vague than the French language.
“We French,” he said, “say exactly what we
mean when we write.” I did not reply (because
I thought it might appear rude), “That is
exactly why English is a better language for
poetry than French,” but I thought it without
saying it! French is a much more exact lan-
guage, and therefore better than English for
prose. Any poet will understand all this, and


some critics may understand it too if they do not
belong to the cocksure school denounced by
Tennyson when he wrote “Vex not thou the
poet’s mind with thy shallow wit.”
On another occasion, and with a view to con-
firming my own opinion, I asked Wilde again
what he meant by his phrase about killing the
thing one loves, and this time he said, “ You ought
to know.” This instantly gave me the clue I
wanted. I do not want to “rub it in,” but of
course what he meant was that if one loves
anyone very much one is very apt to destroy him
or her, or, more exactly, to destroy the image of
the person created in one’s own mind which is
in truth what one loves and worships. You
create an image of the beloved, and then gradu-
ally and inevitably you kill it. So far from the
phrase being nonsensical, as the sapient Mr St
John Ervine once said in an article in the
Observer, it is exceedingly profound; and, being
poetical, it has at least two meanings. Other
critics might interpret it in other ways, but to say
that it is nonsensical is simply to write oneself
down as a man who knows nothing whatever
about poetry, which, as I have said elsewhere, is
“an affair of the spirit” and therefore, more
often than not, a sealed book to the materialist.
Incidentally I may point out what nobody else
appears to have noticed, that Wilde took the


phrase, slightly altering it, from Shakespeare.
In the trial scene in The Merchant of Venice,
Bassanio says to Shylock in a line of blank verse,
“Do all men kill the things they do not love?”
Characteristically Wilde inverted the meaning,
but the words he used in his Ballad are all
Shakespeare’s words with nothing added to them,
and it was on the music (inaudible, doubtless, to
Mr St John Ervine) of this Shakespearian phrase
that he built up his beautiful and touching poem.
It is unpopular now among “highbrows” (loath-
some but devastatingly expressive word), chiefly,
I suppose, because it is entirely moral and has a
moral significance to which Wilde himself would
have objected, theoretically, in his “ art-for-art’s-
sake” days when he never succeeded in writing
anything in poetry on the level of The Ballad of
Reading Gaol.
Poor Oscar, who said that “all art is immoral”
and that “ethical sympathy in an artist is an
unpardonable mannerism of style,” was thus ulti-
mately revealed as a moralist malgre lui, and in
the end he gave in and admitted that his lifelong
pose had failed, and that really, in the long run,
good is good and evil is evil, and that one must
either have ethical sympathy or, metaphorically,
go to Hell, at any rate from the artistic point of
view.
To sum up all the foregoing, Wilde was a


moral writer on the whole. In Intentions, brilliant
and perverse, he preached a doctrine of revolt
against morality, but in all his plays and in
Dorian Gray he was always on the side of the
angels. I feel certain that in this gross, sordid
and material age that is why he is suffering a
temporary eclipse. That it is only temporary, and
that he will, even in his own country, sooner or
later, once more get the appreciation he deserves,
is my firm conviction.
50


CHAPTER VI
IT IS REALLY STRANGE AND ASTONISHING, WHEN
one comes to think of it seriously, that Wilde
never wrote an immoral book or play. The
nearest he got to it was the complete De Profundis ,
including of course the unpublished part which
entirely alters the tone of the book from what it
is as generally known in the published editions.
Intentions , that is to say chiefly “The Decay of
Lying” and “The Critic as Artist,” is a collection
of essays written at different times. The two
essays I have named (really there are three, as
“The Critic as Artist” is in two parts) are
written in the form of Platonic dialogues. Their
trend is on the whole intellectually subversive
and immoral, but a great deal of what they
contain is wilfully paradoxical and may be said
to have been written by Wilde with his tongue
in his cheek and with a set purpose of puzzling
or infuriating the “philistines” of his day.
Wilde couldn’t resist saying things with a grave
face which were really not intended to be taken
seriously but which caused consternation, and
even disgust, among the ultra “proper” who


were not endowed with much sense of humour.
As, for example, when he once said solemnly in
the presence of a pompous schoolmaster and
other intensely earnest people that football was
“all very well as a game for rough girls” but it
was “not exactly suitable for delicate boys.”
The effect of this innocent jeu d’esprit was quite
devastating at the time, as I well remember, and
I also remember being rebuked for the unseemly
laughter with which I greeted it. But apart
from this deliberate “leg-pulling,” Wilde was
not an immoral writer. Even Salome , which I
dislike very much and consider to be the worst
thing Wilde ever did in prose or poetry, is not
immoral, though Mr Justice Darling thought, or
pretended to think, it was. The fact is that
Wilde, as I have already said, shared with
Shakespeare and all the great writers the know-
ledge that if you deny that there is a distinction
between right and wrong or between morality
and immorality, you almost entirely destroy at
one stroke the drama of life. The modern
idiotic affectation of regarding all fine and gen-
uine emotions, such as patriotism, esprit de corps,
and respect for virtue, as laughable anachronisms,
robs the artist in literature of two-thirds of
the instruments of his art. Oscar himself,
in the Preface to Dorian Gray, said that “no
artist has ethical sympathies” and that “ethical


sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable
mannerism of style,” but he did not really believe
it himself, or at any rate he did not carry out his
principles in his own writings. The real truth is
that no great work of art in literature has ever
existed which did not reveal ethical sympathy
in one way or another in its author.
I have a tremendous admiration for Byron as
a man crammed with genius; and considering
his splendid letters, I wish he had written twenty
volumes of prose, but honestly I cannot convince
myself that he was a great poet. Far the best
thing he did was Don Juan, and that is just about
the best example I can recall of a work of literary
art which might be said to approximate to what
Wilde would have us believe a work of art ought
to be. The author has no ethical sympathies.
He deliberately sets out not to be on the side of
the angels. (And even so, if one is to take him
seriously, he has ethical sympathies on the wrong
side.) To my mind this is just what explains
why Byron, for all his genius, was only a second-
rate poet; and that he was no judge of poetry,
at least, is proved not only by his utter failure to
value Shelley at his true rate (although as a man
he really admired and almost loved him), and
his unforgivable and devastatingly self-revealing
references to Keats, but still more by his utter-
ances about poetry in general.


A poet may perhaps be excused for not appre-
ciating his contemporaries, but there can be no
excuse for anyone who thinks that Pope was the
greatest English poet, as Byron did. As Wilde
said, “there are two ways of disliking poetry:
one is to dislike it, the other is to like Pope.”
(I duck my head here, metaphorically speaking,
to avoid a brick launched by Miss Sitwell.)
Pope, of course, was an accomplished versifier,
but he was simply, to my mind, unpoetical. He
knew how to write poetry, but the poetry was
not there to write. He had no vision and no
romance.
When I was editing The Academy, and later
Plain English, I always told my reviewers that in
reviewing a book they were at liberty either to
“slate” or praise, but I said, “If you ‘slate’
anyone you must give chapter and verse. You
cannot, in any paper that I edit, write ‘ so-and-so
is a bad poet, his lines do not scan and he has
no sense of rhythm,’ unless you prove what you
say by adequate quotation from his own writing.”
On the same principle, and knowing that what
I have said about Pope is bound to infuriate his
admirers, I will endeavour to justify. I take
from Miss Edith Sitwell’s Life of Pope the
following lines which she quotes from The Rape
of the Lock as a supreme example of the beauty
of Pope at his best:


Some to the sun their insect wings unfold.
Waft on the breeze, or sink in clouds of gold;
Transparent forms, too fine for mortal sight,
Their fluid bodies half dissolved in light.
Loose to the wind their airy garments flew,
Thin glitt’ring textures of the filmy dew,
Dipped in the richest tincture of the skies,
Where light disports in ever-mingling dyes.
While ev’ry beam new transient colours flings.
Colours that change whene’er they wave their wings.
Now take the following lines, in exactly the same
ten-syllabled rhymed couplets, from Romeo and
Juliet ; I choose them almost at random, and not
because they are by any means the best I could
find in the play:
The gray-ey’d morn smiles on the frowning night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light ;
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day’s path, and Titan’s fiery wheels ;
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer, and night’s dank dew to dry,
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours,
With baleful weeds, and precious-juicM flowers.
How packed every line of Shakespeare is com-
pared to Pope. Observe how by cunning (and
apparently natural and inevitable) altering of
the stress in line after line, Shakespeare lets his
lovely verses flow, and wind on, while poor Pope
mechanically grinds them out with two jerks in
every line, each couplet being a couplet to itself
with what ought to be a full stop at the end of it.
Shakespeare’s rhymed couplets are so much
better than Pope’s that at first it hardly occurs
to one that the two poets are using the same


metre. I have frequently found that people do
not realise that about half Romeo and Juliet is in
rhymed couplets, and the explanation of this is,
I think, that rhymed couplets immediately sug-
gest Pope and the eighteenth century, and arti-
ficiality, and barrel-organ grinding, to all of
which Shakespeare is the very antithesis. No,
anyone who thinks of Pope as a great poet knows
very little about poetry. Shakespeare was a
much better poet than anyone else, but anyone
who has any pretensions to being a “great poet”
must at least be comparable to him and some-
times approach or equal him.
However, there is no disgrace in not being a
good judge of poetry. Dr Johnson was hopeless
about it, so was Byron, as I have just pointed out.
Matthew Arnold, himself a fine poet, was utterly
at fault about Shelley, and one could give many
other instances no less striking. Swinburne, on
the other hand, was a good judge of poetry and
a master of the neglected art of invective. I
wish he were alive now to deal with T. S. Eliot
and his school as they ought to be dealt with.
I would also give a good deal to hear him on
Epstein, H. G. Wells, James Joyce, Aldous
Huxley, and a few more who have “fought the
good fight” against beauty all their lives with
as much energy as (if it had been given to a
noble cause) might have earned them the grati


tude of their fellows, and the immortality which,
in the sphere of art, they will never know.
Ephemeral fame, but lasting oblivion, is the lot
of those who wage war on beauty, whether they
do it for commercial reasons or simply from a
natural hatred of it.
I wonder if anyone who reads this book will
know the author of the following lines:
Cursed be he that setteth
Snares for the youthful feet;
Cursld be he that getteth,
And giveth not, good wheat.
CursM be he that showeth,
Unto the simple, lies;
Curshd be he that throweth
Dust in the star-set eyes.
I seem to have strayed away from Oscar Wilde
and his literary tendencies, but I will return to
him in my next chapter.


CHAPTER VII
THE ALLEGED CRITICS, “DRAMATIC” AND OTHER-
wise, who run down Wilde do not do it very well.
It was much better done in my (now repudiated)
book Oscar Wilde and Myself (1914). In Chapters
16 and 17 of that book there is a very skilful,
I might say brilliant, “cutting up” of Wilde’s
poetry, his prose, and his plays. Unfortunately,
however, for those who might wish to bring this
up against me, both those chapters were written
by T. W. H. Crosland, and not a word of them
is by my hand.
I collaborated with Crosland in this book, and
it was written immediately after I lost the libel
action I took against Arthur Ransome chiefly
through the production of Wilde’s attack on me
in the unpublished part of De Profundis. We
agreed together that the thing to do was to
“go for” Wilde and knock him clean off the
pedestal on which Ross and his other worshippers
had erected him. I quote from my own Auto-
biography (1929) as follows: —
, . . What happened when I began to write that book
(l Oscar Wilde and Myself) was that Crosland, with


whom I was then in close association (arising out of
the fact that he had been my assistant editor on The
Academy for more than two years), said to me: “You
will never write this book as it ought to be written.
Even now, after all that has happened, and after
you have got the complete proof of what an un-
speakable swine Wilde was, you are still too ‘soft’
about him to put it right across him as you ought
to do. Let me do that part of the book. In fact
you had much better let me do the book altogether,
you of course giving me the facts and revising it after
I have put them into shape.” In the end I agreed
to let Crosland collaborate. I paid him hand-
somely, giving him half of what I got for the book,
although originally he asked only for £ i 00. . . .
Crosland was a magnificent literary journalist.
He could either praise or “slate” a book better
than any other writer in London of his day.
Anyone who doubts this has only to look up
Crosfand’s articles in the file of The Academy when
I was editing it. Crosland deliberately “slated”
Wilde in my book, and I am afraid I allowed
him to do it. Had he wanted to praise Wilde,
he could have done it just as well and just as
convincingly. I have already told the story of
all this in my Autobiography and I have there
repudiated the book, on the ground that “on the
whole it does not represent the real truth either
about the facts of our friendship or my feelings
for Wilde.” I went even further in the Preface
I wrote in 1936 to Robert Harborough Sherard’s
book George Bernard Shaw, Frank Harris and Oscar


Wilde. I said there, “I deeply regret that the
book was ever published.”
Anyone who wants to follow the prevailing
fashion of depreciating Wilde could not do better
than to read those two chapters in Oscar Wilde
and Myself, because Crosland, with uncanny skill,
has picked out all the weak spots in Wilde’s
armour. The chapters are utterly unfair, and
they could be answered readily enough, though
even so, there would remain in them a residue
of genuine and justifiable criticism. It is quite
true, as Crosland said, that in his early poetry
(and he never wrote any poetry after I met him
except The Ballad of Reading Gaol and one or two
odd sonnets) Wilde was very derivative, and
imitated other poets, especially Tennyson in In
Memoriam, to the very verge of plagiarism. In
Crosland’s chapters he admits The Sphinx as being
“good stuff,” but he brands it as also imitated
from In Memoriam. This is absurd. It has no
resemblance at all to In Memoriam except that it
is in the same metre, only Wilde printed it in
two long lines instead of four short ones, but
Crosland is able to “make hay” of a great deal
of Wilde’s poetry and to show that it is un-
doubtedly only minor verse. Even Crosland in
those chapters accepts The Ballad of Reading Gaol
as a great poem. To do him justice, I do not
think he would have had the conscience to run


it down even if I had not definitely drawn the
line at that point. I told him, “You can’t
‘slate’ the Ballad, because it really is fine poetry,”
and Crosland said, “For this relief much thanks,”
or words to that effect!
Crosland’s chapter on Wilde’s prose and plays
is quite as unfair, and the “slating,” though
competent and plausible enough, is not half so
well done as in the case of the poetry, because
Crosland was not only a fine judge of poetry but
also a considerable poet himself, whereas I would
not claim him as a good dramatic critic, except
in the sense that anyone who is a good critic of
prose and poetry must also be a good dramatic
critic. He did not find it very difficult to pick
holes in Wilde’s prose, but his attack is not really
convincing, and I doubt very much whether he
troubled to do more than run through Wilde’s
prose works casually with the eye of the skilled
reviewer on the look-out for “slatable” matter.
I feel ashamed of my part in this affair. My
excuse is that, although it is difficult now, even
for me, to recapture the ghost of my feelings at
the time, I was nearly out of my mind with grief
and indignation, and, I might add without
exaggeration, misery. The shock of the revela-
tion of Wilde’s attack on me, after all I had done
for him and after the really almost heroic way I
had stuck to him through thick and thin in spite


of every kind of temptation to desert him when
he went to prison, was the worst experience of
my life. It shook me to the very core, and it
altered me in one week from a young man, still
almost boyish, full of gaiety and joie de vivre to a
fierce and embittered man. As I have already
said, it took me at least ten years to get over this,
and what started my reaction towards my old
love for Wilde was the gradual acquirement of a
conviction that he was not in any way privy to
Ross’s villainies in the matter of the unpublished
part of De Profundis as I had supposed him to be.
Now, in my desire to do Wilde justice as a fine
poet at his best, a brilliant dramatist and a master
of prose (even throwing in all the split infinitives
which Crosland brings up against him), I make
this revelation about a book which was published
as being by myself.
I have said somewhere before that all history is
largely made up of contradicted or corrected lies,
and I verily believe that (on the principle adopted
by St Thomas Aquinas, the greatest intellect the
world has ever known and the furthest removed
from the people who now call themselves “Intel-
lectuals”) the way to get at truth about anything
is to state all that can possibly be said against it
and then refute it. Videtur quod . . . sed contra . . .
in short.
I do not propose to enter into an analysis of


Wilde’s works, because this book is by no means
intended to be a book of literary criticism. lam
quite ready to take anyone on about them, if and
when it becomes necessary, but all I intend to
do now is to put on record my high opinion of
him as a writer, as I have done in this book, and
to give it the support of my considered critical
judgment for whatever that is worth. I think
that, having attacked him unfairly, or allowed
Crosland to do it, I owe him that much. And
even so I find myself constrained to take
something away from him by saying that he talked
better than he wrote. This was to my advantage,
of course, because I heard him talk for about
four years before he went to prison and again for
about three years after he came out. I think he
talked even better after he had been in prison
than he did before, though he had almost entirely
lost the faculty of writing in those last three years.
If he had only lived another twenty years (he
was only forty-nine when he died) he would, I
feel pretty certain, have got back the faculty he
had lost. His imprisonment more than half
killed him, and in my next chapter I will relate
what I think gave him the coup de grace.


CHAPTER VIII
I HAVE LATELY BEEN RE-READING FRANK HARRIS’S
Bernard Shaw, a Biography, which Mr Shaw sent to
me soon after it appeared, with the inscription:
“To Lord Alfred Douglas, another Victim of
Frank’s failings as a biographer, from G. Bernard
Shaw.” As a portrait of Shaw, whom I scarcely
know personally though we have often corre-
sponded, I should say it is about equivalent to
the sort of “counterfeit presentment” which one
can obtain for a shilling (eighteenpence coloured)
on the pier at Brighton. As a self-revelation of
Harris, on the other hand, it is a masterpiece.
I have never read anything more spiteful than
the persistent disparagement of Shaw which
Harris carries out all through the book; and the
general impression of Harris produced on the
mind of his readers is enormously heightened
by the suave magnanimity of Shaw’s brief
“ Postscript” to the book written very shortly after
Harris’s death. (Shaw actually corrected the
proofs and saw the book through the press.)
I hope that the fellow-feeling with myself as
another of Harris’s victims which Mr Shaw


wittily expresses in his inscription quoted above
has by now engendered in him a revisal of his
opinion of Harris’s Life and Confessions of Oscar
Wilde, which up till a short time ago he still
persisted in regarding as a splendid biography. 1
I knew Wilde much better than Harris did
(Shaw scarcely knew him at all), and I can
truthfully say that Harris’s account of Wilde is
quite as false, misleading, and perfidious as his
account of me in the same book.
Moreover, Harris omits to mention in his Life
of Wilde that two or three months before Wilde’s
death they had a violent quarrel over Harris’s
appropriation and spoiling of what should have
been another of Wilde’s inimitable comedies,
Mr and Mrs Daventry.
It would not be fair to say that Harris stole
the play from Wilde, because Wilde in the begin-
ning agreed that Harris should collaborate with
him in it. What happened was that Wilde
created the play in his mind and told it over and
over again to various people, including myself.
This was in the last year of his life, and naturally
all those friends of his who were privileged to
hear the story of the play, scene by scene, from
his lips, were continually urging him to write it.
1 Since this was written Mr Shaw has actually, in an interview
published in the Manchester Guardian , given an undertaking in the
desired direction, as the result of reading Mr Robert Harborough
Sherard’s recently published book on Wilde.


But this Oscar declared himself utterly unable
to do.
“Directly I sit down to write,” he said, “I
begin to think of the past and all the frightful
things that have happened to me, and I become
paralysed and cannot write a word.”
One day, in Paris, at lunch at Durand’s in the
rue Royale, when I was present, Harris said to
him, “Look here, Oscar, you will never write this
play; you say yourself that you know you will
never be able to do it. Why not let me write
the play and get it produced in London, and we
will go fifty-fifty in the profits?”
After a great deal of discussion Oscar agreed,
the real deciding consideration being that Harris
gave him fifty pounds as “advance royalties” on
the play. In those days poor Oscar would do
anything for fifty pounds, and this sum was
actually the first and the last penny that he
received from the play, which was produced by
Mrs Patrick Campbell and ran for a hundred
and fifty nights in London. The name of the
author was advertised as “Frank Harris.” Not
a word was said about the fact that the plot and
the best part of the dialogue had been invented
by Oscar Wilde, and Harris put into his own
pocket all the money received in royalties, which
must have amounted to at least a couple of
thousand pounds.
66


It was really Wilde’s rage at this treatment
from the man who, with the assistance of the late
Robert Ross, afterwards succeeded in imposing
himself on a vast number of gullible people
(especially in America) as his greatest friend,
that killed him. Almost more than by the loss
of the money of which he was defrauded, his
fury was caused by the way in which Harris’s
coarse and heavy-handed treatment of the plot
which Wilde had confided to him ruined the
delicate fabric of his play.
How good the play would have been if Wilde
had written it himself can be judged by the fact
that even after Harris had spoilt it, it had a very
considerable success, due, of course, largely to
the genius of Mrs Patrick Campbell, who, I need
hardly say, was quite ignorant of the injustice to
Wilde, always one of her greatest admirers, that
was being perpetrated.
Readers of this account of what is, in effect, a
terrible tragedy, will find it difficult to under-
stand how helpless Wilde’s position was at that
time. He had nothing in writing from Harris,
he was an ex-convict, an exile from England,
utterly discredited and almost universally ostra-
cised, He had no money except three pounds a
week from his wife’s estate and what I gave him
(the dates and figures of my cheques to him are
given in the appendix to my Autobiography) , and


he was thus at the mercy of Harris, who, being
the vainest of men, was furious because Wilde
said he had spoilt the play. Harris’s answer to
Wilde’s protest was in effect, “The play is mine.
/ wrote it. You admit that you could not do it
yourself. I changed and enormously improved
it; it was I that got Mrs Campbell to put it on,
and you now say yourself that it is not your play
and that I have ruined it. Well, if that is the
line you take, I see no reason why I should give
you any further share of the profits; if the play
is not yours, why should you share in the profits?
You have already had fifty pounds, and if you
had behaved properly I would have given you
half of what I got. As it is, in view of your
attitude, I repudiate you altogether. The play
is mine and I shall keep all I get from it.”
In the middle of all this, and as a result of it,
Oscar Wilde became very ill and died.
The whole of this story, with details that I am
unable to supply personally, will shortly appear
in a book about Wilde, Harris and myself,
which has been written by Mr Thomas Bell, who
was Harris’s private secretary at the time and
who now resides in California. Mr Bell sent
me the typescript of the book a month or two
ago.
At that time, being young in actual years and
younger still in my outlook on life, I also was one


of Harris’s victims, for I admired him enormously
and regarded him as a wonderful man.
I must say in justice to myself that, being even
in those days a fairly good critic, I never thought
as highly of his writing as others did. I did not,
for example, put him in the same street as Oscar
Wilde either as an author or an artist. My
admiration was, I think, as far as I can now
recapture its motive force, the admiration for
his hero of the typical English public-school boy
which, setting aside my gift as a poet, I really
still was in those days, although I was nearly thirty.
I admired Harris because he was, as I believed,
“a hell of a man,” one who was capable of
knocking out a prize-fighter in a street “scrap”;
who had been a cowboy, a mining prospector
and a lot of other romantic things and, as he had
often told me, a dead shot with a gun or a rifle.
That he was also editor of the Fortnightly and
later of the Saturday Review and that his book of
short stories, Elder Conklin, had been proclaimed
as a masterpiece by many good judges, including
Wilde himself, of course added to his attraction
in my eyes, but it was his supposed fighting,
sporting, athletic and adventurous record that
really “got” me.
I admired him for very much the same reasons
as, long before, when I was a child, I admired
my father.


That Harris really was a crack shot I subse-
quently verified, to my great satisfaction I may
say, because someone to whom I had boasted of
his powers had laughed at me and told me that his
stories of his sporting and athletic featswere all lies.
They were not lies. He came to stay with my
brother, the late Lord Queensberry, at a place
called Smedmore in Dorsetshire which my
brother had taken.
There were two or three thousand acres of
shooting there, and the bag included a good lot
of hares. My brother and I used sometimes in
the evenings to amuse ourselves by “stalking”
these hares with a rook-rifle. You got as close
as you could to one behind a wall or hedge, and
shot it. We used to get them sitting, at about
thirty or forty yards. You had to shoot straight
and hit them in the head to do this.
I took Harris out one evening on a hare-
stalking expedition when he was staying with us,
and he amazed me by shooting three consecutive
running (not sitting) hares through the head
with a rifle at a distance of about thirty-five
yards. I have shot running hares through the
head with a rifle myself at a much later date,
but Harris shot three with three consecutive
shots. It was a wonderful performance, and he
was also, I found out, a first-class partridge and
pheasant shot with a gun.


At the time of the South African War, Harris
was, needless to say, strongly pro-Boer. Never-
theless, he wrote a book or pamphlet called How
to Beat the Boers, and when I told him I thought
of “joining up” in the Duke of Cambridge’s
Corps he encouraged me, and presented me with
a beautiful double-barrelled sporting rifle from
Purdey’s. Of course I would not have been
allowed to use this rifle if I had gone to the war,
but this does not appear to have occurred to
either of us.
After I had failed to get into the Duke of
Cambridge’s Corps, I exchanged the double-
barrelled rifle which Harris had given me for a
pair of sporting guns. Harris for his part got
£2OOO out of me some months later by an in-
genious swindle which I have described at length
in my Autobiography.
At that time, my father having died a few
months before, I had a certain amount of money,
and as I was living on my capital, I imagined
myself, being a foolish youth, to be very well off.
So I took the loss of the £2OOO which Harris
got out of me quite calmly, and I went on being
very friendly with him till the year 1908, when
I was editing The Academy. At that time he tried
to blackmail me by sending an emissary from his
Vanity Fair office to warn me that he (Harris) had
written a damning article about me and “the


Wilde Scandal” which was to appear in his next
number, but which, I was told by his emissary,
would be cancelled if I would consent to “a
small financial transaction, say a couple of
hundred pounds! ”
I told the emissary to go back to Harris and
tell him that if he put a single libellous word
about me in his paper he would, within twenty-
four hours, find himself in the dock at Bow
Street, and I also invited him not to forget that
I too had a paper, and that I was quite as capable
of writing unpleasant articles as he was.
From that day forth Vanity Fair did not contain
one solitary derogatory word about me, but The
Academy contained a lot of not altogether good-
natured “roasting” of Harris. For weeks I used
to put paragraphs in my paper making fun of
him and referring to him as “the world’s greatest
wearer of rabbit-skin coats.” (We had a standing
joke at that time in The Academy about “the
world’s greatest,” arising out of the fact that
some of the papers were in the habit of referring
to Mr H. G. Wells as “the world’s greatest
novelist” —which struck me and my assistant
editor, T. W. H. Crosland, as funny.)
I never went beyond chaff in The Academy , and
Harris, of course, would have been perfectly
justified in replying in the same vein in his own
paper.


Instead of doing this he made several attempts
to make friends with me, all of which I rejected.
He twice came up to me with outstretched hand
in the Cafe Royal and I ignored him. I forgave
him for doing me out of £2OOO and never even
reproached him, but I could not forgive attempted
blackmail. By acting as I did I turned him into
a bitter enemy, and he subsequently revenged
himself on me by writing his Life and Confessions
of Oscar Wilde, which he published himself in
America without a publisher’s imprimatur. In
this book he deliberately falsified all the facts
about my relations with Wilde and poisoned
public opinion against me in a way which, even
with his own written and published recantation
to help me, I have never been entirely able to
get over, at any rate in the U.S.A., where they
still take Harris seriously.
If his book had been published in England
(which of course is absurd, as no English pub-
lisher would have published such a book) I
would easily have been able to squash him in
the Law Courts by a civil or criminal action.
But as things were, it was impossible for me to
answer him, and it was just this fact that made
me write my Autobiography, published in 1929.
So I suppose in the long run his attack was to
my benefit, as it forced me to make a reply
concerning which Harris’s one faithful friend,


Bernard Shaw (I call him this to Shaw’s great
credit, because Shaw stuck to him in the last
three years of his life after nearly everyone else
turned against him), wrote to me: “You have
made your position quite clear; and you need
not fear that any biographer will be powerful
enough to write you down.”
So Providence brings good out of evil and
makes our enemies minister to our protection
and comfort even when they think they are
destroying us.


CHAPTER IX
I THINK THE MOST REMARKABLE AND ARRESTING
thing about Wilde was that without any apparent
effort he exerted a sort of enchantment which
transmuted the ordinary things of life and in-
vested them with strangeness and glamour. The
popular idea of him as a man who fired off
epigrams at intervals and was continually being
amusing, is quite inadequate to explain his charm
and fascination. He had a way of looking at
life, and a point of view, which were magical in
their effect. He was a supreme consoler. One
met him, perhaps feeling gloomy and depressed
as the result of some trouble or setback, and in
five minutes he had altered the whole aspect of
the situation and everything became couleur de
rose. Certainly the process repeated again and
again involved an infinite amount of wit and
playful humour, but it was also supported by
much profundity of thought and a deep insight.
He saw things and events in a strange and illu-
minative way, and as I put it in the sonnet I
wrote about him soon after his death:


He conjured wonder out of emptiness
Till mean things put on Beauty like a dress,
And all the world was an enchanted place.
It is one of the curses of our humanity that
memory fails. If I could remember only one
hundredth part of the things he said, I could
write a book which would charm the whole
world, but, alas, apart from what I have recorded
in my previous books, it is generally only
trivialities that remain, and several of his best
stories, which he told but never wrote, as he was
always just going to do, have been retailed and
completely ruined by Frank Harris. If it were
not so I would like to tell the story he invented
and told me of “The Sphere of Professor
Tomlinson” and “Le Systems du Docteur Blanche .”
But Harris has, I believe, massacred them both
in one of his books. I can think now only of
absurd things, like Oscar giving me lunch in a
second-rate restaurant somewhere out of London
(I think it must have been Torquay), and the
melancholy English waiter suggesting “a nice
piece of cod,” to whom Oscar said, “I hardly
think cod is a very nice fish, is it?” and then,
perceiving a pained look in the waiter’s face,
“Oh, no doubt the cod is a splendid swimmer,
admirable for swimming purposes, but not for
eating,” and the dawning of joy in the waiter’s
harassed countenance when he realised that a
joke was toward. And then again, the same


technique applied to the President of Magdalen,
Warren, when he and Oscar and I were sitting
in his study on the ground floor facing the front
“Quad” (Oscar always called on the President
when he was up in Oxford staying with me).
Said Oscar, gravely, “I am thinking of pre-
senting a statue of myself to the College,” and
Warren’s face of consternation changing to de-
lighted relief to find the proposal was not serious
when Oscar added, “Yes, to stand in the quad
here, a colossal equestrian statue.”
He rarely wrote a letter that was not full of
delightful wit and humour, and he wrote some
which were so beautiful and touching that they
would have melted a heart of stone. When I
think that I sat in front of a fire in the year 1912
and threw one hundred and fifty of them into it,
one after another, only keeping about thirty, I
feel almost suicidal. At any rate I can say that
nobody will ever be able to accuse me of being
mercenary, for if I had them now, and was
prepared to sell them, they would be worth
thousands of pounds!
Poor Oscar has lately been made the victim of
an aggravated form of detraction, which consists
in quoting his own sayings and attributing them
to someone else as having been used against
him. Thus a short time back Sir Max Pemberton,
writing an article in the Evening Mews, began his


article with a statement that Whistler had said
of Wilde, “He is a man who has no enemies but
is thoroughly disliked by his friends.” I wrote
to the editor of the Evening Mews and also to
Sir Max Pemberton pointing out that the words
attributed to Whistler were actually written by
Wilde himself in his book The Picture of Dorian
Gray (Chapter 15, page 2), where they are
applied to an imaginary “Ernest Harrowden,”
who was “one of those middle-aged mediocrities
so common in London clubs who have no
enemies, but are thoroughly disliked by their
friends.” However, I am glad to say that Sir
Max handsomely acknowledged his mistake and
inserted a correction in the paper a few days
later, though he rather spoilt the effect of this
by repeating a hoary old chestnut about Whistler
and Wilde which I happen to -know had no
foundation in fact.
This attributing to Whistler of things that
Wilde said is one of the standing dishes served up
from time to time by persons who deal in second-
er third-hand humour. The truth is that while
there are a mass of really witty and brilliant
sayings recorded of Wilde, most of which are
actually printed and published in his own books
and plays, Whistler has left no record of anything
more mildly witty than his “Ten o’Clock” and
the ill-tempered self-damnatory “The Baronet


and the Butterfly.” To compare Whistler to Wilde
as a wit or a conversationalist is like comparing
Mr Beverley Nichols to Voltaire or Dr Johnson,
though to do him justice I would say that Mr
Nichols is quite as witty as Whistler ever was
and much less ill-natured.
After Oscar came out of prison, during the last
three years of his life, his wit and erudition and
amazing conversational powers were not in the
least diminished; on the contrary, he talked
better then ever. The brilliant French writer,
the late Ernest Lajeunesse, himself a wit and
inspired talker, who was a great friend of mine
and of Oscar’s, wrote an article about him just
after his death giving a wonderful impression of
what Wilde was in those days. He describes his
conversation as utterly amazing and eblouissanf.
It is a pretty thing, surely, that while French
men of letters who knew him vie with each other
in paying homage to his brilliance and charm,
English journalists and English editors should
resort to the meanness of using his own written
words as mud-slinging missiles to be thrown at
his memory after he is dead. Who was it, I
wonder, who started the legend that the English
are a chivalrous race?
After a lifetime of experience of their shabby
ways, one begins to get a little tired of hearing
about their “sense of fair play” and “sportsman


ship.” This fatuous self-praise is continually
cropping up in leading articles in the newspapers.
The only foreigner who has been clever enough
to realise how delighted the English are to get
testimonials of that kind not written by them-
selves is Monsieur Andre Maurois, and he is a
“best-seller” in England in consequence. Not
that I wish to say anything against Monsieur
Maurois. His Ariel about Shelley was delightful,
and his Colonel Bramble is a joy for ever. He was
not perhaps so successful with Byron, and I
wrote to him and asked him why at the end of
his book he gives a list of Byron’s illegitimate
descendants (none of whom are now alive) but
makes no mention at all of my cousin Judith,
Lady Wentworth (Wilfrid Blunt’s daughter), who
is Byron’s legitimate great-granddaughter, and
her children.
Monsieur Maurois, in courteously replying to
my letter, told me that he had not mentioned
Lady Wentworth or her mother Lady Anne
(Byron’s granddaughter, whose mother was Ada
“sole daughter of my house and home”) because
he was not sure that Lady Wentworth would like
it! Whereas, of course, her relationship to
Byron is (naturally) a source of great pride and
satisfaction to her. Her mother, Lady Anne,
was devoted to Byron’s memory and cherished
relics of him which she possessed and which are


now the property of Judith Wentworth. Olive,
my wife, who was devoted to Cousin Anne, and
who not only has a great cult for Byron but
probably knows more about him than anyone
else living, has often told me of the conversations
she had with her about her grandfather. Olive
is a perfect encyclopaedia about Byron, and I am
always telling her that she ought to write yet
one more book about him.


CHAPTER X
ACCORDING TO ST THOMAS AQUINAS, THE FUNCTION
of poetry is to suggest certain truths by means of
images, metaphors, similes and examples, and he
says that the instinct by which we recognise good
poetry is something “ angelic ” which comes “from
the soul and not merely from the brain.”
Although at one stage of my chequered career,
when I was living with my mother in a country
house in Sussex, Shelley’s Folly, near Lewes,
round about 1915-1918, I read most of the
Summa Theologica in an edition which had the
Latin on one side and a French translation on
the other, I had forgotten this, until the other
day I was reminded of it by reading the report,
which I found in my own bookshelves, of a
lecture given at a meeting of the Catholic Poetry
Society in 1931 by the Dominican Father John
Baptist Reeves. (I myself subsequently, a month
or two later, took the chair at a meeting of the
same society when Father Bede Jarrett gave a
lecture on “The Poetry of St Thomas Aquinas.”)
I think what St Thomas, who was himself a
great poet, said about that angelic faculty by


which we recognise good poetry is the pro-
foundest thing that has ever been said about
poetry by anyone, and it is a godsend to me.
It explains, in a flash of illumination, why the
beauty of poetry is revealed to some and hidden
from others. Lest this should be taken as vain
boasting on my part (for of course I mean to
imply that I am one of the not very large number
of people who know good poetry infallibly when
they see it), let me humbly point out that wisdom
is sometimes “hidden from the wise and prudent
and revealed unto babes.”
Mr Bernard Shaw says, he wrote it to me in a
letter once, that I have an “infantile complex,”
and that I remind him of Mrs McStinger’s baby
in Dombey and Son, who was “perpetually making
a low-spirited noise.” This delightfully witty
pronouncement was made in response to a letter
in which I had reproached him for lending his
countenance to my enemy and detractor Frank
Harris by writing an appendix to Harris’s
poisonous Life and Confessions of Oscar Wilde,
which has lately been brilliantly exposed by
Robert Sherard as the greatest literary fraud
that has ever been palmed off on the public.
My answer to Mr Shaw was that all the best
poets made a low-spirited noise from time to
time when they were writing their best poetry
{e.g. Shakespeare in his Sonnets), and that we


have it on the best authority that the only way
to get into the Kingdom of Heaven is, precisely,
by having an infantile complex: “Unless ye
become as little children,” etc. I do not claim
that my retort silenced Mr Shaw, but at any rate
he said no more, and as he had already, in his
letter to me, undertaken to remove his contri-
bution to Harris’s book from any future editions
of that book, I hope I have made it clear that
he behaved in a perfectly kind (not to say
angelic) manner.
When I say that St Thomas’s pronouncement
about poetry is a godsend to me, what I mean
is that it explains what some people might call
my arrogance on the subject of poetry. I have
never had any hesitation in contradicting even
the most learned critics on that one subject (let
alone Mr St John Ervine), because in the first
place I am a poet myself, as even Mr Shaw has
admitted, and in the second place, I recognise
that I possess the angelic quality which is bound
up with my “infantile complex.” I do not see
how I can put it more modestly than that. It
is a fact that the best poets are very often what
the world calls fools. They share that distinc-
tion, or whatever you like to call it, with saints.
Bad poetry can no more “get by” me than the
Emperor’s imaginary clothes in Hans Andersen’s
story “got by” the child in the crowd who per


ceived that he was perfectly naked. I have
never in my life been taken in by bad poetry or
failed to appreciate good poetry. If someone
says that I am just using the old philistine gag,
“I know what I like,” I will not dispute it. I
will merely point out that the greatest critic in
the world, in the long run, can say no more and
no less; and that having been a poet all my life,
I at any rate start with a good deal in my favour
as a critic which is quite out of the reach of the
great majority.
Because I say that I know good poetry when
I see it, it by no means follows that I am not
prepared to give reasons and discuss them with
anyone whom I recognise as an intellectual peer.
lam full of matter on the subject and not without
pretty answers if necessity arises to use them.
But, as I have said before, this book is not
primarily a book of literary criticism, though it
begins to look rather like it, and I am only
clearing the ground and taking up a standpoint.
Mr Shaw may or may not be flattered if I tell
him that I find many points of resemblance
between him and Oscar Wilde. Both Shaw and
Wilde are witty, and both set out to preach, and
both do it well. I put Wilde above Shaw, in
the literary sense, simply because Wilde (at his
best again) is a poet and Shaw is not, though
Cashel Byron’s Profession is really astonishingly


good verse. Perhaps if Shaw had tried hard
enough he might have succeeded in being a poet,
but he never entered the lists, so he cannot
receive the crown of bays. No doubt he would
say that he despises it. Anyhow, he cannot have
it. The extraordinary thing is that whereas
Shaw has preached what he considers to be
morality all his life, the general effect of his
works is subversive and immoral in the highest
degree, whereas Wilde, who deliberately tried in
certain of his writings to preach immorality, to
defend sin, and to pose as a wicked man, was, as
I have already pointed out, a moralist malgre lui.
The fact is that it is impossible for a man who
is really a poet not to be fundamentally on the
side of the angels (St Thomas’s angels), and it is
impossible for a man who is against the angels
(as Shaw is, whether he admits it or not) to be a
great writer. Wilde was a sensualist, but so was
David the Psalmist at one period of his life.
Wilde was betrayed and enslaved by his own
sensual nature, but he was never completely
overcome by it. The last thing he ever wrote
was The Ballad of Reading Gaol, which was a
great poem and a great Act of Faith, and the last
act of his life was to become a Catholic.
Shaw, on the other hand, I had always be-
lieved to be an ascetic till I read his own pro-
testation to the contrary in Frank Harris’s Life


of him to which I referred in my eighth chapter.
It was a great shock to me to read Shaw’s
admissions in his letters quoted at length and
verbatim by Harris in his book. I wrote and told
him as much at the time, after he had sent me
the book, as already related. Shaw always used
to say that he was a Puritan. It was the one
thing I admired him for, even while I most
disapproved of him and his philosophy, if you
can call Marxism a philosophy. I still hope
that what he wrote to Harris was not true and
that he was “showing off” when he boasted of
“affairs” with women. My infantile complex
coming out again, I suppose; but let me remind
Mr Shaw that it is a terrible thing to shatter
the illusions of even “the least of these little
ones.”
Shaw’s renouncing of his claim to be con-
sidered a Puritan dethrones him in a million
minds and incidentally spoils my antithesis. The
point I wanted to make was, of course, that
Wilde the sensualist was really a much more
moral force in the world than Shaw the Puritan.
As things are now, and in view of Shaw’s
abdication and descent from his pedestal, and
his admission that he is, in these regards, just an
ordinary man of the world, I am afraid he comes
out even worse than I intended when I started
to compare him with Wilde. I was going to


call him an immoralist malgre lui, but what am
I to call him now?
I wish Mr Shaw would think it out and tell me,
if he can, where I have gone wrong in this thesis
about Wilde and himself. Of course if Mr Shaw
adopted the attitude that he bitterly repented
his lapses from purity and that he is doing, or
intends to do, penance for them, that would put
him right at once. But that was certainly not
the attitude adopted in his letters to Harris; and
would he ever admit, has he ever admitted, that
he was wrong about anything? And even if he
took the course I have suggested, what about
his works which will live after him, unless he
adopts a Prospero-like attitude towards them?
For years he has worked night and day to turn
this country and men’s minds more and more to
the Left. He has had incredible success. It
was a sort of joke when it began, and most people
persisted in regarding it as a joke long after it
became a serious menace. I never did. I saw
what he was doing quite clearly as long ago as
1909 when I was editing The Academy. I quar-
relled with him then and attacked him in my
paper, regretfully, for I always had a sneaking
sort of liking for him, and lately, during the last
five years, I have come to feel real affection for
him. He is the outstanding literary figure of his
age. But I am much more serious than he is,


and I refuse to make jokes about serious things.
The four last things, for instance. The truth is
that Shaw has corrupted the whole country.
He is the God of the “Intellectuals” (or he was
at any rate till a year or two ago). It is he that
is responsible for the phenomenon of Oxford
Undergraduate “Communists” who read The
New Statesman and think it brilliant to protest
that they would never fight for King and
Country, and whose Mecca (theoretically, not
practically, of course) is Moscow. It would not
be difficult to trace back to him almost all the
false ideals and poisonous heresies that permeate
this other Eden, demi-Paradise, this land of such
dear souls (Sir Stafford Cripps, for instance, and
Sir Patrick Hastings). He is at the back of
Pacifism, The League of Idiocy, and Collective
Imbecility, which, added up all together, and
considering what is now going on in Russia and
Spain, have long ceased to look to discerning
eyes like anything less than Antichrist.
All through his life he has steadily worked to
undermine the bedrock of morality and religion.
He describes himself in one of his prefaces as a
“Bible-smasher,” so he cannot pretend that I
am calumniating him. lam told now that he is
beginning to come nearer to Christianity. I fail
to see any signs of it in his recent works, while
I regard St Joan as an outrage not only on


Christianity but on history and common sense. It
pays very well in England to be a revolutionary
and a Bible-smasher for the greater part of your
life and then to “come round” a little and admit
that perhaps there may be something in religion
after all. Persons who adopt these tactics get
far more honour and much better treatment
than those who have merely been on the right
side all the time. The same principle applies in
politics. In fact it is almost infallible. If you
want to end up as a member of the Cabinet in
a Conservative Government, start by being a
Socialist.


CHAPTER XI
SINCE I HAVE CLAIMED WILDE AS A MORALIST,
even in spite of himself, in contrast to Shaw, who
is for ever “preaching” (his own word used by
him in his letter to me quoted in the Preface to
the third edition of my Autobiography) what he
pretends to consider moral doctrine, but which
is in fact grossly immoral and subversive, I think
I ought to “justify” on the principle I applied
to the poetry of Pope in my sixth chapter.
Well, here is a quotation from Wilde’s Intentions
in “The Decay of Lying” :
In the English Church a man succeeds not through
his faculty for belief but through his capacity for
disbelief. Ours is the only Church where the sceptic
stands at the altar, and where St Thomas is regarded
as the ideal apostle. Many a worthy clergyman who
passes his life in admirable works of kindly charity,
lives and dies unnoticed and unknown; but it is
sufficient for some shallow uneducated passman of
either University to get up in his pulpit and express
his doubts about Noah’s Ark, or Balaam’s ass, or
Jonah and the whale, for half London to flock to
hear him, and to sit open-mouthed in rapt admira-
tion at his superb intellect.
How is that, coming from the supposedly im-
moral Wilde? It is profoundly true, and it is a


prophetic utterance too, for at the time Wilde
wrote those words no one had ever heard of
Dr Inge or Bishop Barnes of Birmingham. These
two “ecclesiastics” (save the mark!) are by far
the most popular publicists among the clergy of
the Church of England. Whenever a daily paper
wants to get a new “bright” feature into its
columns it is ten to one that it will pitch on Inge
or Barnes to supply it. Both these gentlemen
are celebrated for their unbelief in what are
considered by Christians to be essential Christian
dogmas. I admit that neither of them is what
Wilde calls an ignorant passman, but that only
makes their conduct worse.
I write as a Catholic, but my views on this
point are shared by a vast number of Anglicans,
ranging from the “Lowest” to the “Highest”
brand.
I used to meet Dr Russell Wakefield, the pre-
decessor of Dr Barnes as Bishop of Birmingham,
and in the last two or three years of his life I saw
a good deal of him and entertained him to
lunch in my mother’s house on two or three
occasions.
I once asked him what his opinion was of
Dr Inge and Dr Barnes. He replied: “I would
rather not speak about them, because I find it
impossible to put into Christian language what
I think of them.” Dr Russell Wakefield, of


course, was very “High Church,” but I have
heard similar expressions of opinion about Inge
and Barnes from extreme “Low” Evangelicals.
Contrast the passage from Intentions, which I
have quoted, with Shaw’s advice to me contained
in his letter mentioned above, to give up
Catholicism and take to “Marxism,” which,
according to him, ought to be enough “religion”
for any intelligent man. Here are his exact
words, in case anyone feels inclined to doubt
that the brilliant Shaw could possibly have said
anything so foolish. “I still hold that Creative
Evolution is the only religion in all the associa-
tions and implications whereof a fully cultivated
modern man can really persuade himself to
believe, unless he can content himself with
Marxism.” Of course one might argue that this
sort of writing is more foolish than immoral.
Mr Shaw can have it either way.
Consider his conception of the “fully cultivated
modern man persuading himself to believe” in
“ Creative Evolution.” What a revolting picture!
One either believes a thing or not in the sphere
of religion. It is not a question of persuading
oneself to believe or being “fully cultivated”
(■ i.e . according to Shaw’s definitions steeped to
the neck in every kind of crazy modern heresy).
It would be a pretty kind of religion which could
be grasped only by “fully cultivated modern”


men and women. Faith is a supernatural gift
and is the reward of goodwill and humility.
God resists the proud. And what is this silliness
about “modernity”? Does Mr Shaw seriously
think that because he is alive to-day and Plato
is dead and belongs to ancient history, that he
is superior in intelligence or cultivation to
Plato?
Let me quote from Paul Bekker’s The Story of
Music ;
But the theory [evolution] becomes unsound when-
ever it tries to make later developments appear
necessarily higher in the sense of absolute improve-
ment over what lies before. Here lies an error of
interpretation . . . only appearances change, so that
what takes place is a transformation and not a
development. . . . This idea (which was Goethe’s)
of metamorphosis as opposed to the idea of develop-
ment we must accept as the basis of approach to all
history. . . . Men have been at all times at least as
clever, at least as talented and as inventive as our-
selves. We have no right to look down on any
former times and speak of them as primitive. . . .
Bekker is writing about art in general and
music in particular, but what he says can be
taken as being true about the whole history of
ideas. Whatever is true now was true five thou-
sand years ago. The only higher development
of truth that has ever occurred in the history of
mankind was the Christian Revelation, and the
most wonderful thing about Christianity is, pre


cisely, that it does not require cleverness or
brilliance, or learning, even, to get hold of it.
It is the religion of the poor and feeble and
foolish (in the worldly sense) as well as that of
the great and noble and glorious and learned
and gifted.
There is to my mind a fundamental stupidity
about the atheist or the agnostic. I have seldom
known an agnostic who was not also a crashing
bore. Normally one would feel sorry for such
persons, and they are, of course, just the sort of
people whom a saint would pity and pray for
most; but if one is not a saint it is very difficult
to suffer them gladly and not be exasperated by
their absurd assumption of superiority and their
utter inability to see the obvious. It is as if a
mole were to boast of its blindness. I knew a
Judge who publicly announced more than once
on the Bench that he had “no ear for music and
still less for poetry.” So far from feeling this as
a disadvantage, he boasted of it as if it were a
great distinction. Of course a man who has no
ear for music or poetry may be a perfectly decent
person (in spite of the opinion that Shakespeare
expressed about “the man that hath no music
in his soul”); and provided he did not actually
advertise his defects as if they were virtues, one
might have a great deal of sympathy with him;
but when he boasts of these defects he rouses


exasperation and contempt. If this is the case
with a man who has a deficient ear for music
and poetry, how much more is it so in the case
of a man who tells you that he cannot believe in
God or in a future life and who announces this
(as most agnostics or atheists do) as if it were
a sign of superior intelligence? I have met one
such man, who told me once that even if he saw
a miracle happen he would not believe in it.
In the race for the “Imbecility Stakes” such a
man represents the deaf adder thrown in at
seven stone.
The deaf adder is credited in the Scriptures
with stopping her ears. This seems rather un-
fair, because as a matter of fact she is not
responsible for the process. She is born in that
condition, and consequently the voice of the
charmer, charm he never so wisely, produces no
kind of reaction in her. (I am not responsible
for making her a female; it appears that deaf
adders are always of the female sex.) Why then
should she be blamed? The agnostic, on the
other hand, cannot be said to be born that way.
No one is born with a disability to believe in God.
The state of mind of the agnostic is really brought
about by a process which may justly be called
stopping the ears to the voice of the charmer.
If a man takes so little account of his own soul
and his own immortal destiny as to starve the


one and ignore the other, he can really be said
to be a wilful stopper of his ears. When on the
top of that he calls himself an “Intellectual,” his
state of mind is of the kind which is calculated
“to make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts
of ever-angry bears.” His mere existence is a
perpetual temptation to Providence, and Provi-
dence in the long run invariably succumbs to
that kind of temptation.
Of course I admit that some people may find
it difficult to believe in God and in a future life.
If they regret it and wish that they could change
their state, they are not by any means beyond
the reach of hope. But if they glory in their
wretchedness and are actually proud of it, and
consider themselves superior to believers, they
invite ultimate defeat and misery. To say, as
they very often do, that they are not afraid of
death is merely absurd. Many people are not
afraid of death, simply because they have not
got enough imagination to have any kind of
apprehension of what it will be like. It is use-
less therefore for them to say that they do not
fear death, because they cannot possibly know
how they will feel when the time comes. Ninety-
nine people out of a hundred never think about
death at all till they get very ill or till someone
they love dies. Whereas it is only common sense
that one ought to think of it every day. Innocence


alone can preserve a man from the ultimate
fear of death, and by innocence I do not mean
the state of a very young child who is held to be
incapable of doing anything seriously wrong, but
I mean the state to which any man can attain,
whatever he may have done, by certain definite
processes which religion provides. No such
state of mind could possibly be induced by
Marxism or by “Creative Evolution,” which (if
it means anything at all and is not mere gibberish)
is about as potent in the face of death as
“ Collective Security ” would be in the case of war.
Why are Socialists and “Intellectuals” always
the slaves of catch-words and phrases?


CHAPTER XII
THE LATE T. W. H. CROSLAND, WHO WAS FOR MORE
than two years my assistant-editor when I was
editing The Academy, was a strange and remark-
able man. That he had genius I do not think
there is any doubt. His appearance and his
usual style of conversation were such that it was
always difficult for anyone to believe that he had
a sensitive soul and a passion for beauty, and
that he was, at his best, a fine poet. As I men-
tioned in my Autobiography, he always looked
rather as if he had been to bed in his clothes,
and when annoyed he exhibited an almost
ferocious aspect. Someone once wittily described
him as looking like an inspired bus conductor;
but that really is a libel on the present-day bus
conductor, who as often as not is distinctly smart
and dapper. The old-fashioned type of bus
conductor of Victorian days, who was still occa-
sionally to be seen right up to the War, looked
quite different and occasionally not at all unlike
Crosland.
When Crosland was on the Outlook on one
occasion he wrote anonymously a very fine poem


which appeared in that weekly paper. A certain
very “precious” and willowy young gentleman
read it and admired it immensely, which was
greatly to the credit of his taste. So greatly
impressed was he that he determined that he
would not cease from mental strife till he had
met and spoken to the author of so much lyrical
beauty. Accordingly he went to the office of
the paper and asked the Editor if he might be
privileged to see the author of “this exquisite
poem.” The Editor looked rather dubious, but
finally called up an office-boy and said to him,
“Take this gentleman round to see Mr Crosland.”
Crosland was round at the printer’s seeing the
paper through the press, and when they reached
the door of the room where he was working, the
boy went in and informed him that a young
gentleman wished to see him as the author of the
poem in the last number of the Outlook. “All
right,” said Crosland, “I don’t mind; show him
in,” The young gentleman advanced delicately
and beheld Crosland sitting in his shirt-sleeves,
without a waistcoat. His face was streaked with
ink, his hands were very far from clean, his
hair hung dankly over his forehead, on which
drops of sweat caused by his exertions, mental
and physical, were glistening, and as the visitor
entered the room Crosland looked up and said,
“Here you are, I’m the bluidy poet.” History


does not relate what happened after that, but I
rather think the young hopeful gentleman made
a rapid “get-away.”
Crosland was like Falstaff in that he was not
only witty himself but the cause of wit in others.
He was also liable to meet with odd adventures.
He had a habit of “roaming the vast live town”
at all hours of the day or night. He suffered a
good deal from a “dicky” heart, which, like the
wedding guest in “The Ancient Mariner,” he
was constantly tapping, and his apparently aim-
less walks were the result of the restlessness which
a bumpy heart engenders.
He told me one day in the office of The Academy
that as he was wandering about the evening before,
somewhere in the East End, he came across a
theatre. Ido not know where the theatre was,
but I gathered it was in a very slummy part and
that it was the kind of theatre, which has now
almost ceased to exist, where the best seats were
eighteenpence and the pit was fourpence. He
thought he would go in and have a look at the
performance, so he took a seat in the front row
of the pit. Sitting next to him was a dirty little
girl aged about five. The play was a melodrama
about Russia, and at the moment when Crosland
arrived the villain of the piece, who was a wicked
man with a large black moustache, had got the
heroine, whose name was Olga, in a very tight


corner. He grasped her by the wrist, and said,
“Olga, you are now in my power; will you
marry me?” “Never,” replied Olga. “Again
I ask you, for the last time, Olga, will you be
my bride?” said the villain. “I would rather
die,” replied Olga. “Very well, then,” said the
villain, “if you will not be my bride, you shall
be my paramower.”
At this point, the little girl sitting next to
Crosland nudged him in the ribs with her elbow
and said, “’Ark at the swine!”
I told this story to Frank Harris when I last
saw him in Nice, and he has put it into his book
My Life and Loves and completely ruined it by
making the age of the girl “fifteen,” If one told
a story to Harris he invariably made a note of
it and reproduced it, generally completely spoiling
it, as his own story. In fact he not infrequently,
when his memory towards the end of his life was
getting shaky, actually repeated a story to the
very man who had told it to him a day or two
earlier.
Crosland’s description of Frank Harris’s book
mentioned above, My Life and Loves, was that it
was “deliberately calculated to make a goat
blush,” and so it certainly was; but Crosland
had a slightly soft spot in his heart about Harris,
because he was, he said (this was in or about
1910), evidently forgetting all about me and


The Academy, “the only editor in London who
had proper ideas of paying contributors and who
was not the merest village idiot about poetry.”
Harris certainly was a good judge of poetry, and
really loved it (though after reading the awful
nonsense he writes about them in his book The
Man Shakespeare it is impossible to believe that
he can ever have read Shakespeare’s sonnets);
but as to having proper ideas about paying
contributors, all I can say is that Crosland must
have been lucky, I wrote a quantity of rhymes,
about animals and so forth, for Harris when he
had Vanity Fair, and only succeeded, after a
desperate struggle, in getting very inadequately
paid for them. He also published two or three
of my sonnets and altogether omitted to pay me
anything at all for them.
Moreover, I remember Arthur Machen coming
to me when I was editing The Academy and
complaining bitterly (I was responsible for
Harris’s taking him on at Vanity Fair after he
had contributed a lot of very fine stuff to The
Academy) that he could not manage to get Harris
to pay him for a lot of work he had done for his
paper. This was just after I had finally quar-
relled and broken with Harris, after he tried
to blackmail me, as described in a previous
chapter.
I said to Machen, “All right, leave it to me;


I’ll make him pay.” It happened that in the
current number of Vanity Fair there was an
article by Frank Harris beginning with these
words; “The German for ‘envy’ is ‘schaden-
freude.’ ” So I wrote a playful note in the next
Academy which said, “Mr Frank Harris, in a
lachrymose article in Vanity Fair, informs his
readers that the German for ‘ envy ’ is ‘ schaden-
freude.’ Perhaps in his next number he will
kindly tell us what is the German for bilking
contributors.” A few days later Machen came
to see me and informed me that Harris had paid
him in full for all his contributions.
That is characteristic of me. lam wonderfully
good at getting money or things done for other
people, but very little good at getting the same
advantages for myself.
I did, however, on one occasion perform a re-
markable feat in the way of getting money (not
exactly for myself, but for The Academy, after I
had become its proprietor as well as its editor),
and as Crosland has something to do with the
story, I may now, as Mr Barlow says, proceed
to relate it. I was running the paper myself at
a heavy loss, idiotically of course, but I may say
quixotically, because I could not bear to part
with it, knowing that it would fall into what I
considered bad hands. Money was getting very
tight, and I said to Crosland, “L*ok here, if we


c’ant collect some money somehow, we shall
simply have to close this sheet down.” “Well,”
said Crosland, “why don’t you go to Howard de
Walden and ask him to put up a bit? After all,
he’s a poet himself, and we gave him the only
decent review he got for his dramatic poem
‘ Lanval. ’ ” “But I don’t know him,” I replied.
“What does that matter?” said Crosland. “Get
into a cab, drive to his house in Belgrave Square
and walk in on him. I’ll come with you and
wait for you at the nearest pub while you go in
and interview him.” Crosland went on to tell
me that he had been assured by those “in the
know” that Lord Howard de Walden would give
money to anyone who asked him for it for a
literary or artistic purpose. “The only thing is,”
he added, “that he always gives just half what
you ask.” This sounded like a fairy tale, where
the hero is given a magic formula to use, but
the idea appealed to me as a sporting one, so
off we went in a taxi. I dropped Crosland as
arranged at a public-house in the vicinity of
Belgrave Square and told him to wait for me in
the saloon bar. I then went on to Seaforth
House and asked if Lord Howard de Walden
was at home. I gave my name and was shown
in at once.
Lord Howard received me with the greatest
friendliness and thanked me for sending him the


paper every week and asked me what he could
do for me.
I told him how I was fixed and that if I did
not have immediate money the paper would
probably have to close down, and that I hoped
that he would help me. “I will give you de-
bentures, of course,” I said, “but it’s only fair to
warn you that they won’t be worth much more
than the paper they’re written on, but I am
only asking you as a very rich man to do what I
as a very poor man have done for the sake of
letters and poetry.”
“How much do you think it would take to
give the paper a chance of turning the corner?”
said Howard. I rapidly calculated in my mind
that fifteen hundred pounds was about as much
as I could hope to get, and mindful of Crosland’s
instructions, I replied, “Three thousand pounds.”
Howard paced the room for a few moments in
cogitation and then said, “I’m afraid I couldn’t
possibly let you have that, but I might manage
half,” I heard him as in a dream and thanked
him profusely. The magic formula had worked
exactly as it does in a fairy story. He went on
to say that if I would write or call to see his “man
of business, Mr So-and-so,” the matter could be
fixed up. But I had an inspiration and said,
“No, No men of business, please, Lord Howard;
can’t we manage it between ourselves as gentle


men and poets?” “Well, what do you suggest?”
said Howard. I saw Howard’s cheque-book
lying on the writing-table and I pointed to it
and said, “Why not give me a cheque right
away?” “Do you think I ought to do that?”
said he. “Yes,” I replied. “ I feel sure it
would be the best thing for you to do.” “Oh,
very well, if you think so,” replied his Lordship,
and without another word he wrote the cheque
and handed it to me.
I feel sure that Lord Howard de Walden will
not mind my telling this story which is so enor-
mously to the credit of his kindness and generosity.
Thanks to him the paper went on under my
editorship for at least another twelve months,
and he subsequently let me have five hundred
more. In the end he bought the paper from me
for two thousand pounds, in conjunction with
Lord Fitzwilliam, cancelling his debentures as
I did mine. I felt sore then because these two
enormously rich men did not continue to keep
me on as editor, but looking back at it now I
think it was my own fault. I did not play my
cards well, and I think Howard was “put off ” by
the number of “rows” that took place about that
time, and chiefly by the unfortunate dispute
with Freddie Manners-Sutton (afterwards Lord
Canterbury), which culminated in Crosland’s trial
and acquittal for libel at the Old Bailey.


Anyhow, I shall never cease to retain a feeling
of gratitude for what Lord Howard de Walden
did, and I leave my readers to imagine Crosland’s
feelings when I rejoined him in the saloon bar of
the Blue Lion or whatever the hostelry was called.
He really was quite flabbergasted, and his re-
spect for me rose a hundredfold. “You really
are a marvel, Douglas,” he said, “I never
thought you would get as much as that, even if
you succeeded in getting anything at all; but
why didn’t you ask him for ten thousand? It
would have come off (five thousand, I mean)
just as easily.”
Honestly I really believe it would!


CHAPTER XIII
in mr sorley brown’s The Life and Genius of
T. W. H. Crosland, a book which is packed full
of interesting stuff and which will be a mine of
information for future historians of the period
with which it deals, I find a very interesting
appreciation of Crosland by Mr Campbell-
Everdon, who was managing director of Vanity
Fair at the time when Frank Harris was editing
it. After Crosland’s death Mr Sorley Brown, his
biographer, called on Mr Campbell-Everdon and
asked if he could give him any recollections of
Crosland which might be useful for the book he
was writing.
Mr Campbell-Everdon said:
“I remember Crosland well, only too well.
A man of unquestionable genius, whose work
for the paper was of inestimable value. There
was admirable purpose and purity and nobility
of thought in everything he wrote. His poetry
was singularly beautiful. I cannot speak too
highly of his work. It was spotless, but the
man himself, I am sorry to say, was a tragedy,
and his own worst enemy,”


Mr Campbell-Everdon went on to explain
what he meant, which chiefly amounts to Cros-
land’s being a heavy drinker. “I am not a tee-
totaller,” said Mr Campbell-Everdon, “and I
frequently had a drink with Crosland, but the
trouble about him was that he always wanted to
have another and another and never wanted to
go home.”
Mr Campbell-Everdon also complained that
Crosland always wanted his week’s cheque in
advance. “When I refused to oblige him,” he
said, “he called me a protestant prig.” He also
gave Mr Sorley Brown an amusing account of
what happened when he tried to collect the
accounts for advertisements of such places as the
Savoy and other restaurants and hotels or shops.
He found that in most cases the money had
already been “taken out” by Frank Harris in
“furs for Nelly” (that is the lady who afterwards
became Mrs Harris), or “eaten” by Crosland
and Harris in lunches and dinners.
But Crosland’s excesses in the way of drinking
and leading what is called a Bohemian life were
not what I would be inclined to bring up against
him. If only that had been the worst of him!
But the truth is that he was consistently disloyal
and ungrateful to those who had done the most
for him. He seemed almost to make a hobby of
“double-crossing” his friends. The more one


did for him the worse, in the long run, he treated
one. He had literally thousands of pounds out
of me, and for years I practically kept him and
his whole family, not only by the salary that I
gave him as assistant-editor of The Academy, but
by constant gifts and “loans,” which were the
same as gifts (for I would like to meet anyone
who ever lent money to Crosland and got it
back!). I never grudged him a penny of the
money, nor the numerous occasions when I have
sat half the night by his bedside in hospitals
when he was supposed to be dying, nor the
paying out “the bums,” as Shakespeare would
say, when a distraint was put on his furniture.
All this would be nothing to talk about. But as
soon as I got short of money, and my lavish
assistance and hospitality declined, he basely
deserted me and went over to the side of my
enemies. It is quite impossible to say that he
had a good character or even that he could be
covered by the latitude of the loose description
connoted by the words “a good chap.” He was
not a good chap. He was treacherous and
utterly unscrupulous, and if ever there was a
man who deserved the appellation of “a fair-
weather friend” it was he. It is quite true that
he “stuck to me” at the time when I lost the
Ransome libel case and was thereafter involved
in a perfect sea of troubles, but at that time I


still had money to give him. (I gave him, e.g.,
£250, half of what I made by my book Oscar
Wilde and Myself, and the same amount when I
sold The Academy .) Once I got into really low
financial water there was the end of Crosland’s
friendship, and not content with ceasing to be
my friend, he became my enemy. For details,
which are so bad that I cannot even now bring
myself to write them any more than I did in my
Autobiography, I refer the curious to Mr Sorley
Brown’s book.
When I got my paper Plain English, years later,
I made friends with him again and asked him to
write for me. He accepted at once and we had
a reconciliation. He wrote some splendid articles
for Plain English, being of course well paid for
them, and he used to come round to the office
two or three times a week. A sort of ghost of
our former friendship was raised up, but it did
not last. From the moment I lost Plain English
I never saw him again. As soon as I lost the
paper and was pushed out of the editorship, he
went straight round to my supplanter and started
writing for him, and although at this time he
was earning well over £2OOO a year from the
Hulton Press and other papers, he never once
made the slightest gesture in the way of offering
to repay me any of the countless loans I had
made him, although he knew that I was very


hard up. If he had offered to repay me any-
thing I would certainly have refused to accept
it, but what a difference it would have made in
my judgment of his character!
It may seem unnecessary to drag this up now,
but I do not see why he should be allowed to go
down to history in false colours. I give him
every credit (in fact I was the first to do so) for
being a fine poet and the best literary journalist
in England of his and my generation. I also
give him credit for being, at his best and when
he was in a good humour (that is to say when he
had money or knew that he could get it, which
was always the case as long as our friendship
lasted), one of the wittiest and most amusing men
I have ever met. But why should I pretend
that he was a good fellow, when he was the
exact opposite? The best I can bring myself to
think about him after recently re-reading Mr
Sorley Brown’s poignant account of his last
months of illness and his death, is that he must
have gone through such terrible sufferings that
no doubt he largely expiated his offences; and
he always had a curious kind of religion of his
own which served, after a fashion, at the end.
I put all this on record because I am a poet
and I have need to justify the two poems about
him published in my Collected volumes; one a
sonnet called “The Unspeakable Englishman,”


which I consider to be one of the best sonnets I
ever wrote, and the other a five-stanza’d poem
“The Seller of the Pass,” which I also consider
to be up to my highest level. Both these poems
were inspired by the tremendously strong creative
force of grief and indignation combined. No one
who has any feeling for poetry could read either
of them without emotion.
The defection of Crosland and the way he
shattered all the illusions I had about him was
certainly one of the worst experiences of my life.
When I read the “unpublished part” of Wilde’s
letter to me written from prison, I thought that
was the worst thing that had ever happened to
me; but it was, as I afterwards realised, not the
shattering blow that I at first imagined it to be.
The fact that it was kept from me by Ross’s
villainy until twelve years after Wilde’s death,
completely altered the effect it would have had
if I had got it at the time when Wilde entrusted
it to Ross to give or send to me, because if I had
had it at that time I would either have then and
there given up Wilde for ever, or, as is far more
likely, I would have forgiven him directly I got
the chance to meet him after his imprisonment.
In either alternative the question of Wilde’s letter
would have been settled and done with for ever
at that time. In any case I have completely
got over it now, and I find that the recollection


of this letter, odious as it is, does not in any way
interfere with my devotion to Wilde’s memory.
It is different in the case of Crosland. Do as I
will I cannot pretend to forget or condone what
he did to me. He had none of Wilde’s excuses.
Wilde did suffer through me (although it was
not my fault), and he was cruelly and unjustly
treated, and his sufferings in prison were enough
to account for any madness and temporary
aberration. But in the case of Crosland, I had
done nothing but heap kindness and benefits on
him. He owed me everything, even his subse-
quent success after he deserted me. I have
forgiven him of course, because as a Christian
and a Catholic I am bound to do that. But it
is one thing to forgive a man, in the sense that
one wishes him nothing but good and can pray
for him, as I have done every day of my life since
he died; it is quite another thing to give him a
certificate of character as a noble creature or
even “a decent fellow.” Crosland was neither
one nor the other. He was, it is true, the sort
of man who gets sentimental over “hard-luck”
stories recounted by professional or semi-pro-
fessional beggars (I am like that myself!). He
would frequently, when he was “flush,” hand
five shillings to little girls selling bunches of
violets in the streets on a cold winter evening, or
press half-crowns into the hands of babies being


wheeled about in dilapidated perambulators, but
he had no scruples about bilking landladies or
going off to Monte Carlo with five hundred
pounds in his pocket to gamble while leaving
his wife and children to get on as best they could
on thirty shillings or two pounds a week. How
he managed, as he did, to write good poetry
with what must have been in his heart and on his
conscience utterly beats me, because it is all
against my theory that a man who writes good
poetry can possibly be a consistently wicked man.
One thing one must say for him (and this, I
suppose, is exactly what explains why he was
able to write good poetry) is that he never in his
life praised wicked writing or countenanced
what he called Commercial Pornography. Un-
scrupulous as he might be, I believe he would
rather have starved than have praised the work
of the modern writers (chiefly novelists), whom
he looked upon as corrupters of youth and
deceivers of the simple and good. At the back
of his strange mind there persisted an innate love
of justice and goodness. It is magnificently ex-
pressed in his lovely poem “The Finer Spirit,”
a poem which is as good as Shakespeare, and
which can be read in the Collected Edition of
his poems which was published by Martin Seeker.
And this is a good place in my book for me to
mention that he is the author of the two stanzas


I quoted at the end of Chapter VI, concerning
which I will merely say that if Mr Yeats were
to live a hundred years, and try hard all the
time, he could never write anything half so
fine.


CHAPTER XIV
MY TWO LAST CHAPTERS LEAD ME BACK BY A
natural process from Crosland to Mr Bernard
Shaw, who in his letter to me which I reproduced
in the third edition of my Autobiography uses these
words:
“And anyhow why should you, who have
been so unjust to many good men, expect
justice for yourself? . . . Does your conscience
never reproach you for the reckless way in
which you exploited Crosland’s phobia for
calumny in The Academy ?”
This is the first time since Mr Shaw wrote me
that letter, dated from Venice, April 16th, 1931,
that I have had the chance to answer his question
publicly. My answer is that my conscience has
never reproached me for anything that appeared
in The Academy during my editorship. On the
contrary, I think The Academy under my editor-
ship was the last dying kick of free, fair and
independent journalism in England. It is abso-
lutely untrue and in itself a gross calumny to
say that Crosland had a “phobia for calumny.”
I challenge Mr Shaw to justify his words by


anything that Crosland ever wrote. Let him
give chapter and verse if he can. But this is
impossible. It is quite true that considerations
of worldly wisdom might have prevented me
from writing myself and allowing Crosland to
write much that appeared in The Academy. lam
well aware that I made a lot of enemies by
absolutely fearless and sometimes fierce criticism;
but there is not a word in The Academy under my
editorship which is either unjust or unjustifiable.
I utterly deny that I have ever been “unjust to
many good men,” or even to any bad men.
On the contrary, as an editor I have always
been perfectly fair to the just and unjust alike,
according to my lights; and so I believe was
Crosland, at any rate in any paper that I con-
trolled. I have never attacked anyone in any
paper of mine, except in the public interest, and
without giving the attacked person the absolute
right of unlimited reply. Generally the people
I attacked (and I never attacked any but the
powerful and highly placed) did not reply at
all, but went about abusing me behind my back
(in several cases they actually had to pay damages
for libelling me).
If I ever did anyone an injustice in my life,
and was subsequently convinced of it, I never
hesitated to say so and to make any amends in
my power. As a matter of fact, all my life it is


I that have suffered from the unfairness of
editors who have attacked me and then denied
me the elementary justice of a full hearing in
reply. Only a few months ago I had a contro-
versy in the columns of The Observer with The
Observer’s dramatic critic, Mr St John Ervine,
about Wilde and Shaw and other dramatists.
The fact that Mr Ervine did not exhibit him-
self as a formidable opponent and that I was
able to “make rings round” him even with the
grossly unfair handicap imposed on me by the
editor of his paper, does not excuse or diminish
that unfairness. On two occasions Mr Ervine
filled his weekly two-column article with a not
very polite attack on me, and yet when I replied
on each occasion in a letter of less than three-
quarters of a column, large portions of my letter
were cut out by the editor. This in a paper
which, I am bound to say, has always treated
me well, and which gave my poems (in their
latest edition) one of the best and most prominent
notices they received.
In France anyone who is attacked in a news-
paper has the legal right to a reply, which he
can insist on being printed with the same promi-
nence and in the same part of the paper as
the attack. This is called le droit de reponse, and
forty years ago, on one occasion in Paris, I
enforced it on an evening paper by sending a


Huissier round to the office of the paper with my
letter, which they were forced to insert. They
not only had to print my letter, but they had to
pay the costs of the legal process involved. I
must explain that I had sent them the letter and
that they had refused to print it before I had
recourse to the legal measure I took on the
advice of a solicitor. I think it is perfectly
monstrous (and also, I may add, characteristic-
ally English) that there is no such law in this
country and that an unscrupulous editor may
refuse to print a letter from a man who has been
attacked in his columns.
I should not like the editor of The Observer to
think that I consider him unscrupulous, though
he knows that I thought what he did in the case
mentioned was unfair, because I wrote and told
him so at the time. He merely acknowledged
my letter in a formal way, and I have no doubt
that he would say that in the particular case I
have cited he printed all the essential part of
my letters, and he might even claim that they
were improved by being “cut.” That is as it
may be, and as a former editor myself, I can
sympathise with the difficulties connected with
what editors call “consideration of space.”
I have no serious grievance against Mr Garvin
(and no doubt letters are “edited” on his paper
not by himself but by some sub-editor), but I


am entitled to give this instance of what I call
unfairness as part of my reply to Mr Shaw when
he accuses me of having been “unjust to many
good men” when I was an editor myself. The
point is that I never in my life, even in the case
of a man writing abusively, refused the courtesy
of my columns to anyone who had a right of
reply, and that I can therefore claim that I was,
as an editor, always absolutely just to everyone
with whose views I differed or whose conduct or
written words I impugned. I have over and
over again in The Academy and Plain English
printed letters which any other editor would
have suppressed.
And may I ask Mr Shaw if he knows of any
other author who would allow himself to be
attacked in his own book and Preface as I
allowed him to attack me? The real truth is
that, far from being unjust, I am much too good-
natured in these regards. Mr Shaw, after doing
me the gravest injustice in his Appendix to
Frank Harris’s book about Wilde, wrote me the
letter from which I have quoted, and I printed
it, partly, I admit, because I thought it would
help to sell the third edition of my book, in
which expectation I was entirely disappointed,
and partly because I thought it was in some
respects an olive branch and that it indicated a
desire to be friendly which I did not want to reject.


Moved by these considerations, I not only
allowed Mr Shaw’s aspersions on me as an
editor to go into the Preface of the third edition
of my own book, but I refrained altogether from
replying to them, as I might have done in the
way lam doing now. If I were anything at all
like what Mr Shaw wants to make me out, would
I have acted in such a way? I trow not. And
now, after saying certain hard things about
Crosland (as well as giving him what I think is
his due as a poet and a writer), I cannot allow
Mr Shaw to “get away” indefinitely with his
utterly unjust aspersions on a man who showed
so conspicuously in his writings just those very
qualities which Mr Shaw would deny him.
Crosland, from a literary point of view, was,
generally speaking, pre-eminently just and fair,
and if he was ever beaten and proved to be wrong
in a controversy, he was ready to admit it. He
once attacked my sonnets very unfairly in his
book on “The English Sonnet” (this is the in-
evitable exception that proves the rule), and I
replied to him in an Irish paper which was at
that time the only paper I could get to print my
stuff. I sent out marked copies of this paper to
a large number of critics in London as well as
to Crosland himself. He made no attempt to
reply, because he knew when he was beaten.
He admitted as much after our “reconciliation.”


My answer was overwhelming, as anyone can
see for himself who cares to read it, as well as
Crosland’s attack, in Mr Sorley Brown’s book
The Life and Genius of T. W. H. Crosland.
If Mr Shaw himself, or anyone else, had cared
to reply to Crosland’s or my strictures in The
Academy , their replies would have been given
the fullest and most prominent publicity. This
actually happened, as Mr Shaw will remember,
in his own case. I severely criticised his play
Getting Married, and he wrote me a “private”
letter in which he rashly assumed that the article
had been written by Crosland (whereas I had
written it myself), and he asked me to “sack”
Crosland for his effrontery in attacking him and
because “he must have been drunk when he
wrote the article.” Instead of doing this I
printed Mr Shaw’s letter in The Academy and
replied to it (myself again, without any assistance
from Crosland), and Mr Shaw discreetly retired
from the fray and was no more heard or seen
in the columns of my paper, though, as I have
already said, he was perfectly aware that I would
willingly have printed half a dozen columns
from him if he had cared to reply (I had already
printed a very long article by him on the Censor-
ship). Now, where is the injustice in this?
I cannot help thinking that when Mr Shaw
accused me of being “unjust to so many good


men,” what he meant was that I had caused
considerable annoyance to one good man, namely
himself. But is not this an example of petitio
principal Not that I wish to insinuate that Mr
Shaw is not “a good man” in the conventional
and worldly sense (even allowing for his dis-
tressing admissions in his letters to Harris).
Obviously he is, like Miss Prism in Wilde’s play,
the very picture of respectability, but his attempt
to exhibit himself in the figure of patient merit
taking spurns from the unworthy, as represented
by T. W. H. Crosland and Alfred Douglas, cuts
very little ice.
The letters containing the admissions, or rather
the boasts, about his “affairs” with women can
be read by anyone in Bernard Shaw, by Frank
Harris, published in 1931 by Gollancz. Shaw
himself with astonishing magnanimity saw the
book through the press after Harris’s death. He
sent me a copy of the book, as recorded in a
previous chapter.


CHAPTER XV
THE TRUTH IS THAT THE WORLD OF ENGLISH
letters is, at the present time, suffering from that
very lack of what Mr Shaw speciously calls
“injustice to good men,” but which I call honest
criticism. As I have said before in this book,
there is hardly such a thing nowadays as a
weekly literary paper which criticises books on
their merits and without regard to political
prejudices or log-rolling cliques. The New States-
man, which has now devoured the Week-End
Review, which itself represented a break-away (on
political and not on literary grounds) from the
Saturday Review, is so rabidly “Left” that it does
not find it easy to look squarely even at a work
of pure literature. I had an amusing instance
of this brought to my attention when in 1933 I
brought out my book The True History of Shake-
speare's Sonnets, which Mr Shaw described as “by
far the best of all the books I have read on the
subject.” A friend of mine, Mr Gerald Hamilton,
who is at the farthest possible pole from myself
in politics, asked the editor of a Left-Wing
weekly to let him have the book for review.
He got the book and reviewed it, giving it a lot


of praise. Whereupon the editor of the paper
in question, after reading his review, said, “We
can’t possibly praise Lord Alfred Douglas like
this in the ,” and told Mr Hamilton that
he intended to get the book done by someone
else. The result was astonishing, and must have
been very exasperating to the editor (of whose
identity and name I am quite ignorant), for he
sent the book to another reviewer, leaping to
the rash conclusion that this gentleman would
“slate” the book as befitted any book by a
“die-hard Tory and reactionary” like Lord
Alfred Douglas. But, lo and behold! the re-
viewer found that he agreed with nearly every-
thing in the book, and instead of “slating” it
gave it the most generous praise. My surprise
when I read the two-columned review may be
imagined, considering that I was in possession
of all the facts about the editorial manoeuvres
that had preceded it. I could hardly believe
my eyes when I read it.
For my part I am unable to understand the
attitude of an editor or a critic who can resist
what is to me the immense pleasure of praising
a book by a man with whose general views I am
in the profoundest disagreement. If Mr H. G.
Wells (“Empty Wells,” as Crosland called him
in an article in Plain English) were suddenly to
produce a book which was a really fine book, or


even a great work of art, I would be in raptures.
It has happened to me from time to time to
read a book or an article by a man whose work
I dislike or disapprove of and to be lifted up
and exhilarated by finding that it really was
good. With what joy would I review any such
book or acclaim any such article!
I violently disliked and disapproved of Mr
Masefield’s The Everlasting Mercy and The Widow
in the Bye-Street. When Mr Hodge was editor of
the Saturday Review, just after I had sold The
Academy and was at a loose end, he asked me if
I would care to write some articles about con-
temporary poetry for the Saturday, which was at
that time (after I had left The Academy) the best
literary weekly in London. I accepted the offer
with pleasure, and Mr Hodge sent me a bundle
of at least thirty or forty recently published
books of verse. Among them were the two
narrative poems of Mr Masefield which I have
mentioned, and I naturally picked them out as
the subject of the first article I wrote. Equally
naturally I “slated” them—that is to say, I
wrote exactly my honest opinion of them—and
the result was that Mr Hodge would not print
my article and begged me, if I “wanted to
‘ slate,’ ” to pick out any of the other books in
the parcel he had sent me.
This assumption of Hodge’s that I wanted, as


a matter of course, to “slate” any recently pub-
lished poetry (whereas I would have been only
too enchanted if I could have found any to
praise) exasperated me. I put all the books in
a taxi-cab and sent them back to Mr Hodge,
and that was the end of my reviewing poetry
for the Saturday Review. The sequel came in a
controversy to which Crosland contributed two
letters containing some of the ablest and most
brilliant criticism which ever appeared in the
Saturday Review. If any young man wants to take
a lesson in the art of severe criticism, which has
now almost disappeared out of the papers, I would
recommend him to look through the file of the
Saturday for that year (it must have been, I think,
the latter part of 1910) and study Crosland’s letters.
I refer to all this, however, simply because I
want to say what tremendous pleasure it gave
me, two or three years ago, when I studied a
collected edition of Mr Masefield’s poems, to
find that he had written a lot of first-rate poetry.
If I had had anywhere to write, it would have
given me real pleasure to praise his admirable
work, though I have not in the slightest degree
modified my opinion of The Everlasting Mercy and
The Widow in the Bye-Street.
I have often thought about Byron, that really
it was a splendid piece of luck for him that his
appalling first volume Hours of Idleness was cut


up as it was by the Edinburgh Review. The anger
he felt, when he read the review, stirred him up
to write what remains to this day the most
brilliant satire ever written in the English
language. As a piece of invective it is un-
equalled. Of course it is very unjust, as Mr
Shaw would say, to “many good men,” in a
sense which nothing I wrote ever was; but how
splendid to answer a “slating” review in that
way, and how completely it justifies the reviewer
who wrote what he really (and quite justifiably)
thought about Byron’s first twaddling verses.
It is quite otherwise in the case of Keats, who
was a far greater poet than Byron (but who, on
the other hand, was utterly incapable of satire
or invective). Keats’ Endymion is a beautiful
poem. It has faults of immaturity, but to attack
it viciously as the Quarterly reviewer did was
base and stupid, and ignorant to the boot of it;
for any judge of poetry ought to have been able
to see through its faults to its essential beauty.
And here again, though in this case it does
nothing to justify the malignant reviewer, the
result was to produce one of the greatest poems
ever written in the English language, Shelley’s
Adonais (prefaced, I may add, by one of the finest
pieces of prose that exists).
Observe the difference between the two cases.
The “attack” on Byron, which annoyed him so


much, was not in the least unfair. It was a
perfectly honest piece of reviewing, and every
word of it was justified. Moreover, as I have
already pointed out, it had the best possible
effect on Byron, who no doubt recognised this
himself later on. The reviewer of Keats, on the
other hand, was a malicious and ignorant fool
who is condemned to everlasting execration for
what he did so brutally and so stupidly to a
great poet who had not the fighting spirit to
hit back as Byron did.
Earlier in this book I mentioned that reviewers
on my papers were always told that they must
never “slate” any book without producing ample
quotation, to justify what they said, from the
book they were reviewing. And again I ask,
Where is the evidence of “injustice to many good
men,” which Mr Shaw attributes to me, in all
this? Was I not, on the contrary, as I have
shown, a singularly just and conscientious editor?
Or would anyone maintain that all severe
criticism or “slating” is wrong? I dare say
some would, in an age of bleating pacifism and
more or less general imbecility, but I can hardly
be expected to answer such people, and in the
long run a man who calls another man “unjust”
must make good his words by specific quotation,
or be content to wear the cap that fits him even
if he himself has made it for another.


CHAPTER XVI
IT IS TWENTY-SEVEN YEARS SINCE I SOLD THE
Academy for £2OOO to Lords Howard de Walden
and Fitzwilliam, who, by appointing an utterly
incompetent editor who turned away from all
the fine principles of my editorship, reduced its
circulation to vanishing point within five years.
As soon as I left the editorship, the circulation
dropped by nearly half, and it finally petered
out to such an extent that the paper was offered
to me for twenty-five pounds by someone who
had taken it on after Howard’s editor had
finished with it! Naturally I declined the offer
to buy, even at that price, a paper which had
been reduced from the position of the best
literary weekly in London to a state of impotence
and ignominy; and The Academy , which was forty
years old when I got it, finally ceased publication.
When I started Plain English in 1920, for senti-
mental reasons I included on its cover the words,
“With which is incorporated The Academy ,”
having acquired the copyright in the title which
someone had kept alive by dummy copies pub-
lished at intervals. The gentleman, Mr James


Conchie, who put up the money to run Plain
English, at my request paid £IOO for The Academy
title. Plain English lasted only about eighteen
months, and is now as dead as The Academy.
History almost exactly repeated itself, for as
soon as I was removed from the editorship the
circulation fell with a bump and rapidly petered
out altogether, and the paper came to an end.
It is a pitiable thing that there is no one with a
little money to revive The Academy. I am so
confident that it was the best paper of its kind
that has existed in my lifetime that I would
willingly submit the point to the independent
arbitration of a committee of men of letters in-
cluding Mr Bernard Shaw, but not including
Mr H. G. Wells, for obvious reasons. For one
thing it was the only paper that has existed in
my time that printed a poem (and a really good
poem) every week as a matter of course. I used
to get a great number of poems sent to the paper,
and I read them all (and so did Crosland after
he came on to the paper, which was when I had
had it for a year) with great care every week
and picked out a good one to print utterly with-
out regard to the name of the author. I pub-
lished a lot of poems by poets who were then
quite unknown and who were afterwards famous
—for instance, Freeman, Middleton, Flecker,
Sassoon, and I could name a dozen more.


The present generation of youth, having had
its taste corrupted by Mr T. S. Eliot, appears to
be losing the appreciation for good poetry, which
in The Academy days was very widely spread.
The kind of chopped-up prose or sheer doggerel
which masquerades as poetry in papers like The
London Mercury (now that Sir John Squire has
left it) and the Mew Statesman would have been
laughed out of court, even if it had succeeded
in getting printed, in an age when quite a lot
of young people really loved poetry and under-
stood something about its nature. But it occurs
to me that perhaps I am wronging the rising
generation. I dare say they would soon begin
to appreciate good modern poetry if they ever
got the chance to see it in any of the weekly or
monthly reviews. I expect that quite a lot of
decent poetry is written by young men even now
(in fact, I know there is some, because I have
actually seen it in two or three cases), but nobody
prints it.
Crosland had a story about the proprietor of
some paper for which he wrote in his youth
before he came to London, who “raised Cain”
because the editor (or rather one of the sub-
editors) filled up a blank space in his paper with
a sonnet by Keats. “What’s this doing here?”
inquired the angry proprietor. “It’s by Keats,”
said the sub-editor. “I don’t care who it’s by,”


replied the proprietor, “I don’t like it, and what’s
more I’m not going to pay him for it.”
I myself have been asked by the editor of a
weekly literary paper “What exactly is a sonnet? ”
and I am perfectly sure that if anyone took the
trouble to copy out any (except about half a
dozen of the best known) of the sonnets of
Shakespeare and send them to any editor in
London, he certainly would not print them, not
because he recognised them, but because he
would not think them worth publishing or paying
even half a guinea for. Thanks to Mr T. S.
Eliot, the sort of thing that passes for poetry
nowadays is becoming more and more to be
despised and looked upon with contempt by
normal reasonable people, and the name of
“poet” is incurring the same sort of odium as
that which now attaches to the name of
“Intellectual,”
A well-known publisher once gave me his
opinion of poetry, and said that for his part he
would not have it as a gift. Give him a good
novel every time. He was rather taken aback
when I pointed out to him that if he were the
sole possessor of the publishing rights of any one
(even the least) of the great English poets he
would be worth a lot of money and draw a
steady income from it years after the poet was
dead.


On the other hand, of course, most of the
“poetry” written by the alleged poets of to-day,
even when they are not disciples of Mr T. S.
Eliot, would never sell even to the extent of two
hundred copies between now and Doomsday.
If anyone at this point wants to know whether
I judge of the excellence of poetry by its sale, I
reply that certainly and undoubtedly I do —in
the long run, of course. All the best poetry has
always sold, and all the “boosting” on the part
of all the “Intellectuals” and Left-Wing nit-wits
in the world will not induce people to buy or
read bad poetry except perhaps for a few years.
Nor, I might add, will the clowning of Mr Yeats
in his “Poets’ Parlour” at the 8.8. C. Nothing
on earth is so certain as that really good poetry
is bound to be appreciated in the long run, and
it must be added that no real poet expects to
make money out of writing poetry, though
accidentally he may do so. All the talk about
the shamefulness of Sir William Watson’s poetry
not being read, and the scandal of his being
unable to earn a living by it, is simply nonsense
and fiddle-de-dee. If Sir William Watson’s poetry
is good enough to survive (and I do not say that
it is not), it will survive, but you cannot force
people to read poetry by telling them that they
ought to read it, any more than you can prevent
them from reading it by running it down and


sneering at it. I know what lam talking about,
for my own poetry has sold copiously in England
all the time, ever since I first published it, though
Ido not suppose I have made more than three
or four hundred pounds out of it in forty years.
It sold when it was praised by the critics, and it
sold just as well when it was abused and belittled,
and it is selling now, and will go on selling
indefinitely.
The Academy not only published good poetry,
but it consistently published first-rate and per-
fectly honest criticism, and it was utterly beyond
the reach of the log-rolling cliques which are so
powerful at the present day. After I had had
it a year, I added politics to its repertoire. It
was originally a purely literary paper. If I had
it now I think I would keep it away from politics
altogether, not because my opinions about
politics are any less pronounced than they were,
but because I do not think that one can do justice
to both departments at my age. But perhaps I
am doing myself an injustice. I always hoped
that I would one day meet a millionaire who
would understand that a paper can be made to
pay and at the same time keep up a tremendously
high standard, not only from a literary, but also
from a moral point of view. I never had half,
or a quarter, or a hundredth part of a fair chance
to put my schemes and theories into practice.


I had one millionaire for The Academy , but he
lasted only about a year, during the whole of
which time his piteous moans at the money he
was losing (a few thousands) might have melted
a heart of stone; and when I got rid of him and
ran the paper myself, at my own cost, I very
nearly made it pay, but I could not perform
actual miracles. If Lords Howard de Walden
and Fitzwilliam had kept me on as editor when
they bought The Academy, I could have made it
pay and show a handsome profit inside three
years; but then, of course, as I was always being
reminded, I am not a man of business.
Yet although I am (so I am told) not a man of
business, as soon as my first millionaire took his
departure, I went to see our printers, and in
half an hour induced them to undertake to carry
on the printing and publication of the paper for
exactly half what the millionaire (who was pro-
tected from the dangers of my poetic frenzy by
a cast-iron business man of his own) had been
paying. After that, in another fit of poetical
lack of business capacity, I sacked the advertising
canvasser, and went round to all the publishers
in London and interviewed them personally,
coming back to the office with hundreds of
pounds’ worth of advertisements, enough, indeed,
to pay all the expenses of the next twelve numbers
of the paper, which, when the millionaire and


his man of business controlled it, was losing at
least three thousand pounds a year. It is a
terrible thing not to be “a man of business” !
Of course I could not go on editing the paper
and being advertising canvasser as well, but I
just wanted to show that it could be done, and to
confound the canvasser, who declared that it
was impossible to increase the advertisements.
Not so bad for a poet, I think I may claim. If
Crosland had not come on to the paper, it would
have lost a lot from the literary point of view,
but I believe I would have been able to make it
pay. Crosland quarrelled with all the adver-
tisers, one of whom on one occasion he threatened
to throw down the lift-well, and involved me in
a violent fight with Messrs W. H. Smith & Son,
as well as letting me in for the disastrous Manners-
Sutton case, to which I have referred; and look-
ing back at it all now, I am convinced that he
ruined the paper from a commercial point of view.
The mistake I made was in taking him into the
office and giving him a share in the management
of the paper. If I had merely kept him as a
contributor all would have been well. I rather
think that Miss Head, who is now associated
with “National Magazines,” and who was my
secretary on The Academy, would confirm this.
As to my second “millionaire,” who started
Plain English for me, he was a great improvement


on the first and was a charming man and a
sportsman. The only trouble with him was
that he was not really a millionaire at all, as I
had imagined him to be; only a fairly rich man;
and he soon got tired of paying out. He pro-
mised me a three years’ run, during which time
I told him he could not possibly expect the paper
to pay, but in actual fact he lasted only less than
eighteen months. So, obviously, it was no fault of
mine that the paper, whose circulation was rapidly
increasing week by week all the time I ran it, did
not get to the stage of paying its way. After I left
the editorship it lasted only about three months.
As I have, for the second time in this book,
referred to the quarrel with Freddie Manners-
Sutton, afterwards Lord Canterbury, into which
I was reluctantly forced by Crosland, I take this
opportunity of repeating what I have already
recorded in my Autobiography , that my friendship
with him, which was interrupted for at least five
years as the result of this miserable “row,” was
afterwards renewed, and that for several years
before, and right up to, his death I was on
terms of the greatest friendship with him. I
was actually staying in his London house as his
guest only about three weeks before he died.
The reconciliation between us was brought about
by my wife, who was very fond of him and had
known him from childhood.


CHAPTER XVII
WHILE I AM ON THE SUBJECT OF PAPERS I MAY AS
well say something about a phenomenon which
has bewildered me all my life. I refer to the
astonishing fact that this country of ours, this
blessed plot, this earth, this England (although
I am chiefly Scots I have a good deal of English
blood through the Wyndhams, who derive from
the original enemies of the Douglases, the Percys),
invariably appears to take the side of revolution-
aries against Kings and the Church on the
Continent. Although the Government of this
country is not, thank God, a Democracy by any
manner of means, since we are a Constitutional
Monarchy, all our papers seem to make a point of
crowing with joy whenever a King is pushed off his
throne, and becomes what they call an “ ex-King.”
Incidentally I dispute that it is correct to call
a King an “ex-King” after he loses his throne.
The King of Spain, for example, is surely en-
titled, as a matter of common courtesy, to be
called the King of Spain, even as he is to-day.
When I was in prison “exercising” in the yard,
or really one might say garden, of the hospital


in Wormwood Scrubs, a Borstal boy who was
engaged in the same process (walking round and
round) asked me if I would be so kind as to tell
him, “to settle a bet,” whether or not I was, or
would be, deprived of my “title” as the result
of my imprisonment. I assured him this was
not, and would not be, the case, and he gleefully
exclaimed “Hooray, I win my bet.”
On the same principle surely it is correct to
go on describing a monarch by his title even
when he has ceased to be a reigning sovereign.
I remember writing an article in Plain English
(in 1920) supporting the King of Greece (the
father of the present King) and defending him
against the attacks of, among others, the Morning
Post d which was at that time the property of
Lady Bathurst and was edited by Mr Gwynne.
I went so far as to say (referring to the Morning
Post’s attacks on the “ex-King”) that it was
lucky for the Morning Post that the King was not
likely to sue the paper for libel in the English
Law Courts, because if he were to do so and
collect, as he certainly would, very heavy
damages, the ex-Mr Gwynne and the ex-Countess
of Bathurst might possibly find themselves
laughing on the wrong side of their mouths or
ex-mouths.
1 I deeply regret that since this was written the Morning Post
has ceased to exist as a separate paper.


I hasten to add that the feud I had with the
Morning Post (during the period when it belonged
to Lady Bathurst), which went on for years and
culminated in a libel action when I was cross-
examined with conspicuous lack of success on his
part by Sir Patrick Hastings, has long ceased to
exist. I am now on the best of terms with Mr
Gwynne, recently of the Morning Post', and its
literary editor, Mr E. B. Osborn, who was one
of my original contributors both in prose and in
poetry to my paper The Spirit Lamp when I was
at Oxford, gave me last year the best review of
my poetry that I have ever had in any English
paper. I feel certain, then, that Mr Gwynne
will not take it amiss if I recall the fact that the
origin of this now extinct feud was that I was
so exasperated by the line approving of the
Russian Revolution, when it first started, adopted
(yes, I know it sounds incredible!) by the
Morning Post, that I wrote very strongly to Lady
Bathurst about it. This annoyed Lady Bathurst
very much and called forth a “stern rebuke”
from Lord Bathurst. Perhaps it was wrong, or
at any rate impolite, of me to write to Lady
Bathurst, but my excuse is that I felt deeply
about the whole business, and I thought it
simply appalling that the leading Conservative
paper in England should back up the filthy
thugs of the Russian Revolution, who shortly


afterwards murdered our King’s cousin, the Tsar,
and his wife and family in a cellar in circum-
stances of the most horrible cruelty and brutality.
I have not much doubt that neither Lady
Bathurst nor Mr Gwynne, looking back at all
the circumstances, and considering what has
happened since, would care to say now that I
was guilty of any very great fault when I wrote
and protested against an attitude which was
certainly, I venture to think, not to their credit.
The Morning Post has long since changed its
ways in these regards, and I am bringing this
story up now simply because it was, and is, a
supreme example of what I have referred to —
namely, the amazing attitude which is habitually
adopted even by soi-disant Conservative papers
in relation to revolutions in foreign countries.
The Morning Post, in this respect, has, I am glad
to say, been an exception in the Spanish question.
It has all along supported Franco and the
Catholics of Spain in their desperate struggle to
save their country from the Moscow-inspired-
and-controlled revolutionaries and anarchists.
(I suppose it is scarcely necessary to explain that
the so-called Government in Spain ceased to be
a lawful Government long before the civil war
started and that it was always a revolutionary
junta.) But nearly all the other papers appear
to sympathise (some violently and others only


mildly) with the wrong side. I am utterly un-
able to understand this, because if they really
represent public opinion, there would have been
a bloody revolution in England years ago.
It is easier to explain the attitude of the frantic
Anglican Deans and Bishops who support the
Reds in Spain. Hating to see the way these
incredible persons were driving us into a quarrel,
if not into a war, with our old friend Italy, the
Mother of all the Arts, I wrote a letter to
Mussolini begging him to ignore them and to
understand that their tom-fool antics were re-
garded with contempt by all decent people in
England. I went on to give my explanation of
the evident lack of the spirit of wisdom which
distinguished these “ecclesiastics,” which I con-
nected with the question of the validity of their
orders. But as Ido not want to be offensive to
a large body of Anglican clergy and laity whom
I respect and like, I will not enter into details.
Very much to my surprise, my letter to the
Duce was reproduced at full length and with the
greatest prominence in the entire Italian Press,
and I venture to think that the effect it produced
was very considerable and did a good deal to
quiet the growing feeling of indignation against
this country in Italy.
One ought always to remember that the papers
in other countries are quite as liable completely


to misrepresent public opinion as our own papers
habitually do. We have got so used to it that
the absurdity of a Conservative paper like the
Evening Standard publishing three or four times a
week Red propaganda in cartoons by “Low”
which would be considered rather “extreme”
even if they appeared in the Daily Herald or the
Daily Worker , passes almost unnoticed. One
cannot go on being exasperated for ever, and one
ends by simply shrugging one’s shoulders. But
the mystery of why the Evening Standard does it
remains. I have had a good deal of corre-
spondence about it with both the proprietor
and the editor of the paper, but although their
replies to my remonstrances are models of
courtesy and amiability, they have failed to
produce the slightest explanation of the motives
which actuate them in this fouling of their own
nest.
I am well aware that there is a considerable
body of English opinion (what Oscar Wilde used
to call, “the wooden heads of old England”)
which believes that failure to be amused, or
other than exasperated, by “Low’s” cartoons,
indicates a lack of the sense of humour. My
comment on this is best exemplified by a little
parable which I sent to the Evening Standard some
months ago. The Evening Standard did not
publish it, so I give it here.


After his death Judas Iscariot, with the character-
istic gall of his type, presented himself at the entrance
of Heaven and was refused admission by the angel
at the gate. “Why can’t I come in?” inquired
Judas. “Well, you know you betrayed the Saviour
for thirty pieces of silver,” replied the angel. “ Good
heavens!” said Judas Iscariot, “have you no sense
of humour?”
When I was staying with my nephew Queens-
berry at a country house which he was then
occupying about three years ago, I had the
pleasure of meeting the present King of Greece,
who came on a week-end visit. I reminded him
that when I had Plain English I had defended his
father against the attacks made on him in the
London papers, and I recalled that his father
sent me a long telegram of thanks which I
published in Plain English. The King (according
to Lady Bathurst I ought to say “the ex-King,”
for this was some time before he got back his
throne: what about it, my lady?) was delighted
to meet the former defender of his father, and
told me that he well remembered his father’s
pleasure and satisfaction at the time, and how he
obtained a quantity of copies of Plain English to
send to various members of his family. He took
it at that time as a welcome sign that “the best
people” in England were not represented by the
English Press; and he was perfectly right. The
best people in England never get a word in any


where, in any sphere of life—at least, they never
have since I ceased to run a paper. This is not
conceit or vanity, I can assure you, gentle
readers. It is simply the bitter cry of outcast
journalism. But the “best people” (by which I
do not mean by any means only the aristocracy
or the rich) have only themselves to blame.
They could have had a paper to represent them
if they cared to pay for it. Which reminds me
that I used to send Plain English every week to a
certain very wealthy duke. After sending him
the paper for more than a year, I decided to make
a few economies by docking names from the
“free list,” and he was one of the victims. A
week or two later I had a plaintive letter from
His Grace complaining that I no longer sent
him Plain English and wanting to know what was
the reason for this. He told me how much he
enjoyed reading my paper and that he missed it
more than he could say. My heart bled for him,
of course, and though I did not relent, I re-
frained from pointing out what had apparently
not occurred to him, that he might obtain the
paper by ordering and paying for it in the usual
way. After all, I considered, noblesse oblige, and
I could not rub salt into his wounds.


CHAPTER XVIII
I HAVE INHERITED A LOVE OF HORSES AND RAGING
from both sides of my family. My father was a
fine horseman and rode a lot of winners over
jumps, and on my mother’s side I descend from
the last Earl of Egremont, who was a great pillar
of the turf in his day. Consequently, although I
never had any right, by all the rules of common
sense, to own race-horses, I proceeded to acquire
a few directly my father died and I came into a
few thousands. I happened in those days to be
more in France than in England, so I bought my
horses in France and had them trained at
Chantilly, I used to get up before breakfast to
ride gallops, and go racing most days of the week
at the various courses round Paris. I won quite
a few races and had an enormous amount of
fun, and though I rapidly got rid of my small
fortune in the process, I still look back at that
period of my life (about two years) with great
satisfaction. The best horse I had was a gelding
called Hardi, who had belonged to Monsieur
Edmond Blanc. I bought him out of a selling
race for £250, and he won several races for me,


finishing up with a £5OO handicap at Maisons
Lafitte, where he beat a field containing some
of the best handicap horses in France by a short
head, starting at 66 to 1 (689 for 10 in the
“Pari-Mutuel”). I also had a good jumper
called Guara who won, among others, a race
at Auteuil.
Years later, while I was editing The Academy in
1908, 1 dreamt the winner of the Derby, Signorin-
etta, who started at 100 to 1, and backed it to
the modest extent of a “fiver.” When I say
that I dreamt the winner, this is not exactly what
happened, and the story is so queer and so
typical of what luck is, that I think it is worth
while to relate it.
At that time I was immersed in my paper, and
I never went near a race-course or took any
interest in racing. In fact when I had the
dream, I did not even know the name of the
Derby favourite of that year. I simply dreamt
that I saw a grey filly winning the Derby. “But
Signorinetta was not grey,” any racing man
would reply. I know she was not grey, but my
dream made me back her in the following way.
At lunch-time on the day after I had the dream
I was lunching by myself in a little restaurant in
Jermyn Street at the back of the Criterion. It
was kept by an Italian called Sinelli, as far as I
remember. This was just a week before the Derby.


At another table, also lunching by himself, I
saw a friend of mine, Charlie Owen, a racing man,
and I called over to him to come and lunch with
me. He came over at once and I said, “ Charlie,
is there a grey filly running in the Derby, be-
cause last night I dreamt that I saw a grey filly
win the Derby?” He replied, “I’m sorry, your
dream is a wash-out. Not only is there no
grey filly running in the Derby this year, but
there is no filly at all of any colour running.”
I laughed and said, “Well, there goes my chance
of backing the winner.”
I thought no more about it till that day week,
Derby Day, when I was once more lunching by
myself at the same restaurant, and there again
was Charlie Owen sitting at another table.
Again he came over and sat at my table, and I
said, “Charlie, what on earth are you doing
here? Why aren’t you at the Derby?” He
explained, and I have forgotten the explanation.
I got a paper and began looking through the
horses and their performances, and after a
minute I said, “Look here, you distinctly told
me last week that there was no filly in the race,
and here I see there is one, Signorinetta.” He
said, “Yes, quite right. I forgot all about her
when you asked me, but she isn’t grey and she
hasn’t got a million to one chance.” “I don’t
care,” I replied; “you said there was no filly and


there is one, and I am going to have a fiver on
her.” He said, “Don’t be a b fool.”
Well, to cut a long story short, I went out
directly after lunch and put a “fiver” on her,
and she won at 100 to i. That is a true story,
but the end of it comes four years later, in 1912.
Again it was Derby Day, and I had been lunching
in his house in Connaught Square with Jack
Stirling (Colonel Stirling, who commanded the
third Battalion of the Scots Guards all through
the War). Jack Stirling had a picture reputed
to be by Murillo, and he had ascertained that
Leopold Rothschild had a painting in his house
in Hamilton Place which was supposed to be the
original of this picture, in which case, of course,
his own would be only a copy. He had obtained
Mr Rothschild’s permission to go and look at
the picture in Hamilton Place, and as I had
always greatly admired Jack’s picture and told
him that I felt sure it was a genuine Murillo (I
was wrong, as it turned out), he asked me to
lunch and to go after lunch with him to see the
Rothschild picture and give my opinion after
seeing it. He had also asked Charlie a Court
Repington (whose “diary” was subsequently
famous just after the War) to come too. Charlie
Repington was a fine judge of pictures. He
used to buy pictures for Agnew’s. At that time
he was military correspondent of The Times.


After lunch we all three walked across the park,
and it being Derby Day, we naturally talked
about the race and the probable winner. Equally
naturally, of course, I told them about my dream
four years before, and how I had backed the
ioo to i winner “on false pretences.”
I had just finished my story when we arrived
at Leopold Rothschild’s house in Hamilton
Place, it being then about seven minutes past
three. We rang the bell, the butler opened the
door and said in an excited voice, “Tagalie
won!” Tagalie, I need hardly remind my
readers, was a grey filly, the only grey filly that
has ever won the Derby.
Charlie Repington said, “Well, we ought all
to be shot. Here have we, for the last forty
minutes, been walking across the park talking
about a grey filly winning the Derby, and none
of us had the sense to remember that Tagalie is a
grey filly. Why on earth didn’t we back it?”
Tagalie, I think, started at about seven or eight
to one, and it was therefore a horse that anyone
might have backed without being prompted by
a dream.
So my dream came true, four years late, and
this time I did not benefit by a penny!
Moreover, our luck was out in every way, for
directly we saw the Rothschild canvas we realised
that Jack’s picture was only a very good copy.


If it had been a genuine Murillo it would have
been worth about £IO,OOO.
In 1910 I sold my paper The Academy for
£2OOO to Lord Fitzwilliam and Lord Howard de
Walden, and although I had been running the
paper at a loss for nearly three years and was
consequently rather heavily out of pocket, I felt
quite rich for a few months. I hated losing the
paper; it was, and remains, one of the tragedies
of my life that I had to drop it, and that the two
enormously rich men who bought it did not
keep me on as editor, but put in an unknown
man (by profession he was, I believe, a land-
agent) who quickly reduced to vanishing point
the circulation which I had built up.
I felt very sore at the way I was treated, and
to console myself and distract my mind I took to
racing again. I mean that I took to frequenting
race-courses and to betting. I was assisted by a
queer character whose acquaintance I had made
at the Cafe Royal. His name was Hildebrand,
but he was generally known by racing men as
Hill. He was by birth, I believe, an Austrian,
but he had passed a great part of his life in the
United States, and his English speech was what
you might call “tough American.” I introduced
him to my wife, who thought him a most en-
trancing person and christened him “Punch”
(he had a rather Punch-like face). He adored


her, and his one idea was to find winners for her
to back. Punch and I attended all the principal
meetings. He was really a bit of a genius about
horses, and he used to stay up half the night
with his note-books compiling handicaps which
when compared with the official handicaps
frequently pointed out a winner with several
pounds in hand. He was rather quick-tempered
and “touchy,” but kind-hearted and a staunch
pal. I liked him very much, and I have often
wished I could see him again, but I believe he
left England soon after the War broke out, and
I am told that he has been dead for many years.
He was the most inveterate gambler I have
ever met. On one occasion he went racing with
a “tenner” supplied by me, and returned home
with over £4OOO in his pocket, having “gone
through the card.” He paid up his outstanding
debts, including about a year’s overdue rent of
his flat in Savoy Mansions, ordered six new suits
of clothes (he was a tall, well-built chap and a
bit of a dandy), and lived very gloriously for about
a fortnight, at the end of which time he was
“broke” once more, and looking out for someone
to “start him” again. If he had stuck to his own
handicap he would have made a fortune, but
when he got on to the race-course he was as often
as not “put off” horses which he had intended
to back. We raced together all over England


for about a year, I generally paying all the
expenses (and we lived on the fat of the land) of
travelling and hotels. At the end of the year I
was many hundred pounds “up” on balance.
I used to bet in those days with Charles
Hibbert, who was the biggest bookmaker in the
ring and stood at the head of the line on the
rails. Although I was only a comparatively
small punter, he liked me and always laid me
the best prices. He once did me a very good
turn at Nottingham, which was his home town,
where he liked to win a race, for he kept a few
horses in training.
It must have been, I think, on a Monday or
Tuesday, and the position was that I owed him
about £2OO for last week’s account and could
not pay (I was not “broke,” only temporarily
“short”), and I went up to him before the first
race and said, “I’m sorry, Hibbert, but I shall
have to keep you waiting for that two hundred.”
“That’s all right, my lord,” replied Hibbert
without turning a hair. Round about the third
race I noticed that Hibbert had a horse running.
I forget its name now, but I remember it had
an enormous knee swollen to twice its right size.
I happened to know from previous experience
that this unsightly defect in a horse does not
necessarily prevent it from fast galloping. I went
into the paddock and looked for Hibbert’s horse


and found it in a stall with its head tied up,
facing the “audience.” While I was medi-
tatively looking at it, I suddenly noticed that
Hibbert was standing beside me. For about
three minutes we stood there in silence looking
at the horse, and then I said to Hibbert, “He
looks well,” and Hibbert replied, “And will
about win too.” He then walked off, leaving
me without another word.
I went straight off to the ring, where I had
excellent credit with several other bookmakers,
and inquired the price against Hibbert’s horse.
“Sixteen to one,” replied the “bookie.” I put
fifty pounds on, and it cantered home about
six lengths in front of a large field!
I was thus, as the wily Charles Hibbert had no
doubt reflected, in a position to settle my account
with him on the following Monday, but for a
week I went about cursing myself for not having
had four times as much on the horse.


CHAPTER XIX
IN MY AUTOBIOGRAPHY I MADE SOME RATHER
strong remarks about certain aspects of English
Public Schools in general and my own School
(and House in particular) at Winchester. I now
regret this, not because what I said was not true,
but because I realise that there is very little to
be gained by such denunciations or “moral-
isings” long after the event. History has to be
written, of course, but on the whole it is best to
avoid criticisms of conduct, even if one includes
one’s own conduct in one’s indictment, which is
what I did in my autobiographical recollec-
tions of Winchester in my time, and which at
any rate protects me against the impeachment of
hypocrisy.
I was rather touched, to tell the truth, when,
soon after the publication of my book, I got an
anonymous communication signed “Old Wyk”
enclosing a newspaper cutting of the report of a
speech containing a denunciation made by an
Anglican bishop of “that repellent type of boy
who runs down his old school,” or words to that
effect. “Old Wyk” had evidently been reading


my remarks about Winchester, and he sent me
the cutting as much as to say, “Behold yourself
as others see you.” The “apparition of a bloody
child” called forth by this evocation gave me a
distinct jolt at the time, and being a person who
is always changing his mind (I cannot help it;
it is because I am so inherently and incurably
fair-minded), I regretted that I had said any-
thing about the less pleasant part of my ex-
periences at school, especially as I found that
arising out of what I had written, a legend
appears to have arisen that I was unhappy at
Winchester. It is actually so recorded in a
Life of me by Mr Patrick Braybrooke, pub-
lished a few years ago. Whereas the plain truth
is that, except for about three months before and
after my marriage, I have never really been
perfectly happy since I left it, and that to this
day my most enchanting dream, which comes
from time to time even now, is that I am still
there. I loved Winchester so much that my
first two years at Oxford were spoilt for me,
because I was always longing to be back at
school. Whenever I got half a chance I used to
rush over to Winchester, if only for the day
(although one must remember that there were
no motors in those days), and it was seldom out
of my thoughts by day or my dreams by night.
On the opening day of my last term at school I


remember walking down from the station to my
House with my great friend Encombe (with whom
I afterwards shared rooms at Oxford when we
were at Magdalen) and “Sunny” Blandford. I
said then, “Do you realise that the end of this
term will be the end of the best time we shall ever
have, and that we shall never be so happy again
in all our lives?” Encombe said, “I agree abso-
lutely,” but Blandford dissented rather strongly.
There was nothing surprising in this, because in
the event Blandford had a much better time
after he left school than he ever had while he was
there. Ido not think he ever liked it very much,
and though he was not unpopular, he certainly
did not have the same what you might call social
success at school as both Encombe and I did.
Our House (Bramston’s) was a great place (looked
at from the point of view of this world), and,
among other distinctions, it enjoyed in my time
an athletic superiority which was almost enough
to make it a match for all the rest of the School
put together. I cannot claim to have contri-
buted to this to any great extent, because I was
no cricketer, except that I seldom dropped a
catch in “the deep field,” and only fairly good
at football. But I did win the Steeplechase (two
and a half miles across country) when I was
sixteen, and I would, I believe, certainly have
won it again the following year from “scratch”


if I had not been laid up in the sick-room with
a bad sore throat when the race was run.
The Steeplechase was run over natural ground,
including at least one ploughed field, with a
stiffish uphill slope of about half a mile soon
after the start. My winning had, for me, all the
pleasurable thrill of backing a winner at long
odds (which still occasionally happens even in
“this sad late day”), immeasurably intensified
by the fact that I did it all myself, without the
assistance of a horse and jockey and a race-
course, let alone a bookmaker. If there had
been any betting on the event, I would certainly
have started at 100 to i with “no takers.” No-
body except myself had the slightest idea that
I had a chance. My particular friend at the
moment was a boy with bright red hair, who was
known in our House as “Young Bar” (his brother
being “Old Bar”), and to his “pregnant and
vouchsafed ear” I revealed the secret that I was
going to win. He was an amiable and kindly
youth and he endeavoured, without success, to
conceal his incredulity. The race was a handi-
cap, or really it would be better described in
racing language as “weight for age with penal-
ties and allowances.” That is to say, you were
handicapped according to your age, but if you
had any “public form” as a runner you were
additionally docked of start.


As I had no public form and had never run in
the race before and was sixteen and a half, I had,
as far as I can remember, 60 yards’ start. There
was a large field, certainly not less than a hundred
runners. The boy who was “limit” had about
400 yards’ start. I told Young Bar I was going
to win, and Young Bar said, “Good for you,
Bosie,” but I felt that he thought I was raving.
My confidence was based entirely on private runs
I had been taking. I knew I could run for miles
and miles and that the farther I went the better
I felt. I was not very fast, but I was what the
sporting writers used to call “one who will be
running on when others are stopping,” and I
could pull out a good final spurt even when I
was in distress.
As I stood (shivering on bare legs) waiting for
the pistol, my heart was in my boots. Young
Bar stood close at hand and surveyed me with
a sympathetic grin. The pistol went off and I
started to run. No spiked running-shoes, as the
going was too rough for these. Before I had
gone 200 yards I had dropped back a lot, and
after going three-quarters of a mile I had been
passed by “scratch” and many more who had
started behind me. I began to feel that I had no
earthly chance and to wish I were dead—or at
least that I had not started. I could not quicken
my pace without completely knocking myself out,


and I seemed to be running very slowly. As we
ran up the long hill we went slower and slower,
but already those in front were “coming back to
me.” When I got to the top of the hill with
about a mile to go I had got my second wind,
and began to run easily, increasing my pace. In
the next quarter of a mile I passed at least fifty
runners, many of whom had stopped dead or
were walking. I felt perfectly well, except that
the excitement almost made me sick. I ran on
blindly, beginning at last to feel that I was
getting to the end of my tether, and that in any
case I could not possibly go any faster, when
suddenly a mob of boys out of my own House—
among them “Kid” Fuller, “Sal” Phipps, Tim
Weatherby and his brother “Bones,” “Shrimp”
Leveson-Gower and his brothers Freddie and
“Duke,” “Cat” Wigram and a lot more ap-
peared from nowhere, yelling encouragement:
“Go it, Alf!” (I was indifferently “Alf” or
“Bosie” in my House), “there are only three in
front of you! ”
By this time the ground was sloping down and
I could see the three in front of me. I bore
down on them and passed the nearest two, but
the leader, “Young Morsehead,” who won the
race in the following year, was still 100 yards in
front of me. Gradually I wore him down, drew
up to him, pulled out my spurt and raced him


neck and neck for 50 yards. He gave a grunt
and fell back beaten, and I went on to win with
great ease by at least 200 yards, though I nearly
came to grief at the last “fence” but one. There
was no question of jumping these natural fences
or obstacles. It was a case mostly of scrambling
or climbing. As I breasted the tape and fell
on the grass, I thought I was dreaming, for there
was my brother Sholto bending over me and
saying, “Bravo, Bosie.” He was at a private
school in Winchester, and the boys of his school
had been brought out by a master to watch the
Steeplechase.
I have never had such a thrill again all through
my life. My father on hearing the news sent me
five pounds, which was a lot of money at school!
Dear old Fort (one of the masters, or “dons,” as
they are called at Winchester) was so impressed
by the “time” I put up that he rose at five
o’clock next morning, and, to use his own words,
“ran a chain over the course.” He thought the
time was “too good to be true”; but it was not.
I believe my time was a record, but whether or
not it has been subsequently beaten I do not
know.
My still great friend “Sal” Phipps (now
Sir Edmund Phipps, C. 8.), mentioned above,
Lidderdale of “Morsehead’s” (I forget his
initials, but his father was Governor of the Bank


of England at that time), and I were the joint
editors of a weekly paper called The Pentagram,
which ran for one summer term (our last) and
had a tremendous success, its circulation working
out at considerably more than a copy a head for
every boy in the school. At the end of the term
we shared about £lO profit, all made on circu-
lation, for we had no advertisements. (Such are
papers in Paradise!) I subsequently edited four
papers, The Spirit Lamp at Oxford, 1892-3, The
Academy, 1907-10, Plain English, 1920, and Plain
Speech, 1921. The Pentagram was the only one
that ever showed a profit.
Can you wonder that I still revisit the glimpses
of Winchester in my dreams?
Apart from winning the Steeplechase, my
whole life at Winchester was one long joyous
“rag” (allowing for a not very pleasant time
during my first year), and although I am bound
to-say that I did very little work, I managed on
the whole to keep going well enough to escape
serious inconvenience. I was told to “order my
name”—that is to say, report to the Headmaster
for a “licking” with a birch—on several occa-
sions; but as Dr Fearon (“the Bear”), misled by
my appearance, cherished the delusion that I
was a youth of almost angelic virtue, he never,
except on one occasion, carried out the sentence.
He would not have done it then if Toye (the don


who ordered my name) had not gone round to
see him and insisted, in a private interview, that
in my own and the public interest it was abso-
lutely essential that I should not escape this time.
I think my crime was that I had been caught
“copying,” which from our (boys’) point of view
was regarded as not even a venial offence.
Anyhow, “the Bear” (for whom I retain a
feeling of great affection) hardened his heart,
and Lionel Johnson, happening to be “Prefect
of Hall” for that week, officiated in the usual
attendant capacity. I did not mind much, I
must say, though it hurt quite a lot. On the
contrary, I was rather proud, especially as even
in those days these executions were getting very
rare compared with what they had been in the
“good old days.” I exhibited my wounds to a
circle of admirers in “gallery” (Winchester for
dormitory) that night, and felt that I was nobly
carrying on the old Wykehamical traditions.
Our House after my first year was, I imagine,
unlike any other House in any school that ever
existed. Our Housemaster, the Rev. John Trant
Bramston (many of us called him just “Trant”
to his face and “The Root” among ourselves)
was the kindest, most amiable and indulgent man
who ever lived. He spoilt us terribly. He did
our verses for us and gave us “construes” five
minutes before we went “up to books,” and we


sat in his armchairs (at least about a dozen
privileged boys did) in his study while he sat on
the floor, and he was never known to let even the
least of us down in any kind of trouble. The
House was run on more or less republican lines.
That is to say, it was more like what a republic
is supposed to be, and never is, than a Tyranny
which (benevolent or otherwise) is the more usual
form of government in a public school.
The prefects did not take themselves very
seriously, the greatest tolerance and good humour
prevailed, one did what one liked, and there was
no “bracking” (Winchester for “bullying”) of
small boys after my first year. A few “brock-
sters” who still existed when I first went to the
House left after I had been there a year, and
after that there was no more in my time. At
least, that is my experience and impression.
Life was simply one long dream of joy and fun.
Too much so, of course, because it spoilt one for
the troubles and miseries which lay ahead for
the “little victims” that we were.
But, all the same, what an earthly paradise it
was (distinctly earthly, I fear, but a paradise all
the same), and how I loved it and love it still!


CHAPTER XX
CASTING BACK MY MIND TO THAT HALCYON TIME,
ray thoughts return chiefly to the wonderful
summer of 1887, the year of the Jubilee of Queen
Victoria, which I witnessed from the balcony of
Apsley House in the days of “Spurgeon,” as the
Duke was called, because of his really remarkable
likeness to Spurgeon the preacher, and Evelyn,
Duchess of Wellington. At that time I also, with
my mother, stayed at Strathfieldsaye, their place
in the country, where I met the late Bobbie Peel
(Sir Robert Peel), then a boy about nineteen
years old, I myself being sixteen. Hearing that
I was the winner of the Steeplechase at Win-
chester of that year, the Duke insisted on getting
up a 200-yards’ race for the four or five boys who
were staying in the house (there was a large
house-party of about twenty-five guests), and the
race was won from me, second, by the aforesaid
Bobbie Peel. It was much too short a race for
me to have any chance, anything under a mile
being “right out of my distance.”
That Summer Term at Winchester remains
ever memorable to me because of the glorious


weather and the fact that owing to an epidemic
of some sort (I think it was “German measles,”
which is really nothing but a sort of rash which
lasts only a few days but continues to be in-
fectious for at least three weeks) a whole lot of
us were interned in the “Sick-House,” which is,
or was (for I have not been to Winchester for
more than twenty-five years), situated right at
the edge of “New Field” —that is to say, the
principal playing-field. It was divided from the
playing-fields by a high wall, on the top of which
we (confined in the Sick-House precincts) sat
and exchanged remarks and gibes with boys on
the other side. While the School was at work
in the classrooms, we in the Sick-House were
allowed to roam freely in the playing-fields.
Really we had the most splendid time, because
we had no work to do and there was no one to
interfere with us in any way except Miss D’Arcy,
the School Matron, a most kind and delightful
lady, and a fat, rosy-cheeked and good-natured
servant known as “Louisa” (there must have
been other maids, but I remember only Louisa).
During this confinement we, of course, made
contacts with boys in other Houses whom in the
ordinary way we would never have got to know
well, if at all. Among the boys in the Sick-House
was one, Maurice Turner, the son of one of the
House dons. He was about two years younger


than I was, and we happened to be put in the
same ward (or whatever it was called), in
adjacent beds. A violent mutual attraction
sprang up between us. (“Whoever loved that
loved not at first sight?”) During the whole of
that blissful three weeks when we remained in
the Sick-House we were inseparable. In the
golden summer weather we walked about with
arms entwined or lay in the long grass with
stone bottles of ginger beer, and talked and
talked, and told each other stories, real or
imaginary. Maurice, who was such a baby that,
as in the case of Cesario-Viola, “One would
think that his mother’s milk was scarce out of
him,” freed from the cramping inhibitions of
public-school taboos and conventions, became a
natural child and sang songs he had learnt in the
nursery. Some lines of one of them stick in my
memory to this day, after more than fifty years.
Old Moriar
What you doing thar?
Sitting in the corner, smoking your cigar?
And as we lay in the long grass bounding “New
Field,”
The day lay still in a dream
And the hours forgot to pass.
Our friendship (perhaps I ought to make it
clear in this day, when any great friendship
between persons of the same sex is generally


labelled homosexual as a matter of course) was
entirely innocent and idyllic, but it was certainly
sentimental to the last degree, which was very
far from being the case with most friendships
between older and younger boys in my day at
Winchester. Immorality there might be, but
sentiment no!
To this very hour it gives me a sharp pang in
the heart to remember that at about ten o’clock
in the morning of the day Maurice left the Sick-
House (he had been there a few days already
when I arrived and consequently went out
before I did) I suddenly realised that I had not
seen him since breakfast. I did not know,
neither did he, that he was leaving that day.
We both thought that he would be there at least
another day, which in mid-summer at school is
an eternity. Then someone told me that Maurice
had been looking for me and that he had been
sent for to Miss D’Arcy’s room. The frightful
implications of this fatal news had just penetrated
to my brain when Louisa appeared on the scene
and said, “Miss D’Arcy wants you to go to her
room to say good-bye to Master Maurice.” I
went to the Matron’s room and there was
Maurice, looking very woebegone, sitting on the
sofa. I threw my arms round his neck, and
while Miss D’Arcy looked on sympathetically we
embraced and mingled our tears, knowing full


well that owing to the idiotic and rotten con-
ventions of public-school life, he being younger
than I, and our not being in the same House,
we would hardly ever again be able to see each
other except in the distance. We both cried
bitterly as we embraced, and I shall never forget
the kindness and sympathy of Miss D’Arcy, who,
being a good woman, saw nothing to reprehend
in two boys kissing each other and shedding
tears at parting.
I never saw Maurice again to speak to for the
rest of that term, except once for about two
minutes when we exchanged a few hurried,
almost whispered words, and thereafter we were
as hopelessly parted as if we had inhabited
two countries separated by “the salt estranging
sea.” I believe Maurice is dead. I tried to
find him the other day in the Roll and Record for
Old Wykehamists compiled by Colonel Cowland,
but his name was not in that list, which records
only the living. I saw him again once or twice
when I came down to the School from Oxford,
and we were able to talk freely then, and even
go for a walk together, for by that time he was a
senior boy and I had all the privileges of being
an “ Old Wykehamist,” but the real irrevocable
parting (as we both knew when it happened)
was on that summer morning in Miss D’Arcy’s
room. I expect we shall meet again some day


in Heaven, and be exactly the same age and look
exactly as we were in the Summer Term of
Jubilee year 1887. According to Thomas a
Kempis, when one is in Heaven one has one’s
will for ever, and I have always intended to be
a boy there, as I mentioned in my Autobiography,
written nearly ten years ago.
This year 1887 was also the year in which I
first met Olive, she being then a small child
bridesmaid at the wedding of my cousin Rachel
Montgomery, as related elsewhere in this book,
although we did not know each other then, and
I have other loves and friendships belonging to
that period or well able to fit into it.
Yes, decidedly, 1887, or its everlasting reflec-
tion, will be the star-year of my eternity. I never
wanted to grow up, anyway. This is not a
Peter-Pannish affectation, for I had the feeling
long before I had ever heard of Sir James Barrie,
nor can I imagine how anyone could ever hope
to be perfectly happy unless he or she were (1)
a child and (2) perfectly innocent in the right
sense of the word, which, when you come to
think of it, are exactly the qualifications for
getting into the Kingdom of Heaven.


CHAPTER XXI
ALTHOUGH I LOVED IT TOO, I NEVER CARED FOR
Oxford quite in the way I did for Winchester.
Looking back at it now, I realise that my best
time there was my first two years, when I was
still as much at heart a schoolboy as I was in
appearance, and before I became “intellectual’ ’
and “aesthetic.” While still regretting school, I
enjoyed the independence and my rooms in
“New Buildings” (eighteenth-century, really),
with my little bedroom looking out on the deer-
park. Later I moved into St Swithin’s, which
really were new buildings, looking out on “the
High.” They were better rooms than my first
set, but by the time I got them I was more
sophisticated and less easily pleased and had
got over the not-altogether-pleasing sensation of
being “grown up,” as I fondly imagined myself
to be in my first year. Later still, I moved into
34 High Street to rooms which I shared with
Encombe. They were charming rooms, on the
second floor, and they had been jointiy occupied
by Ampthill, Artie Paget (Sir Richard Paget)
and Guy Nickalls, all of whom were my friends,


Artie being now the only survivor. Encombe
and I succeeded them there, and one of our
glories was that we had a grand piano, a legacy
from Artie Paget. We were over the Loders
Club (a Christchurch club), which I suppose still
exists. We waged a perpetual (not quite serious)
war with the Loders over our right to use a
lavatory which they claimed belonged to the
Club, but to which we considered we had the
right of entry. I exchanged several letters
couched in formal language with the Secretary
of the Loders on this vexed question, “Lord
Alfred Douglas presents his compliments to the
Secretary of the Loders Club and begs to point
out, &c., &c.,” to which equally formal and
increasingly acid replies were returned.
On one occasion when Artie Paget came to see
us he repaired to this resort, being under the
impression that the Club was empty, but some
member of the Club, having seen him, went and
locked the door on the outside, so that he could
not get out. However, Artie (“Quangle” he
was then more generally called on account of
his delightful musical setting of Lear’s rhyme
about “The Quangle-Wangle-Quee”) was a man
of infinite resource. He remained in statu quo
for at least an hour, and then escaped by the
window and a drain-pipe (the lavatory was on
the first floor), leaving the door locked on the


inside, so that the Loders had to pick the lock
to get in. When they finally did so, they found
that “Quangle” had patiently and methodically
taken the whole mechanism to pieces, and that
all the screws and levers and plugs had been
removed. So they had to get a plumber in to
put it right. Hence more acidly polite letters,
presenting of compliments and so forth. As a
matter of fact we really had no right whatever
to use this lavatory, which undoubtedly be-
longed to the Club, but as Encombe and I slept
on the premises and the Club members did not,
we had them at a disadvantage. In the long
run I think we were tacitly admitted as honorary
members of that portion of the Club, which was
a case on their part of making a virtue of
necessity. By the way, I wonder how many of
my readers are aware that the phrase I have just
used comes from Shakespeare. “To make a
virtue of necessity” is a blank verse line in The
Two Gentlemen of Verona. I apologise to those
who know this already, but I have successfully
challenged quite a lot of people to give the origin
of the phrase, and have found that mostly they
were not aware that Shakespeare invented it.
I wasted time in a shocking way at Oxford.
I did hardly any work (though I did do a lot of
miscellaneous reading) and was “sent down”
for a term because I failed to pass “Smalls” at


my first attempt, being ploughed in mathematics,
which was always my weak point. I never suc-
ceeded in mastering Euclid at school, and it was
only by learning all the propositions in the first
book by heart that I eventually succeeded in
passing “Smalls” at the second attempt. During
the term when I was sent down I stayed with a
most delightful parson, Mr Lambert in Here-
fordshire. I hired a pony from Oxford during
the time I was there and disported myself there-
with, with my brother Sholto, who was also
being coached there. We erected jumps in the
vicar’s fields. But I was made to do enough
work to get through “Smalls” quite easily when
I got back to Magdalen the next term. At this
crammer’s I met E. B. Osborn, who has been for
many years Literary Editor of the Morning Post.
As I have already mentioned, he contributed to
my paper The Spirit Lamp both in prose and
verse, and his younger brother, Percy Osborn,
who was at Magdalen with me, did the same.
Mr Lambert, the vicar in whose house I
stayed, was a fine musician and had a splendid
bass voice, and he had got up quite a good choir
in his village church. I joined the choir as an
alto, and, attired in a surplice, “I went on
Sunday to the church and sat among the boys,”
following the good example of Longfellow’s
Village Blacksmith. I loved music, and I was


well able to sing a part in those days in glees and
madrigals, which were very much in vogue at
Magdalen. In my time the choir at Magdalen
was superb. Somebody told me the other day
that it is no longer very good, but I do not
believe this. It ought to be, considering it has
a £SOOO a year endowment to spend. I was
great friends with Frank Marshall, who was an
“Academical Clerk” —that is, an undergraduate
member of Magdalen choir —and was also a
splendid musician and pianist. Under his guid-
ance I got a very wide and thorough knowledge
of all the best English Church music, for I went
to Chapel regularly every evening simply to
listen to the singing. Marshall could perform
feats on the piano, especially if he had had a few
drinks. On one occasion he was challenged by
someone late at night, after a festive evening, to
play Wesley’s “The Wilderness” by heart and
to transpose it into another key, which he did
with contemptuous ease and perfect accuracy,
and without turning a hair. Later, after he left
Oxford, I have often heard him play Bach’s
great Mass in B Minor right through by heart.
Although I was, in my second year at Magdalen,
over twenty, I could, at a pinch, sing a top G in
a boy’s voice, and I used, though only in the
privacy of Frank Marshall’s rooms, to sing the
soprano part in the trio in Sterndale Bennett’s


May Queen , “Can a simple maiden hear?”, with
Marshall and Tapsfield (another splendid bass
voice and an Academical Clerk) taking the other
parts. Frank Marshall also used to make me
sing “As when the dove” from Handel’s Acis and
Galatea. Lovely stuff. Tapsfield, although he
could not play the piano, was also a very fine
musician. He was one of my greatest friends,
and was known as “Tapper.” He could sing
anything at sight, with perfect ease and accuracy,
and was in great demand at “After-common-
rooms” (that is, smoking concerts which we had
once a week in Junior Common Room).
Frank Marshall, nearly two years my senior,
was one of my dearest friends at Oxford (leaving
out the ever-faithful and beloved Encombe,
perhaps the greatest of all), and I never alto-
gether lost touch with him in after years till,
God rest his soul, he died about five years ago.
Magdalen was really “thick” with musicians in
those days. On one occasion Frank Marshall
brought the Rev. Frederick Bussell, Walter
Pater’s particular friend at Brasenose, to “After-
common-room.” Bussell loved Bach and Handel
and played the piano well and composed quite
good stuff too. He was a “Mus. Doc.” He was
pressed to sing something, and after refusing at
first, finally, to the great joy of the under-
graduates, sat down to the piano and burst into


“Their land brought forth frogs” from Handel’s
Israel in Egypt, which he sang in a falsetto alto
voice. The unmusical part of the rather rowdy-
audience (which was the greater part) regarded
it as a comic song (which it is in a way, with
its hopping accompaniment), but Bussell was
delighted with the reception of his effort, and
expressed gratified surprise at the good taste of
the undergrads of Magdalen in appreciating
classical music.
Dear old Dr Roberts, the organist, was also
a great friend of mine. I often sat in his organ-
loft while he was taking services. He did
not play the organ very well, but he was a
splendid choir-master, and the boys in the choir
(each of them had a scholarship worth £l5O
a year) were simply unrivalled. I remember
Joachim, the great violinist, coming to Magdalen
Chapel to hear Exultate Deo by the older Wesley,
in eight parts, and being so overcome by the
magnificent way it was sung that he wept openly,
the tears running down his cheeks. I studied
harmony and counterpoint with Dr Roberts and
wrote two madrigals, one of which was per-
formed at Winchester, at “School Concert,”
words in both cases by Lionel Johnson. Other
great friends were Reuben Clegg, Lucas D’Oyly
Carte and “Tyler” Reid, all Wykehamists.
At that time I won the mile handicap in the


Magdalen Sports and the two miles (scratch) the
following year (1892). I described in my Auto-
biography how I ruined my chance of winning the
three miles and getting my “blue” at the ’Varsity
Sports, so I will not repeat that sad story. I
think it was partly my disgust at my failure to
win this race, which I had privately tried myself
to be good enough to win, that finally turned me
in the “intellectual” and “aesthetic” direction,
for it was soon after this disappointment that I
took over The Spirit Lamp and retired altogether
from the field of athletics, fool that I was, for I
might just as well have done both things. But
then, of course, by this time Oscar Wilde had
come into my life, and his influence was certainly
not in an athletic direction, as I have already
recorded.
On the whole I admit that I made a hash of
my last three terms at Oxford, after Frank
Marshall and “Tapper” had gone down, even
allowing that The Spirit Lamp was a meritorious
effort on the whole, and that I did write a
certain amount of good poetry. But out, alas!
This, all this, was in the olden
Time long ago.


CHAPTER XXII
IT WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE FOR ME TO WRITE
a book of reminiscences without making some
reference to my imprisonment in Wormwood
Scrubs.
I think I had better explain, first of all, that
the offence for which I received “six months in
the Second Division” did not involve any moral
obloquy (not on my part, at any rate!). I was
sent to prison for libelling Mr Winston Churchill
about the Battle of Jutland. I alleged that he had
deliberately published a false report of the battle
and that, as a consequence, a group of financiers
had brought off a large coup on the New York
Stock Exchange.
I am fully persuaded now that what I wrote
was untrue as far as Mr Winston Churchill
is concerned. There was a false report
published, and Lord Balfour actually made a
speech at the Cannon Street Hotel, in which,
two or three days after the publication of the
report, he corrected it and declared that it had
given an utterly wrong impression, while Lord
Jellicoe from his flagship telegraphed protesting


that the report was “not in accordance with his
dispatch,” as anyone can see for himself by
looking up the “Blue Book” issued by the
Government. But lam now perfectly convinced
that Mr Churchill had nothing to do with it,
and by saying that he had deliberately issued the
report I did undoubtedly libel him and do him a
great injustice.
On the other hand, as I have said before, I
think it was very unfair to send me to prison
because what I wrote (first in my paper Plain
English, when no steps whatever were taken
against me, and then two years later in a
pamphlet which was sold in the streets to the
extent of several thousand copies) was written
by me entirely out of patriotism and in the public
interest and without the slightest malice. I
acted as I did (thereby taking a risk which not
one man in a hundred thousand would have had
the courage to take) simply and solely because I
believed what I wrote on the evidence supplied
to me from various sources. If steps had been
take by anyone whatever when I first published
the story in Plain English to show me that I was
mistaken, I would have at once withdrawn the
allegations, and naturally I would not have
repeated them two years later.
However, there is nothing to be gained by
arguing this out now. I was convicted at the


Old Bailey and sentenced by the late Mr Justice
Avory to six months’ imprisonment in the Second
Division.
This Second Division business is one of the
greatest frauds ever perpetrated on the public
in general. lam quite convinced that even the
judges themselves who sentence people to the
Second Division believe that they are thereby
doing a man a great favour, and saving him
from a great deal of the hardship and suffering
which imprisonment with hard labour or in “the
Third Division” is bound to entail. In fact, the
judge’s intention is undoubtedly to mitigate
the sentence. As a matter of fact there is no real
difference between the Second and the Third
divisions. When I was in prison I was in
“Hall B” at Wormwood Scrubs, and there were
several hundred prisoners in that building,
Second and Third Division men having exactly
the same cells and food, and being all mixed up
together without the slightest distinction, except
that the Second Division prisoners wore clothes
which were different from, arid rather more
revolting in appearance than, those worn by the
Third Division. As to “hard labour,” I was,
till I was removed, when I was nearly at my last
gasp from starvation, to hospital, a “gardener.”
Some of the gardeners were Third Division men
sentenced to hard labour, and others, like myself,


were in the Second Division and supposed to do
only “light labour.” Well, we all did exactly
the same jobs. So if it was “hard labour” in
the one case, obviously it was hard labour in the
other. I do not complain about that, and as a
matter of fact the warder (officers they are called
in prison) who looked after the “gardeners” was
a most kind and amiable man, and the work we
did was, generally speaking, not very hard. I
am merely making the point that being in the
Second Division did not confer the slightest
privilege or alleviation in the matter of the work
I had to do. Actually the only advantage the
Second Division man has over the Third Division
man is that he is entitled to receive letters and
visits from friends at more frequent intervals
(once a month in each case is the allowance, as
far as I remember). This, of course, is a privi-
lege, but it does not amount to much, and in
my case I would willingly have dispensed with it.
It is a painful thing to receive visits when one is
in prison. When my mother came to see me it
was a terrible ordeal for us both, and when she
left I was racked with fear that I would never
see her again, as she was very old and frail, and
it seemed impossible then that she could live much
longer (as a matter of fact she lived twelve years
after that), and the strain of keeping up the
pretence that I was perfectly happy in prison,


and really regarded the whole thing as a joke,
was just about as much as I could endure during
the twenty minutes or so of her visit.
In the case of letters, considering that every
letter you write or receive is read by the Governor
or his deputy, there is really very little consola-
tion to be got out of them. Personally while I
was in prison (before I got into the hospital,
where I got plenty to eat) I would willingly have
exchanged the “privilege” for something decent
to eat at least once a week, say a loaf of bread
on Sunday!
As it was, being utterly unable to eat the filthy
food, I starved for nearly two months, and was
moved into the hospital only when I had lost
nearly two stone in weight and was so weak that
when I did go to the hospital the “officer” who
took me there had to hold me up as I walked
across the yard and garden.
Apart from being starved I would not have
minded the imprisonment very much, and in
any case I am glad I had the experience, now
that it is over. I was sustained not only by the
consciousness of having done nothing wrong and
the feeling that I was suffering “for justice’s
sake,” but also by the kindness with which this
was recognised by nearly all the “officers” as
well as by my fellow-prisoners, who appeared to
be a most amiable and pathetic group of people.


It is not etiquette in prison to ask another
prisoner what he is “in for,” but although
(barbarity number two, filthy food being number
one) we were “not allowed to talk” (though of
course we did), a great number of my comrades
in misfortune confided to me the nature of their
misdemeanours. Bigamy was the fashionable
offence. About half the men in my Hall were
in for bigamy, which is the poor man’s substitute
for divorce. If they had been rich or well-to-do,
these prisoners would have got divorces, but
being poor they resorted to bigamy.
There was one man, a small and melancholy
man, in the garden who on one occasion poured
forth his soul in lamentations to me. “ Gardeners ”
traditionally had the privilege of talking to each
other. He shed tears when he said, “It is not
that I mind being in quod; after all, it’s quite
comfortable, and it’s warm in winter and the
food is excellent ; but when I think of my dear
wife and children I often get very low.” At this
point he was overcome by emotion and left me.
Shortly afterwards another of the gardeners said
to me, “I see has been pitching you the tale.
I suppose you don’t know what he’s in for, do
you?” “I haven’t the slightest idea,” said I.
“Eighteen months’ hard for having a child by
his own daughter aged thirteen,” he replied with
a sardonic grin.


When I got into the hospital, the relief from
starvation was quite overwhelming. Although
the food was just ordinary roast meat and potatoes
and plain bread (no butter, only margarine,
which I never would eat), it seemed to me,
starving as I was, perfectly delicious. I was also
given a pint of milk a day, the idea being to
“feed me up” and let me get back to my normal
weight. I never did this, which was lucky for
me, because if I had done so I would have been
sent back to the ordinary prison, and I was so
much less wretched in hospital, where I not only
had good food but a comparatively comfortable
bed or cot, that the idea of returning to the
starvation and squalor of my cell in “Hall B”
was a nightmare to me. In hospital I also had
any amount of books, and at the suggestion of
the librarian, I marked in the catalogue about
fifty or more that I would like, and these were
brought to me a dozen at a time and stacked up
in my cell. In hospital you are not obliged to
do any work, though some do it voluntarily to
kill the deadly monotony. I merely lay on my
bed and read all day. I injured my eyesight by
reading after dark by a very bad gas-light.
When I went into prison I had superb sight both
for reading and for long-distance vision, but when
I came out of prison I was short-sighted and had
to start wearing glasses for reading.


I wrote my poem In Excelsis (a sequence of
seventeen sonnets) in the prison hospital, having
obtained, through the kind intervention of a
friend “outside,” permission from the Home
Office to have writing materials (a copy-book
and a pencil).
I have already related in my Autobiography how
the Home Office, having given me permission to
write and supplied me with the materials to do
it, confiscated my manuscript three days before
I left prison and refused to give it back to me,
though I twice made an application later on to
have it returned to me. This seems to me to be
cruel and spiteful and also idiotic. If I had not
taken the precaution of learning my seventeen
sonnets by heart and writing them out directly I
got out of prison, my poem In Excelsis would have
been lost for good and all.
I called it In Excelsis, of course, with a view to
going one better than Oscar Wilde’s De Profundis.
It was published in The London Mercury by Jack
Squire a few months after I came out of prison.
His publishing of it was a very generous and
magnanimous gesture on his part, because we
were not personally acquainted and, when I had
Plain English, I had allowed T. W. H. Crosland
to write a rather ill-natured attack on him called
“The Tin Whistle.” At that time I had never
met Jack Squire and did not know, as I do now,


what an altogether splendid fellow he is. I now
regard him as one of my greatest friends, and I
am proud to know, as I do, that he reciprocates
my feelings of friendship.
Prison is much worse than anyone could
imagine who has not experienced it. It is alto-
gether terrible. I would not like to think that
my worst enemy was in prison. (As a matter of
fact nowadays I am not conscious of having any
enemies.) I am convinced that judges on the
Bench have not the slightest idea of how bad it is.
But that, of course, is not their fault. There are
some splendid judges on the Bench, and a good
judge is a man who commands my deepest
respect. There are others, of course, and pos-
terity will remember their names in two or three
cases, because I have put them into my Satires.
Milton, though he said nothing about judges,
warned Captains and Colonels and Knights in
arms to refrain from lifting their spears against
the Muse’s bower. As he put it, the poet can
“requite” those who treat him well by “wafting
their name o’er land and seas.” The poet,
though Milton was too polite to mention it, can
also equally do another kind of wafting in the
case of those who ill-treat him. In either alter-
native he invariably gets the last word. There-
fore judges had needs look to it.


CHAPTER XXIII
IAM GLAD I WAS IN PRISON, FOR SEVERAL REASONS.
I think it is a great distinction, even though I
was not, as poor Oscar Wilde (who could not
resist being witty or amusing in tragic circum-
stances) told me was the case with him, “buoyed
up by a sense of guilt.” On the contrary, I con-
sidered then, as I consider now, that I was quite
innocent in the true sense of the word (although
I admit that I did publish a libel) and that I
was something of a martyr to the cause of free
speech and honest criticism of public men. If
the Labour Party had ever been anything at all
like what it pretends to be, it would have recog-
nised this. (It was a Conservative Government
which sent me to prison.) However, lam glad
it did not, because, if it had, I would perhaps
have been placed in the position of being forced
to have a certain amount of respect for it, which
would not have suited me at all.
The Labour Party was in power when I came
out of prison, and directly I got out I wrote to
their Home Secretary (whose name I have for-
gotten) and pointed out that it was outrageous


from their own point of view to keep the Sinn
Feiners in Wormwood Scrubs as ordinary
Second Division prisoners. Although I had been
violently anti-Sinn Fein while I was running
Plain English and later, I had sufficient respect
for abstract justice to see that it was revolting
for a party of men, who live and exist, as Labour
politicians do, more or less, by exploiting the
idea of revolution, to keep as ordinary prisoners,
in association with convicted criminals, a large
number of men who were guilty of nothing more
than doing exactly what the Labour Party would
do themselves in similar circumstances, supposing
(which is improbable) that they had the pluck
to do it.
I told the Home Secretary in my letter that
the least he could do would be to transfer the
Sinn Feiners to Brixton and treat them as “First
Class Misdemeanants.” Whether as the result
of my letter or not, this is exactly what he did.
They were transferred to Brixton two or three
weeks after I wrote, and very shortly afterwards
they were released.
I made friends with the Sinn Feiners while I
was in prison chiefly because they were Catholics
and gentlemen. I used to see them in the
Catholic Chapel, where for the last two months
of my imprisonment I played the organ at Mass
and other services. I call it “the organ,” but


as a matter of fact it was only an harmonium.
I owed this treat (for it was a treat, because it
did something to break the soul-killing monotony)
to Father Musgrave, the Catholic Chaplain,
who showed me a great deal of kindness, as did
the doctor, Doctor Watson, a most charming
and cultivated man, who lent me French novels
(chiefly Balzac) while I was in the hospital and
who certainly saved my life by having me
weighed and then, finding that I had lost so
much weight, removed to the hospital, where I
got plenty to eat. The Deputy Governor was
also very kind to me. He was a sailor. The
Governor himself was most sympathetic about
the idiotic procedure of the Home Office in
confiscating the manuscript of my poem In
Excelsis. He apologised for taking it from me a
few days before I left prison and said, “It’s not
my fault. I have been told by the Home Office
to confiscate it, and I must, but I dare say they
will give it back to you if you write to them
after you get out.” But they never did, and
they have got it still. I would very much like
to have it, because it would be intensely interest-
ing for me to see again the process by which I
wrote my poem. I wrote it, as I have already
said, in a copy-book, exactly such as are supplied
for educational purposes to Borstal boys. I
worked out each sonnet on the left side of the


book and then made a fair copy on the opposite
page on the right. Thus the whole poem is
shown as it was hammered out, sonnet by sonnet.
It took me a desperate effort to write it, because
the subject was very deep and, referring to my
poem, the critic Tom Earle Welby said to me,
“It is more ‘packed’ than any poem of its length
that I know.” Welby had a tremendous ad-
miration for it, and just before he died he was
engaged on doing an article for one of the
monthly reviews about it and my poetry
generally. The last time I saw him, a few
weeks before his death, as he lay in bed in his
house in Fernshaw Road, he said: “I am going
to do you justice as a poet if I live.” I thought
to myself at the time that he was then dying.
He was a brilliant critic and the most kind and
amiable of men. It was at parties given since
his death by his charming wife that I read my
poems on two occasions out of the four times in
my life when I have done this to an audience, as
mentioned in my second chapter.
I was also glad to have been in prison because,
as I explained in my poem In Excelsis, the re-
collection of hard suffering (especially if it is
unmerited) will probably be a much greater
consolation when one is dying than the remem-
brance of any amount of pleasure and joy. At
any rate that is what my conception of Catholic


Philosophy suggests to me. According to my
poem, such suffering is “Sovereign against the
gates of Hell.” Perhaps after I am dead some
Catholic writer or other may tumble to the fact
that In Excelsis is worth considering from a
Catholic point of view. Up to the present such
appreciation as it has received (not inconsider-
able) has come entirely from non-Gatholic
quarters. A prophet is not without honour save
in his own country, as I have had occasion to
remark before. Most of the Catholic Press in
this country is, apparently, too busy “boosting”
T. S. Eliot and his school to turn its attention to
real poetry written by an orthodox Catholic poet.
Of course the best part of prison is getting out.
I shall never forget the feeling of almost in-
credulous joy I felt when the “officer” entered
my cell in hospital very early in the morning and
said, “Well, the day has come at last,” and I
put on my prison clothes for the last time and
went over to the “Reception Room” to get into
my own clothes once more. Our faithful old
man-servant, Duffy, who had been an A.B. in
the same ship in the Navy when my brother
Percy (the late Queensberry) was a midshipman,
was there inside the prison courtyard waiting
for me with a car. This letting the car come
right inside the prison gates was arranged for
me by the kindness of the Governor, to avoid


the possibility of any attentions from the Press in
the shape of reporters seeking interviews. I did
not see a sign of any reporters, as a matter of
fact. If I had, I rather think my journalistic
instincts would have been aroused, and I would
probably have given them a “story.” One
cannot forget that one has been an editor, and
therefore a journalist, and much as I have
suffered from journalists in my time, I have also
often had a lot to thank them for.
When I got out of prison I did not, I must say,
feel at all embarrassed by my conviction and
sentence. On the contrary, I always felt rather
proud of them, and it amused me to say, “when
I was in prison,” and to observe the reactions
produced by the words on various people.
My dear old friend the late Harry de Windt
told me that he once had a great friend, the
brother of an Irish peer, who had been sent to
prison (for a rather unmentionable sort of
offence), and when he got out, Harry, being
anxious to cheer him up, persuaded some highly
respectable people to ask him to a rather stuffy,
but smart, dinner-party. Harry’s friend, who
was a hearty and loud-voiced soldier, caused
him the most acute embarrassment by calling
up to him from the other end of the table during
a pause in the conversation, “Different sort of
grub this from what we used to get in the


‘Scrubs,’ old boy, eh, what?” which made no
kind of a hit with his host and hostess and
paralysed some of the guests with horror.
Harry, by the way, before the War, visited and
investigated all the prisons of Europe, including
those of pre-revolution Russia and Siberia, and
he wrote a book about them in which he gave
it as his considered opinion that of all the prisons
he had visited, the English were the worst to
be in. England is, I believe, the only country
in the world which forbids prisoners to talk or
to fraternise or to have food paid for by them-
selves or their friends. In these respects, prisons
in England are inhuman, and they were probably
much more tolerable, if less sanitary, before they
were “reformed” by “philanthropists” whose
main object was to prevent their inmates from
being “corrupted” by association with their
fellows. As I have already indicated, we did
talk in prison, but it was “against the rules,”
and one was liable to be shouted at and told to
“shut one’s mouth” by one of the “officers”
every time one did it. I fail to see how it is
possible to defend such an inhuman rule, which,
if it were really rigidly enforced, would drive the
prisoners to melancholy and madness. I am
told that conditions in prison are better than
they were when I was in Wormwood Scrubs in
1923-24. (I went in in December 1923 and


got out in the following May.) All I can say is
that I hope this is true. It is perhaps, however,
fair to say that the whole of my prison experience,
before I got into the hospital, was coloured by
the starvation I endured. If I had been able
to eat the food, no doubt everything would have
been different. I must add too that, no doubt
as the result of this starvation and being worn
out with fatigue at night, I used to sleep in the
most wonderful way, and have the most heavenly
dreams. It was not till I got into hospital that
I began to sleep badly and to experience the
worst kind of prisoner’s dream, which consists in
dreaming that one is “out” at last and then
waking to find oneself still in prison. It is odd
that I have never once dreamt that I was back
in prison since I got out.


CHAPTER XXIV
WHEN I WAS IN PRISON I DERIVED A CONSIDERABLE
amount of consolation from remembering that
a large number of Saints, in addition to nearly
all the Apostles, had been in prison in their time.
I also reflected with distinct satisfaction that
Cardinal Newman (before he became a Cardinal)
was convicted of criminal libel and sentenced at
the Old Bailey, after what the reporters describe
as a “stern rebuke from the judge.” He escaped
imprisonment only “by the skin of his teeth”
and was “let off” with a heavy fine, his offence
being that he told the exact truth about a certain
apostate Italian monk. Everything he had
written was true and “in the public interest,”
but he was a victim of one of those miscarriages
of justice which, whatever English people may
think, do occur from time to time in our Courts.
In Newman’s case the determining factor was
anti-Catholic bias.
I remember reading an article in some monthly
magazine by the late Sir Edward Clarke in which
he wrote that Mr Justice Hawkins was “the
wickedest judge” he had ever come across in


the Law Courts. Obviously, then, there are such
things as wicked judges, at any rate Sir Edward
Clarke, who was the Leader of the Bar for many
years, thought so! If one says that anyone is
the “wickedest judge” one ever came across, it
implies that there are others more or less wicked.
But of course one need not name them, or even
hint whether they are alive or dead. One can
always fall back on Mr Justice Jeffreys.
This reminds me of the Catholic doctrine of
Hell. It is de fide that Hell exists and that there
are souls in it, but charity does not permit a
Catholic to presume that any one given person
is in Hell, not even Judas Iscariot, which has
always seemed to me to settle the claims of Dante
to be considered an orthodox Catholic poet. His
Inferno is a monument of uncharitableness.
On the whole, after a very large experience of
the Law Courts, I am inclined to think that
our system of trial by judge and jury, with the
examination-in-chief and cross-examination of
witnesses, is the fairest method that exists of
grinding out the truth. It is astonishing how it
works. When a case starts one is inclined to
despair of the real truth coming out. The con-
fusion and misunderstanding seem hopeless.
Things “go wrong,” and the judge asks questions
which seem to indicate that he has utterly failed
to grasp the point. I have often felt inclined,


at the early stages of a case, to chuck it up and
walk out (you cannot execute even this gesture
if you are in the dock!); but after a time, when
the legal machine has had a chance to work, the
atmosphere begins to clear, the truth begins to
emerge and the judge reveals himself as extra-
ordinarily astute and as having been all the time
on the right track in spite of his apparently
pointless questions and remarks. One’s heart
does not exactly leap up at this stage of the pro-
ceedings, as Wordsworth’s did when he beheld
the rainbow in the sky, but one does begin to
feel a gleam of hope that, after all (even against
frightful odds, and all my victories in the Law
Courts have been against frightful odds), one
may have a chance of winning the case. Then
comes a certain moment, generally when one has
been a long time in the witness-box and is con-
scious of having been slightly more than a match
for cross-examining counsel, when one’s heart
really does leap up with exultation, and one says
to oneself, “We’ve got them.” I am referring,
of course, to a case which one wins. Losing a
case is a horrible experience, unless, indeed, as
has happened to me twice, one knows beforehand
that one could not possibly win, in which case
one can always do as I did in the first big case
I lost, say to oneself, “Never mind, this is only
the first round. Next time I shall beat them,


having profited by the mistakes made by myself
and my counsel.” In this particular instance
this is really what happened a year later. Win
or lose, it is a wearing business; but I can truth-
fully say that the exhilaration of winning a big
case, and defeating all the prejudice and unfair-
ness which rich men can and do import into it
by means of clever counsel, is unforgettable, and
unbeatable by any other emotion. I should say
that riding in and winning the Grand National
on one’s own horse is about the only sensation
to equal it.
There is a distinct joy in the clash of wits and
brains that takes place when one is in the witness-
box. To win the reluctantly forced approbation
of a judge who started by being hostile and, as
one is obliged to think, deliberately unfair, to
see his grim face gradually relax into the sem-
blance of a fatherly smile (judges always become
fatherly when you are on the point of winning a
case —at least, that is my experience, but perhaps
that is just my infantile complex coming up
again), to go through all this and then to hear
the jury say “Verdict for the plaintiff, damages
one thousand pounds,” is worth a lot of pre-
liminary tribulation and mental agony.
The worst time I ever had in a lawsuit was
when my counsel would not put me in the
witness-box and declared that he could win the


case without my evidence, and that there was no
object in putting me up to be “shot at” by one
of the most brilliant and deadly cross-examiners
at the Bar, I had argued fiercely, in chambers,
over this point with my solicitor and counsel, and
I had said, “If I don’t go into the witness-box I
can’t possibly win the case.” My solicitor said
to me, “Now, Lord Alfred, Mr knows that
you are a first-class witness, but in this case the
attack on you will be very fierce and deadly.
If you go into the witness-box you will be
butchered. Do let him do it in his own way.”
So I had to agree, only to see, when the case had
been on for about an hour or so, how right I
was and how hopelessly wrong they were. When
I saw how things were going (I was being
butchered, without the power to hit back), I
whispered to my counsel, “If you don’t put me
into the witness-box I shall chuck up the case
and walk out.”
He saw it by that time, of course, and he made
an application to the judge to be allowed to put
me in the box “in rebuttal.” Whether I was
allowed to go into the box or not depended en-
tirely on the judge’s discretion, and naturally
counsel on the other side argued that as I had
not gone into the box directly after my counsel’s
“opening,” I had forfeited my claim to do so
now.


But the judge, who I verily believe thought at
that time that I had not got a dog’s chance of
winning anyhow, said, “I think the jury would
like to hear him in the witness-box and I rule
that he may go into it.”
Thereafter I completely turned the tables on
opposing counsel, and after I had been cross-
examined for half an hour I had the jury on my
side, as I could tell by their faces; and in two
hours I had the judge on my side too. I was six
hours in the box altogether, on two consecutive
days, and I was winning all along after the first
two hours. My wife very gallantly and nobly
sat through the case “like Patience on a monu-
ment smiling at grief,” in spite of the fearful
unpleasantness of the attack on me. No doubt
her presence greatly helped me to win the case.
It appealed to the jury, who were, thank God,
not too “intellectual” to respect the loyalty of
a wife to her husband, and it certainly must have
been embarrassing to counsel opposing me, after-
wards Attorney-General, who happened to be a
tremendous gentleman and who later became
Lord Chancellor. Of course he was instructed
by the brief of his clients’ solicitors, and felt it his
duty to follow the instructions in that brief little
as he relished it.
I certainly owe a good deal to the perspicacity
of my solicitor, Mr Edward Bell, of Garter and


Bell, because in the two biggest cases I won I was
represented by Mr Arthur Comyns Carr, who
was then a junior, and who conducted the second
case (the one to which I have just been referring,
when I got a thousand pounds damages, and of
course all the costs as well) very much “on the
cheap” for me. Mr Bell spotted Mr Comyns
Carr when he was quite young and comparatively
unknown, and he proved himself more than a
match for some of the ablest and biggest men at
the Bar even when he was a mere boy. He could
also stand up to any judge on the Bench, a rare
quality in counsel. He is now, of course, a
celebrated K.C. There is an added exhilara-
tion in winning a case with a junior against
formidable (five-hundred-guineas-on-the-brief)
K.C.’s. A junior may not even sit in the front
row of the barristers’ seats, and has to address
the Court from behind. I do not suppose it
really makes much difference, but this has
always struck me as a very strange example of
the boasted “English fair play” of the Law
Courts. It gives a definite moral advantage to
the rich man over the poor man, even in the
High Court, while in the Court of Chancery a
poor man who cannot afford to brief big counsel
simply has, according to my belief and experi-
ence, very little chance of succeeding in getting
the ear of the judge.


CHAPTER XXV
ELSEWHERE IN THIS BOOK I MADE MENTION OF
“le Systems Douglas ,” which is the method I
evolved for defeating cross-examination in the
Law Courts. It all boils down to the principle
of telling the exact truth in the witness-box.
Paradoxically, the worse the truth is for the
witness the more it benefits him to admit it, and
even to blurt it out before the opposing counsel
has asked for it. What happens, of course, is
that by this method the wind is taken out of the
sails of counsel cross-examining you.
I will give two examples, because I mean this
chapter to be really useful to litigants who are
fighting cases with the odds against them. In
the case when T. W. H. Crosland, then my
assistant-editor on The Academy, was prosecuted
before the Common Serjeant for criminal libel
at the Old Bailey (I am not referring to the
case when, much later, he was tried and again
acquitted at the same court on the prosecution
of Robert Ross), I gave evidence for him.
Marshall Hall cross-examined me, as every
lawyer always did in those days, about my


relations with Oscar Wilde, although in this case
they had no bearing whatever on the matter in
hand. I had been warned before the case came
on that he was going to do this, and that he had
publicly stated that he was going to “smash”
me. He began his cross-examination by asking
me whether I had not stayed in an hotel with
Wilde at Naples after he came out of prison. I re-
plied at once, “I did a great deal more than that,
I invited him to stay there as my guest in a villa
which I took for that very purpose. He stayed
with me there for three months. lam not at all
ashamed of it, and I would do the same thing
to-morrow if I had the chance.” Thus, in one
fell swoop, I knocked half the points of his care-
fully planned cross-examination into smithereens.
My instant and fierce reply flabbergasted him
and immediately won the sympathy of the jury.
I saw them look at me with interest and admira-
tion, and I felt at once that the case was won.
To win a case, all you have to do is to “get”
the jury. Marshall Hall never had the slightest
chance after that. I simply “wiped the floor”
with him, and at the close of my cross-examina-
tion, which lasted only about forty minutes, he
went out of court a beaten and humiliated man.
I could call a hundred members of the Bar (the
court was so packed with barristers that there
was barely standing room) to bear me out that


I am not exaggerating. F. G. Phillips, the
novelist, himself a barrister, said to my friend
Rowland Strong, formerly Paris correspondent
of the Morning Post, in describing the scene:
“My dear fellow, Douglas simply ate him; he
ate him, there’s no other word for it. I never
saw anything like it in a Law Court before.”
In the other case, five years later, when I
was being cross-examined by the present Lord
Hailsham, then Sir Douglas Hogg, he asked me
a question on the same subject. His question
was: “During the whole time that Wilde was
staying with you in your villa at Naples, did you
ever once make the slightest effort to induce him
to lead a better life?” I immediately replied:
“I wish I could say I did, but I’m afraid I
didn’t,” The foreman of the jury afterwards
told my solicitor, Edward Bell, that this answer
produced a tremendous impression on the jury,
because it showed that I was absolutely truthful
and honest. It is not too much to say that it
probably won me the case. A friend of mine
said to me afterwards; “That was the cleverest
thing you ever said in the witness-box.” But it
was not cleverness that made me answer as I
did. I was simply carrying out my religious
determination arrived at beforehand, that as a
Catholic I was bound to tell the exact truth on
oath. I did not realise in the least, at the time,


that it was a particularly good answer. I simply
told the plain truth and trusted to Providence.
I am very quick at answering, and hardly wait
for the question before giving the reply, and this
again is a valuable asset to a witness. I must
say, in justice to Lord Hailsham, who has since
then gone out of his way to show me great
kindness, that, unlike Marshall Hall, he had every
justification for asking me questions about Wilde,
because in this particular case (which, as I have
already said, I won to the tune of a thousand
pounds damages) the whole libel of which I
complained was bound up in and intimately
connected with that very Wilde matter. It would
have been impossible for Lord Hailsham not to
cross-examine me about Wilde without letting
down his own clients (an enormously wealthy
and powerful daily paper). I mention this
because I want to make it clear that I have no
kind of grievance against Lord Hailsham. He
cross-examined me with the utmost fairness, and
I won the case only because, when all was said
and done, I had the right on my side and was
entitled not only to the damages I got, but to
the sympathy which the judge himself gave me
at the end and which the jury expressed in a
“rider” to their verdict.
I have always thought that Wilde would not
have lost his libel action against my father if Sir


Edward Clarke had not utterly disregarded and
thrown overboard the tactics which we (that is,
Wilde, myself, our solicitor, and Sir Edward
himself) had all agreed upon in our consultations
in his chambers. Sir Edward Clarke promised
to start the case by attacking my father for his
brutal conduct to my mother and his children,
and he told me again and again that he would
put me into the witness-box directly after he had
opened his case. Of course there is to be said
that no one knew then what a good witness I
was. I had not the slightest idea of it myself
till I was cross-examined for the first time in my
life by Marshall Hall fifteen years or more later.
On the contrary, like all good witnesses (and the
same applies to actors), I was very nervous about
going into the box for the first time, and only
a little less so on subsequent occasions. But the
moment I had answered one or two questions I
was perfectly at ease and really enjoyed it. This
perhaps is Sir Edward Clarke’s excuse. I was
only twenty-four at the time of the Wilde-
Queensberry libel case, and I looked ever so much
younger —honestly I looked about sixteen—and
Clarke probably feared that I would crack up
under cross-examination. He failed to consider
that my youthful appearance would have told
heavily in our favour. But whatever his motives,
he dealt Wilde a felon blow by his conduct of


the case. Poor Oscar never had the slightest
chance. Although so brilliant and so much
more than a match for Carson in mere verbal
repartee, he was a very bad witness, simply
because he did not grasp the fact that it is no
good being witty and amusing in the witness-box
in a serious (one might say, surely, deadly) case
like the one in question, unless you get the
sympathy of the jury. This he never got for one
moment. Of course one is also bound to admit
that, strictly speaking, he had not got the right
on his side, and he could not afford to carry out
“le Systeme Douglas ” even if he had been aware
of it, because in the circumstances he could not
tell the whole truth. If he told the whole truth
he lost his case. But all the same he had a case,
and a very strong one, and this case, thanks to
Clarke’s bungling, incompetence and cowardice,
never reached the jury at all. I do not say it
was a certainty for Wilde to win the case if
Clarke had put me in the box and carried out
his carefully considered, prearranged and agreed
method of attack on my father; but at least if
Clarke had done all this and put up a real fight
(instead of chucking up the sponge after the first
round), Oscar would have had a very good
chance of winning the case outright, in which
event my father would, of course, merely have
been “bound over,” and at the worst, even if


Oscar had lost the case, I feel certain there would
have been no subsequent prosecution. Clarke
never so much as hinted at the greatest, the most
overwhelming argument he had in his hands,
which was, of course, that my father, so far from
wanting to “save his son” as he pretended,
really wanted to do what he actually succeeded
in doing—namely, to ruin him, and to break the
heart of his already much-wronged wife. It
would have been easy to prove this from my
evidence and his own letters to me. Fancy any
lawyer with a reputation as a great advocate
letting such an argument go altogether and
allowing his client’s opponent to get away with
“the noble-hearted father” act!
What a pitiable farce, what an ignoble tragedy,
what an ignominious letting down of all the
“great traditions of the Bar” of which we hear
so much! I think it is about time that the de-
bunking of Sir Edward Clarke took place, and I
seem to have done it at last.


CHAPTER XXVI
AFTER WILDE LOST HIS CASE AGAINST MY FATHER,
he was arrested the same afternoon and com-
mitted for trial on the following day. I went to
see him every day while he was in prison at
Holloway. No biographer of Wilde has ever
given me the full credit for this, which really
required, at that time, an enormous lot of
courage. The vast majority of them never even
mention it. Frank Harris had the unblushing
impudence in his Life and Confessions of Oscar
Wilde , recently so crushingly exposed by Robert
Harborough Sherard, to say that he went to see
Wilde in Holloway. This is an absolute lie,
neither Harris nor anyone else except Wilde’s
solicitor went near him, Robert Sherard would
certainly have gone if he had been in England,
but he was abroad, and I alone visited him, and
went on seeing him every day till his first criminal
trial (which ended in a disagreement of the
jury); and the day before the trial began, at
his request, on the instigation of Sir Edward
Clarke, I left England and went to Calais, where


I remained in the Terminus Hotel till the case
was over and Wilde was released on bail.
I regret very much that I ever left England at
that time at all. The fact that I remained in
London (I was staying at the Cadogan Hotel in
Sloane Street, where Wilde was arrested in my
sitting-room), right up till the day before his
trial at the Old Bailey three or more weeks later,
is quite sufficient proof that my going to Calais
was in no sense a case of “running away.” If I
was in any danger (and I was warned both by
my friends and my enemies that I was), the
danger existed for weeks before I left, and as a
matter of fact I left the country with the utmost
reluctance and misery because I was told by
Messrs Humphreys, Wilde’s solicitors, that Sir
Edward Clarke strongly objected to my remain-
ing in London, and he finally declared that he
would not tolerate it. He practically implied
that if I did not go away he would throw up the
case. The solicitors, on his orders, persuaded
Wilde to tell me, the last time I saw him, that it
was his (Wilde’s) wish that I should leave, and
Oscar also wrote me a long and touching letter
to that effect, in which he said that if he was
convicted his only hope of living through his
sentence was that I would never desert him and
that he might live to “touch my hand once
again.” He wrote, “I am going to test the


power of love, I am going to see whether I cannot
make the bitter waters sweet by the intensity of
the love I bear you.”
So I had to go; but even when I was at
Calais while the trial was going on, I sent a long
telegram to Clarke begging him to call me as a
witness, and telling him that I would return at
an hour’s notice if he would do this.
I have been so foully abused and calumniated
by people (chiefly Robert Ross and Frank
Harris) who started the legend that I behaved
disloyally to Wilde, that I must put all this on
record once more, and also the fact that although
my enemies (and Wilde’s false, or in some cases
merely foolish, friends) succeeded in poisoning his
mind against me while he was in prison, he
started writing letters to me within three weeks
of his release, and three months later, after
writing to me a letter beginning, “My own
darling Boy,” in which he said, “I feel that my
only hope of doing beautiful work in art is being
with you. ... I feel that only with you can I
do anything at all,” he joined me at Naples, and
remained there in my villa till I was obliged to
leave him because my mother threatened to stop
my money supplies if I continued to live with him.
My dear mother, who was an angel, and a
saint, did not like Wilde even before the catas-
trophe. Naturally, like most mothers, she


idealised her own boy, and she put down anything
wrong that I had done to the effect of “bad
example” in others. She looked upon Wilde as
my bad angel. I am convinced, however, that
if she had been left to her own devices, she would
never have faced me with the cruel dilemma of
leaving Wilde (who was then almost dependent
on me) or losing my allowance; nor do I believe
that if I had refused to leave him she would
ever have carried out her threat. The truth is
that all sorts of pressure was put upon her as
soon as it became known that Wilde and I were
together; and the fact that the British Ambas-
sador at Rome sent his honorary attache and
another man from the Embassy to see me in my
villa at Naples to try to persuade me to leave
Wilde sufficiently indicates what the nature of
that pressure (from “Society” in general) was.
No doubt the effort to separate me from Wilde
was perfectly well meant and in my own supposed
interest, but the fact remains that if I had not
been forced to leave him to his own devices
(which I did after giving him two hundred
pounds and the use of my villa rent free for the
next few months), the whole subsequent history
of Oscar’s unhappy life would have been
altered.
He was writing at the villa. He wrote a great
part of The Ballad of Reading Gaol there while I


was with him, and he put the poem (far the best
poem he ever wrote) into its final shape while I
was actually sitting in the same room with him.
He had plans for a new play, and had invented
the plot and worked out a scenario, and he had
been asked, in fact commissioned, to do the
libretto of an opera. He invented the story for
the opera and told it to me, and he was just
going to start on it when the blow of our separa-
tion fell. If we had not been separated he would
not have returned as he did to Paris to live alone
in a third-rate hotel or to die there miserably
three years later. He never wrote another
solitary line of poetry or prose from the moment
we were separated till the hour of his death.
Of course I went on seeing him in Paris, often
daily for months at a time, during the rest of
his life, but we never lived under the same roof
again and I was often away from Paris, chiefly
at Chantilly, where after my father died I had
some horses in training.
It is at any rate some consolation to me to
know that we remained friends to the last, and
though I was not with him when he died (entirely
because Ross wrote to me and told me that he
was ill, but that it was “nothing serious,”
whereas he was obviously dying at the time, as
I found out afterwards), I arrived in time to
bury him and to act as chief mourner at his


funeral. Even the wretched Ross records that
a week or two before he died a cheque arrived
with a letter from me and that Oscar “shed
tears” when he got it. So in spite of everything
done by all sorts of people to sow dissension
between us and to break our friendship, that
friendship never was broken. It is true that
poor Oscar, poisoned by the lies he was told,
turned against me in prison and attacked and
abused me in his letter to me which I never
received till twelve years after his death, but all
his delusions about me disappeared very soon
after he got out of prison, and on my side at any
rate there never was the slightest break. I
remained devoted to him to the last; and
though in my first indignation and anger when
I discovered, twelve years after his death, how
he had attacked me in the aforesaid letter I
reacted violently against him, I got over that
feeling in time, and my love for him as it always
existed during his lifetime came back to me as
strongly as ever. I shall always say that he was
the most wonderful man I ever met, and though
of course as a Catholic I do not defend (I am
obliged to reprobate) his immoralities, I believe
that essentially he was a great man, and I fully
believe that his ultimate reconciliation with and
reception into the Catholic Church, which he
had always dimly hankered after, was valid, and


that in the long run the gates of Hell have never
prevailed against him.
To sum up all I have said about him, I will
say that I think that he was a man of enormous
genius, and that his work is quite certain to
survive indefinitely, and will be read and loved
by countless thousands in the future, long after
the very names of his present-day detractors are
forgotten. I will also say that in spite of his sad
moral lapses he was essentially a man “of good
will,” because he was kind and charitable, in the
Catholic sense, and generous and loyal to his
friends, and never really an enemy of the light.
His constant love for his mother, who always
neglected him and preferred to him his younger
brother Willie, was a touching feature of his
character. He adored his mother and spoke of
her always with a reverence which was really
quite excessive considering her character and
achievements. As to his wife, he married her
solely for love, and if she had treated him properly
and stuck to him after he had been in prison, as
a really good wife would have done, he would
have gone on loving her to the end of his life.
I always liked Mrs Wilde and she liked me, though
I never saw her again after the catastrophe.
She was a charming, pathetic and pretty little
thing. Obviously she suffered a great deal and
deserves every sympathy, but she fell woefully


short of the height to which she might have
risen, and while I feel very deeply for her, I
cannot but blame her for the attitude she took
up after his conviction. She was far from
generous to him in the matter of money, and
apart from that, she wrote to him a letter which
he received very soon after he left prison which
was calculated, as she must have known perfectly
well (knowing his character as she did), to
exasperate and embitter him and to make im-
possible the reunion which she professed to
desire. She offered to “take him back” on
certain conditions. Oscar did not show me the
letter (I did not see him for the first time since
his imprisonment till some time after he received
it), but he told me that her “conditions” were
insulting, and he turned pale and trembled with
anger when he spoke to me about her letter.
That letter finished all chance of reconciliation
and finally killed all that was left of his love for
her. In his De Profundis letter he praises her
kindness and nobility; at my expense, of course,
since what he wrote was in his letter to me
which was full of reproaches and abuse. Yet it
was the abused and be-rated friend and not the
“kind and noble” wife who stuck to him and
would not be driven away even by his own
abuse and railing. If Oscar had accepted her
conditions (one of which was that he was never


to see me), there is no doubt that our reunion
at Naples would not have taken place and I
would probably never have seen him again.
From my point of view, looking at it in the
purely material aspect, this would have been
enormously to my advantage. My father had
more than once offered to “forgive” me and to
give me back the substantial allowance, of which
he had deprived me, if I would give up Wilde,
The reproving and hostile attitude of “Society”
in general and King Edward VII (then Prince
of Wales) in particular towards me was greatly
accentuated when it became known that I had
resumed my friendship with him, and all my
friends told me that I was “cutting my own
throat” when I asked him to come to stay with
me at Naples. So that if Mrs Wilde (whether
merely because she had no tact or because she
deliberately imposed conditions which she knew
he would not accept) had not made it impossible
for him to rejoin her, I would certainly not
have been able, even if I had wished it (which
I was very far from doing), to stand in their
way.
I have long got past the stage in which I
consider that I have anything to defend or
apologise for in my conduct to and about Wilde
after his release from prison. The plain truth
is that if I had been the Archangel Gabriel I


could not possibly have acted better towards
him than I did. I gave everything and received
nothing, except abuse from his soi-disant friends.
People who do not approve of what I did are
welcome to do the other thing. I care no more
for their opinion now than I did at the time.
I am not defending myself, I require no defence;
I am defending Oscar and trying to show that
it was no fault of his that there was no reunion
with his wife. The blame for this rests entirely
on Mrs Wilde. It was not till after she had
written him the letter to which I have referred
that he seriously considered the idea of coming
to stay with me at Naples, and I only asked him
to come then because by that time I knew that
he had nowhere else to go and that I was the
only person in the world who had the pluck to
take him in.
The cruelty of the world was then what it
always is and always will be. I was the only
person in the world who wanted him, out of
pure friendship and compassion, and the world,
having driven him out of every other refuge,
proceeded to smoke him out of this last asylum
also.
The prime mover in all the intrigue to sepa-
rate us was Robert Ross. He was, in this, as
in everything else connected with Wilde, the
villain of the piece. I believe this fact will


emerge more clearly when Mr A. J. A. Symons
publishes his book on Wilde which is due very
soon, and which will contain a number of Wilde’s
hitherto unpublished letters, most of which I
myself have never read.


CHAPTER XXVII
MY REFERENCE IN MY LAST CHAPTER TO KING
Edward the Seventh, then Prince of Wales,
reminds me of an episode in which he was con-
cerned after the Wilde scandal took place.
When I was at Homburg with my grandfather,
my mother’s father, Alfred Montgomery, be-
fore the scandal, he brought me a great deal to
the Prince’s notice. We dined at his table over
and over again in the Gardens of the Kursaal.
My grandfather was very intimate for years with
the Prince, and he (the Prince) at that time
always treated me charmingly. The first time
I ever met him, two or three years before I saw
him again at Homburg, I being then about
sixteen, he gave me a sovereign, which naturally
endeared him to my schoolboy heart. Later, as
I say, at Homburg, he really “made quite a
fuss” of me. He used to joke with me and chaff
me good-humouredly in his rather heavy way,
and ask my grandfather if I was “a good boy,”
and so forth. So when in Paris one day shortly
after the Wilde scandal (while poor Oscar was


in prison) I was lunching by myself at the Cafe
de Paris, which was then not at all like what it
became later, and was one of the last refuges of
la haute cuisine Frangaise, where the idea of a
“band of music” would have given cold shivers
to the maitre cThotel, I suddenly saw the Prince
coming in with a party of about fourteen men,
among whom was old Christopher Sykes, whom
I knew very well, I was rather perturbed, and
wondered what I ought to do. A large table
had already been laid out for H.R.H. and his
party (I think Christopher Sykes was the host)
right at the top end of the restaurant, and to get
to this table the Prince had to pass within a few
feet of where I was sitting. I stood up and
bowed, and he looked straight at me and cut
me dead. I felt very angry and must have
flushed scarlet, partly on his account, because I
think it was not “a very nice thing to do,”
considering how well he had known me and my
grandfather and my mother, and that I was a
forlorn and lonely infant at that time who had
just suffered a fearful lot. Merely as a matter
of good manners, I thought, and still think, that
he ought at least to have acknowledged my
salute. A moment after he had passed me and
cut me, I thought of Mrs Erlynne, in Oscar’s play
Lady Windermere's Fan, saying to Lord Winder-
mere in an exquisite comedy line, “My dear


Windermere, manners before morals!” If I
had remembered it in time, I still had quite
enough spirit left, even after all my tribulations,
to have fired it off at him in the form of, “O,
Sir, manners before morals! ” but I did not think
of it till he was out of hearing, and my own
manners were far too good for me to have said
it except in a low voice for his ear alone. This
is an instance of what the French call esprit
d'escalier, which means, of course, that one thinks
of something brilliant that one might have said
just as one is going downstairs to leave a house
where one has been visiting. Six or seven years
later, when I ran away with my wife (who was
engaged to George Montagu, now Lord Sand-
wich, and went off with me instead, as explained
at length in my Autobiography ), I was told that
the King “was very angry,” which “bucked me
up” considerably.
Although, theoretically, I am a Jacobite, I
have always been, and always shall be, entirely
loyal to the Throne, as anyone can see by looking
at the files of the papers I edited, The Academy
and Plain English. I used to send The Academy
to King George the Fifth every week, and my
cousin George Wyndham, who was rather often
with him at the time of his accession, told me
that the King had told him that he thought it
“a splendid paper”; and when I had Plain


English I of course once more put his Majesty
on the free list.
My grandfather, Alfred Montgomery, was re-
markable for his extreme good looks, and at the
time when he married my grandmother, who
was a daughter of the first Lord Leconfield, he
was considered to be the best-looking man in
London, and my mother and her sister, Mrs
Finch of Burley-on-the-Hill, inherited his re-
markable beauty. I never knew him, of course,
except as an old, or what as a child I thought
old, man, but he was even in extreme old age
extraordinarily handsome, and his dignity was
tremendous.
I had an amusing example of this when I was
staying with him in his house in Curzon Street
when I was about fifteen. We went out for a
walk, and on coming to some square or other, I
forget where, we saw a railed-off space in the
middle of the square which contained what was
evidently a statue, covered with a white sheet or
tarpaulin, awaiting the ceremony of being un-
veiled, Grandpapa was very curious to discover
what it could be, and he advanced, with me by
his side, and was just about to go through the
entrance of the enclosed space, when an enor-
mous policeman confronted him and said in a
stern voice, “The public are not admitted into
this enclosure.” My grandfather drew himself


up haughtily and said, “I am not one of the
public.” “I beg your pardon, sir,” replied the
policeman, and standing stiffly to attention,
saluted him. I imagine that he supposed that
my grandfather was at least a Royal Duke, and
we went in and tried to see the statue. We did
not succeed in doing so owing to the sheet which
covered it, but at any rate my grandfather had
asserted himself, and he chuckled with glee as
he whispered to me, “I don’t know who he
thinks I am.”
It was while I was with him on the same visit
that on Sunday, after a very late breakfast, he
announced that we must go to church, and he
decided that it would be best to go to the Chapel
Royal, St James’s, as the service there did not
begin till twelve o’clock. When we got to the
door of the Chapel we saw a notice fixed up,
saying that the services were suspended till the
beginning of next month. By that time (noon)
it was too late to go to any other church, so my
grandfather said, “Well, anyhow, we’ve done the
civil thing,” and took me to the park instead.
My grandfather, though not exactly wealthy,
was very well off, and he also had some sort of
fairly lucrative appointment connected with the
Inland Revenue, where he presided over a
“Board.” On one occasion, on a very hot day,
one of the clerks came into the board-room in


his shirt-sleeves. Whereupon my grandfather said,
“If you would like to remove your trousers, Mr
Brown, pray do not let any consideration for the
feelings of the Board deter you from doing so.”
Although this story may make him appear rather
formidable, he was really the most kind-hearted
and affable person that ever lived. My recol-
lections of him when I went to see him after I
went up to Oxford are largely connected with
seeing him fumbling with a red-leather dispatch-
box out of which, after unlocking it with a key
attached to his watch-chain, he would extract a
five-pound note by way of a “tip.” At a still
earlier age it was not unusual for one or other of
us boys (his grandchildren) to go round to see
him and, finding him out, to extract a sovereign
from the butler to be put down to his account.
He pretended to be outraged at this, but he was
really quite delighted. He used to come down
to see me when I was a boy at Winchester, and
of course invariably invited me to lunch at “The
George,” bringing with me two friends, one of
whom was always Encombe (father of the present
Lord Eldon) and the other “Sunny” Blandford.
In the last letter I ever got from “Sunny” (then
Marlborough) he makes a reference to the old
days at Winchester, when “dear old Mr Mont-
gomery used to give us lunch and ‘ tips ’ at ‘ The
George.’ ” Substituting “The Mitre” for “The


George,” and Simon (Lord) Lovat for “Sunny”
Blandford, the same thing occurred at Oxford
when Encombe and I were there and he came
down for the day to see me.
The death of my eldest brother, Drumlanrig
(Francie), who was killed at the age of twenty-
eight by the accidental explosion of his gun, was
a frightful blow to Grandpapa, as he was abso-
lutely devoted to my brother, who for three or
four years till he died lived with him in my
grandfather’s house, then in Hertford Street.
In fact he never got over the shock of sorrow
that this tragedy caused him, and when a year
later I came to grief over the Wilde affair, I
fear it was the finishing blow to him, for he did
not live long after it happened.
He was the ideal grandfather, the sort of
grandfather whom a boy might dream about
and hope to find in Paradise, but who has few,
if any, counterparts in real life, in this sad world,
I think if only on account of his almost lifelong
friendship with this dear and universally loved
old man, King Edward the Seventh might have
been kinder to his grandson.
Nowadays I do not think that people (that is
to say Society in general) would be quite so harsh
to a young man even after he had gone through
the process of being “saved by his affectionate
father from a dangerous friendship,” which was


how Carson put it to the jury at the Wilde-
Queensberry trial. No kind of allegation similar
to those made against Wilde was made against
me personally at that trial or at any other period.
On the contrary, Carson carefully explained to
the jury that he made no suggestion at all against
me. He could hardly do less considering that
he was representing my father, who was supposed
to be “saving his beloved son”! The irony of
the situation looked at from this point of view,
and considering the subsequent treatment I
received, does not seem to have occurred either
to Mr Justice Darling at the trial of my libel
action against Mr Ransome, or to any of the
self-constituted historians of the events connected
with the Wilde affair, and this is why I have
thought it well to stress it with special reference
to what Shakespeare calls “the sweet aspect of
princes.”
I wrote to my grandfather from Paris not long
before his death, but I got no reply from him, as
he was too ill to write. My godmother (my
mother’s first cousin and lifelong friend), Mabel
Montgomery, whose death occurred at the age
of ninety-two a few months ago, told me, to my
great consolation, that just before he died he
said to her, “I must write to dear little Alfred,”
so that I know that his affection for me remained
unimpaired to the last. He was almost the only


member of my family who called me “Alfred.”
To my father, mother, brothers, sister, cousins,
and aunts, and all the rest, as well as to my
friends at school and Oxford, I was always, and
am to this day, “Bosie,” a name bestowed on
me by my mother when I was a baby. Grand-
papa did not approve of this at all, especially
as I was christened “Alfred” after him. He
always referred scornfully to “this ridiculous
name Bossy,” as he insisted on pronouncing it,
and would have none of it, affecting indeed
sometimes not to know who “Bosie” was when
some member of the family used the name.
“I suppose you mean Alfred,” he would say.
He had also the old-fashioned way of pronouncing
foreign words in an entirely English way. My
mother had a French maid called Therese, and
when I said something about her to him one
day, he said, “Who’s that?” I said, “Mamma’s
maid.” “Oh, you mean Tereese,” replied my
grandfather. “Why don’t you say so? ” Wagner
was always Wagner (pronounced English fashion)
to him; he had a low opinion of him anyhow;
and “Calais” with the “s” sounded. He also
always said “yaller” for yellow, and balcony,
and laylock for lilac.
Nothing annoyed him so much as to find people
out when he called on them. On one occasion
he called on “Lady A.” (Maria, Marchioness of


Ailesbury), who was a great crony of his, three
times running on various occasions, and each
time found she was out. On the last occasion
he said to the footman who opened the door
and informed him that she was out, “Does her
ladyship sleep at home?”
He was at Charterhouse with Thackeray, and
one of his stories was that he used to be made
to sing in the dormitory for the delectation of
the monitors or whatever they called them.
Thackeray, I imagine, was thinking of this
when he introduced the account of a similar
episode in one of his books —The Newcomes, I
think. In those days children (he was only
about twelve or less when the singing experience
took place) did not have a very good time, at
any rate compared to what they get nowadays.
His mother, Lady Montgomery, he told me, used
to say to him in a cold voice at lunch, “Do you
choose any mutton?” which, as there was nothing
else on the table, was not a question which per-
mitted much latitude in the way of reply.
He became private secretary to Lord Wellesley
(the Marquis, brother to the great Duke of
Wellington) at the age of sixteen. Scandal said
that he was the son of this nobleman, who was
very much attached to Lady Montgomery, and
who was at various times Prime Minister and
Viceroy of India. He left my grandfather his


portrait, some miniatures, and his “Garter” (he
was a K.G.) in his will. I do not believe the
story, though it would be interesting if it were
true, and would make me the great-grand-
nephew of the Waterloo Duke. My grandfather
in his youth certainly had a great resemblance
to Lord Wellesley, and my mother had a minia-
ture of him (now belonging to my sister) as a
beautiful little boy of twelve which might almost
have been a portrait of my grandfather at the
same age.


CHAPTER XXVIII
A FRIEND OF MINE NOT LONG AGO, HEARING THAT
I was writing a book of memoirs, wrote to me
saying: “Don’t be too hard on your father,” and
I certainly wish to be fair to him as far as I can.
When I was a child I adored him. I cannot
but think that he treated me cruelly, even allow-
ing for the fact that at the very beginning of the
trouble his desire to separate me from Wilde
was prompted by a genuine wish to do what
he thought right in the circumstances. But his
method was doomed to inevitable failure, chiefly
because he tried to bully me instead of reasoning
with me. He might have guessed that I was
quite as obstinate as he was. His threat to stop
my allowance (which he actually carried out
within a year of the time when he first made it)
had simply the effect of exasperating me and
making me more determined than ever to stick
to Wilde. By the time he started interfering
with our friendship he had already forfeited most
of his fatherly rights by his scandalous treatment
of my mother and his neglect of all his children.
The truth is that we hardly ever saw him,


even before my mother was reluctantly driven to
divorce him (much against her will, at his own
request), while his public conduct was by no
means such as could be expected to command
the sort of slavish obedience to his orders which
he seemed to expect from his children. For
years he went about denouncing Christianity,
and he even lectured publicly against it, and he
was obliged to give up his seat in the House of
Lords, to which he was elected as one of the
sixteen Scottish Representative Peers by his fellow-
Scots Peers, because he declined to take the oath,
which he characterised as “ Christian tomfoolery.”
In addition to that, he made no secret of his
“affairs” with various ladies, and on top of
everything else he contracted another marriage
with a girl about thirty years younger than him-
self, who divorced him within six months. He
was therefore hardly in a position to take up a
very high moral attitude. If instead of ordering
me to give up my friendship with Wilde and
stopping my money supplies, he had arranged
to send me abroad with a decent allowance, he
would undoubtedly have succeeded in separating
me from Wilde for a long enough period to allow
the whole affair to settle down calmly and
ultimately fizzle out.
As it was, his cutting off my allowance only
resulted in angering and embittering me and


penalising my mother. In war, a blockade has
to be effective before it is recognised. This was
far from being the case with the withdrawal of
my allowance. All that happened was that I
got my money from my mother (and also a good
deal as well from my grandfather) instead of
from my father. Furthermore, by the time a
year had gone by since he first intervened, he
had really thrown away even the pretence that
he was acting in my interest. He was full of
vindictive rage against me, and his openly
avowed object was to “smash” me, as of course
he actually did in the end.
The letters he wrote to me at that time were
incredibly violent, abusive, and undignified. He
lost all control, and his only object was to revenge
himself at any cost on Wilde and me because we
had flouted him.
My father was a singularly primitive man.
He went to sea as a midshipman when he was
twelve, and, in consequence, his education was
very elementary. He really knew very little, and
hardly ever read a book. He was, in short,
almost childlike from an intellectual, or any,
point of view. He was kind and generous
enough, in his own selfish way, but he was in-
capable of discussing anything without losing his
temper, or of understanding any point of view
which did not coincide with his own.


Even when I was a child, while I was devoted
to him and had an immense admiration for him
(chiefly on account of his legendary prowess as
a boxing champion and a fine and fearless
horseman), I could not but see that he was
himself at least as childish as I was. I remember
going to stay with his sister, my “Aunt Florrie”
(Lady Florence Dixie), and my “Uncle Beau”
(Sir Beaumont Dixie) at their house, The
Fishery, on the Thames, for a few days while
my father was also staying there. The way he
and Uncle Beau used to quarrel and argue and
then have almost tearful reconciliations, struck
me even then (I was about thirteen at the time)
as very babyish as well as screamingly funny.
My father had quite a pleasant baritone voice,
and he was for ever “practising” songs and
hammering out the tune with one finger on the
piano. He tried all his life to play the piano,
but never succeeded in getting beyond the stage
which is painfully reached by the average un-
musical child of ten. Although so completely
unable to play the piano himself, he was very
critical of anyone else at the same instrument.
On this occasion Uncle Beau started “playing
the piano”—that is to say, making a horrible
noise very much like that produced by my father
himself. After a few restless minutes my father
said, misquoting Shakespeare, “Music hath


charms to soothe the savage beast.” This
started a terrible row. Uncle Beau said, “I
suppose I can play my own piano if I like, in
my own little cottage without being insulted and
called a savage beast.” My father made a
sarcastic reply, and in a few minutes they were
hurling abuse at each other in spite of the efforts of
Aunt Florrie to pacify them. Finally my father
rose, pale with rage, and said, “Very well, I
shall leave this house, and you had better send
the boy (me) back to his mother.” He then
rushed out of the house, slamming the front door
behind him with such force that all the china
ornaments in the drawing-room rattled.
Uncle Beau took this quite calmly. “He’ll
soon come back,” was all he said, while he went
on “playing the piano,” and sure enough, about
half an hour later, my father came back into the
room, and gloomily sitting down, began to read
a paper. After a few minutes Uncle Beau said,
“Come along, *Q,, 5 dear old boy, let’s go out and
have a game of tennis.” My father replied stiffly,
“No, thank you. I don’t feel inclined to play.”
But Uncle Beau, ignoring this, went out into the
garden and wound up the net, asking me to
come too. We started knocking the balls about,
and a few minutes later my father came out and
joined us, and a game was soon in full swing.
At that age I was, as I have said, devoted to


my father, and he was always kind to me on the
few occasions when I saw him. I used to stay
with him occasionally in some lodgings which he
occupied from time to time at Brighton in
Oriental Place. He was an embarrassing person
to be with, because he had a disconcerting way
of not listening to and completely ignoring what
one said. After dinner he invariably went and
sat in the hall (or I suppose I must reluctantly
use the awful word “lounge”) of the Hotel
Metropole, which had then only just been built.
He sat there in silence and smoked a cigar,
conversation not being encouraged and one’s
remarks being received with stony silence.
On other occasions when I was between twelve
and sixteen he used to talk to me exactly as if I
were the same age as himself, one of his favourite
subjects being the unfortunate propensity of poor
Uncle Jim, his younger brother, to drink. “I
wish your Uncle James did not drink so much,”
he would say gloomily; “he now drinks at least
three bottles of brandy a day.” “Does he
really?” I would ask. “Yes, four sometimes,
and that’s not counting what he drinks at meals,
claret and port and champagne,” replied my
father. I had heard this so often before that it
produced very little impression on me, and I
found it difficult to achieve a polite appearance
of interest. Then perhaps it would suddenly


occur to him that one might wish to go on to the
Pier or to the Aquarium (Brighton’s two “star
turns” in those days), and he would hand out a
sum of money grossly in excess of what was
required for the purpose.
My father, although in the last years of his life
he had the strange delusion that he was almost
entirely without money (really he had about
eight thousand a year after deducting the neces-
sary payments to my mother for herself and the
children), was always very lavish in the way of
tips. He seemed to have no idea what was the
right amount of money to give to a boy going
back to school. He gave me far more money
than any other boy in my House at Winchester
had. When I was going back to school I used
to go round to see him at the last minute if he
were available, and he always gave me three or
four pounds, and when I wrote a fishing letter
half-way through the term, two or three more.
He invariably excused himself for giving so
little, and said, “Of course I know, my dear
boy, this is not much, but you must learn to do
the best you can with very little. lam a very
poor man, and you had better realise once and
for all that you will never have any money. If
I were a rich man I would give you more, but as
things are, I’m afraid you’ll have to make this
do.” He would then hand out four sovereigns,


which was twice as much as my friend Encombe
(whose father, Lord Eldon, had about thirty
thousand a year) ever brought back. Even so,
what he gave me represented only about half
what I got altogether. The result of all this,
coupled with the utter disregard of monetary
considerations which always prevailed at home
(in my mother’s houses in London or the country),
was that I grew up without the slightest inkling
of the value of money. I was quite accustomed
to hear my father speak compassionately about
“poor old so-and-so” who “has hardly got a
shirt to his back,” and then to discover that
what he meant was that poor old so-and-so had
ten thousand a year, whereas his father used to
have forty thousand. My sense of values was
completely fogged and I gave up any attempt at
understanding all this sort of talk. I regarded
my father’s warnings as to my probable future
state of poverty as so much “grown-up” ab-
surdity. It would have been just as easy for me
to visualise life without air, as life without money,
or at any rate everything that money can buy.
My experience was that people who were “very
poor” or “broke to the world” lived in exactly
the same way and on the same scale as those who
had “pots of money.”
Uncle Beau Dixie was especially devoted to
my aforesaid Uncle Jim (Lord James Douglas).


When poor Uncle Jim died and was buried in
the family burial-ground in the park at Kinmount,
on the Border, which is now the only piece of
land in Scotland still belonging to our branch of
the Douglas family, Uncle Beau’s grief caused
him to consume a large quantity of alcohol, even
more than usual, with the result that Aunt
Florrie, who at that period ruled him with a rod
of iron, told him that he must on no account
come to the funeral “in that state.” (They were
living at Glen Stuart, close to Kinmount, a house
belonging to my father.) To make sure that he
should not go to the funeral, she induced him to
go to bed and went off without him, having
taken the precaution to remove his black clothes
and conceal them.
However, when she was gone, Uncle Beau
roused himself, got out of bed, and after vainly
trying to find his mourning clothes, went round
to the inn in the village, where he borrowed a
pair of black trousers from the waiter. The
trousers only reached to his ankles, for he was a
very tall man, but having covered the upper
portion of his body with a dark overcoat, he
hired a “machine” (Scotch for a horse-drawn
vehicle) and went to the funeral, arriving just
as the coffin was being lowered into the grave.
My brother Percy (the late Queensberry), who
was present, told me that the appearance, in his


strange garb, of poor Uncle Beau at this moment
was a fearful shock to Aunt Florrie and all the
mourners, and this was accentuated when with
loud sobs, and with tears running down his
cheeks, he threw himself down by the grave and
ejaculated: “My God, how I loved that man;
we were like a pair of apes! ”
Aunt Florrie was also rather eccentric, though
she had many lovable qualities of generosity and
kindness. She was a magnificent horsewoman,
and being a tiny little woman, weighing less than
eight stone, she was equal to “cutting down” the
best “over a country” when she hunted from
Melton with the Quorn. She had an uncanny
power over all animals and there was never a
horse foaled that she couldn’t ride. She never
during the whole time I knew her had less than
fifteen dogs, and generally a great many more.
She also had a tame jaguar, which she brought
back from Patagonia. This animal used to lie
on the riverside lawn at The Fishery, to the
wonder and occasional alarm of the boating
crowd on the river as they passed by. It had a
collar round its neck attached to a chain at least
twenty-five yards long, which was fixed to a tree
in the middle of the garden. One day it got loose
and made its way into the park at Windsor, where
it remained at large for more than a week, killing
several of the deer there, much to the annoyance


of Queen Victoria, who made such remonstrances
that when it was finally recaptured my aunt
sent it to the Zoo. She used to go to visit it
there, and when it saw her coming towards its
cage it would utter loud yowls and leap into the
air with joy. She always went into its cage,
and so did my Uncle Jim, who was Aunt Florrie’s
twin brother. Aunt Florrie always declared that
the jaguar was perfectly harmless and tame and
that it “would not hurt a baby.” At the same
time we children and her own two boys, Douglas
and Bertie, were forbidden to go up to it on the
lawn. I never felt any particular urge to go
near it myself, I must confess; but my aunt took
it for granted that I was panting to go up and
pat it, her theory being that no Douglas could
possibly be afraid of anything. As she said, “Of
course he wouldn’t hurt you if you did pat him,
but perhaps you had better not, as I don’t think
your dear mother would like it.” So I refrained,
not without inward satisfaction, though if she
had encouraged me I would have patted it all
right, being what Whyte Melville called a “hard
funker.”
Uncle Beau was originally very well off. He
had a beautiful place in Leicestershire called
Bosworth, and at least ten thousand a year. But
he ran through nearly all his money, chiefly
racing. He was very “thick” with the Prince


of Wales (Edward VII) for a long time, and
spent money lavishly in entertaining him. The
Prince was his son Bertie’s godfather. For the
last twenty years of his life he and Florrie (after
her death he married a second wife) lived at
The Glen in somewhat reduced circumstances.
But their welcome and hospitality were always
as lavish and cordial as ever when one turned up
to see them. They belonged to a type which,
with its qualities and the defects of those qualities,
no longer exists, as far as I know. I keep a very
soft spot in my heart for both of them.


CHAPTER XXIX
MY FATHER WAS RECONCILED TO CHRISTIANITY ON
his deathbed, some days before he died (I believe
that as a boy he was very religious), and my
dear mother at his request went to see him. My
Uncle Archie, the Catholic Priest, gave him
“conditional absolution.” I have often thought
that his eccentricities, which in the last few years
of his life really amounted sometimes to madness,
may have been due to one or other of the terrible
falls he got steeplechasing and hunting. At
different times be broke all his limbs, and his
collar-bone two or three times, and more than
once my mother told me he was brought home
on a hurdle unconscious from concussion.
As long as he went on riding he was compara-
tively all right in his mind, but when he gave it
up (as he did suddenly, when he was not much
over forty) his whole character and his brain-
power deteriorated. He became very moody,
and he was obsessed with the strange hatred of
Christianity which he originally imbibed through
reading passages (he never read a whole book,
except a novel, in his life) from Herbert Spencer


and Huxley. He called himself an agnostic and>
referring back to what I said earlier in this book
about agnostics, I can only declare that he was
very far from being an exception to the general
rule I have laid down about them. He bored
people to tears about the whole subject, and he
found it ever increasingly difficult to keep it out
of his conversation. The result was that from
having an enormous quantity of friends he ended
by hardly ever seeing anyone. He really was
ostracised and shunned, especially after the Wilde
affair. The victory he obtained over Oscar
Wilde in the Law Courts was thus dearly bought,
at a terrible price; for I doubt whether he ever
knew a really happy hour after it happened till
just before he died. He certainly succeeded in
destroying Wilde and (incidentally, but by no
means accidentally) blasting the whole life of
his own son, but the satisfaction he got from this
performance cannot have endured for much
longer than a few weeks.
I have described in my Autobiography how I
tried to be reconciled with him again, and how,
up to a point, I succeeded. The reconciliation
did not last long, but at any rate I can honestly
say that, short as it was, it was sufficient to cure
me of the real hatred which I am sorry to say I
felt for him for two or three years after the
catastrophe.


I ended by having nothing but kind thoughts
about him, even though I saw him no more, and
I contrived that he should get to know of this.
Perhaps if he had lived a little longer we might
have had another and more lasting reconciliation.
If he had out-lived Wilde, and still more if he
had lived long enough to see me married to
Olive, I feel pretty certain that we would have
come together again. As it was, he died just
one year before Wilde and three years before
my marriage.
At any rate I may say with considerable con-
fidence that if he had lived till 1913, his own
solicitors would not have appeared against me
in the Law Courts before Mr Justice Darling
and produced letters I had written to him and
that he had written to me, for my discomfiture,
as they so strangely did. As long as he remained
alive it would scarcely have been possible for
anyone, even a lawyer or a judge, to forget, or
even to pretend to forget, that his action in
attacking and ruining Wilde was supposed to
have been undertaken for the express purpose
of “saving” and “protecting” me, and that,
consequently, to use it as a weapon against me
years later, when I had been happily married and
the father of a son for more than ten years, was
scarcely what the English call “playing the
game!”


The only time Wilde and my father ever met
in a friendly way was at lunch at the Cafe Royal,
when they took a mutual fancy to each other. My
father wrote to me a few days later telling me that
he thought Wilde was a brilliant and charming
man and that he no longer wondered why I was so
fond of him. He also told me that his old friend
Lord de Grey (afterwards Lord Ripon) had told
him that Wilde was a great friend of his and a
frequent guest of his and his wife’s, and that he
was “perfectly all right in every way,” as well
as being a man of great genius. I am quoting
almost verbatim, from memory, from my father’s
letter, in which he formally withdrew all his
aspersions on Wilde and authorised me to go on
with the friendship. When one comes to think
that this letter (which Sir Edward Clarke pro-
duced at the trial) was written less than two
years before the final catastrophe, it certainly
seems astonishing and terrible that this catas-
trophe should ever have been deliberately and
cold-bloodedly brought about by my father.
What happened to make him change his mind
in so strange and fatal a manner? I can only
say that I have not the slightest knowledge or
information on this point. Obviously someone
made mischief and deliberately inflamed my
father against Wilde. But who it was, or why
he did it, must ever remain a mystery.


It must be remembered, to Oscar’s credit, and
in proof of what I have said of his extraordinary
powers of attraction and fascination, that when
my father met him at the Cafe Royal he was
violently prejudiced against him, and he had
already written me several letters abusing Wilde
and forbidding me to go on knowing him, and
that Wilde had seen these letters. What hap-
pened was that Oscar and I were lunching
upstairs in the Cafe Royal and that my father
came in, without at first seeing us, and sat at
another table. I immediately, “with great pre-
sence of mind,” as Oscar afterwards put it, went
over and asked him to come and join us. He
refused at first, but finally, when I pressed him,
agreed, and came over to our table, and I
introduced him to Oscar. Within ten minutes
Oscar had got him laughing and smiling. Oscar,
as always, was in brilliant form, and my father
“fell for him” at once. They got on so well and
talked so much together, leaving me out, that
I felt bored and got up and left them at about
ten minutes to three (luncheon having begun at
1.30), and by that time, needless to say, they
had got on to Christianity. This was exactly
why I was bored and left; not that I had any
prejudice in favour of Christianity at that time,
I am sorry to say, but because when my father
got on to that subject I knew by experience what


to expect. But Oscar, being as I have pointed
out over and over again (and especially in one
of my sonnets) a sort of magician or enchanter
who could weave spells, succeeded in doing what
no one else had been able to do for many years
at that time, charming my father into pleasant
and happy conversation, and leading him right
out of the quagmire of boredom and argument
in which he invariably landed himself when he
began to talk about religion.
It is tragic to think that if only the acquaintance
between the two had gone on and been refreshed
by other meetings, Oscar would probably have
succeeded in curing my father’s “melancholy
madness.” He told me afterwards that he felt
great sympathy for my father, and that my father
had a lot in him which appealed to him. He
told me, and I am sure he really meant it, that
he had greatly enjoyed the meeting. After I
left them at the Cafe Royal they remained
talking till nearly four. It sounds rather con-
ceited, I know, but I have often thought that
part of my father’s distorted grievance in all this
business was caused by jealousy. It never
occurred to me at the time, but I believe my
father really was fond of me, and I think he
sensed somehow that, with the horrible heartless-
ness of youth (the undergraduate who imagines
himself to be “intellectual”), I did not appreciate


him as he really was, or felt himself to be. I
probably showed him (God forgive me) that I
thought him rather stupid in comparison with
my brilliant friend. I was a spoilt and selfish
little beast (though of a very attractive appear-
ance) in those days, I know only too well. Did
I perhaps unconsciously wound the feelings of
poor “Papa”? (Having been brought up by
French nurses, I always pronounced the word the
French way, and I called him so at the time of
the luncheon-party, and again the last time I
ever spoke to him during the “reconciliation.”)
The thought which has only recently occurred
to me is a terrible one. Did my father really
love me all the time, as I certainly loved him
before he turned against me, and was he only
doing what Oscar says in his great Ballad all
men always do, killing the thing he loved?
Didn’t we all three, Wilde, my father, and I,
do it, more or less?


CHAPTER XXX
I AM VERY OFTEN ASKED, CHIEFLY BUT BY NO
means exclusively by Catholics, what is the real
truth about Oscar Wilde’s reception into the
Catholic Church, and also what was his attitude
towards Christianity in general and Catholicism
in particular. I reply to these questions now by
expressing my conviction that he was all his
life intermittently attracted towards Catholicism.
As I did not meet him till I was twenty-one and
he was about thirty-eight, I cannot pretend to
write with authority about his earlier years.
But many of his early poems are steeped in
Catholic sentiment, and I believe it is the fact
that he was on the point of becoming a Catholic
soon after he left Oxford.
The person who really knows most about all
this is the Right Rev. Abbot Sir David Hunter
Blair, who was a great friend of his at Magdalen.
It was the Abbot who, when I was staying with
him as his guest at the Benedictine Abbey of Fort
Augustus, round about 1912, first convinced me,
to my great satisfaction and joy, that the recep-
tion of Oscar into the Catholic Church on his


deathbed, and while he was unable to speak
but still able to make signs, was perfectly valid
and genuine. The Abbot showed or read me a
letter he had received at the time from the
Passionist Father who received him. (In my
Autobiography I made the mistake of calling him
a Franciscan.)
Up till then I had always believed the story
that Robert Ross told me in Paris a few days
after Oscar’s death. Ross assured me that Oscar
was entirely unconscious at the time when his
supposed reception took place and that he knew
nothing about it. If this were true, of course his
reception into the Church would not be valid,
as the consent of the person received is necessary,
as is obvious. Ross, with whom I was at that
time, as I fondly imagined, on the best terms,
and who greeted my arrival with pleasure, as I
was the provider of funds to pay the expenses
incurred at Wilde’s death and the cost of the
funeral, told me that Oscar, years before, had
said to him one day, “Catholicism is the only
religion to die in, and if I am ever dying and you
happen to be there, you must send for a Catholic
priest.” Ross went on to tell me that when
Oscar became unconscious he, remembering this,
took it upon himself to go and fetch a priest, an
English Passionist, to whom he swore that Oscar
had expressed an urgent wish to become a


Catholic, and that the priest, acting on this
information, received Oscar while the latter was
in fact not only unable to speak but quite un-
conscious, and not having the remotest know-
ledge of what was happening. Ross (himself a
Catholic and a convert, though I am told that
he subsequently apostatised) said to me, “You
know how I feel about these things, and I felt
I was justified in getting Oscar received under the
circumstances, and I also reckoned that it would
be much easier to arrange his funeral and go
through the necessary legal formalities in a
Catholic country if Oscar were officially certified
as a Catholic.” At that time I was not a
Catholic myself, and though not at all hostile
to the Church, I was not particularly interested
one way or another. I told Ross that I thought
he had acted quite rightly, if it were any satis-
faction to him, and that, as far as I was concerned
(I was the chief mourner at the funeral in
the Church of Saint-Germain-des-Pres), I was
delighted that he had done what he had
done.
Consequently when the Abbot opened the ques-
tion at Fort Augustus, I told him that I feared
Oscar’s reception was not valid. He thereupon
either showed or read me (I forget which) the
letter he had received from the Passionist in
Paris, the decisive phrase of which was, “ I satisfied


myself that he understood and assented, although
he was unable to speak.”
That Ross was an unmitigated liar I do not
suppose anyone would now be inclined to dispute.
Frank Harris’s account of Wilde’s death, which
was supplied to him by Ross, contains a revolting
story which Reggie Turner (one of my oldest and
most valued friends), who was in the room when
Oscar died, declares to be utterly false and
baseless from beginning to end. I could multiply
instances of Ross’s proved and established men-
dacity, but there would be no point in doing
this. My own opinion is that Ross was slightly
mad and that many of his actions, which would
otherwise be inconceivably monstrous, are thus
accounted for. He had, moreover, a very
strongly marked tendency to “romance.” He
could not resist “improving” facts and thereby
making them into a dramatic story. Anyhow,
I dismiss Ross’s evidence on this, or on any
point, as utterly worthless (it may be remembered
that I had the privilege of hearing him cross-
examined by Mr Comyns Carr, K.G., at the Old
Bailey, and the judge and jury on that occasion
evidently shared my view on this point).
The Passionist monk who received Oscar into
the Church, on the other hand, is entirely free
from any suspicion of bad faith. In fact any
such suspicion would be as foolish as insulting.


He saw the dying Oscar and had to make up his
mind rapidly, and indeed immediately, whether
he could possibly receive him into the Church or
not. Naturally he spoke to him and asked him
many questions. His account of the matter as
already recorded is: “I satisfied myself that he
understood and assented.” To do Ross justice,
it is quite possible that Oscar’s signs of under-
standing and assent were not visible to him, but
only to the priest who was bending over him.
So I take it that there is no doubt at all that
Oscar died a Catholic, though it was physically
impossible to give him the Viaticum.
The knowledge of this fact might, one would
have supposed, have had some influence on the
mind of Mr Alfred Noyes when a few years ago
he actually intervened and prevented the vener-
able and aged Abbot from delivering a lecture
to the Catholic Poetry Society (of which I am
one of the Vice-Presidents) in the house of
Mr Shane Leslie on “Oscar Wilde as I Knew
Him.” Mr Noyes, although himself at that time
a quite recent convert, took the extraordinary
step of writing a strongly worded letter to the
Abbot expressing the view that it would be a
scandal if the Abbot delivered his lecture, which
so upset the poor Abbot that he cancelled his
engagement to speak at the very last moment.
I know all about it, because Mr Maurice Leahy,


the Secretary of the Catholic Poetry Society (of
which my friend Lord Tredegar is the President),
asked me to take the Chair at the Abbot’s
meeting. I came up from the country and,
arriving about an hour before the time of the
meeting, I was met at the door by Shane Leslie,
who, taking me into his study on the ground
floor, said: “Well, this is a ghastly state of
affairs!” or words to that effect. I had not the
least notion what he was talking about, and was
flabbergasted to be told that “the Cardinal” —
that is to say, Cardinal Bourne —had intervened
and forbidden the Abbot to deliver a lecture on
such a scandalous subject as Oscar Wilde. It
turned out subsequently, of course, as I guessed
even while Shane Leslie was telling me the story,
that the Cardinal had nothing whatever to do
with it, and that it was simply the great Mr Noyes
who had frightened the poor Abbot into cancel-
ling his engagement to deliver the lecture. Why
the Abbot, who, spiritually speaking, stands in
relation to Noyes in the position of the Father
of a family to his youngest child, should have
allowed himself to be “frightened with false fire,”
I cannot understand. But so it was. I felt very
much annoyed because, for one thing, if the
meeting was “off,” I thought at least I ought to
have been notified and saved the trouble of
coming up from the country on a bootless errand.


Shane Leslie went on to say: “ It’s very annoy-
ing, of course, but anyhow I don’t suppose many
people will turn up.” The words were yet in
his mouth, so to speak, when the loud sounds of
traffic outside drew us to the window of the
dining-room, which looked out on the street.
The whole street was blocked with motors.
People arrived by the hundred. Not only was
the large double drawing-room on the first floor
so crowded that there was barely standing room,
but the audience overflowed on to the stairs, on
which they sat in serried ranks.
Against the strong advice of Shane Leslie I
insisted upon going upstairs (as in the mean-
while Maurice Leahy had failed to turn up at
all) and addressing the meeting. I told them
what had happened, and I also told them pretty
strongly what I thought about it. I received a
regular ovation, and there is no doubt that the
audience were as much disgusted as I was. At
that time I had no knowledge of the part that
Mr Noyes had played in the affair, but just as
I was finishing my harangue, Maurice Leahy
arrived in a state of great indignation and told
the audience all about it. He read all the letters
that had passed between him and the Abbot
and me. I had at first declined to take the
Chair, as I feared that some people might not
like it. On being pressed very strongly by


Maurice Leahy, I had finally said: “I will take
the Chair if the Abbot wishes me to do so and
expresses his wish in writing, but not otherwise.”
Leahy had communicated this to the Abbot, who
had replied that he would be delighted for me to
take the Chair, and that he hoped Leahy and I
would both dine with him after the meeting.
Maurice Leahy read a letter from Mr Noyes
saying that if the meeting were allowed to
take place as arranged, he would be reluctantly
obliged to resign his position as one of the Vice-
Presidents of the Society. To this Maurice re-
plied, with characteristic Irish vehemence, that
the name of Mr Noyes had already been removed
from the list of Vice-Presidents ! Altogether the
scene was most lively and cheering, and when
the part played by Mr Noyes in rebuking and
frightening off his ecclesiastical superior was
understood, the Catholic audience were amazed
and scandalised.
After the proceedings were terminated, Leahy
and his wife and I went off to dine together, and
Leahy, after a great deal of persuasion, induced
me to promise to give a lecture on the subject in
place of the Abbot. He had already, he told me,
got the offer of a drawing-room for the occasion.
On reflection, however, I did not feel inclined
to carry on the war, and I wrote to Leahy a
few days later and compromised by offering to


give a lecture on “The Catholic Attitude towards
Certain Poets.” I gave the lecture a week or
two later with Lord Tredegar (Evan Morgan) in
the Chair. I was then able to point out the
absurdity, as well as the lack of Christian charity
towards a fellow-Catholic, of the attitude adopted
by Mr Noyes, and I inquired if the Society really
considered or would be likely to consider that it
could not properly discuss the works of, say,
Shelley and Marlowe, both of whom called
themselves atheists, and the second of whom was
notoriously distinctly tarred with the same brush
as poor Wilde without having his advantage of
a deathbed reception into the bosom of the
Catholic Church. Needless to say the meeting,
which included several Catholic priests, was
entirely with me on every point, and the vote
of thanks to me for my lecture proposed by Evan
Morgan was carried with acclamation. On the
whole the net result of the incident was on the
right side, as I consider, and I doubt whether
Mr Noyes can have obtained any permanent
satisfaction from the strange part he played in it.
However, as I pointed out in my speech to the
meeting, “This isle is full of noises,” and some
of them do not carry out the Shakespearian
definition. I mean they are not always exactly
“sounds and sweet airs which give delight and
hurt not.”


Apropos of Oscar’s ultimate reception into the
Church, I recall that just before he started his
fatal libel action against my father at the Old
Bailey, he said to me one day: “If I win this
case, as of course I shall, I think we must both
be received into the dear Catholic Church.”
Even in those days I disliked this kind of talk
about religion, and I rather brutally replied,
“Well, if you don’t win the case we certainly
won’t be received anywhere else.” At that time
Oscar’s attitude towards Catholicism was exactly
that represented by a well-known passage in
Dorian Gray. It was the attitude of the aesthete
and dilettante who appreciates the external
beauty of the Church, but rejects her as an
intellectual resting-place.
It was a very different Oscar Wilde who,
broken by the cruel suffering and misery of his
long confinement and the loss of all his worldly
possessions, went round to the Brompton Oratory,
as he did on the day of his release from prison,
and asked to see one of the Fathers there. I
rather think that it was dear old Father Sebastian
Bowden (formerly an officer in the Coldstream
Guards) whom he asked for. As it happened,
the Father in question, whoever he was, was
away, and though Oscar could of course have
seen one of the others, he preferred not to un-
burden himself to a man he did not know. He


had then made up his mind that he wanted to
be a Catholic, but in the circumstances he “put
it off,” and went to France the same day.
While he was at Berneval, the little village
near Dieppe, where a chalet had been taken for
him out of funds supplied by a subscription
among his friends, to which the late Miss
Schuster, to her lasting credit, was the largest
contributor, he constantly went to Mass, as he
informed me when he started writing to me
after purging his mind of the wild delusions
about me which he had fostered in prison. He
also wrote to me from there and described a fete
to the school-children which he gave on the
occasion of Queen Victoria’s Jubilee. This JHe
was, of course, attended by the Catholic Cure of
the parish. Oscar wrote to me with glee that
at the conclusion of the fete the children shouted:
“ Vive Monsieur Melmoth ! Vive la reine Victoria /”
He had an extraordinary devotion to Queen
Victoria, and he was fond of telling stories about
her which, like all his stories, “conjured wonder
out of emptiness.” Not that I wish to say a
word against Queen Victoria, for whose memory
I have a profound respect, partly I have no doubt
because it was constantly instilled into my youth-
ful mind from the moment I first met Oscar.
All I mean is that Oscar had the art of clothing
the most commonplace events with strange and


dramatic significance. He adored the Queen,
and I always thought this a touching trait in
his character. Someone once said to him in my
presence, whether speaking from any real know-
ledge or not I have no idea, “She was never
anything but brutal about you,” but Oscar was
quite unmoved by this, and said at once that he
did not blame “the dear Queen.” “Naturally,”
he said, “she could not be expected to think
otherwise than badly about me.”
After Oscar left Berneval and came to join me
in Naples (I was at Aix-les-Bains and I joined
his train there on the way) he did not persevere
with his Catholic intentions. Ido not think he
ever went to church at Naples, any more than
I did. I was a complete pagan in those days,
and I did not myself become a Catholic till
eleven years after Oscar’s death. Generally
speaking, I would say of him that he always had
a sort of hankering after the Church and what
might be described as a “sneaking regard” for
her. By nature he was religious. I never,
during the whole time I was with him, heard
him say a word against Catholicism. Such
being his nature, it was to be expected that he
would end as a Catholic. Abbot Hunter Blair
has a very dramatic story about a ring which he
agreed while he was at Oxford to give (or to
receive, I forget which) when Oscar became a


Catholic, as he was firmly convinced he would.
I will not spoil the story by trying to tell it, as I
would probably get it wrong. With the kind
permission of Mr Alfred Noyes, the Abbot may
yet be induced to tell the story as he had pro-
mised to do that evening at the meeting of the
Catholic Poetry Society in Shane Leslie’s house.
It is just one of those stories which appeal as
wonderful to religious people, but which would
probably excite nothing but scorn in the
“superior” intelligences of Doctors Inge and
Barnes, who cannot understand (so they say)
how any reasonable person can believe in the
efficacy of prayer, and who invariably fall back
on that blessed word “coincidence” whenever
any question of the supernatural is toward.


CHAPTER XXXI
AS I GET TOWARDS THE END OF THESE RANDOM
recollections of my stormy life, I feel that I have
been jumping about in a rather disconcerting
way from one period to another. But I decided
when I started this book that it would be hopeless
for me to attempt to write it chronologically.
I have already done that in my Autobiography, and
my readers will probably smile when I tell them
that originally I had intended to say little or
nothing about the Wilde business this time.
My whole life has, however, been so coloured
by that association with Wilde and the catas-
trophe to which it led, that I have found it quite
impossible to keep away from the subject; and
the friends whom I have consulted have all told
me that my readers would expect me to write
about it. I have never been allowed to forget
it for long. There have been periods of my life
when I appeared to have got right away from it,
but invariably something has happened to bring
it all back to my mind. Within the last year
there have been Sherard’s book and the play
Oscar Wilde by Leslie and Sewell Stokes, to both


of which I wrote a preface. I suppose more
books have been written about Wilde, all over
the world, than about any other English poet
except Byron, who has this in common with
Wilde, that his clash with society, resulting in
his exile from England, made him an object of
enormous European interest quite apart from
his poetical and literary gifts and achievements.
Neither Wilde nor Byron would have been half
so famous as they are, apart from the tragedies
of their lives.
Nothing can be more absurdly untrue than the
assertion, which is invariably made by about half
the reviewers when a new book on Wilde comes
out, that the subject is exhausted and that no-
body wants to hear any more about it. The
subject never will be exhausted, just precisely
because of its human and dramatic interest.
Wordsworth was a better poet (at his best, and
one must always judge poets by their best) than
either Byron or Wilde; but for one book about
Wordsworth there have been fifty about Byron,
and in the long run Wilde will probably cut out
even Byron in this respect. A great deal of the
exaggerated praise of Byron in France was due
to anti-English sentiment, and the same holds
good about Wilde. When Wilde got out of
prison there were pages in all the French papers
about Vhypocrisie Anglaise. I am bound to say,


however, that the French, on the whole, were
not much kinder to poor Oscar during his life-
time than the English were. An attempt made
by the Franco-American poet Stuart Merrill to
get a petition for his release signed by prominent
French men of letters completely failed. None
of the French men of letters (who included at
that time Zola and Alphonse Daudet) would
sign. They “all with one accord began to make
excuse” when they were invited to demonstrate
in this tangible way against Vhypocrisie Anglaise
which they professed to condemn; and, as I
said at the time, in the long run Vhypocrisie
Frangaise did not appear to differ very much
from the English variety. I wrote a sonnet
about this at the time and sent it to The Savoy,
which was being edited by Arthur Symons. My
sonnet was not printed in The Savoy. It was
addressed “To the French Men of Letters who
refused to sign a petition in favour of Oscar
Wilde’s release from prison.” I never even re-
ceived any acknowledgment of it from The Savoy
or the return of my manuscript. For some
reason or other (disgust, I suppose), I did not
take the trouble to write out another copy of the
sonnet. I felt certain that it would never be
published, and anyhow I reckoned that I had it
in my head and would never forget it. So it
comes about that now, forty years later, when I


really could publish it and would like to do so,
I cannot remember a solitary word of the Octave
(the first eight lines)! All I remember is the
sestet which went as follows :
And did you ask who signed the plea with you?
Fools, it was signed already with the sign
Of great dead men, of God-like Socrates,
Shakespeare and Plato and the Florentine
Who conquered form. And all your wretched crew
Once, and once only, might have stood with these.
Not too bad, I think, admitting that I
“pinched” “all your wretched crew” from
Keats’s sonnet about Leigh Hunt’s imprisonment.
To do the French justice, there were at least one
or two reviews published at that time in Paris
which would have printed the sonnet if I had
asked their editors to do it, but as in those days
not one Frenchman in five thousand spoke or
understood a word of English, I did not think it
worth while to ask them. This was, I now feel,
a piece of foolishness on my part, as although
they did not understand English (Mallarme and
Verlaine were notable exceptions), French men
of letters were interested in my poetry, as is
proved by the reviews I got and by the fact that
a thousand copies of my poems, published in
Paris in 1896 by the Mercure de France with a prose
translation in French, were sold, and that a few
years later I was twice asked by Alfred Vallette,
the Editor of the Mercure , to let him bring out a


new edition; but this I would not agree to do,
because some of the poems in the collection were
considered by English critics and friends to be
improper and the rest had by that time been
published in London. There was really nothing
much wrong about these suppressed poems, and
when the latest collected edition of my poems
appeared two years ago (in two volumes, Lyrics
and Sonnets) they were all reprinted.
Nowadays, of course, an enormous number of
French men and women understand and speak
English almost perfectly, but when I lived in
Paris (on and off for about five or six years,
beginning immediately after Wilde’s conviction
in 1895) I hardly ever met a Frenchman who
knew English except in the same sort of way one
knows (or used to know) Latin. This was all
to the good as far as I was concerned, because,
being obliged to speak French all the time, I got
to know it very well, and after a year or two I
spoke it almost as well as English. I used to
dream in French in those days.
I was amused to see in one of Frank Harris’s
prefaces to some edition of his notorious book
Oscar Wilde, his Life and Confessions, published in
America a year or two before his death, that he
said that I “spoke French very badly.” As a
matter of fact I could call at least a dozen
Frenchmen (including Arnold Van Gennep of


the Mercure de France , the translator of my Auto-
biography into French) to bear witness that even
now I speak French very well. Harris, on the
other hand, spoke it comme me vache espagnole , and
although he lived so many years in France, his
French was atrocious, not only by reason of his
shocking English accent, but also because,
obviously, he really did not know the language
at all well. Oscar Wilde, on the other hand,
when I first went to Paris with him (in about
1893) spoke with a bad accent but fluently, and
in the last three years of his life, after his im-
prisonment, he got to speak it almost perfectly
though he never acquired a good accent. When
he wrote Salome his knowledge of French was not
very profound. Andre Gide told me that he
and Pierre Louys, at Wilde’s request, corrected
Wilde’s MS. for him, and that it was a mass of
blunders and misspelling and bad grammar.
Robert Sherard, however, tells me that Marcel
Schwob, whom I knew well and for whose
fascinating prose I have a tremendous admira-
tion, really did this correcting for Oscar, and
not Gide and Louys at all. I would rather take
Sherard’s word than Gide’s. In his book Si Le
Grain Ne Meurt he indulges in the most astonishing
perversions of truth about Wilde and myself.
Wilde and I met him in Algiers when we were
there together a month or two before the pro


duction at the St James’s Theatre of The
Importance of Being Earnest. Oscar already knew
him and had seen quite a lot of him round about
the time when he was writing Salome, but I had
never met him before. Gide tries to make out
in Si Le Grain .Ne Meurt that he was a tremendous
friend of Wilde’s; but as I pointed out in an
additional chapter to my Autobiography which
appears in the French translation of my book,
but not in the English version, Wilde never liked
him, and used to make fun of him and “pull his
leg” by telling him the most absurd and hair-
raising stories about himself, which Gide, being
what the French call “ Jobard ” (an almost un-
translatable word, but it perhaps can be best
rendered by the American slang “a sucker”),
swallowed whole. Poor Gide, at that time, was
rather an unsophisticated and innocent sort of
person and he was still tormented (“tormented”
is the word) by religious feelings which he has
since, evidently, succeeded in quelling. He was
always telling Oscar that he exercised “ me
influence Junes tef and his moralisings infuriated
Oscar, who revenged himself by making fun of
him.
Gide was that extreme rarity a French Pro-
testant, about the only one I ever met, leaving
out governesses in England. When I met him
at Algiers, Oscar was, as I thought, really rather


unkind to him, and I remonstrated with him
about it. I said, “Why are you so nasty to poor
Andre, Oscar? He is quite a decent fellow.
The way you make fun of him is really too bad,
and it’s not like you.” Oscar replied, “My dear
Bosie, Andre is an egoist without an ego; more-
over, he is a French Protestant, which is the
worst kind, except of course the Irish Protestant;
and, besides, his moralisings are tedious and
really impertinent, and he has a dirty mind, and
whatever my views may be about sin, I dislike
dirt.” This was severe, but who can say it is
unjust after reading Gide’s really appalling
books, e.g. Les JVourritures Terrestres and Si Le
Grain JVe Meurt (written of course long after-
wards) .
As I pointed out in my chapter “ Mes Frequen-
tations Litteraires d Paris ” in the French translation
of my Autobiography , Gide really ought to be
grateful to me for emphasising the fact that he
never was a great friend of Wilde’s and that
Wilde disliked him and made fun of him, because
if he really had been such a friend of Wilde’s as
he tries to make out, anyone would be entitled
to ask him how it was that he never went near
Wilde during the whole of his last years in Paris
except on one occasion when, according to his
own account, he came across him accidentally,
sitting on the terrasse of a cafe. If he had been a


great friend of Wilde’s, his treatment of him in
those years would have been shameful, instead of
being, as it was, just normal and what was to be
expected of the ordinary man.
In those days, even in Paris, it required a
certain amount of courage to be seen about in
Wilde’s company. Gide himself, after at one
time being ostracised on account of his books, is
now the god of a section of la jeunesse Frangaise,
and his supposed great friendship with Wilde is,
or was, in those circles, one of his greatest assets.
I do not suppose that these words of mine will
do anything more than is already done to prick
the bubble of his pretensions in this direction.
It is more than six years since the translation of
my Autobiography, issued by La Nouvelle Revue
Frangaise under the title Oscar Wilde et Quelques
Autres, appeared in Paris. Gide has had every
opportunity to reply to what I then wrote, which
is substantially the same as what I have just
transcribed, but he has remained dumb.
While I am on the subject of translations, it
will perhaps be interesting to my readers to know
that a selection of my poems most skilfully
translated into French verse by the well-known
poet Francis d’Avilla (Madame d’Avilla) has
recently been published in Paris by Albert
Messein. Mr Harold Nicolson, in acknowledg-
ing a copy which I sent him, told me that, as far


as he knows, I am the only English poet since
Byron who has been translated into French verse
while he was still alive. I feel that this is a
distinction, and I hope it is correct. My first
volume of poetry was published in France just
as Shelley’s first volume of poetry was published
in Italy, at Pisa, after he had been, like myself,
more or less driven out of England, which is
never very kind to its poets till after they are
dead and buried, and not always even then!
In France, on the other hand, poets command a
lot of respect, at any rate they did in the days
when I lived there, as I soon found out after my
first volume of poems came out. Up till then
I had been the subject of a good deal of not
always good-natured gossip, scandal and chaff,
but directly I was recognised as a poet the
attitude towards me completely changed and I
got a lot of consideration and respect. I had
numberless friends in those days among French
journalists and men of letters, and the daily
paper, Le Journal, made me a sort of honorary
member of its staff. I had the free run of the
“bar” which was installed in their offices at that
time, when it was considered the last word in
modernity. At one time I lunched there nearly
every day, and my particular friend was the
brilliant Ernest Lajeunesse who wrote a very
kind article about me in Le Journal soon after


my first arrival in Paris, and who afterwards
became a great friend and constant companion
of Oscar Wilde. He was one of about a dozen
mourners who came to Oscar’s funeral at the
Church of Saint-Germain-des-Pres.


CHAPTER XXXII
ERNEST LAJEUNESSE WAS, NEXT TO WILDE, ABOUT
the most brilliant talker I ever met. He used
to frequent the “Calisaya,” a cafe or “bar” on
the Boulevard which became the rendez-vous of
all sorts of literary men, poets and other artists,
during the three years when Wilde was in his
last stage. Wilde himself went there every day,
and among others we used to meet regularly
there were Rowland Strong and Moreas the poet.
Lajeunesse had an impish sense of humour, a
great deal of erudition, and a real gift of wit.
He kept one laughing all the time. When his
first book, Limitation de Notre Mattre Napoleon,
came out it had a wonderful “press,” and even
his enemies, of whom he had a few, praised it.
Alas! he died very young, when he was not
much over thirty. The last time I saw him,
about a year after my marriage, in 1903, when
I had not seen him for a couple of years, he was
struck with amazement at my unalterably
juvenile appearance, which in those days cer-
tainly was astonishing. He said to me “Tu
commence a reproduce le Portrait de Dorian Gray.”


As I was then nearly thirty-three, he had cause
to be surprised when he saw me and could
declare, as he did, that I looked exactly the same
as when he had first met me eight years earlier.
My youthful appearance in those days was on
the whole an asset, but it was sometimes rather
annoying, as when I was taken on two or three
occasions by Oscar to see Sarah Bernhardt, who
always persisted in treating me as if I were a
child, and used to cause me intense sufferings in
my amour propre by giving me a box of chocolates
and more or less pushing me aside into a corner
while she talked to Oscar. She invariably re-
ferred to me as “ce cher enfant .” The result was
that I was always overcome with dumb shyness
and blushes every time I saw her, and never
once succeeded in asserting myself or making
the slightest impression on her fixed opinion of
my infantile age and standing. This I must say
was before the trial of Wilde, in 1894, when I
really was only twenty-three. I never saw her
after the debacle, and although she did meet
Oscar once at that time, when they embraced
and shed tears, she behaved very shabbily to
him in the matter of Salome, which she promised
to produce in Paris but never did produce. She
had actually, in 1894, rehearsed the play in
London and it was advertised to appear when
it was stopped by the Censor.


Later, after Oscar’s arrest, she promised to
produce it in Paris, and to send Oscar money on
account of royalties, which he badly needed for
his defence. In this matter Robert Sherard
acted as intermediary between her and Oscar,
and he knows more about it all than I do. But
we both agree that she behaved very badly and
let Oscar down in a cruel way just at the time
when she might have done something to prove
her great friendship for him, of which she always
spoke so strongly.
During the last part of the time I was in France
up till shortly before Oscar’s death, I was more
often at Chantilly than in Paris, and one conse-
quence of my going in for owning horses and
racing was that I lost touch to a great extent
with my French literary and journalistic friends.
Once I became a “racing man” they looked
upon me as lost from a literary and artistic point
of view. I have always resented and fought
against this assumption on the part of literary or
intellectual people that there is a gulf fixed
between art and sport. I see no reason at all
why the love of both should not exist in the same
man. It seems to me that the old Greek idea of
combining athletics and philosophy and music
as various branches of necessary education is the
best. Of course, strictly speaking, sport and
athletics are different things, and the present-day


journalistic habit of calling football and cricket
and other games “sport” is really a misuse of
the English language as I was taught to under-
stand and use it in my youth. But in any case
why on earth should a poet or a painter or an
artist of any kind not also be an athlete and a
sportsman?
Personally, I was always divided between the
two. I loved horses and I loved shooting and
fly-fishing as much as I loved poetry and litera-
ture. When I was at Oxford, a year or two ago,
staying with an undergraduate at Christchurch,
I tried to impress upon him that he should go in
for rowing or playing some sort of strenuous
game as well as giving rein to his intellectual
interests. I loathe this artificial barrier between
“Aesthetes” and “Hearties.” Merely as a matter
of policy I explained to my young friend, a
brilliant boy who will end by writing a fine book,
and who had recently been ducked in the
fountain because he was very good-looking and
was supposed to be an “Aesthete,” that he ought
to propitiate the “Hearties” (we never used such
a word in my day at Magdalen) by taking some
form of violent exercise. When I was at Mag-
dalen I was the greatest friend with Boating
men, and “Rugby Blues” and other varieties of
what are now called “Hearties”; and I was
elected to Vincent’s Club in my second year and


also belonged to “The Grid.” Not that I was
particularly distinguished at games, but I was a
good runner and, as I have already mentioned,
won the two miles and the mile handicap at my
college sports, and occasionally played football.
Quite enough to qualify!
The result was that when, in my last year at
Oxford, I started becoming “aesthetic,” wore my
hair rather long, sported an opal ring, wrote
poetry, and produced a literary monthly maga-
zine, The Spirit Lamp , nobody minded. I was
by that time accepted, and my eccentricities and
extravagances of dress or conduct were looked
upon not altogether with approval by the
“Blues” and other “Hearties,” but at least
without any serious disapproval. They thought
it rather odd, but they did not mind.
It is true that after I made friends with Oscar
Wilde and had him to stay with me two or three
times in my rooms in High Street which I shared
with Encombe, I became the butt of caricaturists
in the ephemeral undergraduate papers which
used to spring up (and I suppose still do) in
“eights week,” but this I did not mind at all.
On the contrary, I accepted it as a tribute, and
flattered myself that I was becoming famous.
It was one of my few divergences of opinion with
Oscar Wilde that he would not accept my view
on these points. He disliked all sport and all


athletics (except running, because it was defi-
nitely “Greek”) and discouraged me from them
as much as he could. The result was that be-
tween the ages of twenty-three and thirty I
almost gave them up. But I reacted all the
more violently to sport after my father died, and
when increased means enabled me to buy horses
and later to take an occasional cheap “shoot”
in Scotland. I ended by being a pretty good
shot. My friend James Regan, with whom, as
his guest, I used to shoot snipe in the Orkney
Islands, where he had a lot of shooting rights
in various islands, told me more than once that
I was the quickest snipe-shot he ever came
across; and as he himself was a first-class shot
I appreciated the compliment. The best fun
I ever had in my life was riding gallops on my
own horses in Chantilly for the two years just
before I married. I did not write much poetry
in those days, I fear, but this really was chiefly
because, as already described, I was “put off,”
and my lyrical impulse was checked, by the
shabby way I was treated in England after I put
my name on the title-page of The City of the Soul.
I was always, and am to this day, very sus-
ceptible to praise or blame about my writing.
I know I am a good poet, and I can, and do
sometimes, write poetry even in the face of dis-
couragement and neglect {e.g. I wrote In Excelsis


in prison), but all the same if I had been more
praised at the right time I would certainly have
written more poetry. However, I console myself
by reflecting that most poets write far too much.
It is not difficult to imagine what Keats’s feelings
would be if he could see the complete Buxton-
Forman edition of his poems, including all sorts
of doggerel that he wrote as a joke for his brother
when they were children and which he never for
a moment intended to publish. The only poet
who did not write enough to please me was
Shakespeare. I have no patience with, and little
confidence in, the critical acumen of people who
profess to be “bored” by even the least good of
Shakespeare. I wish he had written twenty
more plays and two hundred more sonnets!
Almost every other poet wrote a lot that I would
willingly dispense with. I take this opportunity
of saying that, following Shakespeare, I regard
the occasional ending of a sentence with a pre-
position as an ornament of style. “We are such
stuff as dreams are made on,” 1 and being, like
the dyer’s hand, “Subdued to what it works in,” 2
“I’ll not be juggled with” 3 on this point. On
the other hand, I object strongly to split infini-
tives, not so much on grammatical as on aesthetic
grounds. I think they are ugly. The only one
I know of in Shakespeare (in the Sonnets) is
1 The Tempest. 2 Sonnets. 3 Hamlet.


plainly due to a printer’s error, and though they
have, on rare occasions, been used by a few of
the best writers, I feel certain that this was due
to carelessness and not to deliberate intention.
In spite of Fowler (who is by no means infallible,
as I pointed out in The Academy nearly thirty
years ago), there is no such thing as a split
infinitive which would not be improved by being
“un-split.”


CHAPTER XXXIII
AFTER MY MARRIAGE IN IQO2, WHEN OLIVE AND
I passed our happy honeymoon at the now
extinct Hotel Rastadt in the rue Daunou, I
scarcely went to Paris again (except for a few
days on the occasion when I last saw Lajeunesse)
for twenty years or more. When I did go again
on several occasions, generally as the guest of
my kind and hospitable friend the Dayang Muda
of Sarawak (in Paris she is generally known as
La Princesse de Sarawak ), in her lovely flat at
Passy, within five minutes’ walk of Auteuil race-
course, I found that the vile legend of my
supposed desertion of and disloyalty to Wilde
had been almost universally accepted in Paris.
Nearly all my old friends in the literary and
journalistic world had disappeared, and most of
them were dead. There was no one to defend
me, and it was the usual case of “les absents ont
toujours tort.” It was not till my Autobiography
was translated by Arnold Van Gennep and
published in Paris by La Nouvelle Revue Frangaise,
in 1930, that I was able to “catch up” with all
the lies that had gained currency, chiefly, of


course, owing to the French translation by Henri
Davray of Frank Harris’s abominable book, The
Life and Confessions of Oscar Wilde, which had been
generally accepted as the true story, in spite of
his own written and published retractation. I
think my Autobiography in its French translation
scotched the story, and Sherard’s recent book
Bernard Shaw, Frank Harris and Oscar Wilde (to
which I contributed a Preface), though it has
not yet been translated into French, has pretty
well killed it, coming on top of Leon Lemonnier’s
Vie d’ Oscar Wilde, which, though it does me less
than justice in some respects, is at least an honest
and able attempt to give the real facts and to
dissipate most of Harris’s impudent lies. At any
rate, I was asked by Leon Lemonnier, the last
time I saw him, to give a conference and read my
poetry at the Sorbonne, and many of my poems
have since then been used as examples of English
poetry to be translated by the more advanced
French students at the University in the official
examination papers. I told Monsieur Lemonnier
that I did not feel competent to give a conference
in French, but he said, “You can give it in
English, in fact we would prefer you to do that.”
I promised to think it over, and that perhaps I
would do it later on. But I have not been in
Paris now for about four years, and the conference
has not so far materialised. Still, I accept it as


a great honour to have been asked to give it, and
I feel pretty confident that the false and really
idiotic legend spread about by Harris has now
ceased to be believed by any but the silly and
malignant persons who are always to be found
in any country and in any age, and who in-
variably and instinctively prefer falsehood to
truth. The same thing holds good in America,
where, in spite of all that has happened,
Harris was still, until quite lately, taken quite
seriously.
Harris’s story about me is so obviously absurd
and idiotic that for years I took it for granted
that no reasonable being could possibly believe
it. From a literary or historical point of view
it is just about on the level of The Confessions of
Maria Monk.
About a year ago Mrs Frank Harris came
to see me and asked me to give my permission
for her late husband’s book to be published
in an English edition. I told her that I had
no objection provided that any new edition
contained Harris’s own written and published
retractation, in which he admits that prac-
tically every word about me in the book is false
and attributed by him to the malice of the
late Robert Ross. I also stipulated that any
new edition of the book must contain a Preface
or Note by myself, and I told her that in the


meanwhile Mr Bernard Shaw had, on his own
initiative, undertaken to withdraw his Appendix
to the book. Under such conditions I assured
her that if she could get any English publisher
to issue a new edition I would undertake to
refrain from any legal measures to stop it, and
so the matter rests at this hour, as Mr Gulpidge
would say.
Harris’s book was originally published in
America round about 1915, I believe, so it has
taken twenty years to confute it, in spite of the
fact that as long ago as 1927 I obtained large
damages from two of the leading booksellers
in London for selling one copy of the book
in each case. In one case these damages and
an undertaking to refrain from future sales
of the book were given out of court by agree-
ment between solicitors, but in the second case
the matter was fought out in the High Court
before Mr Justice Horridge and a special jury.
I shall be much surprised, to say the least of it,
if any English publisher can be found to publish
it now, especially after Sherard’s book aforesaid,
though I believe it is still sold in the United
States.
I did not intend to say anything more about
my runaway match with my wife, having given
a very full account of it, and published several
of her letters to me written before our marriage,


in my Autobiography ; but I think I may just say
now that Olive was always a great admirer of
Oscar Wilde, and that when his trial and con-
viction took place (she being at that time a child
and utterly unable to understand what had
happened) she made herself ill with grief over
his fate. Round about the same time she in-
formed her mother that the only man she would
ever consent to marry was Lord Alfred Douglas.
I believe at the time when she made this
announcement she was sent to bed in disgrace
by her scandalised parents, but she never really
changed her mind. She was a bridesmaid, as
a child of eight, at the marriage of my cousin
Rachel Montgomery to the Hon. and Rev.
Reginald Knatchbull-Hugessen, and my sister
was another bridesmaid at the same wedding,
which I, then a schoolboy in an Eton jacket,
also attended. So that was the first time we
met, though on that occasion we “were not
introduced.” Years later she saw me on several
occasions at the Albemarle Club, of which her
mother, Mrs Custance, was a member, and
where I often went with Oscar Wilde, who was
also a member. It was then that she made up
her childish mind about me. From a worldly
point of view no doubt this was a misfortune for
her, but at any rate our marriage and mutual
devotion still survive to this day, in spite of all


sorts of almost superhuman efforts that at one
time were made to destroy them. As I said in
one of the sonnets “To Olive” which appear in
my collected editions:
The World is very strong but love is stronger.


CHAPTER XXXIV
SINCE WRITING THE LAST CHAPTER I HAVE BEEN
going through a whole portmanteau-full of letters
belonging to my late dear mother, who died
about eighteen months ago. I found among them
some letters of mine to her written at the time
when I left Wilde at Naples. Two especially
are of such interest that I reproduce them. The
first was written from my villa at Naples
immediately after I had received the ultimatum
she sent me in which she told me that if I
remained with Wilde she would stop my allow-
ance. The letter is, of course, in some ways very
unfair to my mother, but it is at any rate a
pretty crushing reply to those people who still per-
sist in saying that I behaved badly to Wilde after
he came out of prison and that I “abandoned”
him and “deserted” him.
Among those who still persist in taking this
attitude in spite of the overwhelming evidence to
the contrary, which I myself and others have
produced at various times during the last twenty
years, is Monsieur Maurice Rostand, whose play
about Oscar Wilde was produced recently in


Paris. It was rehearsed for a London production
at the Gate Theatre, and was to have been
produced there by Mr Norman Marshall. I
stopped the production because the story of my
relations with Wilde as indicated in the play
by Monsieur Rostand was a travesty of the real
facts. It did not take me ten minutes to con-
vince Mr Marshall that this was the case, and
that if he produced the play in London, quite
apart from the legal aspect of the matter, he
would be doing me a gross injustice. He at once
sent out a notice to the Press that the production
was cancelled, and eighteen months later he
produced the play Oscar Wilde by Leslie and
Sewell Stokes, which had a long and highly
successful run at the Gate Theatre. This play
was submitted to me before production, and I
raised no objection to its performance, and after-
wards contributed a preface to it when it was
published in book form.
Monsieur Maurice Rostand, chiefly, I feel
certain, because he has not read either my
Autobiography or Mr Robert Sherard’s recent book
on Wilde, or even La Vie d’ Oscar Wilde by Leon
Lemonnier, persists in thinking that he has a
grievance because the performance of this play
was stopped in England. Monsieur Rostand’s
play is obviously and admittedly based on Frank
Harris’s ignoble and ridiculous book, which has


been irrevocably and finally exposed as a fraud
by Mr Sherard, and on the “unpublished part”
of Wilde’s letter to me written in prison (gener-
ally in its expurgated form known as De Pro-
fundis), the whole effect of which is completely
neutralised and cancelled, in as far as its attack
on me is concerned, by the adoring letters Oscar
Wilde wrote to me from Berneval, beginning
within two or three weeks of his release from
prison and going right up to the time when he
joined me in Naples because, as he said, he felt
that only with me could he ever recover his
power of “creating beautiful things.”
Here is Monsieur Rostand’s letter, which is
undated, but which reached me on or about
May 28th, 1937, just about the same date on
which I found my forty-year-old letters to my
mother:
27 Avenue Foch.
Dear Lord Alfred Douglas,
Many thanks for your letter which con-
tributes to make us understand each other.
First let me tell you that I never received your
first letter [this refers to a letter sent by me to
him two years ago addressed to the Thedtre de
I’CEuvre where his play was running], but only
the very strange telegram; and you must
admit, when you speak of politeness, that it
was not particularly polite. I did not reply
because I really could not believe that it was


you, and perhaps also because, if it was you,
I thought I was the last person who ought to
have received it.
I have always been interested in Wilde and
in yourself, and I was nearly a child in 1905
when I read a copy of your poems published
by the Mercure de France. Since then I have
always had a great admiration for those poems
and those you wrote since. I believe that they
can rank with some of the most beautiful ever
written in England and I have always spoken
and written about them in this sense. Once,
in an article I wrote about Wilde and you, I
said that whatever could be reproached to the
young man you had been should be pardoned
to the poet you were. I received many letters
inspired by the greatest indignation, and from
some important French writers.
This is why I thought that your attitude
against me was very unjust, when I am one of
the very rare French writers who renders you
justice.
My play on Wilde insisted on your value as
a poet: some of your verses translated in the
first act were received with great admiration
by the audience.
It is difficult, after having read Wilde’s
letters, to show you to the French public as
the type of a perfect friend: you were more
than that: you have been chosen by Legend
and Poetry as one of their heroes.
What your friends must do for you is not
to follow you in this posthumous quarrel with
Wilde’s shadow (in wanting to prove too much


you go against the thing you want to prove),
but in trying to make you known in France as
you ought to be. I received, translated by a
lady, your poems; but I know them so well
in their English Music that no translation can
satisfy me. I hope you will understand the
real sympathy enclosed in this letter. I would
be happy to meet you one day and I want you
to consider me—what is the truth—as one of
your real friends.
MAURICE ROSTAND.
Monsieur Rostand’s letter is full of amiability
and friendliness, and I appreciate very greatly
his kind references to my poetry, especially as he
is himself an artist and poet of great distinction,
but he fails even now to understand that no
amount of admiration for my poetry can com-
pensate me for vilification of my character.
Monsieur Rostand in his letter to me refers to
a “posthumous quarrel with Wilde’s shadow,”
which exists only in his imagination. He is
evidently referring to the book Oscar Wilde and
Myself, published in 1914, and translated into
French as Oscar Wilde et Moi in the same
year. I certainly had a “quarrel with Wilde’s
shadow” at that time, but I have repudiated
the book over and over again, and I have
explained that most of it was written by
T. W. H. Crosland, and that in any case I


disavow and withdraw everything I said against
Wilde in it. In the Preface which I wrote for
Mr Sherard’s recent book, I said, “I deeply
regret that the book was ever published.” How-
ever, it is no wonder that Monsieur Rostand and
other “important French writers” are unfair to
me, since Wilde himself was cruelly unfair to me
at the time when I wrote the following poignant
letter to my mother at the moment when I was
leaving Wilde at Naples in December 1897. The
first two pages are missing, and it begins on the
page numbered “3”:
[Did you expect] “me to write and say:
‘I cannot come and live with you now. I
lived with you before and stayed with you and
lived on you, 1 but that was when you were
rich, famous, honoured and at the summit of
your position as an artist, now I am very sorry
of course, but you are ruined, you have no
money, you have hardly any friends, you have
been in prison (chiefly, I admit, on my account
and through my fault), 2 you are an ex-convict,
it will do me a great deal of harm to be seen
about with you, and besides that my mother
naturally objects to it very strongly, and so
1 This of course is a wilful exaggeration. I often stayed with
Wilde as his guest for weeks or months it is true, but I never
“lived on” him.
1 This again is quite untrue. It was no fault of mine, nor was
it on my account that Wilde was sent to prison.


I’m afraid I must leave you to get on as best
you can by yourself. . .
Sincerely and frankly, is this what you would
have had me write? Apparently it is. But,
darling Mamma, all my love for you and all
my gratitude for your immense love of me
could not make me a cad and a snob and a low
filthy hypocrite, and a vile crawling time-
server and a dirty coward, such as I would
have been if I had written in that way. Please
observe that I take no credit to myself for
coming back to my friend when he asked me,
though some people might say that it was
courageous, and certainly I have had to pay
dearly for it, if only that it has cost me the
first really deliberately cruel and unkind letter
that you have ever written to me. But I take
no credit at all, it seemed and it seems to me
the plain natural thing to do if I wished to
have any kind of respect for myself or differen-
tiate myself in any way from the lowest and
vilest people in the World. That is all I have
to say, if you cannot see it I am sorry, and
sorry for you.
Before God I believe myself in this matter
to have acted as I should have done both to
him and also no whit less towards you.
I have done nothing to you which is either
unkind or undutiful, or which could warrant
your cruel and unjust letter. I am utterly
innocent of any kind of offence to you. But I
am getting so used to every kind of misfortune
and cruelty that I am now almost not surprised
to find that even you can turn against me and


make my wretched position worse, instead of
trying to help me and console me.
Ever your very loving son
BOSIE.
P.S. Other people are kinder and more
humane than you. When Munthe [this refers
to Dr Munthe of San Michele fame - ] asked me
to go and see him, I said I could not come
without my friend. He immediately replied
that he would be pleased to meet him and
hoped I did not think him so ignorant and so
brutal as to be unkind to anyone who had
suffered so much or been so shamefully treated.
He added, ‘his condemnation was always to
me utterly absurd.’ And yet I think you
know enough of Munthe to know that he is a
good man, and a humane man as well as a
clever and enlightened one. Mrs Snow also
willingly came to lunch with us together. It
is only you who think it necessary to be cruel
and unjust and blinded with unworthy pre-
judices. I cannot understand it, you have
suffered enough' yourself to have learnt pity
and kindness to others who have suffered and
to keep yourself distinct from the pack of those
who hound down the wretched. It is utterly
disappointing.”
I do not think that any living creature, after
reading that slightly hysterical, but surely moving,
letter, could accuse me of failing in loyalty to my
friend, even at the expense of my angelic mother,


whom I so unjustly reproached for not being
about fifty years in advance of her time. It is
terrible to think that I should have written such
things to her. It is with no intention of reviving
any “posthumous quarrel with Wilde’s shadow”
that I remind Monsieur Rostand that at the very
time, within two or three days, of my writing
this letter to my mother, Oscar Wilde wrote to
Robert Ross in a letter which has been given
wide publicity by Frank Harris and others, and
which was quoted in the appendix to my Auto-
biography, “as soon as there was no money, Bosie
left me, it was the most bitter experience of a
bitter life.” As it happens, I have long forgiven
Oscar for having written so falsely and treacher-
ously about me, but there are limits even to the
greatest generosity, and even if I have forgiven
this letter (as I have done years ago), I cannot
explain it away, nor is it in my power to deliver
Oscar from the onus of having written it. If it
had ever been in my possession, I would certainly
have destroyed it, but it still exists and was sold
at Dulau’s in Bond Street in the year 1928, nor
have I ever had it in my possession or even seen
it. I saw only the copy of it which was supplied
to me at the time by Messrs Dulau when they
asked and obtained my permission to sell letters
of Wilde’s, including this and others which
contained derogatory words about me.


I leave it to my persistent detractors to decide
on which side in our friendship was the dis-
loyalty, and to explain why it is, as Monsieur
Rostand says, so “difficult after having read
Wilde’s letters, to show me to the French public
as the type of a perfect friend.” One would like
to ask what the “perfect friend,” who would
come up to the high standard demanded by the
“French public” and the “important French
authors” (including, I presume, Monsieur Andre
Gide), would have done that I failed to do, or
left undone that I did.
All I can do now, consistently with my de-
votion to Wilde’s memory (and in view of the fact
that, even with all the goodwill in the world, it is
not in my power to destroy the evidence in his
own handwriting against him), is to point out
that it is more than dangerous to accept the
evidence of Wilde’s letters without at any rate
listening to the answer to them.


CHAPTER XXXV
THAT LETTER TO MY MOTHER, WHICH I WROTE
forty years ago and which I never dreamed that
she had preserved, has turned up almost miracu-
lously out of the ashes of the past to bear its
overwhelming evidence in my favour on the
question of my loyalty to Wilde. If there was
anything wanting in that evidence it is supplied
by the following letter, written to my mother
from Rome about three days later, after I had
left Oscar in my villa at Naples, which I handed
over to him when I left.
Hotel d’ltalic,
Monday , December yth, Rome.
1897.
My darling Mamma,
lam hoping to hear from you soon. If
you could see and read into my soul, and only
you could do that, you would understand how
terrible it has been for me to do what I have
done with regard to you. lam utterly miser-
able to think of the pain I must have caused
you, but indeed indeed it has not been my
fault. Now I will make a confession to you
that I think will please you. lam glad, Oso


glad! to have got away, to have escaped.
I am so afraid that you will not believe me, and
I am so afraid of appearing to pose as anything
but what I am. But lam not a hypocrite and
you must believe me. I wanted to go back to
him, I longed for it and for him, because I love
him and admire him and think him great, and
almost good, but when I had done it and when
I got back, I hated it. I was miserable, I
wanted to go away. But I couldn’t. I was
tied by honour. If he had wanted me to stay
I would never have left him, but when I found
out that he didn’t really want me to stay and
that I might leave him without causing him
pain and without a breach of loyalty, then I
was glad to go. Even then I hid it from my-
self, I struggled not to let my inward thought
get the better of me, and it is only since I have
been here two days that I have completely
realised and admitted how glad I am to be
away. Even when I got here I persuaded
myself that I was miserable and that I wanted
to go back and I wrote to you in that sense.
But now I know what a relief it is to have
escaped honourably from a sort of prison. I still
think I was right to go to him when he asked,
and at that time I longed to go to him. I felt
I must clear up the matter. And as long as I
was there, I was bound to fight in his interests
and I did it even to the last bitter point. The
knowledge that I didn’t really want to stay
with him only made me more determined not
to show the least disloyalty. I was prepared
to carry it to the very end. If he had proposed


joint suicide I would have accepted it. It was
for you to force me to go, and to give me the
means of going by accepting my terms. This
you have done, and you must fulfil them to the
letter. You must pay this £2OO at once. I
trust to you to do it. I have given myself
away to you so completely now that if you fail
me I shall be utterly powerless. But I know
I can trust you. Also if you possibly can, pay
him the rest of the £SOO. Pledge yourself to
pay £2OO more in six months time and £IOO
six months after that. If you do that I am
quitte. 1 It means so much to me. You
mustn’t misunderstand me. Don’t think that
I have changed about him or that I think him
bad or that I have changed my views about
morals. I still love and admire him, and I
think he has been infamously treated by
ignorant and cruel brutes. I look on him as
a martyr to progress. I associate myself with
him in everything. I long to hear of his
success and artistic rehabilitation in the post
which is his by right at the very summit of
English literature, nor do I intend to cease
corresponding with him or not to see him from
time to time in Paris and elsewhere. I give
up nothing and admit no point against him or
myself separately or jointly. Do not think
either that he has been unkind to me or shown
himself to me in an unfavourable light. On
1 I cannot now, after all these years, give any explanation
of this reference to “the £500.” I can only assume that I had
asked her originally to give him £ 5OO, and that she had told me
that it was impossible, but that she could manage £2OO.


the contrary he has been sweet and gentle and
will always remain to me as a type of what a
gentleman and a friend should be. Only this,
I am tired of the struggle and tired of being
ill-treated by the World, and I had lost that
supreme desire for his society which I had
before, and which made a sort of aching void
when he was not with me. That has gone and
I think and hope for ever. Up to this, however,
I had no excuse to leave him. I simply
couldn’t do it. If he had been disagreeable
to me or if he had turned out different from
what I thought, if he had even behaved in any
way differently from how a man of honour and
humanity should behave, I would have seized
the chance. But he didn’t. He has always
behaved perfectly to me. The only thing that
happened was that I felt and saw that he
didn’t really wish me to stay and that it would
really be a relief to him if I went away. So
at last I was able to get away, with a clear
conscience. And it is no use wishing that I
hadn’t ever gone with him to Naples. It was
the most lucky thing that ever happened. If
I hadn’t rejoined him and lived with him for
two months, I should never have got over the
longing for him. It was spoiling my life and
spoiling my art and spoiling everything. Now
lam free. You mustn’t mind anything I said
in my former letters. It was a horrible comedy
from beginning to end. You are my own
darling Mamma that I love and I am your
most loving child.
BOSIE.


I hardly suppose that it is necessary for me to
stress the obvious fact that the views I expressed
in those letters to my mother, written forty years
ago, do not represent my present views about
the form of immorality which is connected with
Wilde’s name. I altered my views about all this
soon after his death and before my marriage in
1902. As I pointed out in my Autobiography, the
practices for which Oscar Wilde was convicted
are pagan practices. In a pagan country (such
as England has now largely become) they cannot
logically be reprehended. As a Christian and a
Catholic I naturally do look upon them with
the deepest reprehension; but I also look upon
adultery with great reprehension, and I see no
logical reason why one form of immorality should
be made a criminal offence more than another,
I go further, and I say that to send people to
prison for private offences against sexual morality
is a sin against charity.
In that sense it may really and truly be said
that Wilde was “a martyr to progress,” as I put
it in my letter to my mother. The treatment he
received, resulting in the ruin of his health, the
loss of his brilliant capacities as a writer of genius
and his early and painful death, was abominable,
and will ever remain a blot on England’s fair
fame. Although I have now entirely changed
my views on the moral question, I still think that,


according to my lights as they were in 1897 and
the next few years, I acted irreproachably not
only to Wilde but to the whole world. To take
up the attitude I then took required a tremen-
dous amount of courage. lam not in the least
ashamed of what I did, and in similar circum-
stances I would do the same thing to-morrow.
I had really intended to say no more on this
aspect of the Wilde affair. I had, as I supposed,
finished my book when a series of utterly un-
expected events caused me to take up my pen
again and add what I have just written and what
follows. The events were, in order of their
happening: (1) I discovered my forty-year-old
letters to my mother, (2) I received the letter I
have reproduced from Monsieur Rostand, and
(3) I found that, owing to a miscalculation, I had
considerably over-estimated the amount of words
I had written in what I regarded as my completed
book. I found that it was several thousand words
short of what it ought properly to contain.
Believing as I do that everything that happens
is governed not by chance, but by Providence, I
accept these three happenings as providential.
Circumstances have thus almost compelled me to
add these last chapters and to print the two letters
to my mother which otherwise I would never
have given to publicity. I have printed them,
fully realising that they may possibly afford a


handle to my enemies, but as I have always
maintained and believed that, in the long run,
there is nothing more commendable and more
safeguarding than the truth, I am prepared to
take the risks, as I have so often done before.
Times have changed, and public opinion has
changed at least to this extent, that, whereas if
I had published the two letters to my mother
at any time between the years 1897 and 1920,
I would have been inviting a howl of (mostly
simulated) rage and an outburst of hypocritical
abuse, I can now do this without any very serious
apprehension of the probable consequences. It
is even, I believe, quite possible that a good many
people, if not the majority, will agree with what
I have just written, and will have the decency at
long last to admit that by anticipating, all those
years ago, the changed attitude in English
standards, I did nothing but what was to the
credit of my heart as well as my head. In any
case, all my life I have been, if not indifferent to,
at least unmoved by, public opinion.


CHAPTER XXXVI
WHY SHOULD I HAVE PRETENDED TO CONDEMN
Wilde in 1895 when in my heart I did nothing
of the kind? Would it have been to my credit
if I had played the hypocrite? The motive for
such a pretence would and could only have been
the ignoble one of saving my own skin at the
expense of my friendship. Now, towards the end
of my life, and having completely changed most
of my views about morals and conduct, I still
rejoice that, poor, hunted, harassed, and baited
infant that I was, I yet had the courage to stick
to my guns and refuse to “climb down” or
accept the countenance of the World as the price
of my repudiation of my friendship with Wilde.
Do I exaggerate? Well, let my readers consider
the following letter, written by my cousin and
friend the late George Wyndham (who was Chief
Secretary for Ireland under Arthur Balfour) to
his father my Uncle Percy (the Hon. Percy
Wyndham). Observe the date, April 7th —that
is, the day after Wilde’s arrest, at which date
and for some weeks following I was still staying
at the Cadogan Hotel in Sloane Street, where


Wilde was arrested in my sitting-room. The
letter was given by Uncle Percy to my mother at
Florence, where it reached him and was handed
over to me by my mother just before she died
in 1935-
Sunday, April 7,
My dearest Papa, i^9s-
- the suggestion of Algy Bourke, I sent
for Bosie to-day and gave him advice which I
hold to be sound.
I ought to tell you (1) that I know on the
authority of Arthur Balfour, who has been told
the case by the lawyers who had all the papers,
that W is certain to be condemned, and that
the case is in every way a very serious one,
involving the systematic ruin of a number of
young men. 1 Public feeling in London is
fiercely hostile to him, among all classes.
(2) There is no case against Bosie, but
(3) he has associated himself with W up
to die last moment ; and is spoken of as having
known the witnesses who will be called.
(4) Men like Arthur and Lord Houghton
who have spoken to me, speak in kind terms of
him; but are unanimous in saying that he had
better go abroad for a year or two.
(5) If he will do this, his name would go
into the list of members abroad at White’s.
And in that case Algy tells me he could pre-
vent his expulsion.
1 The evidence at the trial did not bear this out in the event.
None of the “ victims ”in Wilde’s case was innocent. As I pointed
out in my Autobiography, they were one and all accomplices.


(6) If he does not he is sure to be ruined,
not only on the ground of suspicion, but because
of his having given W his father’s letters con-
taining aspersions on his mother. You will
understand that this, at a moment when every-
one here is on his father’s side in the matter,
has created a great deal of prejudice against
Bosie.
These are I think all the material facts.
The advice I gave was to this effect: that
he should go to his brother Sholto in America,
or to Ceylon or somewhere; which would
enable his friends to say that he was going to
prove himself a man. When I call it advice,
I should call it an offer. For I said that if he
would do this, I would see that he had an allow-
ance’, and that we would all fight his battle.
But, on the other hand, if he refused, he must
go his own way and that I could do no more
for him.
Bosie took it very well. He thought I was
going to ask him to go at once, and began by
saying that nothing on earth would make him
leave London until the trial was over. You
may be sure that nothing will: he is quite
insane on the subject. He told me of your
wire and his reply. If W was released, Bosie
would do anything he asked, and no entreaty
from you or his mother would weigh with
him.
But W is, humanly speaking, sure to be
imprisoned, I told Bosie so; and he agreed
that it was almost certain.
I did not ask him to answer on the spot; but


I believe that he will answer that in the event
of W being imprisoned, he will do what I
ask.
I did not mention Algy’s name; or that
Algy had said he would approach his father in
the matter of an allowance. Algy advised me
not to mention his name, as Bosie has quarrelled
with him; and I think that, at present, Bosie
would refuse anything from his father.
On the other hand Bosie thanked me with
real gratitude, and if it is arranged so as not
to hurt his feelings, I believe he will do as I
wish.
I am convinced by all I hear from the
lawyers in the case that enough will come out
to make it impossible for him to lead any
tolerable life in England for two years. What-
ever is proved, it is common knowledge in
London that there was a sort of secret society
around the man Taylor; and on these grounds
anyone mixed up in it would not be received. 1
Also I think for Bosie’s own sake and ultimate
chance of shaking off all this nonsensical view,
he must break fresh ground, I do not think
it would do any good his being with his mother
and sister, and I believe that a kind but firm
offer such as I have sketched, is the only
chance for him.
I start for Florence next Friday morning.
Your loving son,
GEORGE.
1 As a matter of fact, it was established at the trial that I had
never been to Taylor’s rooms.


P.S. Bosie will take a good deal of advice
from me; as he came to me of his own accord
on the day of the smash, and thinks I have
been kind to him.
This letter, written at a time when public
opinion was fiercely hostile to Wilde, as George
Wyndham says, shows what a splendid friend to
me George was, and what a lot of good and kind
friends I had even in that terrible moment. But
my reasons for reproducing it are not to pay
tribute to dear George, who twenty years later,
after I lost the Ransome libel case, once more
rushed to my rescue and continued to help me and
defend me right up to the last day of his life.
I reproduce it as part of the answer to those who
continue, in spite of all that has already been
written and proved by myself and others, to say
that I behaved disloyally to Wilde. The evidence
of my fidelity to Wilde in face even of the efforts
of my friends to “save” me (more difficult to
fight than the world’s contempt and hostility)
could hardly be stated more strongly than
George put it in his letter to his father. His
evidence is all the stronger because he gives it
not on my side, but against me. “He is quite
insane on the subject,” he says. It is true that
I did ultimately leave London some weeks after
the date of George’s letter, the day before Wilde’s
trial began at the Old Bailey, but I did this, as


already explained in this book, with the greatest
reluctance and only because Wilde himself
begged me to do so, both verbally and in writing,
on the ground that Sir Edward Clarke had de-
manded it as the price of his continuing to carry
on the defence which he declared was greatly
hampered and prejudiced by my remaining in
London.
In effect I did not accept George’s offer. I
only went as far as France, and the moment
Wilde got out of prison I wrote to him (in spite
of the fact that by that time he himself had turned
against me) and told him that I longed to see
him again. The subsequent events have already
been related in this book. In view of all I have
just written in these last three chapters, it seems
difficult to believe that Robert Ross and Frank
Harris successfully persuaded the world at large
to believe for at least twenty years that I had
“abandoned” Wilde and “deserted” him. I
have always found that whatever I did about
Wilde I was abused and calumniated. Mr
Justice Darling at the trial of the Ransome
action literally trembled with outraged propriety
when I admitted that I had invited Wilde to
my villa at Naples. “How could you?” he said,
“how could you, knowing what he was?” This,
be it observed, although the case of my opponents
was precisely that I had “abandoned” Wilde and


was responsible for his ruin. One would have
thought that even Mr Justice Darling would have
reflected that he could hardly have it both ways.
You cannot logically at one and the same time
accuse a man of “ abandoning ” his friend and of
receiving him as a guest in his villa! In the
same case when it came out (on my admission
and on the production of my bank-books) that I
had given Wilde £360 just before his prosecution
of my father, this was counted against me as a
terrible example of unfilial conduct. Whereas if
I had not given him any money at that time,
I would doubtless have been held up to execra-
tion as a heartless brute who refused to help his
friend in his need. If one really wants to show
how far injustice and foul play can go, at a
pinch, in England, commend me to the British
Law Courts.
But I do not want to go on in a querulous vein.
I have somehow survived all the persecution, and
on the whole I find that even the world which
used to hate me so much is very pleasant to me
nowadays. To end on another note, and as I
have been printing old letters, I will conclude
this book by reproducing a letter I wrote to my
mother from Winchester when I was thirteen
and a half. I found it at the same time as I
found the two I have already given written from
Naples and Rome in 1897.


Culver's Close,
Feb. 2nd, 1884. Winchester.
My own Darling,
I have got back all safe. I travelled
back with another boy called Gordon whom
I like very much. It is very wretched now,
but I suppose I shall be all right by tomorrow.
I will write about the [word illegible ] to-
morrow. I hope you feel quite happy, my
darling, but I wish you had someone with you.
But you will be with Mrs Beauclerck tomorrow.
Goodbye, my pretty. I always think of you
my darling.
Your loving, loving son,
BOSIE.
THE END
