

puM p Si
1 I nave oW^*u.
What I (lawful
it tl»
f -’ii as f
nploykd integrity of action,
ad this & Vor m->-
dsNmufo
wagS,* 1 Hhe afcne
With Compliments to the—
ELECTORS OF REDFERN.
TZSZIH!
Reform Candidate
Selected Liberal
Hid. George William Howe, J.P.
In soliciting your vote and interest in the forthcoming State elec- I am, therefore, decidedly in favor of giving fair and honest encour-
tion, I come before you with a desire country, and to give the agement t to private enterprise to do those things which come within its
people of Redfern an opportunity of selecting me to represent them in the fair Held.
State Parliament. I am heartily in favor of a Proper System of Local Government, as
I claim to have had as an Engineer and it will be the means of educating all portions of the State to look after
Employer of Labour for many years, with a practical knowledge of com- their local wants, and to take their fair part in governing the Country.
mercial business. I have also had many other opportunities of gaining an It tvill relieve parliament of those members who live on the game of
extensive knowledge of the wants and requirements of the people. • “Roads and Bridges” and thereby encourage a better State of Politics.
I do not need to be a Politician nor a Statesman to know when we As one long engaged in Municipal affairs, I think we need a much
are being misgoverned. We all feel the evils of bad laws and bad GovSrn- better Municipalities’ Act, especially to provide for a more equitable
ment, because we have to pay for the one and obey the other. system of rating, so that improvements effected by a man’s own labor
I have not had the benefits of.a college education, but have been and industry shall not be taxed to the same extent as land unused and
brought up in the School of Workers, where men learn by experience and unoccupied.
have to succeed or fail by their own industry and Perseverance. I am in favor of Old Age Pensions ; but I think that the young men
I can claim to be one of the workers of this Country. From the i and women who are rendered incapable of work in early years are as.much
time when I was a mere lad, I have had to struggle to earn my living at entitled to pensions as men and women who have had 65 years of good
my trade ; therefore I know what the lot of a working-man is from my health. I shall advocate that the system be extended, so that by a special
own life. I have worked on the Railways of this State and for other fund as they have in France and Germany, every wage earner and em-
Employers besides the Government, until now, I am an Employer as ployer shall contribute a small amount to provide for sickness, disability
well as a Worker. ' and accident, so that without litigation and from whatever cause arising
Ido not think there is a man, woman, or child in this country who there shall be an allowance paid to persons disabled in life at any age
can say of George Howe that he ever knowingly wronged -another or i and until fit to work again,
sullied his good name by an unmanly action towards anyone. { * ' lam in favour of the platform of the Liberal and Reform party in
I am known to the people here by long association with them. I i its main provisions. It is a humane and sound policy, which will injure
have served them in the Municipal life of the Borough without fee or no one but benefit all persons irrespective of class, creed or condition in
reward —without £6 per week, or a seat on the Public Works’ Committee I life. lam not in favour of “ stone-breaking ” wages or throwing men
—and just as I have served faithfully and well in a humble way in public out of work. That is what the Labour party and this Government have
affairs, so I wish to serve them in the Legislature of this CountrL. tjoing by discharging 400 officers from the Works Department and
I have no personal feeling against Mr. McGowen ; he and Shave SuWhrifen from the Public Works. I don’t believe in a policy of feast to-
always been on the best of terms, and I trust we will remian so. What I famine to-morrow, or borrowing millions at one time and spending
oppose is his policy. He has supported this Ministry which in my opinion it thoughtlessly to go wanting after the money is wasted,
has brought misery and disaster upon the working classes of.the-.Pph.nt.rT4 ' by saving money in big billets that are unnecessary,
He calls himself a Labor Member ; but in his politics he has served only sucuas office, the six State Governors, the Public
himself, and has not helped the Labor of this State to better its position Works Committee and such things. The working men of this State will
in life. He told the people at one of his meetings that the Labor Party, find me a true friend to them and their interests. I will not brand
since they had been in Parliament, had been gradually lifting, lifting, myself with a b<|gjffthe same as the Labour caucus system ; but Isay I
them up ; and then, at a later meeting, he said that the rich were%smv- myself, and as such I will serve the people with a
ing richer, and the poor growing poorer What are the electors to u#4pf> i hem and to the country by honesty of purpose and
stand from these statements? Look at the thousands of our unemployed integrity of action,
and tell me if things are not worse off to-day than before we had this C For marry years I have been in favour of Reduction of Members. I
Caucus Labor System. * ■ ■ clstigntb bfj&me of the first in New South Wales who publicly advocated
Ten and twenty years ago our could earn better' sine. was while occupying the position of Mayor of Redfern in
and buy more with £1 of their money can to-day—and there August, 1892. The occasion was a banquet tendered by the mayors and
was more work for everyone. mm> aldermen of the various boroughs of Redfern, Waterloo, Alexandria,
How is it that things have changed? How is it that our men are North Botany and Botany at Sir Joseph Banks’ Grounds, Botany, to Sir
leaving the Country ? Simply because we are running the country into William Lyne, then Minister for Works. At that time there were 141
debt and loading the State and the Taxpayers #ith aTdmge burthen of memberg; , ipy contention was to reduce them to one-half, and if the
interest which has to be sent out of %\%e pff&itryyda# after year. No Government tall given the people an opportunity at the referendum to
man can grow rich by borrowing money and then wasting it in reckless vote for 70 it would have been carried by as large a majority as 90 was.
living. And that is what we have been doing in this State. lam also in favour of Members of Parliament being paid according to
We have found it easy to borrow, and then we have wasted our their attendance while Parliament is in session so as to ensure a good
millions in Toy Yachts and Railway Stations, Resumptions of Land and attendance.
a host of other extravagances. Having served my apprenticeship at the Government workshops of
Mr. McGowen, as a working-man, knows how hard it is to earn this State, worked in other shops as well, and being connected with the
money, and how careful one ought to be in spending it; and yet, he has firm of Howe and Rose, Botany-street (for 26 years), who manufacture a
assisted to spend millions of pounds in reckless enterprises full well large number of machines I think I can speak with some authority on the
knowing that the labor of this country would in the end be impoverished important question of “ The Manufacture of Locomotives.” lamstrongly
by the weight of debt upon it. in favour of the locomotives being manufactured in the railway work*
I am in favour of prudence In our finance, just as any private shops for the following reasons, viz.:—
Citizen would exhibit in conducting his own affairs, 1. That the railways are not under political influence
In fact I cannot see why any method which in our private business 2. That the workmen employed in those shops will compare favorably
J A. . 1 • A !1 T . 1 _ m 'LI!. nrllh aw in A rl olrill nn/1 oLlUllf
or undertakings must fail, can succeed in the manj|gement of public with any Workmen in the world for skill and ability
affair*. '-M *B?-The special machines in use in these works are equal to any in
No private person can live beyond his me£tns without ending in England or America
hwolveney.—Neither can the State. 4. I Mj'qve be manufactured in the railway workshops at
No private person can long employ others unless life ha* sources of anotft Hiesame cost as they can be imported taking into con-
income to pay wages from, —Neither can the State. sideration freight, insurance and erecting same.
What we want in this country Is : Tb"Wb|k the Laud, Develop the I am strongly in favour of the Commissioners resuming a large
Mine*, Utilise our Timber, and encourage the jwrong and Able-bodied block of land, say about 300 acres, on the Lilyville Estate, between Ken-
Men of our race to go out into the fields, on Farmh, into the sington and Long Bay, for railway and tramway workshops, where they
Mine* and the forests, and produce not only their own wages, but the could manufacture all railway rolling stock. As this is Government land
wealth of the Country. We can never do this so long as we borrow and it is only a matter of transferring from the Lands Department to the
live on our borrowing: so long as we spend our millions in adorning our Works’Department. This would also give the people an incentive to
Cities, and in attracting our labor to the Towns and Cities. We must build on the hundreds of acres of land in that locality. In conclusion,
encourage people to go into the Country, building Railways for them and ladies and gentlemen, I ask you to consider well before you record your
opening up the lands to them. votes on polling day as to the advisability of a change in our political life
If the millions that have been lavished in ornamental or unnecessary so that a new set of men will control our destinies, who will restore our
Public Works had been spent in conserving water for our Settlers in public credit, bring about a return of genuine prosperity and elevate the
opening up new areas of land for settlement, we should have had work of our public life which has become a by-word of shame and scorn
and employment for all our people—and work of a profitable character too in other countries. And I hope that whether I win or lose, you will give
I . , ... . . • ... 1 I • w, a i A -1 ..! F . amcti w, - * frtll A rr orirt nn r I 4 4n rt
We must not continue to kill private enterprise as we have done in me credit for a desire to be of service to my fellow-citizens and to the
country
the past. Common sense tells us that we have not the means for the
S* •to undertake everything ; and if we act like “dog in the manger”
am 1 won’t let private enterprise do those things which the State cannot
afford to do, we must expect to suffer stagnation and disaster.
I am, yours sincerely,
GRfRGE WILLIAM H©WF„
OUS. BLUWTZ.GmwnI ter.lZß ’ ■ m St


/a*?/
