

Y.M.C.A.
With Our
Boys
At the Front
Issued by the National Committee (Army and
Navy Department) of the Young Men’s
Christian Associations of Australia




NATIONAL COMMITTEE
YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATIONS
OF AUSTRALASIA
Army and Navy Department
CITIZENS’ COMMITTEES
Queensland
Chairman. —T. McWilliam.
Committee. —James Allan, R. J. Archibald, Joseph Allen, W. Ahles, W. H.
Austin, M. Baldwin, J. A. Browne, R. Brown, G. T. Bleechmore, J. D.
Bell, Hon. W. H. Barnes, F. Bowcher, S. Benjamin, A. C. Barlow, J.
Bearup, T. Bouchard, Capt. W. J. Collin, A. J. Cumming, A. F. Cox,
S. G. Cowell, W. T. Craig, D. Corrie, W. J. Coakes, H. J. Diddams,
C.M.G., J. W. Davidson, W. P. Devereaux, A. L. Dawson, J. Earwaker,
A. Exley, E. G. Eager, E. E. Forth, M. Finlayson, H. A. Feather, H. R.
Gale, Aid. A. Gillespie, J. Gore, G. H. Howell, M. G. Haymen, C. H.
Hollingshead, W. J. Hooper, Hamilton, J. B. Henderson, E. R. Isaacs,
J. T. Isles, W. E. Illingworth, R. IP. Julius, A. Jeffray, E. Jones, F. R.
Lloyd, F. C. Lea, Gilbert Lees, H. Luya, L. Marks, W. A. Morrow, T.
E. Matthews, J. P. Macfarlane, D. Mactaggart, R. J. Morris, G. S.
Murphy, F.C.P.A., G. McAdam, B. W. Macdonald, D. B. McCullough, J.
McLeod, H. G. Noble, F. O. Nixon, Hon. Sir Robert Philp, K.C.M.G.,
W W Pike, T. Pratt, J. Reid, F. Reimers, G. Rees, F. Ranson, H.
Roberts, E. Ruddle, J. Robb, T. J. Rothwell, J. K. Stewart, G. P. Stuart,
C. Skene, A. Spencer, F. R. Sharpe, J. Stitt, A. C. Saltmarsh, R. Trout,
T Mcllwraith Taylor, P. Vallely, A. D. Walsh, Hon. A. H. Whittingham,
M.L.C., C. Woodhead, E. Wickham, E. B. Wareham, J. P. Wilson.
Hon. Treasurer. —F W. De Little.
Hon. Secretary.—F. Watson, Y M.C.A., Brisbane.
New South Wales
Patron.—His Excellency the Governor, Sir Gerald Strickland, G.C.M.G.
Chairman.—G. Mason-Allard. TT
Committee.—Hon. James Ashton, M.L.C., O. C. Beale, H. Y. Braddon, Wm.
Brooks, Hon. Colonel James Burns, M.L.C., A. A. C. Cocks, M.L.A., Ernest
L. Davis, J. O. Fairfax, PI. F. Francis, R. Gillespie, J. Grace, T. J.
Hitchman, S. Hordern, W. J. Keep, Adrian Knox, K.C., Harry S. Levy,
W T Macpherson, H. H. Massie, George Michaelis, S. McColl McCowan,
Parke Pope, T. Pratt, Claude H. Reading, J. M. Sandy, W. Vicars, G. B.
Vickery, A. J. Warry, Hon. F. E. Wincheombe, M.L.C., Alf Wunderlich.
Organizing Secretary.—H. C. Dew.
Hon. Treasurers.—Hon A. W. Weeks, M.L.C,, J. T. Tlllock.
General Secretary.—W, Gillanders, B.A , Y.M.C.A., Sydney.
Victoria
Patrons.—His Excellency the Governor-General The Right Hon. Sir BL Muuro-
Ferguson, P.C., G.C.M.G.; The Minister for Defence, Senator The Hon.
G. F. Pearce.
Chairman. —Frank G. Clarke, M.L.C. ' „ .
Committee.—G. C. Arnold, A. S. Austin, Clive Baillieu, J. Newman Barker, J*.
O Blackwood, F. T. Bridges, C. F. Crosby, J. Clayton, M. Conran, M.
C’ Coates, A. W. Clark, David Elder, J. A. M. Elder, Alex. Eggleston, R.
Hallenstein, H. P. Henty, J. W. Dunbar Hooper, M.D., F. G. Hughes,
C.B. W. Howat, L. Jenner, J. C. Journeaux, E. Jowett, Ernest E. Keep,
R W Knox, Geo. Kettlewell, Joseph Levi, Clements Langford, J. H. Mad-
dock, A. A Mendoza, F. D. Michaelis, H. V. McKay, J. F. W. Payne, W.
J. Roberts, J. H. Riley, A. H. Sargood, W. G. L. Spowers G. Swinburne,
Geoffrey Syme, A. Tolhurst, E. Trenchard, R. E. Weigall, M.D., W. Atkin-
son Wood, M.D., H. E. Wootton, A. Whybrow.
Hen Treasurer—A. H. Sargood, 238 Flinders-street, Melbourne.
Hen. Secretary T. Thomas, Esq., Elizabeth House, Ellzabeth-street, Melbourne.


South Australia
Patron.—His Excellency the Governor, Sir Henry Galway, K.C.M.G., D.S.O.
Chairman.—Alfred J. Roberts. •
Committee.—The Right Worshipful the Mayor of Adelaide (I. Isaacs), C. H.
Angas, Sir Langdon Bonython, C.M.G., E. H. Bakewell, Wm. Burford, Hon.
George Brookman, E. W. Bramble, R. H. Crawford, W. B. Carr, W. A.
Clutterbuck, H. C. H. Denton, T. W. Fleming, S.M., J R. Fowler, M A.,
Sir Charles Goode, W. J, Gunson, Hon. D. J. Gordon, M.L.C., E. B
Grundy, K.C., R. J. Hawkes, W. J. Isbister, K.C., L. A. Jessop, Edward
Kay, F.1.A.5.A., H. Kneebone, James Marshall, A. J. Murray, A. B. Mon-
crieff, C.M.G., R. T. Melrose, Col. Sen. J. V. O’Loghlin, A. W. Piper, K.C.,
W. Herbert Phillips, R. T. Palmer, J. M. Pittendrigh, Col. J. Rowell, A. G.
Rymill, Alfred Simpson, Richard Smith, W. J. Sowden, E. W. Van Senden,
J. Shiels, Sir Edwin Smith, K.C.M.G., Walter Smith, A. L. Taylor, H. B
Thompson, John Tassie, Dr. C. E. Todd. F. W. Vasey, A. Waterhouse,
Peter Wood, C. J. Young.
Hon. Treasurers.—F. Chappie, B A., B.Sc., C.M.G.
J Hayter Reed, Bank of Australasia Chambers, King William Street.
General Secretary.—H. A. Wheeler, Y.M.C.A., Adelaide.
Western Australia
Patron.—His Excellency the Governor, Sir Harry Barron.
Chairman.—Hon. Sir Walter James, K.C.
Committee.—Cecil Andrews, M.A., Hon. Sept. Burt, K.C., Albany Bell,
E. A. Black, James Brennan, John Bateman, R. C. Clifton, 1.5.0.,
C. B. Cox, Col. R. E. Courtney, C. 8., V.D., G. H. Cargeeg,
A. Clementson, A. Carson, J. D. Connolly, M.L.A., Hon H P
Colebatch, M.L.C., H. Daglish, W. J. W. Forbes, Rt. Hon. Sir John
Forrest, P.C., G.C.M.G., W. W. Garner, Hon. W. J. George, M.L.A.,
A, C. Gillam, James Gardiner, M.L.A., A. A. Hall, P. Hunt, W. N.
Hedges, M. E. Jull, Norbert Keenan, K.C., J. J. Lloyd, Hon. H. b!
Lefroy, C.M.G., A. Lovekin, W. T. Loton, E. S. Lazarus, J. F. Mullen,
F. A. Moseley, James Morrison, Fred Moore, Dr. S. Macaulay, A J
Monger, Neil McNeil, C. S. Nathan, J. Nicholson, Mr. Justice Northmore,
E. T. Owen, A. M. Oliphant, William Padbury, Hon. Sir Henry Parker,
K.C.M.G., G. F. Pitchford, J. H. Prowse, Professor A. D. Ross, F Rea
(Mayor of Perth), John Rushton, A. Sandover, Hon. Sir Edward Stone,
K.C.M.G., R. Henderson Smith, L. E. Shapcott, J. McCallum-Smith,
M.L.A., Hon. John Scaddan, J. Sinclair, G. P. Stevens, Dr. A. Saw, MLC
Lt-CoL, Dr. Trethowan, Major, R. P. Vincent, Hon. Frank Wilson!
C.M.G. (Premier), C. A. Wylie.
Hon. Treasurer.—H. D. Holmes, W A. Bank, Perth.
General Secretary.—A. S. Wilson, Y.M C.A., Perth,
Y.M.C.A. Committee of Tasmania
Chairman.—H. M. Woolley, Hobart.
Vice-President.—P. Oakley Fysh, Launceston.
Hon. Secretary and Treasurer.—F. L. Langford, Y.M.C.A., Hobart.
Committee.—J. Stirling, Burnie; S. H. Margetts, Wynyard; Wm. Fothering-
ham, Launceston.
General Secretary.—A. Jameson, Y.M.C.A., Hobart
J. HENRY LANG, National General Secretary,
Elizabeth House, Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.


Y.M.C.A. and Red C ross
THE JUDGMENT OF A
STATESMAN
“Looking at it as a whole as I have
done during the year, both as a member
of the Association, and as the High
Commissioner of this country, I have
been profoundly impressed with the
magnitude of the work, and above all,
with its success. I have heard, on all
sides, appreciation of this work expressed
by the Generals and Commanders of
our Forces, and I am not going too far
in saying that the Y.M.C.A. play quite, as
important a part in the War, by promoting
the health and well-being of the Troops,
and thereby keeping them out of Hospital,
as our Medical services and Red Cross
do by looking after the men when they
get there.”
Sir HENRY McMAHON, G.C.V.0., K.C.1.E.,
High Commissioner for Egypt


With Our Boys at the Front
NATIONAL STATEMENT.
The Young Men’s Christian Association, in
recent years, has been a vital organisation touching
the life, not only of Europe and America, but reach-
ing out its constructive service to the youth of India,
Korea, Japan, and China. Lord Derby’s tribute to
the work of the organisation in the trite sentence,
“ The Y.M.C.A. in peace is invaluable, in war in-
dispensable,” gives the right perspective, how-
ever, for it was not until the war clouds lowered
and the nations were hastening their preparations
with feverish anxiety that the Y.M.C.A. unosten-
tatiously but expeditiously perfected its plan of cam-
paign for extending its operations in a great com-
munity and national work on behalf of the troops
in training camps, at advanced bases, and at the
front.
Two years before war was declared the Associa-
tion approached the War Office at Home, and asked
for information and direction as to how it could
best serve the nation in the event of an European
war. When the declaration came, therefore, the
Association was ready for service, and in ten days
had established itself at 250 centres. The work
grew apace, until there is now throughout the Em-
pire a staff of over 1000 secretaries working with
the troops. The magnitude of the work is indi-
cated in the fact that half a million sterling was
spent by the Y.M.C.A., all raised by public sub-
scription, in the first year of the war, and £1,200


is now spent per week in providing writing materials
for the troops. The Y.M.C.A. is in every theatre of
war, serving British, Canadian, New Zealand, Aus-
tralian, Indian, South African, and West Indian
troops. It has centres for sailors and dockers’ bat-
talions and munition workers as also hostels in
First Y.M.C.A. Tent on Gallipoli
Northern France for relatives of soldiers wounded
to the death. Its Enquiry Bureau, for assisting
relatives to trace their friends, has brought comfort
to thousands of homes. In enemy countries it has
a staff of 70 secretaries at work among the allied
prisoners of war. This privilege of serving our
prisoners of war was obtained only after weeks of
international negotiations, and was finally arranged
by securing secretaries from a neutral country


Open-Air Refreshment Lounge


(America) to carry on this work. Its work in mili-
tary camps is for every soldier, and its facilities
and privileges are available to all.
In Australia the Y.M.C.A. has rendered service
in practically every military camp. More than
£60,000 has been spent in service and equipment
in the various States. Each transport of any size
leaving Australia carries a Y.M.C.A. secretary.
Secretaries numbering 116 have been sent abroad
with the A.I.F. The highest military authorities
abroad endorse the work of the Y.M.C.A. with our
troops, and urge its extension. Money is needed
for buildings and other requisites to divert the
minds of our troops from the scenes of horror and
suffering with which they are surrounded, and fill
the weary hours with occupation.
The Y.M.C.A. is the one organisation rendering
this service in all theatres of war with the troops
at the front. All chaplains use the Y.M.C.A. All
creeds are fused in this practical Christian work,
yet the Australian troops are inadequately served.
The Army and Navy Department of the National
Committee of the Y.M.C.A. of Australia has af-
firmed the principle that Australia should send
Y.M.C.A. men and money in proportion to the num-
ber of troops sent from this country. Over 300,000
men have been sent from Australia to serve in the
great war, and these are being increased. Addi-
tional secretaries should be sent, with suffi-
cient equipment The cost of each secretary, salary


and personal expenses, is about £250 per man per
annum. There is scarcely a home in Australia that
is not interested in someone at the front, and whose
inmates would gladly provide the needed service if
they could. The Y.M.C.A. offers to do it through
The Rest Room
facilities provided. Millions of letters to homes in
Australia have been writen in Y.M.C.A. tents, on
paper supplied freely. Tens of thousands of men
have their spare time filled with wholesome, help-
ful entertainment and social privileges in Christian
surroundings.
Australian Headquarters are now established in
the strange eastern city of Cairo and in “lonely
London,” with club and sleeping accommodation
for Anzacs on leave.


The response of the people of Australia to the
national appeal for funds has encouraged the
National Committee to assume the full responsi-
bility for Australian troops in every theatre of war.
The movement of Australian troops to Egypt,
England and France and elsewhere meant a greatly
increased budget, and it is necessary that further
substantial public support be secured this year if all
needs and requests are to be met.
Contributions may be sent to the Secretary of
the local Y.M.C.A., or direct to the Honorary
Treasurer for Australia, Mr. A. H. Sargood, 238
Flinders Street, Melbourne.
J. HENRY LANG,
National General Secretary.
Conference of Australian Y.M.C.A. Secretaries and Workers
Zeitoun, Egypt


OUR ACTIVITIES AND NEEDS.
“A home away from home” has been established
for our soldiers in 260 “field service centres” in
France, and in more than i,600 centres in Malta,
Salonika, Egypt, India, and the British Empire.
Y.M.C.A. Tents, Thursday Island Military Camp
Large funds are needed to maintain the present
work among the soldiers, to which the Y.M.C.A.
is committed.
Free stationery to the amount of twelve million
pieces per month is an absolute necessity, and is
being regularly supplied to the men.
See pages 4 and 19.
Far-reaching as is this “ social service ” to the
troops in training or at the “ front,” with all its
varied needs and activities, no money subscribed
for war work is used for any other purpose.


EMPIRE LEADERS
HIS MAJESTY KING GEORGE.
The übiquitous Y.M.C.A. man, with his cheering smile
and helpful presence: God bless the organisation.”
‘His Majesty congratulates the organisation on the suc-
cessful results of its war work. It has worked in a prac-
tical, economical, and unselfish manner, with consummate
knowledge of those with whom it has to deal. At the
same time the Association, by its spirit of discipline, has
earned the respect and approbation of the military
authorities.”
THE LATE FIELD MARSHAL EARL KITCHENER.
“I always viewed the Y.M.C.A. with favour; I now re-
gard it with gratitude.”
Mr. H. H. ASQUITH (as Prime Minister of Great
Britain).
“The Y.M.C.A. is one of the discoveries of the war.”
FIELD MARSHAL VISCOUNT FRENCH.
It is certain that British soldiers never surpassed the
splendid courage which has been shown by our present
Army, and one cannot help thinking that it is due to the
work of such institutions as the Y.M.C.A. It was when
I was commander-in-chief in France for some eighteen
months that I really saw what the Young Men’s Christian
Association had done for the soldiers.”
Mr. LLOYD GEORGE.
“The Y.M.C.A. have organised everything in this
war with a most perfect success. Wherever I go, I hear
nothing but good of the work they are doing throughout
the country, and we owe to them a very deeD debt of
gratitude.”
LORD DERBY, Director of Recruiting in Great Britain.
‘Jouknow how strongly I support the claims of the
* * or . the generous treatment of the public. The
Y.M.C.A. is invaluable in peace time. It is indispensable
in war time.”


AUSTRALIAN APPRECIATIONS.
The files of correspondence bearing acknowledg-
ment of the work of the Association contain speci-
ally heartfelt appreciations from officers and men
at the front, whose gratitude is one of the cherished
results of the service. Nearly all these communi-
Y.M.C.A. Tent at the Front
cations state that life on active military service
would be drear indeed without the sustaining in-
fluences of the Y.M.C.A. Of such an abundance
of testimony the following extracts, taken at ran-
dom, serve as examples:—
Mr. W. G. Conley, general manager of the “Sydney
Morning Herald”: “I cannot refrain from paying a tribute
to the work of the Y.M.C.A. in this war. It is the only


organisation that has really risen to the occasion. Its
management and its work generally have been mar-
vellous.”
Lieut.-Col. Springtborpe, A.A.M.C..—“The work of the
YjM.C.A. has now become of national importance, and
nationally appreciated. The war gave this great institu-
tion a unique opportunity, and it rose to the occasion in
Y.M.C.A. Mat Hut, for Convalescents, Kasr-il-Aini
a manner and to an extent that can never be over-praised.
It is to be hoped that after the war it will be as pro-
gressive and successful as it has been during the war,
for though the conditions will be different, the funda-
mental needs will remain the same.”
A mother writes: —“I have just received visible evi-
dence of the very splendid—not to say Christ-like —work


your organisation is performing in every, part of the zone
of conflict in this horrible war. Having just received a
letter from my only son, who commenced his letter on a
sheet of your official notepaper, and though it must of
necessity be the proverbial 4 widow’s mite,’ you will
always find my contribution cheerfully and readily there
whenever applied for in any appeal that is made so long
as there is a 4 shot in the locker.’ ”
£5OO will provide a Y.M.C.A. But.
£350 will provide a Portable But.
£250 will maintain one Y.M.C.A. Secretary at the Front
for Twelve months.
£ 125 will maintain a Y.M.C.A. Building for Three months.
£lOO will Furnish One But.
Mr. James Morrison.—“ Having ‘wo mairied sons at the
front, I can and do, as a father, feel most grateful to the
Association for its world-wide influence for good amongst
the men, both as regards their comfort and their morals.
But little of this would have taken place had it not been
for your very worthy Association, and long may it con-
tinue to carry out its good work.”
A battery commander of Australian Field Artillery
writes from France:—“The Y.M.C.A. are doing, and al-
ways have done, most magnificent work for the troops.
Everywhere I’ve been the Y.M.C.A. have never failed to
have a tent, coffee and writing material for the men—


even at Anzac. All the time I was there it knocked out
every other fund or institution that provided comforts for
the troops. From practical experience, I always welcome the
Y.M.C.A. tent, and the men go there instead of to the
nearest bar. They were a perfect Godsend in Egypt,
and always pleasant sort of men in charge of them. At
Anzac these men took a lot of risks too. When I get
back home again I will always be a member of the
Y.M.C.A., and so will most of the members of the A.I.F.
I would rather give subscriptions to them than any other
patriotic fund. The latter might be quite well run, and
I think are, but I know the value of the former, and it
is just the right thing for our troops.”
The civic heads in nearly every city in Australia have
commended the war work of the Y.M.C.A. in high terms.
Most of them have taken active steps in securing sub-
scriptions to the funds, and in doing so have expressed
opinions, of which the following from the Mayor of Bal-
larat is typical:—“The Mayor voices his pleasure at having
given a civic welcome to Mr. J. J. Virgo, British Field
Secretary of the Y.M.C.A., who recently visited Ballarat.
The work of the Y.M.C.A. in connection with the war is
magnificent, and is highly valued and appreciated, not
only by the men at the front and in the various camps
in Australia and abroad, but is a source of pomfort to the
minds of parents of our brave defenders, to know that
there is such an organisation that renders every comfort,
assistance, and relief during this time of great distress.”
lan Hay, an officer in the British Army, whose book,
“The First Hundred Thousand,” has been one of the most
successful of war books, says:—“The Y.M.C.A. huts have
done work in this war which will never be forgotten while
human gratitude remains.”


SOLDIERS’ APPRECIATION
“Any funds raised for the assistance of the Y.M.C.A.
could not be better devoted,” writes Sergeant Consedine,
formerly of Irrewillipe, in a letter to a friend at Colac.
“Everybody who subscribes • has the assurance ithat the
money is used in the best interests of the men,” says
Sergeant Consedine. “The Y.M.C.A.' is a feature of
every group of camps in Salisbury Plain, and the value
of this splendid organisation is everywhere apparent, both
in the enthusiasm and courtesy of its staff and the effici-
ency of its equipment. It would be impossible to even
estimate the great advantage of the institutions to the
camps. I can recall their small but welcome efforts in
the Victorian Easter .Camps, which at that time were
practically unnoticed by the authorities. They are now
recognised as camp institutions, which perform genuine
services, and the manner in which the exigencies of the
present situation have been met is a testimony to the
organising ability of its leaders.”
Mrs. P. J. Nankervis, of Akarana, Woodend, has writ-
ten to the National Committee of the Y.M.C.A. in Aus-
tralia, stating that her husband, who is on active service,
has sent her a letter saying:—“In my opinion, the people
who are doing the greatest work in the war are the
Y.M.C.A,, and we cannot speak too'highly of the great
comfort :hey are to the boys.”


THE LONDON “MAIL’S” OPINION OF THE
Y.M.C.A.
“ Those four letters, Y.M.C.A., should be written in
gold to-day. Wherever one turns the praises of the
Young Men’s Christian Association are sung alike by
officers and men of the British Army, training at home
or fighting all along our far-flung battle line. The
An Interior, Y.M.C.A. Mat Hut
Y.M.C.A. has done incalculable good in the most unosten-
tatious and practical way, looking after the creature com-
forts of the soldiers. Their work is carried on without
any objectionable sermonising or tract distribution. This
is wise. Besides, if the moral and spiritual welfare of
the soldiers were aimed at. there is no better way of
achieving that result than by enlisting their gratitude. If
any sceptic wishes to cast a sneer or a stone at the
.M.C.A., he had better not do so in the presence of a
Tommy, especially a colonial.”


A PRIEST’S TRIBUTE.
Y.M.C.A. “A NATIONAL FORCE.”
A tribute to the work of the Y.M.C.A. among the troops
was paid by the Rev. Father Bampton, at Farm-street
Roman Catholic Church, London: “None of us,” he said,
“need be ashamed to learn from the Y.M.C.A.’s example
of true Christian character and most effective social
efforts. I make no apology for drawing the attention of
my Catholic friends to it. The work of the Young Men’s
Christian Association shows us what we ought to do, and
shows us how to do it.”
JEWISH RABBI’S TESTIMONY.
“I desire to add my testimony to the splendid work that
the Y.M.C.A. is performing among our troops. No dis-
tinction whatever of faith is made by them, and they
have been most kind and helpful to the Jewish soldier,
among whom I am now working here. Again and again
I have heard from my men how much they appreciate
the invaluable work of the Y.M.C.A., and I have wit-
nessed on all sides the services this body is rendering,
both to the spiritual and material needs of the British
soldier.
“It was a remarkable sight I beheld recently in a large
camp here in a valley miles from my town, where a new
hut had been erected by the Y.M.C.A. Scarcely had the
doors on the half-finished building been thrown open when
it was thronged by masses of men, who gave expression
to their pleasure by round upon round of cheers for the
Y.M.C.A.—their best friend—l earnestly hope that the
Anglo-Jewish community will come forward in giving
generous support to the appeal of the Associations that
all branches of the work may be expedited in every pos-
sible way.”—Michael Adler, Jewish C.F., British Expe-
ditionary Forces.


OUR SOLDIERS IN LONDON.
AUSTRALIAN Y.M.C.A. HUT.
It is the boast of the Young Men’s Christian As-
sociation, as it was that of the late Dr. Barnardo,
that its doors are never closed. This is literally
true of the new Australian Y.M.C.A. (Aldwych)
hut for soldiers and sailors, which has been opened
next to the Commonwealth Buildings in The
Strand, London, at a cost of £BOOO.
In London, the Y.M.C.A. had many “huts,” or
social and residential centres for soldiers, but even
with the large number of existing buildings, having
accommodation for 1500 men nightly, the capacity
fell short of requirements, owing to the great popu-
larity of Y.M.C.A. rest houses among the troops.
Expansion became imperative, and it was also de-
sirable that a building should be erected and estab-
lished as a recognised Australian centre. The Ald-
wych hut was the result. At this fine establishment
1600 men are being accommodated with beds
weekly, while many thousands of Australian sol-
diers make it their place of call for meals, rest, and
recreation, for meeting friends, writing and reading,
and for other services.
More than 200 women, under the leadership of


CAIRO, EGYPT—Ezbekia Gardens —former fashionable resort of Cairo —now Y.M.C.A. Soldiers’ Club
Up to 6,000 Soldiers visit here for a cup of tea daily and 40,000 letters are written weekly on Y-M.C.A. paper freely supplied


Lady Plumer (wife of General Plumer, of Mafeking
fame), carry out the work of the refreshment sec-
tion. The hut is a 24-hour institution, and is never
closed, hot meals being obtainable during the small
hours of the morning with the same readiness as
during the day. Each shift of women has its own
chief, and among the large number of Australian
workers is Lady Mcßride, wife of the Agent-Gene-
ral for Victoria. A large honorary male staff is
attached, more particularly to the accounts and re-
cords branch, and to the beds department. The
arrangements throughout are on the latest plan.
The tariff, both for refreshments and bed accommo-
dation, is lower than that offered at any respectable
private establishment in London. Among the hon-
orary male staff it is a common sight to see a solici-
tor scrubbing a floor, a prominent figure on the
Baltic Exchange cleaning a bath for an Australian
private, or a leading light in-society performing
some other such menial task. But whatever else
the Australian lacks, he is not behind in gratitude,
and the honorary worker is well repaid by the know-
ledge of appreciated service.
On Sunday, as many as 1100 cooked meals are
served, in addition to hundreds of men being sup


Writing Room


plied with light refreshments. There is an in-
formal service in the afternoon, in which the men
join with great heartiness. On week days enter-
tainments and lectures are provided, many of the
leading artists of the city freely giving their ser-
vices. Sir Francis Champneys, Sir A. Pearse-
Goold, and Sir Thomas Barlow, physicians to the
King, give practical and pointed addresses to the
men on medical topics.
Mr. A. Gilchrist, M.L.A., of Australia, who
has written an appreciation of the work at the
Aldwych hut, says that the Y.M'.C.A. is addressing
itself to a great problem, and is protecting our
troops from wounds which the enemy in the city is
daily inflicting with effects more distressing than
those received in the firing line.


A GLIMPSE OF THE WORK IN
MESOPOTAMIA.
Speaking at a Garden Party given in the Govern-
ment House Gardens in Calcutta lately, Colonel
Wauchope, of the Black Watch, said:—
Y.M.C.A. give Bluejackets early Morning Tea
“ You have heard of the work being done in France.
I, too, have seen something of it both in France and in
the camps in Scotland.
“ A year ago, when wounded, I was in a camp of 2,000
men in the North of Scotland. In that camp there was
no meeting-place for the men, no sign of outward com-
fort and cheerfulness other than what one found in the
one large hut of the Y.M.C.A.
“ Darkness set in at four in the afternoon, and from
that hour till lights out every night the hut was packed
to overflowing ; and in it was every sign of cheerfulness
and contentment, especially on the faces of the men. But
the work of this nature of the Y.M.C.A. is known every-
where in the army. It is a common-place.


“ Though I have been but a week in Mesopotamia, I
will try and recall one scene from that country that
comes to my mind. The scene is on the Tigris. There
are three boats on the river; they are large boats, and
they are filled to overflowing with wounded soldiers.
“ There are Highlanders from Scotland and High-
Y.M.C.A. Mat Hut in Egypt Desert
landers from the Himalayas; there are Christians, Hin-
doos, and Muhammadans. But all have this in common,
that they are wounded, and on those three boats there is
space for great suffering, yet room for little comfort.
“ But when the three boats reached Amara, there came
on board two men from the Y.M.C.A. depot. These two
men worked in conjunction with the army doctor. I can-
not tell you of the change they wrought among those 300


wounded soldiers—of the food they distributed, the shel-
ters they contrived against the rain (for all the three
boats were exposed to wind and rain), the quilts and
mattresses they laid under the wounded on the decks that
were swimming in water. You have not the time to
listen, nor I the skill to tell, of the change wrought on
board those three boats by these two men, but I can tell
you this, that whoever gives in money or in kind towards
the Y.M.C.A. in Mesopotamia (and there is much need
of extension and development of the Y.M.C.A. work
there), may give in the sure knowledge he is doing
something to lessen the sufferings of the soldiers who are
fighting there now, and who will be fighting throughout
this next hot weather, under conditions of hardship and
difficulty without parallel in my experience in any other
theatre of war.
“ I had finished. But I would add one word more.
There are some who believe soldiers in war time shun a
society that is avowedly Christian. That is a false im-
pression. I will read you one sentence from a letter I
received not an hour ago from Mesopotamia. It was
written by the officer then commanding the Black Watch,
when he had been fighting continuously for 48 hours.
Fighting within 300 yards of the Turkish trenches, he
wrote it when three-quarters of his regiment had been
killed and wounded. The letter gives me a description of
the fighting. The sentence I quote is, ‘lf thy faith is
entire, look onward, for thine eyes shall see thy heart’s
desire.’ The officer who wrote that has since been killed,
leading a charge into the enemy trenches. But he was
loved and trusted as only the best and bravest are loved
and trusted.
“ And the sentence I have read appeals to all fighting
soldiers, and might well be made the motto for the
Y.M.C.A.”
GIFTS THAT ARE APPRECIATED.
Early in 1916 Mr. and Mrs. J. Millear, of Willaura, do-
nated £350 to the funds for the erection of a hut in
Egypt. Towards the close of the same year, having as-


sured themselves of the fine work the hut was doing for
the men, Mr. and Mrs. Millear contributed a further sum
of £IOOO.
Mr. J. McHardy, of Palmerston North, New Zealand,
who last year sent a cheque for £IOOO, has donated an-
“I do not know what we should do
without institutions such as the Y.M.C.A.
and, when the war is over, among those who
have done their duty there will be none
more worthy of praise than the noble army
of workers of the Y.M.C.A.”
MAJOR-GENERAL A. G. CHAUVEL,
Administering Australian Forces in Egypt.
other £lOOO in appreciation of the Association’s service
to the troops.
In enclosing a cheque towards the funds of the
YM.C.A., Major J. G. N. Bardwell, officer commanding
troops at Kharga, Egypt, wrote (13/10/16): “This is a
small token of my appreciation of the excellent work of
the Y.M.C.A. for the troops, especially in the areas I have
been in in Egypt, in Kharga Oasis above all. My men
would be almost miserable if they had not the Y.M.'C.A.”


From a Melbourne lady, accompanying a modest (but
none the less valued) donation:—“Please accept a small
contribution as a first instalment to the funds. One can
gather from the references, often brief, to the Y.M.C.A.
in the boys’ letters, that the comforts, solace and protec-
tion afforded by your admirable institution to the brave
fellows, at all times, is beyond, calculation and beyond
praise. If ever a human institution did the work of God,
surely the noble Y.M.'C.A. does.”
Then there was —not a gift, but a noble spirit prompt-
ing one. A lady called at the office of the National Com-
mittee so overwhelmed with gratitude for the service the
Y.M.C.A. had rendered her son, that she wished to give
something. She was in poor circumstances, but, drawing
a ring from her finger, she asked that it be accepted in
discharge of the great debt she felt she owed.
Captain Phillip Russell, of Carngham, Victoria, sent a
contribution of £250 to the funds before leaving for the
front. Upon seeing the work being done by the Associa-
tion for the men on the fighting fronts, he increased his
contribution to £2,200.
A grandmother who had received many letters from a
grandson with the Australian Army, expressing gratitude
for the service of the Y.M.C.A., died leaving 10/6, as all
she possessed. Her daughters decided to dispose of the
money in the way that they knew would have best met
with her approval, and so it was sent to help the funds
of the Y.M.C.A., to which she had often expressed her
thanks.
Large and small donations are equally appreciated.
WITH THE MEN IN THE TRENCHES.
Mr. Oliver H. McCowen, Executive Secretary of the
Y.M.C.A. in France, writes: “We motored out
of Calais on Sunday morning with a squad of
six new workers for the front. A run of forty miles
brought us to the headquarters of the 2nd Army, where


passes were issued to our men for the area in which they
were to work. Thence our road led still eastward until
a small town just by the frontier of Belgium was reached
and here we planted two of our men in an old barn close
to a certain supply column, who welcomed the advent of
the men. Coming to the frontier, the sentry passed us
‘trough with a wave of the hand—the red triangle
(Y.M.C.A. sign) is as good as a carefully-stamped permit
Y.M.C.A., Zeitoun
—and in a few minutes found ourselves in a town which
has been a favourite target of the enemy for some time.
We are opening two centres here—one in an old dancing
hall, which, the town mayor explained, had the great ad-
vantage of a back way to a field, in case the place was
shelled—a new recommendation for Y.M.C.A. quarters!
and the other in a deserted hotel beside an almost de-
serted railway station, on the main road to a town a fev.'
miles away which is a mere pile of bricks and mortar.
Both will be the brightest spots in this depressing town
during the coming winter days for our men back from
the trenches. We went north a few miles, and called on
the authorities of a certain corps defending a very cele-


brated British outpost. The General led us to a great
map on the wall, covered with certain significant little
flags, and asked, ‘ Are you prepared to work for my men
in this shell-swept area?’ And, of course, our reply was,
‘We covet the opportunity.’ I know there will be com-
petition for these places by men who realise fully what
work here may mean!
“ Evening had come by the time we reached some of
our centres farther south. The service was beginning as
we entered* our large marquee The place was full; the
busy scramble at the counter had ceased, and the men, who
had been up to the knees, and in some cases to the waist,
in mud in the trenches early that morning were sing-
ing—
“Oh! Saviour Christ, Thou, too, art Man;
Thou hast been troubled, tempted, tried.”
“ I don’t mind telling you that I have rarely been more
touched by anything, and as I stole away, I pictured to
myself One passing through that great crowd, healing,
helping, uplifting our brave brothers.
“The day was not over yet. We travelled some two
miles of very bad road to another of our tents, planted in
a sea of mud. No lights were visible from the road, and
everything seemed strangely silent. I began to wonder if
all the men had gone, and crept up to see, but the place
was full, and one of the workers was reading the fifty-
third chapter of Isaiah: ‘He was oppressed and afflicted,
yet He opened not His mouth,’ and so on; and the men
who had given themselves in the supreme sacrifice for
others realised a strange sense of fellowship with One
Who had trod that path before them.”


WORK OF LOCAL ASSOCIATIONS.
from the date of the outbreak of war the work
of local Y.M.C.A.’s throughout Australia has been
conducted with great energy. The various acti-
vities have been numberless. There has been a
Red Triangle centre at every military camp in the
Commonwealth, and no request for the establish-
ment of a Y.M.C.A. centre has been turned down.
SNAPSHOTS FROM HOME LEAGUE.
Ihe work of the Snapshots from Home Leagues
of the different Australian States has been de-
scribed by military officers as one of the most
appealing touches of the Y.M.C.A. service to the
men. “Nothing cheers the boys,” says one letter,
“like the receipt of home photographs. A photo-
graph of home often causes more delight than a
letter from home.”
Thousands of honorary photographers, enrolled
in the Snapshots League of the Y.M.C.A., are ope-
rating ail over Australia. No charge whatever is
made for the pictures. All that is necessary is
for an application for a photograph to be made to
the League by or on behalf of a soldier, sailor, or
nurse on active service. The League has branches
in every town of any size in the Commonwealth,
and a member takes the photograph desired, gives
one to the relatives, and sends another to the per-


son on active service. This work has given much
joy.
How the first photograph sent to the front by the
Snapshots from Home League was received among
the Australian soldiers in camp at Salisbury Plain
is told by Mr. L. L. Bird, one of the military sec-
retaries of the Association.
“A few weeks ago,” writes Mr. Bird, “Private W. J.
Witt, of Newcastle, came in greatly delighted over a photo-
graph he had received of his home sent to him by the
Australian Snapshots League. This was the first Snapshot
I had heard of being received. The Snapshot form had
been filled up at this Enquiry Office. The interesting
thing about it is that it was the first one dealt with by
the League (so the proud possessor of the photograph
informed me). The value of the Snapshots League is
evidenced in this case by the great joy it brought to
the recipient as he gazed at the picture of his home.”
Another letter says: “The dejight of one of the boys
when he received from the Snapshots League a picture
of his home and one of the baby he had never seen was
indescribable. It was lovely.”
THE SOLDIERS’ NEED.
A report submitted to a meeting of the Y.M.C.A.
Army and Navy Committee in Egypt states: —
“ No one knows better than the Secretary out in the
camps that the writing paper, food, and social amuse-
ment provided cannot supply all the needs of the men.
The needs that lie deepest are in men’s hearts and
minds, and these are the needs that we must satisfy.
This was felt by the leaders of the Association in Eng-
land, and they instituted a campaign. We do not know
what has been done there, but we do know what
has been accomplished here in Egypt. We have held


campaign meetings in our thirty-five centres in order to
give the men the Message of Hope and Cheer, the Mes-
sage of a fight for character which is, after all, the best
way to bring victory to Christ and to give the men an
opportunity of making a stand for better things. Larger
numbers of men have gathered for these meetings than
for any concert party, or anything else we have arranged
for them. We have had splendid co-operation from the
chaplains, the missionaries and others. Two thousand
men have come out stating that they wanted to live a
better and cleaner life. Thousands of men have signed
our War Roll, which is simply a declaration of allegi-
ance to Jesus Christ. I wish you could have been with
one of our speakers at Tel-el-Keber, away out in the
desert, where he was met by a man who said: ‘I am an
illegitimate son and nobody cares for me.’ He was
weeping like a child, but what a difference the Message
of Hope and Love has made to him. So it has gone on.
After all, the greatest need of these men is something
that is deep, something that will help them in their fight
for character, in their individual lives, and in the life of
the nation.
“Just one more picture! It is twilight in the Esbekia
Gardens, in the heart of Cairo, two minutes’ walk from
the devious dirty lanes of the Wassa or Red-light district.
Fifteen hundred men, wrapped in profound silence, fill
every available seat in the open-air theatre and skating
rink, their eyes intent upon four figures on the stage.
Two of these are secretaries of the Y.M.C.A. dressed in
khaki, and two are nurses in grey dresses and scarlet
shoulder capes. Through the air floats the sweet melody
of ‘ Lead, Kindly Light, amid the encircling gioom, lead
thou me on!’ The rumour has spread that within three
days many of the boys will be off to ‘ somewhere on the
front,’ and a thrill of reverence and awe surges through
the very being of many a man, and eyes are dim, as
each joins in the refrain, ‘Lead thou me on.’”


FOR HONOR AND FOR HER.
Somewhere a woman, in her firm, sweet way,
Faces the future bravely for your sake;
Toils on from da.wn till dark, from day to day,
Fights back her tears, nor heeds the bitter ache;
She loves you, trusts you, breathes in prayer your name;
Soil not her faith in you, by sin or shame.
Somewhere a woman —mother, sweetheart, wife,
Waits betwixt hopes and fears, for your return.
Her kiss, her words, will haunt you in the strife,
When death itself confronts you, grim and stern;
But let her image all your reverence claim,
While base temptations scorch you with their flame.
Somewhere a woman watches, thrill’d with pride,
Shrined in her heart, you share a place with none;
She toils, she waits, she prays, till side by side
You stand together when the battle’s done;
O keep for her dear sake a stainless name,
Bring back to her a manhood free from shame 1
The above lines by Miss M. Sernton have been
distributed by us in thousands at the Front and ap-
preciated by the boys.


Y.M.C.A. ARMY WORK
A Living, Not a Soul-less, Ideal.
In these pages an attempt is made to give
the people of Australia at least a reasonable
word picture of the “ ideal service ” aimed at by
a great Association, and also some idea of the real
service rendered to the officers and men of our
Australian Army. A recent writer heads his
article on the present “ world crisis ” by saying,
“ Thank God for the war,” and adds, “it is the
mercy of heaven that Germany struck before Bri-
tain’s soul was dead.” Throughout the grey, sad
days and months of struggle, disaster and dis-
organisation, men’s minds must have been slowly
and surely realising that the British Empire was
steadily drifting away from the splendid heritage
of clean achievement towards a soul-less ideal of
“ self.” Of London, the heart of the Empire, a
distinguished critic has recently written: “ The city
was, just prior to the war, the‘centre of tango-
teas and misery, night clubs and starvation, sloth
and sullen work.” Thank God! the cleansing tide
THE EVER OPEN DOOR"
of Welcome to Returned Men


Honorary Lady Workers serving at Y.M.C.A. Canteen at the Front


of adversity is bringing about a transformation of
our national outlook that must, in the end, bring to
our people a purer practical life and a simpler faith
ever reaching forth to a God-given ideal of clean
work, clean speech, and clean thought throughout
all the days and years to come. The Y.M.C.A. is
but following the “ gleam,” and is putting out
every effort to send the “ call ” along.
Join the Fighting Lines,
The call is clear! Come on, Australians! Step
up or step out! Get in or go under! Are you game
to tread the road of “ clean self-sacrifice ” and
fight for all the Y.M.C.A. stands for? The ques-
tion is up against you, and you—and you alone —•
can settle it. To-day the British fighting line is
lengthened the wide world round, but were every
Britisher right in that line, each in his place,
standing shoulder to shoulder, doing his little bit,
whether in the battle line or not; were each train-
ing himself and the “ other fellow ” in clean and
Christian usefulness, then, and then only, will
come the heartening up of the nation, and the
sure and sane achievement of the hard won vic-
tory that will be a saving grace to all the nations.
The Work at Home and Abroad.
This has been done under the full view of our
people, and after allowing for all faults, must, of
course, be left to them for their final judgment.
It will, however, be found in the following pages
that the “ field service ” work abroad is the more
emphasised, and in this respect the Y.M.C.A.,


in the “ field,” through its devoted represen-
tatives, makes no claim to infallibility in social
and religious organisation, but it does demand re-
cognition of this fact, that, with all faults and mis-
takes given in and allowed for, it is the one
organisation that attempts to give, and does give,
a touch of home life a measure of social enjoy-
ment, and a practical touch of Christian influence
at the back of the “ fighting line.”
What the “Red Cross Societies,” with their thou-
sands upon thousands of loving helpers, are to the
wounded soldiers, the Y.M.C.A. Field Service aims
to be to the “ strong men ” through their discipline
and training, and throughout the weary and awful
work at the Front. Knowing this, and reading
the pages that follow, it may perhaps come as
an “ inspiration ” to Australian men, the Common-
wealth over, who are too young, too old, or other-
wise debarred from “active service,” that they,
too, like our Australian Red Cross women, could
form a vast army of “ Field Service ” workers,
which would mean that the National Y.M.C.A.
Executive would have to overflowing the financial
assistance in money and gifts in kind, which would
enable them to despatch more and more “ Field
Service ” workers properly equipped to the front,
thus enabling our lads in khaki to be really and
efficiently helped by the keen and sympathetic
.Handy Men ” of the Social Service for our sol-
diers.
What this would mean in the way of comfort
and hope to the sorrowing and anxious hearts of
our Australian mothers, fathers, wives and sisters,


only He who.realises and knows the secrets of all
human hearts will ever know, but the “ Field
despatches ” from end to end bristle with the same
“ ideal,” the same appeal to Australian people for
a mighty awakening of practical interest in the
“ Service ” which touches the Camp and fighting
line of our brave Australian soldier lads, in a
homely, happy, Christian way, and throughout all
the grimness, the ghastliness, and murk of the
battle work tends to keep the “ boys ” themselves
the clean thinkers, clean livers and clean fighters
we all wish them to be.
A Group of the Tropical Force, with the Bishop of Carpentaria
on the right
