

Christian Evidence Society
N EW SOUTH WALES
CLOSB to st. Andrew’s cathedral.




CHRISTIAN EVIDENCE AND CHRISTIAN FAITH.
LECTURE I
DELIVERED AT THE INAUGURATION OF THE SOCIETY
ALFRED BARRY, D.D.,
Bishop of Sydney and Primate of Australia and Tasmania.




CHRISTIAN EVIDENCE AND CHRISTIAN
FAITH.
“To be witnesses for Christ” before the whole world, as
it was the charge of the first Apostolic Mission, so is the
perpetual duty and privilege of all true believers. To take an
humble part in such witness is the object of that “ Christian
Evidence Society for New South Wales,” which we are met here
to-night to inaugurate publicly, not without earnest prayer for
God’s blessing upon our work. Honoured by the request of the
Committee that I should undertake the task of addressing you at
this our first meeting, I have thought that the most appropriate
scope of an Inaugural Lecture would be a declaration of what is
designed to be the especial function of the Society, and, in
connexion with this, an attempt to determine the true relation
of Christian Evidence to Christian Faith,
(I.) The object of our Society is the union of all who acknowledge
the Divine authority of Holy Scripture, and the true Godhead of
Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, in paying obedience to the
Apostolic injunction “to be ready to give an answer,” (or, pro-
perly, “ a defence”) “ to every man that asketh us a reason for the
hope that is in us.” In that work we invited the co-operation of
all sections of the Christian Church ; we saw no reason why any
should hold aloof. We rejoice that in so large a measure of
brotherly sympathy our invitation has been accepted. With
the differences, which so unhappily divide and distract the
Church of Christ, we have no desire to meddle ; our concern
is with the basis of common faith, which (thank God !) does in
fact underlie those rents of the fair superstructure. Our hope
and prayer is that the work of this Society may aid directly
under God’s blessing the struggle of every Church and of every
Christian, against ignorance and sin and unbelief; and may
perhaps indirectly draw closer together those who hold a common
faith, and encourage, by the very exhibition of that common
faith, all who mourn over the breaches in our Zion, and are
crying out to God for the restoration or increase of Christian
unity.
That there was a place for this work we could not doubt. The
age is emphatically one in which “ every man ” —whether


qualified or unqualified—is “ asking a reason” for the most time-
honoured institutions, and for the most firmly established beliefs.
To this enquiry indeed, in some sense, and a very true sense,
the daily preaching of the Word in the Church of Christ is one
long continuous answer. But in the ordinary ministry of the
Word the consideration of what is called Christian Evidence must
occupy but a secondary place. The main object of that ministry
(if I may so express it), is the creation and sustentation, rather
than the defence, of the Faith. In the conversion of the careless
and sinful and unbelieving; in the building up, by instruction and
exhortation, of those who already believe, the great instrument
is the simple proclamation of the Word of Grod, “ living ” as it is,
“ and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged swordso that,
in its own intrinsic force of truth and love, it may be brought
home by the grace of the Holy Grhost to the hearts of the people.
Its power is its best evidence ; its operation is of aggression, not
of defence. Only, I think, at special times and for special
reasons should the ordinary teaching of our pulpits and our
schools assume an evidential character, or devote itself to the
task of examining and repelling the attacks made upon the great
principles of our faith. Still less is it to be desired that every
Minister of Christ should hold it to be within his duty and his
ability to deal at all points with the ever-changing questions
and controversies, which gather round the changeless faith of
the Gospel.
There will, therefore, always be room for the work of
a Society like this —devoting itself exclusively to the study of
Christian Evidences, under the light of the enquiry and
knowledge of our own days—uniting in that work, the best
contributions of thought, which it can draw from various
quarters—and bearing, as primary, the witness which else-
where holds at best a secondary place. In its work I venture to
think that it should be mainly positive and constructive, rather
than negative and polemical—that it should devote more time
and thought to the exhibition of the solid strength of Christian
Evidence, than to the examination of various objections and
difficulties of detail. You will perhaps remember the old
homely warning to the rider, that he will be in danger of swer-
ving from his course or losing his seat, if he thinks of nothing but
whipping off the dogs, which bark at his horse’s heels. I have
often thought that we are apt to lose the solidity and repose of
faith in the necessary but distasteful task of controversy of
detail. That task, as I know, must be resolutely done, and in its
measure we shall seek to do it. But I still hold that the other is
the higher and the more fruitful task. I hold this, because, so far
as I know the popular objections and cavils against the faith,
they will in many cases vanish, without needing any answer,


when we clearly understand what true Christianity is—when we
have gained a right conception of the structure and gradual
development of Holy Scripture—when we have come to see how
deep the ultimate basis of faith lies below the superficial
disturbances of these questions. But still more do I hold this,
because it seems to me that, while we have no promise of being
able to meet every objection, and to see our way through every
difficulty —while, in fact, it is rather implied that such things
will continue, so long as we are in this state of imperfection,—
yet we have ample warrant for believing that we shall be able
to assure ourselves that we have not “followed a cunningly
devised fable,” and to be convinced of Him in whom we trust,
that He has indeed the words of Eternal life.
Without any attempt at systematic comprehensiveness, it is, I
conceive, this which will be shown from various points of view in
the lectures to be delivered here. They will address themselves
quite as much to believers as to sceptics and unbelievers; they
will attempt to instruct, as well as to silence or convert;
they will seek to strengthen the ground of faith, in those—not a
few in our days—who are staggered and disheartened, without
being really convinced, by loud denunciations of Christianity as
an exploded superstition, unphilosophical and immoral, or by
the calm assumption of its unreality, as a matter beyond the
need of argument; they will aim at clearing and defining what
is held (I fear) hazily and uncertainly by many sincere
Christians, especially by distinguishing the true Divine essence
of Christianity from additions and deductions, which are the
perishable work of man. It is this work, which above all needs
in these days to be done; it is this, which, by God’s blessing, we
shall attempt in some measure to do.
(II.) But, in order that we may make this attempt with
anything like success, it is beyond all things necessary that we
understand clearly what is the true function and scope of
Christian Evidence.
What can it do, and what can it not do, for the life of Chris-
tianity? I should answer unhesitatingly that the function of
Christian Evidence is not to demonstrate to reason the truths of
Christianity, but to offer a solid basis for Christian faith.
Religion —all religion which deserves the name —is not properly
a philosophy: it must be faith—a faith which knows, indeed,
why it believes, and in whom it believes, but which is a faith
still. Before we can judge of the sufficiency or insufficiency of
any religious evidence whatever, we must vindicate the right
province of faith, as a law of all human knowledge, naturally
coming to its culmination in respect of the knowledge of God.
Eaith, as I need hardly remind you, belongs to the region,
not of abstract thought, but of personal relation. It is the


acceptance of truth, the homage of obedience, the self-sacrifiee
of love, simply through trust in the word or the character
of a person. It may be prepared for and facilitated by
accordance with our own thought and conscience; it may be in
part verified by the fruit of subsequent experience. But, so far
as it is faith, it goes beyond what we ourselves can discover,
and beyond what we ourselves can verify. If it is not to be
mere credulity, it must (as I have said) know in whom it
believes, and have good grounds for trust —trust in a power,
a wisdom, a goodness greater than our own. But when it has
this knowledge, it yields itself, more or less unreservedly, to
him whom it trusts, and through such self-surrender (to use
the well-known Apostolic paradox) “knows that which passes
knowledge.”
That such faith is a necessary law of human life, both for
knowledge and for practice, is surely beyond controversy. Even of
the knowledge of things, on which we act every day—the know-
ledge of facts, and even more clearly the knowledge of laws and
principles —a large portion for all, and for most of us far the
largest portion, rests, not on our own discovery, not even on our
own verification, but on trust in others, individuals or society at
large. The great steps of human progress itself are mostly
made by the many, through faith in the few, or even the one.
Sometimes it is true that we can test and verify for ourselves if
we will; although, if we always insisted on so doing, the world
would in great measure stand still. But in many things, and
these the greatest, such test is beyond our power: we have to sit at
the feet of the great masters of humanity—the philosopher or
the poet, the born ruler of men or the prophet who speaks for
God.
Sc it is even in knowledge of things ; but how much more in
knowledge of persons ! Every man is to his fellows, as far as
abstract and independent knowledge goes, “ unknown and
unknowable.” Partly, no doubt, we can stud} r him, as we would
study a thing, by observation of his ways and actions, even of
his looks and gestures —an observation, which is aided by our own
inner knowledge of the springs of human action and thought in
ourselves, which, with such modifications as are needed, we
transfer to him, “putting ourselves in his place.” But, beyond this,
if we would know a person thoroughly, up to the limits of possible
thoroughness, he must reveal himself to us ; and, if we think that
we can trust him, we have to accept that self-revelation with the
right measure of faith. Every day we act on such faith ; where
we feel that we can trust, we trust beyond or in spite of appear-
ances : we accept, as true, accounts of action, which beforehand
might have seemed to us utterly unlikely. And the province of
such faith increases, just in proportion as the object of our trust


is wiser, greater, nobler than ourselves, until it almost over-
shadows all other means of knowledge. It has been said, and I
think truly said, that such faith in others is the greatest of all
the forces that move the world. Certainly advancing civilisation
and greater diffusion of knowledge and power seem in no sense
to diminish it, in our social and political life, or even in the
domain of Art and Philosophy.
Now, it is clear, to every thinking man, by the very nature of
the case, that the application of this fundamental Law of Faith
must have its highest exemplification, when man stands face to
face with the Supreme Power which rules the world. There is
in every human soul a capacity of faith—a faith of reverence and
love—which can find no adequate object on earth, either in the
hero-worship of the individual, or the worship of humanity at
large. If the Supreme Power be an impersonal Force, or a Life
diffused through the body of the Udiverse, such faith is left
without adequate satisfaction, stretching out its hands, often
with pathetic earnestness, and vainly personifying the Imper-
sonal. But religion is the recognition of a Living Personal Q-od ;
and on such recognition there follows at once the irresistible
impulse of faith. You will see, at once, if you consider the
matter in the light either of theory or of experience, the truth of
the old saying of the Schoolmen, omnia abeunt in mysterium,
“ all lines of thought end in mystery.” Along whatever line
your mind seeks to move, the advance leads up to something
known to be, but in itself unknowable. In Natural Science we
thus come to the mystery of matter; in Physiology, to the
mystery of life; in the science of Humanity, to the mystery of free
personality; in the study of the whole Universe, to the mystery
of Creation or Causation. Now, so long as we deal with abstrac-
tions, we can only pause helplessly before these black precipices
of mystery, at best striving to irradiate them with the summer
lightning of imaginative speculation. But if our thought leads
us a Person, then there comes down to us out of the darkness a
living Hand, which is grasped by faith.
We find accordingly that “Natural Religion” rightly so
called the religion which, under many forms, with many
excrescences of superstitution, and with many hesitations and
negations of philosophy, is actually in possession of human
thought—must always involve faith. It holds that man is
led by all the various lines of thought to a Hod —by the intellect
and imagination, ascending to the First Cause of all, and giving
it personality by the discovery in the Universe of Design of
usefulness and beauty—graspingby the conscience the conception
of an Absolute Righteousness, and, under the sense of duty and
love, recognising as necessary the idea of a Person, who is Himself
Righteousness and Love. By the accumulated force of conver-


gence of all these lines of thought it holds that God is known —
that, in fact, all these are revelations of Himself to man. But it
warns us that this knowledge is, and must he, partial. In the
system of physical Creation, in the government of the world of
humanity, in the Divine relation to the individual soul, there is
much which is very dark to us. There crosses us especially the
great mystery of Evil—suffering, and sin, and death—before
which mere human reasoning stands aghast. The knowledge,
therefore, of God ends, and must end, in faith, which is the
child, not of pure ignorance or full understanding, hut of partial
knowledge. There is abundant means of partial knowledge of
Him, and that knowledge implies everywhere an infinite depth of
power, and wisdom, and love. To these, or rather to Him, of whom
they are attributes, v?e have to trust ourselves. The Evidences
of Natural Theology can but give ground —as we believe, more
than sufficient ground—for that inevitable faith. A religion
which involves no mystery is by that very fact self-condemned,
even as a system of thought; a religion which refuses boldly to
assert the law of faith, can never meet the needs, and lay hold
of the spirits of men. When St. Paul dwells so earnestly on
faith, as the one thing needful in approach to God, or when St.
John declares faith to be “ the victory that overcometh the
world,” they speak, indeed, in the special application of their
words, of the peculiar characteristics of the Gospel message ; but,
in the generality of the words themselves, they advance the
claim of all Peligion, just in proportion to the truth and vitality,
which it contains.
There is (let me submit this to your thought in passing) a strange
and delusive ambiguity in the now hackneyed phrase, “ God is
unknown and unknowable.” In regard to absolute knowledge
the saying is so true, as to become a mere truism. Nowhere is
it more emphatically urged than in the pages of the New Testa-
ment. In that sense it may be applied to the ultimate truths
on which all forms of science rest; in that sense it is absolutely
true of every one of the human beings, whom we meet and deal
with every day. But how far it is from truth in regard to the par-
tial knowledge which alone is possible or necessary, is testified
indirectly by every language and literature of man, directly
by the many religions, which cover the face of the whole world.
The one question is, whether, in respect of God, we shall do at the
bidding of the Agnostic what we should refuse to do in the science
of Nature or of Man—reject knowledge as unreal or unfruitful,
because it is confessedly imperfect; and whether we shall shrink
from applying to our relation to Him the principle, on which we
act unhesitatingly in our relations to men, supplementing im-
perfect knowledge by the conviction of faith.


Before quitting this part of the subject, I would remark, that it
is this requirement of faith, which gives religion a moral power,
and which makes it the property of all classes and ages of men.
Faith, as I have said, belongs to personal relation ; it is the sup-
plement of personal knowledge. Now, it is clear that no personal
knowledge was ever obtained by the action of the intellect alone.
The so-called “knowledge of the world,” which is purely intel-
lectual and unsympathetic, is a knowledge of the surface, not of
the heart of things ; the keen passionless intellect when, in the
statesman, for example, it has to deal with man, is constantly
betrayed into blunders and failures, which would be impossible
to duller understandings, enlightened by the magic touch of
sympathy. Faith, therefore, has, indeed, an intellectual element,
but in its essence it is a moral action; it is necessarily connected
with duty : it is “ perfected by love.” It is, I say, this moral
character of faith which makes it a regenerating and exalting
principle ; and it is this also which brings it home to every age
and class, every variety of character and education among men.
Those who can follow out the course of reasoning, when it passes
from the things which can be seen and handled, to the things
which are invisible—from concrete examples to abstract princi-
ples—are but few. There is no aristocracy so exclusive and
supercilious as the aristocracy of intellect and of culture.
But the trust in a Person, known in measure, and trusted beyond
the limits of knowledge—with its necessary fruits of obedience
and love, even to the extreme of self-sacrifice —this all can
understand, and all can exercise. It is the first impulse in the
heart of childhood; it is the ruling force with the great mass of
men, who have to work and to feel more than to think ; it is that
which alone satisfies the deepest needs and aspirations of the
heart. How signally does the neglect of true faith in our theories
of life revenge itself by morbid outbursts of strange superstition
from the hard rock of pure intelleetualism! “The godless
Regent trembling at a star,” is still a common type of humanity.
Gross and sensual idolatry grows up under the cold shadow of
Buddhist Nihilism; spiritualistic vagaries in Europe and
America mark the recoil from a bare Materialism. A religion,
if such an one there were, which rested on cold intelligence, and
worked out its own conclusions by mathematical formulas, with
a kind of defiant cogency, could only be the religion of the few.
It could never claim even the possibility of being Catholic; it
could never be one, which “ the common people would hear
gladly.”
(III.) But from this general conception of the prerogative of
faith in all religion, I pass on now to consider more carefully
what is that prerogative under the Gospel, and so to dwell on the
relation of Christian Evidence to Christian Faith.


What is Christian Faith? The answer is contained in the
well-known words of Our Lord, as recorded by St. John, “ Ye
believe in God; believe also in me.” It takes up, at once
assuming and confirming, that faith in God, of which I have
spoken —that faith, which embodies itself in all the religions of
men “ seeking after God, if haply they might feel after Him
and find Him,” and which St. Paul recognised as a true although
an imperfect faith, in his pleading for Christ at Athens before
the choicest wisdom of heathenism—that faith, which, as in those
whom Our Lord addressed, was for Israel a firm, clear, definite
faith in a God, who had made covenant with man, and who
revealed Himself to man in the Law and the Prophets. So far
Christianity takes that position which by confession both of
friends and foes is its due, as the great living and aggressive
representative of the Peligions of the world. But in the words
“ believe also in me,” it adds to this, that which alone can give
it perfection of strength and certainty,—the claim for an absolute
faith in the Word and the Person of Christ, both as the Eevealer
of God and the Mediator between God and man.
Faith in Christ, as being (to use St. John’s phrase) “ the Word
of God,” revealing the Godhead in revelation perfect, universal,
unperishable —it is clearly a tremendous claim, unexampled (I
think even in comparison with the claims of other religions for
their Founders ; and Christianity boldly draws the rational con-
clusion that it can be advanced only by One, who is not merely
the Son of Man but the Son of God. It is, indeed, once more,
as usual, the culmination of a great Natural Law. For it is
certain that a Personal God can be revealed to man only through
man; and that such revelation is given, not merely through
humanity as a whole, but through the great leaders of humanity,
inspired with the lower or higher inspiration —the inspiration of
the sage, the poet, the lawgiver, the ruler of men, or the inspir-
ation of the true Prophet who has both “ the Word of the
Lord,” and “the Spirit of the Lord.” But, in itself and its
logical consequences, it rises infinitely above all these lesser
exemplifications. The only Christianity which has proved itself
to have vitality and force, is that which frankly recognises this
claim as transcendent and ultimate. All attempts to explain it
away into a difference not of kind, but of degree, recognising in
Christ only the greatest and wisest of the sons of men, fail to
meet either the facts or the necessities of the case. They
melt away gradually into the patronizing sentimentality to
“Henan’s Life of Jesus,” or the coarse blasphemies of what
calls itself “ freethought” among us.
Yet even this is not all. This faith in Christ claims for Him
the One Mediation, through which man has access to God—•
a Mediation, having, as is shown by the visible sign of the


Cross as symbolic of Christianity, an especial reference to Salva-
tion by atonement from sin and death, but yet involving, as we
are taught in the deeper passages of the Eevelation of the New
Testament, a relation to man from the foundation, and in the
Divine purpose before the foundation, of the world, and a rela-
tion to all created beings, even beyond humanity. Again it is
an unexampled claim. True it is, as Bishop Butler has unanswer-
ably shown, that mediation —that is, the power of affecting for
good the spiritual relation of another to God—is a fundamental
law of human life, exemplified in a thousand ways; so that
a Religion which did not recognise it, would stand out branded as
inapplicable to humanity. But this merely human mediation is
limited —sternly and mercifully limited —within narrow bounds.
What is claimed for Our Master rises infinitely above all these
lower forms of mediation; and, again, no Christianity has ever
endured and conquered, which has ignored it or explained it
away.
This certainly, and not less than this, is Christian Faith in
its broadest and simplest conception. What now, in similar
breadth and simplicity, is Christian Evidence ? There are two
great Christian Evidences—Christianity and Christ Himself.
Christianity itself is the first chief evidence. It is the great
sign to lead to Christ, corresponding in its power in these latter
days to the miracles in the world of matter or the world of mind,
which are recorded in the history of the first proclamation of the
Gospel. If, indeed, by “ miraculous ”we mean (as perhaps we
ought to mean) something which is rightly called supernatural,
because it rises above all ordinary human experience, and above
the regularities in Nature, which it discovers and calls laws,
Christianity is itself miraculous ; for it certainly has no parallel
in the history of the world. It is an unique fact, which must be
accounted for by some unique cause.
I speak of Christianity both as Ideal and Actual Christianity.
First, as ideal —as manifested, that is, in the transcendent
conception, as yet but imperfectly realised, which we gather
from the Bible, and from all which Christian thought and study
has drawn out of the treasure-house of the Scripture.
The Bible —need I say it ?—is, both in itself and in its actual
effect on the thought and history of the world, a Book certainly
like no other book —immeasurably above the highest master-
pieces of human genius, and the best and noblest of all other
sacred Books. The cavils and sneers, which are the staple of so
much infidel lecturing and oratory, vanish in a moment,
when men knew how to regard the Bible as a whole in the
right development of its revelation, and in its variety of Law
and History, of Psalm and Prophecy and Apostolic teaching.
Whatever origin we may assign to it, one thing is certain—that


the origin of what is thus unique ought itself to have some
unique character, and that it is difficult indeed to find any
of the new philosophical and critical theories of origination,
able to stand as an adequate account of the actual phenomena,
which the origin assigned to it hy Christian faith explains so
simply and so completely. Speaking broadly, it is clear that the
actual power—intellectual, moral, spiritual power—which the
Bible has exercised is the evidence of some superhuman
character in it. We may discuss, if we will, theories of its
inspiration ; we may examine critically the date and the
human authorship of its various books; we may listen, if we
please, to the German criticism, which describes the first, second,
and third editor of this or that portion of the Scripture, as
confidently as if it had seen them at work, and collated their
manuscripts. But, after all, the Bible stands out, not only as a
true organic whole, though its composition stretches over
centuries, but as a Book, which is (I repeat) in its actual influ-
ence over man miraculous, in the sense, in which I have used
that phrase. Amidst all other lesser words it is a supreme Word
of God.
Now examine the ideal Christianity—the Christianity which
should be realised perfectly—the Christianity to which Christian
life actually, although imperfectly, approaches—the Christianity
which is embodied in the pages of the New Testament.
We note first, its extraordinary power, as a Divine Philosophy,
grappling with and solving, so far as solution is possible,
the great problems of Being—the personal being of the soul
within, the great universe of things and men without, the
relation of both to the great First Cause, and through this their
harmony with each other; and yet, while it thus faces the
mysteries before which the deepest thinkers of the world have
stood abashed in perplexity, still its teaching is one which can
come home, and does come home, to the great mass of men. It is
one which, in contrast with the elaborate systems presented to us
in other names, stands out like the simple Copernican system
against the endless fantastic cycles and epicycles which, it swept
away.
We note, again, its still more transcendent moral power, not
only in the noble and imperishable morality which it has
created, but infinitely more in the moral force, which it brings
to purify and inspire the soul—facing the dread reality of
an engrained sinfulness in man, yet giving the power to
conquer it, and renewing in fallen nature the Divine Image of
righteousness and love; and we note here also that this moral
power is one, which all can understand, all receive and act upon
one which is the same amidst all varieties of race and
character, and all changes of place and time.


We pass on, next, to estimate its power as a spiritual life—meet-
ing and satisfying the thirst for a living God, which has
expressed itself in the universal instinct of prayer—at once
forgetting self before God, and yet realising a true individuality,
not overborne or crushed by communion with the Infinite—
rising above the things changeable and temporal to the things
changeless and eternal, and yet never losing in mysticism the
grasp of those present realities which are the earnest of the
future perfection. Nor here again does the same characteristic fail
us, that it meets its spiritual needs of the youngest child and the
maturest thinker, and knows no distinction of race or condition,
“barbarian Scythian, or bond or free.”
This ideal Christianity, it is a creation such as the world has never
seen ; yet it had its origin in the teaching and life of a Galilean
peasant, and in the preaching of Him by a handful of men,
mostly unlearned and ignorant men, with but one at most, and
that one a convert, who had the insight of masterly genius, and
the equipment of large culture. In itself it is, I repeat, a great
Christian evidence ; for 1 know not how to account for it, except
by that belief in Christ, as the revealer of God and man, which
our Creed embodies ; and when I study the so-called explana-
tions of its power, which modern criticism, or imagination under
the name of criticism, has supplied, I come back with increased
conviction from their utter failure, that there is but one adequate
explanation—that “ the thing was from the Lord.”
But what of actual Christianity with its imperfections and
perversions—its weaknesses and sins—its declension from this
noble ideal, and its failures to conquer the world ? We acknow-
ledge them all, often with perplexity, always with shame and
sorrow ; yet we notice, with surprise and yet with infinite comfort,
that Christ Himself foresaw them and predicted them. We
come by degrees to understand that spiritual power can work
only by spiritual means, and that, while man is free, intensity of
good must bring forth intensity of evil, until the time of conflict
and probation is over; we gain by the study of Nature the concep-
tion of the vastness of the time, and the slowness of the processes,
through which the hand of God works; and we understand that
Apostolic warning against impatience, which reminds us that to
God “ one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day.”
But take even actual Christianity under the three aspects of
which I have spoken. Study it as embodied in the Christian
Church—that Society again unlike all others in its infinite
variety, its world-wide extension, yet its underlying unity—that
Society, which with all failures and sins, has been in fact the
great moral force of history, the one realization, however
imperfect, of true humanity—that Society, which, even through


all its unhappy divisions, yet preserves still substantially the one
Faith, and rests on the one Divine Communion with God in
Christ—that Society, in which all races and characters find their
place, and which opens its doors especially to the poor and
simple, on whom the world tramples. Again for this unique
and supernatural phenomenon there must he some account. The
account, which Christianity gives, and which is embodied in the
history of Pentecost, is at least an adequate account. Put it
aside ; and what other can explain this subjugation by a Society,
arising in narrow and despised Judaism, of all the greatest
civilisations of the world ; and this undying and ever-spreading
life, while around it nations, ages, races “ have their day and
cease to be ?” Yes! the actual Christianity represented by the
Christian Church in itself, if rightly considered, is an evidence
of Christianity, a sign to lead to Christ Himself. Yet this is not
the whole of actual Christianity. Mark—as the author of the
Gesta Chrtsti, himself clearly no blind follower of Christian
tradition, bids us mark—the moral, intellectual, spiritual
power which Christianity has exercised, over the civilisation
of the world—guiding, and allying itself with, the growing
light of thought and knowledge and literature—winning again
and again moral triumphs, in the victory of the higher law of
true humanity over the lower animal law of selfish struggle for
existence — creating and sustaining a new and lofty ideal of an
inner spiritual life, hid in God. Outside the pale of avowed
discipleship there is an actual Christianity. If the spirit of the
world has entered into and degraded the Church, the spirit of
the Church has spread itself through the world, and at least
reflected in bright glow of diffused light the rays of a Sun of
Eighteousness, Himself not plainly seen.
Thus it is that Christianity, ideal and actual, is itself a Christian
Evidence. But it is only such, as leading to the contempla-
tion of the true ultimate evidence of Christianity—the manifes-
tation of Christ Himself. In a sense true of no other religion,
Christianity is Christ. Its wisdom, its righteousness, its holi-
ness, are simply the reproduction in man of the life of its Lord
and Master. If it aspires to promote intellectual enlightenment,
it is by setting forth Christ, as the Light of the world. If it
would give moral regeneration, it is by embodying in men
the righteousness of Christ. If it would create, or re-create, the
spiritual life of communion with God, it is by unity with Christ,
and through it access to the Father. Hence it follows that
Christianity is but a preparatory evidence to lead to the true evi-
dence in Christ Himself.
This manifestation of Christ on earth, in His character and in
his life (let me remind you) depends not on the detailed criticism
of the date, authorship, and origination of our Gospels—on the


supposed varieties of development of Apostolic teaching—on the
genuineness of this or that passage or book of Holy Scripture.
All these questions are important; and in all it seems to me clear
that the destructive criticism has done its worst, and that its
hour is rapidly passing away, and that the old belief is emerging,
substantially unchanged, nay, hardly modified. But the
character and the life of Christ are not only pictured in the
Gospels ; they are implied in the Epistles ; they are reflected in
all Christian literature, and the life of the Christian Church.
That the Jesus of Christian faith is substantially the Jesus of
history is beyond doubt. As John Stuart Mill convincingly
remarks, the conception is one too grand not to be true,
because infinitely beyond the power of early Christianity to
create.
The character and life then of Our Lord in their marvellous
union of power, wisdom, goodness—the three forces which
rule the world —I need not dwell upon them ; for before them all
thoughtful and reverent humanity has ever bowed down. The
relation of the Christ of the New Testament to the Messiah of
the Old, at once fulfilling and infinitely transcending all pro-
phecy —I glance but at this, which will be dwelt upon more
fully hereafter. The miraculous works of His redeeming love,
leading up to the great miracle of miracles in the Besurrection—
which I take to be established by irrefragable evidence, and by its
establishment to establish the rest —against these we have seen
the assaults of a priori and a posteriori sceptism fiercely gather,
and, sometimes by mutual destruction, melt away. It is on the
manifestation of Christ Himself that we are content to rest our
main Christian Evidence. As we trace it out, we pass, I think,
naturally, through the phases of belief, represented to us by St.
John in his Gospel, from the first acceptance of Him as the
Messiah of Jewish expectation to the final confession of a
victorious faith, though a faith arising out of doubt, and en-
forced by self-chosen evidence, “ My Lord and my God.”
(IY.) Such, in the brief sketch alone possible to me to-night, is
Christian Evidence. The more we study it in its unity and
simplicity, the less we fritter it away into isolated fragments of
evidence, and, according to the old proverb, “lose the wood in
the trees,” the more, I believe, will it tell upon the mind and the
soul.
But once more let me remind you, that it cannot supersede,
it can but prepare for, Christian Faith. The great mysteries of
the Gospel —the Incarnation of the Son of God in human flesh,
the universal and all-prevailing Atonement of Calvary, the
ultimate truth of the Divine Nature, which we call the doctrine
of the Trinity in Unity—these are doctrines of faith, resting on
the word of Christ, and on it alone. The inner reality of


Christian life, by which it grows to spiritual perfection before
God, depends not mainly on study of evidence and intellectual
conviction, but on the moral and spiritual force of faith. We do
not merely confess and acknowledge this, but we glory in it.
The conflict between Christian and anti-Christian is rightly
described in its essence as a conflict between faith and unbelief,
between the theory of life which excludes faith, and the theory
which makes it the leading force of thought and action and
worship.
Such (I repeat), is the outline of the true function of Christian
Evidence in relation to faith. There are those, who accept
Christianity, as they accept civilization and science, by inherit-
ance : there are those who are content with the teaching of the
Bible and the Church : there are those to whom it is sufficient
to test Christianity by the practical test of its sufficiency to meet
the needs and aspirations of life: there are those, who go on to
study it deeply, and by that study are drawn irresistibly to
Christ: there are those who feel the need of the direct study of
what are called Christian Evidences, to prepare them to embrace
the Gospel. Each and all of these, if you consider the matter,
have grasped some Christian evidence in the true sense of the
word: the difference, after all, is not of kind, but of degree.
But by whatever path, long or short, broken or continuous, they
approach, still at last the action of final adhesion to Christ is an
action of Faith. If by God’s blessing, we can in this Society
bring out clearly the strength and solidity of Christian Evidence,
we trust that the work may not be without value and without
fruit of blessing. But we confess it to be only a subsidiary and a
preparatory work. It aims only at bringing men face to face with
the manifestation of Christ. Then it must be for Him, by His
grace—ministered, it may be, through the continual witness of
His Church, or infused, it may be, directly into the secret life of
the individual soul —to draw men to Himself; and, just as when
He was on earth, it will be the touch of faith which draws out
the hidden virtue of His Presence ; and still His word of blessing
will be, “ Thy faith hath made thee whole.”


THE BIBLE AND SCIENCE IN THEIR
MUTUAL RELATIONS.
LECTURE II
BY THE
REV. ROBERT STEEL, D.D. Ph.D.
st. Stephen’s church, phillip street, Sydney.
Delivered in the Protestant Hall, Sydney, 29th May, 1885 ; the late
Sir George Wigram Allen, K.C.M.G., in the chair.




THE BIBLE AND SCIENCE IN THEIR MUTUAL
RELATIONS.
Faith in the Bible as a revelation of truth from God to men,
is more widely spread at the present day than ever before ; but
it may be also affirmed that Scepticism with regard to its claims
to belief is also widely diffused. The same tide of emigration
which has carried so many believers in the Bible over the world
has also borne the disciples of Doubt. Unbelief has also caught
the infection of earnestness and activity which characterise the
Christianity of the nineteenth century. This is pre-eminently a
missionary era ; and though it may be true that no apostles of
unbelief have adventured their lives among uncivilised and
savage nations to endeavour to convert them to freethought, and
that they cannot, like Christian evangelists, point to their success
in raising up a benighted people to true knowledge, pure
morality, and some civilisation, yet they can point to the itinerant
advocates of scepticism, and to the converts to their views
among the cultured and operative classes in Christian lands.
Even missionaries among the heathen in India and Japan, while
teaching and translating the Bible, have been confronted by the
literature which the apostles of unbelief have put into the hands
of the natives of those lands at the critical period, when their
minds had been enlightened by education to discredit their
ancestral faith and idolatry. Among ourselves Unbelief has
its advocates, full of zeal and activity in propagandist enter-
prise, and bold enough to challenge a conflict on questions of
evidence for the truth and authority of the Bible. The cultiva-
tion of knowledge, and especially of physical science, has
demonstrated the incredibility of all systems of the universe
untrue to nature, and consequently, the religions which are built
upon a false cosmogony. It has, therefore, been assumed, by
some that the venerable records of the Christian faith, tried by
the same test, present insuperable difficulties to credibility.
Probably the greatest difficulties to belief in the present day
arise from the methods and results of modern science; and young
minds especially, dazzed by the brilliancy of some of these


results, have been captivated by sceptical theories drawn from
them. A great revolution has taken place in the method of
acquiring knowledge —to the advancement of truth in all its
departments. The pursuit of scientific study has had an influence
on Biblical inquiry. The Physical sciences, which investigate
the forms and changes of matter; the Philological and Biologi-
cal, which attempt to reduce to system the facts of man’s nature,
and of his intellectual and moral development —have all a bear-
ing upon the study of the Bible as a revelation professing to
come to man from God. A spirit of scepticism has been
awakened. A great demand for evidence to satisfy critical
inquiry on the most approved principles has been made. Many
are restless and unsettled. Some have departed from faith in
the Bible, and demand a divorce between Science and Scripture.
The conflict now is different from the past, though all the old
battles have occasionally to be fought over again. But the
critical school is new, and the Bible has had to submit to its
searching analysis. The inductive philosophy has gained its
importance from the correct methods it has pursued, and the
splendid results it has obtained. When, therefore, it is alleged
that the Bible cannot stand before this new method it is im-
portant to examine whether there is any real danger to Faith or
the Scripture from the certain truths of science, and whether
there is any just ground for the panic which some feel for the
safety of the Ark of God. It is proper that, in an introductory
course of lectures, we inquire whether there is any real disagree-
ment between the venerable Bible and modern Science. It may
be premised that the Bible does not profess to teach physical
science. Its purpose is moral and spiritual, throughout the
sixty-six treatises, by forty-four different pens, composed during
a period of fifteen centuries, and crowded together with marvel-
lous unity of teaching, within the pages of a pocket Bible. It
professes to be a record of God and man in their spiritual rela-
tions, and to make men “ wise unto salvation.” But professing
to come from God, and to be true, it may be presumed that the
Bible should not contain anything inconsistent with scientific
facts. It would be a serious argument against its credibility
and authority if it built any of its doctrines on a scientific false-
hood. But, on the other hand, if its language, fairly interpreted,
does not contradict what science has discovered, it must be a
presumption in its favour, though it must be tried by its own
special lines of evidence, to which it appeals. The Bible has
often been in the crucible, and subjected to trying tests.
Furnaces heated seven times have been prepared for it, and the
most searching scrutiny has been held over the process. Philo-
sophers and sciolists in every age have been ready to break a
lance with Moses. Some have even made physical science the


seat of the scoffer, and disowned the authority of the Bible ;
but those who believe, on what they regard satisfactory evidence,
the revelations of Divine truth in the Bible and the revelations
of scientific truth in nature, have no fear that ultimately there
will be any discrepancy between their disclosures, as the two
volumes are honestly and carefully studied. “ Nature and
Revelation are not conflicting but conspiring forces,” as the
late Professor Sedgwick, of Cambridge, so felicitously said. Both
have a claim to be patiently and fairly studied. The great dis-
coveries of science, the brilliant array of its facts, and the grand
order of its laws, cannot be hostile to the facts and laws of the
Bible, if both proceed from one Great Author. The inquirer
after knowledge may take up the language of the quaint Sir
Thomas Browne, in his “ Religio Medici,” and say—“ There are
two books from which I collect my divinity; besides that written
one of God, another of His servant Nature, that universal
manuscript which lies expanded unto the eyes of all.” As Arch-
bishop Whately said, —“ It is not for the confutation of objectors
merely, or for the conviction of doubters, that it is worth while
to study the two volumes —that of Nature and that of Revelation
—which Providence has opened up before us ; but because it is
profitable and gratifying to a well-constituted mind to trace in
each of them the evident handwriting of Him who is the Divine
Author of both.” We are bound to admit all the ascertained
facts which science has discovered, and all the general laws
which these facts satisfactorily prove; but we are not bound to
accept the speculative theories which scientific men occasionally
put forth. These theories have often varied, and have been
refuted by further investigation. Their first appearance may
have been directly antagonistic to the Bible, but the issue may
be quite in harmony with its teachings. As we shall see, such
has already been the case in some conspicuous instances. The
speculation and theory were wrong, and their authors had
demanded for them the authority due to established laws with-
out waiting for complete evidence of their truth. In like
manner the Bible has, in all ages, suffered more or less from its
professed interpreters. Theories founded on imperfect or wrong
views of natural truths gave a meaning to texts of Scripture
which the words themselves did not necessarily convey, and
these interpretations gained authority by tradition. The Bible
has had a human incrustation of interpretation. Hence when
new discoveries of physical truth were first proclaimed by men
of science, theologians, as well as humble believers in their
explanation of the Bible, looked with suspicion on them as they
came into collision with traditional views. Lactantius, an
eminent father of the third century, denied the rotundity of the
earth. St. Augustine, a more profound reasoner, in the fifth


century, admitted the rotundity, but denied the antipodes.
After Copernicus published his discoveries, Pope Paul 111., by
a decree of the Congregation of the Index, declared the
Oopernican theory to be false and contrary to Scripture; and
Galileo, though scientifically convinced of the truth of the earth’s
motion round the sun, had on the 22nd June, 1633, before the In-
quisitors, on his bended knee with one hand on the Bible, to
abjure and curse the doctrine which his telescope had established.
The prohibition of books containing the doctrine was continued
till Benedict XIV., partially removed it in 1757, nor were these
books expressly authorised till 1822 by Pius YII. Protestant
theologians have sometimes been weak enough to deny scientific
truth. Though Sir Isaac Newton’s splendid discoveries were
made after the new methods of inquiry had been recognised, yet
the great Puritan divine, John Owen, declared that the New-
tonian philosophy was based on fallible phenomena and against
evident testimony of Holy Scripture. When Geology produced
its doctrine of the great antiquity of the earth, Protestant as
well as Catholic was ready to quote the first chapter of the Bible
against it; and Moses Stuart, one of the leading Biblical critics
of the age in America, opposed it. William Oowper, who was
so true to nature in his poetry, expressed his fears of those
“ who drill and bore the solid earth, and from the strata there
extract a register, by which we learn that He who has made it,
and revealed the date to Moses, was mistaken in its age.” But
it was the interpretation that was wrong —the human theory,
not the sacred record. Human conjecture had wrapped up
Biblical texts in too narrow an interpretation. We now smile
at the folly of the interpreters who refused to admit the
rotundity of the earth, the existence of the antipodes, the motion
of the earth around the sun, and the antiquity of the earth’s crust.
No respectable interpreter now has any difficulty with the Bible
on these points, and he can fine ample room for all the long
ages of Geology. Thus the Bible, when its language is honestly
explained, has been able to stand the test of advancing scientific
knowledge more than any other religious book of the past.
Let us look at ancient and modern Science in relation to the
Bible. The ancients had their systems of the universe in a
cosmogony as well as a theology. The latter was dependent
upon the former. They had their philosophers of far more
learning than the pastoral Hebrews. Their sacred books
contain their system of the world. The oldest of these docu-
ments takes us back to an age older than Abraham, and near
the founding of Babel. It covers the very ground taken up by
the early chapters of the Bible ; but the contrast is great. The
Accadian tablets, while they have a substratum of agreement
with Mosiac record, are childish, fabulous, and polytheistic.


Others rescued by modern excavations, and thus capable of
being read without a Greek exposition, present a similar mass
of crudities, fancies, and falsehoods utterly irreconcilable with
modern science, and in striking contrast with the Book of
Genesis. There is a gross ignorance of nature, and an ascrip-
tion to matter of powers and properties most ludicrous, with a
peculiar national characteristic that suits only one locality. The
Babylonian cosmogony made the first state of the world to be
chaos—a darkness in which frightful forms moved, and over
which a woman presided. Bel cut her in two and made heaven
and earth. He then cut otf his own hand and made men. The
Indian imagination had great fertility in making cosmogonies,
and, amidst much that poetic genius can admire, there was still
more that was grotesque and absurd. The seed of life became
an egg, and produced Brama the great creative principle. The
earth rested upon an elephant, the elephant upon a tortoise, the
tortoise upon a stone, and the stone upon nothing! Greek
physicists made greater approximations to truth. Night was
the daughter of Chaos. Men were formed from clay, and
animated with fire from heaven. Thales found moisture every-
where—all things were nourished by it; therefore water was
the source of all things. Anaximenes thought water an insigni-
ficant element. He felt within himself something which moved
him, he knew not why —something higher than himself, invisible,
but ever present. This he called life. The life he believed to
be air, which seemed to be universal. The earth, like a broad
leaf, rested on it. Air inspired and expired seemed the very
stream of life. Air was the source of all. Hionvsius of
Apollonia asked what constitutes the source of things ? Clearly
it was force. The air had a soul, and was therefore living
and intelligent. Anexagoras, reviving the inquiry, was the first
to teach the idea of personal intelligence in the Creator of all.
Plato then added that “ the great first cause is endowed with
life, intelligence, and goodness.” But the god of Plato, though
thus invested with a moral character, was, after all, a mere
anima mundi, whose goodness was only order or harmony. The
Hebrews, on the other hand, to whom we are indebted for our
Bible, were confessedly not a philosophical or scientific people.
They had not such schools of learning as the Egyptians, Chal-
deans, and Greeks. They could not be expected to express their
ideas of the universe in so correct a form as those who boasted
of their knowledge. Yet the Hebrew Bible has the superiority.
It has nothing fanciful or absurd in its record of creation. It
does not ascribe to matter powers and properties which are
scientifically untrue, and has no recourse to fanciful expedients
to carry out the great purposes of nature. Moses, the reputed
author, was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and


had exceptional opportunities of acquaintance with so advanced
a nation. He spent much of his time in Arabia, yet neither
Egyptian nor Arabic ideas tinge his narrative of creation. The
simple and sublime sentence with which he opens his account is
without a parallel in all the literature of antiquity: “In the
beginning God created the heavens and the earth.” This bears
the stamp of truth as a seal upon its brow. He does not specu-
late or give wing to fancy, nor does he pause to discuss the
questions which curiosity might suggest, but discloses a suc-
cession of phenomena which nature assumed in the days or eras
of its progress. He introduces no dualistic principles, like the
oriental cosmogonists. He does not degrade matter, but dis-
tinguishes it from its Creator, who is supreme and independent.
Matter is foimed according to the will of God. The Bible
throughout all its pages ascribes to the Creator becoming
attributes. It asserts that God made all things out of nothing
—an idea to which no other ancient cosmogony ever rose. It
says that God “ sitteth upon the circle of the earth,” and that
He “ hangeth the earth upon nothing.” It distinguishes
between the heavens and the earth, makes the heaven a bound-
less space, and the waters above the earth an expanse, which,
the millions of tons evaporated every day abundantly attest. It
makes the stars innumerable and dependent, and makes the
motions of the sun and moon relative to each other. There is
no extravagance in the account, and it is consistent throughout.
Considering the age of the Hebrew narrative, it is marvellous
for its simplicity. “Such a geogony or cosmogony we seek in
vain among all ancient nations.”
Now, with respect to Modern Science, the narrative of the
creation in the Bible is not intended to convey instruction on
the science of Astronomy, Geelogy, Mathematics, Chemistry, or
Natural History. As Cardinal Baronius said long ago, “The
intention of Holy Scripture is to show us how to go to heaven,
not to show us how the heaven goeth.” Its purpose is moral,
and treats of the universe, and of the earth, and of the things on
the earth, as it pursues its moral aim. Its language, therefore,
in describing any natural phenomena, would be in harmony with
appearances rather than with their actual relations, just as phil-
osophers speak still of the sun’s rise and setting, while in fact,
it is the earth’s motion that causes the succession of light and
darkness. But the Bible, nevertheless, abounds with references
to natural phenomena. Are then these such as contradict the
ascertained facts of science ? If so, then the Bible loses much of
its authority. There can be no doubt that all other ancient
sacred books have lost their credibility before the light of
modern science. All religions, built upon untrue cosmognies
must necessarily fall before true knowledge. Hoes the biblical


narrative disagree with the results of modern science ? Astron-
omy, now one of the most perfect of sciences, was long viewed
with doubt and fear by traditional interpreters ; but a fair ren-
dering of the sacred text has left ample room for all its brilliant
discoveries, and not a word of the language of the Bible needs
to be changed in its references to the celestial sphere. The
astronomer of to-day uses equally popular language, and speaks
of the facts of his science as they appear to the eye, though he
knows that quite other terms are necessary to explain them
scientifically. He can stand on the same platform as the
peasant, “ whose soul proud science never taught to stray, far as
the Solar Walk and Milky Way,” and he can join with him in
words of the Hebrew king, “The heavens declare the glory of
God, and the firmament showeth his handiwork.” The science
of Geology startled believers in the received chronology, when it
first declared that the rocks attested the existence of the earth
throughout countless ages, and that the process of creation had
required a long succession of periods of time. But at length it
was discovered that as one day was with the Lord as a thousand
years, and frequently includes an age, all fear of discrepancy
subsided, and eminent geologists themselves recognised in this
wider interpretion an order of creation in the Mosaic record
which harmonised satisfactorily with records of rocks. Geology
has established that the world is not eternal. The Scripture
asserts that it had a beginning. Geology has proved that the
earth must have existed for incalculable ages, and the Bible fixes
no date for its creation. Geology has classified the changes
through which the earth has passed, and the first chapter of
Genesis has ample room for them. Geology, last of all, has
proved than man is the most recent of animated nature, and the
Scripture places his first appearance on the sixth day or era, and
from the date of his creation begins its record of moral and
spiritual relations between him and God. Thus the very cos-
mogony of the Bible has become a witness to its truth. Biology
has been arrayed against the Bible by some of its ardent devo-
tees, and philosophers have asserted, after a succession of
elaborate experiments, that life was self-generated. Dr. Bastian’s
published reports seemed to exhaust the subject, and establish
the spontaneous generation of life. But other experimentalists
followed, and from the searching investigations of Professor
Tyndall, Professor Lister, Dr. Burdon Sanderson, and the Hev.
Dr. Dallinger, it was proved beyond a doubt that there was no
reliable evidence of life proceeding from non-living matter.
Professor Drummond says : —“ The inorganic world is staked off
from the living world by barriers which have never yet been
crossed from within. No change of substance, no modification
of environment, no chemistry, no electricity, nor any form of


energy, nor any evolution, can endow any single atom of the
mineral world with the attribute of life Where the
organic and inorganic meet science is silent. It is as if God had
placed everything in heaven and earth in the hands of nature,
but reserved a point at the genesis of life for His direct appear-
ing.” Professor Huxley has also admitted that along the whole
dine the doctrine of spontaneous generation has been refuted.
The Biblical view of the creation of life remains. The problem
of life science cannot solve. The theory of Evolution advanced
by the late Mr. Darwin, and pushed forward so boldly by his
followers, has been proclaimed a science, though one of its great
advocates, Professor Haeckel, regards the doctrine to be incom-
plete without spontaneous generation. Darwin, however, did
not rest his theory on that, but on natural selection, which he
modified considerably in his lifetime, but against which there is
also a reaction among scientific men. Professor St. George
Mivart, an illustrious zoologist, does not find natural selection
sufficient to account for the developement of higher life from
lower. Professor "Virchow emphatically declares that there “is
a complete absence of any fossil type of a lower stage in the de-
velopment of man. I am bound to declare that any positive
advance which has been made in the province of prehistoric
anthropology has actually removed us further from the proof of
such connection, namely, with the rest of the animal kingdom.”
Mr. Darwin did not deny creation. The Duke of Argyle said
recently that in the last year of Darwin’s life he had a long and
interesting conversation with that distinguished and patient ob-
server of nature. The Duke expressed his own opinion that the
discoveries which Darwin had made with regard to the fertilisa-
tion of orchids, the habits of earth-worms, and the wonders of
nature, could not be understood otherwise than as the effect and
expression of mind. Darwin looked at him very hard for a
moment, and replied, “ Well, it often comes over me with over-
powering force, but at other times it seems to drop.” Darwin,
however, had said distinctly, “ The question whether there exists
a Creator and Euler of the universe has been answered in the
affirmative by the highest intellects that ever lived,” and he also
had stated, “We stand in awe before the mystery of life.”
Professor Stanley Jevons says that he cannot admit that the
theory of evolution could alter our theological idea of a Creator.
The very atoms are “manufactured articles,” a phrase adopted
from Sir John Herschell by the late distinguished experimental
philosopher Professor Clerk Maxwell, himself so devout a
Christian. The arrangements of Nature—like the contrivances
of man—all argue for a personal intelligence. Science demon-
strates that the laws of proportion, weight, and number are
exactly and uniformly maintained in the physical world, and it


is therefore a simple consequent to argue that, as the Bible
asserts, the waters “ were measured in the hollow of the great
Maker’s hand,” “ the heavens meted out as with a span,” “ the
mountains weighed in scales, and the hills in a balance.” As
Professor Flint, of Edinburgh University, has asked, “Could
anything less than intelligence thus weigh, measure, and num-
ber. Could mere matter know the abstract properties of space,
and time, and number so as to obey them in the wondrous way
it does ? Could what has taken so much mathematical know-
ledge and research to apprehend have originated with what was
wholly ignorant of all quantitative relations ? Or must not the
order of the universe be due to a mind whose thoughts as to
these relations are high even above those of the profoundest
mathematicians as the heavens are above the earth ? If the
universe were created by an intelligence conversant with quanti-
tative truth, it is easy to understand that it should be ruled by
quantitative laws ; but that there should be such laws in a
universe which did not originate in intelligence is not only inex-
plicable, but inconceivably improbable. The belief in a Divine
Eeason is alone capable of rendering rational the fact that
mathematical truths are revealed in the material world.” Some
of the very highest names in all departments of physical science
fail to see any real opposition between the results of their
inquiries and the Biblical records. Galileo did not, as may be
seen in his third dialogue on the Copernican system. Coper-
nicus regarded the great good God as “ the best and most regular
Artificer of the Universe.” Kepler was so full of the idea of a
Creator that, as he traced His great laws in the heavens, he said,
“ 0 Lord, I think Thy thoughts after Thee.” Sir Isaac Newton
said: “ This beautiful system of sun, planets, and comets could
have its origin in no other way than by the purpose and com-
mand of an intelligent and powerful Being.” Linnaeus had over
his study door the words : “Live innocently; God is present.”
Sir William Thomson, the eminent Professor of Natural Phil-
osophy in the University of Glasgow, said in his address to the
British Association that “overpowering proof of intelligence and
benevolent design lies all around us showing to us,
through Nature, the influence of a Free Will, and teaching us
that all living beings depend upon one ever-acting Creator and
Euler.” Last year he said : “The inference is inevitable that
the source of all living things is that Eternal Life which gives
existence to universal being. Not only do earth and man, but
the silent spaces of the air cry out for the living God.” He
regarded Paley’s argument from design—solid and irrefragable.
Kant, the great German philosopher, though preferring another,
•said that the argument from design, was “the oldest,* the clearest,
and the most suited to the ordinary understanding. It animates


the study of nature, because it owes its existence to thought, and
ever receives from it fresh force. It brings out reality and pur-
pose where our observation would not of itself have discovered
them, and extends our knowledge of nature by exhibiting indi-
cations of special unity whose principle is beyond nature. This
knowledge, moreover, directs us to its cause, namely, the induc-
ing idea, and increases our faith in a Supreme Originator to an
almost irresistible conviction.” At the tercentenary of the Uni-
versity of Edinburgh in 1884, when a galaxy of the most
illustrious men of science from the Continent of Europe, America,,
and British Colonies were present, it was remarked how theistic
and biblical were their voluntary testimonies. Professor Yirs-
chow, of Germany, pointed out strongly the failure of evidence
in relation to the pre-Adamite man. Count Saffi, from Italy,
Pasteur, from France, and others, spoke of the relations between
science and revelation as true, and, therefore, credible and
ennobling. Max Muller, the distinguished professor at Oxford,
finds Comparative Philology to afford scientific evidence of
original belief in one God, and Language itself to be the greatest
gift of God to man. Comparative Philologists declare that
Language presents an insuperable barrier to development by
evolution. Sir Charles Lyell, in his “ Principles of Geology,”
says that in whatever direction we pursue our researches,
whether in time or space, we discover everywhere the clear
proofs of a creative intelligence, and of its foresight, wisdom, and
power. Professor Tyndall, though opposing Scripture, does not
profess to deny God. “ I have,” he said, “not sometimes, but
often, in the spring, observed the general joy of opening life in
nature; and I have asked myself this question, Can it be that
there is no Being in nature that knows more about things than
Ido ? Do I, in my ignorance, represent the highest knowledge
of these things existing in the universe ? Ladies and gentlemen,
the man that puts this question fairly to himself, if he be not a
shallow man —if he be a man capable of being penetrated by
profound thought, will never answer the question by professing
the creed of Atheism, which has been so lightly attributed to-
me.” Professor Huxley, in his “ Physical Basis of Life,” has
stated that the materialistic position, that there is nothing in the
world but matter and force and necessity, is as utterly devoid of
justification as the most baseless of theological dogmas. “I,
individually,” he added, “am no materialist.” He has stated
in the Contemporary Review that he has been seriously perplexed
to know by what practical measures the religious feeling, which
is the essential basis of conduct, was to be kept up in the present
day without the use of the Bible. Sir John W. Dawson, the-
learned scientist of Canada, says: “The so-called conflict be-
tween science and religion depends on ignorance of one or the-


other, or on a dishonest and partial representation of the testi-
mony of nature, or that of revelation, or both. In those branches
of natural science in which I myself work, it is the growing
testimony of discovery to corroborate and elucidate the references
to natural things in the Bible.” Professor Stokes, who now fills
the chair held by Sir Isaac Newton, says that—“ To those who
believe that the order of nature is in accordance with the will of
a Supreme Being, it must be axiomatic that there can be no
real opposition between what we learn from the study of nature,
and what we are taught by a direct revelation from that
Being.” Dr. W. D. Wilson, of the Cornell University in
America, a purely scientific institution, says: “After thirty
years’ study in this field, and after what I am disposed to regard
as a pretty thorough and impartial exploration of the field
in all its parts, I desire to put on record my belief that while
some changes may have been necessary in the details and un-
essential particulars of our faith, nothing has been discovered in
any department of research that ought in the slightest degree
to shake our fath in the doctrines of the Creed or the practices
of religion that have grown up and can be fairly justified by an
appeal to the Holy Scripture.” The late Thomas Carlyle was
not a scientific man, but he was a great thinker, and mightily
influenced thought throughout his long literary career. Mr.
Fronde tells us that in the last ten years of his life Mr. Carlyle
advanced more in theism and in the belief of the rectitude of
Cod’s moral Covernment and even of a particular providence.
In 1870 he wrote :—“I wish I had strength to elucidate and
write down intelligently to my fellow-creatures what my outline
of belief about Cod essentially is. It might be useful to a poor
protoplasm generation, all seemingly determined on these poor
terms to try atheism for a while. They will have to return from
that, I can tell them, or go down altogether into the abyss. I
find lying deep in me withal some confused but ineradicable
flicker of belief that there is a particular providence. Sincerely
I do, as it were, believe this, to my own surprise, and could,
perhaps, reconcile it with a higher logic than the common
draughtboard kind. There may be further a chessboard logic,
says Novalis. That is his distinction,” Referring to the large
circulation of “The Logic of Death,” and such like works,
Carlyle wrote : —“ This is a very serious omen, and might give
rise to endless meditation. If they do abolish Cod from their
bewildered hearts, all or most of them, there will be seen for
some length of time, perhaps for several generations, such a
world as few are dreaming of. But I never dread their aboli-
tion of what is the eternal fact of facts.” Referring to some
new disclosures of Science regarding the sun, he wrote :
seemed to me a real triumph of science, and infinitely widening


the horizon of our theological ideas withal, and awakened a good,
many thoughts in me when I first heard of it, and gradually
perceived that there was actual scientific basis for it —I suppose
the finest stroke that ‘ Science ’ —poor creature—has, or may
have, succeeded in making during my time. Welcome to me,
if it be a truth, honorably welcome ! But what has it to do with
the existence of the Eternal Unnameable? Fool! Fool! It
widens the horizon of my imagination, fills me with deeper and
deeper wonder and devout awe. No prayer, I find, can be more
appropriate still to express one’s feelings, ideas, and wishes, in
the highest direction, than that universal one of Pope :
44 4 Father of all, in every age,
In every clime adored
By saint, by savage, and by sage,
Jehovah, Jove, or Lord ;
Thou great First Cause, least understood,
Who all my sense confined.
To know but this, that Thou art good,
And that myself am blind.”
The author of all this is not omnipotent only, but infinite in wis-
dom, in rectitude, in all noble qualities. The name of Him is Q-od
(the good). How else is the matter construable to this hour ?
All that is good, generous, wise, right—whatever I deliberately
and for ever love in others and myself—who or what could by
any possibility have given it to me but One who first had it to
give ? This is not logic. This is axiom. Logic to and fro
beats against this like idle wind on adamantine rock. The anti-
que first thinker naturally gave a human personality to this
supreme object, yet admitted too that in the depths of his an-
thropomorphisms it remained inconceivable, 44 past finding out.”
This thought Carlyle fancied was an 44 aperture zenithwai’d,”
which had gone on 44 widening our faith, capable of being be-
lieved by one’s self against the whole world, this day and to the
end of days.” The whole passage is too long for quotation, but
is very worthy of study. Experts in various departments of
science will give their evidence in future lectures to the truth of
Revelation. As a theologian I hail all the discoveides of science,
and rejoice that so many divines have added scientific attain-
ments to professional endowments to illustrate the harmony be-
tween the Bible and Science. Dr. Chalmers, the eloquent Scot-
tish philosopher and divine, did eminent service in this way by
his Astronomical sermons, the circulation of which, when pub-
lished, ran parallel with the extraordinary success of the Waver-
ley novels. A place at the altar of God was vindicated for this
exact and glorious science. The astronomical difficulty in the
book of Joshua had long an alarming importance from its sup-
posed antagonism to science. Kepler tried to explain it
rationally, but it was reserved to Biblical Criticism to discover


the true anti simple interpretation of the words. They are not
the historian’s, hut a quotation from a book of poetry, to be
interpreted like all other poetry—like the Hebrew poetry itself
when it says that the “mountains leaped like rams, and the
little hills like lambs.” “ The stars in their courses fought against
Sisera.” There is, therefore, no need for conflict with a fact of
nature, or to assert that the earth stopped in its motion. The
Deluge of Noah, as recorded in the Bible, was for a time a
difficulty to Science, and early geologists were disposed to regard
the trees found embedded in bogs and the sharks’ teeth and 1
shells found on mountains as evidence of its prevalence. Even
Dr. Buckland, the Dean of Westminster, and a great geologist
of his day, took this view. Scientific investigations soon, how-
ever, demonstrated that there were no remains whatever of a
universal deluge so late as the time of Noah. The Dev. Dr.
Fleming, Professor of Natural Philosophy at Aberdeen, was the
first to propound a “Tranquil theory of the Deluge,” and to
limit it to the great Caucasian basin where man had his earliest
home. The universal terms used by the sacred historian he re-
garded as a description from the writer’s point of view, and it is
manifest that in other parts of Scripture similar terms are used.
The traditions of all nations point to a deluge as universal as
man, but as man was not then dispersed over the earth’s surface
there was no need to submerge other parts not inhabited, or to
bring all animal life from these localities to the ark. The lan-
guage of Scripture has been sufficiently vindicated on this point
by such writers as Hugh Miller and others. There are now few
interpreters of Scripture who insist on a total submersion of the
earth in the time of Noah. Ethnologists have long impugned
the sacred record in its declaration that God made of one blood
all nations of men. Dr. Tylor, the very highest authority on
primeval man, declared, so late as 1877, that there were five or
six centres of origin for the races of men, but the same high
authority stated to a recent meeting of the British Association
that the results of scientific research forced him to believe that
“ all mankind are one—one in origin, blood, and brain—sprung
from the original pair.” Professor Huxley is said to have con-
fessed that the facts of science favour this belief. The skulls of
cave-men recently discovered, and held triumphantly as speci-
mens of man long before the Adamic age, have puzzled theorists.
Anatomists, however, have declared from measurement that the
size of brain in these skulls prevents them from being placed on
a lower level than the present living men, and they are three
times bigger than the brain of the highest ape. Man must,
therefore, have appeared suddenly on the earth, as there have
been discovered no traces of any intermediate development be-
tween man and ape. The very age of these cave-men must be


posterior to the great glacial period, and probably not more than
8000 years ago. The chronology of the Bible beyond Abraham
is not easy to fix. The Septuagint version actually gives us
7500 years. Seeing, then, that the age is not so far away, and
that the brain is so like our own, and that the sudden appear-
ance of man upon the earth seems probable from science, we can
easily afford to wait for further evidence before even revising our
chronology, or adjusting our interpretation, or having any reason
to doubt the Biblical record of man’s appearance. The question
of miracle in relation to science is an important one, but it would
require fuller discussion than can now be given. As John Stuart
Mill admitted, miracle is not improbable, and if you admit a
Giod, “ the production of an effect by his direct volition must be
reckoned with as a serious possibility.” Miracles are to be ex-
amined in the light of their own evidence, and not to be rejected
because they are supernatural. The New Testament miracles
are specially a recovery of nature, and were signs of a Divine
commission of Jesus Christ, who, if his claims are justified, was
certainly worthy of such attestation. It is remarkable, however
—having once served that high purpose, and taken their place
as evidence —how seldom miracles are dwelt upon by the very
Apostles themselves in their extant writings. If we except re-
ferences to the resurrection of Christ as one of the acknowledged
pillars of Christianity, and one chapter in the First Epistle to the
Corinthians, the references to miracle are singularly few. In
fourteen Apostolical Epistles there are none with the exception
mentioned, and in seven the references are confined to a few
verses. Altogether, excepting the chapter on the gift of tongues,
there are not 20 verses out of 2767 in the 21 canonical Epistles.
Miracles had their use as evidence of Divine power ; but it is the
doctrine, as it effects motives, principles, and precepts of con-
duct, which is most fully and constantly dwelt upon in the body
of Christian teaching. The cultivation of Natural Science so
characteristic of our time, is not now looked upon with any fear
by intelligent believers in the Bible. Even where orthodoxy
keeps in conservative lines, as in Scotland, classes of Natural
Science have been instituted in theological colleges, and candi-
dates for the Christian ministry are required to attend them.
Professor Drummond, the eloquent author of “ Natural Law in
the Spiritual World,” which has made so great a mark, occupies
one of these chairs. Recent contributions to religio-scientific
literature have been numerous and able. Bishop Temple has
lately published his masterly Bampton lectures on the Relations
of Science to Religion. The Rev. Gr. 11. Curteis has devoted his
Boyle lectures of 1884 to the same subject. Dr, Matheson has
discussed the evolution theory in able volumes. All of these
divines recognise the truth of scientific discoveries, and vindicate


their harpaony with the truths taught in the Bible. The Hon.
Robert Boyle, who was a distinguished chemist, founded the
lecture connected with his name for the purpose of vindicating
revealed truth to a permanent place in the faith of men.
The discoveries of science have done immense services in faith.
Our views of God’s attributes, as these are taught in the Bible,
have got an expansion from the disclosures of science fitted to
create deeper and more devout ideas of the Infinite Creator.
Various writers have brought out this, and none with greater
force, fulness, and eloquence than the Provost of Queen’s Col-
lege, Oxford, Dr. A. S. Farrar, in his University sermons on
“ Science on Theology.” Geology, for instance, has expanded
our Biblical views of God’s eternity by bringing up the vast
ages of the past with all their marvellous transformations and
successions of life. Time has received a boundless extension by
the unveilling of those long ages when infinite wisdom, power,
and goodness were preparing a home for the generations of men
afterwards to inherit the earth. Astronomy has revealed the
omnipresence of the Almighty in the vast space around us,
where at least a million of orbs pursue their courses in such
perfect order and harmony. Some of these are so distant from
us that their light takes two millions of years to reach our eyes,
yet all of them are
“ For ever singing as they shine,
‘ The Hand that made us is divine.”
Their relation to us, who observe them so far away, still prompts
us, though with fuller knowledge and wider range, to take up
the Hebrew poet’s idea, paraphrased thus :
“ While David, else his sire, ’tis all the same,
Lay long ago, upon some purple hill
To guard his sinless flock from nightly ill,
The golden sun went home ; the pale moon came,
A slender crescent wove of silver flame,
And one by one at first, then ten by ten,
The stars slipt out and in, and out again,
Until a thousand prank’t the sapphire frame,
Some red, some blue, and others like the moon,
And also some like little suns at noon.
He knew them all, although unknown by name,
They shone all night for love, and not for fame.
‘ Lord, what is man,’ he cried, ‘ that such a choir
Should ever watch him thus with eyes of fire V ”
Chemistry has added to its brilliant and rapid array of discover-
ies the astonishing revelations of the spectrum, that the very
same component elements in our world are used by the One great
Maker in all the other worlds of space. The everlasting Future,
too, stretches out before us, safely provided for, as proved by
the science of mathematics in the hands of Lagrange, whose cal-
culations on the stability of the inclinations of the planetary


orbits showed conclusively that infinite wisdom had made ade-
quate compensation for all possible dangers of disturbance.
The future is secure for untold ages to reveal its glorious
Apocalypse. The reign of law is now demonstrated throughout
the physical world, and many are tracing its operations in the
moral and spiritual spheres. Science has given us the know-
ledge of things in their relation to each other, and that know-
ledge gains in importance in proportion to the number, range,
scope, and dignity of the mental faculties concerned in its
apprehension, and also in relation to the infinite mind. In view
of all His attributes as disclosed by the reign of law, we may
well say, “ 0 the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and
knowledge of Hod ! How unsearchable are His judgments, and
His vays past finding out!” As Science goes on to aid this
enlargement of knowledge, believers in Revelation may bid her
Hod speed :
“ Sail on, 0 Science, like a mighty ship
That venturest unknown regions to explore.
Sail out 1 Survey each wild mysterious shore,
In depths where other prows have feared to dip.
Like that bold mariner whose venturous trip
Revealed a mighty world unknown before.
So shalt thou add new volumes to our lore,
And all romance and fairy tale outstrip.
Far seas of thought and mystery expand
Where mind hath not in all its searching crossed.
There shape thy course, and many a wondrous land
Thou shalt behold, though oft by tempests tossed.
Sail on 1 Sail out ! O’er oceans yet unscanned,
That nothing of true knowledge may be lost.”


CHRISTIANITY AND BUDDHISM.
A COMPARISON AND A CONTRAST.
LECTURE 111
BY THE
REV. JAMES JEEEBRIS, LL.D.




CHEISTIANITY AND BUDDHISM.
A COMPARISON AND A CONTRAST.
Most of you, I suppose, saw the very noticeable picture
recently exhibited in our Art Gallery called the ‘ ‘ Renunciation
of Buddha.” The treatment of the fact or idea it professes to
represent, is upon the whole effective, though the chief figure,
that of Buddha himself, is utterly wanting in the moral and
spiritual grandeur which we have been wont to associate with
his history. There can be no doubt that some 500 years before
Christ there appeared in India a great moral reformer, by name
Gautama, afterwards called Buddha, the Enlightened, who
waged successful war with the degenerate disciples of Brahmin-
ism, just as Christ did with the degenerate disciples of Judaism.
The son of a king, born to a lofty heritage, graceful, accom-
plished, brave, the husband of a loving wife, the father of one
beloved child, Gautama, in early manhood, at the stern behest
of duty, renounced everything prized by men, father, kingdom,
luxury, the happiness of marriage, the joys of paternity, to
become an exile, a wanderer, a beggar. The picture represents
him at the great crisis of his moral being, when, at the dead of
night, he drew back the curtain from the couch of his sleeping
wife, to bid her and his infant son a silent and eternal farewell,
before going out a homeless wanderer, to spend the rest of his
life as a mendicant, and from the standpoint of the mendicant to
be a teacher of men. The main facts of the history were not
committed to writing till nearly 500 years afterwards, but there
seems no valid reason for rejecting the traditions which were
then given into the custody of literature. Vastly more im-
portant than the facts of his biography are the results of his
teaching. To-day some 400 millions of the human race believe
in the Lord Buddha as the supreme teacher. The system of
religion he devised is in the main that which prevails to-day,
though the teaching of successive generations of commentators
have overlaid the simple tenets of the early faith, and in some
instances have utterly degraded them. Its existing sacred
literatnre is voluminous enough. Not long ago a revised version
of the Buddhist bible was published in Tibet by command of
the Emperor of China. It filled 335 folio volumes, weighing
from four to five pounds each.


I chose the subject for this evening’s lecture because it seemed
to me a fair and reasonable contention in the matter of Christian
evidence to place Buddhism side by side with Christianity and
freely consider both. For of all the successful religions which
prevail to-day, no others are likely to be regarded by those who
think freely, as possessing genuine claims to their belief.
Hinduism is incurably idolatrous. Mohammedanism is insuffer-
ably impure, Zoroastrianism among the lesser faiths may
command attention and respect from its high standard of
morality, and its high conception of the First Great Cause. But
I do not find it quoted as a competitor of Christianity in any of
the Theosophic publications, while Buddhism is constantly
referred to as presenting a high moral doctrine and a series of
primary truths not less noble, perhaps more noble than those
contained in the Christian Scriptures.
I propose, then, to compare and contrast the religions which
bear respectively the names of Christ and Buddha. I am not
going to exalt the one by casting scorn upon the other. If
modern learning and, may I add, the Christian spirit which
leavens it, have taught me one lesson more precious than
another, it is that there is evidence of a divine original in all
the faiths, that there is no religion which does not contain in it
much truth (call it instinct or intuition or revelation —what you
will) that answers to the deepest and most solemn questionings of
the human heart. I agree with Max Muller when he says :
“To my mind, the great epochs in the world’s history are
marked, not by the foundation or destruction of empires, by the
migration of races, or by French revolutions. All this is
outward history, made up of events that seemed gigantic or
overpowering to those only who cannot see beyond or beneath.
The real history of man is the history of religion : the wonderful
ways by which the different families of the human race advanced
towards a true knowledge and a deeper love of God. This is
the foundation that underlies all profane history: it is the light
of the soul, the life of history, and without it all history would
indeed be profane.”
You will not expect me to have subjected to a rigid criticism
all the alleged facts of Gautama’s career, nor to have accurately
studied that wonderful book of 335 volumes folio, in which his
teachings are enshrined. There are certain facts commonly
admitted by Eastern historians, I shall accept these. There are
certain doctrines generally propounded by Eastern scholars as
lying at the basis of Buddhism. I shall regard these as setting
forth the ideas of its founder. But let me warn you against
implicitly trusting to poetical descriptions of the life and teaching
of Buddha. One of the most fascinating books I have read of
late years is Edwin Arnold’s “ Light of Asia.” By the medium


of an imaginary Buddhist votary he has depicted the life and
character, and indicated the philosophy of Prince Gautama.
But this disciple of Buddha being none other than Edwin
Arnold himself, shows very clearly by turns of expression, by
softenings of the asperity of doctrine, that he knew and
reverenced Christ, and so has attributed to Gautama much that
he himself has gained from the Christian gospels.
Before entering upon the contrast which is the chief subject
of my lecture, I must refer to an impression which prevails
among many who think freely about the religions of the world.
It is thought and said that many of the alleged facts in the
history of Christ, and many of the doctrines ascribed to Christ
have been derived from India, and that therefore Christianity is
but a revised version of Brahmanism, and Buddhism, and
Zoroastrianism. You will please to observe that in my argument
to-night 1 have nothing to do with what are called corruptions
of the Christian faith. Everyone knows that in the first three
centuries of our era, the mystic philosophies of the Eastern
world did exercise a powerful influence upon the new religion
of the west. The Manichaean and Gnostic heresies were the
fruits of subtle speculation which sought to unite the leading
doctrines of the Ayran faiths, more especially those set forth in
Magianism, with those proclaimed by Christ and Paul and John.
But these heresies were comparatively shortlived. If there is a
remnant left of them in the celibacy and monastic asceticism of
one great section of the Christian Church, I have no defence of
these to offer. My contention is only on behalf of Christ and
the Gospel, and such doctrines as may fairly be deduced from
the ipsissima verba of the New Testament.
There is without doubt a certain parallelism in the lives and
character of Gautama and Christ, They were both reformers.
Both laid stress on the inner life as of vastly more importance
than the outer. Both established admirable systems of
morality. Both lived lives of self-denial, and exhibited un-
blemished purity of conduct. Both founded an enduring
spiritual kingdom upon the earth, and each is reverenced by
countless millions as their supreme teacher and ruler. So far
we may compare them without noticing points of divergence.
But it is said by anti-Christian writers that there were Hindu
prophecies of the birth of a Messiah before Gautama appeared,
that he was born of a virgin Mother, that he was regarded as an
incarnation of the Deity, that his birth was accompanied by
prodigies, that he was tempted by demons, and adored by angels,
and that he wrought great miracles during his life. All which
accounts and a number of others, are cited to prove that the
story of Christ is mythical, and that the very myths were
borrowed from the legendary stories of the life ot Gautama,


To one who has read himself into the literature of Buddhism
all this carries its own condemnation. The Buddhist books, as
tested by modern scholarship, are of different ages. In them
the same process is repeated which we find in the literature of
all religions. We get first of all the faith in its primitive form,
then commentaries to explain the sacred text, then tales and
legends to adorn and illustrate both. European scholars have
examined with the critical sagacity which is almost a special
product of our era, the three collections, which together form the
Bible of Buddhism. They have distinguished the various
layers of sacred lore according to their respective ages, just as
geologists determine the order of the earth’s strata. The earlier
and simpler books belong to a period before the advent of
Christianity, the later and more complex are dated some cen-
turies after Christ. A scholar’s answer to the suggested charges
of plagiarism is that the earlier texts of the Buddhist Bible, so
far as they are determined by the Pali and Tibetian and Chinese
versions, do not contain the alleged stories. There are no Hindu
prophecies of Buddha’s advent, no reference to his birth from a
virgin. The incarnation theory is absolutely foreign to the
character of early Buddhism, and is opposed to the doctrine of
transmigration which is so emphatically taught. The wonders
alleged to have accompanied his birth resolve themselves into a
mother’s dreams, and a father’s pride. The temptation is no
more than a period of intense mental suffering, not without
visions such as ascetic meditations commonly produce. Not
from the earlier but from the later writings come the legendary
accounts upon which these anti-Christian objections are founded,
from the Lalita Yistara published in Tibet in the sixth century
of our era, from the commentary on the Jatakas, written in
Ceylon about the middle of the fifth century, and from a Chinese
Book called the Book of the Great Penunciation, which dates
somewhat later. The legends in these later books are of the
most extraordinary character. Gautama, e.g., is said to have per-
formed wonders with a bow that a thousand men could not bend,
the twang of which was heard at the distance of 7000 miles.
Without a teacher and while yet a mere boy, he had mastered
all the learning of the East, and a great deal that the East had
never gained. He could tell you at a glance the number of grains
of sand upon the sea shore, and the number of sunmotes, 50,000
of which made up the breadth of the whisker point of a mouse,
that would measure a full mile.
If there are any parallelisms which may be a real stumbling
block to earnest minds, they belond to a period subsequent to
Christ, and may be more reasonably explained by the influence
of Christianity upon Buddhism, than by the influence of Budd-
hism upon Christianity. We have no clear historical evidence


that the teaching of Buddha travelled westward before the third
century, while we have abundant proof that Christianity
travelled eastward. The Nestorian Church of Persia, e.g., dates
back to Apostolic times. On the Malabar coast of India there
are 250,000 Christians belonging to a Church founded by an
Apostle. In the year 325 a.d., a bishop was present at the great
Council of Nicaea, who signed himself Metropolitan of Persia
and the Great India. It is much easier to believe that the
Buddhist legendary writers borrowed from Christianity than
that Christ and his Apostles borrowed from Buddhism.
And now, contrast these two great masters as they appear in
their respective and veritable histories, both in regard to their
character and their doctrines. We are accustomed, in the study
of religion, to separate its morality from its essential doctrines,
usually called its theology. The division is not without diffi-
culties since the two perpetually interact upon each other. But
let us follow this course in our study of the two religions
before us.
The morality of Buddhism is worthy of all praise. It emphasises
tire common social duties of life in a way that has seldom been
surpassed. It would be possible to quote page after page con-
taining precepts as pure and lofty as many that are found in the
New Testament. Indeed, some ardent reformers will discover
precepts that they would very much like to find among the
teachings of Christ. The sins are classified thus : —Three of the
body—taking life, theft, fornication; four of speech —lying,
slander, abuse, vain conversation ; three of the mind—covetous-
ness, malice, scepticism. The moral code is divided into two
sections of five commandments each. The first section is binding
upon all disciples, the second only upon mendicants, i.e., upon the
clergy. The common table of the law is thus given;—“Thou
shalt not kill,” “thou shalt not steal,” “ thou shalt not lie,”
“ thou shalt not commit adultery.” You might almost think you
were listening to Moses, only don’t forget Moses lived nearly
1000 years before Buddha. But what shall we think of the fifth
commandment, “ Thou shalt not be a drinker of intoxicating
liquors.” Besides these, which are obligatory upon all, the pious
layman is recommended to keep the first three of the second
table ; Thou shalt not eat unseasonable food at night, thou shalt
not wear expensive dresses, thou shalt sleep on a mat spread on
the ground. Then come the remaining two which are not obli-
gatory upon laymen, nor recommended to pious laymen, but are
binding only upon mendicants : Thou shalt abstain from dancing,
music, singing, and stage plays ; thou shall abstain from the use
of gold and silver. On the whole rather a curious code of morals.
Jews and Christians, Puritans and Quakers, total abstainers,
vegetarians,-—they all seem to have borrowed from Buddha.


But now, as an expression of authoritative law for life on
earth, will you say that Buddha’s 10 commandments are better
than the 10 commandments of Moses, or the two commandments
of Christ ? You will see at once that his moralty has no relation
whatever to the Divine. Man’s duty reaches no higher than
himself and his fellows. The sanction of God is not looked for,
either for approval or disapproval. For the sake of emphasis,
I have used the words, “ thou shalt,” “thou shalt not,” but in
Buddha’s system there is no one to command or prohibit.
Literally translated, it would be “ one must,” “ one must not.”
The sanction of duty is the man’s own conception of what is
right. No reference is made to the worship of God, or the taking
God’s name in vain. The moral precepts that are common both
to Moses and Buddha might have been expected of any thought-
ful reformer. It requires no special divine intervention to teach
men not to lie, or steal, or kill, or be unchaste. These are laws
written upon our very nature. But surely the revelation of one
living and true God, as the object of our reverential homage,
and the true Master of our life, is a gain of itself, and an added
sanction to the precepts of common morality. The omission of
these is in no sense made up by the Buddhistic commandments,
which are wanting in the Mosaic code. The health of some of
us would, perhaps, be greatly improved by following these also.
We might get rid of a good deal of dyspepsia if we went to bed
every night without supper, and some of you young men would
get into good training for honourable service with the next con-
tingent, if you always slept upon a mat on the floor. The
commandment, too, about expensive dresses, I respectfully com-
mend to the young ladies present, and to those youths with
wonderful collars whom I occasionally meet on the block. As
for the precept on total abstinence from intoxicating liquors, it
would be hard for a Christian, with the absence of direct pro-
hibition in the teachings of Christ, and hard for a philosopher
with the example before him of the Eastern peoples, Turks,
Egyptians, Arabs, Chinese, who have in this obeyed Mohammed
and Buddha, without much elevation of national character, to
affirm that it is a precept which ought to have a place in a
peremptory moral code. There was considerable difficulty at
first about this particular commandment. In the second great
council, held after Buddha’s death, a large number of the monks
pleaded for the indulgence, “ that fermented drinks should be
allowed, if they looked like water.” They were ready to give
solemn pledges never to touch wine which was red, if only they
might be allowed to take whisky, which looked like the dew off
Ben Nevis. After a severe struggle, we are told, the indulgence
was refused.


It is worth while considering- for a moment how this code of
morals affects the clergy. Eeligion is always judged of by its
priests. They concentrate in their office the good and evil of
their system. Most of the attacks on Christianity are levelled
against its ministers. lam not concerned with false conceptions
of their office, but contrast the mendicant priest of Buddha with
the minister, i.e., the servant of Christ. In Buddhism the society
of mendicants was marked off most rigidly from the people. A
special code of morals was provided for them. Poverty, beggary,
celibacy were demanded. They were to have no dealings with
money. Their robes were to be rags, their property only an
alms bowl, a razor, a needle, and a water-strainer. They were
to live by begging, going straight from house to house. Their
complete separation from the laity is clearly expressed in one of
the Pitakas. “He who maintains a wife, and is at the head of
a household, is not the equal of that other who lives righteously,
possessing nothing. The head of the house lives unrestrained,
and brings about the destruction of men, but the wise and
restrained is a protection to all living beings.” In the Christ-
ianity of the New Testament there is no such separation. Every
Christian is a priest of the living God. One moral code suffices.
The idea of a superior sanctity as the inheritance of officials is
absolutely foreign to the teaching of the Gospel. The true
minister of Christ is a brother among brethren, discharging
certain duties by which he is to live, just as other men live by
the discharge of their duties. The taunts which are constantly
levelled against ministers by the free critics of Christianity prove
how strong is the hold of this false clerical idea upon men of
the world. It is not Christ, but an anti-Christian society with
its Buddhistic notions about the services of religion which insists
upon the separation of clergy and laity, which thinks that a
parson ought to take vows of poverty, and has a tendency to
think more highly of him if he abjures the married state. If
Christianity has been abused and degraded by the intrusion into
it of such false notions they have come from alien sources and
chiefly from the mystic philosophers of the East. The moral
code of our religion as propounded by Christ and expounded by
the Apostles, whether viewed in relation to ministers or those
called laymen, will be pronounced by an impartial observer to be
far above that of Buddhism.
Let us now glance at the essential doctrines of Buddhism, the
teachings that lie at the foundation of the system. In any other
religion we should call these its theology, but Buddhism has no
Theos, no God. It has not even the notion of a univei sal spirit
into which the human soul may be absorbed. And yet, in some
very important respects it was an advance upon Brahminisni.
The story of Buddha’s revolt against the corrupted religion of


his day, is one that has been often repeated in the history of the
world. .Religions have a strong tendency to lose their original
vital power. Commentators and priests, dogma and ritual, con-
spire against liberty and life. It was so in India. The old
Vedic faith, the faith of our Aryan ancestors, the faith
sung joyously in the noble hymns of the Rig Veda, had
been corrupted from truth and simplicity. The human
heart expressing itself in a theology which saw the Divine
in every power of nature, and adored the Supreme under all
its manifestations, simple, childlike, trustful, had been seized,
bound, and imprisoned by the Brahmins. No longer could it
yield to its natural instincts, its joyous impulses. A hierarchy,
sxich as elsewhere the world has not seen, crushed it with iron
hands. The priest was the master of life, and man his born
slave. He imposed formulas for conduct from the cradle to the
grave. Sin lurked in every action. The anger of the gods was
threatening every moment. Only the priest could absolve from
sin. Only the priest could avert the doom. An elaborate cere-
monial, an all-pervading system of invocation and sacrifice, made
life itself a burden and a woe. Then Buddha arose. He declared
that the ceremonial was childish, the sacrifice not only useless
but sinful. He bade the people laugh at the penances and
defy the excommunications of the Brahmins. He said, “ Confess
your sins publicly, and go and sin no more. That is better than
all the nostrums of the priesthood.” His success was beyond
his wildest dreams. Freethought in the iconoclastic stage is
nearly always welcome to average human nature. There is a
glorious sense of power in breaking down the carved work of
any sanctuary, human or divine, with axes and hammers. The
difficulty is not in the destructive work of reform, but in the
constructive. But can we say that in this Buddha failed, when
after the lapse of 23 centuries his religion is professed by nearly
a third of the human race ? Only grant me that numbers are
not the final test of truth, and I think you will join me in opining
that Buddhism fails to satisfy the religious instinct in man. A
more hopeless system of thought it would be difficult to imagine,
unless it were the gloomy atheistic materialism among ourselves,
which under the specious name of liberty binds so many in fetters
of steel, until the soul “ cribbed, cabined, coffined,” groans and
dies beneath the weight of an intolerable destiny.
Buddhism attempts to explain the world of man without God
and Providence. Everything is linked together in a chain of
fate. The universe as it is, with its world and heavens and
hells, its angels and devils, and men, is always in a state of flux,
always moving upwards in circles of development. And yet
creation is a mistake, a misfortune, nay an illusion born of the
senses. Like Ecclesiastes Buddha perpetually cries—“ vanity


of vanities, all is vanity.” But Ecclesiastes in quest of
the chief good, comes at length to a profound belief in Provi-
dence. “Fear God,” he says, “and keep His commandments,
for this is the whole duty of man.” Buddha on the contrary
sees no rest for the weary, no comfort for the sorrowful, save in
the illimitable void, in which all conscious personality is for ever
lost. His philosophy of life is simple. All life is sorrow. All
sorrow springs from desire. Conquer desire and you conquer
sorrow. Follow me and desire shall be destroyed. Those un-
satisfied yearnings which are the spring of all noblest efforts, he
denounces as the chief curse of being. He does not shrink
from applying this dreary philosophy to every power of human
nature. He pursues his theme through the mazes of one of the
most subtle systems of metaphysics that have ever been given to
the world. Man’s material qualities are like a mass of foam.
His sensations are like a bubble dancing upon the water. His
ideas are like the mirage of the desert. His mental and moral
predispositions are like the soft, pulpy skin of the plantain.
His thoughts are like a spectre, or a magical illusion. But in
spite of his theories, Buddha is appalled like every other earnest
soul with the spectacle of human suffering. The miseries of
age, the sorrows of sickness, the blackness of death, what shall
account for these ? There must be a cause, but in this life no
cause is apparent, and so from older beliefs he adopted the
doctrine of transmigration, and shunted his difficulties from the
known to the unknown. There are other lives besides this, lives
innumerable for each human being. Every separate life carries
its own merit or desert, for this is transmitted to the new being
with the most rigid accuracy. You and I are what we are to-
day as the sum total of all that we have been in feeling and
desire, in thought and action, during the previous lives of our
sentient existence. Nay, since Buddha’s philosophy takes in
material as well as spiritual conditions, the cause may be more
complex yet. He once pointed to a broom in a corner, which
he said had in a former birth been a novice who had not
been diligent in sweeping out the Assembly Hall.
But looking on life as it is, how can it be made better ? How
can we win at last our chief good ? Buddha offers himself as
our guide. He opens up to us the noble path in which whoso-
ever travels shall reach at last the Heaven of perfect intelligence,
of perfect rest. Eight things are required of the disciple : right
faith, right judgment, right language, right purpose, right
practice, right obedience, right memory, right meditation.
What could be better ? Certainly a novice on receiving this first
lesson from the lips of the incomparable master might be
inclined to say a little profanely, “ Doesn’t he wish he might
get it ?” But we are to suppose the disciple in possession of


these virtues, and now he enters upon the four stages or paths
to perfection : profoundly meditating, with an intense belief in
the infinite capacity of the human intellect, his inward eye is to
be turned towards the unfathomable abyss of being. In the
first stage he gets freedom from self-love, and sin and doubt;
but he cannot get rid of the use of his reasoning powers, and
the pleasure derived from their exercise. In the second stage
he conquers desire, and sees through all illusions, but retains,
alas! a measure of self-consciousness and a general satisfaction
with the progress he is making. In the third he reaches a state
of indifference, but even yet he is impeded in his outward
advance by a feeble consciousness of his own personal identity
and by a slight glow of pleasure. In the fourth he becomes
free from self, from all desire of existence, memory fades,
pleasure and pain vanish. He has entered the infinity of space,
the infinity of intelligence, the infinity of nothing. Nirvana
with its eternal rest and eternal peace is gained ; no thought, no
feeling, no desire, but blissful sleep without a dream. Con-
siderable controversy has been waged in literary circles of late
about this Nirvana. Some deny that it is absolute annihilation,
they prefer to call it perfect holiness, perfect intelligence. But
they all agree that Nirvana is a state without thought, without
desire, without consciousness. A condemned felon was once
offered the choice of being drowned or hanged, or flogged to
death, and it is said that he found it difficult to make up his
mind. We can hardly be expected to show much enthusiasm
about this holiness or intelligence, or any other divine quality if
it come to us with the absolute cessation of our individual being.
For my part I care very little what they call it. To me it is
death, it is annihilation.
This slight sketch of Buddhism might suffice for my present
purpose, but by some I should be accused of treating it unfairly
if I did not refer to a very remarkable book that has lately
issued from the English press. Its author is Mr. A. P. Sinnett.
Its name is “ Esoteric Buddhism.” It professes to give an
account of occult knowledge, which hitherto has been in the
possession of certain trained adepts—knowledge embodying the
progressive wisdom of humanity in spiritnal affairs. If it were
not for the author’s earnestness and seeming good faith, one
would be inclined to think that the book has been produced
spider fashion out of his own inner consciousness. From the
heights of wisdom he has won, he looks down upon Christianity
with patronising condescension, as one of the popular faiths
which appeal only to the vulgar mind. According to Mr.
Sinnett, the deeper knowledge of the unseen is vested in a
secret society of illuminati, the members of which are scattered
over the East, and are the adherents of many faiths. But it is


chiefly in Buddhism that the grander truths are enshrined, and
from Buddist priests in Tibet, he, the one fortunate and chosen,
has received them for his ignorant Western brothers. I have
read the book with much effort and indifferent success. It
reminded me of the blacksmith of Glamis’s definition of meta-
physics. “Twa folk disputin’ thegither; he that’s listenin’
disna ken what he that’s speakin’ means, and he that’s speakin’
disna ken what he means himsel’ —that’s metapheesics.” The
revelation, however, is wonderful enough. Darwin of late
startled us a little with his doctrine of descent, and Tyndall a
little troubled us with his “potentialities of matter.” But the
theory of evolution held by these masters of science is tame and
commonplace compared with the doctrine of evolution taught by
the illuminati of Tibet. Millions of years are dealt with as
units. The immeasurable past and the immeasurable future are
expanded before us in sublime succession. Mr. Lyell’s specula-
tions about the antiquity of man sink into utter insignificance
when contrasted with the actual facts of his duration. Man is
evolved, we are told, in a series of rounds or progressions which
may be compared with the revolutions of a spiral. Seven of
these rounds have to be completed before his destiny is worked
out. In accomplishing each round every man has to pass
through seven races. We who are at present living on the
earth are passing through the fifth race of the fourth round.
And yet the evolution of this fifth race commenced a million
years ago. All this is within the human period. But man has
been evolved from lower forms. This pedigree of animal
ancestors is so long that his development from the anthropoid
apes, or even from the Ascidian mollusc, seems of recent date.
Many worlds in different conditions of material and spiritual
development have witnessed the astounding evolution. Life
elements at different stages pass by subtle currents from world
to world. The spiritual monads—you and I are spiritual
monads —work their way all round the cycles of development.
Our history goes back in the chronology of the infinite to the
cycles of animal forms, with their rounds and races, back to the
cycles of universal being—back to the cycles of elemental
force. Every product of nature is an evolution from something
behind it, until in the vast series of manifestations the mind
travels back to the unmanifested beginning. You and I then,
now human monads, were in our proper identity animal monads,
and mineral monads, and monads of force, and monads of mere
spiritual existence, until we get back to a period where even
the Buddhistic telescopes can see nothing but nebulosity. But
all this evolution of the past is but little as compared with the
evolution of the future. There are loftier peaks of being to be
scaled. We are invited to cast our eyes across enormous


abysses of the future, and to behold Alps and Himalayas that
have yet to be ascended, towering above each other until they
are lost in the infinite azure. When we have reached the
seventh stage of the cyclic evolution, after thousands of lives yet
to be spent in this and other worlds, after millions and
millions of centuries have passed we shall enter upon Nirvana,
a life of supreme intelligence and infinite felicity, and unutter-
able greatness, in which a Godlike consciousness is fully evoked,
ourselves in the aggregate the only God recognised by this
esoteric wisdom. To use Mr. Sinnett’s own expression, “All
that words can convey is that Nirvana is a sublime sense of
conscious rest in omniscence.” If you both smile and shudder
at such a conclusion, remember that it is almost the same as the
ultimate doctrine of the modern positive philosophy: “ Man is
the measure of all things. Humanity is the great collective life.
This collective life is the Supreme Being, the only one we can
know, therefore the only one we can worship.”
It would be almost an insult to your intelligence to attempt
any detailed comparison between these wild doctrines whether
propounded by Mr. Sinnett, or more trustworthy writers, and
those of the New Testament. In Buddhism there is no God,
therefore no prayer, no worship. Some of you may remember
Richter’s strange unearthly dream in which he beheld the pale
spectres of the dead pass at midnight from the churchyard and
crowd around the altar, and cry to the dead Christ, a lofty noble
form having the appearance of a never ending sorrow, “ Christ
is there no God ?” And he answered, “ there is none. I tra-
versed the worlds. I ascended into the suns, and flew with the
milky ways through the wildernesses of the Heavens, but there
is no God. I descended as far as being throws its shadow, and
gazed down in the abyss and cried, ‘ Father, where art thou?’
But I heard nothing but the eternal storm which no one rules ;
and when I looked up to the immeasurable world for the Divine
eye, it glared upon me from an empty, bottomless socket, and
eternity lay brooding upon chaos. Cry on, ye shadows ; cleave
the discords with your cries, for He is not. And the shadows
grew pale and melted. And then there arose and came into the
temple a terrible sight for the heart—the dead children who had
awakened in the churchyard, and they cast themselves before
the lofty altar, and said, “ Jesus, have we no Father ?” And
He answered with streaming eyes, “We are all orphans, I and
you; we are without a Father.” Only a dream, possibly an
imaginary dream; but what heart does not answer with the
feeling which the poet sought to evoke ? A religion without a
God is a monstrosity from which we start back with affright.
No one to whom we can cry when our shuddering humanity
trembles on the brink of eternal abysses. Do you wonder at


Max Muller’s exclamation, “ Such a religion we should say was
made for a madhouse.” And yet see how underneath all this
ghastly Atheism the need of the Highest Powers displays itself.
There is no real worship, but there are phrases deemed to be of
sovereign efficacy, e.g .* “ Reverence to the jewel in the lotus,”
“ Honour to the incomparable Buddha.” The value lies in re-
peating them often—hundreds of thousands of times. But the
priests have invented a method of prayer, if prayer it can be
called, much more convenient and powerful than words. Write
your mystic sentences upon streamers of silk to wave in the
wind, or upon the perimeter of a wheel to be moved by the hand,
or water, or machinery, and the results of your piety will accrue
to you by every movement of the breeze, by every revolution of
the wheel, according to some mechanical law of cause and
effect.
Frederick Maurice has shown in his usual broad and sympa-
thetic way that true deep feelings moved the early Buddhists in
the assertion of their doctrines. I myself do not doubt it. We
may commend the gropings of the hnman mind, and the yearn-
ings of the human heart, even if the result be some strange
abortion of thought or emotion. A profound philosopher once
remarked, “ There is a good deal of human nature in man.” I
find it true in all his religions. The question is not whether
there is truth in Buddhism, but whether there is not infinitely
greater truth in Christianity. He, whom we call our Great
Teacher, comes to us with teaching about God, and our relations
with God, and our duties to God, which answer as no other re-
ligion has done the deepest instincts, the loftiest yearnings of
the soul. The aim of the gospel is to bring about our union
with God in such a manner as to secure the permanence of
man’s personality and energy. The eternal life unfolded in
Christianity is the highest activity of a perfected moral being.
It does not vilify man, and seek by self-mortification, by profound
contemplation, by utter inaction, to secure the extinction of his
being, It endeavours to effect its end by an entire renovation of
his nature. It appeals to the purest and mightiest motives. It
reveals God as our Father, and declares that He will supply the
regenerating power that we need. Christianity has not yet
attained its ideal. But what is its ideal ? It says that we are
all children of a Heavenly Father, that Christ has come to
reconcile us to Him, and to lead us to His home, and that by His
Spirit we are brought unto a divine fellowship which embraces
all nations, kindreds, peoples, tongues.
But we are told of the success of this Buddhistic faith. Nearly
400 millions of people look to Buddha as their life teacher, and
more or less perfectly obey his precepts, and look forward to
Nirvana as their Heaven. Our views about these numbers would


be altered by a slight effort of the critical faculty. The truth is
that modern Buddhists are nearly all idolaters. A name is not
a religion. Buddha himself is adored. I have seen his image
in the same temples with those of Vishnu and Siva in India and
Ceylon. The Chinese—and remember that six out of every
seven Buddhists are Chinese—the Chinese have three religions
which are held in common. They burn their colored paper and
offer their rice and pigs to Lao-tze and Buddha in the same
joss-house, and pay more reverence to Confucius than to either.
The argument, I know, tells both ways. Among the peoples
that are called Christian there are other faiths. Here— e.g ., in
Sydney, as in other cities of the Empire, there are some Theists,
some Atheists, a few who believe only in nature, a good many,
I am sorry to say, who believe only in themselves, and one or
two who are in search of their soul and cannot find it. They
are all j oined together in one happy family, and they call them-
selves by one name. I cannot call it a happy name, because it
is, as our American friends say, slightly sarcustical. However,
it is a free country, and we must not" complain, and there is
something commendable in the endeavour to get out of the
particular into the universal. When I first came to Sydney I
had a good many hearty laughs in passing the shops of two
bootmakers in Greorge-street. One of these, evidently the first
established, announced himself as the “ Poor Man’s Friend.”
The other, with a wider reach of philanthropy, but not without
a touch of sarcasm at his righthand brother, called himself
“Everybody’s Friend.” (Laughter). Now, Freethought means
“ everybody’s thought.” Theist, Atheist, Pantheist, Materalist,
Buddhist—we are all one. Allow for this happy family; deduct
these beliefs and unbeliefs in every province of the Empire, in
every province of Christendom ; deduct, too, if you will, all
positive unbelievers in the Christian doctrine who yet range
themselves on the side of Christ; there remains the great mass
of the Christian people, differing in some smaller matters, about
which they make great fuss and bother, but united in all the
great doctrines of Christ with historic continuity of belief from
the age of the Apostles until now. Well nigh every church of
Christendom could utter its own deepest thoughts in the ancient
creed called the Apostles’ Creed, which is recited every Sunday
in the cathedral in Greorge-street, and in the cathedral in Hyde
Park. (Applause).
But, leaving mere numbers, I will ask you to look at results,
such results as are apparent in the world of to-day. My argu-
ment is this—lf by people of the same race and the same lineage
two religions should be chosen, and those who embraced the one
should, after the lapse of centuries, be the very foremost nations
of the world, not by war but by the arts which flourish in peace,


and those who embraced the other should be among the least
regarded, taken as a whole, because of their ignorance or inca-
pacity or national feebleness, then this would be fair proof of
the superiority of the first religion to the second. Now, the
case stands thus: The great Aryan race, with its habitat some-
where to the north-west of the Himalayas, held in it before the
dawn of history the ancestors of the Hindoos and the Europeans.
The primeval faith of the Aryans, which was idolatry, and which
in the course of centuries had become grossly corrupted, was at
length abandoned by those of the Hindoos who became Budd-
hists, and those of the Europeans who became Christians. In
the one case the change was from idolatry to atheism; in the
other ease it was from idolatry to monotheism —the belief in one
living Hod, the father of man. It is remarkable, however, that
in the progress of the two faiths, none of the noble Aryan race
could remain content with a religion of atheism. Buddhism lost
its hold on India, and made its numerous converts among the
Turanian races—races undoubtedly of the lower type. Chris-
tianity, on the other hand, not only held its ground among the
Aryans, but gradually embraced them all with the exception of
the Hindoos and Persians. In the strife for supremacy the
whole world was open to both, but Buddhism, remember, had
500 years start of Christianity. And now, after the one has
existed 1900 years and the other 2400, compare the positions
they have won. Compare the leading peoples that profess
Christianity with the leading peoples that profess Buddhism.
On the one side you have the English, the Americans, the Her-
mans, the French, the llussians, the Italians. On the other side
you have the Chinese, the Japanese, the Mongolians, the
Tibetians, and the mongrel races that inhabit the Malayan
Peninsula and the Malayan Archipelago. Will any historian or
philosopher, or man of common sense declare that these two
sets of people will weigh with an equal balance? Christianity
includes all the great nations of the world that are forem >st in
civilisation and refinement, in arts and science, in philosophy
and literature, in political and religious liberty. Buddhism,
with one honorable exception —and Japan, remember, though
nominally Buddhist, is crying out even by the voice of its Grov-
ernment for Christianity—Buddhism can boast only of nations
with a feeble or stagnant civilisation, with little science, with a
literature which belongs where it does exist only to the past,
and with the great mass of the people wholly unfit, through long
and degrading servitude, either for civil or religious freedom.
Christianity is a living organism. Sects and churches may rise
or fall, but the teachings of Christ adapt themselves to every
advance in the mental condition of society. (Applause). There
is no science too exact, no philosophy too searching, no political


life too free for the closest and most intimate alliance with the
Christian faith. (Applause). Century by century is has
gathered to itself men of various superstitions and alien beliefs.
If for a while they have hindered its advance and dimmed its
glory, it has always purged itself of their errors and it utterly
defies their power. It is the only steady, powerful, pervading
influence which is uplifting the mind and the soul of Europe,
and through it the mind and the soul of the race. The history
of the future is the history of Christianity. (Applause). But
Buddhism is in a state of hopeless decrepitude. In China it
exists only as a member of a triple alliance of weak and nerve-
less religions without energy or life, Japan, the young, strong,
nation ef the East, is dispising and leaving it; central and
southern Asia, which are fast becoming the prey of European
conquerors, will see that it has led to their weakness and over-
throw. In the advance of western thought, Buddhism will be
slowly but surely destroyed. Now, the disparity between these
two great religions —the only ones that may be regarded as
competing for Empire —is so apparent and so vast that it seems
to me, now I have finished my lecture a needless work to have
compared and contrasted them. Were it not for your atten-
tion and your interest, I should be inclined to think my flail
to-night had been threshing the threshed-out corn. And yet it is
true there are some Americans, some Englishmen, and some men
in Sydney that are not ashamed to exalt Buddhism above
Christianity, Buddha above Christ. I have read of “ wit that
can creep and pride that licks the dust but even this seems
insufficient to account for so scandalous a choice. I can account
for it only on the supposition that these fellow-citizens of ours
are not of our western Aryan race, but belong rather, through
some unlucky intermarriage in the past, to some one of the
Turanian races of the East. Whatever their parentage is, may
God speedily bring them to the better mind. (Applause).


“ OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST THE ONLY CREDIBLE
EXPLANATION OF THE HISTORY, SCRIPTURES,
AND PRINCIPLES OF ISRAEL.”
LECTURE IY
BY THE
EEV. MBEVYN AECHDALL, M.A.
INCUMBENT OF S, MAKY’S, BALMAIN, SYDNEY.


“OUE LOED JESUS CHEIST THE ONLY CEEDIBLE
EXPLANATION OE THE HISTOEY, SCEIPTUEES,
AND PEINCIPLES OF ISEAEL.”
According to the testimony of the New Testament, “Our
Loed, Jesus, Christ, for both the Jewish (Acts ix. 14; ii. 21,
iv. 10, 12 ; Is. yiii. 11, 13, I Peter hi. 14, 15 ; James ii. 1, v. 8;
Heb. i. 6,8, 10; S. John xii., 40, 41 ; Eev. v. 13) and the
Gentile (1 Cor. i. 1) portions of the Church, is equivalent to
Our Jehovah, Jesus, Christ.
The “Salvation of Jehovah ” shadowed forth in our Loed’s
personal name, Jesus, is, according to the New Testament, a
salvation from sin, its guilt, its power, and its effects (S. Matt,
i. 21, ix. 1—8; S. John viii. 24; S. Luke xix. 10, v. 32; 8,
Matt. xi. 28 ; xx. 28, xxvi. 28 ; S. John iv. 42 ; S. Luke i. 67
79 ; S. Matt. xix. 28, v. 5 ; S. Mark ix. 9—27, S. Luke vii. 11—
17; S. John xi., v. 28, 29). It is a salvation from within out-
wards, a spiritual salvation extending to every sphere effected by sin.
Christ is an official title. The assertion that Jesus was Christ,
that He had a right to fulfil the office which that title Christ
implied was the first assertion of the faith of our Lord. And
this assertion was so characteristic that our faith is still known
as Christianity and not as Jesuism, and we are Christians not
Jesuits. This being so, we are obliged to refer hack to the time
and to the history which preceded the appearance of Jesus.
We must seek to understand how the conception of the Christ
arose, and became definitely fixed, before by the identification of
Jesus with Christ, the power which was latent in the Christ
conception was set in motion. This leads us back to the Old
Testament*. But for the Old Testament the New could never
have been written, just as but for the conception of the Christ
which existed when Jesus was born, Christianity could never
have existed. The Old and New Testaments stand to each
other, to a great extent, in the relation of cause and effect. It
was not merely the personal character of Jesus that won its way
among mankind. It was not “Jesus only,” but Jesus Christ
and Him crucified, risen, living, and returning, that moved and
renewed the old Eoman world. The whole conflict between the
* Comp. Edersheim’s “ Prophecy and History in Relation to the Messiah,”'
chap. i.


Christian portion of Israel, and non-christian Israel, was —not as
to the maintenance of a doctrine of a Christ—hut whether Jesus
was the Christ or not. And as regards the Gentile members of
the Church, it is evident from S. Paul’s Epistles that both he
and his readers so fully identified Jesus with the Christ, that
the two words, Jesus Christ, frequently appear conjoined as the
appellation of one and the same person ; frequently also Jesus is
referred to simply as Christ. * “ The actual history of the word
Christ was not a little strange. It is found some 40 times in the
Old Testament, first in Leviticus, where it is four times applied
to the High Priest, then chiefly and almost exclusively in the
Books of Samuel and the Psalms, where it for the most part
refers to the reigning king, and besides this, once in Isaiah,
Lamentations, and Habakkuk, and twice in Daniel, but no
where else. The era then at which the name seems to have
come most into vogue and to have been most used, is that of
Samuel and David, and between this era and that of Christ was
an interval of nearly a thousand years. For so long then we
may say that the idea of a Messiah had been incubating in the
national mind. It was as it were an element held in solution in
the national life ; and doubtless the idea existed in various
forms more or less indefinite or vague, but there it was in some
form or other, and 400 years after the age of prophecy the anti-
cipations and hopes connected with it were as rife and vivid as
ever —nay, they were wrought up to a higher pitch of expecta-
tion than ever.” I may add that even the Roman historians
Tacitus and Suetonius show how Israel’s expectation had found
an echo in the heathen world.
The words “Our Lord, Jesus, Christ,” as used in the New
Testament and in this Lecture, involve His true Deity, the
spiritual and all-embracing character of the salvation which
He brings, and the realization by Him of the meaning of a
conception which was worked out in the history, and can be
traced in the religious records of Israel for about a millenium.
I now proceed to prove that “ Our Lord, Jesus, Christ,” thus
understood, is the only credible explanation of the History,
Scriptures, and Principles of Israel.
1. The history of Israel under the old covenant may be divided
into two stages—the family (1) and the national (2.) Though
it is connected with the beginning of the human race—
the line of descent being marked, Adam, Seth, Noah Shem,
Abram—yet the whole history of Israel begins with Abraham,
the “ one ” (Mai. ii. 15 ; Is. li. 2) from which it sprang. And
in the family, or patriarchal stage, we have a narrower
particularism than in the second or national stage, which
began with the Exodus. First, one particular family, and
* Professor Leathes.


then one particular nation is represented in Scripture as
chosen to be the means or instrument of blessing for all
families and nations. For, both the narrower and the wider
particularism have as their aim universalism. (1) Consider then
the call and history of Abraham; his monotheism and his
fellowship by faith with Jehovah, the Eternal, the free Creator,
‘‘the Judge of all the earth ” and “the God of the spirits of all
flesh,” but at the same time the God of self-manifestation and of
covenant. Notice how as the founder of the people of God, and
the seed of blessing for the world, as the new beginning of
God’s final purpose, Abram must break off all natural connections
with his fatherland, his kindred, and his father’s house, and go
into a strange, an unknown land. To begin with, his life is,
thus, separated from the ground on which it naturally rested.
By faith it is at once placed simply on God. Next, God gives
Canaan and Isaac. But even these God’s own special gifts must
be surrendered by Abrahanj, lest he should trust in them. His
whole trust and confidence must be proved to be in the Giver
not in the gifts. And not until in his faith the natural element
has been stripped away from the latter are they fit for his
use as outward things. Israel was thus born of faith.
How great is the mystery of this faith of Abraham ! His
descendants did not rise to the height of it. They only, at the
most, “ walked in the steps of faithful Abraham ” (Bom. iv. 12).
“ This faith, standing at the threshold of the old dispensation,
like the life of Christ at the threshold of the new, could not be
invented : it stretches, as Paul has shown (Gal. iii.), across the
whole Old Covenant history, which, as depending on it, stands
beneath it, and points directly onward to Christ Himself.”
Abraham’s call, was, as far as we know, the origin of Israel-
itish monotheism ; and the actual existence of this monotheism
is itself a proof of a direct revelation consummated in our
Lord, Jesus, Christ, for it cannot otherwise be accounted for. M.
Henan, for example, says it is the result of an intellectual
constitution sui generis ; but all men think according to the same
laws, and just because the human mind and activity are not ab-
solutely free, are not capable of creating in an absolute sense of the
word, there is no analogy on which any one can construct the
idea of a free eternal Creator. The Church’s faith in the Creator
has recently been called by a leading philosopher “the carpenter
theory.” A strange carpenter truly is he who can not only
produce his works when he has his material, but can bring into
existence by an exercise of his vill his own material. How
foolish sometimes is the wisdom of the wise ! Now, while Israel’s
faith in the eternal and therefore free Creator and Redeemer is
in entire accord with the demand made upon Abram to re-
nounce all else in which he might trust, and to trust only in


God, it finds its perfect realisation in Jesus Christ who “ trusted
in God ” absolutely. If, as I have proved, the monotheism of
Abraham and his descendants was not an idea discovered by
human thought, we can at once see that our Lord, Jesus, Christ,
is the true interpretation of this monotheistic history. It must
end, not in a philosopher who has built for himself an abode,
God; but in the God-man, who is, on the one hand, the Word,
or the perfect revelation of God, and, on the other, the Son of
man, or the perfect revelation of man. The grace which gives,
and the faith which receives, are the two chief elements of this
history. And its only adequate interpretation is the “ unspeak-
able gift,” “ the only Begotten of the Father,” and the Son-
servant, obedient with the obedience of perfect trust even unto
death and that the death of the cross.
This leads us, also, to observe how, in our Lord Jesus Christ
alone, the fundamental antithesis which runs through this mono-
theistic history between the absolute, infinite, and invisible God
and the God who manifests Himself within the limitations of the
finite, is explained. Nothing is clearer than that the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is the eternal God, who in the
beginning created the heavens and the earth ; and yet He is the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. This contrast is utterly
inexplicable to those who have not the key to it—viz., our Lord,
Jesus, Christ. Now, they emphasise one side of this contrast,
and contend that the God of the Old Testament is an impersonal
Infinite; now, they emphasise the other side of it, and contend
that the God of the Old Testament is a purely local, national,
and limited God. But take the Old Testament monotheistic
history as it stands, and what have we ? We have the infinite
and invisible God, and special, local manifestations of His pecu-
liar presence. We have a God of moral greatness, who, unlike
the gods of human systems, makes known His almighty power
most chiefly in showing mercy and pity in harmony with right-
eousness and justice. We have a God who is so great as to be
able to be gracious—righteously gracious. We have a God who
not only dwelleth in light which no man can approach unto, but
who also possesses —not the “prejudices, caprices, and passions of
men ” —but the moral nature of man. free in “ the Father of
spirits ” from all the imperfections which characterise it in man,
His offspring. We have a God who is so infinitely great as to
have no need to be nervously anxious about His dignity—so
great that no condescension can lessen His greatness. Hence He
stooped to make and to behold the things that are in heaven and
earth; hence He graciously condescended to manifest Himself
under the Old Covenant—when His people were children and
■could only appreciate such manifestations —in the Angel of the
Lord, in theophanies, covenants, oaths, and so forth; hence,


finally, He fully united Himself to us and became man. As it
has been truly remarked in connection with God’s oath to Abra-
ham, “ God swearing made Himself in condescension inferior to
God sworn by. That is, God, in taking an oath, did a thing
analogous to God becoming man. The acts were kindred, being
both acts of condescension and love. In these two acts, and in
covenant-making, God stoops down from His majesty to the
weakness and low estate of man. In covenant-making God
made Himself a debtor to His creatures, and gave them a right
to claim what is in reality a matter of favour. In taking the
oath, God submitted to indignity imposed by man’s distrust, and,
instead of standing on His truth, put Himself under oath, that
there might be an end of doubt or gainsaying. In becoming
man, God condescended to man’s sin, and submitted to be as a
sinner, that sinners might be delivered from moral evil. Grace
appears in all these acts in an ever ascending degree.” The
personality of the infinite and invisible God, the spirituality of
man as His offspring, and the blessed reality of fellowship be-
tween Him and His creatures, yea, between Him, the Holy
One, and sinners—all this, which the monotheistic history of
Israel implied and involved, is fully exhibited in the faith of
our Lord, Jesus, Christ. He is the perfect explanation of the
invisible God, whose face, whose unapproachable glory, no man
can see and live; and yet whose face, whose reflected glory,
Israel saw in the Angel of His face. “He that hath seen me,”
said the Lord, “ hath seen the Father.” And God hath “ shined
into our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ.”
(2.) If from the Patriarchal stage we pass onwards, we come to
the Exodus, and to the second, the national, stage of Israel’s
history. Here for the first time “ signs ” and “ mighty works ”
are wrought by God’s representative. Moses is equipped with
supernatural power in the opening conflict with the kingdom of
darkness. And here, too, everything, whether what we call
natural or supernatural, is in full accord with the explanation
“ our Lord Jesus Christ.” However understood—and its main
features are undeniable —the Exodus, which is the type of the
New Testament redemption, is of an exceptional character. As
regards the Divine agency in the history, the Angel of Jehovah
is sent by Jehovah, the Father of the people (Deut. xxxii. 6),
as the quasi-human organ of His presence (Ex. xxiii. 20, 21,
xxxiii. 14), and His spirit is poured out on their leaders. So
that, in looking back upon the history of the redemption from
Egypt, Isaiah describes it as the work of Jehovah —his Angel, and
his Spirit. “He (Jehovah) said, Surely they are my people —
children that will not lie. So he was their Saviour. In all their
affliction He was afflicted, and the Angel of His presence (or


face) saved them ; in His love and His pity He redeemed them ;
and He hare them and carried them all the days of old. But
they rebelled and vexed His Holy Spirit ” (Isa. Ixiii. 8—10).
And these three forms of divine manifestation, Jehovah, His
Angel, His Spirit, rule the whole history of Israel. They con-
stitute the Trinity of the Old Testament, and it is in the revela-
tion of our Lord, Jesus, Christ, that their full meaning has been
explained.
Notice, again, how according to the record the degradation
and bondage of Israel had come to so great a height that there
was no hope of their being able to deliver themselves. Philo-
sophers who are determined to derive all Israel’s religion from
the human side, speak of “an upward movement of mind ” on
the part of the nation. But, taking the record as it stands, there
is not a syllable about any such “ upward movement.” It is to the
downward movement of God’s grace that the whole deliverance
is referred. And Israel’s movement of mind is represented as
only downward and backward continually. They come before
us as unbelieving and rebellious throughout. It was to Jehovah,
and not to germs in their own minds, that Israel’s bridal
song was chanted on the Bed Sea shore. “It was not their own
arm that helped them.” “ With a mighty hand and with an out-
stretched arm He brought them out and planted them in.” All
this is not Jewish and human; it is Christian and divine.
(Compare Col. i. 13).
The deliverance from Egypt was based, too, on the sacrificial
blood of the passover lamb. But it was not the blood of the
animal, which now, any more than in the case of Abraham’s
sacrifices, of Noah’s, or of Abel’s, “changed the divine wrath
into mercy which spared Israel’s first born, but the antitypical
sacrifice ” of “ Christ our Passover ” “ stood behind it, as yet a
dumb, unrevealed secret, for all the types spring from the
invisible root of their antitype.”
This second stage of the Old Testament development attaches
itself most naturally to the first, the patriarchial, stage. In the
latter we have the establishment of a fellowship between “ God
Almighty” and man as “ dust and ashes.” But now a further
step was taken, and the principles which already existed in solu-
tion, so to speak, in the administration of God’s grace before it
came, were formally embodied in the Law. It had a threefold
object: ( a ) to separate the people of Israel from the nations, as
“ a kingdom of priests and a holy nation”; \b) to give them a
knowledge of sin ; and (c) to furnish them at least with a figure
of the redemption of Messiah. These purposes, thus, had special
regard to the political, moral, and ritual, or ceremonial, aspects
of the law. Without pausing to examine recent theories for the
reconstruction of the Pentateuch, it may suffice to observe that


they all imply the existence in the original law of at least a
nucleus or germ, from which the sacrificial, ritual, system is sup-
posed to have been developed. And this is sufficient—however
the critical question may be decided—to establish the harmony
of the different elements of the law among themselves, and in
relation to the preceding and following stages of the revelation.
By the first purpose of the law was the course laid down for the
New Testament salvation ; by the second was the primary con-
dition provided for it; and by the third was granted a partial
foretaste and a typical representation of it.
In the kingly-prophetical period of the national stage of
Israel’s history there is continued progress in the knowledge of
God, in spite of the current of Israel’s life. “ Thou hast made
me labour,” says Jehuvah of Israel, “with thy sins, thou hast
wearied me with thine iniquities” (Isa. xliii. 24); “ Hath a nation
changed its gods, which are yet no gods ? but my people have
changed their glory for that which doth not profit ” (Jer. ii. 10),
The heathen did not change their gods. Their gods suited them
too well; for they had invented them themselves. But not so
with Israel. Jehovah was the negation of the natural tendencies
of Israel, and therefore of the gods which Israel would have
invented, just as Jesus, Christ, especially as crucified, was
the negation of the Messiah which Israel would have inven-
ted, and which Israel actually did follow. Israel’s progress
in the knowledge of God involved the labour and weariness of
the love of God, which was fully expressed in the cross of
Calvary. But even at this cost, and under these difficulties, the
progress was made. The brilliant blossom, however, of David’s
and Solomon’s time —a time itself phophetic of the reign of the
true Beloved and the true peaceful One —soon fell away. The
open conflict between heathenism and Jehovah, in the northern
kingdom, called for the activity of the prophets of power—
Elijah and Elisha—armed, as it were, with the terrors of Sinai.
The subtler, though not less dangerous enemy, incipient Phari-
saism in the Kingdom of Judah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others
met by the scathing exposure of its hollowness. It was a mere
treading of God’s courts —a form of godliness without the power
or reality thereof. So, the law was pressed in upon the con-
science, and the necessity was more and more realised of the
appearance of God’s truly Righteous Servant—the realisation of
the ideal Israel—the Prevailer with God by faith, by the strength
of weakness and self-abandonment. But the mass is only Israel
in name. Therefore, it is foretold, they shall share the fate of
all the other little nations which became the prey of the great
world-powers. Yet, unlike those nations, Israel shall not wholly
come to an end. Accordingly it went “ into retreat and performed
penance for its errors and sins and, cured at least of outward


idolatry, it returned to its place. It was so far restored to its-
mountain home, as to preserve the rough casket of its nationality,
from which the pearl of great price should he taken. And in
Israel there was “animmenseexpectation.” Butof what character
was it ? A new covenent was to be made not according to that
of Sinai (Jer. xxxi. 31 —35). Jehovah’s Righteous Servant was
to make His soul an offering for sin and yet the pleasure of the
Lord was to prosper in His hand (Isa. liii. 10). Here is a reli-
gion with a John the Baptist-like self-abnegation, declaring
itself defective or incomplete. Is this human and Jewish?
But still more inexplicable is the further fact that it is clearly
predicted that only a remnant of Israel, “ an afflicted and poor
people ” (Zephaniah iii. 12), will receive the new covenant and
the coming One, the temple being destroyed and the land
smitten, while the Gentiles shall be gathered in (Isa. xlix. 5,6,
8; Zech. xi. 4—7 ; Daniel ix. 26). It is not thus that any
nation, speaking from the chest of its own breast, pictures its
future. And yet—the greatest marvel of all—this singular
foretold future is all realised. The Righteous One appears, and
Christian Israel, the nucleus of the Church, left Jerusalem as
Israel formerly left Egypt. Through the Red Sea of martyrdom,
through the wilderness of flight and banishment, through the
cunning devices of sorcerers they move on, and attain the king-
dom. On thousands of towers and pinnacles, at last, gleams the
sign of victory in death. “In the sign of the cross thou shalt
conquer ” comes to be the indelible motto of history. The girdle
which bound the martyrs has become the measure to span the
world. But Jerusalem, that slew her prophets, and cast forth
her Redeemer, her Consoler, and her King, burns to this very
day ; her flames illuminate universal judgment. Out of the gold
dross in those ruins have innumerable synagogues been built,
but the flame is not quenched, and Rachel’s tears for her child-
ren have not extinguished it; and flames and tears are yet
burning and flowing through the history of the world, till at last
they shall both be lost in the ocean of Christ’s love, which
sustains and encircles all life.
If we look back upon the second, the national stage of Israel’s
history in the age of preparation, we see how the theocracy, or
the rule of God, in Israel has passed through its full typical
development. From Moses to Samuel it is under the guidance
of prophets ; from Saul to the captivity under kings ; and from
Ezra to Jesus Christ under high priests. And lo ! in Him,
Prophet, King, and High Priest, all is interpreted.
Let the impartial historian consider the history of Israel from
its beginning through all its phases, and say whether the super-
natural, which is only another word for the freedom and the
love of God, does not in a full stream, flow through it into our


Lord, Jesus, Christ, in order to flow forth from Him the fountain
of life on its all-embracing mission of blessing. There is the
exceptional, the Christward, call of Abraham. There is the
exceptional faith of Abraham and the Jewish nation in the one,
sole, inconstruetable, eternal Q-od. There is the exceptional
solution in our Lord Jesus Christ of the antithesis which per-
vades this monotheistic history between the invisible and the
manifested God; between the abstract and infinite and the
concrete and anthropomorphic element; between the great
and the gracious, the self-sufficing and the self-imparting
G-od. There is the exceptional Exodus, and wilderness journey
to Canaan, and the threefold manifestation of God fully unfolded
in the revelation of God in our Lord Jesus Christ, and in His
work of blood-bought redemption. There is the exceptional
variety and unity between the Law and the Gospel, between the
Sinaitic covenant and the Christian, the latter being the renewal
and completion of the Abrahamic covenant. There is the excep-
tional religious progress of Israel organically developed in spite
of the nation’s syncretism, its readiness to exchange its faith in
the Holy One of Israel for more congenial systems. There is
the unwearied effort of the love of God consummated in the final
gift of the Father who spared not His own Son. There is the
exceptional aspiration towards a sublime future of which Israel
was to prove itself unworthy. There is the exceptional restora-
tion of the nation after the first great catastrophe. There is the
appearance of the exceptional personage, Jesus Christ, who is as
much a mystery, a moral enigma to the unbeliever as to the
Church. There is the exceptional terribleness of the fall of
Jerusalem. And, finally, there is the exceptional preservation
of this people, a witness of the sacred history recorded in Scrip-
ture, a pledge of a yet greater and more glorious theocracy.
Let the earnest thinker judge whether there is not so much that
is exceptional, and at the same time that is Christward, in this
history as to j ustify the assertion that the true explanation of
the history of this people is alone our Lord, Jesus, Christ.
Yet it is only when we take into account the future fortunes
of Israel as foretold in the Old and New Testament Scriptures
that we see the full symmetry of its history. It is unnecessary
to quote the glowing predictions of the prophets concerning the
national restoration of Israel and the establishment of peace
throughout the world. But, merely observing that such a pas-
sage as Isaiah lix 14-lx. 5 sets before us some of the leading
moral characteristics of Christendom, and is in entire harmony
with the present condition of Israel, it may suffice to adduce the
following passages from the New Testament: “ Jerusalem shall
be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles
be fulfilled” (St. Luke xxi. 20—24). “Ye shall not see Me
henceforth until ye shall say blessed is He that cometh in the


name of the Lord ” (St. Matt, xxiii. 37—39). “ Hardness in
part has happened unto Israel until the fulness of the Gentiles
shall come in, and so all Israel shall be saved: even as it is
■written, there shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall
turn away ungodliness from Jacob ” (Rom. xi. 25—29 ; Comp.
Isa. lix. 20, &c.). “ The Lord God shall give unto Him the throne
of His father David, and He shall reign over the house of Jacob
for ever ” (St. Luke i. 32, 33 ; Comp Isa. ix. 6,7). Taking into
account this second stage in the age of fulfilment, which is to be
inaugurated at the second coming of our Lord (Acts iii. 19—21),
we may represent the world-plan thus :
0)
(2)
(3)
(-1)
(5)
Unity. Death. Judgment.
Corruption. Particularism on basis of the family substi
tuted for universalism.
Corruption. Particularism on basis of the nationality.
Our Lord, Jesus, the Christ.
Regeneration. Universalism in “ thehousehold of faith,”
on basis of “the election” from Israel, substituted for
(6)
(7)
particularism.
Regeneration. Universalism in the brotherhood of nation-
alities, on basis of “ all Israel.”
Judgment. Life. Unity.


As in the age of preparation there was a narrower and a wider
particularism, based on the family (2) and on the nationality (3)
respectively ; so in the age of fulfilment there is to he a nar-
rower and a wider universalism, the former in “ the household
of faith ” on the basis of “ the election ” from Israel (5), the latter
in the brotherhood of regenerated nationalities, on the basis of
“all Israel,” that is of Israel as a nation (6). Then, beyond
the millennial conclusion of Israel’s and the world’s history,
when with the general resurrection and judgment, and with the
destruction of death and Hades (Rev. xx. 11—15; 1 Cor. xv.
24 —28 ; Isa. xxv. 8), time and time-forms shall have passed
away, are the life and unity of eternity (7). In sketching this
outline I do not forget that when we come to interpret the
statements of prophecy as to the future, we may easily fall into
error. But we cannot go far wrong, when once we recognise
the fact, of which the New Testament assures us, that in Israel’s
history—which is the poem of the ages—we have the ground-
work of the world-plan of the Eternal. What once He gave to
Israel belongs to them still; what was once their calling is their
calling still. “The gifts and the calling of God are without
repentance ” (Rom. xi. 29 ; St. Matt. xxiv. 34).
When the metaphysical subleties, as well as the refined secu-
larism of our day turn with aversion from all direct interference
of God, whether in the past as recorded in the history, or in the
future as recorded in the prophecy of Scripture, Israelis a living-
sign and irrefutable evidence of the superintending providence
of God, who works out in the history of the world His eternal
love-design. No wonder that Hegel, one of the greatest of
pantheistic philosophers, found Israel’s history a dark and per-
plexing enigma. Its only explanation and exposition is our
Lord, Jesus, Christ.
2. Our Lord, Jesus, Christ, is the only credible explanation of
Israel’s Scriptures. The indjssoluable relation of man to God as
his Judge as well as the Father of his spirit, and the consequent
necessity for the acceptance of man’s person before his nature can
be renewed {e.g. Gen. xviii. 25; Ps. vii. 11, 12, ix. 4, l. 6, lxxv.
7, 8, xciv. 2; Is. ii. 4, xi. 4, xxxiii. 22 ; Jer. xi. 20); the in-
separable connection between sin, and legal responsibility and
punishment—all this which is so emphatically taught in the
Levitical Law and in the Hebrew Scriptures generally is con-
firmed and explained in the Gospel of our Lord, Jesus, Christ, and
in that only. The good news of “ a just God and a Saviour”
(Isa. xlv. 21), “ Himself just and the justifier of him that hath
faith in Jesus ” (Eom. iii. 26), which alone at once fully recog-
nises and fully satisfies the claims of the law and of the universal
conscience, is simply the fulfilment and explanation of the Scrip-
tures of Moses and the prophets.


The Christian conceptions, humanity and brotherhood of man-
kind, on which the whole of our modern world rests, have their
root in the opening chapters of Genesis. While the profoundest
Christian thought as to the ultimate mystery of being is but the
expansion of the great truth of which the Old Testament is the
unique and abiding record : “ God is One and such a One that
there is no other unity like His in the universe ” (Maimonides
in Yad Hackazakah). In the region of the finite there is a
separateness between individuals which has no place in the
Infinite. Hence the unity of God is of a higher order than any
finite unity. Therefore the Hebrew Scriptures speak of God as
“ Holy Ones.” In Hosea xi. 12 we read: “ Judah yet ruleth
with God, and is faithful with the Holy Ones.” On which
Kimchi says : “ He repeats the same sense in different words,
for Holy Ones is instead of God. He uses the plural number as
in that passage ‘He is a Holy God,’ ” (Joshua xxiv. 12—where
“ holy ” is “ Holy Ones ” —plural). “ The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom; and the knowledge of the Holy Ones is
understanding ” (Proverbs ix. 10). Here the parallelism proves
that “ Holy Ones” in the latter clause is equivalent to “The
Lord ”in the first member. This is acknowledged by Eben Ezra
in his commentary on the place. And, indeed, to interpret
“ Holy Ones” of any created beings, and thereby to assert that
the knowledge of created beings is understanding, just as the
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, would be blas-
phemy. The only God of revelation—of Israel and of the
Church —is not the lonely God of whom philosophic heathenism,
ancient and modern, talks. He is “ Holy Ones,” the holy Ones
of the “holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts,” of Isaiah and John.
Even the ancient synagogue knew better than some modern
critics. Commenting on the daily confession of the Divine unity
in Deut. vi. 4, “ Hear, 0 Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord,”
&c., the Sohar (Gen. p. 15, versa, Amsterdam ed.) says:—
“ Jehovah, Elohenoo (our God), Jehovah are the three steps in
the Godhead by which we can understand the profound mystery
implied in the words, ‘ln the beginning Elohim created,’ ” &c.
This “ profound mystery” is that which is unfolded in the open-
ing verses of S. John’s Gospel. For it is the cross and resur-
rection which reveal to us at once our own sinfulness and guilt,
and the blessed truth that “ God is Love,” having in Himself
the eternal object of His love, His “ beloved Son,” in whom He
knew Himself as “Father.” f God, through the eternal Son,
is the eternal Father, the eternally loving and the eternally
loved One ; the eternal I and the eternal Thou, as Christ ad-
dresses His Father in loving converse (John xvii. 24). And the
f For the following compare Christlieb (Modern Doubt and Christian
Faith) and Miiller (Doctrine of Sin).


Responsive Love which is in Giod is as ready to impart itself, as
perfect and as great as God, whose essence it is; and therefore
the Son is not less than the Father, nor does He differ from Him,
either in essence or in origin. How small would be the Father-
hood were the Son hut half God ! Love always includes delight
in the object loved. If this object be an entirely separate per-
son, the purity of my love is not sullied by my delight. But
this is not the case with God. The object of His love is not a
person outside of Him, but His second self. Here therefore the
delight in another is at the same time delight in Himself. But
this delight in Himself is not self-seeking egotism, for it is com-
mitted to a third person, who represents the mutual delight of
Father and Son in each other; and this person is the Holy
Spirit. This doctrine is simply the crown of the Old Testament
monotheism. It alone explains how God is the Infinite. He is
the Infinite because the fulness of His nature, unlimited from
without and undisturbed in itself, is perfect harmony—a har-
mony wherein any one element does not contradict, but confirms
the rest. The world, even were it boundless in extent as to time
and space, would still, viewed as a whole, be in character or
quality finite, because there is a separateness among the beings
who compose it, in virtue of which each exists only as it excludes
others from the sphere of its existence ; consequently the inner
unity of God is specifically higher than that of the world. This
doctrine is the explanation, so far as explanation of the mystery
of mysteries is possible, of love. Without it neither the Old
Testament doctrine of creation, nor that of sin and atonement,
can be held by thoughtful men. It is the only safeguard from
pantheism. It reveals to us a God who from eternity lived and
loved ; who indeed from eternity thought of and willed the world
and time, but only as having a beginning; who was under no
necessity—neither the “mathematical” of Spinosa, nor the
“ logical” of more modern philosophers —to call the world into
existence ; who did so only in the freedom of His love. The
cause of the world’s existence is the will of God, and His absolute
freedom requires that the existence of another being should not
of necessity follow from His existence. If on account of His love
God must stand in a necessary relation to any other than Himself,
then he would not be what throughout the Scriptures He is re-
presented as being, complete in Himself, self-subsisting, and need-
ing nothing. It is only because He is wholly self-sufficient, in virtue
of the distinction of persons in the unity of essence, that His
love can be pure self-communication, and condescending self-
sacrifice, as it reveals itself in creation and redemption. Our
Lord, Jesus, Christ, is the explanation of the self-sufficing and at
the same time self-imparting God of the Old Testament, for
whom the heaven of heavens is not too great, and a human
heart is not too small, for him to dwell in.


In relation to the predictions of the Messiah and of the future
revelation of God in Him we have what we may call the
harmony of Old Testament contrasts in our Lord, Jesus, Christ.
There is the representation of sorrow and glory, misery and
majesty, as combined in the coming One, which so sorely puzzled
the Jews that some of them were led to think of two Messiahs.
There is the contrasted representation of Jehovah as coming
down from above and of a man as rising up from beneath. In
some passages, as in Isaiah iv. 2, in which “the branch of the
Lord,” and “the fruit of the land” or “earth” are most
naturally understood as descriptive of the Messiah, there appear
to be allusions to the two natures of the coming One. But more
frequently while the Mother (Isa. vii. 14; Micahv. 2; Psa. xxii.
10, 11) —never a human father —and the true humanity of the
Messiah are spoken of and assumed, the great truth that salva-
tion is of Jehovah, and will be accomplished by His presence
in the Messiah is specially emphasised. “ Lo, I come
and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord. And
many nations shall join themselves to the Lord in that day and
shall be my people, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and
and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto
thee” (Zech. ii. 10, 11). Here is Jehovah who sends and
Jehovah who is sent. In Isaiah (v. 14, ix. 6) Messiah is called
“Immanuel” or “ God-with-us,” and “ El gibbor” or “ Mighty
God” (compare Isa. x. 21 with Deut. x. 17). St. Peter’s inter-
pretation (1 Peter iii. 14, 15) of Isaiah viii. 8, 13, and St. John’s
interpretation (xii. 40 41) of Isaiah vi. are specimens of the
New Testament exposition of the Old, and give us the key to all
such passages. To seek for the completed truths of the New
Testament in the Old, and to deny that the New is the legitimate
interpretation of the Old if they are not found there, is utterly
unhistorical and unphilosophical. The real union of God and
man is sought in the Old Testament. The Hebrew Scriptures
contain a movement towards it.
If there is nothing blasphemous in the whole current, the end
to which it is flowing the appearance of a man who declares
himself one with God has nothing in itself derogatory to the
sovereignty of God (Comp. S. John x. 30 —39). We trace in
the Old Testament ( e.g. Isa. xxv., 8,7, xlv. 24, 25) a growing
union between the God of grace who brings His “righteousness”
and “ salvation ” near, and a people which is being constantly
trained to recognise its sinfulness, its guilt and helplessness.
“ In the Lord,” or Jehovah, was the “ righteousness,” of justifi-
cation and the “ strength ” of sanctification to be, according to
the Old Testament. The New Testament only completed the
formula by identifying Jesus, Christ, with “the Lord:” “In
the Lord, Jesus, Christ ” (Compare Isa. xlv. 24, 25 with Rom.
v. 18—21).


3. Our Lord, Jesus, Christ, is the interpretation of the principles
of Israel. Its root principle, with which all others are connected,
is its faith. What is the meaning of faith ? Faith, to use the
words of Dr. Lightfoot, the present Bishop of Durham, is “ the
absolute surrender of self to the will of a being who has a right
to command it. It is this surrender which places men in ” the
only true, the only becoming “ personal relation to God, which (in
St. Paul’s language) justifies them before God. It is faith which
determines their character as responsible beings in the sight of
God.” It is not merely true of the sinner as sinner, but of the
creature as creature, that it is faith, absolute surrender of self,
our whole trust and confidence, which places him in his right
personal relation to God. Faith alone fully recognises the
principle God is Creator, man is creature. For just so far as a
man, or a nation, either in his or its self-righteousness, or self-
sufficiency, depends upon the resources of the creature, just so
far that man or nation dispenses with God. To dispense with
God is to act the part of the atheist. Self-dependence, or
reliance upon man’s doing or thinking, even if the ground of
confidence in ourselves is supposed to be produced in us by God
—so that even He is made use of for purposes of self-righteous-
ness—is atheistic in principle. It is based on pride, and all
pride is a lie against God. Absolute dependence alone recognises
the truth. We are not only dependant a little—so that some
help may come from above, from the Creator, and some from
below, from the creature —but “ absolutely dependent.” If a
beggar came to you, and in order to win your favour offered you
a penny or two, you would regard his beggar pride as an insult.
And naturally so. The beggar’s relation to him whose bounty
he seeks is at once contradicted and reversed if he attempts to
give that he may get. And if this is true —in any degree true
—amongst us, how can we poor creatures, not to say sinners,
come before the immeasurably rich and glorious Creator with
confidence in our thinking and doing ? How shall we expect
that He will receive from us, and out of consideration for what
we give afford us whatever help and salvation we condescend to
consider we cannot ourselves supply? Oh! how do all human
religions and philosophies —for they all either depend on man’s
thinking or doing—fail to understand what God the Creator is,
and what man the creature is! The seraphim, according to
Scripture, draw nigh to Him alone with countenance veiled in
deepest reverence ; and man?—how else shall he come than on
his knees, with bowed and broken heart ? How else than with
the confession : “ Lord, I am nothing but what Thou makest
me to be ; I have nothing but what Thou givest me ; Thou art
the beginning and the end ; Thou must gratuitously give me
what I need, or else I perish?” This is faith. It is a total


renunciation of self —a giving up of all confidence in reason
strong, mighty, and effectual, in righteousness rigid and irre-
proachable, as the ground of acceptance. It is the confession,
“I am wholly dependent on Thee;” the establishment of the
true relation between Creator and creature, between Saviour
and sinner.
The fellowship of faith ever lifts up its eyes unto the
hills from whence cometh its help. Israel was the only
nation of antiquity in which this fellowship of faith existed.
Therefore it was the only nation whose history, the constitution
of whose state, whose origin, aim, and life-principle afforded a
clear conception of such a relation between humanity and God
as vindicates and preserves the supremacy of the gracious
Creator, loving service to whom is for the creature perfect free-
dom. The essence of Israel was its faith, by which its relation-
ship to God was decided. And it was what it was for the sake
of all the nations. It was the means which God used of
showing on the lower level of this earthly life what is the true
relationship of man to God—a relationship which is the true one
for eternity as well as for time. Israel in itself was neither
holier, nor in any respect materially different from the nations
which surrounded it; but the whole course of its conduct and
fortunes bore on its relation to God. This is the significance of
the covenant —God by grace giving, and man by faith receiving.
Not only all their institutions, but all the mingled majesty and
mercy, severity and goodness, of God in his threats and promises
and their fulfilment, aimed at the establishing and furthering of
this right relation of Israel to Him. The ascription of all their
state affairs immediately to God did not arise from defective
insight into second causes; it was the intended result of the
Theocracy or rule of God amongst them. But when Moses, in
the name of the God of Abraham, established the earthly
Theocracy, he looked forward to a mediatorial Prophet, to whom
alone Israel should perfectly hearken (Deut. xviii. 15— L 9), and
to a time when Israel’s heart should be circumcised, instead of
being confronted with the law from without (Deut. xxx. 6).
In other words, it was darkly intimated that this Theocracy was
only preparatory, and that his tabernacle was only an earthly
representation of what the original and antitypical tabernacle
was in heaven. The imperfect expression of the true relation-
ship between God and man pointed on to the perfect. So it was
also under David—the least amongst his brethren outwardly,
but a man after God’s own heart inwardly, on account of his
faith. He is not —the Israelite king could not be—the father,
but the brother of his people, for God, whose viceregent he was,
was their Father. In the name of Jehovah, in whom he trusts,
he lays low Goliath. He will not stretch forth his hand against


Saul, the Lord’s anointed, but will leave all to the guidance and
direction of the invisible God by faith in whom he lives. Even
when carried away by his exalted position and strong passions,
he sins grievously, and gives the enemies of the Lord occasion
to blaspheme, he goes down to the depths of penitence, and cries
out of them, “ Against Thee only have I sinned.” The right
relation is obscured ; but its very obscuration shows its reality,
and its power to purify the heart and life. He regarded not the
royalty promised him as a prize to be grasped at; he humbled
himself, and was by faith made partaker of the sufferings of
Christ. And therefore, also, he was highly exalted, and his
name and history are used to shadow forth his greater Son, and
the history of His triumphant extension of the same true rela-
tion between God and man—the same kingdom of God, only
over all humanity in time and eternity. The description of the
exaltation of the Messiah, the ideal Shepherd, the ideal King,
is, so to speak, read off from David’s history. The same true
relation to God which David, under whom the priestly kingdom
was realised in an outward earthly manner, and who only
wielded his sceptre in virtue of his relationship to God,
strengthened in Israel, was by the second and greater David to
be established universally, for soul and body, for time and
eternity. The true relation between God and man established
by faith, or, in a word, the kingdom of God, was to be brought
in by Him. He was to be not merely the occupant of David’s
throne, reigning over the house of David on earth, but of God’s
throne in heaven. “Sit thou on My right hand ” Ps. cx. 1).
He was in short to be God’s Vicegerent, all authority in heaven
and on earth being given to Him, in order to realise universally
on earth, and to carry over from the visible to the invisible, the
true, the faith-mediated relation of God and man ; and so to
perfect the kingdom of God. As David was, so according to
the Prophets was Christ to be. As was his relation to God and
man, so was to be that of the Christ —only purer, universal,
eternal, the sun instead of the moon. Thus, the Christ who was
to be pre-eminently the chosen of God, who should universally
establish this holy relationship between God and man, could only
commence His work where the form, conception, and root of
this relationship already existed. And in this respect He is the
explanation of the principles of Israel. Hence the threefold
sense in which the name Israel is used in the Scriptures.


j to the nation
striyer and i
It is used as referring to
for the most part a stri
nominally, because not led
nation generally (1), which was
and prevader with God only
;he spirit of the Messiah. For
by the
the Israel principle is the principle of faith by which man alone
strives and prevails with God when the sinew of his natural
strength has been strained (Gen. xxxii. 24—28). It is, in short,
the spiritual principle fully and perfectly embodied in Christ,
crucified in weakness, and because of His believing obedience
unto death “raised in power.” This is the principle to the
realization of which Israel was called (Hosea xii. 3—6). But
they proved “ a disobedient and gainsaying people,” and
“ seeking to establish their own righteousness, did not subject
themselves to the righteousness of God,” even “ Christ, the end
of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth ” (Eom.
x. 21, 3,4). Trusting in themselves, in man, they were Israel
only in name and by calling (Eom. ix. 4—6). Secondly the
name Israel is used to describe the Spirit-led portion of the
nation which may be regarded as rising like a pyramid above
the mass (2). These “ Israelites indeed ” are the “ seed ”of
the nation, because Christ “ the seed of God.” was in them by
His Spirit (1 Peter i. 11). This is the spiritual Israel, or “ the
Israel of God;” and there is generally something in the context
of the passages in which the word occurs in this sense to indi-
cate an implied contrast between the true Israel— ‘ ‘ they that
trust in the Lord,” and “ glory in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ ” —and the false Israel—“ workers of iniquity,” who
“desire to make a fair show in the flesh” (Ps. cxxv. 1,5, cxxviii.
1, 6 ; Gal. vi. 11—17). And, lastly, the word is used ( e.g . Isa.
xlix. 3, and compare St. John xvii. 4,5) of the Christ, the perfect
personal realization of the Israel principle (3). He is at once
the inmost heart, and the crown of the whole structure. He


“in the days of his flesh ” —like Jacob of old—“ having offered
up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto
Him that was able to save Him from death, and haying been
heard for His godly fear, though He was a Son, yet learned
obedience by the things which He suffered, and having been
made perfect, he became unto all them that obey Him the
author of eternal salvation ” (Heb. v. 7—9). He is the perfect
Prevailer with God. In Him is the truth of Israel, and in Him
the faith-established relation exists, not only for Himself, but
for all whose persons having been accepted on account of His
meritorious cross and passion have received His spirit of adop-
tion, and have had Him formed in them. Had the spirit and
essence of the Israelitic history and constitution perished,
together with its temporary form, instead of being transformed
and fitted for universal application here and hereafter, we must
have regarded the whole of Israel’s history as an unexampled
delusion. But the universalism which was confined within the
particularism of the Old Testament dispensation has been set at
liberty in our Lord, Jesus, Christ. What else had remained
particular has in Him attained its destined and fore-announced
goal by becoming universal.
There can, therefore, be no question as to whether the
Christ has come, and come in our Lord. Jesus. Nor can
there any longer be any question as to whether the heathen
principle of self-dependence, the Man-god, is as strong as
the Israelitic principle of faith, the God-man. This is the
great question which is being agitated in the world and in
each human heart: Which is greater, Creator or creature ?
Whether shall we finally have a God-man or a Man-god ? The
Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth, in
word and deed testifies —to use the language of the Epistle to
Diognetus :—“ It is no mere earthly invention which was
delivered to the saints, nor is it a mere human system of opinion
which they judge it right to preserve so carefully. But truly
God himself, who is almighty, the Creator of all things, and
invisible, has sent from heaven and placed among men Him
who is the truth and the holy and incomprehensible Word, and
has established Him in their hearts. This is He who was from
the beginning, who appeared as if new, and was found old, and
yet is ever born afresh in the hearts of the saints.” While in
Christ are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, He is the
life of the world. That which is central in Christianity is
Christ; not because the one God has ceased to be the centre,
but because the one God has been perfectly revealed, and fully
communicated to us in Christ. Our Lord, Jesus, Christ, our
inseparable life, is the manifested will of God. A family and a
nation of faith, and therefore a praying family, a praying nation,


preceded our Lord ; a family of faith and therefore a praying
family out of all nations has succeeded Him; and a believing
and therefore a praying brotherhood of nations, a praying
humanity, is that for which we look. Is it all a dream ? Then
reason reels and dies, conscience is a lie, the heart sends forth its
infinite desires to nothing. Then the best of men are the most
deceived, the most useful are the most insane. All is plunged into
the abyss of the eternal nothing. All, all is illusion. But the
Church testifies : ‘ I believe in reason : God is the eternal source
of intelligence; I believe in conscience: God is its eternal
support; I believe in the heart : God made it for Himself, its
only rest.’ The world is not a lunatic asylum ; and the eyes of
our understanding are enlighted, our conscience by the blood of
Christ is purified, and our heart is fixed—o God, our heart is
fixed—in glad responsive love. We are not ashamed of that
which is “ the power of God unto salvation to everyone that
believeth,” even “ the gospel and the preaching of Jesus, Christ,
according to the revelation of the mystery which hath been kept
in silence through times eternal, but now is manifested, and by
the scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of
the eternal God, is made known unto all the nations unto
obedience of faith ” (Horn. xv. 25 —26).




MAN’S NEED OF RELIGION.
LECTURE Y
BY THE
KEY. JOHN KINROSS, D.D.,
PRINCIPAL OF ST. ANDREWS COLLEGE, UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.


CAN MAN LIYE WITHOUT RELIGION?
During the course of last year a series of articles appeared in
the “ Nineteenth. Century ” on the subject of religion. These
articles deserve the attention of all who take an interest in
human progress, not only because they are important in them-
selves, but because of the conspicuous position which their
authors occupy. Mr. Herbert Spencer, by his voluminous writ-
ings and as the acknowledged leader of the Agnostic philosophy,
is exercising a powerful influence in Britain and America. Mr.
E. Harrison, well known as the champion of Positivism, is one
of the most vigorous contributors to the leading reviews of the
day; and Sir J. F. Stephen, distinguished as a lawyer, and now
raised to the bench, has proved by several works that he is pos-
sessed of great logical acumen. It is from his article in the
“Nineteenth Century” that I have derived the title of this
lecture.
In this colony we have got very much the same difficulties to
face and the same problems to solve which they have at home,
with regard to politics, social science, and religion. We have
to apply our minds to the same questions that arise regarding
the nature and reality of the religious life ; but perhaps we have
not as yet acquired the same ability to follow out with requisite
intelligence the profounder problems involved in this all-impor-
tant subject. At all events, it could not be expected that in a
lecture delivered to a public audience such as this the more
abstruse parts of the subject should be handled. Accordingly, I
shall confine my attention to the first three articles already men-
tioned, and dwell chiefly upon those matters embraced in them
which are most easily comprehended.
1. Let us look at Agnosticism as represented by Herbert
Spencer. In the Acts of the Apostles St. Paul says, “Ye men
of Athens, in all things I perceive that ye are somewhat super-
stitious (or religious), for as I passed along and observed the
objects of your worship, I found also an altar with this inscription,
Ayvwa-Tcjo Osa>, ‘To an Unknown God ’ ” (revised version). This
word of the apostle suggested the term “agnostic,” which denotes,
as most of you are aware, one who affirms that the character
of that power from which the universe proceeds is both unknown
and unknowable. Whether God is personal or impersonal, con-
scious or unconscious, intelligent or nonintelligent, human reason


is utterly unable to decide. Whether that power which mani-
fests itself in the works of nature, takes notice of the action of
men, views with approbation their good conduct, and with
condemnation their evil, and will call men to account for
the lives they have led, we cannot tell. These are questions
which admit of no answer; they involve problems which can
never be solved. You will observe that the Agnostic does not
say that there is no Gh>d ; neither does he say that there is. He
repudiates the name of Atheist, but neither will he accept the
name of Theist. He will not subscribe to the dogma of the
Materialists—the brain secretes thought as the liver secretes
bile. “No phosphorus, no thought.” Spencer somewhere says
that those who hold views similar to his own often speak of
materialism as taught by Biichner in terms of contempt. With
respect to the Agnostic system, it may be freely admitted that
there is some truth—even important truth—in it. That there is
much about the character of God as the great first cause of the
universe, as the moral governor of the world, and as possessed of
the attributes of infinity and of goodness, which is unknown and
unknowable, is an unquestionable truth, and in perfect harmony
with the conclusions of rational philosophy and a devout theology.
The same thing, however, meets us in almost all branches of
knowledge. Almost every important object of inquiry ulti-
mately terminates in mystery. To go as near home as
possible, let us look at ourselves. What is the origin of
life, of thought, and of language ? Each of these questions,
notwithstanding all the thought that has been expended on
them, and the number of volumes that have been published for
their elucidation, remains very much an enigma still. But the
fact that they cannot be known fully in their origin and rela-
tions is no reason for affirming that we can know nothing at all
concerning them, unless we adopt the absurd idea that when
knowledge is imperfect it must necessarily be unreal. Herbert
Spencer says :—“Amid the mysteries which become the more
mysterious the more they are thought about, there will remain
the one absolute certainty, that he is ever in presence of an
infinite and eternal energy, from which all things proceed.”
This is a most remarkable as well as important admission. We
know something, then, about the cause of the universe, and even
know to an absolute certainty that this cause is an infinite and
eternal energy. This seems to me to be a most inconsistent
statement for an Agnostic to make—to write in distinct letters
on his banner, “ Know Nothing,” and yet to say that we are
absolutely certain of the existence of an infinite and eternal
energy. It may be conclusively established, I humbly think,
that he either goes too far or does not go far enough. To my
mind the greatest difficulty is to unite together such words as


eternal and energy. We know more of energy than we do of
eternity, and the same arguments that lead us up to eternal energy
will lead us to eternal intelligence. How do we arrive at the
conviction of an eternal power ? By the contemplation of
nature and of ourselves. Granting, then, that our existence is
caused by an infinite power or energy, can our natures not tell
us whether that power is intelligent or non-intelligent ? We
should say, quite as certainly as it tells us of its infinity. To be
convinced of this you have only to reflect upon the marvellous
adaptation of the world to man. Man possesses that wondrous
piece of mechanism, the eye ; but what would be the use of it
were there no light ? He also possesses the organs of speech,
which produce a voice of all but miraculous capacity, expressive
of joy and sorrow, fear and wrath, of persuasive entreaty and
dire imprecation; but what would be the use of this grand
instrument if there were no ears on which its tones could fall ?
Even should we have both ear and voice, there could be no
interchange of thought without a medium to convey the vocal
tones to the organs of hearing. We have got the very medium
required, in the atmosphere which encircles our globe. So go
through the various organs of the human body and you will find
that they are all admirably, wondrously adapted to the external
world ; as much so, only in a far higher sense, as the key to the
lock, and the wheels of our railway and tram carriages to the
rails on which they run. Whence comes this adaptation ? None
can seriously affirm that the eye adapts the light, or the light
the eye, the voice the ear, or the ear the voice, or both the
atmosphere, although they may modify each other. Even the
Agnostic admits that this is effected by the infinite and eternal
energy, since all things proceed from that. This adaptation is
the work of that power—are we not bound to say intelligent
power? The usual marks of intelligence are the power of
adapting means to ends and the power to understand, form, and
carry out plans. The more comprehensive the plan, the more
skilful the means selected, and the more varied and harmonious
the results, the higher is the scale of intelligence always sup-
posed to be. The order and harmony everywhere conspicuous
in the works of nature bear striking testimony to the wisdom of
its author. It is either extraordinary perversity or blind adhe-
sion to a preconceived theory that prevents anyone from fully
recognising this fact. This marvellous adaptation of means to
ends is visible in all parts of the universe known to us, and may
be traced there with as much certainty as in the works of man.
No one doubts that the latter are to be ascribed to intelligence.
Why should not the former ? The only difference is that they
are on an indescribably higher scale, and are of surpassing ex-
cellence in their execution. The chief reason assigned for


refusing to ascribe intelligence to the power from which the
universe is derived is that it would be anthropomorphism to do
so; it would make this power too like man. Of course it
is possible to err in this direction. Men have too often
spoken of God and of his ways as if he were one of them-
selves ; but that is no reason why we should shrink from declar-
ing the truth as far as we know it. It is not anthropomorphism
to say that this energy is an infinite power; why then
should it be thought so when it is called an infinite intel-
ligence or reason ? Nor do we affirm that the knowledge of
the infinite power is, in all respects, the same as that of man,
inasmuch as there are both degrees and kinds of intelligence,
just as there are degrees and kinds of beauty. We can talk
with strict propriety of the beauty of a crystal, of a flower, of a
building, of a human face, of a speech, and of a poem. All these
objects are very different from each other in appearance and
character, and yet they may all agree in possessing in common
this one quality of beauty. All would admit that there is a
great difference between the beauty of a crystal and of a human
face, and between the beauty of a flower and that of a poem.
But though they all possess this common property, and
we &pply to them, without the slightest hesitation, the common
epithet 11 beautiful.” _Why should not the same thing hold
good with regard to intelligence ? Agnostics are extremely
ready to grant this in all the varieties of intelligence which are
manifested in creatures lower in the scale of being than man.
They use without the least scruple the words “ animal intelli-
gence. The bee, the beaver, the ant, and the dog are repre-
sented as possessing it in a wonderful degree. They don’t seem
to be afraid of carrying anthropomorphism downward in the
scale— i.e., of making the lower animals too like men. On the
contrary, some scientists of the Agnostic school seem to dwell
almost exclusively upon the points of resemblance between man
and brute, and to pass by the points of difference, which are of
ten times more importance. On the other hand, when we begin
to speak of a power higher than man—of that eternal power
from whom all things proceed—they adopt the very opposite
course. This is well expressed by the Duke of Argyle in his
work on the “Unity of Nature:” “It is remarkable that the
very men who insist most strongly upon our being one with
everything beneath us, tell us at the same time that we are not
one with anything above us.” From the movements, operations,
and works of ants and dogs we are compelled to credit them
with some degree of knowledge. What shall we say of the
movements of the heavenly bodies, of the structure of our globe,
wh'ch is neither all land nor all water, which contains innumer-
able varieties of plants and animals, not one of which could live


without an atmosphere or even in one materially different ?
Can we arrive at any other conclusion than this : Here is the
manifestation of mind, of wisdom of the highest type. When
we ask, How came we to have our intellectual powers, how did our
reason originate ? the only possible answer is, from a higher reason,
from a divine mind. Non-intelligent force can never produce
that which knows ; our intellectual powers, not to speak of our
moral nature, link us to the Divine. Here, as in what is lower,
we do not contend that the Divine knowledge is identical with
human more than brute knowledge with that of man. It is
infinite in extent and perfect in character. There is a resem-
blance to ourselves in that it is intelligence, but it is infinitely
more glorious, inasmuch as it is free from all trace of imperfec-
tion or limitation. He knows the thoughts, feelings, desires,
and affections, not of one life only, but of all, and we can offer
to Him our prayers and thanksgivings in the sure and certain
hope that all will be bestowed which is best for the welfare of
the universe.
Such knowledge affords a foundation for religion, as it brings
before us a being whom we can fear, trust, and love; but
Agnosticism leaves us no such foundation. Yet it professes to
be a reconciliation of religion and science. Rather should we
say, if its main doctrine is true, there is nothing to reconcile.
The only point of agreement is, that nothing can be known of
that power from which all things proceed. What good such a
reconciliation can accomplish it is very hard to comprehend. A
conference of experts, let us suppose, assembles to discuss the
cause and cure of typhoid fever. The discussion brings to light
great diversity of opinion. At length they all agree in
stating that no cause can be discovered and no remedy suggested.
There is here agreement, but only in negation. They might as
well not have met. A Jury deliberates for days respecting a
certain murder. They are unanimous in the verdict that murder
has been committed, and that the murderer is unknown and
cannot be discovered. Here is agreement, if you will, reconcili-
ation ; but it is only upon a mere negation, which does not help
us much to arrive at the truth on the matter. The contribution
of Agnosticism to the knowledge of the origin of man and of
duty is equally valueless and inoperative. Religion cannot
build upon mere negation. It must have something positive,
and that can only be the power infinite and eternal, which works
for truth, love, and righteousness, by whom we are preserved,
to whom we are accountable, and whose commands we ought to
obey.
11. Let us now look at Positivism as represented and defended
by Mr. F. Harrison. This system has several points of agree-
ment as well as of difference with that of Agnosticism. They


both agree in rejecting Atheism and Theism as matters of
belief; but their system would lead them to order their thoughts,
feelings, and actions just as if there were no G-od. So far as
his life is concerned, the divine being and a future state will not
exercise the slightest influence upon the Positivist if he is con-
sistent with his principles. The name which the one assumes
is in striking contrast to the other. The Agnostic has inscribed
on his banner “ Know nothing ” — i.e., of Religion. The
Positivist affirms, by his very name, that he does know; he has
got in his possession positive truth. He knows matter in its
immense varieties, and man in his marvellous capacity, history,
and progress. As regards the origin of the universe we know
nothing ; whether it is self-existent or was created, he does not
profess to know. He goes a step farther and affirms that it is
useless to enquire into such matters ; it is pure waste of time or
something worse. He abandons all study of the causes of
things and denies that design can be traced in the world
around us. Such questions as the origin of man, the origin of
reason, and the origin of language, are proscribed by the Posi-
tivist as giving rise only to baseless conjectures or barren
speculation. The world will never be right till men renounce
the pursuit both of first and final causes, which can never be
known, and concentrate their attention upon the laws of this
material universe and upon the conditions necessary to secure the
progress of humanity. This system of philosophy was taught
by Augustus Comte in France, who may be regarded as the
founder of the school; it was embraced by the late Q-. H. Lewis,
and is most skilfully defended by Mr. Frederic Harrison in the
Review to which reference has already been made. The Posi-
tivist as well as the Agnostic claims to have a religion, even the
only rational religion that can ever exist. Atheism, Deism,
Pantheism, Agnosticism are all to him mere metaphysical
abstractions, utterly destitute of any foundation in fact, and
whatever they may have been in the past, are no longer fit to
discharge the functions of a religion for man in the future.
The religion which Mr. Harrison offers us is one without God
and without a future state; but in place of the former we have
humanity—that great being, the human race—a fit object of
reverence for everyone of us; and for the immortality of the
individual soul we have held out to us as a worthy substitute,
that we may live in the recollection, the improved spirit, and
noble conduct of future generations. Man perishes, but his
works may remain.
If we are to accept this new religion as a substitute for the
old we shall make a miserable exchange. We have got little-
ness for greatness, the sinful and imperfect for the holy and
perfect; we have humanity for God. Humanity is even more


unfit to be an object of reverence than the unknown and
unknowable of the Agnostic, especially, as Spencer contends,
that the unknown power is so much above man that it is irre-
verent to call it intelligent. But even humanity is to a great
extent unknown. Of the thousands of millions that have
peopled this earth we have never even heard. Utterly ignorant
are we of almost every one of them as regards their deeds and
character. Many of them of whom we have heard were
exceedingly wicked ; a vast number were only commonplace in
their lives, not worthy of much praise, and not deserving of
severe censure ; while those whose memory is universally revered
have been comparatively few. Sir James Stephen says of this
object of worship : “ For my part I would as soon worship the
ugliest idol in India, before which a majority of the Queen’s
subjects chop off the heads of poor little goats.”
But this idea of humanity is not in any proper sense a substi-
tute for the Gk»d of the Christian Faith, because it enters into
the religions of Christ; and not only so, but in Christianity it
is presented in a nobler aspect than in Positivism. According
to the law of Christ we are bound to love our neighbour as
ourselves. All the energy of our nature is to be expended in
helping on the progress of this same humanity. All the
barriers which race and civilisation and caste have erected are
cast down and levelled to the dust by the Son of Man. The
Gospel is to be proclaimed to every creature ; all are the children
of our heavenly Father, who causes His sun to shine upon the
evil and the good. This was taught far more effectually 1800
years before Comte was born than it is by him or any of his
disciples. All this talk about Altruism, &c., is, so far as it is
true, a mere echo of Christian teaching. Peverence for the
great and good, admiration for the self-sacrificing, compassion
towards the weak and sorrowing, are more clearly enunciated
in the words of Christ than in all the teachings of the apostles
of Positivism put together. Everything that Positivism can
justly claim for humanity, Christianity has a far stronger reason
for the same, and every valid argument which the former can
plead for the utility of his system, the latter can use with
greatly increased force.
While Positivism dresses up a part of Christianity, and repre-
sents it as worthy of our reverence, it robs humanity of its most
valued characteristic —immortality. Instead of exalting man it
degrades him. It resolves into illusion the hope of immortality
which has been cherished by the best men in all ages, and
leaves man only a butterfly existence. If a lease of ten days is
equal to one of a hundred years, then you may say that the
denial of a future life will not degrade man ; but every motive
and every consideration which can raise the value and dignity


of human nature is taken away by this denial of the life beyond
the grave. When we commit the mortal remains of our dearest
iriends to the dust, there is, if Positivism be true, no hope of
-ever meeting again. The separation is eternal. Whatever
convulsions and catastrophes may visit our globe, none of them
will ever quicken our ashes into life again. No.; everlasting
silence, never-ending unconsciousness, is the only prospect in
store for mankind. How such a dismal creed can inspire men
with an ardent desire to live nobly, is hard to conceive. A
system that on the one hand exalts the race of humanity to a
god, and on the other degrades the existence of the individual
to that of the brutes that perish, has within itself the seeds of
its own destruction. “ For bread it gives a stone, and for fish a
serpent.”
111. I have now spoken of Agnosticism as represented by
Herbert Spencer, and of Positivism as maintained by Frederic
Harrison. We have seen that they agree in their negations,
viz., that we are not warranted in affirming that there is a
supreme being of infinite power and perfect goodness, nor
that there is a sufficient foundation for the hope of a
conscious life beyond the grave. Those two gentlemen are, I
think, completely successful in demolishing each other. They
are both powerful in attack and weak in defence. Sir James
Stephen turns their own batteries upon them, and successfully
demolishes them both. He shows conclusively that neither
Agnosticism nor Positivism can properly be called a religion,
and that neither of them can ever perform for the world what
Christianity has done. Hence arises the all-important question,
should men become Agnostic in their creed, and accept humanity
as the only object of worship, so that Christianity would be
completely renounced, or should the whole three be cast aside,
and every variety or even semblance of religion repudiated,
what would happen ? How would men then live ? I will quote
his answer: “In a few words I contend that to expect to
preserve the morals of Christianity, while we deny the truth of
Christian theology, is like expecting to cut down the tree and
keep the fruit; that if the Apostles’ Creed is given up the
Sermon on the Mount and the Parables will go too. But I also
contend on the other hand that, if Christianity does pass away,
life will remain in most particulars and to most people much,
what it is at present, the chief difference being that the respect-
able man of the world, the lukewarm nominal Christian who
believed as much of his creed as happened to suit him, and led
an easy life, will turn out to have been right after all, and
enthusiastic believers of all creeds to have been quite wrong.”
In this extract, there are some very remarkable statements and
perhaps some irony. He frankly admits, even contends, that if


the miraculous or supernatural element in Christianity he
renounced, the morality of the gospels and the parables will go
too. In this, I believe, he is correct. That which in Christ
transcends the natural is so interwoven with the facts of His
life and with the morality He inculcated, that, to a very great
extent at least, they both stand or fall together. If He per-
formed no miraculous cure, and if He did not rise from the
dead, then the morality which He taught becomes a very
different thing. Sir James does not say that what our Lord
taught was of no value for the regulation of human conduct and
for producing the noblest type of human character; on the
contrary, he admits that some of the brightest specimens of
humanity have been formed under its influence. Yet he main-
tains, with a very important reservation, that even if all religion
ceased to influence us, men would live very well, indeed very
much the same as they do now. That reservation is to the
effect that if science can explain all existence, can account for all
phenomena, and can clearly trace all events to their real causes,
so that no mystery should remain in the universe, then there
would be no necessity, or even room, for the exercise of religion
of any kind. If this were strictly true (which he does not
admit; then we should all agree that the foundation of Chris-
tianity, as well as of every other religion, has been completely
swept away. We should be compelled to submit to the
inevitable. Should such a calamity take place (and let me say,
notwithstanding the loud boastings and confident predictions of
some, that there are no sure indications of this happening in our
day or in any other day) will men live very much as they do
now ? Yes; but there will be a difference, viz., that the
respectable man of the world and the nominal Christian who
led an easy life will turn out to have been quite wrong. This
certainly will be a difference, and that of gigantic proportions.
Looking at the matter as one of probability, the statement is
about as improbable as any one that could be made. Cool
calculating self-interest; the determination to enjoy the
maximum of pleasure and submit to the minimum of pain ;
to profess a self-denying and self-sacrificing creed and yet con-
tradict that in the most important acts of life; in short, that the
principles and practice of Epicureanism, are most likely to
conduct us to truth ; but enthusiastic devotion to the welfare of
humanity, and self-denying efforts to elevate our brethren in
the moral scale, is the most likely road to lead to error and
deception. Such a state of things would be in flat contradiction
to the experience of the past.
But leaving the mere probabilities of the case, the two fol-
lowing propositions would require to be clearly proved, before
we could accept the above statement:—


1. That the number of respectable people in the world would
be as great as it is, were there no enthusiastic believers of any
creed.
2, That belief in a future state and in the existence of a
righteous God who will render to every man according to his
deeds, exercises little or no influence in making or keeping men
respectable.
1. If either of these propositions cannot be substantiated,
the whole theory falls to the ground. I venture to affirm that
neither of them can be established, but that both of them can be
disproved. Following in some respects the division of Sir
James Stephen, we may divide men (roughly, of course), into
three classes ; the wicked and immoral; the commonplace or
respectable; the conscientious and enthusiastic on behalf of
goodness. This division is applicable, with more or less exactness,
to all periods of human history. Perhaps the majority are to be
ranked as commonplace in this respect, as in most other
relations. On the supposition referred to, the higher class will
disappear, and the ordinary worldly man, along with the
perversely wicked, will have all the field to themselves. Will
the former elevate the latter to their higher standard or will the
latter drag down the others to theirs ? The probability is all on
the side of the latter course, since the higher class has been
removed. Imperfect as our civilization is, low as the standard
of moraliiy is among men of the world and nominal Christians,
it would have been very much lower —indeed it would have
been semi-barbarous —had it not been for the determined and
continued efforts put forth by those who were filled with enthu-
siasm for the progress of truth and for the moral advancement
of the human race. In every point of view the ordinary type of
man would have been much inferior to what it is, had it not
been for the efforts of men of surpassing zeal and energy in the
work of moral improvement, who saved their fellows from
sinking lower in the scale and held out a helping hand to those
who were struggling to reach a higher and a nobler life.
It seems to be forgotten by many that public opinion exercises
a powerful influence in moulding human character. The
majority of men are unwilling to run counter to the general
opinion that prevails in the community around them. They don’t
like to be singular; they have a strong aversion to be regarded
as odd. When public opinion is on the right side ; when the
general sympathy of the community is in favour of honesty in
all transactions, of truthfulness in statement and promise, and
of chastity both in speech and action, then there is a strong
inducement for all the members of that community to cultivate
those virtues and avoid the opposite vices. Many have not the
courage to oppose public feeling; and, for this reason, often


become virtuous in outward act, not from principle but from'
expediency. Although such virtue cannot be of a high type,
yet it may lead to good habits, and prevent the individual him-
self as well as others from falling into certain transgressions,
which would be the case, but for these acquired habits. What,,
then, is the origin of public opinion? When it is enlisted on
the wrong side who can turn it round to the right ? When it
has prevailed for centuries, and has become ingrained in the
nature and prejudices of the people, who can change it ? This
is one of the most difficult of human undertakings—far beyond
the capacity of the ordinary man of the world. Grievous neglect
or perfunctory discharge of duty, and abuses of the worst des-
cription, might reign for centuries in any country, and such
persons might never lift up so much as a little finger against
them. Some of the best blood that has ever stained our earth
has been shed for the purpose of changing public opinion.
WRen we inquire into the origin of theview which prevails amongst
ourselves on such questions as the following: Ought one man
to hold a brother-man as a slave ; should the woman be the
companion or the slave of the man ? Should the blessings of
education be extended to all, even the most degraded, or re-
stricted to a select few ? Is it lawful to institute, support, or
witness games at which men fight with wild beasts and with
one another, for the amusement of spectators assembled in an
amphitheatre ? Compare the state of public opinion on the
latter subject in Rome about eighteen hundred years ago and
now. In a single day, at the dedication of the Colosseum by
Titus, 5000 animals perished, 800 pair of human beings fought
at the triumph of Aurelian, 10,000 during the games of Trajan.
All this for the amusement of the people. Happily amongst
ourselves such exhibitions are condemned by all as cruel and
revolting; but in ancient times they exercised a most marvellous
fascination over the Roman world. An emperor, who furnished
the people with numerous gladiatorial shows, was more popular
than one who distributed corn. How has this great change
been brought about? It was changed by enthusiastic believers
in Jesus Christ, who crossed sea and land in order to proclaim
the glad tidings of salvation for all men—Jews and Gentiles,
free and bond, and to inculcate humanity and tenderness to each
other. The humane character of their religion in general, the
strongest opposition by precept and practice to the games them-
selves, and even the loss of lives, brought about the change.
Had Christians not been enthusiasts, those brutal games
might have been witnessed to-day in Sydney with as much
delight as in Rome of old. Mr. Lecky in his “ European
Morals” (vol. i., p. 249) says:—“lt is well for us to look
steadily on such facts as these. They display more vividly than


any mere philosophical disquisition, the abyss of depravity into
which it is possible for human nature to sink. They furnish us
with striking proofs of the reality of the moral progress we have
attained, and they enable us in some degree to estimate the
regenerating influence that Christianity has exercised in the
world; for the destruction of the gladiatorial games is all its
work. Philosophers, indeed, might deplore them, gentle natures
might shrink from their contagion, but to the multitude they
possessed a fascination which nothing but the new religion could
overcome.” The same is true with regard to.all changes that
have been wrought in public opinion. The blots which dis-
figured the statute-book have been wiped out, abuses have been
swept away, political, social, and religious reforms have been
introduced, and moral victories have been gained, not by the
easy-going man of the world, but by those who were burning
with zeal for the moral improvement of mankind, and who set
themselves to their Herculean labour with the fixed determina-
tion that they would gain their end or die in the struggle.
2. Does belief in the existence of a God who will render to
everyone according to his deeds, exercise no influence upon the
respectable man of the world and upon the nominal Christian
who to lead an easy life believes only so much of his creed as
suits him ? We must all admit that no one motive is omnipotent
on the side of virtue and against vice. Man being a rational
and free agent, is not always determined in his actions by pre-
cisely the same set of causes. On one occasion, he may yield
to influences which he has always resisted; and on another he
may enter upon a course of conduct to which he had formerly
a strong aversion. Men often do things which their most inti-
mate friends cannot account for, or which even they themselves
cannot understand. There can be but little doubt that it may
be said of many men of the world and nominal Christians that
God, for a long time, is not in all their thoughts. It does not
follow, however, that because this thought is not consciously
present to the individual, that it exercises no influence upon his
conduct. We are often powerfully affected by matters that are
not felt in the mind at the moment of action. As you go home
from this hall to-night, every step you take will be caused by
the intention of going home, but that intention will not be
consciously felt at one in a hundred of the steps ; and yet, as you
know, had you not that intention, not one of them would be
taken. So with respect to our courts of law, our judges and
magistrates, the laws of the land with their threatenings of fines,
imprisonment, and death, exercise a potent influence in every
community ; but it would be a great mistake to suppose that they
deter from crime only at the moment when one is exposed to
sudden temptation. Generally, the action is not determined by


the feelings that are uppermost at the moment, but by a fixed
habit, or formed character, which has been of slow growth, and
is the result of the combined action of education, law, and
religion. Had these influences been absent, the man’s character
would have been very different from what it is. They have
given rise to various trains of thought representing the good
effects of right conduct and the pernicious results of wrongdoing.
The difference between right and wrong (of which we have all
naturally some perception) has been prominently brought before
the mind, so that these form, as it were, a fence between him
and many wrong actions which he never thinks of leaping or
breaking down. In like manner it may be said that many men
who are not under the influence of a living religion, are yet
strongly influenced by religious ideas and practice. These are,
in many instances, the unconscious source of their actions and a
legitimate place in their convictions is given to the existence of
a righteous God, who will call men to account for the evil they
have done. The conviction that God exists, and that sin will be
punished, is as strong in their minds as that it is -wrong to steal
and to utter an untruth. The very fact of these convictions
being felt prevents many from entertaining certain trains of
thought which would lead to some kind of transgression.
As an objection to this argument it may be asked —Is it not
a fact that persons who have renounced belief in Gfod and in
a future life, have remained moral, notwithstanding their
change of belief, and that many who hold both of these truths
violate the laws of common morality ? Unquestionably, both
of these questions must be answered in the affirmative. There
are moral unbelievers and there are immoral believers. There
have been those who, while denying that God governs the world,
have yet been men of upright conduct in the ordinary walks of
life. There have also been men, professing the faith of Christ,
who have fallen into grave transgression. The important ques-
tion for us is, What inference should we draw from these
incontrovertible facts ? Is it that the morality of the unbeliever
is to be ascribed to his unbelief, and the immorality of the
Christian professor to his Christianity ? The legitimate answer
would be of course a decided negative. The unbeliever who
happens to be a man of exemplary conduct is so, not be-
cause of his unbelief, but in spite of it. The Christian
who falls into sin does so, not because of his Christianity
but in spite of it. These two facts prove beyond a doubt
that even Atheism, in some cases does not destroy pure
and honorable conduct, and that a belief in religion does not
always produce it. Such general statements, though true, do
not, however, bring us much nearer a satisfactory solution of
the difficulty. They show, as I have already remarked, that no


one influence is sufficient to prevent wrong doing and lead to
righteousness. Many causes conspire to bring about the result;
but we can say with certainty that some causes have a powerful
tendency to produce goodness and others the reverse. Because
all more or less fail, it surely does not follow that they are all
without influence ; e. g. Education is admitted by all to affect
materially the morality of communities, but no one could con-
tend that its universal diffusion, even though carried to the
highest possible degree of perfection, would banish all evil from
the world, and thus shut up our gaols and disband our police-
men as being no longer necessary. We know that men whose
intellect has been cultivated to a high degree frequently descend
to the lowest depths of moral degradation. This fact may be a
conclusive answer to those who assert that education is the
panacea for all the evils which afflict mankind ; but it does not
touch at all those who hold that it is, along with other agents,
a powerful force in forming the highest types of human charac-
ter. The same may be said of many other agencies which are
now co-operating for the moral improvement of humanity. The
constitution of the universe, as well as of human nature, being
what it is, not one of them can invariably produce the desired
effect; but this does not preclude us from saying that some
influences are powerful for good, and others for evil. Take
Atheism, or the system which denies the existence of a Supreme
Being, and affirms that, to all men, to the most hardened repro-
bate as well as to the self-sacrificing philanthropist, death is an
eternal sleep from which they will never awake to consciousness.
What possible good could such a view exercise upon the conduct
of men ? Could it render them better in any one respect what-
soever ? As rational beings, accustomed to weigh the motives
of human actions, can we say that such a belief could, in the
slightest degree, act as a power in stemming the torrent of
iniquity or in stimulating to renewed efforts after a higher and
nobler life ? Such an expectation would be as reasonable as
that of “ gathering figs of thistles or grapes of a bramble bush.”
On the other hand the idea of an infinite Creator, who knows the
secrets of all hearts, and who will, not only in this passing world,
but in the future everlasting existence, render to everyone
according to his deeds, must of itself deeply affect men’s hearts
and lives, inasmuch as it appeals to those feelings in human
nature —such as hope, fear, and gratitude—which are the most
powerful incentives to action. Ho men fear an earthly tribunal,
the judge on the bench, the gloomy prison with its iron bars, or
society which may brand them with infamy ? How much more
profound the feelings excited by the contemplation of an infal-
lible judge whose knowledge is backed by omnipotence, whose
justice is inflexible, and whose aversion to sin is of indescribable


intensity ! From the nature of things, and the constitution of
the human mind itself, the belief of these truths must profoundly
move the heart in all the varieties and stages of human progress.
Nothing else can ever be substituted for this as a safeguard
against the indulgence of the flesh, and as an incitement to reach
the purest type of character. The reason why the reception of
these great truths is not invariably followed by a blameless,
self-denying, and devoted life, is the fact, that in this, as well as
in most other matters, there is often a tremendous chasm between
creed and practice —between what a man believes and what he
does. Of all those who were last night confined to prison in
Sydney because of their being in a state of intoxication, every
one of them, with very few exceptions indeed, would admit that
intemperance is a sin, and that they did wrong in yielding to
the temptation which led them astray. It may be affirmed with
perfect truth that ninetenths of those who, for some crime, have
been condemned in our courts of law to penalties of greater or
less severity frankly admit that they ought not to have acted as
they did. They believe in temperance, honesty, truthfulness,
and chastity, as right and obligatory, as truly as they believe in
the existence of ferns, in the necessity of good sanitary laws, or
in the life of Julius Caesar. Here the belief is right, the conduct
wrong, and the descrepaney between the two unquestionable.
This fact might lead some persons to jump to the conclusion that
belief is of no force in human life. This result could be arrived
at only after a very superficial examination. Suppose the belief
to be completely reversed, and that men were persuaded in their
hearts that there is no wrong in committing a robbery, or in
forging a cheque, or in the exercise of free love, would such a
change of view not produce a marked change of conduct ?
Without doubt it would multiply crime tenfold. If a man will
do wrong against his convictions, how much more likely he is to
do so where wrong doing is in accordance with them. As long as
the individual is convinced of the wrongness of certain actions
there is a barrier in the way of his doing them. Bemove that
barrier, and passion will have its full force without anything to
resist its progress. Accordingly, when a believer does wrong he
goes against his principles, against his temporal and against his
everlasting interests ; if an unbeliever (in God and future life I
mean) does wrong, he may go against his principles and
his temporal interests, but he cannot go against his eternal
interests, since (according to him) he has none. In the latter
case one of the strongest motives to act according to conviction is
removed; as eternity is so much more important than time, you
remove the stronger preventive of evil and leave the weaker.
If a man’s principles are bad, the probability is that he will act
according to them ; if they are good, then there will be a


struggle betwixt them and passion, and the stronger will win
the day. So the question comes to he—which system, religion
or irreligion, supplies the strongest force for curbing passion
and intensifying conviction of duty ? Both systems, of course,
can have recourse to temporal punishment, in order to lay a
restraint upon passion ; but we can anticipate nothing but evil
as the result of that teaching, which leads men to believe that
there is no future state for man more than for any species of
the lower animals.
The baneful effects of such doctrine is not so much seen in
individuals as it would be in communities when it became
general. Some who have altegether renounced religion have
been engaged in a process of inquiry; they have been assailed
with doubts and difficulties ; they have- felt themselves in dark-
ness, and when in this state of mind they have been peremptorily
called upon to believe in God, whose character has been repre-
sented in a light that appears to them as tyrannical. With
men who are in such a state of mind we ought to have deep
sympathy, and against them we should not utter one harsh
word. We call to mind the words of our Lord, “If any man
willeth to do his will, he shall know of the teaching whether it
be of God.” We don’t look for the full effects of unbelief in
such an individual, as it may be only a passing phase of his
mental history. Even in the case of one, where his mind has
hardened into a fixed belief and strong feeling against God, the
full effects are not seen, because he still retains unconsciously the
results of the good influences which he received when trained
under the religion which he renounced, and he is still sur-
rounded with a public opinion which has been formed under the
same influences.
I have been hitherto speaking almost exclusively of the two
great truths of natural religion, viz., the existence of God and a
future state. These two doctrines may not only be practically
denied by the conduct of those who correctly apprehend and
truly receive them ; but they may also be corrupted or perverted
in theory. When a defective or corrupt belief is formed
respecting them, it produces its pernicious effects in the lives of
its professors. Mahometanism believes in God and in a future
state ; but its God is one whom we may fear and dread, but not
one whom we can love ; and its heaven is a sensual paradise
calculated to excite our passions and not to stimulate our virtue.
Christianity itself has also been corrupted, and always with
results more or less injurious. As taught by Christ and his
Apostles it is one thing, and as exhibited by His followers it is
often very different. I shall allude now to only one of these
corruptions—the manner in which many followers of Jesus have
attempted to propagate His religion. They have often had


recourse to force, they have called in the aid of fire and sword.
The story of religious persecution is one of the darkest pages in
history, and we should never attempt to make its guilt less than
it really is. But the vital point is, who was responsible for
these persecutions. Was it Christianity? Was it Jesus Christ ?
We answer emphatically, No; not for one drop of blood that
was ever shed, or for one fire that was ever kindled. As
Madame Boland, one of the patriots of the French Revolution,
was being dragged to the place of execution, she turned round,
and looking up to the statue of Liberty, exclaimed, “ Oh,
Liberty ! what crimes have been committed in thy name !”
Was Liberty responsible for her death or for the thousands that
perished at the same period ? We should all decidedly answer,
No. Let the guilt rest upon the head of its misguided and cruel
friends who disgraced it. And so with respect to Christian
persecutions ; let the disgrace cling to the persecutors them-
selves, who, in defiance of our Lord’s statement, “ My kingdom
is not of this world,” and “put up thy sword into the sheath,”
have appealed unto force. They have followed Peter’s example
and transgressed their Master’s command. Our Lord is no more
responsible for the cruelties of persecution than He was for the
cutting off of Malchus’ ear.
I have already spoken of the influence of the fear of punishment
both in this life and in the next, as deterring from crime. To
this it may be replied that the morality that rests exclusively upon
punishment cannot be of a very high type. That, I freely
admit. Nothing great or noble has ever yet been accomplished
in the world through fear. If we rely exclusively upon this
feeling for the moral regeneration of mankind we shall un-
doubtedly be grieviously disappointed. Fear exercises its
influence most powerfully upon the most hardened and the
least refined natures. The sword is to be a “ terror to evil
doers,” not to them exclusively, but to them chiefly. A certain
regard for one’s own happiness is a duty binding upon everyone,
but virtue must exceed the bounds of calculating self-interest.
In the religion of Jesus virtue is based upon a disinterested,
not upon a selfish foundation, as is sometimes alleged—not
altogether without truth. Paley defines virtue as “ the doing
good to mankind, in obedience to the will of God, and for the
sake of everlasting happiness.” This definition is liable, I
humbly think, to serious objection. If the motive for obeying
the divine will is to obtain everlasting happiness (in the ordinary
sense of the expression), then we adopt a system of refined
selfishness. If I act merely to secure my own happiness, lam
acting from a selfish principle. The length of time does not
change the character of the principle. If it is selfishness when
-the happiness extends over a few days or a few years, it is


equally so should it be continued through eternity. What does
the Christian minister mean, and what do his hearers believe he
means, when he urges them to attend to their own salvation ?
Is it that they are to escape punishment in the life to come ?
That, no doubt, is included ; but there is something more, and
much more important than that included—even deliverance
from the power of evil in heart and life. If men embrace
Christianity solely to be delivered from impending woe, they
have yet to learn what are the first principles of the doctrine of
Christ. The latter sets before us the highest ideal of human
life. The altruism of the Positivist is a very poor stunted affair
compared with the benevolence inculcated in the Gospel of
Christ. The latter embraces all that the other does, and a
great deal more, the additional part being by far the most
valuable in itself and the most efficacious for the end in view.
We are bound to regard humanity with the strongest feelings
of benevolence. “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.”
“Do good unto all men as ye have opportunity.” It is a sin to
lead a selfish life, whether of ease, indulgence, or indifference
to the claims of others. The poor, the destitute, outcasts from
society, those who cannot or will not help themselves, are to be
objects of care to the Christian disciple. Humanity is one: all
men are brethren, because children of the same father, bound
by the same law, capable of rendering obedience thereto, and
of being made fit for the abodes of bliss, where sin and sorrow
are unknown. How superior in every respect to the motives by
which the merely respectable man of the world is governed !
The desire of victory over sin is to be gratified; the hope of
reaching perfection in thought, feeling, and action will be
realised; and opportunity of lending a helping hand to enable
others to reach the same glorious end, is freely given. Should
religion be renounced this high ideal will not be aimed at.
Who can adequately describe the disastrous effect this would
have upon those who seldom strive to reach this ideal, and
whose efforts in this direction are of the feeblest character
imaginable. The highest types of human intelligence would be
unknown, i.e., that which loves virtue for its own sake without
fear of suffering or hope of reward; and the inferior types
would be still further degraded from want of stimulus.
There are many other matters, some even more important
than these, on which I might have touched. I have dwelt more
upon punishment than upon reward ; more upon both than upon
the inherent excellence of virtue, which is more important than
either; but I have already detained you too long. The influence of
the thought and worship of a divine creator upon human life, both
in the way of support in sorrow and hope in action, is in calculable,
Even Mr. Harrison feels the need of worship for the elevation


of man, and for this object ha presents us with humanity.
When Sir James Stephen objects to the worship of such an
object the former defends himself by saying that they do not
pray to it, or sing hymns, or bend the knee. But no Christian
affirms that outward acts are the essential parts of worship, but
with unanimous voice maintain that internal feelings, reverence,
trust, submission, are essential conditions of pure worship.
From the Greek Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic
Church, with their gorgeous ritual, down to the baldest service
conducted by illiterate men in humble huts, there is no difference
as to the essential character of worship, although there is as to
outward form. It is in the act of worship and not in reasoning
or speculation that we most realise the Eternal. The late Pro-
fessor J. H. Green (who, I think, is a profounder philosopher
than H. Spencer) says, “You complain that by searching you
cannot find out God. The assertion that He exists cannot be
verified like any other matter of fact. But what if that he not
because He is so far off but because He is near. You cannot
know Him as you know a particular fact related to you, but
neither can you so know yourself.”
This is to be sought in worship, private and public, which
helps us to get out of the anxieties and littleness of the world
for a season. To be reminded again and again that the
omniscient eye of God rests upon us, of His ear being open at all
times to our cry for help, guidance, and sympathy ; and that He
views with approbation every one of His children, even the most
insignificant who is striving to lead a better life. Should
worship cease, all such feelings would pass away. When
reverence for God or for one superior to ourselves, is extin-
guished in the heart, reverence of every kind will speedily share
the same fate. When reverence ceases to characterise an indi-
vidual or a community, deterioration in other virtues speedily
appear. If this is a fatherless world, and all the great powers
of nature the sport of chance, then man is at the head of the
universe ; he will measure everything by his own little self, and
a regard for self will reign supreme.
What would the world be without Christ ? What would the
world have been without Christ ? He has extorted warmer
praise from his foes than even tho greatest men have from their
friends ; He has gained the homage of the profoundest minds
that have ever existed. So marvellous has His power over the
human heart been that multitudes have confessed that, when
they came into contact with Him, they acquired a new life and
gained a priceless treasure. He has inspired young and old,
rich and poor, with such zeal and ardour that they have given
up their lives to His service, and themselves to death for His
glory. Nor can the world yet do without Jesus. As long as


human nature is what it is, He will retain His hold over the
hearts of men. Christ met man and all men meet each other at
a point which science scarcely touches. It is now the most
commonplace of sayings: this is the age of steam, of the
electric telegraph, and of the telephone. Time and space are
almost annihilated. The discoveries in science have been so
numerous and so far-reaching in their consequences, that we
are often compelled to stop and ask, —what is to come next ?
But, although multiplied a hundred fold, what will they, what
can they do for the human heart ? What help do they give us
in controlling our temper, in subduing pride, and extracting
selfishness from our nature ? Can they support us when we are
suffering from an irreparable loss, or when crushed under a
heavy bereavement, or when enduring anguish of soul because
of conscious sin ? It is here that all men meet on an equality.
They are all exposed to sin and sorrow ; but neither the wealth
of the rich, the knowledge of the cultured, nor the discoveries
of science, bring the slightest support or consolation. It is here
that Jesus touches human life, and meets the profoundest wants
of the soul. For eighteen hundred years these words have been
resounding in the ears of men : “ Come unto Me all ye that
labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” Multi-
tudes in all ages have received them with a firm faith, and have
testified that the chief joys of their life were derived from them.
They appeal also to us of this generation, and where heartily
responded to, will be followed by the same result, —“You shall
find rest unto your souls.”




HOW DOES THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION
BEAR UPON RELIGIOUS BELIEF?
LECTURE YI
BY THE
BEV. CANON SHARP, M.A.,
WARDEN" OP ST. PAUL’S COLLEGE, UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.




HOW DOES THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION BEAR UPON
RELIGIOUS BELIEF?
It will not, I think, be out of place if we prepare the way for
the consideration of the subject of this lecture by first reminding'
ourselves of a fact which is certainly true and certainly impor-
tant, but which, nevertheless, seems rather apt to be left out of
count. I mean the comparatively narrow limits within which
human science—human knowledge —must of necessity be confined.
To the mind of a great master in natural science, such as Sir
Isaac Newton, it would seem to be no strange or unfamiliar
thought that the very highest achievements of the human intellect
will still leave practically undiminished the vast total of the un-
discovered. Since the time when Sir Isaac Newton contemplated
“ the great ocean of truth which lay unexplored ” before him, we
have advanced some handbreadths further from the shore. For
every such advance it is not easy to be too thankful; but it is
easy enough to allow ourselves to be carried away by a mislead-
ing and undignified spirit of self-laudation, forgetful that al-
though perchance our progress may seem large to ourselves, yet
in comparison with the infinite unknown it is a vanishing quan-
tity, just as the diameter of the earth’s orbit is a vanishing
quantity in comparison with the distances of most of the stars.
The progress of knowledge has long since dwarfed men’s con-
ceptions of the earth they live on; it must dwarf in like manner
their conception of its own limits. For the questions which are
solved do but open up ever new questions for solution. “ There
is one privilege,” says Stanley Jevons in his Principles of Science
(p. 754), “which a certain amount of knowledge should confer.
It is that of becoming aware of the weakness of our powers com-
pared with the tasks which they might undertake if stronger.
Just as the numbers we can count are nothing
compared with the numbers which might exist, so the accomplish-
ments of a Laplace or a Lagrange are, as it were, the little corner
of the multiplication table, which has really an infinite extent.”
Now, one might suppose that reflections such as these upon
the relatively narrow limits and the extreme imperfection of
human knowledge ; and again, upon the long series of errors
and fallacies which thinker after thinker exposes in others, and
to which in turn he too surely contributes his own share, would


induce a spirit of ever increasing modesty and caution, a dispo-
sition to suspend the judgment and to sit loosely to theories.
Nevertheless, in curious contrast with so natural an expectation,
it is not unfrequently alleged against some men of science at the
present time, that they are apt to speak and write in a very
confident and a very positive tone, and to treat opponents with
impatience, if not with ill-disguised contempt. It is said that in
propositions purporting to be scientific the word must is frequently
found to have usurped the place of the safer and more unas-
suming word may. Now I do not profess to say how much
truth there may be in statements of this kind; but it will not be
denied that, if true, they disclose a state of things which is to
be regretted. It is to be regretted because it must tend to retard
the progress of sound knowledge. For it implies the intrusion
of feeling into a domain which professes to be reserved exclu-
sively for reason. It shows the presence of prepossession and
prejudice where prepossession and prejudice are more than ever
out of place. It reinstates the principle of authority where
authority has been explicitly and emphatically disowned. It
exhibits in physical science a tendency towards that very dog-
matism and intolerance which in theology have been so ener-
getically denounced. For a scientific man who dogmatises far
beyond his data, like a Christian who persecutes, is acting in
palpable defiance of his own first principles.
Now, if there are various ways in which a spirit of undue
positiveness may assert itself in the teaching of natural science,
there is at any rate one way which more especially crosses our
path this evening. I allude to the danger of not distinguishing
very clearly and trenchantly between scientific hypothesis and
ascertained truth. As a servant of discovery, hypothesis is of
course simply indispensable. To frame hypotheses or supposi-
tions, and then to test these suppositions by comparing the
results deduced from them with the facts given by observation
and experiment, and thus either to confirm or to confute them,
has been the fruitful method of inquiry pursued by the great
pioneers in scientific discovery. But a good servant may be a
bad master. Even when a hypothesis has been found to explain
successfully a large number of facts, and when it has thus been
advanced to the higher dignity of a plausible theory, it is still
essential to bear in mind its provisional character. For a theory
may be fascinating and yet false. It may be a useful guide for
a certain distance, and yet may presently turn out to be a safe
guide no further. It may be found to be inconsistent with some
new fact. It may need to be modified or to be rejected. And
therefore, while on the one hand the most perfect liberty is rightly
demanded by the man of science to frame any manner of hypo-
thesis that he may please, it is no less urgent on the other hand


that he should exhibit the strictest and most conscientious
fidelity in keeping hypothesis in its proper place, and not
allowing it to rule where it ought to serve.
But in saying this I should like also to say that an appearance of
undue dogmatism displayed in the name of science should always
he gently dealt with by those who reflect upon the undue dogmatism
which has been displayed in the name of religion. It a sorrow-
ful and a humiliating tale—that of the attitude of mistaken
religion towards great scientific discoveries in astronomy and
geology ; and if the tables are now to some extent turned, and
there is apparent reason to complain of intolerance on the other
side, it is because, as Mr. Moore says in Shirley, “ human nature
is human nature everywhere,” and what we now see in some
instances in this direction is but a similar temper at work upon
a different subject matter. Nevertheless we may feel sure that
in the long run confusion of thought arising out of the loose and
ambiguous use of language will tend to be cleared up; and that
the demand for evidence will become as strict in other sciences
as it has already become in the sciences of physics proper; and
thus that theories which do not accurately fit the facts will tend
to receive the needful confutation or correction. And in the
meantime, if we desire to contemplate a conspicuous example of
the patient and indefatigable investigation of nature, and of the
candid and open-minded consideration of objections to a favourite
theory, we have a notable instance of such characteristics in the
distinguished man whose name is inseparably connected with
the subject of Evolution, the late Charles Darwin himself.
With these remarks by way of introduction, I may now turn
more directly to the particular matter in hand. My subject is
this: —How does the theory of Evolution bear upon religious
belief ? Now I need scarcely remind you that, strictly speaking,
one should rather use the plural number, and say the theories
instead of the theory of Evolution. Eor there are current at the
present time a variety of theories which all pass under the general
name of Evolution, and all partake of the same general character,
but which differ considerably in comprehensiveness, and in certain
other respects. The earlier theory of Charles Darwin was con-
fined to the sphere of plant and animal life. The later theory
upheld by the most advanced Evolutionists takes in, not plant
and animal life alone, but all phenomena without exception,
from suns and planets up to the thoughts and affections and
aspirations of men. It is sought to show that every phenomenon
has its place as a term in one long series of undisturbed and
unaided self-development; and that it does but exhibit some
phase of greater or less complexity in the ceaseless process des-
cribed by Mr. Herbert Spencer as being “ a change from an
incoherent homogeneity to a coherent heterogeneity, accom-


panying the dissipation of motion and integration of matter.”
Given mass and motion to begin with, and (it is said) the
Universe may be constructed. A primitive homogeneous nebula
will begin to move, and thereupon to exchange its incoherent
homogeneity for a more and more coherent heterogeneity. And
when this process has been going on for a sufficient length of
time, there will arise out of it a solar system ; and therein a
habitable earth ; and matter will then begin of itself to live upon
the earth; and by-and-bye it will grow coherent and hetero-
geneous enough to produce a cane ; and later still it will become
yet more coherent and more heterogeneous, and will produce a
schoolmaster to wield the cane ; and in the fulness of time,
by an upward or downward progress, it will succeed in achieving
the integration of that most heterogeneous of elements in modern
politics —the “ dynamite demon.” What higher or lower results
may yet be forthcoming time alone can show, and no greatest
philosopher can safely predict.
But perhaps I need not trouble you further about exact and
technical definitions of Evolution. We readily admit that" the
existing state of things is the outcome of the state of things
immediately preceding ; and again, that this earlier state is in
its turn the outcome of a still earlier. Push the process of deri-
vation backwards without limit, and you thus arrive at the
notion that the present state of things is the direct descendant
and representative of a primitive state of things exceedingly
unlike itself. Where there is now expreme complexity and
variety, there was once extreme simplicity and uniformity.
Where there is now life and thought, there was once mass sus-
ceptible of motion. The conclusion of thoroughgoing Evolu-
tionists appears to be, that not only the world of inorganic matter,
but the worlds of plant and animal life, and even the world of
human consciousness itself, are reducible in their ultimate
analysis to changes of configuration in the system of minute par-
ticles or atoms whereof the primitive nebula was composed. And
our question for the present is this ;—How does such a theory
of the development of the universe by the mechanical interaction
of atoms bear upon the belief in a personal God, the Creator and
Upholder of all things ?
The theory of Evolution is sometimes put forward as excluding
a Creator and Sustainer of the Universe. Is it able to bear the
strain of so tremendous a negation ?
Now, there are two ways in which we may attack this question.
We may attack it in the first place by looking into the founda-
tions upon which the theory is built, and asking whether they
are strong enough to justify its upholders in putting us to the
trouble of answering such a question at all. Or, secondly, we
may assume, for the sake of argument, that the theory is true,


and then proceed to examine its bearings upon our position as
believers in a Creator.
Well then, in the first place we may naturally inquire
whether the theory, in any such comprehensive form as that
above described, is at present substantial enough to make the
question of its bearing upon the belief in a Creator a seriously
pressing question at all. One may ask, for instance, at the very
outset whether the existence of atoms of the kind postulated by
the theory of mechanical development has been made out with
anything approaching to a reasonable degree of probability. Or
again, at a later stage, we may ask whether there are at present
any reasonable grounds whatever for assuming the actual
occurrence of what is admitted to be essential to the theory,
namely, spontaneous generation, or the coming to life of
inorganic matter without the intervention of life previously
existing.
Now, with regard to prevailing confusion and uncertainty
about the existence of atoms such as are required by the theory
of mechanical development of the Universe, I may cite a recent
volume of the International Scientific Series, entitled The Concepts
and Theories of Modern Physics. I have not seen any review of
this book, but it is one of a series held in good repute, and it
appears to have reached a second edition within a few months
of its publication. The first chapter begins wtth a statement of
the well known fact that “ modern physical science aims at a
mechanical interpretation of all the phenomena of the universe.”
And the last chapter begins with a statement of the conclusion
to which the author has arrived, namely this, “ that the atomo-
mechanical theory is not, and cannot be, the true basis of modern
physics.” In the body of the book it is shown, among other
things, that the mechanical theory is in flat Contradiction with
other scientific theories regarded at present as being well
established. Thus, for instance, the mechanical theory demands
the absolute equality in all respects of the primordial units of
mass. But then such a demand conflicts fatally with the prin-
ciple upon which modern theoretical chemistry has been so
successfully built, up —the principle known as the law of
Avogadro or Ampere, and of which it has been said that “it
holds the same place in chemistry that the law of gravitation
does in astronomy.” * And again, the mechanical theory
demands that the elementary units of mass* shall be absolutely
hard and absolutely inelastic. Now among recent hypothesis
devised for the purpose of affording a consistent footing for the
mechanical interpretation of physical phenomena, the most con-
spicuous is that known by the name of the kinetic theory of
gases. The kinetic theory of gases is itself somewhat roughly
* The New Chemistry, by Professor Cooke, p. 13,


handled.in the hook of which lam speaking; but whatever
may be its merits or demerits, the particular point now before
us is that it would appear to be directly at issue with the
mechanical theory which it was supposed to corroborate. For
while the mechanical theory is inexorable in demanding that the
elementary units of mass shall be absolutely inelastic, the kinetic
theory of gases is equally firm in demanding that they shall be
perfectly elastic. And yet again, for the purposes of the
mechanical theory, the elements of mass must be absolutely
inert, and therefore incapable of exerting any action at a
distance. But what of gravitation? How is that to be ex-
plained as other than action at a distance ? If gravitation is to
fit in with the mechanical theory, it must be shown to he the
product of the impact and the pressure of contiguous bodies.
No one has yet succeeded in showing gravitation to be that.
And be it remembered that this very same obstinate fact, which
has refused to be brought under the yoke of the mechanical
theory, is “ the foundation of the most magnificent theoretical
structure which science has ever erected —a foundation
deepening with every new reach of our telescopic vision, and
broadening with every further stretch of mathematical
analysis.” *
It would be easy to say more in this direction, but enough may
have been said to show that there is a great deal yet to be learnt
before the subject of elementary atoms, whether homogeneous or
heterogeneous, can be regarded as having been tolerably cleared
up. Even the science which has been most conversant about
atoms—the science of chemistry—has begun to ask whether the
belief in atoms is not now rather a hindrance than a help.f So
that it would not seem unreasonable to consider that anyone who
should set up atoms and their self-development in place of a
Creator has been sufficiently answered when it has been shown
how shadowy and insubstantial is at present the character of his
hypothesis. And even if the existence of atoms were better
established than it is, and their nature better understood, there
is still the great chasm to be bridged which up to this time sepa-
rates the not living from the living ; to say nothing of the chasm,
even greater, between the highest animals and the lowest men.
Of course anyone can say, if he chooses, that life appeared spon-
taneously in the immeasurably distant past, or that by-and-bye
life will be produced in the laboratory from inorganic matter.
Anyone can say this, just as he can make any other assertions
which he may take a fancy to make. But neither of these state-
ments can be proved, and it is notorious that hitherto the evidence
has been all the other way. For anything that has yet been
* Concepts of Modern Physics, p. 65.
f Cournot, quoted in Concepts of Modern Physics, p. 102.


shewn to the contrary, it is reasonable to hold at present that
the attempt to make inorganic matter live, without the interven-
tion of matter previously living, runs parallel with the efforts of
the alchemists to discover an elixir of life, or to transmute the
baser metals into gold. Of the two, it would have seemed the
easier task to preserve alive that which was alive already than
to bring to life that which had never lived. The alchemists
failed to do the first; we may well doubt whether the chemists
and biologists will succeed in doing the second.
But, as I said before, there is another way in which the ques-
tion may be looked at. Suppose that there are veritable atoms,
either all alike, or some of one kind and some of another. Sup-
pose that in a vast nebulous assemblage of these atoms there lies
potentially such a universe as that we see. What then ? Why,
you are still as far as ever from your goal. You are still as far
as ever from having explained the mystery of being. For your
atoms themselves need to be explained, at least as much as any-
thing which your atoms have produced. You may have reached
a better understanding of the mode in which a solar system has
been formed, but you have got no nearer to the cause of its for-
mation. Here are words of Mr. Herbert Spencer’s to the point :
—“ The problem of existence is not solved; it is simply removed
further back. The Nebular Hypothesis throws no light on the
origin of diffused matter, and diffused matter as much needs
accounting for as concrete matter. The genesis of an atom is
not easier to conceive than the genesis of a planet. Nay, indeed,
so far from making the universe a less mystery than before, it
makes it a greater mystery.” * And we may add that no theory
of development can get beyond this point. If there is develop-
ment, there must first be something to develope. And the ques-
tion, Whence that something ? lies outside the province of the
theory. You may find your best answer to that question in the
statement that it came from God, and no theory of development
can ever say you nay.
We have thus by two different roads arrived at an answer te
our first question. Our first question was this :—“ Does the most
advanced theory of evolution exclude belief in a Creator?” We
have seen in the first place that such a theory rests upon assump-
tions, and not upon ascertained facts. We are justified, there-
fore, in pointing out to those who would make use of it to disprove
our belief, that they will have to make their own position a very
great deal stronger than it is before they can seriously menace
ours. But in the second place we have also seen that even if such
a theory of evolution received vastly more countenance from
ascertained facts than it does actually receive, it could still have
nothing to say against belief in a Creator. For it would be
* Essay on the Nebular Hypothesis.


dealing exclusively with the after history of materials of whose
origin it could give no account. The materials must be there to
be developed, before a theory of development can have anything
to do with them.
A second question may now be asked. We have found that
the theory of Evolution, however far it may be pushed, is impo-
tent to contradict belief in God directly. It may now be asked
whether it tells against such a belief indirectly ? In other words,
does it blunt the edge of any argument by the help of which
men’s belief in God has been wont to be sustained ? Does it cut
away the ground from the famous argument with which the
name of Paley is identified—the argument from design to a
designer ? This is a question which was discussad last year before
the University of Oxford, in the fourth of Bishop Temple’s
Bampton lectures. But before I refer to the results of this dis-
cussion, let me take you back for a moment to a time when the
theory of Evolution hid not yet risen into prominence. Ido so
for this reason. There seems to be a tendency at present rather
to look down upon the argument from design. Under these
circumstances it is interesting to see how that argument im-
pressed the mind of a philosopher, whose repution classes him
among the chiefs of scepticism. 1 will read you some words which
are not a little remarkable as coming from such a man as Hume ;
—“ Though the stupidity of men, barbarous and uninstructed,
be so great that they may not see a sovereign author in the more
obvious works of nature to which they are so much familiarised,
yet it scarce seems possible that any one of good understanding
should reject that idea when once it is suggested to him. A pur-
pose, an intention, a design, is visible in everything; and when
our comprehension is so far enlarged as to contemplate the first
rise of this visible system, we must adopt with the strongest
conviction the idea of some intelligent cause or author.” And
again, “ In many views of the universe, and of its parts, par-
ticularly the latter, the beauty and fitness of final causes strike
us with such irresistible force, that all objections appear (what I
believe they are) mere cavils and sophisms; nor can we then
imagine how it was ever possible for us to repose any weight on
them. Tiie order and arrangement of Nature, the curious adjust-
ment of final causes, the plain use and intention of every part
and organ, all these bespeak in the clearest language an intelli-
gent cause or author. The heavens and the earth join in the
same testimony. The whole chorus of Nature raises one hymn
to the praises of its Creator. I have found a Deity, and here 1
stop my enquiry.”*
* Quoted in a lecture on Water, by the Rev. J. M. Wilson, M.A., Head-
master of Clifton College, p. 20.


Well, but we are to ask how the theory of Evolution bears
upon this argument which seemed to Hume so overwhelming ? I
will here briefly put before you the conclusions at which Bishop
Temple arrives in the Lecture to which I have referred. He
finds that the theory of Evolution does make a difference. It
makes this difference, that it leaves the argument stronger than
it found it. It leaves it stronger in two ways. It leaves it
stronger in itself; and it leaves it stronger by the removal of
objections. The creative power is left unchanged, and the design
with which that creative power was exercised is left unchanged.
What is changed is the mode in which the design has been
worked out. The Creator “ did not make the things, we may
say ; no, but He made them make themselves. And surely this
rather adds than withdraws force from the great argument. It
seems in itself .something more majestic, something more befit-
ting Him to Whom a thousand years are as one day, and one
day as a thousand years, thus to impress His will once for all on
His creation, and provide for all its countless variety by this one
original impress, than by special acts of creation to be perpetu-
ally modifying what He had previously made. ......
What conception of foresight and purpose can rise above that
which imagines all history gathered as it were into one original
creative act from which the infinite variety of the universe has
come, and more is coming even yet ?” (p.p. 115, 116).
And as the theory of Evolution thus directly strengthens the
substance of Paley’s argument from within, so too it strengthens
it indirectly from without, by removing objections and by sup-
plying defects. Thus, for instance, it disposes of the old
objection that God was represented rather in the light of an
Artificer skilfully overcoming the various difficulties which arose
in dealing with somewhat intractable materials, than in the
light of a Creator of Whom it might properly be said that what-
soever He pleased that did He in heaven and on earth. And
again, it reinforces the answer which has to be given to those
who urge in opposition to the argument from design the obvious
presence of so much imperfection and pain and apparent waste.
For it “ tells us that we are looking at a work which is not yet
finished, and that the imperfections are a necessary part of a
large design, the general outlines of which we may clearly trace,
but the ultimate issue of which, with all its details, is still beyond
our perception.” (p. 117). And yet again, to all lesser designs
it superadds the magnificent design of a perpetual progress, by
showing not merely that Grod’s purposes are being fulfilled, but
that from age to age they are being ever better and better ful-
filled. And it also draws more emphatic attention to the striking
and significant fact of the beauty of nature —that lavish adorn-
ment of his dwelling place which furnishes to man one of his


highest and purest pleasures, and yet which need not have been
there, and without which the fittest might have still survived.
And finally it binds into one whole the vast multitude of separate
and partial designs. It exhibits that solidarity of the Universe,
that interdependence of its constituent parts,-which may fairly be
looked for in the work of a single Creator. In short, Paley’s
argument may need to be re-written in the light of the theory of
Evolution; but assuredly, were it so re-written, its power would
be found to be not less, but greater than it was before.
We conclude, then, that the theory of Evolution has no hostile-
bearing upon the essence of religious belief. It is evidently
powerless to deny the existence of a Creator. Nor can it under-
mine the force of the argument from design. The question
which comes next is this If the theory has no hostile bearing
upon the fundamental truths of religion, has it any such bearing
upon the revelation through which we believe these truths to-
have been conveyed ?
Of course such a question takes us back at once to the first
chapter of the book of Genesis. Now if one thing is more
certain than another about the opening document in the book'
of Genesis, it is that it has suffered wofully from misinterpreta-
tion. But when this has been said, it is needful at once to-
guard the statement by pointing out an important distinction.
On which side or aspect of its contents is it that the document
has thus suffered ? Has it been misunderstood when it teaches-
that the Universe is the work of one God, Who created it out of
nothing? Has it been misunderstood when it teaches that*
matter and life and the soul of man come each of them from a
spiritual source,—from the Will of One Who is good, One Who
can love and can be loved ? No, assuredly, in these supreme
lessons its teaching is plain enough. It is notin regard to these-
that the misunderstanding has arisen And these are the-
lessons which we cannot but believe that it was meant to teach,.
But there is another aspect of the document in regard to which>
we must allow that misunderstanding was inevitable. Do buP
think of the enormous difficulties under which the lessons of
this chapter had to be conveyed. They had to be conveyed in
an account of the creation to be given to a barbarous andi
utterly unscientific people. They had to be given in a language
poor alike in vocabulary and inflection, —a language whose
poverty in these respects bespoke the mental poverty of those
who used it. They had to be given in so brief a form as to be
capable of easy retention in the memory. The task to be
accomplished was to teach great truths about the origin and.
development of a universe, and about the position of man, and.,
his relations to God and to the things around him; and to do
all this within the limits of a few verses, and in common.


language—not in language such as there is nowadays, specially
framed to convey scientific propositions with precision and
accuracy, but in ordinary language,—and for the use of
ignorant untrained minds. How could truth be taught under
such conditions ? Plainly it could not be taught with com-
pleteness, and it could not be taught with perfect accuracy.
But no less plainly it has been taught with a success which is
truly marvellous. For in the first place it has been so taught
that the primary purpose of the teaching was made plain from
the first, and could never be obscured. And secondly, it has
been so taught that what may be called the physical envelope or
medium by means of which the spiritual teaching was conveyed,
while offering no stumbling block to the unscientific minds to
which it was presented, has been found, after its long and
patient submission to inevitable misconception, to be in wonder-
ful accord with the discoveries of our latest science. It could
speak of such things only as its first recipients had some know-
ledge of, or of which they could form some notion ; but it spoke
of these things in such a way as to avoid the false conceptions
with which other cosmogonies abound, and thus to leave the
way open for the acceptance of fuller scientific truth, so soon as
the time should come for it to be made known.
Let us take first the theory of evolution as applied to the solar
system and to the life of plants and animals. Does the theory
which teaches that the solar system as we see it has been
developed very gradually and continuously out of a primitive
condition of far greater simplicity and uniformity conflict in any
way with the teaching of this first chapter of Genesis ? Or again,
does the theory which teaches that the vast variety of forms of
plant and animal life now existing on the earth has come by
slow development out of some one or more lowly types of life
which came into being when the earth was cool enough to enable
them to live —does this theory contradict what is said of plants
and animals in that same chapter ? Well, I think that question
may be fairly answered in the following way. Assume the
theory to be true. Then set yourself to think how you could
manage to give some idea of the main outline of such a jmocess
to people whose minds were thoroughly unscientific. If you had
at your command such resources only—in the way of language
and so on—as were at the command of the writer of this chapter,
how could you contrive to give to minds untrained and unin-
formed instruction which should be fairly within their limited
apprehension, and yet which should not be false to truth which
was still altogether beyond their reach ? If you consider the
matter in this way, it seems difficult indeed to conceive how so
arduous a task could have been better accomplished than it
has been accomplished by the story of creatioa as given in the


Bible. In that story a very prominent thought is the thought of
progressive change. The account which it gives is an account
of orderly succession, —“ going,” as Bishop Temple puts it,
“ from the formless to the formed; from the orderless to the
ordered; from the inanimate to the animate; from the plant
to the animal; from the lower animal to the higher; from
the beast to the man ; ending with the rest of the Sabbath,
the type of the highest, the spiritual life. Nothing, certainly,
could more exactly match the doctrine of Evolution than this.
It is, in fact, the same thing said from a different point of
view. All this is done by casting the account into the form
of a week of work with the Sabbath at the end.” (p. 182.)
“If the evolution hypothesis be true,” says another dis-
tinguished clergyman, whose life has been to a large extent
occupied with teaching and research in science, “ and if its
results had to be communicated to thoroughly unscientific
minds, then I do not see how some idea of these results
could be better imparted than by such picturesque verbal
diagrams as these : by seizing the successive salient points in a
continuous history of myriads of years, projecting them on the
mind like a series of dissolving views, which gather into distinct-
ness and fade away into nothingness, like the dawning and the
parting of the day.” (Bonney, Sermons on some Questions of the
Bay, p. 7.) In short, the account in the Book of Genesis is
dealing with results, and the theory of evolution is dealing with
method. Whether true in whole or part, the theory can do no
more than describe the mode in which the Universe has been
brought into the condition in which we see it now. It can speak
of mode, but it cannot speak of cause. It cannot assign a cause
for the existence or the first movement of a nebula. It cannot
answer the great questions, Whence ? and Whither ? It may
tell us something of phenomena; but it cannot say why pheno-
mena are as they are. It lays hold of variation as a foundation
upon which to build ; but it cannot say why variation is pro-
duced. It makes much of certain principles, such as ‘ natural
selection but, after all, these principles merely sum up facts of
observation, and do not in any degree explain their ultimate
cause. And thus, once more, the theory of Evolution leaves us
at perfect liberty to assign the cause which alone is adequate to
the result, namely, the operation of supreme Intelligence and
Power.
There remains but one more topic on which I can now touch ;
and that must be treated very briefly. I refer to the question
whether the theory of Evolution and the book of Genesis are in
accord with each other in the accounts which they respectively
give of the origin of man. The theory of Evolution, in its more
pronounced and thorough-going form, regards man as having


come to be what he is by the very same process as that by which
the animals have come to be what they are. The animals are
taken to be lower terms in a series in which the highest term
extant is man. On the other hand the book of Genesis,
in describing the origin of man, makes use of a most significant
phrase, declaring that man was created in the image of God. And
so, instead of being himself merely one of the animals, man is
represented as having had committed to him the dominion over
the animals. He is, indeed, like them in some respects. His
body is formed “of the dust of the ground,” as theirs are. The
materials are the same ; the general functions of bodily life are
the same. But to the mere bodily life there has been superadded
in the case of man a gift by which the difference between him
and the animals has been made so great as altogether to over-
shadow the resemblance. “The Lord God .... breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living
soul. To the mere bodily life, which could not have been in
the image of God, there was added the gift of reason and spirit.
It is clear that at this point what may be called an extreme
theory of evolution does come into collision with revelation and
with Christian faith. The upholder of such a theory tells us that
there is nothing in man essentially different from what there is
in animals, but that man simply represents one more step for-
wards in the process of self-development. The Bible, on the other
hand, from end to end represents man as being in possession of
gifts and capacities which distinguish him absolutely from the
lower animals. It teaches that between the two there is a great
gulf fixed, over which the animals can never pass. Which of
these views commends itself to the general human consciousness
as being the truer—the view which sees no essential difference
between animal life on the one hand, and “ a Moses, an Isaiah, a
Paul, a Dante, a Luther or a Milton ”on the other; or the view
which sees in man a child of God, capable of being a partaker of
the Divine Spirit, and of realizing the promised gift of eternal
life ? If one were to place the highest specimens of animal life
side by side with the men whom I have named, it would surely
require the most prodigious power of exaggerating resemblances
and of minimising differences to enable us to come to the conclu-
sion that we had before us nothing more than types of different
stages of progress on the same road.
It may be well, however, to point out that the Bible tells us
nothing whatever of the process by which the body of man was
formed “of the dust of the ground.” If it should turn out that
man’s body was prepared by a process of gradual evolution on a
line parallel with that of the development of the animals, I do not
see why the discovery need in any way disturb our Christian
faith. It is in the spirit, not in the body, that the image of God


is to be found. But even as regards the body there has been
hitherto no discovery of a predecessor of man. Upon this
important point a very competent and unbiassed witness—
Professor Virchow —is reported to have spoken last year at the
tercentenary of the University of Edinburgh. “In my judg-
ment,” he said, “no skull hitherto discovered can be regarded
as that of a predecessor of man. In the course of the last fifteen
years we have had opportunity to examine skulls of all the
various races of mankind, —even of the most savage tribes —and
among them all no group has been observed differing in its
essential characters from the general human type. So that I
must say that an anthropological teacher has not occasion to
speak of a pro-anthropos except as a matter of speculation. But
speculation in general is unprofitable. As Goethe says—‘A
speculating fellow is like a beast on a barren heath led about by
the Evil Spirit.’ I still think it necessary to guard
against the danger of constructing systems of doctrine out of
possibilities, and making these the basis of general education.” *
“No occasion to speak of a pro-anthropos except as a matter
of speculation,” and “speculation in general is unprofitable.”
This brings me back to the thought which I ventured to express
at the outset of this lecture. If science were true to her name,
she ought herself to be our never-failing safeguard against the
danger of being imposed upon by mere speculation. But it is
our misfortune to find too often that the name of science is taken
in vain. Science means knowledge ; and if all who speak in the
name of science would, while so speaking, keep strictly within
the range of ascertained knowledge, we should hear but little of
the supposed conflict between science and faith. We have seen
that the theory of Evolution passes utterly beyond the bounds
of knowledge when it presumes to deny a Creator, or to affirm
either spontaneous generation, or the essential identity of man’s
whole nature with the nature of the lower animals. It is pre-
cisely at these three points that the book of Genesis makes use
of the word ‘ create.’ God created the heavens and the earth.
He created life in its lower manifestations. He created the
spiritual life of man. Given these acts of creation, we can have
no quarrel whatever with Evolution, so far as it may be proved
to be true. For it is dealing with nothing but the subordinate
question of method. Was the universe as we see it made in this
way, or was it made in some other way ? That is a question of
the most profound and legitimate interest to any thoughtful
man. But it is not a question upon the solution of which our
Christian faith depends. Whether it be ultimately solved in this
way or in that, we have no reason to four lest its solution should
rob us of the sure conviction that “ The Lord, lie is God : it is
He that hath made us, and not we ourselves : we are 11 is people,
and the sheep of His pasture.”
* Printed in Transactions of the Victoria Institute, vol. xix., p. 72.


THE PEESOH OF JESUS CHEIST, THE SOUECE
OF HIS POWEE.
LECTURE YII
BY THE
REV. E. HIBBERD,
CHAIRMAN OB' THE BAPTIST UNION OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


THE PERSON OF JESUS CHRIST, THE SOURCE OF'
HIS POWER.
It is a beautiful thought to which Tertullian gives utterance
in his Be Testimonio Animae, when he proposes to summon the
soul to testify of its origin and destiny; not as “ fashioned in
schools, trained in libraries, fed up in Attic academies and por-
ticoes but “ simple and rude, uncultured and untaught,” in a
purely natural condition. To the soul he thus speaks:—“l
demand of thee the things thou bringest with thee into man,
which thou knowest either from thyself, or from thine author,
whoever he may be. Thou art not, as I well know, Christian •
for a man becomes a Christian, he is not born one. Yet Chris-
tians earnestly press thee for a testimony; they press thee,
though an alien, to bear witness against thy friends, that they
may be put to shame before thee, for hating and mocking us on
account of things which convict thee as an accessory.” Why
should we not subpoena the soul as a witness in the case before
us ? Its testimony will suffice to show that human desire craved
the blessing, reached after it with great eagerness, but was not
able to grasp it—the blessing which a merciful God bestowed
upon the world in the fulness of time, when “the Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us.”
Incarnation a Christian Revelation.
The Incarnation of God is a decidedly Christian Revelation.
The Revelation was given when the Divine and the human were
united in the God-man. The Revelation did not antedate the
fact. Revelation and fact were strictly contemporaneous.
Christianity did not derive this sublime doctrine from earth, for
men had not been able to attain to it. It was not a grand idea
evolved out of the guesses and aspirations of mankind which
Christianity formulated into a doctrine and proclaimed as its
own, for the candid student who scrutinises the religious systems
that prevailed before the Christian Era, is not able to find this
doctrine in a complete form in any of them, nor, indeed, ic
scattered fragments, furnishing materials from which a plastic
hand might fashion the doctrine of Incarnation, which meets us
the very threshold of the New Testament. This point is
raised at the outset because of its important bearing on the line


of thought to he followed by-and-bye, for the purpose of tracing
the marvellous power of Jesus Christ in the Church which recog-
nises Him as its Living Head, and in the world, where He
“ rules in the midst of His enemies.” Give me your close
attention while I submit to you a condensed and popular state-
ment, embodying the main facts which have been brought
together, as the result of immense research, by scholars who
have devoted splendid talents and the labour of their lives to the
study of Christological doctrine, in the forefront of which the
Incarnation necessarily takes its place.
Not Found in Indian on Grecian Religions.
Taking the Indian and Grecian religions as representing
Eastern and Western conceptions and aspirations, there was a
fundamental difficulty in the way of their realising the true
union of the Divine and human, as we have it presented in the
striking sentence, “ The Word was made flesh,” because they
were pantheistic. Upon this point Neander says:—“ The
heathen myths of transient appearance of the gods in human
form, especially the Incarnations of the Oriental gods, are con-
nected with pantheism, which in all forms of existence beholds
the divine made an object of the senses, and, therefore, admits
an Incarnation of it in the forms of lower nature. This was
something altogether different from the full revelation of the
Divine essence in the form of a definite human life which was to
share all its limitations.” Both the Indians and the
Greeks were members of the Aryan family, both were
addicted to Nature worship. Indeed, Max Muller clearly
shows that the mythology of the Greeks was derived
from the ancient Aryan religion, which was a beautiful system
of Nature worship. “ And Nature worship rests on the assump-
tion that Nature is God, or the manifestation or existence form
of the infinite unknown.” At the very outset, then, there was
this insurmountable obstacle to the attainment of the truth to
which Paul so triumphantly refers :—“ For in Him dwelt all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily.” But there were other obstacles
which obstructed the way, and to these we now turn, It has
been said by an eminent historian of Christological doctrine,
that ‘ ‘ the germ of the idea of the God-man is found in all reli-
gions just so far as they are religious.” As we use the word
germ generally it may be questioned whether facts bear out this
statement. Is it not much nearer the truth to say that the
nations groped after it, but were never able to reach it ? The
Indian religion starting with the Divine tried to realise its union
with the human. In the Incarnation of Yishnu, in a pure
human form as Crishna, to teach men the truth and lead them
back to heaven, it looked as if the Eastern quest had been
crowned with success. But this Incarnation was only one of


ten. And the humanity thus assumed was laid aside. The
work undertaken was suspended, and was to be followed by a
period in which evil was to he predominant. This was neither
true on the Divine nor human side of the Incarnation. It did
not present Christ’s abiding relation to our race, nor the certain
success of His work. We have to notice also that in the Indian
mind there was a settled antagonism between the infinite and
the finite, which could not be softened down. A conjunction
could only be thought of by an intermixture, and this must lead
to the destruction of the finite. Indeed, the very rise of the finite
was an evil, and there was no way of reaching the pure, perfect
spirit without laying it aside. Atma, the All-life, was every-
thing with them ; the world was nothing. From this denial of
the world the Indian mind passed over to deny the independent
existence of God, and to transfer “ all that is Divine to the
world.” So, beginning with the Divine, and seeking its union
with the human, it first resolved the human into nothing, and
then the Divine. Clearly this was not the source from which
Christianity derived the doctrine of the Incarnation of God.
The Greeks chose an opposite starting-point. Men, they taught,
by courage and moral worth, were to raise themselves to god-
hood. This was an inversion of the Divine order observed in
the Incarnation of the AVord. It was not humanity rising up
towards the Divine; it was the Divine taking up its abode in
the human. This radical defect is described in a striking
sentence by Dorner: —“In Hellenism man celebrates his own
apotheosis; in Christianity the condescending grace of God is
glorified.” It is a matter of history that this attempt of men to
elevate themselves to the Divine was as disastrous in result as it
was false in principle. It terminated in the loss of liberty and
in moral corruption, and that at a time when men congratulated
themselves on having reached the proposed end. The self-con-
sciousness of man was thus humbled, and his glory trailed in
the dust. It was common to both of these systems that they
confounded the world and God, and failed to detect the true
relation of man to God. In the East, where the mind seemed to
be on the right track, where it began to see God descending to
man, it suddenly turned aside and denied God. In the West,
where to man and his power was assigned the task of achieving
an “elevation, by an active process of intellectual and moral
culture to the society of the gods,” this task was not only
unfulfilled, but the opposite result was reached. Aspiring to
the Divine by their own effort, they fell lower than the human.
No Trace in Parses or Hebrew Peeigioxs.
In some respects Parsism was better fitted to realise this idea
than the systems already referred to. It was the purest form of
the Aryan religion, and had much in common with the Hebrew.


It was even more pronounced in its hatred of idolatry than the
Hebrew. Certainly it had juster conceptions of Cod and man,
and of man’s relationship and responsibility to Cod than the
Indian and Creek religions. But there were two obstacles which
made it impossible for a true union of the Divine and human to
be effected. There was abiding antagonism between Ormazd,
“ the purest, endless light, the wisest and most perfect one, the
author of all good,” and Ahriman, the principle of darkness or
evil. These antagonistic powers were equal in might, so “ the
elements of good were hopelessly and inextricably blended with
the elements of evil, and mankind was left to groan between the
terrible contrariety.” And another obstacle was found in con-
nection with Zervan, “boundless time,” an absolutely divine
being, who was self-contained, incapable of condescension, and
of communicating himself. This system, therefore, is as fruitless
in results as the others we have passed in review. The Hebrew
religion made a proper distinction between Cod and the world,
and recognised the personality of Cod and man, but, not-
withstanding the theophanies of the Old Testament, and
the glowing prophecies which foretold the advent of Jesus Christ,
—prophecies w'hich combine qualities that from our standpoint are
manifestly Divine and human—yet the union of the Divine and
human, as we behold it in the Incarnation of the Word, was a
conception which was almost impossible to the Hebrew mind.
They were custodians of a truth which separated them off
sharply from the rest of the world —a truth uttered amid solemn
scenes they could never forget:—“ Hear, 0 Israel, the Lord our
God is one Lord.” They were witnesses of the unity of Cod.
They believed in Him as above all gods. In their temple songs
they celebrated His supreme power, His unrivalled wisdom, His
unyielding justice, His perfect righteousness, His tender com-
passion, and His marvellous mercy. No man could see His face
and live. He could not be searched out. His thoughts were
too deep to be fathomed, and His ways were untraceable. Far
above man, He was absolute, unchangeable. Truly the more
spiritual of them adored the condescending grace of such a great
and glorious God who remembered men in their low estate,
pitied His fearing children, dwelt in the heart of the contrite ; but
all this fell below the grand idea embodied in the Christian doctrine
of Incarnation, viz., that there “is an essential relation between
Cod and man, and not a mere moral or religious one.” And yet
they felt their need of this great boon, and prayed earnestly for
it. Revelation records three prayers that were uttered at different
epochs of the world’s history, by different persons, in different
localities, and under totally different circumstances. These
prayers had a wider scope and a deeper significance than the
utterers of them either knew or fell. Dealt with chronologically


they stand thus : Job, under profound suffering and bereavement,
uttered the complaint—
“ There is no daysman betwixt us,
That might lay his hand upon us both ;
Israel, confronted with the majesty of the Divine Law-giver,
appealed to Moses : “ Speak thou with us and we will hear, but
let God not speak with us lest we die.” Solomon amid the
solemnities of the temple consecration, asked: “ Will God in
very deed dwell with man upon the earth ? ” Different states of
mind were here presented—-in Job humility, in the Israelites fear,
in Solomon reverence. Different influences were at work. The
patriarch of JJz realised his weakness; Israel was oppressed with
a sense of sin ; Solomon was swayed by a mighty, religious
inspiration. All of them were favoured with a knowledge of
God far in advance of the world’s attainments, but in this par-
ticular, the light of Revelation had not been vouchsafed, the
great “ mystery of godliness ” was not yet unfolded, God had
not manifested Himself in the flesh. These men then uttered
the desire of the human soul. Nor was the desire unlawful, as
the sequel showed. Job found in Elihu a partial answer, the
Israelites an immediate one in Moses, and Solomon in the
Shechinah glory which descended and filled the temple; impres-
sive figure of Him who was the effulgence of God’s glory, and
the very image of His character. The more deeply one studies
all the available evidence, the stronger does the proof become
that there were insuperable barriers in the way of the heathen
nations ever attaining to a knowledge of the perfect union of the
Divine and human in one life. And the Hebrew’s conception
of the unity of God, of His dread majesty, His supreme power,
His profound wisdom, His awful justice, His absolute perfection,
His unspeakable greatness, His insufferable glory, forbade that
he should entertain the thought that “ the Mighty God, even
the Lord,” should become flesh and dwell among men.
Human Longings Answered by God.
Yet the yearnings of men after the truth were not without
their meaning, for they were the intense utterances of the desire
of the human soul. Within the pale of Judaism or without it,
the human soul hungered for the Incarnation. Though
humanity groped in darkness for the light, and could not formu-
late the idea which was moving its heart, yet its poor attempts
to realise the union of the Divine and human were fervid
utterances of profound desire, piercing cries to heaven, in answer
to which One appeared in our world in the fulness of time, who
was in very deed “Emmanuel, God with us.” We find no
difficulty, then, in endorsing the beautiful words of Origen:
The human soul, even among the heathen, has a deep desire to
unite herself with the Word. She has received the earnest of


the Divine espousals. Just as the law and the prophecies were
the pledge of the future to Israel, so the law of conscience,
reason, and free will were the gifts of betrothal to the human
soul outside of Judaism. No doctrine of philosophy satisfied
her desire or love. She asks the illumination and visitation
of the Word. Neither men nor angels content her ;
she seeks the Divine embrace of the Word.” We see,
then, that the religion of Him who is called the “ Son of Man,”
and the “ Son of God,” has the stamp of heaven upon it,
because it is based on the very truth which crowns human desire.
Men may feel their need, may utter their desire, and so furnish
proof that there is a want, but beyond that they cannot go.
Yet somewhere, and at the proper time, that need will be met,
that desire answered, that want supplied; for has not the eye
its needed light, and the ear its sound ? Is not the earth
irrigated by streams and visited with successive seasons to fit it
for man’s dwelling place ? Are not stores of minerals and metals
laid up to aid man’s inventive genius, and prove an incentive to
toil ? Is not his love of the beautiful satiated with a thousand
-charms ? So this desire of poor humanity is mated with its
fulfilment. The blessing long sought after but never found, the
prayer oft presented, to which no answering voice replied in
East or West, or even within the sacred precincts of Palestina
while Judaism lasted, engaged the loving heart of the Heavenly
Eather, and He gave His answer in the person of His Son.
“ God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in
times past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last
days spoken unto us by His Son, whom He hath appointed Heir
of all things ; by whom also He made the worlds.”
Incarnation explains the Life, Character, and Work of
Christ.
The Incarnation has been called “ the great central sun of
Hevelation“the beating heart, the inner soul of sacred
history “ the central fact in the scheme of moral providence,
whose unity and harmony make it a fountain of power “the
realisation of the highest purpose of God the unveiling of the
depths of His wisdom and love and might,” What force did
the union of the two natures give to the teachings of Jesus
Christ! He spoke the thoughts of God in the language of
-earth. This is the key to that wondrous life where side by side
are often seen the evidences of human frailty and Divine power.
The Incarnation was no isolated or disjointed phenomenon, it
was strictly related to a history which “bristled with the
supernatural.” “Great is the mystery of godliness; He who
was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
ungels, preached unto the nations, believed on in the world,
received up in glory.” Thus the facts of His wonderful appear-


ance and work are linked together—the far and near, the 1
earthly and heavenly—and they are all closely related to IJ is
miraculous entrance into our world. Such an extraordinary
beginning would have been incongruous if the life had been a
mere ordinary one. So far from the miracles of Christ astound-
ing the real believer in His Incarnation, to him they rather
constitute an atmosphere in which the God-man lives and moves
quite naturally. They are “signs and wonders” from our
standpoint, but from His they are “ works” which He performs
with ease and grace. “ The Word was made flesh and dwelt
among us, full of grace and truth.” Beautiful summary of a
life in which all the virtues met. It takes in the purity and
beauty of His childhood, and the domestic qualities which marked
Him as a perfectly obedient son. The sinlessness of His life,
and the moral excellencies which it enshrined; His love, which
resulted in perfect obedience to the will of God, and practical
benevolence towards men; His endurance under wrong and
suffering ; His spirit of forgiveness, were quite in keeping with
His claim, “ I came forth from the Father.” The purity of His
style and the wisdom with which He spoke proved Him to be a
Master teacher. His control over diseases, and His knowledge
of the human heart bespoke a power and wisdom which no man
ever possessed. The leading events of His life marked Him out
as the “ wonderful.” The portents of Nature and the heavenly
embassy stamped His birth as a significant fact for the world.
The Divine attestation and sealing at His baptism, the might by
which H e overcame the tempter, the glory of His transfigur-
ation, the prodigies which were witnessed at His crucifixion.
His triumphant resurrection and glorious ascension, were worthy
of Him who dwelt in the bosom of the Father and came to earth
as the special revealer of His will. His undertaking, the salva-
tion of a fallen world, and the means by which He proposed to
accomplish it—the giving up of His life—depended for their
efficiency upon His power in whom “ dwelt all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily.”
Christ’s Power ox the Course of History.
Notice the power of Christ on the course of history. It has
been written: “ Jesus Christ rules chronology. We reckon
years and centuries from His advent. History is thus placed under
Him, being divided into periods before and after Christ. The
whole civilised world celebrates His birth, death, resurrection,
and ascension. Each week begins with the day that memorial-
ises His resurrection. Our whole life is outwardly pervaded
and governed by His influence.” Men are willing to grant the
subjective influence of Christianity, but they demur to the claim
which the consistent Christian thinker sets up when he traces
this influence to the personal power of his Divine Lord. There


are two conceptions of Christianity : one makes it a system, the
other a living power. Max Muller says : “ Christianity has had
its history like all other religions, and is not at the present
what it was in the past. The Christianity of the Nineteenth
Century is not that of the Middle Ages ; that of the Middle
Ages was not that of the Early Councils; that of the Early
Councils was not that of Christ and his Apostles.” In proof of
this he tells the story of a Hindoo convert, who was a real
martyr to his faith, who had pictured to himself from the pages
of the New Testament what a Christian country must he, who,
when he came to Europe, found everything different from what
he had imagined in his meditations. It was the Bible only
which saved him from returning to his own religion, and helped
him to discover beneath the theological futilities accumulated
during nearly two thousand years, beneath pharisaical hypocrisy,
infidelity and want of charity, the buried but still living seed
committed to the earth by Christ and His Apostles. He saw
that what Christ appeared to be He really was, what He said
He nobly said, what He did He did well, and being willing to
follow in His footsteps, he was blessed with the light of life.
It is not to this distorted form of Christianity we trace the
power that controls the destinies of the world. It is a Chris-
tianity whose essence is Christ, whose thought is inspired by
Him, whose life is permeated with His spirit, whose actions are
controlled by His wisdom, and whose constant aim is the exalta-
tion of the Lord and Governor of its life, to which His promise
is real: “ Lo, I am with you alway, even to the end of the age.”
This vital Christianity was the potent force which changed the
course of Jewish history, gathering under its banner thousands
of Hebrew believers, and by the penalty following its rejection
giving momentum to the swift judgment which swept away the
nationality of the Jews and the city which they hailed as the
joy of the whole land. Its success in the Eoman empire was
too remarkable even to admit of denial. Gibbon, who proposes
to institute a “ candid and rational inquiry into the progress
and establishment of Christianity ” in the Eoman empire, says :
“While that great body was invaded by open violence or
undermined by slow decay, a pure and humble religion gently
insinuated itself into the minds of men, grew up in silence and
obscurity, derived new vigour from opposition, and finally
erected the triumphant banner of the Cross on the ruins of the
Capitol. Nor was the influence of Christianity confined to the
period or the limits of the Eoman empire. After a revolution
of thirteen or fourteen centuries that religion is still professed
by the nations of Europe, the most distinguished portion of
human kind in arts and learning, as well as in arms. By the
industry and zeal of the Europeans it has been widely diffused


to the most distant shores of Asia and Africa, and, by the means
of their colonies, has been firmly established from Canada to
Chili, in a world unknown to the ancients.” Testimonies grant-
ing quite as much to Christianity, probably more, are open to
the careful student of history, whether he take a secular or
sacred path ; but Gibbon is cited because, holding opinions
adverse to the supernatural claims of Christianity, he had no
bias in its favour, and therefore granted no more than was based
upon veritable historical data. No doubt he endeavours to
account for these results without admitting the personal power
of Jesus Christ, or even the supernatural life of the Church.
He attributes them to the zeal of the Jews, which was imported
into the Christian Church, the doctrine of the immortality of the
soul among the philosophers, the miraculous powers of the pri-
mitive Church, the virtues of the first Christians, the activity
of Christians in the government of the Church. But these
“ causes ” are inadequate. If the zeal of the Jew isolated him
from the rest of the world, how was it the zeal of the Christian
made him cosmopolitan in the spirit and action ? If the doctrine of
immortality taught by the great intellectual leaders of the Pagan
world was fruitless in results, how could it succeed if preached
by simple men such as the early Christians were ? Then, how
could the pretended possession of miraculous powers be asso-
ciated with pui’e morality, as Gibbon’s third and fourth “ causes ”
require ? And we may well ask how a few poor illiterate
persons could construct a system of government suitable to the
different tastes and races that were brought into the Church by
her missionary labours ? Put the power of a living Saviour into
these “causes,” and immediately you apply the motive-power by
which they are made to work in beautiful harmony for the
accomplishment of a grand purpose. Jesus Christ supplied the
zeal of the Church, and directed its efforts into proper channels,
and made them streams of blessing. Faith in a risen Pedeemer,
seated on the right hand of the throne of God, made belief in a
future life strong as a conviction, and effectual as a truth pro-
claimed. Faith in the same Divine Lord whose power was
present to heal, was the source of whatever miraculous power
the Church possessed. Vital union and fellowship with Him
was the cause of that pure morality that was one of the noble
signs of the regenerating power of the Gospel on human life,
which even enemies were compelled to admit. And it was the
wisdom He bestowed upon men of humble life and humble mind
which endowed them with power to establish an organisation
•elastic enough, and strong enough to bind all classes of men into
a holy association devoted to His service, and pledged to live
according to His commands.


His Influence on Domestic and Social Life.
Here, depend upon it, we find the fountain of the spiritual
power which has revolutionised society, much as the great, quiet
forces of Nature change the face of the earth at spring-tide.
And the great change began in the family, where its hallowed
influence was spread over infants and women, where it sanctified
monogamy, and preserved the purity of the family hearth. The
oppressed slave had his burden lightened by being taught to
render principled service instead of constrained, or his lot was
improved by the gracious treatment of a lord whose heart was
influenced by the merciful doctrines of the Gospel. And, strange
to say, though there is no word of direct condemnation of
slavery in the New Testament, yet the working of the brotherly
spirit which it engenders gradually brought about the emanci-
pation of slaves in Europe. Here, we trace its influence on the
ordinary avocations of life, making them all modes of serving
the Lord. There it comes in contact with human suffering, and
manifests the philanthropy of Jesus Christ. Visit the estab-
lishments in this colony, supported for the benefit of poor
lunatics. See what humane arrangements, what almost princely
•expenditure, what scrupulous regard is paid to health, what care
is bestowed upon surrounding scenery whose soothing influence
must exert a salutary effect upon even a disordered mind. Was
there ever a religion in the world that evinced such a spirit but
the religion of Jesus Christ ? The classes, rich and poor, the
.great questions of labour, property, morality, government, and
punitive justice owe much to Christian influence. Indeed, every
aspect of social life is taken into view, and directly controlled by
the sovereign power of Jesus Christ.
His Influence on Art.
If we turn to poetry, sacred poetry stands supreme for chastity
of language, naturalness of description, sublimity of conception,
and purity of style. And if we remember that the most glowing
sentiments are those which depict the glories of Messiah’s
Kingdom, we shall here find a proof of the supremacy of Christ.
Or, if we walk along the corridors of the past, rich in noblest
sculpture, we shall see human genius consecrated to His service.
It has been said that “the history of sculpture is almost the
history of idolatry.” Then, how much greater the wonder that
this gift should have been subordinated to Jesus Christ. Yet
so it is. One of the most masterly compositions of any school
of sculpture is a semi-circular basso-relievo in marble by Nicolo
Pisano, representing the taking down from the cross. And
Raphael’s picture of the “ Transfiguration of Christ ” is described
as his best work. The dulcet strains of music blend to make
His praise glorious. Hadyn, joining the harmony of the
spheres, sings of that creation which bespeaks His divine power.


Mozart celebrates the glory which He receives in heaven, and on
earth. Mendelssohn realizes the conflicting history of the
“ Prophet of Fire,” who was the prototype of the harbinger of
the Lord. Handel has set the sorrows of the Man of Sufferings
to pathetic strains. Beethoven brings up the chorus which arises
from the world renovated by His power. As the rivers come
from the sea, and return to it again, so human intelligence,
genius, and taste, proceeding from Him who stands at the head
of humanity, in whom is life—life which is the light of men—
return to their source and accomplish their true mission, when
their best works are laid at the feet of Jesus Christ.
He is Supreme in the Intellectual World.
The influence of Jesus Christ on the intellectual life of the
world Phillips Brooks finds in the fact that He is the truth, that
His is the kingdom of the truth. He thus possesses the means
by which the intellect can be influenced. But in His case it is
truth, not only grasped by the understanding, but possessed by
the affections and the will. Intelligence subordinated to obe-
dience, and included in the consecration of the whole life to it.
His influence on His disciples was remarkable. They were
inspired by it to receive Nature’s utterance as consonant with the
Divine will and character. They believed in the possibility of
life being larger than their knowledge of it. They saw sur-
rounding circumstances in Christ’s light, and the way in which
the nobler life of the world was to be developed. I hey learnt
also to discover some point of interest in those with whom they
had to do. They acquired the power to find the principle under
the letter, and to move on from the special to the universal
application of truth. His influence on the intellectual life
of the nations, he goes on to show, is seen in the constant
“ struggle after symmetry in the intellectual action of
mankind,” the search after harmony in all the knowledge
obtained; the immediateness of Divine influence, that power
recognised by men who gain the hearing of their fellows; the
opportunity of intellectual life open to all; and the everlasting
progress of knowledge, for Christ has joined together our ignorance
and the knowledge of God. The testimony is valuable as coming
from one who is truly a “man of the times,” and who takes a
broad view of the affairs of the world. One of the grand im-
pressions the mind receives from a reverent, profound study of
Church history is that the Person of Jesus Christ opens a ques-
tion which reveals the thoughts of many hearts, and engages
the attention of all classes. Bitter opponents, heretical sects,
councils, theologians, philosophers, kings and emperors, eminent
jurists and scientists have been constrained to face it. Take
such a work as Doiner’s “ Doctrine of the person of Christ,” if
you wish to realise what a vast amount of intellectual power has


“been developed inanswering thequestion, “ Whois JesusOhrist ?”
Beginning with the witnessing Church, you soon emerge upon a
battlefield where active minds are engaged in earnest contest.
The brightest intellects of the world, past and present, men who
have taken a prominent part in moulding our forms of thought,
have been unable to evade the question, “ Who is Jesus
Christ?” No doubt the prominence of this question in eccles-
iastical circles was to be anticipated, and even this fact has its
value as furnishing evidence of its importance ; but it has also
loomed up before the minds of thinkers outside of the Church
and chained their attention—thinkers of successive ages, of
various countries, and occupying different attitudes towards the
question. Granted that many of them diverge greatly from the
Church conception of Christ as embodied in the Petrine con-
fession, yet they felt obligated to face it as a burning question.
Why ? One says :—“ The relation of man to God, to the world,
and to himself, has been wholly changed by Christianity.”
Thus we see that the great question of the Person of Jesus
Christ impinges upon human interests at all points, and must
be grappled with by all who desire to solve the problem of
human life. Nor is there any sign of an abatement of interest.
The literature of the last quarter of a century on this subject
furnishes a convincing proof that the human mind is still stirred
by the question which Jesus Christ raised at Caesarea Philippi,
which He intended to affect all classes, and continue through all
time. There is the fact that men’s thoughts have been em-
ployed, and are still intensely concentrated upon the question
“Who is Jesus Christ?” Does it not witness to the lordly
supremacy of Christ in the intellectual world ?
Religious Influence on Scientific Progress.
We hear a great deal in these days about the antagonism
between Science and Revelation. Those of us who keep our
reading fairly abreast of the times are tolerably conversant with
the pros and cons of this controversy. We honestly believe that
the balance of evidence is in favour of harmony, not discord.
When you get on true ground in Revelation and Science, there is
no divergence. Human interpretations of Revelation, and specu-
lations in Science may collide, and one is thankful that they do;
but in each department whatever is able to abide the test of
honest criticism is strictly related to the other. The sphere of
law is not confined to the visible world, it governs man’s mental
and moral life, and as far as we are able to understand, it is
established in the spiritual region also. We need not hesitate,
therefore, to endorse the opinion of Bunsen : —“The full light
of Science does not eclipse the truth of the Bible, but only leads
us, by its discoveries, to understand the sacred pages aright, and
shows more and more convincingly their imperishable worth.”


But another line of argument is finding favour, and will doubt-
less command proper recognition in due time. The claim is,
that Modern Science owes its existence to Christianity, being
indebted to it for the governing principles which have guided
it in its wonderful discoveries. Listen to the words of Dr. Mart-
ensen in his “ Christian Ethics ” (Social). “ The deepest
thinkers have always perceived that not the physical, but the
ethical, world is the higher, and that the central point of human
inquiry and the enigma of human life, is man himself. The
wisdom of the ancient world closed its career by racking its brains
over the ideal of humanity, which it was always seeking, but
never finding; and, despairing of itself, it sank, worn out and
exhausted. Christianity which solved the enigma by the per-
sonal ideal of humanity who descended from Heaven, which
teaches us that only in God and His revelation does the
enigma of human life find its solution, has given to Science a
new development, not only by emancipation from the restrictions
of the ancient world, but also by the power of eternal redemp-
tion.” This is a statement that needs confirmation. And it
seems to me this has been furnished by Ernest Naville in his
admirable work on “ Modern Physics.” We are more imme-
diately concerned with the portion of it in which he deals with the
“ Influence of Peligious Beliefs upon the guiding Principles of
Physics,” and the “ Consequences of Scientific Atheism ; ” in the
first he gives the positive proofs; in the second, the nega-
tive. His position is nicely put in few words : “ The founders
of Modern Physics have all been placed under the influence of
their faith in God the Creator, and have connected with that
faith the guiding principles of their researches.” Further : “An
attentive study of the subject has led me to the clear conviction
that, on the condition of the observation of facts, Science had its
origin under the influence of these two ideas, the immaterial
nature of the soul, and the existence of God.”
The Position Logically Maintained.
He goes on to show that the guiding principles of Science
existed to some extent in the minds of Grecian philosophers, but
polytheism was an obstacle to their development and application.
In some of the schools of philosophy, the unity of God was recog-
nised, but the conception was vitiated, because the ancient mind
was unable to disengage “ the idea of the unity of the principle
of the universe from dualism, unless by formulating in the direc-
tion of pantheism, which allies easily with idolatry.” The people
of Israel possessed a clear idea of the unity of God, and cele-
brated His praises as the Creator of all things. But they were
not scientists. While they regarded God as the cause of all
things, they were not addicted to the study of natural laws.
Their monotheism was passed down to the Christian Church by


Christ and His Apostles, who preached it with power. Still it
had to contend against Pagan opposition and the crudities of the
Christian sects, so that it was not firmly rooted till the Middle
Ages. He says : —“ This period of history offers to observation,
in regard to the development of the human mind, these two
capital facts: the logical culture of the understanding, under
the discipline of Aristotle, and the definite establishment of the
idea of the unity of the principle of the universe.” The union
of Hebrew monotheism and the rational tendency of the Greek
thinkers was the arduous work of fifteen centuries. But though
united at this period, the absence of liberty prevented progres-
sive thought. The mind of man needed to be emancipated before
Modern Science could enter upon its course under the influence
of a right conception of the Divine unity, and the free exercise
of the power of reason. Thus the words of Professor Du Bois-
Eeymond to the German naturalists assembled at Cologne are
true :—“ Though it may sound like a paradox, Modern Science
owes its origin to Christianity.” M. Naville proceeds :—“After
having set in contrast the polytheism of the ancient world to the
pure and complete theism which Christianity has spread through
the world, the Berlin Professor went on to say :—‘ This idea of
God, handed down for ages from generation to generation, came
at last to react upon Science itself, and by accustoming the
human mind to the conception of a unique reason for things,
kindled in it the desire to know that reason.’ ”
Illustrious Examples.
To the fundamental principle that “ Nature is governed in
a way conformable to the laws of our understanding,” four
others must be added which are included in it, viz., Causality,
Constancy, Simplicity, and Harmony. It was their belief in
the unity, wisdom, and goodness of God that guided the
pioneers of Science in their discoveries. Copernicus, who
firmly believed in the wisdom of God, was led to dissent
from the popular opinion that the earth was the centre of our
system. Kepler from the Divine intelligence expected to find
those laws which He gave to the universe characterised by unity
and universality. Bacon’s scientific career was under the control
of the lofty sentiments contained in his memorable words : “ The
three steps by which Science rises to unity are somewhat similar
to that three-fold ascription—Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus ; for God
is holy in the multitude of His works, holy in the order in which
He has disposed them, and holy in their harmony.” His con-
tention for the necessity of observing God’s works, in order to
understand them, rested on a religious basis. It was reverence
for the power of God that made him plead for careful observa-
tion of His great works instead of “ each man looking upon the
universe from the recesses of his own brain.” Descartes saw a


road from our understanding of God to our acquaintance with
the things of the universe. He confessed : “ The certainty and
truth of all Science depend wholly and only upon the knowledge
of the true God.” He held that our clear, distinct conception of
the true is certain only on the supposition that a perfect God
exists, from whom we derive all things. The fact that the world
is governed by laws in harmony with those of our understanding,
is a proof of its oneness, of the unity of its Creator, and this is
the principle of its harmony. Galileo’s belief in the wisdom of
God, which employed the simplest means, led him to regard the
laws of Nature as of the simplest character. His persuasion of
the wonderful intelligence of the author of Nature led him to
reject the Ptolemaic system. Newton’s discovery of universal
gravitation was the product of his faith in God as a wise
sovereign who rules all things and is the same everywhere. The
mathematical discoveries of Leibnitz, and his general ideas,
which greatly affected the progress of Science, were due to the
central thought which occupied his mind, that there is harmony
established by God in the universe. Fresnel’s faith in Provi-
dence led him to accept the undulatory theory of light
because it was in harmony with the principle of sim-
plicity. Liebig, the great German chemist, confessed
that what we know of Nature by experience impresses
upon us the conviction of a being far superior to man,
who is recognised by His perfect mind, by His greatness and
sublimity. We are told that in one of his attempts to apply
chemistry to agriculture to remedy an exhausted soil, he credited
himself with having made a discovery ; but on further investi-
gation he found that provision for the recuperation of the soil
always existed in Nature, though it was so wonderfully arranged
that the possibility of such a law eluded human discovery. So
with Faraday’s labours in connection with the unity of physical
forces, and Mayer’s in connection with the conservation of energy
—their religious beliefs were the mind and soul of their scientific
pursuits. Other names are cited as witnesses, and others sug-
gested as available to swell the testimony. Then our illustrious
author sums up his conclusions thus :—“ In the foundation and
development of Physics definite principles have directed experi-
mental researches, and belief in God has afforded to those prin-
ciples a solid point of support. This belief has strengthened
and confirmed the tendencies of the reason which lead it to the
research of unity, harmony, and simplicity. Scientific hypotheses,
although conceived under the influence of true principles, still
have no value except so far as they are confirmed by experience,
for the human mind is prone to wander, even when it takes
truth as its point of departure. In the intellectual locomotive,
experience is the combustible, and belief—the centre of the


guiding principles—is the fire. This Kant acknowledged and
proclaimed when he wrote :— ‘ For the unity which reason gives
me as a guiding clue in the investigation of Nature, I know no
other condition than to suppose that a Supreme Intelligence has
ordered all in pursuit of the wisest ends. To suppose a wise
author of the universe is, therefore, a condition of an end, which,
in truth, is contingent, but which is, however, not without impor-
tance —that, namely, of having a guiding clue in the investiga-
tion of Nature.’ ”
Commendation or the Argument.
Into the other line of proof, viz., that Scientific Atheism dries up
all the sources of true scientific progress, it is not necessary to go.
We have seen enough in the evidence produced to endorse the
words of Martensen : —“ Christianity, by emancipating men from
the limitations which were peculiar to the ancient world, opened a
new horizon, and made possible the universal character of
Science, its free movement in all directions. The new view of
life and of the world which Christianity introduced penetrated
the world of thought in various ways, like leaven.” Nor is this
wonderful, for where there is a perfect knowledge of God there
is a fitness to study Nature, which is His work, and a revelation
of “ His eternal power and Godhead.” When we understand
an author’s life and character we are better prepared to appre-
ciate his work. Take as an illustrative case that interesting
series of biographies, “English Men of Letters.” Having gone
through these life sketches, we are able to read our English
classics with greater discernment and appreciation. We may
learn something of the authors from their works, but, depend
upon it, a thorough knowledge of the history of the authors is
the best key to open up the treasures of their works to us. So,
with the clear eye that sees the unity of God, His wisdom, His
changelessness, His goodness, it is possible to read with greater
facility the records of them on the fair pages of Nature, to detect
traces of them in the works of the Lord, which are searched out
with pleasure under the inspiration of religious principles.
Appraise the argument at its proper value. There is force in it.
It is a strong link in the chain. It bids fair to become one of
the brightest trophies of Christ in these last days, and one of
the most convincing proofs of His regnant power. It takes its
rise in the scientific world. There may it win and conquer, and
bring Science to bow to Christ, its author and end —for Chris-
tianity is the mother of Modern Science, and, like many a fond
parent, has had cause to complain, “ I have nourished and
brought up children, but they have rebelled against me.”
The Ideal Christian Life Sketched by John.
The existence of the Christian Church has often been referred
to as an evidence of the deity of Jesus Christ, and on any other


hypothesis it is impossible to account for its origin, progress,
establishment, continuance, and widening influences in a world
that was intensely hostile to it at the beginning of its history—
and even now, though conscious of its power, is little capable of
understanding the principles by which it is swayed. But
another line of argument seems possible, and, if rightly fol-
lowed, cannot fail to make a profound impression on the candid
inquirer. Take the ideal Christian life as it is presented to us in
the pages of the New Testament; and, remember, it is a standard
of life which was meant to be reached—which doubtless has
been reached in numberless instances—and then ask yourself
the question whether such a life is possible without the super-
natural aid of Jesus Christ, who is “the Head of the Church
and the Saviour of the body.” The task of pourtraying such a
life is by no means an easy one, since traces of it are found
throughout the New Testament. It seemed to me, therefore,
an incumbent duty to go over the whole ground afresh, so as to
speak in accordance with the oracles of God. This life, then,
begins with faith in Christ, which secures to it the right of son-
ship, is the condition of everlasting life, and becomes a means of
authenticating God’s truthfulness. Its maintenance is provided
for by the living bread which satisfies the soul’s hunger, and the
spiritual water which allays its thirst. As needing careful
tending and succour from danger, it obtains entrance into the
sheepfold by Christ the door, and is the special charge of the
Good Shepherd. Whatever power enslaves, whether arising
from human nature, the outside world, or Satan, deliverance is
secured by the intelligent and hearty reception of the truth, and
interest in the Father, through the adoption of the Son, confers
the privilege of freedom indeed. The bonds are loosed as a
preparation for service, which is effective, as it resembles
Christ’s, for He joins service and following Him together,
demands the exercise of a self-renouncing spirit, and urges the
necessity of love to supply the proper motive power of service
and invest it with such qualities as will make it at once a mani-
festation of affection towards Himself and acceptable to His
Father. The revelation of the Father is made to such as these
because they have the requisite power of appreciation, and the
spirit is bestowed to lead them into all truth, to comfort them,
to gird up their strength for all coming trials. For this life is
to have its trials, its sorrows, its persecutions, but in conjunction
with the Word, communion with the Saviour, and the illumina-
tion of the Spirit, they are to ensure great fruitfulness. In the
world where evil surrounds, they are to he consecrated to God’s
service, and, though representing different phases of thought,
experience, and attainment, rising above all party barriers, they
are to realise the unity of the Spirit in the bonds of love and


perfectness ; and so the Church on earth is to reflect the ineffable
union and affection of the true God and His Son Jesus Christ,
until the Redeemer's will is executed and His consecrated fol-
lowers are admitted to His presence and privileged to behold
His glory. So, in the main, is the plan of the Christian life, as
John sketches it in that memorable Gospel of his, which was
meant to specialise the Divine nature, power, and revelations of
our adorable Lord. Whatever those revelations had to say
about the life which resulted from vital union with the Son of
God, the branch living in “ the True Yine,” we should expect
them to speak of a life marked by qualities answering to its
great original source. A life which at its initiation was honoured
with the prerogatives of Divine sonship would need supernatural
aid to keep it on its level, and enable it to make progress on the
lines laid down. Its law is so evidently “of Him, and through
Him, and to Him,” that the argument for the need of Divine
aid, all through its history must be esteemed as valid. “He
who hath begun a good work in you will perform it until the
day of Jesus Christ.”
Same Life in Synoptical Gospels and Epistles.
But we have additional touches in the Synoptical Gospels and
Epistles giving side views of this beautiful face, tracing
out the history of this noble manhood in all the practical details
of life, looking at it under the law of self-sacrifice, under the
influence of philanthropy, the energy of the Spirit; as doing,
daring, contending, contemplating, adjusting relationships,
revealing character, choosing and pursuing a course; strong in
faith, actuated by hope, governed by love, and in various other
ways living a unique life, not only not according to the customs
aad maxims of the present age, but under the inspiring influ-
ence of a Divine power. This life is carried on in the world
which is out of harmony with God, and this fact has to be recog-
nised in many practical ways. A life which is comparable to the
light of the world, and pungent salt, cannot be reckless in its
proceedings, hence the need of energetic endeavour to escape
from the dominant evil of life, lusting after earthly things, and
building up a character which, being graced with Divine quali-
ties, is able to see the wide sweep, the grand issues of life, and
to realise the Christian’s noble destiny—conformity to Jesus
Christ. A steadfast stand must be made against evil. Neither
by word nor deed must there be the slightest trace of fellowship
with it. And, yet, wisdom must be shown in this non-confor-
mity to the world. And in all the active duties bearing upon
its condition the same wisdom must appear. We must be free
from its absorbing interest in earthly things, trust God for tem-
poral good as well as spiritual, and find our heart’s treasure in
heaven. Our religion must be pure ; based upon right being


and right doing. Caesar has claims upon us as well as God, and
the lower must never be suffered to trench upon the higher, nor
the higher to swallow up the lower. At many points we shall
come into collision with the world, according to the measure in
which we live godly in Christ Jesus ; but its opposition, in what-
ever form manifested, must be borne in a resigned spirit after
the example of Jesus Christ, The relationships of life, making
up an important part of our earthly history, must be sustained
in a manner which will find room for the claims of those bound
to us by such ties, and yet give prominence to the idea that all
such relationships are means to an end. As the children of
light and the day we must not live as others, but walk in the
Spirit in whom we have our life ; and this walk must be worthy
of God and our dignified calling in Him, while it is to be regu-
lated by the spirit in which we received Christ, and made ser-
viceable among men as a testimony favourable to the spread of
the Gospel and the honour of our Lord. Unequal yoking, love
of money, fleshy lusts, and all such evils are to be avoided as
contaminating sins, for it is an imperative duty to keep our-
selves unspotted from the world, and live as the sons of God
without rebuke. Bound as we are to others in the Church who
may have less light, and be very scrupulous, we must not stand
on rights, but show a tender regard for weak persons, and
deal with the fallen in a spirit of consideration, remembering
our own liability to fall. We must be forbearing towards the
erring, love those stoutly opposed to us, overcome evil with good,
and in these ways show ourselves imitators of God as dear chil-
dren. Our nature must be brought under the Divine control.
r lhe body subjected to a wholesome regime. The mind occupied
with the will of the Lord. The heart filled with the duty of love
to God and man. We must put character above position, prin-
ciple above forms and ceremonies, sincere endeavour to please
the Lord, above special days and prescribed meats. Not only
the softer graces, such as compassion, pitifulness, tenderness,
but the more heroic virtues must appear in our lives. There
must be no scruple to take up the cross. No attempt to find the
natural life, or save it at the expense of duty, but the life must
be given up, self-denied, all connections broken at the bidding
of Christ. In no sense are we our own. Our persons, property,
talents, influence, belong to Him who has the double right of a
Creator and Redeemer. There is nothing small in life, for all
may of God partake and subserve His glory. Things are not
what they seem. Adversities which have a forbidding aspect are
really helping to fashion us for a nobler life ; so are the fiery
temptations of Satan and the trials of the world. Call them by
what name you please, all things are ours by virtue of our rela-
tion to Christ, who has gained the mastery over them. We


cannot avoid death more than other men, but its character is
changed; it has no sting, it is subjugated, enlisted in our
service, changed into a sleep which will last for an appointed
time. It is to he followed by an awakening, when the
desire which we have felt intensely all along, shall be
crowned with the blessing of a pex-fect redemption. Such a hope
arms us with zeal to purify the life and character, to follow
earnestly after holiness, as the condition of seeing Q-od and being
able to dwell in His presence. And this is not a ghostly, unreal
thing, hut literally the consecration of the whole life to Q-od,
inwardly and outwardly, great and little, thought and action,
temporal duties and cares, spiritual claims and responsibilities,
and life comes under the law which gives a heavenly character
to all its issues, “ Whatsoever ye do in word or deed do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus.”
The Christian needs the aid of a Divine Lord.
There are men who will not scruple to tell us “ That all this
New Testament teaching presents an ideal life which it is all
very well to talk about, but the endeavour to reach it is Utopian.
It is an impossible, and unattainable life in these times.” That
robs Christianity of its practical tendency, and converts it into
an abstract religion which is devoid of all power to regulate
human life. And what sort of a conception does it give us of
God and His Christ who have planned such a life, and called us
to rise up to it, if it is unattainable ? Such an assumption is
an offence against the generation of God’s children. Have all
who ever named the name of Christ proved defaulters ? Where
are all those resources of power of which we read, if all believers
in Christ Jesus have failed to reach the standard of Christian
life ? That theory must be abandoned, for it makes Christ play a
farcical part, and reduces Christianity to a mere name. Looking
at it as all earnest Christians must, it is a life answering to the
Apostle’s apt description, when he styles it “ our high calling of
God in Christ Jesus.” High indeed it is. It is only by deep
teaching carried on throughout life that we come to understand
what manner of persons we ought to be. The life, as outlined
in the resume just given, is far above the current life of the
present age, and is to find its culmination in conformity to Jesus
Christ. If at the beginning of his career the believer realises
that, separated from Christ, he can do nothing, how is
it possible for him to achieve the conquests, to perform
the duties, to bring forth the fruits, to acquire the lessons, to
manifest the graces of such a life —in a word, to live a heavenly
life on earth —without Divine aid ? The higher his conception
of the greatness of the Christian life rises, the more profound
will be his conviction that he can do all things through Christ,
who strengthens him, to whom he is joined in spirit. Such a


life needs an adequate foundation, and a sustaining energy
greater than its own. It needs superhuman aid. It has it too ;
for it is with a triumphant air the Christian confesses—“ That
life which I now live in the flesh I live in faith, the faith which
is in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave Himself up for me.”
In the Person of Jesus Christ we have found the truth the world
was feeling after, hut was never able to grasp. He was God’s
answer to humanity’s prayer. His miracles and teachings, and
extraordinary traits of character are luminous enough when we
look at them through the Person of Jesus Christ. As we look
around, evidence of His Lordship bursts upon the view. We see
it in the aggressive work of the Church and her mighty conquests,
which changed the course of history and governed the ages ; in
the transformation of domestic and social life, in the dedication of
Art to the Christian cause, in the intellectual activity awakened
and sustained, in the guidance and inspiration afforded to the
pioneers of Science, and above all in the Christian’s need,
for he requires a Divine Lord to enable him to “ stand
perfect and complete in all the will of God.” An in-
fidel author concluded his fourth volume on the “ Origin
of Christianity ” by speaking of the New Testament
on this wise : —“ And this is all; nothing else ! Just a
handful of books in which there is so little ! And is it then on
this that the Christian world has lived? ” No, not on the books,
but on the living Christ they reveal. It is written, “ the world
knew Him not,” and to-day they ignore His Person and His
Power. But while the world revolts against Christ’s claim to be
absolutely necessary to the spiritual life, we accept the truth
with all cordiality, and to His question, “ Will ye also go
away ? ” reply wdth Peter : “ Lord, to whom shall we go ? Thou
hast the words of eternal life, and we have believed, and know
that Thou art the Holy One of God.”


THE BIBLE THE ONLY CREDIBLE EXPLA-
NATION OF WHAT MAN WAS, IS,
AND WILL BE.
LECTURE YIII
The Hon. Alexander Gordon, Q.C., M.L.C.


THE BIBLE THE ONLY CREDIBLE EXPLANATION OF
WHAT MAN WAS, IS, AND WILL BE.
1. It was with some hesitation that I acceded to the request
made to me to undertake the delivery of one of the lectures which
the Council of the Christian Evidence Society arranged should he
given during the winter months of this year. I was apprehensive
that the cause with which the Lectures have to deal might not
receive from me that effective support which it is entitled to
expect at the hands of one standing forward in public as its
advocate. I trust, however, that this apprehension may turn
out to be unfounded, and I certainly rely with some confidence
on the courteous indulgence of my hearers to assist me in the
discharge of the duty which notwithstanding my original hesi-
tation I have on the present occasion undertaken to perform.
And now although I have little pretention to the eloquence and
learning of those who have preceded me as the exponents of
various portions of the general subject which is dealt with in
these Lectures, I am inclined to think that I may not be without
certain advantages in addressing you. I come forward as a
Layman, as one who, unaffected by what is generally assumed
must be professional bias, is as free as any one of you to think
independently upon such a topic as that which forms the subject
of this Lecture. I am here, in fact, to state as distinctly as I
can conclusions at which I have arrived, with the hope that in so
doing 1 shall assist others who may be disposed to accept the aid
of a fellow-student and a Seeker after Truth. It is a well worn
simile to compare the life of a man to a journey, but it is not the
less true for being trite. Its aptitude to express our position in
the world forces itself upon us as we advance in life. The
freshness of the start, the steady labour of the mid journey, and
the desire of rest as the end is neared are common to the type
and to the anti-type. The traveller, indeed, finds himself on the
road all but unconscious of the commencement of the way, and
thus it happens that in many cases he fares on without much
more thought than what is directly connected with the free and
pleasant exercise of those faculties with which mind and body
are severally endowed. But I feel sure that, in these days at
least, an intelligent man can hardly arrive at the midstage of his
course, and assuredly cannot progress far beyond it, without
certain questions forcing themselves on his attention. What


means this journey on which I find myself ? What has caused
me to he here as lam ? What will be my state at my journey’s
close ? What is man ? What was man ? What will man be ?
His present condition—his past history—his future destiny.
These are subjects which must engage the attention of every
thoughtful traveller. In fact, these questions have in some way
or other been asked, and answers to them have been sought
through the whole course of the world’s past history. And these
questions are still asked and answers to them are still sought
and with as much earnestness as ever. And my object in this
Lecture is to direct attention to answers which may satisfy those
who are real and honestly minded seekers after truth. The
attempted answers of past times were returned in the absence
of knowledge which we now possess, and certain answers of the
present day are given sometimes in neglect and sometimes even
in ostentatious defiance of that knowledge. It need not, there-
fore, he matter of surprise if these various answers are for the
most part hopelessly imperfect and unsatisfactory.
I propose, then, so far as time will admit, to direct your
attention to the results of the efforts which were made in times
past to answer the questions I have indicated. I intend to point
out the answers which can be now given, and by comparing the
one set of answers with the other, I hope to secure an assent to the
conclusion not only that the answers which can now be given are
in themselves complete and credible, but that in their complete-
ness and credibility they afford proof of the higher than human
authority of the Revelation by means of which they are presented
for the acceptance of mankind.
There are, I admit, persons whom this examination and reason-
ing will not, and cannot directly, affect. I knowthat there are those
who have made up their minds that man’s journey through this
world leads to nowhere, and that he and this life-work will end
together. To such the questions with which lam proposing to
deal will be matters of little interest. And, therefore, should
such be present, I can only ask their courteous attention while I
address myself to those who being ready to admit that the ques-
tions suggested involve matters of real concern, may also be dis-
posed fairly to weigh the merits of answers which they cannot
but allow have a practical bearing on the highest objects of their
existence.
Before, however, entering upon the direct consideration of my
subject and as bearing upon the remarks I have just made, I
desire to point out the close connection which exists between the
fact that civilised men have ever taken an interest in questions
such as those with which we have now to deal, and another fact,
viz., that civilised men have never been without a religion,
meaning by that word a system upon which they have proposed


to themselves to fulfil the obligations which they have recognised
to he due to some Power out of themselves. The consequence of
this connection is that it is within the religious system which any
association of men has adopted that the answers to the questions
which have so interested them have to he sought, and the
character of the religious system is greatly tested by its ability,
or the reverse, to deal with those questions.
2. After these remarks, hy way of introduction, we are, I think,
in a position to enter upon a consideration of the immediate
subject of my lecture.
Man’s present Condition —What Man is ?
Man’s past History—What Man was ?
Man’s future Destiny—What Man will be ?
Correctly to estimate the first;
‘ To give a credible account of the second;
To forecast the third consistently with the first and second.
These are matters on- which the seriously thinking part of
mankind has, as I have intimated, been in some form or other
engaged for centuries. It might indeed have been assumed that
these efforts would be to a great extent ineffective unless and
until some aid was forthcoming from a source external to the
enquirers. Now the student of the history of the world finds an
epoch in that history when such aid was afforded. The intro-
duction of Christianity marks a change in the relation of man to
all which is outside of this world, a change which has been
admitted by, and has affected millions of the human race. In
consequence of it men have been led to look to a Great Being,
the Creator of all things, to One who has placed his creatures,
men and things, where and as they are ; to One who provides
and cares for his creatures in their several positions, and has
secured to them a future destiny consistent alike with their
present condition and past history. Men have been told, too,
that this Creator has revealed himself to his creatures, and in-
structed them in his will, and that this Revelation exists in a
form of teaching familiar and accessible to all. The Christian
religion claims to be possessed of this Revelation, and presents
it to the world in the form of the Book—the Bible.
If this account be true, man may expect to find in this Revela-
tion, in this Bible, some answers to his questionings as to his
past history —some solution of his perplexities with regard to
his present position —and some forecast as to his future destiny
upon which he can rationally rely.
In order to appreciate fully the value of this Revelation, from
which so much may be expected, it is absolutely necessary to


make ourselves acquainted, to some extent at least, with what
was effected in the same direction by systems of religion anterior
to that Revelation being made.
Let us, then, at once turn to the past history of the world.
And, doing so, let us fix our attention on the Greeks and
Romans as the two nations in which it is universally admitted
that the pre-christian civilisation culminated, and from which
modern civilization draws much of its highest teaching in
politics, in literature, in arts and sciences, and the thoughts and
feelings of which are generally consonant with those that are
familiar to the cultured intelligence of the present day. This
being so, it was to be expected that in the religious systems of
these nations some answer would be found worthy of acceptance
by those whose thoughts turned upon such subjects as the
present, the past, and the future position of man. As a matter
■of fact, however, such expectation is not realised, as we shall
immediately see. And here let it be clearly understood that my
examination of these religions is not general, but is directed to
one point only, that is to test their ability to answer enquiries
•of the nature just mentioned. Now, speaking historically, it
would seem that the religions of the Greeks and Romans had a
sort of common origin dating from a time before the ancestors of
each people had parted company. While living together in.
very early times (to quote the learned Dr. Theodore Mommsen)
“ those old tillers of the ground when the clouds were driving
along the sky probably expressed to themselves the phenomenon
by saying that the hound of the gods was driving together the
startled cows of the herd. The Greek forgot that the cows were
really the clouds and converted the hound of the gods —a form
devised merely for the particular purposes of that conception —
into the adroit messenger of the gods, ready for every service.
When the thunder rolled among the mountains, he saw Zeus
brandishing his bolts on Olympus; when the blue sky again
smiled upon him, he gazed into the bright eye of Athensea, the
daughter of Zeus ; but so powerful over him was the influence
of the forms which he had thus created that he soon saw nothing
in them but human beings invested and illumined with the
splendour of nature’s power, and freely formed and transformed
them according to the laws of beauty. It was in another
fashion, but not less strongly, that the deeply-implanted
religious feeling of the Italian race (the Romans) manifested
itself ; it held firmly by the idea and did not suffer the form to
obscure it Throughout the whole of nature the Roman
adored the spiritual and the universal. To everything existing
a spirit was assigned which came into
being with it and perished along with it, the coun-
terpart in the spiritual domain of the physical phenomenon.


While the Greek for the most part threw aside the old legendary
treasures of primitive times, because they embodied the idea in
too transparent a form, the Roman could still less abide by them
because holy thoughts seemed to him dimmed even by the
lightest veil of allegory.” I, 28, 3. From such a starting point
let us now follow for a few moments the Greeks and their
religion. Recognizing in a measure an Unseen Influence the
Greeks first humanized it and then deified it. Thus they were
not unprepared to assign and did assign to this Influence indivi-
dual existence and bodily form and shape, and thus, too, they at
last brought it down to the level of man. This in fact was what
the old poets Homer and Hesiod, with whose writings we are all
more or less familiar, did. What the Religion of the Greeks
then became is very correctly stated in the following interesting
passage, which I make no excuse for quoting from one of the St.
Giles Lectures on “The Faiths of the World,” p. 199.—“ The
Divine world became the counter part of the human. Olympus
was a Royal Palace, and Zeus the King, surrounded by his
attendants, among whom were found all the rivalries, jealousies
and intrigues that mark the aspirants to the favor of an earthly
monarch. No doubt the gods were stronger or more beautiful
than the inhabitants of earth, a finer blood coursed in their veins
and they were nourished by more heavenly food, but they ate
and drank and made merry like revellers of earth upon their
mountain top; and when they descended from it to the world
below, they were often mistaken for mortal men. Besides this
they were greatly multiplied in number, so that the Polytheism
which followed the Homeric age became even more marked than
before. There were deities of every city and mountain and
grove and river. There were deities who presided over every
stage of human life, from its beginning to its close ; over every
event, whether of joy or sorrow, by which our mortal lot is
checkered, over ever}' endowment of the mind and every affection
of the heart. And this multiplication of deities went on until in
that city, which was the capital of Greece, the centre of her
civilization, and learning, and art, it was said that it was easier
to find a god than a man In
this deifying process too, not only were the higher attributes of
humanity transferred to the Greek Pantheon, its meanest, most
sordid, most debased, and most sensual characteristics were
equally represented. To this period belongs the great immor-
ality of the gods. They had been much purer at the first, but
as the morals of Greece became loosened, its looser morals were
transferred to them, until they lived and laughed and quarrelled
and strove and sinned in the Olympian commonwealth, as if they
had belonged to the Agora or to the purlieus of a Greek city.
Yet all of them were presented as beings of that higher sphere;


in which, man was to find the objects of his worship and lessons
for his conduct.”
Such was the popular religion of the Greeks—such the
religion in which the men and women of Ancient Greece lived
and died. And I ask you to imagine if you can the possibility
of solving by means of a religion like this the perplexing pro-
blems of life. The seriously minded among the Greeks tried the
experiment and failed, and their efforts only intensified the
feeling which sprang up that some other religion was necessary,
and this tended to destroy the influence which their actual
religion, such as it was, might otherwise have exerted. As to
man’s past history and future destiny all enquiries were equally
unanswered. The past was really a blank, and the future was
inexpressibly dreary; the grave was man’s only home, and all
beyond was shadowy, indistinct, and unsatisfactory. The result
was that faith disappeared from the people, and was succeeded
by a speculative philosophy in which religion has no place. And
this philosophy thus left to itself, soon arrived at the stage when
as it has been truly said, it, “instead of giving greater depth
and freedom to the mind, rather renders it shallow, and imposes
on it the worst of all chains—chains of its own forging.” (iii.
427).
I think that I have done enough without going into the matter
more in detail to satisfy you that if what man is, what he was,
and what he will be, are enquiries worth making, answers to
them could not be secured through the medium of the religion
of ancient Greece. I will now ask you to follow me as I very
briefly examine the religion of ancient Rome.
Having the common origin with that of Greece, which I have
explained, you will be prepared to accept as a description of the
difference between the two religions the statement that all that
in the Greek religion was ideal was lost in the Roman, which
was in every respect a practical and utilitarian system. But the
Roman religion no more than the Greek enabled men to deal
with such questions as those now under consideration. As time
went on, indeed, the cultured Roman, dissatisfied with his
national religion, sought to enlarge his mind by the study of
Greek philosophy, and had such a thing been possible one might
have expected that the serious and practical Roman might have
gathered from the intellectual Greek materials to satisfy his
mental longings. But this result was not attained, and all that
he received was a philosophy, the nature of which I have des-
cribed. The Greek handed to him what Dr. Mommsen calls that
enchanted draught of speculation which is always dangerous,
but which when diluted and stale, as it then was, is certain
poison. And so the Roman found it. He became, as he has
been represented, an inferior scholar of a bad teacher. It would


detain us far too long to describe minutely the systems of Greek
philosophy, and how they affected the religions of Greece and
Rome, but if any one desires to see the lamentable barrenness of
the Grecian and Roman religions, when brought together in
philosophy, he has nothing to do but to peruse such a work as
Cicero’s “ Treatise on the Nature of the Gods.” That eminent
orator, statesman and philosopher sought consolation, as he tells
us, under various troubles which pressed upon him, in discussing
topics to which the questions we now have under consideration
are akin. He believed strongly in the superiority of Greek
philosophy, and strove by his own writings to bring it to bear
usefully on his fellow countrymen. The treatise to which I have
just referred is one of these efforts. In it he supposes a discussion
concerning the nature of the gods to take place between repre-
sentatives of the three great schools of Grecian philosophers, an
Epicurean, a Stoic, and one, like himself, belonging to a school
which denied generally the possibility of assured knowledge. And
what is brought out in this supposed discussion is something of this
kind (I am availing myself largely of language used by Dr.
Mommsen 111. 427). Cicero, and those of his turn of thought
contested every conclusion which was sought to be laid down as
established, and formulated nothing for themselves. The Epicu-
rean and Stoic agreed in trying to give a rational explanation of
the nature of things, the former starting with atoms of rigid
matter, out of which all things were evolved by mechanical
variations, the latter also starting with atoms of matter, but
giving to them a certain innate force, and a fluctuating movement
up and down. The Epicurian held that the gods could hardly
be said to exist, were a dream of dreams, and certainly had
nothing to do with the government of the world. The Stoic held
the gods to be active in their superintendance of human affairs.
He held also an immortality of the soul, which the Epicurean
denied. With regard to men and what should be the aim of
their lives, the Epicurean and Stoic were hopelessly at variance.
But I need not pursue this further. It must be clear that the
religions of Greece and Rome did not, and could not, afford
answers to the questions with which we are engaged. Men no
doubt, were feeling after, though they did not find, that which I
shall presently show Divine Revelation supplied. But it may be
asked, Were there not other systems of pre-christian religion
which, although unknown to, or, at all events, disregarded alike
by Greek and Roman, put forward something more credible and
satisfactory for the acceptance of mankind ?
This leads me to bring before you, as concisely as I can, the
religions of India, as illustrative of the thought of the Oriental
in distinction from that of the Western mind. And I shall deal
with these for the same limited purpose that I have had in view


when discussing the religions of Ancient Greece and home. I
will take first Brahminism, the oldest of these Eastern systems.
The root idea of Brahminism is not the rough Pantheism which
makes everything to he God, hut is this : That there is one
Being—no Second —that one Being Brahma—and that the world
and all the forms which matter assumes are illusions, preserving
only the semblance of reality. Applying this idea to man’s
actual existence in the world, it stamps on it as it is a state of
fixedness, and it is in this that the dreadful anti-social system of
caste has its origin. With regard to man’s past, it makes
his soul to be a limited portion of the unlimited spirit of
Brahma, and sets it off upon a journey which leads it through
a succesion of innumerable births, until it finally deposits it in
a human birth —when there the spirit enters upon a period of
probation, and according to its merits, and after other births, is
either raised to a rewarding heaven or sunk into a punishing
hell. Then, when in either one or the other of these the allotted
period of reward or punishment has been accomplished, it starts
anew as at the first. The great object, therefore, of desire
to the Brahmin is to be absorbed into the Supreme Soul, from
which his soul started as I have mentioned. But this absorption
is to be attained only by the observance of forms and ceremonies,
and by courses of conduct utterly impossible to be observed and
followed, and thus the idea of it tends to a result the very
opposite to that sought to be secured. The whole system is,
indeed, a logical absurdity for to assert that Brahma is the only
being, and that all we see in the world is an illusion, and then
to people the world, and to prescribe laws, and ceremonies to be
observed, and to set up the distinction of cas.te is a mass of
practical contradictions which could not give satisfaction to any
thinking being. And it did not. The common people wor-
shipped all sorts of gods, and believed in and dreaded the transmi-
gration of souls, which they recognized in its coarsest and most
repulsive form ; and it was this state of matters which, after an
experience of some thousand years gave rise to Buddhism. The
religious value of Buddhism has been already dealt with in the
most interesting and able lecture delivered by the Rev. Dr.
Jefferis. I therefore refer to it very briefly, and merely for the
particular purpose which I have immediately in view. Buddhism
has been described as a protest against the religious and social
despotism of Brahminism, and also as an attempt to escape the
terrible theories involved in the doctrine of Transmigration.
Instead of God being the only real being in the universe as with
the Brahmin, the Buddhist makes men to be the only beings.
He admits the existence of pain and sorrow, and points out
deliverance by Nirvana, that is a state of ceasing to exist, the way
to attain this state being by a life of the most painful virtue.


The inducement to such a life is that until Nirvana is attained a
man is subject to innumerable successive births, his state in each
being the result of his existence in the preceding one. The ob-
ject to be attained is therefore to get rid of Existence. The
matter is thus reasoned out. Existence is caused by attachment ,
that is inclination towards something. Inclination arises from
desire; Desire must be preceded by perception; Perception is
caused by contact; Contact implies the existence of the senses ;
the Senses can only perceive what is distinct , that is has form
and name ; Distinction is the result of ideas; Ideas are illusions,
the result of ignorance ; thus IGNORANCE is made to be the
cause of existence, and is to be got rid of by contemplation.
Then by means of contemplation in the manner prescribed a
state of incomplete Nirvana may be reached even in this life.
This will be succeeded by a progress in subsequent existence to
perfect Nirvana where there is complete rest—rest undisturbed
by even the idea of nothing—rest undisturbed by even the idea
of the absence of ideas. I think it will be allowed that if man
is to gain any intelligible conception of his past, his present, or
his future state, he can scarcely gain it from the 13 uddhist
system, and that whatever hold Buddhism has obtained can
hardty have been due to the clearness of its teachings, but is
rather to be attributed to the character of those to whom it was
presented—a character already distorted and weakened by
Brahminism and which Buddhism has not strengthened and
enabled, but has rather enfeebled and further debased.
Having thus dealt with the chief religious systems in the
Eastern world, it is hardly necessary for me to examine very
minutely the Confucianism of China or the Religion of Persia,
founded by Zoroaster. Seeing that the Brahmin looked on life
as an illusion, and the Buddhist viewed it as a curse, Confucius
seems to have substituted a morality for a theology, and to have
set up for his Chinese fellow-countrymen rules by which to
secure a perfect empire on earth, and to make China that perfect
empire. As a matter of fact, I cannot discover that Confucius
contributed anything to answer the questions with which we
have to do in this lecture.
The Religion of Persia, founded by Zoroaster some thousand
years before the Christian era, now requires a few words of
notice. It seems to have been in its origin a revolt against the
earlier form of Brahminism, and to have been as much a social
and political as a religious movement. Of Zoroaster himself
little certain is known historically, although there are stories
and legends in abundance. The religion which he founded
started with the idea of the existence of One Great Supreme
Being. Then, to account for the presence of evil, it recognized
the co-existence of what it treated as two original causes —one of


good and the other of evil—and that these appear in every-
thing, even in the Great Supreme Being himself. In process of
time these two causes were personified and deified, and were
converted into the leaders of two contending forces, numbers of
good spirits and bad spirits forming the armies of each. Every-
thing is ranged on one side or the other—nothing can be neutraL
As to the past time the good and bad spirits are represented as
being equal; they are still in conflict, but victory is ultimately
to be with the good spirit. As to what is to be the result of
this victory the Religion of Zoroaster, in its pre-christian form,
gave little information, except that all things will then come
right. With later developments, it is useless for the present
purpose to deal. As a pre-christian system it was not likely to
contain, and certainly it did not contain, any truth unknown to
other heathen Religions. It must now, I think, be clear that
the Religions of the Old World, from which most might have
been expected, had really nothing credible and certain to tell
explanatory of man’s present condition, past history, or his
future prospects. And here I cannot help noticing a fact to which
attention is drawn by the learned in such matters, namely, that
a careful examination of the different systems of heathen,
mythology exhibits such an agreement among them, not only in
what is obvious and natural, but also in what is arbitrary and
circumstantial, both in fanciful speculations and in artificial
observances as to lead to the conclusion that they must all have
had a common origin, in fact brings the enquirer back to the
Tower Builders on the plain of Shinar, and the dispersion of men
abroad upon the face of all the earth which thence took place.
3. It was upon the world involved in this darkness,doubt, and
uncertainty that the light of Christianity at last broke. It was
to the perplexed questioners of those days that Christian teachers
came and gave clear replies to their before unanswered enquiries.
Christianity proclaimed itself as the outcome, or rather the com-
pletion, of an existing religion (the Jewish), to which the
heathen world had paid little attention ; and with regard to the
message which it brought it asserted for it the character of a reve-
lation from God, part of which had been uttered long since when
prophets and holy men spake as they were divinely moved, and
the remainder of which was being delivered by the followers of
Him whose coming and ministry the former utterances had
heralded and foretold.
The message which Christianity delivered was indeed clear
and distinct. It told men as a fact, and appealed to their own
sense in proof of it, that there was a great God by whom all
things had in the beginning been called into existence, had been
created. It affirmed, and appealed to man’s reason to confirm


the assertion, that this Great Creator must be possessed in
full perfection of all those attributes and endowments,
which men recognised as existing in measure in them-
selves. It made men understand that they had been placed by
their Great Creator where, and as they found themselves, not
indeed as animated fixtures according to the caricature presented
by the Brahmin in his system of caste, but as beings capable of
advance, and bound to make the most of their several talents
and opportunities. It recognised as a fact that which each man’s
experience told him was true, namely, that while much in the
world was beautiful and pleasant, there was much too that was
the reverse. As to this it explained in clear and distinct terms
what some had already darkly guessed at, namely, that man
had been created and designed by his Creator not to be a mere
perfect piece of mechanism, but something vastly higher and
more wonderful—that he had been endowed with the marvellous
capacity to be, and was intended to be, a free agent, and that
thus it had come to pass by man’s own choice, and by man’s own
doing that the imperfections which are seen in this world exist,
imperfections by which what would otherwise have been beauti-
ful and perfect has been rendered distorted and faulty. It told
with equal certainty and clearness that the Great Creator had,
from the first, foreseen and provided a remedy for this state of
things. And it indicated that out of the combined elements of
man created free, man misusing his freedom, and man restored,
there arose a manifestation of the perfection of almighty Intelli-
gence, Goodness, and Power far higher than any single act
of creative energy, however perfect, could have exhibited.
But the Christian message did not stop here. It pointed out
that in the story of man’s creation was involved the assurance
of man’s immortality, and that from the history of his fall and
promised restoration was equally to be gathered an assurance
that his life would not end in the grave. It went still further,
and told of the reunion of body and soul after death, and thus
converted the future life from a dreary and shadowy thing into
a bright and substantial reality. And then with regard to what
this after life shall be, it told sufficient for the guidance of man,
when it represented it, as it did represent it, to depend on the
sentence of a Just Judge and at the same time a Loving Father;
this sentence beingpassed with reference to things done in this life—
patientcontinuance in well-doing here being connected with glory,
honour, and immortality, eternal life, hereafter. And the force of
this message was not lost because over the future lot of many there
still hung a heavy cloud of doubt veiling from human sight
the dealings of a perfectly just and merciful Being, who pro-
claimed himself as the Saviour of all. Now, I affirm that in
what I have hitherto stated I have in no way exaggerated either


what the Christian message announced or what pre-christian
systems of Religion failed to announce to mankind. If this be
so then it is clear that man by means of the former obtained a
knowledge of his present condition, his past history, and his future
hopes differing in clearness and credibility from anything
afforded by the latter. And I direct attention to the fact that
this Christian message is that which we now have before us in
the form of the Bible. And thus I link together the present
and the past, and claim for the contents of that Bible that it
contains a credible account of man’s condition here and of his
position hereafter such as no other religion has afforded, in
short the only credible account to which reference can be made.
4. But over eighteen centuries have passed away since the
Christian message was first given. The religions of Greece and
Rome have disappeared, and though the Indian, Chinese, and
Persian religions still hold a certain sway over large portions
of the human race it is in company with Christianity that
progress has been made, whilst those professing the older faiths
have been left behind in the race of intellectual advancement
and material improvement. It is also to be noted that with one
exception it cannot be said that any new religious system has
taken hold of any considerable section of mankind. That excep-
tion is Mahommedanism as to which and in reference to its
bearing on the subject of this Lecture it is sufficient to remark
that it is a faith of which the sword not the assent of the heart
was the pioneer; and that it would be an insult to a man having
any acquaintance with Biblical Christianity to suppose it possible
that with the view of attaining certainty as to his position in
this life and his condition hereafter he would desert the cross
and transfer his allegiance to the crescent.
Efforts, however, are unceasingly made to discredit the
Christian Religion and the value of the Revelation which it
brings. These mostly take the form of attacks on portions of the
Bible in its history and teaching. lam not going to deal with
them further than to point out that unless a man has persuaded
himself that there is no God or Creator, nine-tenths of these
attacks can produce but little practical result. If a man has
made up his mind that an Almighty Being has created all that
he sees and knows about, he can hardly be much affected by the
most ingenious suggestions that the Ante-deluvian creatures
could not have got into the Ark, or that the sun could not have
stood still at the command of Joshua, or that a dumb animal could
not have spoken with man’s voice. The sceptic may indeed ply his
hearer with suggestions that such things did not happen, but any
argument founded upon the impossibility of their taking place
must be futile, if that hearer believes that an Almighty Being
guides human affairs at his will. The Bible, be it remembered.


is not given to prove to man that there is a God, but to inform
him -what that God, of whose existence and power he has other-
wise sufficient evidence, desires him to do. Apart, however, from
attacks of the nature to which I have thus referred, atttempts are
made to explain away the whole system of Christianity and its
Divine message, and to shew that however credible and com-
plete its account of man’s position and prospects may be, such
account is worthless inasmuch as Christianity itself is a delusion.
These attempts assume two forms —the one seeks to get rid of
Christianity by placing it on a level with the Religions of Ancient
Greece and Borne; the other affects to supersede it, and every
other religion past and present, by setting up a Religion which
has all along, and still is, the soul as it were of these Religions,
and of which they have been, and are only, the outer ease or
covering. Of the value of these attempts I shall leave you to
judge when I have (as I now propose) briefly explained them
somewhat more in detail.
The theory that Christianity is to be regarded in the same way
as the Religions of Greece and Rome, though by no means new,
has had its fullest and latest development in the advocacy of Mr.
Gerald Massey who was recently among us here in Sydney. As
Mr. Massey is absent, I shall confine my remarks to simply
noticing the elaborate works which he has put forth, and direct-
ing attention to the extraordinary theory which they purport to
support.
Mr. Massey, according to his own statement, would seem to
have spent some ten years of his life in endeavouring to find out
a mode of explaining the existence of Christianity. The account
of his labours appears in four large octavo volumes, containing
over two thousand pages altogether. The conclusions arrived
at are —that Jesus Christ of the Gospels is not an historical
person—that he never lived —that Jesus Christ and his sayings
and doings are mythical—that they had been written long
before the Christian historians related them, and could be traced
to the history of the Sun God Osiris or Horus—that the cruci-
fixion is not a fact, but merely a representation of the sun in
autumn, the cross being the autumn equinox formed by the
junction of the equator and the meridian—that Herod is the
red dragon of an old Egyptian myth who was an enemy of the
sun —and that the betrayal by Judas is the betrayal of the
sun god as related in Egyptian mythology. Mr. Massey deals
in a similar way with all the sayings and doings of Jesus Christ.
He then affects to explain how it came to pass that the
Christians managed to write and get accepted as history what
had been thus written before as mythologies. His explanation
is of this kind—that the substratum of the Gospels was a
collection of sayings called the sayings of the Lord, assigned to


one Matthew as his Scribe, and that the early Christians
received these as the sayings of an historical Jesus written by
one of his followers, whereas the sayings were uttered by the
Logos of Egyptian mythology three thousand years before, and
the Scribe Matthew was one Martin known in mythology as
the Scribe of the gods. All this appears to me to be
on the face of it such a tissue of absurdity that it is not
without hesitation that I have ventured to put it before you.
It is, however, as I find it in Mr. Massey’s work, and as
such I give it. Mr. Massey evidently finds some difficulty in
dealing with the testimony borne to Gospel history in the
Epistles of St. Paul, but he meets it by boldly treating the Apostle,
whose existence he does not deny, as one who understood and
taught what he (Mr. Massey) asserts was the true nature of the
Gospel history, and that he was opposed by the other Christian
teachers of his day. The following remarkable passage clearly
shows the straits to which Mr, Massey felt himself to be
reduced. He writes—“ Paul passed away, and his writings
remained with the enemy to be withheld, tampered with, rein-
doctrined, and turned to account by his old opponents, who
preached the Gospel of Christ carnalized. But we know that
his Jesus and his Gospel were not theirs; we know that he
warred strenuously against their false interpretation of mythology,
and it now appears probable that the never-yet-fathomed ‘ mys-
tery of lawlessness ’ which Paul described as being already at
work was none other than the Gospel of the carnalized Christ,
which being foisted on the world by James, Cephas, and John,
one of the three being the man of sin, the lawless one (Anomos)
‘ the son of perdition, he that opposeth and exalteth himself
against all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he
sitteth in the temple of God, setting himself forth as God.’ He
is no outsider, but a mortal enemy within the gates ! In that
case Paul was the one who restrained them for the time being,
until he himself should be taken out of the way. Thus inter-
preted, Paul foresaw what would come to pass through the
pernicious teaching of James, John, Cephas, and other Sarkolatroe
when he himself should be removed, and we have seen what he
foresaw.” (Yol. ii. 496).
This passage is surely sufficient to show that Mr. Massey has
become hopelessly self-deluded ; it is therefore unnecessary for
me to deal further with his theories. It may, however, interest
you if I mention very briefly the process by which Mr. Massey
has arrived at his very extraordinary conclusions. Two of the
four volumes to which I have referred constitute a work called
“ A Book of the Beginnings.” In this it is “ maintained that
the oldest mythology, religion, symbols, language, had their
birth-place in Africa, that the Primitive race of Kam (Egypt) came


thence, and the civilization attained in Egypt emanated from
that country and spread over the world.” The author in pur-
suing this subject manages to satisfiy himself that the Jewish
Bible is not history, but Egyptian mythology—that in particular
the Glenesis and the Exodus are both myths and not historic
facts—Moses and Joshua not being real personages, hut the two
Lion gods of Egypt. Having gone thus far Mr. Massey in his
next work called “The Natural Genesis” sets himself to
“ demonstrate that the true subject matter of Holy Writ belongs
to astronomical mythology, and that this has been converted
into human history in both the Old and New Testaments.” And
thus it is that towards the close of the second volume he arrives
at the conclusion which I have already mentioned.
I now pass from Mr. Massey and his theory to the other attempt
which is made to get rid of Christianity and its teachings, namely,
by opposing to them a religion which it is affirmed has existed
through all the world’s history as the common substratum of all
the religious systems that have prevailed. The assertion is that
these religious systems as they are generally described, and as
I have dealt with them were the religions in their popular, out-
ward, or as it is called exoteric form, but that there was in each
case an occult or secret or inner religion known only to the
learned and to the initiated, an esoteric religion as it is called,
which was the real and true religion of the system; and further,
that when examined it will be found that this occult or inner
religion was in substance the same in all systems, though harmoniz-
ing possibly more completely with some than with others. It is
stated that this harmony is especially apparent in the case of
Buddhism, and that in the study of what is called esoteric
Buddhism is to be obtained a clear view of that inner religion,
which, though hidden, has pervaded every system and is
the only true religion of mankind. I am indebted for
being able to deal with this subject to the works of
Mr. Sinnett, President of the Simla Theosophical Society. The
system which he endeavours to explain can not be said to
lack a certain completeness if its testimony to itself is to be
credited. It avowedly disclaims all idea of affording proof of
any assertion which it makes. It asserts that so and so is the
fact, and says to the enquirer, “ Here is the key of knowledge ; go
and see for yourself.” This system treats man as composed
of seven parts or principles—physical body, vitality, astral
body, animal soul, human soul, spiritual soul, spirit. In
explanation I may mention that what is called the astral
body is an etherial duplicate of the physical body, and
that it may, under certain circumstances, exist and be seen
separate from it. The position of man on this earth is
to be next considered. It is explained somewhat as follows :


This earth on which man now appears is the fourth in a
series or chain of seven planets or worlds, in which man’s
developement is being carried on. I will now try to
describe the history of an individual human being or unit.
Unreckonable periods of time ago each human unit (rudimen-
tary man they might call it) entered upon the first of the seven
planets. In that planet it had to work through seven races,
each race involving its being born and reborn many times,
and occupying thousands upon thousands of years. It
then, however, began again on the first planet, and went a
second round through the seven planets, similar in all respects
to the first round, only that in each planet it appeared in a higher
state of being than in its first round. In this way the human
unit has to accomplish seven rounds of the seven planets. Now,
fixing our attention on the human units on earth at this present
time, we are told that they (you and I are of them) have accom-
plished three rounds of the seven planets, and are at present on
this earth in the course of going through the fourth round, and
that they are in the fifth race of the seven races on the earth.
What has taken place with regard to them is that each human
unit (you and I, mind) began millions of years ago as a loose,
unformed, unintellectual spirituality, and has gradually evolved
through a more compressed, yet still spiritual and unintellectual
existence into the compact substance of intelligent rational man. In
the rounds 5,6, and 7, which it has still to pass through, the
human unit will again become spiritual, but spiritual with
intellect, and when the seventh round has been accomplished
man will be something too Godlike for present-day man to
forecast. The three first rounds have perfected the human prin-
ciple of man and prepared it for the higher principle, which is
now being developed in the fourth round and leading to some-
thing still higher, which will make the fifth round a prepara-
tion for assimilation with pure spirituality in the sixth round.
If this assimilation does not take place further existence will be
forfeited. Between each round the human unit passes for a time
into a state of conscious rest in omnipotence, a sort of partial
Buddhist-Nirvana. Such is an outline of the general history
of an individual human unit; but as we have seen that this unit
has to pass through various births on each planet, it may be as
well for me to explain what is taught as to the births to which it
is thus subject on earth ’ere it passes on to the next planet.
When man, the present human unit, (you and I recollect),
■dies, the first three principles which I mentioned as be-
longing to man’s constitution, namely his body, vitality,
and astral body are abandoned, and the other four principles
escape into a spiritual world or earth which is attached
to this earth, and there the fifth principle or human soul


divides itself into two, its better part uniting with the
sixth principle or spiritual soul, and the lower part uniting
with the fourth principle or animal soul. The spiritual soul
and spirit that is the sixth and seventh principles which are in
fact the real man, then pass into a spiritual state called Devachau,
in which what is called the Karma of the life just ended
is satisfied. Karma is defined to be the affinities for good
or evil generated by a human being during life, and the charac-
ter of which inheres in the human soul through all the interval
between one life and another. When the period of Devachau is
passed, which, however, may last for centuries, the human unit
emerges from it into a new birth, which new birth is materially
affected in its conditions by the Karma of the former life.
I have mentioned that the human units of the present time
are in the middle of the fourth round of Evolution. It
is asserted that it is not until this fourth round is
entered upon that human responsibility begins, and that it
is only after the middle of the fifth round that the
employment by man of his faculties affects his final destiny
hereafter. There then takes place a struggle between good and
evil, between on the one side spirituality, that is the capacity
for assimilating knowledge; and on the other side Intellect,
that is the perfection of mere material welfare. If in this
struggle man is found to have no capacity for the higher
spiritual life before him, he must of necessity pass into an-
nihilation. But now as to the human being who is successful
in this struggle, and arrives at last, after incalculable periods of
time, at the end of the entire circuit of all the Planets —what
is his position ? The answer is that he stands on the threshold
of Nirvana. What Nirvana is, cannot it is admitted,
be described in words. Whatever this state may be it is-
that to which it is the grand end of the evolution of
humanity to attain. Now as periods of activity and repose
prevail everywhere in Nature this Nirvana has been described
by some to be merely a state of conscious repose which is in
store for humanity alone. As soon, however, as the last unit
shall have passed into that state the whole Planetory chain
will itself pass into rest. Again, as in the Solar System there
are other Planetory chains besides that of which the earth is
a member, so each of these will pass into its own rest or
Nirvena, and when all shall have thus passed into rest there will be
also a solar rest or Nirvana. And then, as if to baffle thought
we are bid to remember that throughout the Universe there
are other Solar Systems, each within itself representing the
activity and repose of our solar system ; and that therefore a time
must come when the entire Universe with its myraids of these
systems must pass into repose and the great cosmic night of rest
envelopes all.


You will, I am sure, agree that it is well laid down as
part of this religious system that it disdains to prove the
assertions which it makes. You will also understand how
needful to its existence has been the secrecy in which it has
been shrouded, and you will feel little wonder that it has
never done anything for mankind at large. And I can hardly
suppose that any one estimating religious systems by their
credibility would suppose that he was exchanging the incredible
for the credible by substituting for the teachings of Biblical
Christianity the unproved theories of Mr. Sinnett and his esoteric
Eeligion. I ought to add that the system does not profess to
offer any explanation of the existence of the human unit which
begins its course through the planetory chain, nor of the exis-
tence of the Planetory chain through which the evolution is
performed. And I feel bound also here to state as my firm convic-
tion after perusing the theories of Mr. Massey and Mr. Sinnett
that the mythology of the one, and the occult religion of the
other are simply the stories of those incrustations of error which
by the unlearned and learned of pre-christian times severally
were gathered round the original truth ; that the original truth
was preserved in the Jewish Eeligious System; and that the
Eeligion of Jesus Christ swept away the incrusted errors and
displayed the original truth, not for the enlightenment of merely
a single nation, but for the guidance, comfort, and gladdening
of bewildered and dispairing humanity.
I have now discharged to the best of my power the duty which
I undertook this evening to perform. You have had under con-
sideration certain questions involving matters of serious import
to each and every one of us, and the answers to which can only
be found in a religious system of some kind or other. I have
brought before you the principal religions of the world, and
accordingly we have sought in them and sought in vain, for any-
thing like complete and credible answers to our enquiries. I have
also brought before you Christianity and the Eevelation
which it offers in the Bible, In this system, and in this Bible,
we do find the answers which we seek. As to their being
complete to the extent of human comprehension, there can be
no doubt, and as to their credibility, that cannot logically be
impeached by any one who owns the existence of a Creator. As
a result the deficiencies and incredibility of pre-christian systems
of religion seem to me to establish and render clear the com-
pleteness and truth of Christianity and the Bible.
Anri now a few words by way of conclusion. Bearing in mind
that the course of lectures which this evening brings to a close
has had for its object to aid the faith of those who, feeling the
value of ascertained truth, are desirous to be armed in its
defence, let us see what has been effected. We have had


placed before us the nature of Christian evidences and of Chris-
tian faith; the relation in which religion and science stand to
each other; a comparison of the two systems of Buddhism and
Christianity as means of practically influencing mankind; the
fulfilment and completion in the person of Jesus Christ of the
history, scriptures, and principles of Israel; the absolute neces-
sity of religion to man; the bearing upon Christian belief of
the scientific theory of evolution ; the explanation afforded by
the Divine personality of Jesus Christ of the power which He
has exercised over mankind; and the answers which the Bible
gives to man’s questionings with regard to himself —his present,
past, and future.
The Christian Evidence Society, under whose auspices these
Lectures have been given, and those who, as Lecturers and
audience, have aided in the work have, I believe, no reason to
regard the effort which has been thus made with any other feel-
ings than those of thankful confidence in its success.
For myself, personally, nothing remains for me to do but to
warmly thank you for the kind attention which you have accorded
to me this evening.
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 490, Kent-street, Sydney.




QI ~Jq
OBJECTS
OF THE
-*§• Christian 4- Evidence Society
N. S. W.
1. To promote the intelligent study and knowledge of the
Evidences of Christianity.
2. To meet the various forms of modern douht and objection
to Christianity.
; _ :-o-:
CHIEF METHODS.
1. The delivery of Lectures and Sermons.
2. The formation of classes for the study of the Christian
Evidences, and of the best methods of presenting them.
3. The holding of Examinations, open to those attending the
classes, and to those privately studying the same subjects.
4. The circulation of literature bearing on the objects of the
Society.
