

WIVES
OR
MISTRESSES.
A POPULAR TREATISE ON THE MARRIAGE QUESTION OF TO-DAY,
To which is added an article on the difference between
MORAL LOVE and SEXUAL PASSION,
ALSO
WHEN and WHOM TO MARRY,
Concluding with a chapter translated from the “Brahmin,” entitled
DESIRE AND LOVE,
BY
ANNIE BESANT.
MELBOURNE:
THE AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY, EASTERN ARCADE,
AGENTS FOR AUSTRALIA.




WIVES OR MISTRESSES
It was lately stated in the Contemporary Review, in an article
on certain existing marriage laws, that a large number of French-
men evidently preferred mistresses to wives, and the reason sug-
gested was, that men liked women to be more dependent upon
them, more entirely their own, than the just property laws of their
country made their wives.
This reminds us of a little girl who used to ask, whenever any-
thing was given her, if it were hers to burn ? otherwise, ap-
parently, she did not consider it property worth possessing. For
temperaments of this sort there can be little doubt that all ar-
rangements for social intercourse should be of the nature of open
contracts, terminable at the option of either party to them, and
the existence of such a feeling clearly indicates the nature of the
injustice involved in the ordinary sexual intercourse outside of
marriage.
We all acknowledge that each one’s rights end where another’s
wrongs begin; but it is too difficult to go a step further, and ac-
knowledge that every reasoning creature’s right is primarily it s
own happiness and advantage, secondarily the good to be obtained
by association.
Men and women can each live alone—that is, without sexual
communication but a man’s life, alone, lacks comfort, complete-
ness, and its keenest pleasures, and a woman’s its chief element of
happiness. They are each able, as a rule, in some way or other,
to obtain their own separate subsistence ; but men do not choose
to live without love, and no woman voluntarily gives up the hope
of children. Natural history and Greek tradition alike indicate
a time when what we now call humanity was hermaphrodite j it
might have been yesterday, the sexes have so little learned to
keep apart. This is not vice, but nature ; for chastity, the sweet
natural grace of all high types, is the fruit, not of abstinence, but


of satisfaction and self-government. Yet it is even a mistake for
himself, when a man takes a mistress instead of a wife, however
full of advantages it seems at first sight—advantages which invite
many besides Frenchmen in these days. The case is easily realized;
a young man is away from his family, he is hard-worked, as
all are who make any way at all in these high-pressure days ; he
is preyed upon by a landlady or servants, his accounts get into
arrears, his little bills are not right, he loses his things continually,
then his health. He wants a woman’s care and attention—above
all, a woman’s loving sympathy. He cannot afford the risk of a
life-long burden in a wife ;he will have a mistress. She is not
far to seek ; there are plenty of available women in the world—
kind ones, too, and pretty—if they are also idle, weak, and not
perfectly nice in their ways. What can one expect 1 There is
very little money to be paid down, and no security to be given ;
one must not scrutinize too closely such a very cheap article. He
buys a live piece of humanity, with a soul to boot, and after its
having satisfied his every want as far as possible to it, he is legally
entitled to turn it out of his doors at a moment’s notice.
If it is not his to burn, it is quite the next thing to it. Ideally
this is fine, practically it has many drawbacks. A reasoning
human being, of however low type, can never be bought body and
soul; it has always apart its own strong instincts of separate life
and separate instincts.
This he soon realises. Disenchantment the second is, that
order, neatness, tenderness, and gentleness are not qualities innate
in all women, and that differences of education and associations
may be too great even for companionship. Then even the physical
gratification is imperfect.
Nature has ordained that the fulness of voluptuous delight must
be the reward of love and mutual consent. Without love ordinary
women have no desire ; a man, therefore, who gratifies his instinct
in a bought caress is guilty of brutality as surely as if he used
physical force, for hunger is a very strong force. What wonder
that his satisfaction is imperfect, and its effect morally lowering ?
Lastly, however free he may legally be to rid himself of an ill-
starred burden, all men who have seen anything of this sort of life
know that it is one of the greatest of social difficulties to dispose of


a mistress of whom one has wearied. Honour is not wholly dead,
even in the breast of one who can take a girl at a disadvantage,
and brand her with a life-long stigma or an incurable taint. Still,
the fact that she can be got rid of is undoubtedly a strong point in
her favour against the indissolubility of the tie that binds th e
Frenchmen to his sacramental wife, Englishmen are not situated
in precisely the same manner; still, the difference is only one of
degree, and it is worth while to consider whether the facilities for
divorce may not be brought more into practical working in this
country.
The preference for slaves, for all possessions to be ours even to
burn, is simply a relic of barbaric immorality, to be resisted un~
compromisingly ; but the difficulties in the way of rectifying a mis-
take in the choice of a wife are real and rational objections to mar-
riage, and the greatest stumbling-blocks that have been ever put
in the way of healthy natural morality.
The words uttered by the great world-teacher of Galilee on this
subject have been long acknowledged by the candid thinker as
merely an emphatic protest against the infamous practice of the
Jews (prevailing among them till quite recently) of putting away
their wives like chattels on the smallest pretext, the wives having
no such privilege towards their husbands. They have no applica-
tion to the case of a contract entered into by two adult persons,
and dissolved by mutual consent, with due regard to mutual inte-
rests. This, however, is a matter which is in the hands of legisla-
tors. Another equally serious objection to the marriage of young
Mien who have to work for their living is one that is in the power
of women themselves to remove. It is an objection so unpleasant
to state that only a very deep conviction of its truth, and of the
great interests at stake, emboldens us to bring it forward.
Tranchons le mot. It is that the majority of young ladies, mar-
riageable, or so considered, while claiming to be taken with the
safeguards and rights of wives, are not worth more than mistresses.
For the woman who calmly spends the greater part of her day
in fancy work, visiting, or gossiping, while her husband is working
hard for their living at his office, his studio, or literary labour, is a
courtesan at heart, living on , not with, him, though she calls her-
self his wife. And herein we believe we approach nearer to the


reason of the preference of so many men for mistresses over wives
than in either of the suggestions before made.
For it cannot be denied that in the great race for life women un-
fairly started run feebly, and that, consequently, in the great ma-
jority of cases, they are hindrances and burdens, rather than helps
to the men who would be glad to have them to press forward at
their sides.
In part this results from the unfortunate impression that, while
gentlemen may work for their living in any way they please, ladies
should be helpless and idle.
If ladies only knew that this very idleness is the peculiar char-
acteristic of just the last class of their sex to which they would
choose to be compared, would they not be ashamed 1 ? Yet it is
so; and another firmly-rooted idea, that the physical pleasure they
can give entitles them to all with which their husbands can pos-
sibly endow them, makes the resemblance complete. Naturally a
man prefers a mistress to a wife of this sort, and how many do we
see !
There is much talk now of the rights and wrongs of women >
in these matters it is surely clear enough. A man who takes
a woman to live with him on any terms that are not of equal
mutual advantage, does a great wrong to humanity. He has
trampled upon, or, at least, hampered, an equal right to an
existence of happiness; and a woman who pledges herself to
be a man’s helpmeet in all things on condition of being his
partner and carefully-guarded friend for his life long, and yet,
instead of helping him to the utmost of her capabilities, becomes
to him a burden and a care, does an equal wrong.
Perhaps some will ask, what after all can a woman, brought
up a lady, do for her husband, except superintend his house-
hold, and look nice for his pleasure 1 Now, assuredly, this
latter is a very clear duty, so clear, that in truth, where people
bound to live together, make themselves personally unpleasant to
each other through neglect or any such removeable cause, it
should be made a sufficient reason for divorce on either side, so
keen and increasing is the sensitiveness of civilization to a want
of mutual consideration in this matter.
But this admitted as a mutual duty, let us proceed to show


that there is so much actual work that may be gracefully done
by a wife, and such a world of care that may be taken by her
from her husband’s shoulders, that if, as a rule, wives would
undertake it even in certain measure, the exceptions would be the
unmarried young men of the middle classes, not as now the
married ones. To this it may perhaps be objected, that the rapid
increase of the population being at present the great trouble of
statesmen, such a result is a doubtful advantage. We reply that,
in the first place, it is not from the middle classes (the great
centre of the strength of the country), that even a greater in-
crease need be feared ; and in the second, that procreation is not
the only object of marriage. Few people, comparatively, can now
afford to do more than replace themselves in the world, yet, at
the same time, they may rationally and with great mutual advan-
tage associate their lives and interests. The management of a
small income, so as to make it go as far as possible in these days,
is in itself almost a science, requiring an amount of time, energy,
and high intelligence, which it is simply impossible for a man,
whose chief vital forces are expended on his profession, to give.
Unfortunately, very few ladies understand the advantages of
co-operation with their neighbours in the matter of obtaining, at
a reasonable rate, the necessaries and comforts of life, and fewer
still, if they do know it theoretically, will exert themselves in the
matter so that it may be left safely in their hands. Again, with
mere house-work, when will ladies universally recognise that it is
not good, or kind, or pretty, to come down to breakfast in a dain-
ty dress, and sit down and read novels, or do lace-work after,
while the poor maid-of-all-woik empties heavy baths and pails
alone, and muddles through work that might be every bit done
as pleasantly, and much more efficiently, by the lady and maid to-
gether, with the exception of cleaning grates and sweeping, the
latter being such exceedingly hard work, that as soon as a few
more kind-hearted ladies have tried it, it will probably become an
employment paid for by the job to strong men who will go round
periodically for the purpose. Needlework, again, requires great
skill and intelligence, and calls for much time and thought; no
household is comfortable where this department is neglected, or
even imperfectly understood ; while as for the care, teaching, and


training of young children, and the superintending of the studies
of older ones, it cannot be denied that the mother who efficiently
discharges these duties, is fulfilling the very highest that can fall
to the lot of any human being. Again, neither ladies nor their
maids need confine their occupations indoors, nor indeed should
do so. A garden, that dear delight of the office-wearied man, is
another field that the intelligence and capabilities of a woman are
quite equal to undertaking as her entire charge. It is one of those
luxuries which may be an inexpensive, even a paying affair under
intelligent management, with people who will do the greater part
of the work themselves; and what more delightful change from
house and needlework can there be than the varied labours of a
garden 1
At the same time, it is a costly pleasure for a man whose wife
chooses to do nothing but watch the gardener, and order expen-
sive bedding plants. Not that we doubt that this is a pleasant
way of managing a garden, or that in fact everything in the nature
of real work has an unpleasant element in it. It always must be
so ; but the argument is, that if a man has to work, the wife of
his bosom should work also —must work, in fact, if she is his true
friend and partner, bravely undertaking a share of the burdens of
his life, and faithfully bearing them. She must not even stop
to reflect whether these employments are her special vocation or
not. Once married, the exigencies of life leave little choice to
the wives of professional men. This is fair, for in England ladies
do not in general marry before they are old enough to judge
whether they would rather marry young men, or wait till their
lovers are in comparative ease in middle life, and thus able to place
them also in nests of ease, submitting to the chance of their first
caresses being given to hirelings, and the first confidence in women
of their fair youth being blunted.
We may safely prophecy that the majority of women would
not wait, for youth is so divine a thing, so full of hope, and
help, and love, that the hearts which are one, will never
believe that it is better to struggle long alone, to pass fretting,
incomplete lives apart, inventing compromises, and deranging
natural laws, instead of accepting honest work and care together-
We have said nothing of wives following professions them-


selves, not because we do not believe that all women would
not be benefitted by being brought up to do so, a cultivated
mind and a high intelligence being those that will make the
best of every situation in which they are found. But as a
rule, we cannot think it desirable that in the present state of
society, married women should follow professions. Works of
mental exertion require a concentration of intelligence and
a great expenditure of vital power. It is not wise that the
expectant or nursing mother should be subject to this trial,
which would probably be as deteriorating to her progeny, as
the heavy physical labour from which poor women and their children
suffer so greatly. It is well known that the colts of aged sires
among horses frequently have hollows over the eyes ; is it fair then
that women should ever unnecessarily risk their children having
a double chance of an inheritance of wan-worn looks 1 Doubt-
less there are and will be women who follow lucrative professions
after marriage without injury, but these must be exceptions
where exceptional intelligence rises equal to their needs.
In conclusion, may we be allowed to plead in defence of this
attack upon ladies, that it is made in consideration of treble claims ;
first, in extenuation and explanation of the preference of a num-
ber of men for mistresses over wives; secondly, out of pity for the
wandering girls taken at a disadvantage, because the ladies neglect
their duties ; thirdly, and chiefly for the young ladies themselves,
who would be so much happier, better, and more valuable to
society in their right position, working beside the men of their
own age and condition, whom the high pressure of competition in
professions place more than ever in need of companions to supply
them with that necessity of vigorous life in all conditions, a help-
ful and healthy sympathy 1
Moral Love and Sexual Passion,
Many persons talk without either knowing what they say, or
whereof they affirm. Nothing is more commonly spoken of, or
so little considered as the subjects that head this chapter. Let us
not waste words in showing how often these important matters


are misunderstood and misapplied by the light and the trifling, the
gay and the thoughtless, or the vicious and the ensnaring, but trace
them at once through all their mazes to a satisfactory solution of
their purport. What then is love ? Delightful emotion that binds
the mother to her offspring—dear daughter of desire, and parent
of tenderness, heaver of the throbbing heart, and sweet exciter of
the maidens blush, how—how shall we describe thee? indes-
cribable art thou ; a beautiful and pure, as well as an all-con-
quering possion ! Ho poet can adequately define thee, nor
painter portray thee, lovely and all-refining, spotless, and heavenly
as thou art. Yet, all-pervading as thou art, who has not felt the
delicious witchery of thy power ! Moral love is the kind which
must first claim our cognizance. This sort implies that affectation
which persons of different sexes feel toward one another—on ana-
lysis, we find it to consist in ideas attached in part to matter, and
in part to mind. Love is pure. Ic is not what the sensualist
imagines it to be. The voluptuary does not know the meaning
of the word, the vicious know it not. These follow but a vain
shadow a low, vile passion, not the ennobling, sublimating soul-
refining delights known only to the virtuous, as attached to the
idea comprehended in the word love. For instance, two indivi-
duals, different in character and pursuits, meet a young lady at
an evening party. She is arrived at blooming seventeen. Her
form is a fit model for Phidias or Praxiteles. Her
lips are like rubies, her teeth like ivory, her eyes like the gazelle’s.
Her countenance is angelic, and realizes the heau ideal of poetic
beauty. As she moves in the gay circle of the dance, her whole
deportment combines all that is agile with all that is graceful; and
as the waving jetty curls flow down her fair neck, the eye rests for
a moment on the embonpoint of her heaving breast; and the two
individuals thus viewing her—the one from the gaming-table and
the haunts of vice and debauchery—the other from an unpolluted
home, the abode of a loving mother and an affectionate sister—
these two individuals see the fair girl at the same moment, and she
inspires the one with passion —the other with love. They both
gaze on her—and while the one would only plot how to rob her of
the pearl of virtue, and gratify a transitory passion by sacrificing
her purity and happiness to his ungovernable lust—the other in-


spired by a heavenly sentiment, grows deathly pale, his lips quiver
his voice trembles, and filled with inexpressible tenderness and
purest emotions, he views her as the fair star of his destiny ,
the beacon light of his future ; and, studying her interests and
felicity no less than his own, he desires to devote his life to the
pleasing task of making her happy, and that in the holy state
of matrimony. This is pure love, and undefiled. In like man-
ner, a tender maiden sees a man who is the object of her
esteem; his comely proportions, his exalted character, his noble
disposition, all tend to impress her favorably, and scarce known
to herself, she thinks of him when he is absent, blushes in his
presence, betrays some little tender emotions, and already her
heart is his own —she loves !
Thrilling and delightful emotion in the pure heart of woman !
For woman’s heart is kind, and is not made of rock ; on the
contrary, it is more like the wax which is pliable and can
easily be impressed. There is thus in the sexes an adaptation
to one another. Each without the other is imperfect. The
coarseness of the man, his hardness and asperity, are refined
and softened, and smoothed down by the gentle influence of
woman. They have a mutual attraction for each other, like
the opposite poles of a powerful magnet. The woman may be
called the negative pole. She is passive, as it were.
The motive and existing power must come from man, nature has
made all creatures perfect, and endowed woman with static —man
with dynamic force. Thus man and woman fulfil their destiny,
when they mate and unite for life, and “ multiply and replenish
the earth.”
Among animals the sexual instinct is, perhaps, purely physical—
at least there is no reasoning faculty in them to guide and control
and limit such instinct or passion. They have their certain
seasons of sexual conjunction —a burning heat consumes them—
they are occupied with their desires alone. Scarcely indeed, do
they think of their personal safety during their erotic agitation or
excitement. We find as a general rule that animals cohabit at
fixed periods and certain times of the year, and afterward seem
to lose all sexual passion in their desire to satisfy their other
wants, as of food, &c. On the contrary, man is not subject to


the influence of the seasons in the exercise of his genital functions.
Man alone has sexual intercourse at all times, and impregnates
the female under every latitude and in every climate. Moral
love in man has the same principle with physical love among
animals. The only difference between them is the animal seeks
directly to satisfy his wants, while reason and moral circumstances
prevent man from obeying the mere animal instincts of nature.
To accomplish the purposes of love, as Rousseau has well remarked,
men ought to attack—women to defend. In other words, man
should woo and woman surrender, when she can discover in the
prudent and mild guidance of their mutual pleasures, a supporter,
a defender, a friend, lover, husband, a beloved companion for life.
It is moral love, then, which is the foundation of all that is
beautiful in the tender passion, and of all the interest which
erotic writers have thrown around this peculiai sentiment or feel-
ing. Pure affection is not based on mere sexual instinct, but a holier
and divine impulse, although sexual conjunction is not irrelevant
to its blissful fruition. In regard to the mere animal propensity,
there may be sensual love without affection. At the period of
puberty especially, in both sexes, the sexual instinct—as if by a
spontaneous internal voice of Nature—at first excites, and then
renders man, now in the flower of his life, more prone to the
venereal embrace. At this peculiar erotic period, the agitation and
disorder of the senses, give birth to a new sense, in which man
alone seems to receive his existence—in which everything becomes
animated and embellished, and in which all around him appear
to burn with the same flame by which he is so deliciously consumed.
Nor is the influence of animal love or the sexual instinct, confined
to man alone. It extends to the whole of nature as is shown in the
following beautiful lines.
“ The lion king forgets his savage pride
And courts with playful paws his tawny bride,
The listening tiger hears with kindling flame
The love-lorn night-call of his brindled dame.
Despotic love dissolves the bestial war,
Rends their proud necks, and joins them in his car
Shakes o’er the obedient pairs his silken throng,
And goads the humble, or restrains the strong.”
The above picture is glowing in the extreme, but none the less
true and faithful to nature.


Sexual love or sexual instincts are vividly portrayed as well in
their physical as their moral aspects. We see everywhere the law
of sexual union exemplified, and its result in mating or marriage,
and progeny.
WHEN AND WHOM TO MARRY.
The desire for sexual union is rarely indicated until the male
and female have arrived at puberty. This is a period of
life, when childhood is passing from a stage of immaturity of
the sexual organs to a full development of their functions. In
other words, puberty is that combination of circumstances in
which the passion of love originates. Sex, climate, and manner
of living, however, have a great influence on the earlier or later
appearance of the phenomena of puberty. Woman attains to this
state a year or two sooner than man, and the inhabitants of
southern before those of northern countries. In the hotter climes
of Africa, Asia, and America, girls are marriageable as early as
ten years of age ; in the temperate zones, the period of puberty is
from twelve to fifteen; while in the colder regions of Russia,
Sweden, England, and Canada, menstruation, the most charac-
teristic sign of puberty, is frequently delayed to the seventeenth
year. As a general rule, however, in this country, women are
pubescent at fifteen ; and young men at about sixteen. It will not
be necessary in this chapter to present specially all the indications
of puberty- We may say, in a word, that it marks itself by cer-
tain physical aspects too palpable to the sight and senses to be
misunderstood. It manifests itself by the increase of strength and
of animal heat, by the impetuosity of the vital motion, and by the
fire which sparkles in the eyes. Early marriage, in fact, is a
primary law of human nature, and, whatever the doctrines of
Malthus and Franklin in respect to over-increase of population,
etc., should be consummated while the parties are in the
first flush of ripened life, when the affections are pure,
and every sentiment refined and ennobling, when man
and woman are congenially associated in every element of
physical health. A woman at eighteen would not be unequally


yoked to a man of twenty-five or twenty-eight; but any greater
disparity of ages is seldom ever productive of benefits or felicity.
If marriage be delayed too long in either sex ; say from thirty to
thirty-five, the offspring will be puny, and more liable to insanity.
On the contrary, if she be fully organized and glows with joyous
bounding health and vitality, the early age of “ sweet sixteen”
may not be an inappropriate season to enter upon the marriage
relation, provided her deliberate reason and judgment have sanc-
tioned the object of her affections, and that the man of her choice
be equally developed, in every manly attribute, and whose age does
not greatly exceed her own. We must not however, always judge of
the advancement of the young man by the early appearance of the
beard; for it is known that those who abandon themselves early
to sexual indulgence have an earlier beard. But if manhood be
premature, death, fatal death, is premature also. Young men
are, and must be fond of the society of young ladies, and reason and
custom incline them to marry, but with the thought of everything
except beds of roses and domestic joys, they refuse to take the lead.
So far as courting goes, all is pleasant enough j but with maniage
is associated the idea of doctors, nurses, and a constant monologue
about pains, aches, bad feelings, morbid sensations, as the prevailing
music of the fireside. The young man knows that the chances are
against him of marrying a patient to take care of, instead of a
wife to enjoy. Young men are just as selfish as women perhaps
more so.
The young lady who supposes that any young man on the face
of the earth wishes to marry her for the sake of nursing her
through life makes a very great mistake.
Young men will play court where they cannot think of marry-
ing. Whenever they find their attentions are beginning to be
taken in earnest they will seek other society. They will not of
course give the reason for this, and the young ladies will of course
wonder “ Why don’t the men propose V’ Make proposals of mar-
riage indeed ! Surely they will not, when they see the sad evi-
dence of infirmity, which false hair, artificial teeth and expensive
skirts are unable to conceal! Nay, they rather avoid all ap-
proaches to intimacy, and often abandon the society of those who
could be healthy and make good wives, and seek amusement in


less respectful society and more debasing associations. Hence the
increase of celibacy, profligacy, and sensualism in every form
facts like these are of fearful interest to generations yet to come.
It requires no extraordinary reach of thought to comprehend that
the natural and inevitable result must be, sooner or later, the
general demoralization of both male and female, and the utter
disorganization of human society.
The young women have it in their power to arrest entirely this
growing evil. Let them make themselves healthy, and prove their
capacity to be useful as well as ornamental, and they will not be
long in the matrimonial market.
Let them snap their fingers at the fashions of London and the
folies of Baris, and act like sensible human beings j otherwise they
are neither fit for wives or mothers.
DESIRE AND LOVE.
We quote from the Brahmin :
“ Beware young man ! Beware of the allurements of wanton-
ness, and let not the harlot tempt thee to excess in her de-
lights.
“ The madness of desire shall defeat its own purpose, from the
blindnes of its rage, thou shalt rush upon destruction. There-
fore, give not thy heart to her sweet smiles, neither suffer thy
soul to be ensnared by her enchanting delusions.
“ The fountain of health, which must supply the stream of
pleasure, shall be quickly dried up, and every spring of joy shall
be exhausted.
“In the prime of thy life, old age shall overtake thee, thy
sun shall decline in the morning of thy days.
“ But when virtue and modesty enlighten her charms, the lustre
of a beautiful woman is brighter than the stars of heaven, and the
influence of her power it is in vain to resist.
“ The whiteness of her bosom transcendeth the lily ; her smiles
are more delicious than a garden of roses.
“ The innocence of her eye is like that of the turtle dove ,
simplicity and truth dwell in her breast.


“ The kisses of her mouth are sweeter than honey, the perfume
of Arabia breathes from her lips.
“ Shut not thy bosom to the tenderness of love; the purity of its
flame shall ennoble thy heart, and soften it to receive the fairest
impressions.
PRINTED BY THE AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY, EASTERN ARCADE.
