

r vff
WODDOWRO PERSONAL PRONOUN^:
THEIR DERIVATION.




WODDOWRO PERSONAL PRONOUNS.
THEIR DERIVATION.
By John J. Cary.
(Read before the Gordon College Science Club, March, 1898.)
In a paper, A Discovery in the Australian Language,* the
writer recently brought under notice an interesting peculiarity
in Woddowro—the dialect of the Geelong Aborigines—
namely, the use not only of dual but also of trinal pronouns.
No other Australian dialect shows examples of trinal number ;
but in the singular dual and particular duals' of East
Australia an affinity may be traced.
PERSONAL PRONOUNS.
Nominative Case, Possessive Case.
Singular. Singular.
Bangik, I. Bang-ong-ik, My, mine.
Bangen, Thou. Banggo-de-gneu, Thy, thine.
Bang-nuk, He. Bang-go-de-duk, His.
Dual.
Dual.
Bangui, We. Bang-go-de-irl, Ours.
Bangbullok, You. Baug-go-de-bul-ok, Yours.
Bang-a-bul-ong, They. Bang-go-de-bul-ok, Theirs.
Triple. Triple.
Baug-etuk-kol-lik, We. Bang-ong-etuk-kol-lik, Ours.
Bang-ud-kol-lik, You. Bang-ong-ud-kol-lik, Yours.
Bang-tan-a-kol-lik, They. Bang-a-tan-a-kol-lik, Theirs.
Plural. Plural.
Bang-wod-jok, We. Bang-a-wod-jok, Ours.
Bang-ud, You. Bang-ong-ud, Yours.
Bang-tan-ong, They. Bang-go-de-tan-ok, Theirs.
(Not strictly as classified by Tuckfield ; arranged as above for convenience.)
* Read before the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science ,
January, 1898.


Francis Tuckfield, the missionary who laboured for ten years (1838 to
1848) among the aborigines of the Geelong district, states that both dual
and trinal forms could be expressed without using the numeral adjective.
Indeed, numerals above two we find expressed in Woddowro by addition.
So if a Geelong aborigine came up to a camp fire, around which sat three of
his fellows who had just picked the bones of three gray geese—a mere snack
for the natives—he could ask with brevity and precision, Winyer kolik
kudjo, what have you (trinal) been eating; while they would have to fall
back on a childlike method in replying, Bullaid-harp-koimoil karol, two-avd-
one gray geese.
But that the dual and trinal forms contain, in bul and kol, an appearance
of the Australian numeral for two and three is the view to which Professor
Tucker (Professor of Philology of the University of Melbourne), and Dr.
John Fraser (editor of Threikeld’s Australian Grammar) incline. The
element bul is found signifying two in Woddowro compounds, showing a
synthetic kinship with the pronouns. Kol has not been similarly
identified.
An Opinion by Dr. Fraser.
(i) “There ought to be no difficulty in accepting Prof.
Tucker’s suggestion that these dual and ternal ( i.e ., triple or
trinal) examples contain the Australian numerals bnl-a, two,
and gul-i-ba, three, for several islands of the New Hebrides
occupied by Melanesians akin to our Australian blacks have
the numbers ‘ two ’ and ‘ three’ incorporated in the dual and
ternal forms of their personal pronouns, and the Samoan of
Polynesia and the natives of the south coast of New Guinea
have also their word for ‘ two ’ in their dual pronouns.
(2) “ If we admit bula and guliba, then your examples
should read—Dual ; bang-(b)ul, bang-bul-ok, bang-a-bul-ong ;
bang-go-de-(b)ul, bang-go-de-bul-ok, bang-go-de-bulok. (I
think this last example must be wrong, for ‘ yours ’ and
‘ theirs ’ cannot be expressed by the same form). Ternal:
bang-etuk-gul-ik, &c.
(3) “ I do not think that bang-ik of your examples can be
the same word as bang, ‘ I,’ of Lake Macquarie, for your
hang occurs in all the forms quoted, and it seems to me
impossible that a word meaning ‘ I ’ should be part of a
pronoun ‘ thou ’or ‘he ’or ‘ you ’ (plural). In human speech,
‘ he,’ for instance, is a simple demonstrative meaning ‘ that ’
or‘this one,’ i.e., someone distinct from the speaker, and so
the word for ‘ I ’ could not be a part of it.
(4) “ But I think it probable that in the sentence from
which you quote, the bang is a verb or a verbal noun
(perhaps meaning ‘ be,’ or ‘ strike,’ or ?), and that the
terminations which follow the bang in your examples are the
pronouns and the numerals. I would therefore write your
singular thus :
Bang-ik.
Bang-ngin.
Bang-nduk.
Bang-ong-ik.
Bang-ngo-di-ngin.
Bang-ngo-di-duk.
2


If this supposition weretrue, then the suffixed pronouns
ik, ngin and duk would be an interesting parallel to t e
Melanesian (New Hebrides) pronoun forms used as sutlixes
to the verb, and also to the usage of the classic language,
Latin ama-baw, ama-bas, ama-baC & c * ~,a
Aneityumese and other New Hebrides dialects k is the suit
pronoun ‘ I.’ And ngin (which I have written) is the Lake
Macquarie pronoun ‘ thou ’ ; elsewhere it is in. ihe dun o
the third person may be a local demonstrative used by the
Geelong tribe. There is always a great variety m these
demonstratives.
(c) “ Against taking ik for ‘I ’ lies the fact that this
same ik or lik occurs in your examples of the triple ist, 2U
and 3rd persons all through. Unless these examp
wrong it cannot there mean ‘L’ But when I examined
Taplin’s Narrinyerri examples I found similar mconsistenc ,
which I took to be errors made by the compiler.
(6) “ Although your dual and ternal examples seem to
contain the numbers 2 and 3, yet the difficulties m explain! g
your whole paradigm of these pronouns on that footing areso
great that I would not lightly venture an opinion untilM have
an opportunity of examining the sentences from which these
examples are taken.
(7) “I have omitted to say that in the possessive forms,
in paragraph 2 of this opinion, I write ngo-di because ko that
is, ngo , is a well-known Australian genitive form (as in Lake
Macquarie dialect), and ong (Ist person) may be for i
Geelong ngo-di would then correspond with the Awabakal
ko-ha, genitive.
In the Dravidian languages of India ko, ku, hex : are the
common dative forms, but they are sometimes used for the
genitive.”
It is to be understood that the foregoing is merely a preliminary
, V™o Wtv nerusal of my MS. (A Discovery in the Australian
Language), at a time when Dr. Fraser was folly occupied W!th preparations
fo?The work of his section (Anthropology) of the Science Congress at Sydney
(1898).
Remarks Suggested by Dr. Fraser’s “ Opinion.
Paragraphs 3,4, and sof Dr. Fraser’s “ Opinion” suggest
this quesflon to 3 me. (a) Are the Woddowro personal
pronouns really pronouns, or (6) have the aborigines mere y
transplanted or words of another class into the p ace
of pronouns ? Considering the second part of this question
(bV it may be conjectured, as bang occurs (or at least may be
used) in aU the forms, that something of the kind has been done.


lhat hang is rightly present in the compounds seems
well assured. F. Tuckfield shows it in the Wod-
dowro, | Letter bowok f bangen 1 riprqnn nf letters
? \ ~ a person of are you J a person oi letterSj
and in, { b “S’ k { = Kararamik loves
me. Moreover, by four independent inquirers, Tuckfield,
Wedge, Parker, and Lloyd, it has been obtained, seemingly
as the principal word, in examples of the pronouns of the first
person.
“ Max Muller has in his Lectures (Second Series 1864,
P* 3 2 ) given an excellent illustration of the way in which the one
class of words may be transplanted into the place of the other.
‘ Ihe pronoun of the first person in Cochin Chinese is not a
pronoun, but means ‘ servant.’ I love is expressed in that
civil language by servant loves.’ If the word servant in this
case is not a pronoun, it is at least in a fair way of becoming
so. Already £ your humble servant,’ when used playfully as
a substitute for I, is a pronoun ; as much as your Honour,
your Lordship, your Grace, your Highness, your Majesty.
That all these have passed or at least are passing, into the
region of the symbolic, there can be little doubt.”
Again, in Lenape, an American dialect of the Algonquin
group, the sentence, I am a man, is expressed by a man my
body.
Now regarding the compounds in Woddowro as the
resultant of a lexical makeshift, the transplanting of words,
this dialect if using phrases such as ;
This it, I,
This here it, Thou,
This there it # , He,
would clearly have the same word appearing in I and than
just as hang does. But let it be said at once that hangik (/)
is not to be taken as Woddowro for “ this it.” The above
example is merely by way of illustration. Nor are similar
examples lacking in the dialects spoken in the neighbourhood
of Woddowro. The Kolijon gives gnud, in gnud-duk, I, and
in gnud-dok, thou. The Yarra, murrum or jnurrumb, in
murrumbeek, I, and in murrumbinner, thou. The Ta-
oungurong, murrumh, in murrumbik, I, and in murrumbyen,
you. The Pine Plain, Walloon, in walloonoongeek, me, and
in walloongin, thee.
Here we see, though the suffixes, and the materials of the
first part of most of these compounds differ, that in the five
dialects the principle of construction remains the same. May
we infer that this same synthetic method springs from the
expedient of taking words of another class and attaching to
them suffixes to form pronouns ?
* Suggested by the French demonstrative pronouns celui, celui-ci, celui-la.


Let us here consider a few facts that go to support such
an inference, first tracing the word bang (which has apparently
been pressed into pronominal service), or at least the same
combination of letters, as used in the aboriginal dialects of
Victoria. Bang means flesh in Jajowerong dialect. Bang,
body, occurs at Lake Hindmarsh. Woddowro itself gives
two examples : hang-mo-ren, it is fat, which literally would
perhaps be “ flesh fat ” or “ body fat ” ; and
Bangik, body; (used by Witouro or Ballarat natives.)
Bang, man is found at the L»wer Murray.
(Bangganoo, brother, at the River Yarra.)
Bang-bang-go, woman, in the Western district of Victoria.
Bang-go-ok, children, at Mt. Talbot.
(Bangondeduk, black man, in the Ballarat district.
Now it seems safe to affirm that we probably have in
these examples the same word appearing with but different
shades of meaning. If the word is not a compound, bang,
flesh, may be regarded as its simplest form. With ik
suffixed, as in the Ballarat dialect, it signifies that human
flesh wherein is (or was) the breath of life, the human body.
Bang, body, of Lake Hindmarsh, and bang, man, of the
Yarra dialect expresses the same idea. In the name of the
smaller and weaker sex, bang-bang-go, woman, we may regard
the reduplication, by which the Australian, like other
agglutinative languages, marked emphasis, as referring to the
maternal function, the producing of many bodies ; go, the
suffix in E. Australian dialects sometimes serving as ‘ of the,’
sometimes as ‘ to,’ or, growing more elastic, according to the
intention of the speaker, appearing literally meaning ‘ with
regard to,’ completes this supposed aboriginal notion. In
bang-go-ok, children, I would look upon ok as a contraction of
gorok or worok, female : bangook would thus mean ‘ bodies-
of-the-female,’ Anglice, the offspring of the woman.
Now the word bang of the Woddowro pronouns is either
identical or not identical with the word bang, body. Possibly
the negative view is correct; perhaps the words are homonyms.
But we may incline to the affirmative view when confronted
with the striking illustration that the Yarra dialect affords in
Murrumbeeh, the pronoun I. We have just seen that in
this compound and in Bangik, I, of Woddowro, the principle
of construction is the same, both probably being words of
another class used as pronouns. Strange to say, in both
compounds also the first part of the word has the same in-
dependent meaning,* Mur rum, body, Bang, body.
*Yery probably this also applies to Murrumbik, I; Murrumbyen, you, in
Ta-oungurong dialect, which was spoken at Mt. Alexander and the
Campaspe river, where the word for body is marramboo. Gmtrdong,
Knurdon, mother (Woddowro), show an analogy as regards the change of
Vowel. As in marramboo , oo forms the terminal suffix of other nouns in
the Ta-oungurong dialect.


I should say that the pronoun of the first person in
Woddowro and in Waworong (the Yarra dialect) are synony-
mous compounds with the -radical word different, but with
the suffixed word the same : each dialect preserves in the
pronoun I its favoured term for body, the element ik or eek
being a demonstrative common to both.
In Woddowro we get the suffix in both forms : Ban gik,
I ; Ban geek, I.
But if the pronominal ban// is not identical with, and
does not mean body, we know it must be a word expressive of
some general notion applicable to 7, thou, he, we, you, they ;
and in view of this and the foregoing facts, one may hold, and
reasonably until the contrary be proved, that the noun body is
the word we find in Woddowro pressed into pronominal service.
It may possibly be a mere coincidence that the same
material, the word bang, was hit upon to express the pronoun
‘I ’ by the Awabakal, at Lake Macquarie, and by the
Woddowro, at Corio Bay, yet as a lexical and grammatical
agreement may be traced in the dialects of E. Australia, it is
not unreasonable to regard the Awabakal word as a sporadic
example radically the same as the Woddowro. Both dialects
seem to show but, the supposed root syllable of the Australian
numeral ‘ two,’ in the dual forms of their personal pronouns.
Awabakal, Bul-un, you. Woddowro, Bul-en, you.
The Terminal Suffixes Ik and Etuk.
I will now offer a few remarks about two more com-
ponents of the Woddowro compounds, viz. ik and etuk. Ik
takes its place in the pronouns independent of person, case,
and to this degree as to number. In the trinal examples, as
already pointed out, it occurs in all the forms : in the
singular it sometimes means ‘ I’, and sometimes ‘me.’ But
neither Ik nor Etuk seems to be a suffix expressive of only
pronominal relationship, if that is the function of both in the
compounds. In bangilc, body, amajaik, white man, moondik,
young woman, boorp-boorp-kal-ik, children, warreip-kallik,
sons, the component ik perhaps serves as a nounal suffix.
Etuk is the common Woddowro termination to the names of
parts of the human body : mirgn etuk, eye ; kaun g-etuk, nose ;
&c. Very probably we also have a variant of it in bangond<?<7oo£,
black man. Thus both ik and etuk seem to be nounal as well
as pronominal suffixes.*
*“ Many American tongues, notably Algonquin and Iroquois, do not
distinguish the verb from the noun, the verb being nothing but a noun
accompanied by suffixes denoting possession. This seems to us somewhat
the case with the agglutinating languages generally, and we have shown how
the Dravidian verb may take nominal suffixes, just as the noun itself is
declined by means of pronominal suffixes.” Abel Hovelacque, “ The
Science of Language ” p.p, 132-3. London, 1877.


Again, etuk,. like ik, may perhaps take its place in the
pronouns independent of person,' case or number ; for, after
undergoing a probable phonetic change, it appears to be
present, abridged to uk, ok, duk and jok, in ban-
gbul-/o/r, bang-go-de-buZo£, bang-go-d e-duk, bang-wod-jo/- and
bang-a-wod-yo/r.
We will now consider a few remarks as to the possible
change in these six examples. At the outset the question
arises, Why do we look for the appearance of etuk as a suffix
in these compounds ? It is because ik and etuk most probably
perform a similar function in the pronouns, e.g. bang-i/r. I ;
ban g-etuk, we. Granting this, and seeing how frequently ik
crops up in the compounds, it is quite reasonable to suppose
that etuk may also reappear.
As to the abridgment. That the suffix may be contracted
is shown by the contraction of gorok, in dajorongbu/o7— dajorong,
implying priority of birth ; bullaid, two ; gorok, female = the
eldest of two sisters.
That uk may be written ok is shown by Francis Tuckfield’s
marked vowels, which give lok with the vowel having the
sound of oin ‘ move.’ In fact the Woddowro suffix is written
etok ; mor-rok gn et-ok,* head. It is to be remembered also
that in Woddowro t and d are interchangeable ; and an
example analogous with the further change of the mutes t dg
and jis found in the aboriginal for foot : tinnan, dinan, genong,
jeenong. The first, second, and third, given respectively by
E. Stone Parker, F. Tuckfield, and J. H. Wedge, are
Woddowro. The forms of the pronoun me, dih, gik, as given
by Tuckfield, also afford a limited illustration. Two forms
of the Woddowro word ‘ tongue ’ may also be cited : tellang,
jell an g. So, admitting these changes, the primal vowel of etuk
being lopped off, just as by apherisis the component but or
bull of the dual pronouns becomes ul or ull (bang-ul, we ;
bang-ullen, us, also bang bullen), the terminations dull and
jok. in the pronouns bang-go-de-duk, bang-wod-jok and bang-
a-wod-jok may perhaps be variants of tuk.
But if in bang«uk (the first of the six examples) the suffix
etuk is contracted to uk may it be possible that some other
element has been worn away, and is now represented only
by the intercalated letter n ? Or observing the law of least
effort, does etuk appear in this particular compound as nuk ?
Some evidence that might help to incline one to favour the
supposition that nuk may be but a variant of etuk is found by
comparing Mossman’s and Tuckfield’s f forms of this suffix,
* Eyre’s “ Journals of Discovery ” Vol. ii. p. 400.
| Tuckfield gives both forms in the word Spirit, Moxoxaetuh, Muronmwfc,


the common Woddowro termination to the names of parts of
the human body : Murri neuk, Morok etuk, head : Gour ono/c,
Korn etuk, neck.
In the last example, regarding /corn as the principal
syllable of the word neck,* kor and ijour of the two forms seem
to correspond ; the sound of the letter n of horn is perhaps
blended with the sound of the suffix in gouronok, or perhaps
the sound of n is here lost altogether.
We may, however, more easily recognise this change of
etuk in the Woddowro dialect as spoken in the Ballarat district,
where, tacked on to the names of parts of the human body,
the suffix appears as ettuk, etook, edook, yook, and nook.
Woddowro gives a modification corresponding to edook , ( e)nook,
in wanfong, wamoong (brother).+
Now, it may be said, if this change, effik, etfuk, [e)juk,
(e)yuk, is not merely the result of chance, but admits of “ a
simple physiological explanation,” we ' should find similar
examples occurring in the language of the native. And so
we do. The transition from the hard dental to the soft, and
then—the speaker not troubling to push his tongue against
his teeth—the gliding to the palatal or spirant, may be traced
in words that I find in the Victorian dialects, and now place
by the side of the Woddowro suffix.
Earth. Suffix. Where, Foot.
Winter
Winda
Winger
Whinjar
Whim/a
Tinnan Tarang
_Dirman
C/iinan
Ectuk (E/iuk)
Gh a
Jaa
Fa
(E)juk
(E)?/uk
Jinnung Jerrang
Tongue.
White man.
Pellaug
Dtallang ?
(7halee
Bullait
Bullaiit
Bullaitc/z
Amerdeit
Amygeet
Arner/ig
Jellang
* Tark-korn, a string of reeds for the neck— tark, reed ; korn, neck.
f If in hang-nuk, he, nuk, is a variant of etuk, the Woddowro singular
pronoun he and the plural pronoun bang-etuk, we, are identical.
f These two examples serve for the interrogative pronoun ‘what.’ As
such, the word also occurs as wim/ar.
‘ Where ’ in the table is the interrogative adverb.


Therefore as by permutation ( n)uk , oh , jok, duk, or edu/c,
equals etuh, this suffix may be present in the following :
Example with Etuk Unabridged.
Bang-etuk, we.
Probable Examples with Etuk Abridged.
Bang-nuk, he
Bang (n? et) uk.
Bang-go-de (et) uk.
Bang bull (aid et) uk.
Bang-go-de-duk, his
Bang-bul-lok, you
Bang-go-de-bul-ok, yours = Bang go de bul (laid et)uk.
Bang-go-de-bnl-ok, ' theirs =
Bang-wod-jok, we = Bang wod (e) tuk.
Bang-a-wod-jok, ours = Bang a wod (e) tuk.
Examples in Ik.
Bangik, I. Bangongik, mine. Ik, me.
Bangetukkollik, we. Bangtanakollik, they.
Bangongetukkollik, ours. Bangatanakollik, theirs.
Bangudkollik, you. Baugongudkollik, yours.
Other Terminal Suffixes
Of the fourteen remaining compounds, seven no doubt take
En as a terminal suffix.
* En as a suffix expressive of pronominal relationship
appears to be common to several aboriginal dialects of Victoria.
It is, however, to be remembered that i and e, and that d and
g are interchangeable—as we have just seen {ih eh ; dih gih ,
&c.) We shall find the same change occurring in the use of en.
This suffix is shown in the Glenelg River dialect in marmeH,
father your = your father. So in rnahmfw, your father, at
Eake Hindmarsh. The Ta-oungurong dialect perhaps gives
another variant in the pronoun Murrumbvcw, you. In
Waworong dialect, in or din means your. The Pine Plain
dialect no doubt shows this component suffixed in Walloon^tw-,
Examples in En.
Bang-en, thou
Gnud-den,
you (plural)
us (dual)
us (trinal)
Bang-ong-en, thine
Bul-en, you (dual)
Gnulleu,
Gnellen,
Bang-gnud-den, us
* Like ik and etuk , en or in is also a nounal suffix :—leangm, teeth ;
tchilinm, tongue ; woorinen, mouth ; wirumpoolera, ear ; dinangtin, foot;
chinan gin, foot.
And in the following we perhaps have variants of the suffix tin (in or
din) showing the consonantal change previously noted :
Dinangtm, foot. Camperdown dialect
Yerangindw, his dog. Melbourne „
Wallonpin, you. Pine Plain ~
Pip jin, his pipe. Melbourne ~
Murrumbj/en, you. Oampaspe E. ~


And now a word as to the compounds Bangui, Bang-godeul.
In the dual form Bangui (we) may it be possible that the
pronominal suffix is wanting ? “ Terminal suffixes, gradually
obliterated and disfigured, have sometimes at last disappeared,
even in ancient languages; sometimes they are still written,
but are subject to elision, and are no longer pronounced;
sometimes the prolongation, slight or marked, of the syllable
which preceded them alone reveals their former place, then
this syllable which they protected, now exposed, wears away
and disappears in its turn. The word grows shorter, becomes
contracted, but that which remains retains the accessory
meaning which the vanished syllables added to the complete
form,” Shortened by apocope, the compound Bangui probably
appears without the demonstrative or pronominal suffix, which
was no doubt its original termination. So, one would also
here recognise the. syllable id as a witness of the wearing away
of the numeral hnllaid until only the two letters subsist.
Bang-go-de-ul, ours, is a parallel example.
Little can be said by me of the remaining five examples.
Of Bang-(a)-bul ong, they, Bang-tan-oyy, they, Bang-go-
de-tan-ong, theirs, we may note that the same combination of
letters, ong, that terminate each of these compounds, occurs
in five other examples, infixed most probably as a component
denoting possession. I do not imply however that ong is
identical in both instances. Ong, or gunong also appears in
Woddowro as a nounal suffix.
In the last two compounds, Bang-ud, you, Ba*.gongud,
yours, the termination ud may perhaps be a contraction of
gnud, appearing in gnud-en.
The elements, hang, body, hul, two, hoi, three, etuh and
the variants, and en, pronominal suffixes, being accepted, we
may trace the components denoting possession. These are
clearly ong, gode, and the vowel a, placed immediately after
the principal word {hang).
Brief reference has already been made to ong and gode
(Dr. Fraser’s “ Opinion ” par. 7)
Two examples of a serving in the Woddowro dialect
apparently as a case ending may be given. Kin-hin-hil, people ;
the blacks. Kin-hin-hil-a, of the blacks. Murna-a, in the
hand. (Tuckfield’s Sentences and Phrases Nos. 15, 90).
Objection. But if we regard ik and etuk in the pronouns
as components simply serving as demonstrative or pronominal
suffixes, an objector may ask, Why do we find in two instances,
both ik and etuh in the one pronoun ? e.g.,
we ; bang-ong-tfht/ekolh’/z ours.


Here the difficulty seems to be for one to determine
whether etuk is redundant or intrusive in both these trinal
examples, whether it acquires a different meaning collocation,
or what it may here signify. (If the trinal were a more recent
development than the plural, perhaps it may have been formed
by simply attaching the elements hol-lilc to the plural forms ;
Plural. Nom. Case.
Bang-etuk, we.
Bang-ud, you.
Bang-tan-ong, they.
Trinal. Nom. Case.
Bang-etuk kol-lik, we.
Bang-ud-kol-lik, Ton.
Bang-tan-a-kol-lik, they.
It is noticeable that the final a in tana (they, trinal) is
wanting in the plural, bangtanong. In the latter, ais perhaps
suppressed avoiding the hiatus that would arise with o follow-
ing a. Or in the trinal, ong may be contracted to a).
It may possibly be correct, however, to look upon the
retaining of the two demonstrative components in the one
compound as a peculiarity of the Australian, akin to that
which we find in such aboriginal sentences as, Going I to
burn I stick - I am going to burn a stick; You big-headed
skin and bone fellow you ; Going I to pour out I water.
Thununa ngi leckin nganatha yarn.
Going to I pour out I water.
And now a few words in conclusion, basing them
on the foregoing analysis. The Woddowro compounds,
while not pronouns in verity, are pronouns by effect. Either
(i) the principal word used without the demonstrative, or (2)
the demonstrative without the principal word, or (3) the root
syllable of the numeral prefixed to the demonstrative may
serve as a pronoun. The composition in most of the examples
may be thus expressed, genitive in brackets indicating the
place of the element denoting the possessive case : — singular
and plural, principal word ( + genitive) + demonstrative: dual,
principal word (+ genitive) + numeral + demonstrative :
trinal, principal word (+ genitive) + demonstrative + numeral
+ demonstrative.
11


* yy
,■ V -
