

A PLEA FOR PHYSIOLOGY
FRANCES GILLAM HOLDEN
LADY SUPERINTENDENT, CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL
“Duke et decorum est pro patria vivere ”
GEORGE EOBEETSON
’Melbourne, Sydney Adelaide and Brisbane




WOMAN’S IGNORANCE
AND THK
WORLD’S NEED
A PLEA FOR PHYSIOLOGY
FRANCES GILLAM HOLDEN
LADY SUPERINTENDENT, CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL
“Duke et decorum est pro patria vivere ”
GEORGE EOBEETSON
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide and Brisbane


Dedicated to all those who, loving their native
land, Australia, would fain see it the happy home
of a healthy and noble humanity, and, therefore ,
the prosperous abode of a truly great nation.


WOMAN'S IGNORANCE
ANT) THE
WORLD’S NEED
“ Ignorance,” says one, “ is the fertile parent of most of the
mistakes and the greater part of the evils of life. In the
ignorance of means whereby to accomplish an end, there is
no question but that women are more often than men, both
the most to blame for obstinate refusal to be enlightened, and
for wilful belief that they need no enlightenment at all.”
Upon the latter part of this quotation, I express no
opinion ; with the former I thoroughly agree : for looking
around on the world, on its ways, its life ; on the great and
awful social evils under which nations, families, and
individuals are groaning; and tracing back, from fruit to
branch, from branch to trunk, from trunk to root, I see that
the evil root of these evil fruits—gigantic, all pervading,
noxious, terrible —is ignorance: ignorance of the grand,
simple, beautiful laws of nature (which are the laws of God),
and mainly, chiefly, emphatically, Woman’s Ignorance. I ask
only for a calm consideration, and not a pre-judgment upon
the subject of this paper. Multitudes err in good faith,
forming superficial opinions upon insufficient grounds, and
external appearances for want of this calm consideration.
Errare est humanum.
I wish to show, taking a substratum of fact, and from
analogy, that a knowledge of the truths of physiology by
women, a sound, clear, thorough-going knowledge, would
have a supremely beneficial influence upon the world ; and I
desire to aid as I am able, towards the intelligent judgment of
the unprofessional public upon this subject: a subject upon


which their interest is, or ought to be, great, vitally concerning
as it does the most vital interests of each, and about which
their possibilities of personal knowledge are necessarily small,
while around it some natural and more conventional prejudices
cling close and thick, hiding like a rank growth of ivy the
object around which it twines.
Women collectively have no sound knowledge (even the
most elementary) of physiology or anatomy. Can any
thoughtful mind doubt that, if women collectively had a
sound knowledge of physiology, infinite suffering and disease
would be prevented ? The world may be challenged to deny,
that were it possible from this time forth for woman’s educa-
tion, theoretical and actual, to be based upon a clear solid
foundation of such knowledge, words fail to express the
benefit thereby conferred upon the human race, through this
one circumstance alone. This one I say, but bearing upon
what and upon how many ?
Upon life in its every phase and aspect, and its widening
and unnumbered ramifications, moral, mental, physcial,
domestic, social, and national. Giving to those who have the
will but know not the way, the blessed power of sapping at
the roots, of crushing in the germ—gigantic evils which,
looming dark and hideous, are blighting the very core of life
in our countries and our homes.
Yes, this is the noble task a luminous physiology is to
achieve; to undermine and eradicate the physical and
psychical suffering which enshrouds this beautiful earth in
gloom.
The psychical as well as the physical, for, as the loveliest
blossoms are intimately related to the unsightly hidden root,
so man’s noblest, highest, purest interests and destinies, for
weal or woe, are intimately, nay, inextricably, involved with
his meanest wants. The loftiest spiritual and the lowliest
physical needs are linked in one wondrous chain of well or
of ill-being. This is no materialism. “ The false mysticism
is in the belief that the neglect of the body tends to the
enfranchising of the soul —which is one of,the devil’s lies.
We know that ‘ the sound mind in the sound body ’ is the
best offering we can make to God or man, and no waste labour
is that which we spend to attain that end.”


Problems which tax the brains of our wisest legislators,
which appal the hearts and well nigh paralyse the energies
of our truest philanthropists—problems of sanitary science, of
national and domestic hygiene; of social evils, of widespread
vice and folly—would fade and insensibly disappear (as
gloom and noxious vapours before the brightness and warmth
of the sun) in the face and pure presence of lives lived
parallel to truth, as God who gave them would have them
lived ; of the right, true, wholesome up-bringing in the many
millioned homes of the young life of our world, by the wife
and mother ; who with clear, definite, intelligent, personal
knowledge of the simple and beautiful (and inexorable) laws
of nature, lovingly and thankfully adapts her family’s life to
that benign influence; moulding it on that perfect model in
blessed and pure knowledge, no longer cursed by ignorance of
those very laws and truths, without which health, therefore
happiness, therefore goodness (noble exceptions apart, whose
struggles God alone knows) are impossible.
Impossible ? Yes ! Does not a wise old writer say, as
truly as graphically, that “ weak nerves are the devil’s
harp-strings ?”
Why, this knowledge for women opens a future for
humanity such as is yet undreamed of! A future when noble
physique, strong nerve, right instinct, true hand, clear brain,
grace, beauty, and health (upon which all are based) would
be the rule and not the exception ! When a happy race
would know by happy experience the right royal wealth of
“ mens sana in corpore sano !”
Not as now—alas that it should be so !—when, cursed by
centuries of ignorance, that familiar phrase, “ the human
form divine,” sounds saddest satire, in the presence of the
misshapen iil-developed, unhealthful animals of the race :
too common—again, alas ! —on every hand.
Now it is probable that few who read this will question
the desirability of women understanding the rules of health
which bear upon the well-being of themselves and their
children. It is as to the amount of knowledge, and how it is
to be acquired, that opinions differ. Many say: “No
downright anatomy or physiology ; such studies are out of


women’s province.” And therein lies the mistake, in that
carelessly and superficially assumed belief. For knowledge
at second hand, without personal, practical, actual compre-
hension, is knowledge, for all practical application, virtually
worthless.
That this is so, is exemplified by the general disregard
constantly shown for rules of health which are widely known
with this kind of superficial knowledge. Papers, magazines,
periodicals, and literature of the day in general contain much
on health. “Health-hints,” “health-notes,” “popular hygiene,”
etc,, put in the plainest, the most intelligible words, the most
popular manner. Warnings against everyday habits and
customs, of dress and its wretched disease-and-death-
inducing absurdities for example, as inevitably tending to evil
results ; and what impression do they make ? What effect
have they ? Read, approved, and—neglected ! And why ?
Because the reader does not know from her own actual
conviction, through studied fact, that such results must follow
such practices. That, given certain premises, certain results
must follow, inexorably as fate. “We obey,” says Jean Mace,
“ readily and easily, when we understand the reason for
doing so, and a duty which one can satisfy one’s self about
forces itself upon one as a sort of necessity.”
“If scientific training,” says Huxley, writing on the
wider subject of all science study, “is to yield its most
eminent results it must be made practical. That is to say, in
explaining to a child the general phenomena of nature, you
must, as far as possible, give reality to your teaching by
object lessons: in teaching him botany he must handle the
plants and dissect the flowers for himself; you must not be
solicitous to fill him with information, but you must be careful
that what he learns he knows of his own knowledge.”
This applies equally to the subject under consideration.
It is because health-studies are not made thus practical
and self-convincing that there is the utter, deep, lamentable,
all but universal neglect, of their very plainest lessons, which
is apparent to every one knowing anything on the subject.
Could women indulge in the flagrant follies of which they
are constantly guilty—follies of occupation and recreation,


of food, dress, late hours, want of exercise and fresh air—
were the laws they break and the effects thereof a right-down
plain reality, not to be blinked or got rid of, to their own
personal conviction ? Never !
Could a mother, who knew clearly and intelligently
the structure and working of that wonderful organ the
stomach, the exquisite delicacy of its various parts, their
subtle interworking and mutual dependence upon each other;
its intimate and inextricably involved connection with brain,
and heart, and nerves, with all life’s ultimate recesses and
mysterious centres ; knowing also, that for it, as for mental
phenomena, habit is second nature, growing with its growth,
and strengthening with its strength —could this mother allow
or encourage her children in eating food unfit for them, rich
or seasoned dishes, spices, condiments, wine daily or for a
treat, strong tea or coffee, as countless mothers do : lowering
the tone of the stomach, robbing it of its normal energy, and
implanting that physical instinct for stimuli, which surely
paves the way for the fierce, insatiable craving of maturer
years ?
Could this mother smile at and ignore the early attempts
of her young sons—very children—to smoke, did she know
the sensitive and marvellous delicacy of that nervous system
which smoking affects, and the sovereign influence of that
nervous system over every function of animal life, either in
its physical or psychical developments ? Assuredly not!
Now, assuming it granted that a practical thorough-going
knowledge of the general laws of health is needed, such
knowledge is impossible, except upon the basis here
advocated : a basis indicated by these words of Dr. Michael
Foster, in his admirable little “ Science Primer of Physi-
ology ” : —“ In my descriptions and explanations I have
supposed the reader to be willing to handle and examine such
things as a dead rabbit and a sheep’s heart. I have done
this purposely, from an increasing conviction that actual
observation of structure is as necessary for the sound
learning of even elementary physiology as are actual experi-
ments for chemistry.”
To expect aught else is to expect reading without the
alphabet; a knowledge of French without its grammar; of


equations without arithmetic; or of engineering without
mathematics. Can any definite portion of knowledge be
isolated from all others and its natural surroundings ?
Emphatically, No ! No hard and fast line can be drawn in
scientific, in any studies, for none has been drawn by the
Great Artificer. Subjects so impinge upon, are so mutually
dependent and interpenetrated, that one cannot be thoroughly
mastered, independently of others. It is not for any one to
draw the line. It must be left for individual feeling so to do.
And, oh, my readers ! hinder not by scoff or ridicule
those who endeavour to understand this great study.
“ Surely,” says the author of ‘John Halifax, Gentleman,’
u it must be pleasing to Him who put the soul into the body,
that we should know how best to treat the latter, both for
ourselves and for others.”
I ask you, reader, would you care to trust your life upon
that railway, whose trains were driven by men, only knowing
monkey-like the stereotyped usual movements —destitute of
clear idea of the principle upon which their engines worked ?
The human engine is a valuable one ; let those hands which
chiefly drive it, and drive it so often fatally wrong, have skill
to drive it right. Teach women physiology .
If we have freed ourselves from belief in the wretched
lie, that to abuse the body is to exalt the soul (“ the belief of
the old Egyptian anchorite in the desert, whose filth was his
glory, who feared nothing so much as human beauty, except
pure water and wholesome bread ”), if we have learnt the
blessed truth, that it is right to care for and honour it, to keep
it in purity and strength, is it not time to acknowledge that it
is neither wrong, nor indecorous, nor indelicate to learn and
to understand how to attain those ends? Not wrong, nor
indecorous, but wholly right; and furthering a deeper, truer
delicacy than the suave ignoring of smoothly veiled evils, by
cruel, pharisaic, conventional propriety. Listen to Professor
Huxley’s wise words ; “If any persons object that they find
it derogatory to the honour of the God whom they worship,
to awaken the minds of the young to the infinite wonder and
majesty of the works which they proclaim His, and to teach
them those laws, which must needs be His laws, and therefore


needful of all things for man to know, I can only recommend
them to be let blood and put on low diet. There must be
something very wrong going on in the instrument of logic, if
it turns out such conclusions from such premises.” This
opinion every candid mind must surely endorse.
Upon another point of this wide subject, namely, the
relation of vice to disease, as effect to cause ; their co-existence
as the legitimate and necessary result of the ignorance
denounced, I quote some living writers—writers abreast of
the thought and culture of the age, to show that physical
degeneration and moral taint are as substance and shadow.
The two together covering every awful evil, visible or cloaked,
under which the world groans.
First, from a certain popular—and deservedly popular—
novelist: “ What is morality, but the perfect adjustment of
the human organism to the actual conditions of life—the
observance by the human being of those unchangeable, inexor-
able laws of the universe, to break which is death, physical
or spiritual as the case may be ? When Igo down to the
slums I have been talking about, how dare I say that these
wretched people, living in squalor, and ignorance, and misery,
are only paying the penalty for their own mistakes and
crimes ? Look at the narrow, retreating, monkey-like
forehead, the heavy and hideous jowl, the thick neck, and the
furtive eye; think of the foul air they have breathed from
their infancy, of the bad water and unwholesome food they
have consumed ; and how can you say that their immoral
existence is anything but inevitable ?”
Again, what says The Times (practical, utilitarian, and
reflex of the public mind) ? “ The close connection between
moral and physical degradation could not be more clearly
exemplified than in the list before us (The Register of
Habitual Criminals). The catalogue of burns, boils, blains,
and other Egyptian plagues, dints in the forehead, premature
baldness, broken noses, and bone disease, might be indefinitely
prolonged, but to indicate its existence is sufficient.”
I regret that I cannot now refer to some of Charles
Kingsley’s utterances upon the subject—vivid, forcible, and
fervent with the intense conviction of his clear strong English


mind, and warm, true heart. I believe, however, that it is a
work of supererogation in these days to laboriously argue
that crime is the corollary of physical degeneration.
Again (from an American author this time): “ The
doctor was religious, but he had a theory that all sins could
be traced to physical conditions ; the worse the sinner, the
more abnormal must be the status of his vital organs.” Yes,
and this theory is held most firmly in its widest-reaching and
broadest-embracing heights and depths by those who are
most capable of forming an opinion, denied only by those
who are incompetent to do so. And that most sensible and
popular writer, Dr. B. W. Richardson, what does he think of
these things ? He says, “ With the object in view of making
existence better and happier, ready and convincing methods
should be sought of making known to the uninformed the
facts, that many of the conditions which lead to the pain and
penalty of disease are under our control; that neither mental
serenity nor mental development can exist with an
unhealthy animal organization the inevitable conclusion
being, that as there is a vast amount of disease, so a large
proportion of it is preventible ; that the means of prevention
is information diffused as to its causes : that is, “ physio-
logical teaching;” that mental serenity and development are
being hindered by the ignorance which knows not how to
prevent the physical disease of which the former are the
inevitable result ; hence that the world is losing tremendously
in all that makes life worth having from what might be
prevented by knowledge, and is fostered by ignorance. Ah !
it is a sad picture. How sad few know, expect those who
get behind the curtains on life’s stage—medical men,
ministers, hospital nurses —too sad for thought, but for the
fair dawn of hope, in the belief that it is preventible ; that
better days must surely come, and that to speed their coming
by life, and word, and pen, is an object worthy to live for.
How now is the grand end to be attained, of making
humanity healthier, and therefore happier and better ?
What are the factors of the world and of nations ? Families.
And the living centre of the family and family life (mental,
moral, and physical) is the wife and mother. Teach her
when she is young. Teach her as well as her brother.
Teach her that she may use aright the tenfold power of


influence which God and nature have placed in her hands.
What can the justest and wisest ideas of one parent do for
the rearing, physically and morally, of his children, if
neutralized by the ignorance and prejudice of the other, and
that other, her whose influence in childhood’s plastic season
is paramount, whose life and practice, in ten thousand cases,
mould her children’s natures and being ? Small but unceasing
influences have mightier results than rarer though stronger
ones; they are the mother’s prerogative, God-given, and
inalienable, and men sin against themselves and their dearest,
highest, noblest interests, if they cramp the hand which
touches the very springs, and unseals the very fountains of
life, —and dull the eye, by lack of knowing what to look for,
which has truest, oftenest opportunities of seeing. Truly
says our great modern poet, speaking of the mutual relations
of man and woman : “ They rise or fall together. Together
rise as gods, or sink as dwarfs.” Those who use their
influence, active or passive, to withhold from woman that
light and knowledge of which I speak, are indeed and in
truth, helping to rivet the awful chains of drunkenness and
crime, and to build wider the prisons, the lunatic asylums,
the hospitals, and the reformatories of generations yet to
come. You who have thought upon these things, bear
witness whether I speak truth or no. Truth too sad, too
deeply awful and infinite to be reached, far less exaggerated
by any weak words of mine.
With regard to the direct, immediate bearing of woman’s
intelligent familiarity with physiological law or truth, upon
present, actual surroundings, I would ask—Upon what does
a valuable life often depend? Upon the administering of
this drug or that ? Upon the attendance of one doctor
rather than another chiefly ? Or upon the intelligent, minute,
practical attention to cleanliness, sleep, ventilation, tem-
perance, warmth, etc ? All in woman’s province and power.
A little clothing more or less ; a window shut or open ; a
little food daintily brought just at the right moment, to tempt
the failing appetite, or slovenly to repel it: these weight the
balances of life and death. How often, who can tell, for
their want the scale goes down ? See Mr. Callender’s
“ Address to the Clinical Society of London,” January 26
Lancet, 3, 2-77, upon the vital importance of attention to


the minutest details, “a revolution,” he says, “having been
effected in one hospital, by seeing that the nursing, the
cleansing, and the dressings were strictly, hence successfully,
carried out.”
Whose work is this I ask ? And when at this date, this
nineteenth century, of whose enlightenment we boast
ourselves, a medical man deems it necessary to insist upon
its importance to medical men, is it to be expected that
ignorant women should rightly estimate it ? For a time,
under external stimulus of careful and incessant supervision,
it might be partially realized—not then in all integrity. But
who will not acknowledge that an intelligent appreciation
and understanding of “ the why and the wherefore,” is the
only sure guarantee of its permanence. Again, the wise Jean
Mace : “We obey readily and easily when we understand
the reason for doing so, and a duty which one can satisfy
oneself about, forces itself upon one as a sort of necessity.”
“ How can a bit of potato or pudding hurt any one,” says
ignorance, and the disease gains vantage ground, and a life is
lost. “I won’t bother to wash those sponges in carbolic,” says
ignorance again (that is root- ignorance mark, not ignorance
that she has been told to, and that they should be washed in
carbolic), “ they are quite clean with plenty of water.” The
sponges are not washed in carbolic, and the doctor is at a
loss to account for a healthy wound developing bad
symptoms, and a strong right arm is lost, to its country’s
detriment, or perchance a darkened home has another empty
chair, and another strong young life is untimely ended.
Ah, yes! ye know not what ye do ! Ye who, actively or
passively, by ridicule or inertia, help to keep woman in
supine ignorance. Do the negative wrong of denying right,
and the fruits are the positive evils of pain and death, ever
widening as the circles in water from a carelessly flung
pebble. “ Evil is wrought by want of thought, as well as
want of heart.” Like the noble Bereans, search and see if
these things are not so. When doctors are miraculously
gifted with omnipresence and omnipotence, there will be less
need for women to have intelligent physiological knowledge
in relation to nursing the sick.


But it is not in relation to nurses’ work at all
(comprehensive as are the interests involved) one ten-
thousandth part as much as in the aspects of home
life, that I would further with my warmest efforts woman’s
emancipation from the worse than Egyptian bondage of
physiological darkness. For the one it is, it can be, but
the stern, and often discouraging and unsuccessful battle with
present potent, dominant evil. For the others it would be a
guiding the tiny crystal stream in the right channel; the
pleasant sowing seeds of future bright beauty ; planting the
acorn of the coming grand and stately oak ; pulling up the
easily eradicated young weed-growth. The hopeful looking
forward to the glad summer, the richly rewarding fruitful
autumn, the placid, serene, silvery winter. Not alone the
pains and penalties—dire beyond word’s depth—avoided, but
the life and joy and blessedness gained.
A popular American authoress says, in one of her
charming girl stories: “ 1 fancy everything begins with
exceptions, and happens in spots, from the settling of a
continent to the doing up of hair in new fashions. I shouldn’t
wonder if it were an excellent way to take life, to make it as
exceptional as you can in all unexceptionable directions. To
help to thicken up the good spots, till the world gets confluent
with them.” Yes! And it is in an unexceptionable direction
when it is towards the making known to the uninformed—
oneself as others—the physical and preventible causes of
disease, mental and physical, whose ravages are desolating
hearts and homes, and lying like a hideous incubus upon the
world. But, as has been said, how the causes, and the
physiological laws upon which they depend, can be clearly
made known to any one, without actual study of physiology
and anatomy, I know not.
“ Our eye speaks much more loudly and distinctly to us
than does our earand as Latin is the basis of all the
modern languages, and without a knowledge of Latin one
cannot understand (to its heights and depths, in its niceties
and subtleties of expression) even their own English mother-
tongue ; so every law of health and happiness for mind and
body is based on, and cannot be understood without
physiology and anatomy. No great structure can be raised


without an adequate foundation. This structure would be of
such vast, far-reaching, deep-penetrating, mightily-powerful
blessing, it needs foundation strong and deep and broad, —
living foundation stones of intelligent minds.
“ When the women of a household understand as much
of the constitution of the human body, as they do of old
pieces of pottery, and are as well instructed in the best way
of making their homes healthy and pure, as they are in its
artistic decoration, we may find sanitary law practically
unnecessary, for each home will be * a law unto itself,’ and the
whole community will be saved a vast amount of suffering
and pain, inflicted on it now by the ignorance of those who
are left uninstructed in these most important matters.”
Good ! Such is the result to be aimed at, but, towards
such result, second-hand knowledge is worthless for practical
application. The amount of conventional prejudice to be
overcome in applying physiological laws to every day life is
so great and overpowering, that the need for so doing must
be felt, vivid and potent—patent to individual sense—for the
effort of application to be attempted at all, in the majority of
cases. The lever must be strong and the fulcrum firm set
that stirs the giant mass.
Much might be said of the indirect, but infinitely
beneficial, effect of this (as of any scientific study), on the
mental tone and life. The broadening, deepening, and enlarg-
ing of the sphere of thought, interest, and action. Here will
be found the true and sure antidote to the tremendous
frivolity, whose fatal incubus is smothering and choking the
womanhood of our days, with a soft, but deadly power, like
the vampire, lulling its victim to slumbers while sucking its
life’s blood.
Upon this point, however, I will say no more, only one
quotation towards refuting the common and superficial error,
that such studies have any hardening or debasing tendency.
“It has been suggested that the study of ‘ Huxley’s
Elementary Physiology ’ is likely to make children indulge in
cruelty. Allow me to give the experience of the father of
five boys on the subject. Those old enough to be taught from
that book are so, and have attended the Professor’s lectures


and seen some of his experiments. The impression left upon
their minds from the reverent and touching treatment of the
subject by the able Professor, has led to an improved and
exalted respect for the rights and life of the meanest thing
that crawls. Although these boys are now at what may be
called, the predatory age, the interest and respect they evince
for animal life is mainly to be attributed to the beautiful and
refining lecture of the humane Huxley.” Good bona fide
testimony. Boys! And at the “ predatory age.”
In conclusion I would ask whether, looked at fairly and
candidly in the light of the opinions of such men as
Huxley, &c., and, above all, of common sense, it does not
appear more than desirable, earnestly and ardently to be
encouraged and commended when women, individually or
collectively, set themselves with heart and mind to study this
subject as they are able—as their circumstances and surround-
ings allow. Some have many facilities, some few.
It is simply an impossibility for the mass of women so to
do now, but all the more need for the few to do it thoroughly
and vigorously—those for whom circumstance and qlesire
invite favourably to that end.
“ A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.”
In these times precedent is followed in far-spreading
lines, and quickly-multiplying circles. If all cannot be near
the fire on a cold winter’s night, pile on the logs, let the blaze
be large and bright, and the heat will radiate to the distant
corners. Therefore, to those who have the will and the
opportunity to study these grand, ennobling subjects of
Physiology, Plygiene, and Sanitation, I say, use them, realiz-
ing the vast interests at stake, and the solemn responsibility
of clearer light, of God-given conviction.
Be assured to your own conscience that your motives are
high and worthy, then flinch not for the condemnation of the
conventional, or the frown of the wide world, should the wide
world frown, but it will not. The noblest and best, recog-
nizing by wondrous, natural, magnetic sympathy the truth,
will uphold you ; and the truth as it ever has done, ever shall
do—whether spoken or lived—shall be triumphant. Magna
est veritas et prevalebit. “Stand,” says Emerson, “on your own


two feet, parallel to life’s laws, and the world shall come round
to you.” “Do you not know that a real good planted in the
world in social living must spread from point to point, where
the circumstance is ready, where it is the next thing.”
To the ignorant, the conventional, the thoughtlessly
indifferent and ridiculing, I would say, “ consider these
things.” And ye who have the power personally, by
knowledge, influence, position, to further physiological study
and strengthen the hands of those who are furthering it:
Oh ! do so heartily and earnestly. Do so in the sacred
names of home and humanity—of saddened homes and
suffering bodies and souls ; of women weeping over their
dead —untimely dead in green quiet graves ; or haply, sadder
still, living dead “gone down in the dark depths of a great
town.” In the name of the poor, infinitely-to-be-pitied
drunkard, dragged loathing in the mire, and held there by the
awful fetters of that insatiable craving—that mad hunger-thirst
—implanted perchance in infancy’s earliest, primal dawn.
Of the poor, supremely-wretched, dyspeptic, striving fruit-
lessly, helplessly, hopelessly, against the terrible, tyrannical,
over-powering strength of morbid impulse, engendered by and
rooted in abnormal physical states. Oh try! Try to stem
the fierce surging tide of suffering, and sin, and death ; to
swell the spring flow of health and purity and loving happy
natural life, in this beautiful world of ours. That it may be a
blessed thing to live, to breath the breath of life—the blessed,
full, bounteous thing God meant it to be—sow far and wide
the fruitful, pregnant, hope-inspiring seeds of Physiological
Truth.
FRANCES G. HOLDEN,
Children’s Hospital.
1878.




lArp
&(€iio
Fto^lS
j'J
1508 00074643 3
