

v ' , ' " ll
WOMAN’S BURDEN ACROSS THE AGES.
In this picture “we examine In the next stage she has
the destiny of young woman- clearly reached resignation, so
hood.” Here we have the life- we may judge that the struggle
story of a girl who marries early to lift the grosser mentality of
and undergoes life’s stern disci- her lord is over. Only duty
pline, in the normal way. The now, and a consideration for
six figures holding the blanket appearances, keep her at her
represent six stages in her life, P°™ .
and the ass represents her hus- The fourth stage is only hinted
k anc | at. from what we can see of
t-l* 1.1 her she appears to be much over-
Ihe woman represents the i i i , £ ,■,
i i - r i loaded, and either from blows or
most advanced type of to-day. r j i i . .
C 1 , ~ ill i. . from indulgence, she staggers at
She has discarded the traditional j^ er f- as k
abundance of petticoat and skirt The fifth stage
is very care-
and permits herself freedom fully portrayed, and is terrible
both of body and mind. See her j n its directness. All charm is
in the gay confidence of youth gone, and we have now to do
standing upon the left of the pic- with one of whom circumstance
ture and picking up her task has made a virago. Her duties
with happy insouciance. are perfunctory, and as she nears
“Why should marriage be the turning point of life she
made such a nightmare?” she decks herself out in garments
seems to say. “Everything de- that are conspicuous and unsuit-
pends upon how you manage the able the garments of that
man. Begin as you mean to go y° uth which is no longer hers,
on. He is not such a brute as he She P a Y s no regard any more to
seems, but will respond to a appearances, and takes such low
woman’s lighter thought.” So pleasures as come her way.
she confidently enters the first Ir \ th f last s J a S e ’ w ’ th a . back f
L r • j tc ward glance down the vista of
phase of married life. 43 . T L i
t -. i . i ■ the wasted years, she sets her
1 o the right we see her again u j j u i u i
r c ■ burden down, a broken, hopeless
after a year or two of experience woman So ends the tale that
have passed over her. She is now began so happily
the young matron. Tired? No, The ass symbolizes the obese,
not exactly tired, but a little wist- and a l most inert mass of
ful, perhaps. The lines of youth an imality—by courtesy called a
are gone and youth’s buoyancy, husband—who proves such an
but there is still the will to happi- intolerable load to the wife,
ness, if only it were possible. She His stupidity is a perpetual
is trying hard to lift him. affront to her bright mind. No
wonder Nietzsche, when observ- Marriage with mules is
ing him, exclaimed: “Even yet slowly destroying the lives of
man is more of an ape than any millions of living, feeling, think-
of the apes!” ing women.
So now we may read Goya’s Contrast their poor, pitiable
message in words something lives with the rich and harmoni-
like these: ous existence they deserve!
“How vainly does the natural Could there be a more poignant
vivacity and charm of woman world tragedy?
strive to lift the inertia of the Were such women —with all
world’s grossness and stupidity. their potentialities for good—
If men respond at all to these mated with real men, what a
efforts, it is not their true selves grand world-power they would
that do so. They are playful only be!
as puppets are playful. The I s it possible to estimate the
fundamental animality of their loss suffered by humanity in the
nature is untouched. marriage of women to mules?
The sagging weight of the Women are wasted on mules.
unconscious ass in man, and the Capitalism, and the mules it
still more intolerable burden of produces, are destroying all that
his mental stupor, wear out in i s best in woman.
time the delicate fibre of the Socialism is woman’s only
woman’s nature, which she hope.
brings to the task in her happy The Socialist Labor Party is
inexperience. transforming the mules into
“When she has seen through men.
the sham ideals of her mate, and Women! Assist the great
realized his leaden and sordid cause.
outlook, she drops beneath the [NOTE. —The main idea embodied in the
disillusionment, and does well if picture and the accompanying letterpress is
, . , 1-1 l ” taken trom a picture by the famous Spanish
She SinKS not to his level. artist Goya, and its interpretation by Mr.
There is something in this Blamire Young. We are deeply grateful to
• . r • iit .1 . Goya and Blamire Young for having made
grim picture of married life that this publication possible. For further par-
recalls Tennyson’s lines ticulars see Mr. Blamire Young’s remarkable
i . .(■ work entitled; “The Proverbs of Goya,”
A.S the husband IS, the Wife is: published by Jonathan Cape, London,
thou art mated with a 1923.]
clown, Published by
And the grossness of his nature The Socialist u LaI T Party of Australia ‘
I ~ , . , i Headquarters:
shall have weight to drag 107 LIVERPOOL STREET, SYDNEY,
thee down.” June 14, 1929. Copyright.
Worker Print, St. Andrew’s Place, Sydney.
