

PRICE THREEPENCE.
PREST
DEVIL
RED-HOT SHOTS, INTENSELY SATIRICAL.
INGERSOLL TRIUMPHANT
I !
j
I
i
'
DEYIL FACTORIES—DriyIng the Devil out o! the Priesthood and Clergy.
WOMAN’S BONDAGE—Woman (say those old fossllated and celibate Divines) brought all
the trouble into the world, and they have been at it ever since.
Should be read by every Woman, married and unmarried.
Every Man reads it as a matter of course.




h WOMAN,
RIEST, AND DEVIL
COLONEL INGERSOLL,
AUTHOR OF
‘MOSES’ MISTAKES.”
THE KEENEST SATIRES OF THE DAY.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY H. J. FRANKLIN, 40 HUNTER STREET,
1881.
tIOT)Z




M 3364
WOMAN, PRIEST, AND DEVIL.
MAN advances just in the proportion that he mingles his thoughts with his labor
—just in the proportion that he takes advantage of the forces of nature ; just
in proportion as he loses superstition and gains confidence in himself. Man advances
as he ceases to fear the gods and learns to love his fellow-men. It is all, in my judg-
ment, a question of intellectual development. Tell me the religion of any man, and
I will tell you the degree he marks on the intellectual thermometer of the world. It
is a simple question of brain. Those among us who are nearest barbarism have a
barbarian religion. Those who are nearest civilization have the least superstition. It
is a simple question of brain, and I want, in the first place, to prove that assertion.
A little while ago I saw models of nearly everything that man has made. I saw
models of all the water craft of the world, from the rude dug-out which floated a naked
savage up to a man-of-war that carries a hundred guns and spreads miles of canvas;
from that dug-out to the great steamship, with a compass like a conscience, crossing
the whole ocean without missing a throb or beat of its mighty iron heart from shore
to shore. And I saw at the same time
THE PAINTINGS OF THE WORLD,
from the rude daub of yellow mud to the landscapes that enrich palaces and adorn
houses of what were once called the common people. I saw also their sculpture,
from the rude god with four legs, a half-dozen arms, several noses, and two or three
rows of ears, and one little, contemptible, brainless head, up to the figures of to-day
—to the marbles that genius has clad in such a personality that it seems almost impu-
dent to touch them without an introduction. I saw their books—books written upon
the skins of wild beasts —upon shoulder-blades of sheep ; books written upon leaves
upon bark, up to the splendid volumes that enrich the libraries of our day. When I
speak of libraries, I think of the remark of Plato : “ A house that has a library in
it has a soul. ” I saw at the same time the offensive weapons that man has made, from
a club such as was grasped by that same savage, when he crawled from his den in the
ground and hunted a snake for his dinner —from that club to the boomerang, to the
sword, to the cross-bow, to the blunderbuss, to the flint-lock, to the cap-lock, to the
needle gun, up to a cannon cast by Krupp, capable of hurling a ball weighing two
thousand pounds through eighteen inches of solid steel. I saw, too, the armour from
the shell of a turtle that one of our brave ancestors wore upon his breast when he
went to fight for his country ; the skin of a porcupine, dried with the quills on, which
this same savage pulls over his orthodox head, up to the shirts of mail that were worn
in the middle ages, that laughed at the edge of the sword and defied the point of the
spear—up to a monitor clad in complete steel. And I say orthodox not only in the
matter of religion, but in everything. Whoever has quit growing, he is orthodox


whether in art, politics, religion, philosophy —no matter what. Whoever thinks he
has found it all out, he is orthodox.
ORTHODOXY IS THAT WHICH ROTS,
and heresy is that which grows for ever. Orthodoxy is the night of the past, full of
THE darkness OF SUPERSTITION ; and heresy is the eternal coming day, the light
of which strikes the grand foreheads of the intellectual pioneers of the world.
In the old time there was but one crop, and when the rain did not come in answer
to the prayer of hypocrites a famine came and people fell upon their knees. At that
time they were full of superstition. They were frightened, all-the time tor fear that
some god would be enraged at his poor, hapless, feeble, and starving children. But
now, instead of depending upon one.crop, they have several, and if there is not rain
enough for one crop there may be enough for another. ’ And if the frosts kill all, we
have railroads and steamships enough to bring vs hat we need from some other part
of the world. Since man has found out something about agriculture, the gods have
retired from the business of producing; famines. I saw at the same time a row of
human skulls, from the lowest skulT thatnas been found, the Neanderthal skull—skulls
from Central Africa, skulls from the aborigines of Australia, skulls trom the farthest
isles of the Pacific Sea. up to the best skulls ot the last generation ; and I noticed
that there was the same difference between those skulls that there was between the
products of those skulls, and I said to myself ; “ After all it is a simple question of
intellectual development.” There was the same difference between those skulls, the
highest and the lowest skulls, that there was between the dug-out and the man-of-war
and steamship—-between the club and the Krupp gun —between the yellow daub and
the landscape— oni IbT .Jnomqobveb limJaolbfni lo noilgoup n ,Inon
tl ’ 'bhowmdl JkLialarrioanarll Enloolbtni mil no gjfcrjsoi off ooiuob orß troy fbl Iliw. I
BETWEEN THE TOM-TOM AND AN OPERA BY VERDI.
The first and lowest skull in this row was the den in which crawled the base and
meaner instincts of mankind, and the last was a temple in which dwelt joy, liberty,
and' love. And I said to myself it is all a question of intellectual development. Man
has advanced just as he has mingled his thought with his labour. As 1 he has grown
he has taken advantage of the forces of nature : first of' the moving wind, then ot
falling water, and finally of steam From one step to another he has obtained better
houses, better clothes, and he has done it by holding out every incentive to the inge-
nious to produce them. The world has said, give ms better clubi and guns and
cannons with which to kill our fellow Christians. Every incentive was held out to
every human being to improve these things, and. that -is. the reason we have advanced
in all mechanical arts. But that gentleman in the dug-out not only had his ideas
about politics, mechanics, and agriculture—he had his ideas also about religion.
THAT LOW SKULL WAS A DEVIL FACTORY.
He believed in hell, and the belief was a consolation to him. Lie could see the
waves of God’s wrath dashing against the rocks of dark damnation. He could see
tossing in the white caps the faces of women, and stretching above the crests the
dimpled hands of children ; and he regarded these things as the justice and mercy of
God. And all to-day Ulio believe in this eternal punishment are the barbarians
of THE nineteenth century. That man believed in a devil, too, that had a
long tail terminating ■■ ith a fiery dart ; that had wings like a bat—a devil that had
a cheerful habit of breathing brimstone; that had a cloven foot, such as some ortho-
dox clergyman seem to think I have. And there has not been a patentable improve-
ment made upon that devil in all the years since.
THE MOMENT YOU DRIVE THE DEVIL OUT
of theology there is nothing left worth speaking of. The moment they drop the
devil away goes atonement. The moment they kill the devil the whole scheme of
salvation has lost all of its interest for mankind. You must keep the devil and you
must keep hell. You must keep them. You must keep the devil because with
no devil no priest is necessary. [As the best instance of progress and truth,


it is refreshing to find that the devil has been sent about his business from the pages
of the Revised New Testament, together with his blazing estate, so that he must now
restrict his eccentricities for the dismal entertainment of those who, so to speak,
religiously cling to the “ dug-out.-— Ed. ] Now all I ask is this : the same privilege
to improve upon his religion as upon his dug-out, and that is what I am going to do,
the best I can. No matter what church you belong to, or what church belongs to
us. Let us be honor bright and fair. I want to ask you : Suppose the king, if there
was one, and the priest, if there was one at that time, had told these gentlemen in
the dug-out : “ That dug-out is the best boat that can ever be built by man ; the
pattern of that came from on high, from the great god of storm and flood, and any
man that says he can improve it by putting a stick in the middle of it and a rag on
the stick is an infidel and shall be burned at the stake : ” what, in your judgment—
honor bright—would have been the effect upon the circumnavigation of the globe ?
Suppose the king, if there was one, and the, priest, if there was one—
AND I PRESUME THERE WAS A PRIEST,
because it was a very ignorant age —suppose this king and priest had said : “That
tom-tom is the most beautiful instrument of music of which any man can conceive ;
that is the kind of music they have in heaven ; an angel sitting upon the edge of a
glorified cloud, golden in the setting sun, playing upon that tom-tom, became so
enraptured, so entranced with her own music, that in a kind of ecstacy she dropped
it—that is how we obtained it; and any man who says it can be improved
by putting a back and front to it, and four strings, and a bridge, and getting a bow
of hair with resin, is a blaspheming wretch and shall die the death ”■—l ask you,
what effect would that have had upon music ? If that course had been pursued,
would the human ears, in your judgment, ever have been enriched with the divine
symphonies of Beethpyen? Now all I ask is the same, privilege to improve upon his
religion as upon his’mechanical arts. Why don’t we go back’ to that period to get
the telegraph ? Because they were barbarians. And shall we go to barbarians to
get our religion. What is religion ? Religion simply embraces the duty
of man to man. Religion is simply the science of human duty and the duty of man
to man—-that is what it is. It is the highest science of all ; and all other sciences are
as nothing, except as they contribute to the happiness of man. The science of reli-
gion is the highest of all, embracing all others. And
SHALL WE GO TO THE BARBARIANS TO LEARN
the science of sciences ? The nineteenth century knows more about religion than all
the centuries dead. There is more real charity in the world to-day than ever existed
before. There is morp thoughtto-day than,ever before. Woman is glorified to-day
as she never was before in the hisiory of the world. There are more happy families
now than ever before —more children treated as though they were tender blossoms
than as though they were brutes than in any other time or nation. Religion is simply
the duty man owes to man ; and when you fall upon your knees and pray for some-
thing you know not of, you neither benefit the one you pray for nor yourself. One
ounce of restitution is worth a million of repentances anywhere, and a man will get
along faster by helping himself a minute than by praying ten years for someone to
help him. Our fathers in the “good old times”—and the best I can say of the
“good old times” is they are gone, and the best I can say of the good old people
is that they are gone too —believed that you made a man think your way by force.
Well, you can’t do it. There is a splendid something in man that says, “ I won’t —
I won’t be driven.” But our fathers thought men could be driven.
THEY TRIED IT IN THE GOOD OLD TIMES.
I used! to read about the manner in which the early Christians made converts —hpw
the^impressed upon the world the idea that God loved them. I heard so much
about being fried for ever in hell that it didn’t seem 1 so bad to burn for a few minutes.
I love liberty, and 1 hate ail persecutions in the name of Crod. I never appreciated
the infamies that have been committed in the name of religion until I saw the iron
arguments that Christians used. I saw the thumb-Screw, and many people


suffered for making some such trifling remarks as, for instance, that they didn’t
believe in baptism. You know that is very wrong. You can see for yourself the
justice of damning a man if his parents had happened to baptise him in the wrong
way. I happened to be in the company of some Baptist ministers once—you may
wonder how I came to be in such company as that —and one of them asked me what
I thought about baptism. Well, I told them I hadn’t thought much about it that I
had never sat up nights on that question. I said, “ Baptism—with soap —is a good
institution.” Now, when some man had said a trifling thing like that they put this
thumb-screw on him —in the name of universal benevolence and for the love of God —•
man has never persecuted man for the love of man ; man has never persecuted
another for the love of charity—it is always for the love of something he calls God,
and every man’s idea of God is his own idea. Nobody has ever been persecuted for
calling God bad—it has always been for calling him good. When I say that
IF THERE IS A HELL, GOD IS A FIEND,
they say that is very bad. But let me tell you one thing—there is no reformation in
fear ; you can scare a man so that he won’t do it sometimes, but I will swear you can’t
scare him so bad that he won’t want to do it. Then they put this man on the rack
and priests began their refined tortures of another cruel instrument, and kept on until
the ankles, the hips, the shoulders, the elbows, the wrists, and all the joints of the
victim were dislocated, and he was wet with agony —and standing by was a physician
to feel his pulse. What for? To save his life? Yes. In mercy? No. But in
order that they might have the pleasure of racking him once more. And this was
the Christian spirit. There is not an orthodox preacher in the city who has not a
respect for these clerical butchers. As, for instance, for John Calvin, who was a
murderer, and nothing but a murderer, who
WOULD HAVE DISGRACED AN ORDINARY GALLOWS
by being hanged upon it. These men when they came to die were not frightened.
God did not send any devils into their death rooms to make mouths at them. He
reserved them for Voltaire, who brought religious liberty to France. He reserved
them for Thomas Paine, who did more for liberty than all the churches. But all the
inquisitors died with the white hands of peace folded over the breast of piety. And
when they died the room was filled with the rustle of wings of angels, waiting to bear
the wretches to heaven ! I swear that while I live I will do what little I can to aug-
ment the liberties of man, woman, and child. I denounce superstition and slavery
everywhere. I have just as good a right to talk about theology as a minister. And
if men have been slaves—it they have crawled in the dust before one another —
WHAT SHALL I SAY OF WOMEN?
They have been the slaves of men. It took thousands of ages to bring woman from
abject slavery up to the divine height of marriage. I believe in marriage. If there
is any heaven upon earth, it is in the family by the fireside, and the family is a unit
of government. Without the family relation is tender, pure, and true, civilization is
impossible. Ladies, the ornaments you wear upon your persons are but the souvenirs
of your mother’s bondage. The chains around your necks, and the bracelets clasped
upon your white arms by the thrilled hand of love have been changed by the wand
of civilization to shining, glittering gold. Nearly every civilization accounts for the
devilment in the world by the crimes of woman. They say woman brought all the
trouble into the world. I don’t care if she did. I would rather live in a world full
of troubles with the woman I love than to live in heaven with nobody but men. I
read in a book an account of the creation of the world. That book, I have taken
pains to say, was not written by any God. And why do I say sq ? Because 1 can
write a far better book myself. Because it is full of barbarisms. I want to ask
ministers one thing. I want them to be fair. I want them to say whether they
believe that the Eternal God of this universe
EVER UPHELD TPIE CRIME OF POLYGAMY?
Say it square and fair. Don’t begin to talk about that being a peculiar time, and


that God was easy on the prejudices of these old fellows. I want the ministers to
answer that question, and to answer it squarely, which they haven’t done. Did this
God which you pretend to worship ever sanction the institution of human slavery ?
Now, answer fair. Don’t slide around it. Don’t begin and answer what a bad man
I am, or what a good man Moses was. But stick to the text. Do you believe in a
God that allowed a man to be sold from his children ? Do you worship such an
infinite monster ? And if you do, tell your congregation whether you are not ashamed
to admit it. Let every minister who answers me tell whether he believes God com-
manded his general to kill the Itttle dimpled babe in the cradle. Let him answer it.
Don’t say those were very bad times. Be honest. Tell them whether that God in
war captured young maidens and turned them over to the soldiers ; and then ask the
wives and sweet girls of your congregation to get down on their knees and worship
the infinite fiend that did that thing. Answer ! It is your God lam talking about;
and if that is what your God did, please tell your congregation what, under the same
circumstances,
THE DEVIL WOULD HAVE DONE.
Don’t tell your people that is a poem. That won’t do. Tell your people whether
it is true or false. That is what I want you to do. In this book I have read about
God making the world and one man. That is all he intended to make. The making
of woman was a second thought, though I am willing to admit that as a rule second
thoughts are best. This God made a man and put him in a public park. In a little
while He noticed that the man got lonesome ; then He found He had made a mistake,
and that He would have to make someone to keep him company. So He causes sleep
to fall upon this man—now, understand me, Ido not say this story is true. After the
sleep had fallen on this man, the Supreme Being took a rib (or, as the French would
call it, a cutlet) out of him, and from that he made a woman : and I am willing to
swear, taking into account the quantity and quality of the raw material used, this was
the most magnificent job ever accomplished in the world. Well, after He got the
woman done she was brought to the man, not to see how she liked him, but to see
how he liked her. He liked her, and they started housekeeping, and they were told
of certain things they might do, and of one thing they must not do —
AND OF COURSE THEY DID IT.
I would have done it in fifteen minutes, and I know it. There wouldn’t have been
an apple on that tree half an hour from date. And then they were put out of the
park, and extra policemen were put on to prevent them from getting back. And then
trouble commenced, and we have been at it ever since. Nearly all of the religions of
this world account for the existence of evil by such a story as that! Well, I read in
another book what appeared to be an account of the same transaction. It was written
about 4000 years before the other. All commentators agree that the one that was
written last was the original, and that the one that was written first was copied from
the one that was written last. In this other account the Supreme Brahma made up
his mind to make the world and a man and woman. He made the world, and He
made the man and then the woman, and put them on the beautiful island of Ceylon.
Brahma, when he put them there, said, “ Let them have a period of courtship, for it
is my desire and will that true love should forever precede marriage.” When I read
that, it was so much more beautiful and lofty than the other that I said to myself, “ If
either of these stories turns out to be true I hope it will de this one.” Then they had
their courtship, with the nightingale singing and the stars shining and the flowers
blooming, and they fell in love. Imagine that courtship ! No prospective mothers-
in-law ; no prying and gossipping neighbours ; no father-in-law to say—
“YOUNG MAN, HOW DO YOU EXPECT TO SUPPORT HER?”
Nothing of that kind—nothing but the nightingale singing its song of joy and love.
They were married by the Supreme Brahma, and he said to them, “ Remain here,
you must never leave the island.” Well, after a little while the man—and his name


was Adami, and the woman’s name was Heva—said to Heva, “ I believe I’ll look
about a little.” He wanted “to go west.” He went to the western extremity of the
island, where there was a little narrow neck of land connecting it with the mainland,
and the devil, who is always playing pranks with us, produced a mirage ; and when
Adami looked over to the mainland he beheld such hills and vales, such dells and
dales, such mountains crowned with snow, such cataracts tinted with glory that he
went back and said to Heva, “ The country over there is a thousand times better
than this —let us migrate.” She, like every other woman that ever lived, said, “ Let
well alone ;we have all we want—let us stay herri.” But he said, “No ; let us go.”
So she followed him ; and when they came to this narrow neck of land he took her
on his back like a gentleman and carried her over. But the moment they got over
they heard a crash, and, looking back, discovered that this narrow neck of land had
fallen into the sea. The mirage had disappeared, and there were naught but rocks
and sand ; and then the Supreme Brahma cursed them both to the lowest hell. Then
it was that the man spoke—and I have liked him ever since for it—-
“ CURSE ME, BUT CURSE NOT HER—
it was not her fault, but mine.” That’s the kind of man to start a world with. The
Supreme Brahma said, “ I will save her, but not thee.” And then Heva spoke out
of the fullness of her love, out of a heart in which there was love enough to make all
her daughters rich in holy affection, and said, “ If thou wilt not spare him, neither
spare me. Ido not wish to live without him —I love him. Then the Supreme
Brahma said—and I have liked him ever since I read it— “ I will spare you both,
and watch over you arid your children for ever.” Honor bright, is not that the
better and grander story ? And in that same book I find this: “Man is strength,
woman is beauty ; man is courage, woman is love. When the one man loves the one
woman, woman loves the one man ; the very angels leave heaven and come and sit
in that house and sing for joy.” In the same book is,this.: “ Blessed is that man and
beloved of all the gods who is afraid of no man, and of whom no man is afraid.”
Magnificent character ! A missionary certainly ought to talk to that man. And I
find this : “Never will I accept private individual salvation, but rather will I stay
and work, and strive and suffer, until every soul from every star has been brought
home to God.” Compare that with the Christian that expects to go to heaven while
the world is rushing over Niagara
TO AN ETERNAL AND UNENDING HELL.
So I say that religion lays all the crime and troubles of this world at the beautiful
feet of woman. And then the Church has the impudence to say it has exalted woman.
I believe that marriage is a perfect partnership ; that woman has every right that man
has—and one more—the right to be protected. Above all men in the world I hate a
stingy man—a man that will make,his wife beg for money. “ What did you do with
the dollar I gave you last week ? and what are you going to do with this ? ” It is
vile. No gentleman will ever be satisfied with the love of a beggar and a slave—no
gentleman will ever be satisfied except with the love of an equal. We have never
thought ourselves very rich unless we were the possessors of some magnificent man-
sion. Every little boy is striving to be this and to be that. I tell you that the happy
man is the successful man. The man that has won the love of one good women is a
successful man. The man that has been the emperor of one good heart, and that
heart embrace all his, has been a success. If another has been the emperor of the
round world, and has never loved and been loved, his life is a failure. . . . Call
me an atheist —call me an infidel, because I hate the God of the Jews, which I do —
but I intend so to live that when I die my children can come to my grave and truth-
fully say, “He who sleeps here never gave us one moment of pain.” When I was a
boy there was, in each week, yp 'pj'.my >i ’JOY OQ Y/OH VIAM DHIJOY"
ONE DAY TOO GOOD FOR A CHILD TO BE HAPPY ON.
In these good old times Sunday commenced when the sun went down Saturday night,
and closed when the sun went down on Sunday night.' We commenced Saturday to


get a good ready. And when the sun went down Saturday night there was a gloom
deeper than midnight that fell upon the house. You could not crack hickory nuts
then, And if you were caught chewing gum, it was only another evidence of the
total depravity of the human heart. Well, after a while we got to bed, sadly and
sorrowfully, after having heard heaven thanked that we were not all in hell. And I
sometimes used to wonder how the mercy ot God lasted as long as it did, because I
recollected that on several occasions I had not been at school when I was supposed
to be there. Why I was not burned to a crisp was a mystery tome. The next morning
we got up and got ready for church—all solemn ; and when we got there the
minister was up in the pulpit, about 20 feel high, and he commenced at Genesis about
the Fall of Man, and he went on to about twenty-thirdly—then he struck the second
application. And when he struck the second application I knew he was about half
way through. And then he went on to show the scheme how the Lord was satisfied
with punishing the wrong man. Nobody but a god would have thought of that inge-
nious way. Well, when he got through that, then came the catechism—the chief
end of man. Then my turn came, and we sat along on a little bench where our feet
came within about fifteen inches of the floor, and the dear old minister used to ask
us : “ Boys, do you know that you all ought to be in hell ? ” And we answered up
AS CHEERFULLY AS COULD BE EXPECTED,
under the circumstances, “Yes, ;ir.” “Well, boys, do you know that you would go
to hell if you died in your sins?” And we said, “Yes, sir.”
And then came the great test : “ Boys ” —I can’t get the tone, you know. And
do you know that is how the preachers get the bronchitis. You never heard of an
auctioneer getting the bronchitis, nor the second mate of a steamboat—never. What
gives it to the ministers is talking solemnly when they don’t'feel that way ; and it has
the same influence upon the organs of speech that it would have upon the chords of
the calves of your legs to walk on your tip-toes, and so I call bronchitis “ parsonitis.”
And if the ministers would ail tell exactly what they think they would all get well,
but keeping back a part of the truth is what gives them bronchitis. Well, the old
man—the clear old minister —used to try and show us how long we would be in hell
if we would only locate there. But to finish the other. The grand test question was ;
“ Boys, if it was God’s will that you should go to hell, would you be willing
to go ? ”
And every little liar said, “ Yes, sir.”
Then, in order to tell how long we would stay there, he used to say ; “ Suppose
once in a billion ages a bird should come from a far distant clime and carry off in its
bill one little grain of sand, the time would finally come when the last grain of sand
would be carried away. Do you understand ? ”
“ Yes, sir.”
“ Boys, by that time it would not be sun-up in hell.”
Where did that doctrine of hell come from ? I will tell you—from that fellow
in the dug-out. Where did he get it? It was a souvenir from the wild beasts. And
I despise it with every drop of my blood, and defy it. If there is any God in this
universe who will damn his children for an expression of an honest thought, I wish to
go to hell. I would rather go there than go to heaven and keep the company of a
God that would thus damn his children.
OH, IT IS AN INFAMOUS DOCTRINE TO TEACH THAT,
to little children —to put a shadow in the heart of a child, to fill the insane asylums
with that miserable, infamous lie. I see now and then a little girl—a dear little
darling with a face like the light, and eyes of joy, a human blossom, and I think,
“Is it possible that little girl will ever grow up to be a Presbyterian ? Is it possible,
my goodness, that that flower will finally believe in the five points of Calvinism, or
in the eternal damnation of man? Is it possible that that little fairy will finally
believe that she could be happy in heaven with her baby in hell?” Think of it !
Think of it ! And that is the Christian religion.
We cry out against the Indian mother who throws her child into the Ganges to
be devoured by the alligator or the crocodile; but that is joy in comparison with


the Christian mother’s hope, that she may be in salvation while her brave boy is ia
hell. I tell you I want to kick the doctrine about hell —I want to kick it out every
time I go by it. I want to make them ashamed 10 preach it—to get congregations
so that they wont’t listen to it. We cannot divide the world off into saints and
sinners that way. There is a little girl fair as a flower, and she grows up until she is
12, 13, or 14 years old. Are you going to damn her in the 15th, 16th, or 17th year,
when the arrow from Cupid’s bow touches her heart and she is glorified—
ARE YOU GOING TO DAMN HER NOW?
When are you going to damn her—because she has listened to some Methodist minis-
ter, and, after all that flood of light, failed to believe ? Are you going to damn her
then ? I tell you God cannot afford to damn such a woman.
Well, after we got over the catechism, then came the sermon in the afternoon,
and it was exactly like the one in the forenoon except the other end to. Then we
started for home —a solemn march —and when we got home, if we had been real
good boys, we used to be taken up to the cemetery to cheer us up, and it always did
cheer me. Those sunken graves, those leaning stones, those gloomy epitaphs,
covered with the moss of years, always cheered me. When I looked at them I said,
“ Well, this kind of thing can’t last always.” Then we came back home and we
had books to read which were very eloquent and amusing. We had “Josephus”
and the “History of the Waldenses,” “Fox’s Book of Martyrs,” Baxter’s “Saint’s
Rest,” and “ Jenkyn on the Atonement.” I used to read Jenkyn with a good deal of
pleasure, and I often thought the atonement would have to be very broad in its pro-
visions to cover the case of a man that
WOULD WRITE SUCH A BOOK FOR THE BOYS.
Then I would look to see how the sun was getting on, and sometimes I thought it
had stuck from pure stubbornness. Then I would go back and try Jenkyn again.
Well, but it had to go down, and when the last rim of light sank below the horizon,
off would go our hats and we would give three cheers for liberty again. I tell you,
don’t make slaves of your children on Sunday. The idea that there is any God that
hates to hear a child laugh ! Let your children play games on Sunday. Here is a
poor man that hasn’t enough money to go to a big church, and he has too much inde-
pendence to go to a little church that the big church built for charity. He don’t want
to slide into heaven that way. I tell you, don’t go to the church, but go to the
woods and take your family and a lunch with you, and sit down on the old log and
let the children gather flowers, .and hear the leaves whispering poems like memories
of long ago; and when the sun is about going down, kissing the summits of far hills,
go home with your hearts filled with throbs of joy. There is more recreation and joy
in that than in going to a dry goods box with a steeple on top of it and hearing a man
tell you that your chances are about ninety-nine to one for being eternally damned.
LET US MAKE THIS SUNDAY A DAY OF SPLENDID PLEASURE,
not to excess, but to everything that makes man purer, and grander, and nobler. I
do not believe in drinking skimmed milk here, with the promise of butter beyond
the clouds. And no day can be so holy but what the laugh of a child will make it
holier still. Strike with hand of fire, O wierd musician, thy harp strung with
Apollo’s golden hair. Fill the vast cathedral aisles with symphonies sweet and dim,
deft toucher of the organ’s keys. Blow, bugler, blow until thy silver notes touch and
kiss the moonlit waves, and charm the lovers wanderihg ’mid the vine-clad hills.
Yet know your sweetest strains are discords all compared with childhond’s happy
laugh—the laugh that fills the eyes with light, and every heart with joy ! O rippling
river of laughter, thou art the blessed boundary line between the beasts and men,
and every wayward wave of thine doth drown some fretful fiend of care. O Laughter,
rose-lipped daughter of Joy, there are dimples enough in thy cheeks to catch and hold
and glorify all the tears of grief.
All the advance that has been made in the science of medicine has been made


by the recklessness of patients. I can recollect when they would not give a man
water in a fever —not a drop. Now and then some fellow would get so thirsty he
would say, “ Well, I’ll die any way, so I’ll drink it,” and thereupon he would drink
a gallon of water, and thereupon he would burst into a generous perspiration, and
get well. And the next morning, when the doctor would come to see him, they would
tell him about the man drinking the water, and he would say, “ How much ? ”
“ WELL, HE SWALLOWED TWO PITCHERS FULL.”
“ Is he alive ?”
“Yes.”
So they would go into the room, and the doctor would feel his pulse and ask
him :
“ Did you drink two pitchers of water ? ”
“Yes.”
“My God ! what a constitution you have got.”
I tell you there is something splendid in man that will not always mind. Why,
if we had done as the kings told us five hundred years ago, we would all have been
slaves. If we had done as the priests told us we would all have been idiots. If we
had done as the doctors told us we would all have been idiots. We have been saved
by disobedience. We have been saved by that splendid thing called independence,
and I want to see more of it. And don’t insist on children pursuing some calling
they have no sort of faculty for.
DONT MAKE THAT POOR GIRL PLAY TEN YEARS
on a piano when she has no ear for music, and when she has practised until she can
play “Bonaparte Crossing the Alps,” and you can’t tell after she has played it
whether Bonaparte ever got across or not.
Now, my crime has been this. I have insisted that the Bible is uot the word of
God. I have insisted that we should not whip our children. I have insisted that we
should treat our wives as loving equals. I have denied that God ever upheld polygamy
and slavery. I have denied that that God
EVER TOLD HIS GENERALS TO KILL INNOCENT BABES,
and tear and rip open women with the sword of war. I have denied that, and for
that I have been assailed by the clergy. They tell me I have misquoted ; and I owe
to you, and maybe I owe it to myself, to read one or two words to you upon this
subject. Now, the Rev. Mr. Collyer, a gentleman standing as high as anybody (and
I have nothing to say against him) because I denounce a God who upheld murder,
and slavery, and polygamy, says that what I said was slang. I would like to have it
compared with any sermon that ever issued from the lips of that gentleman. And
before he gets through he admits that the Old Testament is a rotten tree that will
soon fall into the earth and act as a fertilizer for his doctrine. Is it honest in that
man to assail my motive ? Let him answer my argument ! Is it honest and fair in
him to say lam doing a certain thing because it’s popular ? Has it got to this, that
in this Christian country of the United States, where they have preached every day
hundreds and thousands of sermons —has it got to this, that infidelity is popular in
the United States? If it has, I take courage, and I not only see the dawn of a
brighter day, but the day is here. Think of it! A minister tells me that a man is
an infidel simply to be popular. lam glad of it. Simply that he may make money.
Is it possible that we can make more money tearing up churches than in building
them up. If so, lam glad. I call publicly upon Robert Collyer to state whether
he believes the Old Testament was inspired. I call upon him to state whether he
believes that God Upheld these institutions—whether he believes God was a polyga-
mist —whether he believes that God commanded Moses or Joshua or anyone else
TO SLAY LITTLE CHILDREN IN THE CRADLE?
Do you believe that Robert Collyer would obey such an order ? Do you believe that
he would rush to the cradle and drive the knife of theological hatred to the tender


heart of a dimpled child ? Suppose he should act like Abraham. Suppose he should
send some woman out in the wilderness with his child in her arms to starve—would
he think that man ought to hold up his name for ever in reverence ? Robert Collyer
says we should read and scan every word of the Old Testament with reverence ; that
we should take this book up with reverential hands. I deny it. We should read it
as we do every other book, and everything good in it, keep it ; and everything that
shocks the brain and the heart, throw it away. Let us be honest. The Bible is
inspired in no other sense than that in which Shakspeare was inspired. Honor
bright, I tell you that all the sweet and beautiful things in the Bible would not make
one play of Shakspeare ; all the philosophy in the Bible would not make one scene
in “ Hamlet ; ” all the beauties of the Bible would not make one scene in “ Mid-
summer Night’s Drearn ; ” all the beautiful things about women in the Bible would
not begin to create
SUCH A CHARACTER AS PERUITA, OR IMOGENE, OR MIRANDA.
No. There is another gentleman here. His name is Herford. He says it is not
fair to apply the test,of truth to the Bible. I don’t think it is myself. He says that
although Moses upheld slavery, he improved it. Do you believe that God ever
turned the arms of children into chains of slavery? Do you believe that God ever
said to a man, “You can’t have your wife unless you will be a slave? You cannot
have your children unless you will lose your liberty ; and unless you are willing to
throw them from your heart for ever you cannot be free.” I want Mr. Herford to
just state whether he loves such a God. Be honor bright about it. Don’t begin to
talk about civilization, or what the church has done or will do. Now tell it fair,
Mr. Herfoid : I want you to tell the ladies in your congregation that you believe in a
God that allowed women to be given to the soldiers. Tell them that, and then, if
you say it was not the God of Moses, don’t praise Moses any more. Don’t do it.
Then there is another gentleman, Mr. Ryder—the Rev. Mr. Ryder—and he says that
Calvinism is rejected by a majority of Christendom. He is mistaken. There is what
they call the Evangelical Alliance. They met in the United States in 1875 or 1876,
and there were present representatives of all the evangelical churches in the world,
and they adopted a creed, and that creed is,
THAT MAN IS TOTALLY DEPRAVED;
that there is only one way to be saved, and that is by faith, and by faith alone. And
they would not allow anybody to be represented there who did not believe that, and
they would not allow a Unitarian there, and would not have allowed Dr. Ryder there,
because he takes away from the Christian world the consolation naturally arising from
the belief in hell. Dr. Ryder is mistaken. ■ All the orthodox religion of the day is
Calvinism. It believes in the fall of man. It believes in the atonement. It believes
in the eternity of hell, and it believes in salvation by faith—that is, by credulity. I
want to tell Dr. Ryder that if there is no hell somebody ought to have said so, and
Jesus Christ himself should not have said : “ I will at the last day say, ‘ Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.’ l ” And if
you, Dr. Ryder, are depending for salvation on the God that wrote the Old Testa-
ment, you will inevitably be eternally damned. There is no hope for you. It is just
as bad to deny hell as to deny heaven. It is just as much blasphemy to deny the
devil as to deny God, according to the orthodox creed. Pie admits the Jews were
polygamists; but, he asks, how was it they finally quitted -it ? I will tell you—
THE SOIL WAS SO POOR THEY COULDN’T AFFORD IT.
Professor Swing says the Bible is a poem. Dr. Ryder says it is a picture. The
Garden of Eden is pictorial; a pictorial snake —and a pictorial woman I suppose—
and a pictorial man—and maybe it was a pictorial sin : and only a pictorial atone-
ment. H3SQJIH3 SLEPT LI '/AHP OT
Then there is another gentleman, and he is a rabbi, a Rabbi Bien, and he comes
to the defence of the great law-giver. There was another Rabbi who attacked me
in Cincinnati. The Rabbi here, I will not answer him, and I will tell you why.


Because he has taken himself outside of all the limits of a gentleman ; because he
has taken upon himself to traduce every American woman in language the most dis-
gusting I ever read, and any man who says the American women are not just as good
women as any that were ever made is an unappreciative barbarian. I will let him
alone because he denounced all the men in this country—-all the members of Con-
gress, all the members of the Senate, and all the judges upon the bench ; in his lec-
ture he denounced them as thieves and robbers. That won’t do. I want to remind
him that in this country the Jews were first admitted to the privileges of citizens ;
that in this country they were first given all their rights, and I am as much in favour
of their having their rights as lam in favor of having my own. But when a Rabbi
so far forgets himself as to traduce the men and women of this country,
I PRONOUNCE HIM A VULGAR FALSIFIER,
and let him alone. Strange that nearly every man that has answered me has answered
me mostly on the same side. Strange that nearly every man that felt himself called
upon to defend the Bible was one who did not believe in it himself. Isn’t it strange?
They are like some suspected people, always anxious to show their marriage certifi-
cate. They want, at leas', to convince the world that they are not as bad as I am.
I want now to see if I have said such awful things, and if I have got any scripture
to stand by me. Here is an extract from the Old Testament :
“ Moreover, all children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them
shall ye buy of their families which are with you, which they beget in your land, and
they shall be your possession. Ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children
after you to inherit them. They shall be your bondsmen for ever.”
Upon the limbs of unborn babes this sets the chains of slavery. Again, this :
“ Both thy bondmen and bondwomen shall be of the heathen round about thee,
and them shall ye buy, bondmen and bondwomen.”
Now let us see how they believed in the rights of children ;
“If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, who will not obey the voice of
his father or the voice of his mother, and that, when they have chastened him, will
net hearken unto them, then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and
bring him unto the elders of his cdy and unto the gate of his place, and they shall
say unto the elders of his city, ‘ This our son is stubborn and rebellious ; he will not
obey our voice jheis a glutton and a drunkard.’ And all the men of his city shall
stone him with stones, so that he die. So shalt thou put away evil.”
THAT IS A GOOD WAY TO RAISE CHILDREN.
Here is the story of Jephthah. He went off and asked the Lord to let him whip
some people, and he told the Lord if he would let him whip them he would sacrifice
to the Lord the first thing that met him on his return. And the first thing that met
him was his own beautiful daughter ; and he sacrificed her. Is there a sadder story
in all the history of the world than that ? What do you think of a man that would
sacrifice his own daughter ? What do you think of a God that would receive that
sacrifice ? When you go to the Old Testament, to the great law-giver, you find that
the woman has to ask forgiveness for having born a child. If it was a boy, thirty-
three days she was unclean ;if it was a girl, sixty-six. Nice laws ! Good laws !
If there is a pure thing in this world —if there is a picture of perfect purity—
IT IS A MOTHER WITH HER CHILD IN HER ARMS.
And does the Bible describe a God of mercy ? Let me here quote a verse or two ;
“ I \vill make my arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh;
Thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies.
“ And the tongue of thy dogs in the same.
“ And the Lord thy God will put out those nations before thee by little and


little; thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase
upon thee.
“ But the Lord thy God shall deliver them unto thee, and destroy them with a
mighty destruction, until they be destroyed.
“ And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shall destroy their
name from under heaven ; then shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou
have destroyed them.”
Does the Bible teach polygamy? The Rev. Dr. Newman had a discussion with
Elder Heber, or Kimball, or some such person in Utah, as to whether the Bible
sustains polygamy, and the Mormons have printed that discussion as a campaign
document. Read the order of Moses in the 31st Chapter of Numbers. A great many
chapters I dare not quote —they are too filthy. Read the 31st Chapter of Exodus,
the 31st Chapter of Deuteronomy, the life of Abraham,
AND THE LIFE OF DAVID,
and the life of Solomon, and then tell me that the Bible does not uphold polygamy
and concubinage ? Let them answer. Then I said that the Bible upholds tyranny.
Let me quote a little more : “ Let every soul be subject to the higher powers —the
powers that be are ordained of God.”
George 111. was king by the grace of God ; and then our fathers rose in rebellion;
according to this doctrine, they rose against the power of God —and if they did, they
were successful. And so it goes on, telling of all the cities that were destroyed, and
of all the great-hearted men whose brains they dashed out, and of all the little babes,
and of all the sweet women that they plundered and killed—all in the name of a most
merciful God ! Well, think of it. The Old Testament is filled with anathemas, and
with curses, and with words of revenge, and jealousy, and hatred, and meanness, and
brutality.
Have I given enough to show that what I said is so ? I think I have. But let
us look to see what the
DEAR OLD FATHERS OF THE CHURCH SAID ABOUT WOMAN.
St. Augustine in his 22nd book says : “A woman ought to serve her husband as unto
God, affirming that woman ought to be braced and bridled betimes ; if she aspire to
any dominion, alleging that dangerous and perilous is it to suffer her to precede,
although it be in temporal and corporeal things. How ean woman be in the image
of God, seeing she is subject to man, and hath no authority to teach, neither to be a
witness, neither to judge, much less to rule or bear the rod of empire.”
Oh, he is a good one. These are the very words of Augustine. Let me read
some more: “ Woman shall be subject unto man as unto Christ.” That is St. Augus-
tine, and this sentence of Augustine ought to be noted of all woman, for in it he
plainly affirms that women are all the more subject to man. And now St. Ambrose,
he is a good boy : “ Adam was deceived by Eve, and not Eve —called Heva—by
Adam, and therefore just it is that woman receive and acknowledge him for governor
whom she called sin, lest that again she slip and fall with woman facility.” Don’t you
see that
WOMAN HAS SINNED ONCE AND MAN NEVER?
If you give woman an opportunity she will sin again, whereas if you give it to man
who never, never, never did betray his trust in the world, nothing bad can happen.
“ Let women be subject to their own husbands as unto the Lord, for man is the head
of woman, and is the head of the congregation.” They are all real good men, all of
them. “It is not permitted to woman to speak, let her be in silence ;as the law said,
‘Unto thy husband shall thou ever be, and he shall bear dominion over thee.’”
SO ST. CHRYSOSTOM. HE IS ANOTHER GOOD MAN.
“ Woman,” he says, “ was put under the power of man, and man was pronounced
lord over her ; that she should obey man, that the head should not follow the feet


False priests do commonly deceive women because they are easily persuaded to any
opinion, especially if it be again given, and because they lack prudence and right reason
to judge the things that be spoken ; which should not be the nature of those that are
appointed to govern others. For they should be constant, stable, prudent, and doing
everything with discretion and reason ; which virtues woman cannot have in equality
with man.”
I tell you women are more prudent than men, I tell you as a rule women are
more truthful than men. I tell you that women are more faithful than men—ten times
as faithful as man. I never saw a man pursue his wife into the very ditch and dust of
degradation, and take her in his arms. I never saw a man stand at the shore where
she had been morally wrecked waiting for the waves to bring back even her corpse to
his arms : but I have seen woman do it. I have seen woman with her white arms
LIFT MAN FROM THE MIRE OF DEGRADATION
and hold him to her bosom as though he were an angel. And these men thought
woman not fit to be held as pure in the sight of God as man. I never saw a man that
pretended that he didn’t love a woman—that pretended that he loved God better than
a woman, that he didn’t look baleful to me, hateful and unclean. I could quote you
twenty others, but I haven’t time to do it. They are all to the same effect exactly.
They hate woman, and say man is as much above her as God is above man. lam a
believer in absolute equality. lam a believer in absolute liberty between man and
wife. I believe in liberty, and I say, “ Oh, liberty, float not for ever in the far
horizon —remain not for ever in the dream of the enthusiast, the philanthropist, and
poet; but come and
MAKE THY HOME AMONG THE CHILDREN OF MEN ! ”
I know not what discoveries, what inventions, what thoughts may leap from the brain
of the world. I know not what garments of glory may be woven by the years to
come. I cannot dream of the victories to be won upon the fields of thought: but I
do know that, coming from the infinite sea of the future, there will never touch this
“ bank and shoal of time ” a richer gift, a rarer blessing, than
LIBERTY FOR MAN, FOR WOMAN, AND FOR CHILD.


jAf r
r
13 itL lo
FlO 772 -
.
\
v
■x
• k- . m '
*' ~ ~' r
*:H yon oJ batau?.iaq yfi.xa am yad) aaaeaad nampw aviaaab ylnommoo ofydeahq arta'i
** * iiosctl tar. aanabinq dael yad) aainsaad linn .navis ad Ji li yltaaaqga .noiniqd
oiß )cd) aeod) lo auden ad) ad ion fch/oria daiHw ; nadoqa ad )r,d) agnid) ad) agbut pi
gniob ban ,J/i3bora fiddle ,)nB)|noo ad bluoria yad) iod .aiari)o mavogq| boJnioqqe
ydfcnpa ni avjsd lonnna liSfiro ir Kitiiv xloidw ; noKJsai bar noibiasib d)iw gnid)yiava
".Hem rijiw
air. narnov/ aim n ?.t. udV lb; I .nara nr.dl Jnabuiq atom am narnov/ noy Ha) I
aarniJ n ,%-narn nr.dl tadlixd aiom aje hi mow )dd) uoy lb) I .nsm ncdl liddlui! aiom
io )?.nB boa daVib yiav ad) o)ni aliw Bid auainq nern e wca vavan I .near zr. bdd)ifcl 8A
. . * aiariw aiorfg ad) in ImusK? nsrn n wrsa vavan I .?.nns aid ni lari sllfiJ tax: .nohßbßigab
o) aaqioa isd nava daed gnhd'63 gavr.v/ ad) lol.snhl&w badaanw yllf>iom naad tad atfe
gxinx: a)idv/ lad ri)rw run now naag aved I .)i ob nnrnov/ naag avrd I )ud ; znnn aid
ZOITACIAfIOMCI 10 3HIM MHT KOM'i V.AK T'dlJ
jdgt/od) nam a?ad) bnA .bgnr. ns aiawad dgnod) en moaod 10 do) mid blori ban
. , jjjxf) n«m j. v/ijg lavan 1 .nem ?b boOld )dgig ad) ni ainq gf. bbd ad o) J>! ion nnrnow
and) rj))ad tab) bavoj ad )ed) babnajaiq )r.d)—nr.rnow n avol )'nbib ad'ißif) babna)aiq
uoy ajonp bluoa I mrabnu bnr. Inland ,am o) Inland dool )*nj>if> ad led) tiemow r.
.y{)DBX3 Jaafb arnca ad) o) lie am yadT i)i ob o) ami) )'navad I )ud ,«iad)o y)naw)
bme I .arm avodr ?.i bob) an lad avods dawn 86 si nern ye« bus .xusai m a)ed yari I
fens nam oaaw)a<f yhadil alulogde ni lavaibd r. ms I .yiilsupa a)uiogdr. ni tayaibd
ud adl ni uva ml )on )ro[t .yjiadil ,dO * 1 ,ycg 1 bxyi ,y)ia<iil ni avaifa ! I .aliw
bne ,)aiq ad). r ii;!idq ad) ,)ta?n/I)n3 ad) torn naif) ad) ni lava io) )oa nir.rnai~no::hod
ban amoa )nd ; )aoq
0 "; Z>IM TO ViaHaJIHO HUT OVIOMA SIMOH YHT 3yIAM
a y-f *jd) fno-ri <[cal yem gldpnod) )ndw ,Bnoi)navni )ndv/ .aaiiavoo- ib )bHv/ )on wond I
o) ad) yd nayow ad ysm yidg.lo atnaonns J«dw )on wdad I .blio-// ad) lo
1;;f ;) iod) lo giblarl ad) noqn pun ad o) aaii«)aiv ad) Jo nieaiib )onnca 1 .a'moa
k id) dam)/Javan Ifiw aiari) ,uiu)iJtta) lo eag a)indni ad) mod ’mimoa dr.d) wond ob
ncri) .jjniagafd iaun vaibii jj ” ami) lo ledda pun dried “
.
,M 111 l ) HOH QUA % Ykt-Ai.OU JO i t >IU I x
*
