

WOMAN-BORN.
A
SERMON
Preached at the Cathedral Church of St. Andrew.
SYDNEY
ON
SUNDAY MORNING, APRIL 20th, 1873,
BY
REV. P. B. POWER, M.A.,
(Late Incumbent of Christ Church, Worthing, Sussex.)
tip Request




Job xiv. 2.
“MAN THAT IS BORN OF A WOMAN.”
[“ Man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble, he someth
forth like a flower and is cut down, he fleeth also as a shadow and continueth not.”]
shelves of our libraries are laden with volumes treating
of subjects which at first sight seem to have very little
v£§!|f affinity with each other. Here you open one which fells
you of the battle of the warrior with confused noise, and garments
rolled in blood; and side by side with it stands another which
records the yearnings of some saint after perfect peace, or it may
be the efforts of a philosopher or a metaphysician to grasp the
laws of matter or of mind.
These stories of crime and folly, these treatises of the Eabbis
of our race, these histories of nations, these biographies of
individuals, are all to be summed up in a single volume—nay,
in a single page —nay, in yet a smaller space, in the fraction of
the verse which forms our text, “ Man that is born of a woman ! ”
Had there been but man to write about as he first came from
the hand of God, his story would have been quickly told. The
curse of the tree of knowledge would have exhausted no brain.
No treatises need have been written —the revelations of God
would have been enough ; nor any history, for the diplomacy and
wars and crimes wherewith men make history should have been
unknown ; biographies would have been unneeded, because there
would have been no death, nor perplexed efforts after truth, for
questions concerning truth never would have been raised.
But now we have to do with man, not as first created, but as
woman-born, entering the world with elements of weakness in
body and in mind, with the seeds of decay in both; and even if
of the making of books there shall be no end, the last penman on
the earth shall have left unfinished the tale of the weakness and


The writer has consented to the publication of the
following sermon, not because of any particularly new
setting forth of truth therein, but in the hope that by
so doing he may lend a helping hand, however
humbly, to the Church in the Colonies, in which,
though a stranger, he has met with Christian kind-
ness, hospitality, and sympathy, which he can never
forget.
Some thoughts on the unaided ministry of the
colonial clergy, on its evil, and the method of its cure,
which could not find place in the sermon, he has
ventured to insert in notes at the end.
The reader will please consider, that the writer alone
is responsible for what is said ; and it is possible
that these thoughts may have more weight coming
from one who is an observer from outside ; and who
can have no possible personal interest in their being
acted upon.
That they may be, first in the provision of a curate
for the Cathedral, and happily in other Churches after-
wards, is his earnest hope.
Donations or subscriptions towards providing a Curate
for the Cathedral will be received by the following :
Mr. Alexander Stuart.
Mr. Robert Chadwick, Liverpool Street.
Mr. Bowen, Baioer and Co., George Street.
Mr. John Kent, 9, Francis Street.
Mr. Abraham, Chemist, George Street.
Mr. J. F. Thompson, 525, Bourke Street.
Mr. Robert Guy, George Street.
Mr. H. Cobcroft, South Head Road.
Mr. Bently, Sydney Morning Herald Office.
Mr. W. H. Simpson, George Street.
Sydney , April\ 1873.




the weariness, the cruelty and folly, the ignorance and the
poverty, the sorrows and the sighs of “ man that is born of a
woman.”
Had I no more to say to you to-day than that such, and such
only, must be the melancholy story of our race, I should decline
so ungracious a task —the only result of which must be depression,
hopelessness and woe.
But I.am not called to this. To me as reading my Bible,
“ man that is born of a woman ” bears a double aspect. I see one
sin-born of woman; I see another born of woman, made in all
points like as we are, yet without sin. I see the children, woman-
born, partakers of flesh and blood, and I see Him likewise taking
part in the same, that “ through death He might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is, the Devil.” I see Him made
under the law that He may redeem them which were under
the law. Yirgin-born in Bethlehem, weary at Sychar, hungry
at Bethany, agonizing in Gethsemane, crucified on Calvary,
rising in the garden, yea, ascending from Olivet, I follow my
Lord —the Seed of the woman —in thought, above the cloud which
hid Him from the disciples’ sight; I hear the cry, “ Lift up your
heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and
the King of Glory shall come in ; ” I hear the challenge, “ Who
is the King of Glory?” I hear the answer, “It is the Lord
mighty in battle ; ” and the One whom God receives, and angels
worship, and the ransomed Church is for ever to adore —the One
who takes His seat at God’s right hand —is none other than very
man as well as very God —“ man that is born of a woman.”
It is absolutely essential to the Christian life in all its
branches that we hold fast to the woman-born condition both of
ourselves as sinners, and of the sinless Christ as our Saviour. In
no other way can we know what we are and what He is, or the
connection between us both. In no other way can we escape the
opposite perils of these days of error —the heresy which would
exalt man, and that which would depress Christ—the one making
us out as regards sin to be scarce woman-born at all; the other
as regards Christ considering Him woman-born and no more.


It is Christ’s manhood that enabled .Him to live and die for us,
to be our representative, our substitute, our all; and woe is
gathering around that soul which has no dead, risen, and ascended
Lord, at once the seed of the woman and the Son of God.
These few words, “ Man that is born of a woman,” are both the
history and the teacher of our race. The way in which the words
meet us is suggestive in itself. “Man” comes first before us
bringing us thoughts of beauty, and strength, and vigor, and
nobility, and all that he had before he lost his first estate. It is
as though God still remembered him as once possessed of all
these, and whence he had fallen. And this old excellency is what
man is continually trying to reassert for himself now. He is in
the present day especially claiming for humanity that which teas,
rather than that which is. But God will not have it so. Before
Him we live as man born of a woman , wdth all the elements of
weakness which belong to a woman-born state. Let us be as
strong as we will, He links us to weakness ; and with the one who
seems to have been weakest in moral power also. He reminds us
whence we came; and as in its last helplessness we lay our
brother’s body in the grave, it is well that when we say how he
has “ come up and been cut down as a flower,” we should note that
this comes to man not as God made him, but as born of woman,
the inheritor of human sin, and its punishment—death. I
care not whether he died a King, with a nation’s breath hushed
around his bed, or uncrowned and exiled, a bye-word and a scoff—
whether he passed from earth a brilliant discoverer, or a dis-
appointed man —whether he heaved out life’s last sob beneath
the silken coverlit of Dives, or Lazarus’s thin and scanty quilt—
enough for me that he is dead—that he is gone; if his requiem
be sung, it must be “ Man that is born of a woman ” —or if he bo
too unfortunate or too mean to have a requiem, still more awful
is the silence, in which an unbreathed whisper minds us that this
little heap is all that earth now remembers of “ Man that is born
of a woman.”
I know what frantic struggles the pride of man is making in
the present day to escape from this woman-born condition, as
regards the position in which it has placed him before God—it


may be that we know this from the experience of our own hearts,
and we are for flinging from us the ideas of weakness and guilt,
and the thought of our being inheritors of these —but back Ave
must go in our pedigree, back and back through woman and
Avoman, until we come to her, the consequences of whose sin are
upon us all.
And this woman-born position is the safest for us to take up.
It is the true one, and truth is always best. It is not always
pleasantest at first, but in the end it yields its peaceable fruit. I
know that your hearts will naturally strive against it. I doubt
not that there are some amongst you who make yourselves
out not to be so bad in the sight of God after all; you strive
against your woman-born state, and would stand erect in your
own righteousness, or your own strength —righteousness, perhaps
you say, ne\ r er lost, or by yourself to be regained ; but God will
bring you to your true position, He will deal with you on no
other basis than that. He will have nothing to do with your
self-righteousness, but to strive against it, now by the influences
of His Spirit; and if you reject those influences, then to try you
on the ground of it hereafter, and finding you guilty, to condemn
you. By the deeds of the laAV shall no flesh be justified. The
laAV, we are especially told, is weak through the flesh ; but what it
could not do, that is, justify man, in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh.
And have you thus come to God? Have you come to Him
fallen, weak, with no remedy in yourself, and all your hope out-
side yourself? Have you —each of you —come to Him in your
woman-born condition ? Has the humbling process passed over
you —on you —into you —through and through you ? Have you
been brought low by God ? Have you come down low willingly
of yourselves ? If so, well! If not, this very moment you are in
a state of condemnation before God. And oh, brethren, do not
leave this for a dying bed; do not lay yourself open to be broken
Avith breach upon breach, when your poor woman-born body has
its strength dried up like a potsherd, and you are lying helplessly
at the very gates of the grave. It is not to be laid doAA r n at God s


door then if, as Job says, He run upon you as a giant; if the pains
of hell get hold upon you, and the thunders of the law roll round
you. You chose as a woman-born man to stand up before Him,
but the weakness of your nature as such has cast you down, for
you would not (you could not, on your terms) have Jesus as your
friend, who only could give you help. It is a frightful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God at any time, but worst of all
upon a dyiDg bed; with unstrung limbs and failing sight and deaf-
ened ears and quivering nerves to fight against the living God, or
to lie, bearing helplessly His grievous wounds. How is the time
for you to humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God, and
He will lift you up—now, the time to cry, “ I am undone ” —now
the time to say, “ Enter not into judgment with Thy servant, O
Lord : for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified; ” now,
he that humbleth himself shall be exalted ; now, from this dust of
humiliation can spring flowers which Paradise itself shall not
disown.
And why hesitate to come low. You are not brought low to
remain beaten down upon the earth, but to be put in that
position from which alone you can be raised. God means you to
act on the knowledge of your woman-born state. The moment
you are brought low you are put in a position]of power. His eye
looks with pity, as He sees the woman-born come to Him for life.
Destitute of beauty and strength; the old nobility gone; the
bloom of Paradise withered from his cheek; its vigor departed
from his limbs; its joyousness damped within his heart; its
moral power wasted from his soul — God sees the woman-born
before Him, and is prepared to act out of the immense fulness of
His own grace. All that He asks is an empty vessel to pour
into; and lo ! as though to still all fears, and encourage the
shrinkings of humanity before His throne, there hath passed into
the heavens Jesus made of a woman and made under the law—
the One at whose birth of woman heaven and earth met together
in the theme of the heavenly choirs ; there is glory to God in the
highest, there is on earth peace and goodwill toward men. We
have a High Priest who can be touched with a feeling of our
infirmities; for woman-born as He is, He was tempted in all


points like as we are, only without sin—and so we come boldly
to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace
to help in time of need.
It is of this Holy One that we must now for a few moments
speak.
God has, as it were, met Satan upon his own ground, and for-
asmuch as he tempted woman and overthrew her; by One born of
woman has lie proved His mighty strength —the heel of a woman-
born man has been set upon the serpent’s head.
God has shut me up to two great truths ; (1) my own utter
ruin by myself; (2) my equally perfect restoration by His Son.
He has enclosed me as with hewn stone in each of these points,
He will not let me escape from myself in any other way than
through His Son. He will keep me to what I am —woman-born,
and-that, in my salvation as well as in my loss. He says to me,
‘ Thou shalt be saved in My way, and My way is by My Son,
who f took not upon Him the nature of angels, but the seed of
Abraham; ’ and as a man, thou shalt be saved by a man ’ —as we
say in a creed, “ Perfect God and perfect man, of a reasonable
soul and human flesh.”
In all this I see the wisdom of God. I see Satan hopelessly
baffled. It is over the weakness of my nature he has triumphed,
and that nature in all its weakness. Jesus as the woman-born has
assumed. I have no weaker point which the Evil One can find
out, and to which he can apply himself, so as to leave me in
dread that by an attack on somewhat unknown I may be
destroyed.
I see the Evil One beaten on his own battle-field. On the
lower platform of humanity, he fought with God, and to all
appearance triumphed; to that lower platform I see God
descending, and by the right hand of His woman-born Son getting
Himself the victory. Let Satan take me where He will —to
temple heights or desert wastes; let him choose his own battle
ground with my soul; if Ibe Christ’s —one with Him and He with
me —the battle-ground of his choice shall be the battle-ground of
my triumph. For, let him take me at my worst, he can go no lower


than the weakness of my flesh ; and in that weakness my chief has
been, my chief has fought, my chief has won. Woman-born He,
woman-born I, He counts me as of His brethren ; He enters into
my great weakness, and takes hold of me by His great strength ;
and He who stooped frpm Godhead, and made Himself of no
reputation, but took upon Him the form of a servant, lifts me in
my manhood to be not a servant but a son.
lam content as woman-born to go wholly down. I wish mine
to be a thorough abasement; I wish to humble myself under the
mighty hand of God, for I must take to myself the whole evil of
my nature, if I am to have the whole blessing of His grace. I
cannot have a part of my own nature and a part of His; I must
give up all mine that I may have all His, that I may be one with
Christ, and He with me ; the whole thing must be thorough, and
it is for want of thoroughness that men are being lost. Yes! I
want to live as a man undone in self, I want to die as a man
undone in self; but to live as a man saved in Christ; and I
want to die and appear before God as a man saved in Christ; and
I want to enter heaven as a man who woman-born was laden with
sin, but who found atonement and acceptance and life aud glory
in a woman-born in whom was no sin.*
And it is through Him, and Him only, that I wish to meet the
perishings of my flesh ; the perishings of property ; the changes
and chances of this mortal life ; the having but a short time to
live ; the coming up and being cut down as a flower; the never
continuing in one stay ; the passage of a breath over me and I
am gone.
Were it not for Jesus, how could I meet all these? Floated
like a withered leaf on the smooth current of the summer’s
stream, or hurried helplessly along like an uprooted tree on the
turbid water of the winter flood, man is drifted onward out of
sight of all the landmarks of his former place ; and borne to us on
the soft summer air or on the wintry blast, comes in melancholy
wail at once his history and his dirge, “ Man that is born of a
woman,” But the Christian has ./Eolian strings over which he
can pass these voices of the wind, and make them give utterances,
solemn it is true, but soothing to the soul. I meet all these wrnes,


and death, the last woe, with the human nature of my Lord. He
went through all, He triumphed in them all; and He did so, not
only for Himself but me. I want no philosophy to sustain me,
I want His sympathy; I want no human wisdom, I want His
experience; I want no mere moral resolution, I want His
strength ; I want to meet everything in Him, and to have every-
thing in Him too; I want nothing apart from Him, I seek for
everything by Him. Rising (as at this time) from the tomb, I
see Him meeting “man that is born of a woman, hath but a short
time to live, and is full of misery,” Himself a woman-born, having
in His hand the gift of eternal life, and saying, “ Because I live
ye shall live also ; ” and telling me that in God’s presence there
is fulness of joy, and at His right hand there are pleasures for
evermore, and that He has gone to prepare a place for me. I see
him coming forth from His garden-grave, saying that man shall
be something more than one that cometh forth like a flower and
is cut down ; for that they who are planted in the likeness of His
death shall be planted in the likeness of His resurrection also,
and that such as be planted in the house of the Lord shall
flourish in the courts of our God. All these as woman-born He
was Himself —His days were few, His troubles many, His life
flower faded quick, His life’s shadow fleeted fast—but it was that
length of days should be in His right hand for us, and in His left
riches and honour; it was that we should die no more, but be
equal unto the angels, and be the children of God, being the
children of the resurrection ; it was that our shadow-life should
pass for ever, and that where He is we may be also, going out no
more, and being a pillar in the temple of our God !
And here I would gladly close, were it not that I have to
remind you of the notice given last Sunday that the collection to
be made to-day is to he in behalf of the Church Society.
The objects of this Society are, as you know, to aid in the erec-
tion of churches and parsonages, to augment the insufficient
stipend of many poor parishes, to stimulate local effort by affording
such assistance as shall encourage men to undertake the settle-
ment of a minister, and the erection of churches, schools, and
parsonages, which they could never carry through by themselves.


Having regard to the circumstances of the colony, this Society
might be said to be a Missionary Society, as well as a Church
Building and Pastoral Aid Society, and to combine within itself
the work of them all; it is a powerful lever which sets in motion
very complicated machinery, producing at great distances the
most important, and in some cases the most delicate and beautiful
results.
If the object which I have immediately in hand permitted it, I
should have much indeed to say on the general operations of this
Society; but my mind is set, so far as you are concerned, and so
far as this particular service is concerned, upon the performance
of a specific work to-day —a work most gracious, and if you look
at it in its right light, most profitable to the Church at large in
this colony, and to this Cathedral in which you are in the habit
of worshipping.
I have been much struck in passing through the colonies of
Victoria and Tasmania, and now in this of New South Wales,
with the heavy amount of work which the clergy have to do. It
is in many cases far more than falls to the lot of most of the
clergy at home, (a) The frequency of their Sunday ministrations,
their inability to get help from the absence of curates, the few
chances they have of getting a holiday ( [b ) or rest of any kind —and
when they do get it, the scantiness of its duration —the being so
much thrown in upon themselves, owing to their absence from
the great centres of life at home—all combine to make their
labor arduous in an especial degree.
I know that there are many who think a clergyman can go to
bed on Sunday night and sleep till Sunday morning comes again,
and that their’s is about ( c ) the easiest life a man can have, but let
me tell you that it is nothing of the kind. Look at the numbers of
them who are broken up, some of whom you see from time to
time wandering out all this way from home to try and twist
together the breaking threads of life, and regain the precious
nervous energy which has passed mysteriously from them in the
carrying on of their work. It were a deep study to investigate
how and why it is that in such strange ways so many ministers
are broken up, and what there is in this spiritual labor that so affects


the body. Into such an enquiry it is manifest I cannot enter
here ; suffice it to say that so it is—the treasure of the Gospel is
borne in earthen vessels —the ambassador of God is “ man born of
a woman.”
Such is the minister of God, and to you as “ man born of
woman ”he ministers; and as such, your sympathy he craves.
He sows to you spiritual things, and the Word of God says it is
no great matter if he reap your temporal things.
And you must treat him as woman-born man, like yourselves.
You must not harden your heart against him, and refuse to think
o/him and/or him, and say that anything will do for him and for
his work. Never harden your heart against the minister with
whom you have to do. Remember the exhausting character of his
labor, and that from the very nature of the case (unless you
expect him to carry on all the work out of his own often scanty
resources) he must rely on you.
The Apostle says, “ Who goeth a warfare at his own cost? ”
You surely do not want to have the doubtful honor of being the
first to answer that question by practically saying, “ Our minister
shall be the man! ”
Now what I am earnestly desirous of doing to-day is, enlisting
your Christian sympathy to provide a curate for this your
cathedral church.
When I think of the cathedral churches at home with their
large staff of clergy and no parochial duty attached to them, I
should feel inclined to smile at the contrast which this presents
with its little pay and abundant work —but the smile refuses to
come to when T see one man —your respected, and, I am
sure to many I may add, your well loved Dean, struggling with
the parish work entailed by this building as a parish church, and
with the cure of souls of 4,500 people, 1800 of whom, at least,
belong to the Church of England, and have a claim on his minis-
try, his sympathy, his-time, his health, his strength, and indeed
all he has. *
Now what I am saying to you to-day, I am saying entirely on
my own responsibility; I am a mere wayfarer here, and am just
speaking to you the thoughts of my own heart.


Is it well, my brethren, that your Dean should have to struggle
single-handed with all this work ? I may speak freely in his
absence to-day; and I may tell you that in my opinion he looks
like a man worn by it, and it is not safe to impose it too long
upon him. Eemetnber that the spring of youth is no longer his ;
and that if you wish to keep long amongst you one who has the
affections and confidence of you all, you must so use him and so
let him use himself as not to waste too fast what is left of the oil
of life.
And I tell you, if you are wise (and “ I speak as to wise men,
judge ye what I say ”) you will retain an experienced minister as
long as you possibly can. You will keep with you one who has
your confidence and affection ; for ministers of any kind are
becoming scarce, and men of weight are few and far between.
Confidence is a plant of slow growth, and where you find one in
whom you can place it, keep him with you as long as you can.
You will be the gaiuers yourselves, for your ministers will be able
to give more time for preparation, and they will be able to serve
you with fresh vigor and strength.
Eemember that your minister is flesh and blood. Eemember
that he has to minister to hundreds who in their woman-born
condition are ever claiming his sympathy, his energy, his help—
aye, and remember that you yourselves are woman-born, and out
of the sympathies of a common humanity do this good work.
I want you to provide a curate for this cathedral church. ( d ) I
want you to make it henceforth your Easter work to send in the
£2OO necessary for his stipend. I want it to become one of the
traditions of this House of God that at Easter time this sum be
provided. Gather it how you will, only let it come. +Give to-day
for this specific purpose, and as though you intended this to be
done: and talk amongst yourselves about it; and form a Com-
mittee amongst yourselves to collect for it, aud do it any way you
like ; only let it be done.
t The sermon having been advertised as for the Church Society, it was
thought right to devote to it, the proceeds of the collection.


Our old cathedrals at home have many grand traditions clinging
around their venerable walls ; the ashes of the illustrious and
royal dead repose within them, and those who have been great
in statesmanship, in literature, and war, there lie helplessly as
woman-born, in their last long sleep; but you have it in your
power now to do a deed which will in the sight of God be truer
history than theirs. You may hand down a tradition of charity,
which will be acted on when these now unfinished walls are grey
with age ; and your children’s children, repeating this blessed
deed as Easter-tide comes round, will be holding fast a tradition
handed down to them from their fathers, who remembering this
day that they were woman-born themselves, eased the over-
burdened shoulder's of a minister they venerated and loved,
remembering that his toil was great, and that he like themselves
was but “ man that is born of a woman''
Copies of this Sermon may be had for distribution, on application
to Joseph Cook and Co., “ Churchman " Office , 370, Georye-street.


Note —A.
The exhaustive nature of clerical work.
The amount of labour falling on their clergy is a subject well
worthy the serious consideration of lay members of the Church
of England in these colonies. Its ill effects must be felt by the
clergy, and must re-act upon their congregations.
It is no uncommon thing for a clergyman to have to perform
three full services, each service involving a sermon, and to teach
in the Sunday-school beside. There are also frequently baptisms
and other occasional services to be performed. Now, it is sim-
ply impossible for any man made of ordinary flesh and blood,
and the organization of brain usually belonging thereto, to hold
on continuously at work like this.
No doubt if his bodily frame be strong, he can do so for a con-
siderable time, just as a strong horse can pull a heavy load day
after day. But unfortunately a minister cannot do his work like
a horse.
The animal having no immediate pull upon his nervous system,
nor any brain work to perform as he drags his load along, goes
on his way, the worst that can befall him being a little fatigue,
which perhaps only makes his evening feed and nightly stall the
more acceptable. Morning comes, and he goes into the shafts
renewed in vigor, and fresh for his day’s work again. Not so the
minister. His work is eminently of an exhaustive character.
Bare physical fatigue is not, what wears him out ? It is the nature
of his work. The Eev. Henry Ward Beecher, one of the most
eminent preachers in New York, and a man who unquestionably
does not slur the preparation of his sermons, says “ that two visits
of sympathy make as great a pull upon his energies as the pre-
paration of one sermon.” And it should be borne in mind that
this very sympathizing forms no inconsiderable part of a minister’s
work. How then can he hold out and hold on, if much of this
in addition to sermons, schools, &c., be laid upon him without
any aid.
I know from my own experience what a strain this is on the
energies, and I may add I know it from the experience of many
of my brother clergy too.
Note —B.
The need of rest for the clergy.
Let it be borne in mind also tbat in these colonies the clergy
have scarcely ever an opportunity of getting a holiday. As there
are no curates, there is no one to take the duty of an incumbent
if he go away for a change of scene and air, and for rest. The


consequence is he cannot go. Re-creation (i.e., a being fresh
made —made over again) he has none ; the tone of his physical
system becomes lowered; his mental powers probably sympathize
with it, to the great injury both of himself and his congregation.
It would be invaluable to the Diocese, I am sure, if there were a
clergyman employed by the Church Society, whose duty would be
to take the duty of various clergymen while they went away for a
month or six weeks. Allowing him one month for his own
recreation on the good Scripture principle that we must not
muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn, refreshment would then
be provided for eleven clergymen every year,
I have been a good deal connected with the sea-side home for
the London City Mission. We send over 400 missionaries to the
sea or the country every year ; and our experience is that they
come back to their work twice the men they were, with new
strength and courage, and cheeriness, and energy —with health
restored, and life prolonged. That holiday we consider all-im-
portant in enabling them to carry on their work. They come
back from it almost new men.
But the appointment of such a clergyman while invaluable, if
nothing more can be done, would after all be only a make-shift.
The true remedy is the provision of curates, at least for all largely
populated parishes. “ Two are better than one,” the wise man
says, and in no instance more so than here.
"Surely, then, my readers will make a beginning in this matter.
The fittest church to commence with is manifestly the Cathedral.
And from it as the centre, the good influence may be hoped to
radiate. Congregations will find that they can have curates for
their churches, and will have a fitting pride in providing at
Easter time Avhat is required. It is no uncommon thing in Eng-
land for congregations to do this amongst themselves regularly.
A small committee is formed, a notice is sent round that such
and such persons will receive whatever is sent in, and the sum is
handed to the clergyman; and it is doubtless the most acceptable
Easter offering he could receive.
And according to that great law of sowing and reaping, the
Churches which are thus liberal shall be blessed in their liberality.
The extra time at their minister’s disposal for his sermons, his
increased physical power, his ability to see more of his people from
time to time, will all be fruit, which they shall reap. They must
reap —for such is the law of God.


Note —C.
The following extracts will show how much real work there may he
even ivhen little is apparent. And these refer only to a portion of a
clergyman's daily life.
“ And now I come to the great ordinance of preaching. What
makes a good sermon ? A great many things go to the making
of a good sermon. Nothing so much as this, that we should
speak from heart to heart. A dull discourse which does not
speak the real sentiments of the preacher, which does not try to
search the conscience of the hearer, certainly will never come up
to the idea of a good sermon. Much reading is required of the
clergy, especially in these days, when all men read; and when
the clergy who are teachers, cannot with safety be behind those
whom they teach. There must be reading of all kinds—reading
of ordinary literature—but above all regular and careful “ reading
of the Holy Scriptures, and all such studies as help to the
knowledge of the same,” No man who is to do his duty in the
preaching of the Gospel can neglect such studies. But after all
there may be the utterance of the fervid spirit, there may be the
I’esults of much reaching; but for your preaching to be effectual
there must be added to these things the speaking forth of the
experiences of your own spiritual life, &c.”
“ But the preaching of Sunday will have little effect unless it
be followed up by private ministrations. A parish is neglected if
the various persons living in it are not distinctly aware that they
are continually under their pastor’s eye, and that their wants are
known to him.”
The above are extracts from the Charge recently delivered by
the Ai’chbishop of Canterbury. If his Grace were Metropolitan
here instead of in England, I apprehend, as he surveyed the
work pressing on his clergy, he would feel that this receipt, so
excellent in itself, was unavailable, simply because some of the
ingredients cannot be had. How is it possible for a clergyman
with rings at his door all day, with the calls of the sick and
dying, and poor, and distressed in mind, body, and estate; with
schools to attend to, with correspondence, to give himself up to
“ much reading,” very often to any reading at all. The nature
of his study, when he can engage in at all, is such that it requires
much quiet thought—the elaboration of a sermon is a great
mental effort, and requires patience and skill, so far as the mental
process is concerned. Broken bits of time are not sufficient for it.
It is perfectly true that a preacher should be a man of “ all kinds of
reading,” but how a Sydney or a Melbourne preacher can be such,
Ido not know. The fact is,_ the clergy here have not common


fair play in the exercise of their calling. A certain man wants a
particular painting executed, and he calls an artist. “ Now, sir,
in this painting I want grace of outline, transparency of colour,
it must be an embodiment of poetry and truth, but, sir, you must
paint under my conditions, otherwise I cannot give you the com-
mission.” In an evil hour the unhappy artist agrees to the
unknown. He secures his model, and fired with the genius of his
art begins his work. But soon his tormentor comes, he goes
off with a brush, he comes again, and messes up the paints,
then he jogs the artist’s elbow, then he gives the easel a pull,
and all the while he is brim full of the self-sufficiency of the
connoisseur, and tells the artist how he means to write .a critique
on his performance when it is done. The artist may take his
choice of two things —either to go crazed himself, or believe
charitably that his patron must be so. And not one whit more
reasonable is it for people to expect good sermons from ministers
who for want of proper help, they allow to be pulled here and
there, and to have their thoughts jogged about and scattered and
lost by their being called to attend to all sorts of things, from the
cedar that groweth in Lebanon down to the hyssop that springeth
out of the wall, than for the orderer of the picture to expect a
work of art, under the provoking circumstances we have supposed.
You cannot have good sermons, unless your ministers have time
in which to write them and to think over them.
Then there are these “ experiences of our own spiritual life,”
which the Archbishop says, and which your own Metropolitan,
I have no doubt w r ould say, are essential to effectual preaching.
Now these “ experiences of our own spiritual life ” are not merely
those changes and chances of this mortal life, which come upon
us whether we will or no, but they are the inward thoughts con-
nected with them —the deductions and lessons to be drawn from
them. They are the disciplinings and teachings of the Holy
Spirit sometimes connected with these, and sometimes not; being
in the latter instance of a refined spiritual character, having to
do with spiritual things and them alone. These experiences are
beyond all question of primary importance in the work of preach-
ing and in forming the character of the preacher. The book of
his own heart and the book of God, are the two volumes above
all others which he must study. But they must be studied. And
no man can have experiences of spiritual life, unless he have time
to gather himself together and think. As face answereth to face in
the water, so does the heart of man to man. The preaching that
will benefit a congregation is that of what a man has felt himself.
You cannot have a man’s thoughts unless you give him time to
think ; and to expect them is to exact a daily or rather weekly
tale of bricks, when you have not given straw.


The Dean of Norwich in his book on the Principles of the
Cathedral System has some remarks which may fitly be quoted
here. They occur in the chapter entitled “The Cathedral a
Detreat for Contemplation.” Such the cathedral of Sydney
never can become, still some aids to contemplation may be
afforded to whoever is the Yery Rev. the Dean thereof, by sup-
plying him, through the instrumentality of a Curate, with a little
leisure. That such leisure is not idleness, a perusal of the
following extract from the fore mentioned chapter will show.
“ The opening of the intelligence to hear the Word of Christ,
“ the opening and unfolding of the heart to receive the Christ
“ whom the Word presents, the communing of that heart with
“ itself and with God in its secret chamber, in its own hidden
“ recesses, where only the Pather who seeth in secret can discern
“ its workings —is this no work at all, because it does not transpire
“to the world ? Or is it not rather the work of works, without
“ which all outward symptoms of good in the Church can have no
“ vitality, and therefore no endurance —the very highest exercise
«of the faculties of the soul ? Answer me, you who are in the
“ habit of holding communion with God, does this communion
“ make no demand upon your faculties, or rather does it not make
“ an infinitely greater demand than any external activity whatso-
“ ever ? Is it no labour to the will to keep the mind steady in
“ prayer, and devotional reading, and self-examination ? Is it no
“ work to keep the thoughts from roving, and to bring them back
“ when they do rove ? Does it make no demand upon the under-
“ standing to set God before us, to lift oneself up to the idea of
“ Him, an idea so lofty, so attractive, and which rises so high above
“ all that is seen and that is temporal ? Does it make no
“ demand upon the heart to aspire towards the blessed God,.
“towards His will, His Word, His favour; to say. in the
“ inner man such words as these; ‘ My soul longeth, yea, even
“ fainteth for the courts of the Lord : my heart and my flesh crietfi
“ out for the living God ; ’ ‘How sweet are thy words unto my
“ taste! yea sweeter than honey to # my month ; ’ ‘As the hart pant-
“ eth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after Thee, 0
“ God ; ’ ‘My soul thirsteth for Thee, my flesh longeth for Thee,
“ to see Thy power and glory, so as I have seen Thee in the sanc-
“ tuary ! ’ And if there is an exercise which calls out will, and
“ mind, and heart, and braces them all up to their highest tension,
“ is not this exercise worthy of being called “ work ’ in the truest,
“ and highest, and best sense; or is there no such thing as work
“ without an external movement, and the construction of some-
“ thing which is distinct and detached from the agent, so that the
“ bird works when she makes her nest, and the beaver works


“ when he builds his hut, and the bee works when she forms the
“ cells of the honeycomb, but the man does not work, when his
“ soul goes forth to G-od in desire, or receives upon it the doc-
“ trine, which drops as the rain, and distils as the dew from the
“ word or the Spirit of the Most High. Or, to advance upon the
“ point in question with more explicit boldness, think you, that our
“ Lord would have accepted mere statistics of what is called church-
“ work, as satisfactory evidence of Church progress ? Suppose it
“ pleased Him to come in person to inspect His vineyard and to
“ examine its true condition, would it, think you, satisfy Him to
“ answer, ‘ Lord, behold, here are five schools for poor children,
“ where there was only one before ; and a hundred churches, where
“ there was only a quarter of that number; and sermons so
“ many, that all may have an opportunity of hearing ; and ser-
“ vices so many, that all may have an opportunity of worship-
“ ping ; and, in a word, every single part of ecclesiastical organi-
“ zation, and every appliance which religion can possibly need
“ for its furtherance.’ Would not the answer be: ‘My son, I
“ ask not how many be the outward signs of life, but rather how
“ much of prayer, and love, and zeal have gone to produce those
“ outward signs ; I ask not how many churches there be, but how
“ much of the spirit of worship in the hearts of those who fre-
“ quent them; nor how many ministries may be carried on in
“ these churches, but how much study, and prayer, and sanctified
“ sorrow has disciplined the hearts and characters of your minis-
“ ters, and trained them to the wisdom, and tenderness, and
“ experience of true pastors. Judge not (in this, or in any other
“ matter) according to the appearance, but judge righteous
“judgment.’ ”
Note —D.
THE PROVISION OF CURATES.
The provision of curates for some at least of the large churches
in the colonies appears to the writer to be a matter of great
importance as regards the well being of the Church at large.
From what he has seen and heard, it seems to him that the question
of the future supply of clergy is a very serious one indeed.
Little, lie is persuaded, can be looked for from home. The Church
of England is becoming short-handed herself. From a variety of
causes the quality of her candidates for orders does not appear to
be equal to what it used to be —nor are they, even so, sufficient in


number. The difficulty of getting good curates is almost uni-
versally acknowledged. There is no overflow from which the
Colonies can expect a supply.
It is much to be regretted that so little is known at home of
the Church in these colonies, or, perhaps, a few more of the clergy
might find their way out here. If there are no Eschol grapes in
these parts which require to be borne by two on a staff, there are
chances, at least, which for many do not exist at home, of a man’s
sitting under his own vine and fig tree.
In both the colonies of Victoria and of New South Wales many
of the clergy are advancing in life. The question arises, Who is
to succeed them. Their natural successors would come from
amongst the curates ; but the curates do not exist.
And now when country parishes have to be filled up, too often
the only Incumbent to be found is a young man, perhaps fresh
from his studies, with no experience. With no clerical training
under an older minister, with no opportunity of hearing any
voice but his own ; too often from long distances and press of
work, without having anyone to consult with in his daily difficul-
ties, he has to plunge into the activities of clerical life. This
beginning will probably tell against him during the entire of his
ministerial life.
But if the town churches at least had curates, they would
supply the country parishes with incumbents and would eventually
reap the benefits themselves, for these same ministers would
return as incumbents to them in after years, with experience
based on an originally sound training. In this aspect alone the
curate question is surely one well worthy the attention of
thoughtful members of the Church.


Extract from speeches delivered at Church Aid Society.
THE BISHOP OF SYDNEY SAID —
These things existed—notoriously existed —and it was impos-
sible that the evil could be met except by the personal application
of the remedy by the person who brought it to those who needed
it. They might as well expect that the diseases that existed in
Sydney could be cured through the medical gentlemen meeting and
delivering lectures, as to expect that the moral diseases he had
spoken of could be cured through the clergymen delivering ser-
mons on a Sunday. Just as the physical disease can only be
reached through the physician personally visiting and examining
his patient, so he felt sure the moral contagion could only be
reached by the personal application of the W ord of GrOD to the
souls of men. He felt this strongly, and seeing that they had so
little hope of getting additional assistance, it appeared to him that
their wisest plan was to throw their efforts into the work of the
City Mission. He felt disposed to give what assistance he could
to that work, and in this he believed he would be assisted by the
clergymen of the city of Sydney. But this, however, was only
meeting a portion of the evil, for there was assistance required
that none but a clergyman could give. It was necessary that
•every clergyman who had a certain amount of work should have
the assistaece —a right hand, as it were —of a curate, to help him
with the work of his parish. If there were only one or two
curates in Sydney, then, as no doubt his friend the Dean well
knew, if his neighbour had a sore throat, or was laid up, nothing
was so easy as to send to the Dean and ask if the curate
•could be spared for a portion of the day. Thus the curate
was at the beck and call of ever} T one instead of being the
help and assistant of his own clergyman. If there was any
movement to be made in the direction of remedying this evil
he hoped it would be a general one, and if so it could be only
through the agency of the Church Society. That Society had
been a Church Building Society, and a Parsonage Building
Society, but it was necessary that it should now become an
Additional Curates’ Aid Society. To every clergyman requiring
assistance he would give £lOO a year towards the stipend of a
curate, on condition that the parish made up the remainder of
the sum required. He hoped that this idea would be brought to
some practical issue.
The Rev. Gf. H. Moreton moved the second resolution. He
urged the expediency of supporting the Curates’ Aid Society.
He had often wondered how the clergy of the city of Sydney,


worked up to high pressure as they were, were enabled to minis-
ter to the spiritual wants of the community. He contrasted
this with the state of things in England where there was scarcely
a church which had not its two or three curates besides the
incumbent. They divided their labours in the parish so as fully
to conduct the work devolving upon them. He adverted to the
overwrought condition of body and mind in which clergymen
here frequently had to appear before their parishioners on Sun-
days. It was extremely desirable that other clergymen should
■come into their parishes. No doubt the insuperable difficulty
was the supply of stipends. He wished that those churches
having glebes attached to them could hand over their glebes to
the Church Society for this purpose ; that could be something
like the germ of an endowment. He moved, —“ That while this
meeting acknowledges with gratitude to Almighty God the
tokens of His increased blessing upon the Society’s labours
during the past year, it would urge upon members of the Church
the necessity of yet greater efforts to enable the Society to pro-
secute its important designs more effectually.”


WORKS BY THE REY. P. B. POWER, M.A.
Price, Five Shillings Fach.
The Feet of Jesus— ln Life, Death, Resurrection, and Glory
{Just Published).
Breyiates : Or Short Texts and Their Teachings. 4th Thousand.'
The “I "Wills” of the Psalms. 24th Thousand.
The “ I Wills ” of Christ. 14th Thousand.
Piyot Words of Scripture. sth Thousand.
The Labyrinth of the Soul. 3rd Thousand. Price, 3s.
Scripture Night Lights. 15th Thousand. Is. and Is. 6d.
Failure and Discipline. 4th Edition. Is. 6d.
Breathings of the Soul. 50th Thousand. Bd. and 6d.
TnE Fearful Ones : An Allegory. 3rd Thousand. Is.
“ Behold.” 11th Thousand. Is.
A Fagot of Stories for Little Folk. 4th Thousand. Is. 6d-
Tiie Oiled Feather. 2d. 125th Thousand.
John Clipstick’s Clock. Id. 105th Thousand.
He’s Overhead. 2d. 85th Thousand.
The Man who kept himself in Repair. 2d. 62nd Thousand
The Eye Doctor. 2d. 60th Thousand.
The Talking Eire Irons. 2d. 55th Thousand.
Stamp on it John. 2d. 55th Thousand.
Croaking Kate and Chirping Jane. 2d. 50th Thousand.
Reports ! and the Mischief they do. Id. 45th Thousand.
The Experience of a Church Plate. 2d. 40th Thousand.
The use of a Child. 2d. 40th Thousand.
The 111-used Postman. 2d. 35th Thousand.
Tiiis-day-month. 2d. 30th Thousand.
The Man who ran away from Himself. 2d. 37th Thousand.
&c., &c.
London : Hamilton, Adams and Ccfe
