

British Commonwealth League.
(“To secure Equality of Liberties, Status and Opportunities between
Men and Women in the British Commonwealth of Nations”).
“Women, and the Future”
(a) Women of the Less Forward Races
within the British Commonwealth.
Their Need and Our Responsibility.
(b) The Enfranchised Woman and the
Future.
Report of Conference
HELD
June sth and 6th, 1929.
Headquarters —
17, Buckingham Street, Adelphi, London, W.C.2,
Price 1/6.




British Commonwealth League.
(“To secure Equality of Liberties, Status and Opportunities between
Men and Women in the British Commonwealth qf Nations”).
“Women and the Future”
(a) Women of the Less Forward Races
within the British Commonwealth.
Their Need and Our Responsibility.
(b) The Enfranchised Woman and the
Future.
Report of Conference
HELD
June sth and 6th, 1929.
Headquarters—
-17, Buckingham Street, Adelphi, London, W.C.2.




British Commonwealth League.
Telephone: Regent 4375.
Honorary Organizer:
Miss M. Crave Collisson, M.A
17, Buckingham Street,
Adelphi,
London, W.C.2,
CONSTITUTION.
Name .
British Commonwealth League.
Objects .
a. To secure equality of liberties, status, and opportunities
between men and women in the British Common-
wealth of Nations.
b. To increase mutual understanding of common problems.
Methods .
1. To study —
a. The rights and status of women in the British
Commonwealth of Nations.
b. The extent and use of political power in relation to
issues affecting equality in Empire citizenship.
2. To take such action as may be necessary to achieve the
object.
Membership.
Membership shall be open to —
a. Any regularly constituted Women’s Society in any
part of the Empire which is in agreement with
the objects of the League.
b. Individual men and women in agreement with the
object. They shall be called Associate
Members.
There shall be a Headquarters Group of Associate Members.
Overseas Members of affiliated Societies or Associate Mem-
bers shall be eligible to membership of the Headquarters Group.
Finance .
Societies affiliating shall pay a subscription of not less than
One Guinea per annum.
Associate Members shall pay a subscription of not less than
7s. 6d. per annum.


Overseas Members desiring to join the Headquarters Group
shall pay a minimum subscription of 7s. 6d. per annum.
Council .
The business of the League shall be conducted by a Council,
to consist of the Honorary Officers, one representative of each
affiliated society, and one representative of the Headquarters
Group of Associate Members. The Council shall meet annually
to elect its Honorary Officers and ten members of a Standing
Committee.
Standing Committee .
Each Society affiliated to the League and to the International
Woman Suffrage Alliance may appoint a member to the Standing
Committee. The Standing Committee shall have power to co-opt
from time to time additional members not exceeding in number
one quarter of the number of the whole Committee.
There shall be a Committee on Admissions, consisting of the
President and two other Members, The Committee shall be
appointed by the Standing Committee and their decision shall be
final.
Officers.
The Honorary Officers shall be President, Honorary Secre-
tary, Honorary Treasurer, and the Chairman of the Council.
Vice-Presidents .
Vice-Presidents shall be appointed by the Council.
Nominations shall be submitted from the affiliated societies:
not more than one nomination shall be accepted from each
Province or State.
NOTE. —The League has been formed to carry on the work
formerly done by the British Dominions Women Citizens’ Union
and the British Overseas Committee of the International Woman
Suffrage Alliance.


THE FUTURE IS MADE NOW.
British Commonwealth League.
’'To secure Equality of Liberties, Status, and Opportunities
between men and women in the British Commonwealth of
Nations”.
WHAT IS IT?
r pjio British Commonwealth League is a Society formed to
deal with issues of Equal Citizenship within the countries ruled
under the British flag. This involves the heavy task of bringing
women citizens to understand the meaning and extent of their
political power. The grouping represented by the British Com-
monwealth exercises enormous influence in world politics. Ihe
influence and claims of the Woman Citizen must be understood
and exerted in this political sphere.
The British Commonwealth League represents the reorgan-
ization of two much older bodies: the British Dominions Women
Citizens’ Union and the former British Overseas Committee of the
International Woman Suffrage Alliance. It has therefore a fine
tradition of public service to follow" and maintain.
WHY IS IT NEEDED?
The British Commonwealth League is needed because an
International body cannot devote to Empire issues an undue
proportion of its time and funds. Otherwise the auxiliaries of
the International might justly claim the same right and funds.
The League continues in co-operation with the International
\lliance of Women for Suffrage and Equal Citizenship, BUT
DEVOTES ITSELF TO ISSUES OF EQUAL CITIZENSHIP
within the EMPIRE ONLA .
SHALL WE UNITE?
Citizens come and go from Overseas. Other bodies do
splendid work in looking after them socially. Most of these
bodies are constitutionally bound to avoid issues of political
citizen education. The League is non-party and non-sectarian,
but it believes in political education, and aims at giving every
woman who comes from overseas the opportunity of realizing what
her demand for citizen equality means in terms of power. It
aims also at helping the home keeping British woman citizen to
realize the enormous reservoir of strength and help through
educated opinion and common action on issues of Equal Citizen-
ship which lies in the British woman citizen from Overseas.
NO OTHER BODY DOES OR CLAIMS TO DO this special


work of building up within the Empire WOMAN’S POLITICAL
power as an instrument for good. The League aims at helping
weaker bodies to fight by taking united action.
HOW DOES IT WORK?
The programme includes: —
1. Conferences:
2. The establishment of a woman’s non-party political
centre. From this centre, where contacts will be
made from all parts of the Empire, women will
meet leaders and each other, and will be directed
to other bodies in which they have a special interest.
The League hopes to act as a clearing house and
strengthen existing societies.
3. Luncheons to consider and hear views from the Overseas
and English political citizen leaders.
4. Gatherings where views on the important issues affected
be the demand for Equal Citizenship can be plainly
stated and personally discussed.
5. Steady work for representation on all bodies where
Empire policy is laid down.
The League needs money and active personal help.
You can help:—l. As a Headquarters Member. (Minimum
Annual Subscription 2s. 6d.).
2. By a Donation.
Write or call to see the Secretary, 17, Buckingham Street,
Strand. Telephone: Regent 4375. .
THE FOLLOWING SOCIETIES SUPPORTED THE
CONFERENCE.
Australia. Federation of Women Voters. Victorian Women
Citizens’ Association. Feminist Club, Sydney. Women’s
Union of New South Wales. Queensland Women’s Electoral
League. Women’s Non-Party Association of Queensland.
Women’s Non-Party Association of S. Australia. Women’s
Service Guilds of Western Australia. Women’s League of
New South Wales. Social Hygiene Council, New South
Wales. Women’s Christian Temperance Union, New South
Wales. Women’s Christian Temperance Union, Western
Australia. Women’s Non-Party Association of Tasmania.
New Zealand. The Pioneer Club, Wellington. Women’s
Christian Temperance Union, New Zealand.
South Africa. Women’s Enfranchisement Association of the
Union of S. Africa.
India. Women’s Indian Association.
Bermuda. Bermuda Woman Suffrage Alliance.


Ceylon . Women’s Franchise Society.
Canada . Montreal Women’s Franchise Club.
British Societies. National Union of Teachers. National Union
of Women Teachers. Association of Assistant Mistresses in
Secondary Schools. Women’s Freedom League. St, Joan s
Social and Political Alliance. Association for Social and
Moral Hygiene. British Social Hygiene Council. Women’s
International League. Young Women’s Christian Associa-
tion of Great Britain. Women’s Guild of Empire. Society
for Promoting the Training of Women. Divorce Law
Reform Union.
The following Resolutions were passed: —
Nationality of Married Women .
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League urges
the Governments within the British Empire in sending in their
reports on Nationality to the Preparatory Committee of the first
Codification Conference of the League of Nations to state that:
(a) There is a strong demand from Women’s Organisations
throughout the Empire that the law should give a woman the
same right as a man to retain or to change her nationality.
( b ) That the British and Australian Parliaments have
unanimously adopted resolutions in favour of a woman retaining
her nationality on marriage with an alien, it to be open to her to
make a Declaration of Alienage.
[c) That many Members of the Nationality Committee of
the 1926 Imperial Conference were in favour of a change of the
law which would provide for the British woman an opportunity
of retaining her British nationality on marriage with an alien.
This Conference further urges that there should be no further
delay in setting up the Committee of Experts to which this
subject was referred by the 1926 Imperial Conference.
It further urges that the Codification Conference should
include Women Members.
Problems of Social Hygiene.
This Conference congratulates the Secretary of State for the
Colonies on the report of the Committee appointed by him to
examine the new enactments in the Straits Settlements, and the
Federated Malay States, dealing with the protection of women and
girls, and this Conference desires to express its warm approval
of all the recommendations contained in that report, and urges
that they be put into effect at the earliest moment possible, and
further, this Conference urges the Secretary of State to extend
the application of the report to the conditions in Hong Kong.
The Conference desires to thank the A.M.S.H. for its per-
sistent agitation in making known, and working against, all
Regulation measures in the Crown Colonies,


This Conference urges its respective organisations to further
the study of problems of social hygiene as they exist amongst the
less forward races within the area covered by the different govern-
ments concerned: in particular with special reference to the
bearing of these problems upon the status of the women of such
races.
The Imperial Government and Responsibility.
This Conference recognises that a heavy responsibility rests
upon both Imperial and local governments for the care and
welfare of races of less forward development governed under the
British Flag. While recognising the excellent work done in the
past by these Governments, the Conference desires especially to
affirm the particular responsibility that is incurred in relation to
the women of such races, and their right both to education and
to preparation for the fuller citizen life in proportion to their
ability.
This Conference asserts the willingness of women of the more
forward races to take their full share of responsibility under the
Governments, and desires that in all matters of policy relating
to women of the less forward races, women advisers shall be
appointed, if possible members of the race itself, and that efforts
shall be made where possible to have the needs of the women of
such races examined by women with a view to the development
of policy suited to their special difficulties.
The Federal Ordinance relating to Aboriginal Women in
Australia .
This Conference expresses the view that the problems relating
to the care, education and general condition of aboriginal and
half-caste women and children in Australia are of such an urgent
character as to require immediate attention. This Conference
expresses its confidence that solutions can be found, and respect-
fully urges that where this is not already the case these problems
be made matters of Federal responsibility. This Conference
further urges that in the matter of policy representative Federal
organisations of women, missionary groups or other existing
Federal organisations be called into consultation.
This Conference, in view of the report issued by Mr. Bleakley
at the request of the Commonwealth Government, urges that the
question of women protectors be considered and as a practical
measure suggests that the wives of telegraph officers when suitable
be appointed with full powers of protection over women and
children of half-caste and aboriginal race, at the same pay and
with the same powers as any men officers appointed.
This Conference points out that the report pays very high
tribute to the unpaid work of the wives of officers in authority
and considers that women protectors would be of inestimable
service.


Resolution on Mui Tsai in Hong Kong.
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League, in
view of the fact that the proclamation recently issued in Hong
Kong declaring the Mui Tsai free is identical with that of 1922
which did not result in the abolition of the system, calls upon
the Government to take definite action to end this slavery at the
earliest possible moment, and as a first step to enforce registration
as provided for in the ordinance of 1923.
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League
congratulates the women of India, and especially the Deputy
Speaker of the Madras Legislative Council, on the Bill passed by
the Madras Legislative Council dealing with the rights of property
of Devadasis and on the work done to bring about the abolition
of the custom of the dedication of girls to be devadasis.
This Conference warmly congratulates the fourteen women
returned to the new House of Commons in England, and bearing
in mind their excellent work in the past, offers its special con-
gratulations to the women members now re-elected.
Resolution on Franchise in South Africa.
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League offers
to the Women of the Union of South Africa engaged in the struggle
for the suffrage its heartiest sympathy: it deplores the loss of
status imposed on enfranchised women when settling in the
Union of South Africa: it urges the Government of the Union of
South Africa to recognise their claim to full citizen rights, and
asks it to take the earliest opportunity of remedying this situation
by admitting women to the full Franchise at the same age and
on the same terms as men.
Resolution on Franchise in Ceylon.
This Conference heartily congratulates the women of Ceylon
on their foresight in asking for the full Franchise for women in
Ceylon, and offers them the warm support and sympathy of
Enfranchised Women united with them through the British
Commonwealth League.
Resolution on Franchise in Bermuda.
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League
offers to the women of Bermuda engaged in the struggle for the
suffrage its heartiest sympathy: it deplores the loss of status
imposed on enfranchised women when settling in Bermuda, it
urges the legislature of Bermuda to recognise their claim to full
citizenship rights, and asks it to take the earliest opportunity of
remedying this situation by admitting women to the full fran-
chise. It congratulates the women of Bermuda on their active
work at the last election and the most interesting issues arising
in relation to the parochial franchise.


Franchise in Quebec.
That since the Province of Quebec, the oldest of the pro-
vinces, is the only one which denies its women the provincial
vote, while having the Federal vote, this Conference of the
British Commonwealth League urges the Provincial Legislature
to remove this anomaly as soon as possible, constituting as it
does a slur on the intelligence of the women of Quebec.
Resolution on Women on Film Boards.
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League urges
the Governments within the British Empire to include women
on Boards dealing with Film Censorship in their respective
countries: also that these Boards be given control over posters
and other forms of publicity for Cinema performances.
Resolution on Affiliation Orders.
That this Conference desires to bring before the Imperial
Conference the urgent need for reciprocal legislation in regard to
the enforcement of affiliation orders, a precedent being already
established in relation to maintenance orders under the Mainten-
ance Orders (Facilities for enforcement) Act, 1920.
That this Conference further urges its constituent societies
to study the problem of parents who evade their responsibilities by
leaving their country of residence, and to take steps to secure:
(a) the enforcement of existing laws; (b) the promotion of
any necessary new legislation, and (c) the establishment of volun-
tary machinery for bringing home to such parents their respon-
sibilities and obligations.
Resolution on the Co-ordination of Marriage Law.
That, in view of the fact that Women’s Organisations in
Australia are working toward a Federal Divorce Law, this
Conference of the British Commonwealth League affirms the
desirability of co-ordinating wherever possible the Marriage,
Maintenance and Divorce Laws throughout the Empire. This
Conference recommends to the Standing Committee that a Sub-
Committee be appointed to consider and prepare a recommenda-
tion for the Imperial Conference and urges that attention be paid
to the question of domicile.
Social Insurance and Empire Co-ordination.
That, although the difficulties as reported by the Committees
appointed to consider the problem of co-ordination, are
admittedly great, this Conference urges that in view of the special
problem of migration further attempts be made to find some
solution.
Women in the Civil Service.
That in any investigation of the position of women in the
Civil Service initiated by the Government it is important not
only that the opinion of women civil servants shall be given full
consideration but that women shall have substantial representa-
tion ,


Imperial Conference.
This Conference urges the British Commonwealth League to
summon in preparation for the Imperial Conference a special
delegate meeting, to which interested outside societies be invited
to send representatives, to consider and prepare a memorandum
on points of importance in regard to the citizenship of women.
Such a memorandum should include:—
(а) The Co-ordination and more effective working of law
relating to Maintenance and Affiliation orders.
(б) The right of married women, born British citizens, in
regard to nationality.
(c) The co-ordination of schemes of special insurance where
such schemes exist within the Empire.
(d) The appointment of women as full delegates to the
League of Nations.
( e) The principle of the representation of women on Com-
missions, Boards, or representative bodies which deal with
Empire policy, in particular with migration.
(/) In the event of the formation of any such body as an
Imperial secretariat the establishment of the principle of full
equality of opportunity, payment and conditions on such a
secretariat as between men and women.
Any other matters of importance.
PROGRAMME.
JUNE sth
10 a.m. Chairman’s Address, Mrs. Corbett Ashby.
WOMEN AND THE FUTURE.
10-15 a.m. Women of the less forward races within the British Common-
wealth. Their need and our Responsibility.
EDUCATION FOR THE FUTURE.
New Departures in the work of the Colonial Office. Miss Sara
Burstall (Advisory Committee on Education to the
Colonial Office).
The Education of Women in (a) Tropical Africa. Miss Wrong.
(b) N. Rhodesia : Mr. G. Latham, Director of Native Education.
PROBLEMS OF SOCIAL HYGIENE.
Our Responsibility. Miss Ruby Rich (Australian Racial
Hygiene Centre).
Rev. H. Dalliimore, Oxford.
1-15 p.m. Luncheon adjournment.
2-30 a .m. The Imperial Government and Responsibility.
Resolution.
2-40 p .m. SOME URGENT PROBLEMS AND WAYS OF MEETING
THEM.
The Federal Ordinance relating to Aboriginal Women in
Australia. Mrs. Bennett.
Resolution and Discussion.
Mui Tsai in Hong Kong, Mrs. Haslewood.


4-15 p.m.
4-45 p.m.
Tea adjournment.
Vice Regulation. The Devadasi Bills. Mrs. Jinarajadasa.
Resolution and Discussion.
Time will be allowed for discussion after each Paper.
JUNE Oth
10 a.m.
Resolution on Nationality of Married Women. Moved from the
Chair.
10-15 a.m. Resolution on Franchise in South Africa.
Proposer: Mrs. Pritchard . Seconder: Mrs. Do re .
Resolution. Franchise in Ceylon.
Mrs. Guneseekera (Ceylon). M iss Fleming ( V ictoria).
Resolution. Franchise in Bermuda.
Mrs. Stedman. Miss Rothenberg.
Resolution. Franchise in Quebec.
Mrs. Minden Cole (Canada). Mrs. McVicar, J.P.
(New Zealand).
Women on Film Boards, Representative of Australian
Federation, Miss Fleming, Mrs. Waterworth.
Affiliation Orders. Miss Musson.
THE ENFRANCHISED WOMAN AND THE FUTURE.
The Co-ordination of Marriage Law. Mrs. Waterworth
(Tasmania).
Divorce Law and Co-ordination. Mrs. Normanton.
Social Insurance and Empire Co-ordination. Miss Reeves
(W.F.L.).
1 p.m. Luncheon adjournment.
2-30 p.m. THE ENFRANCHISED WOMAN AND THE FUTURE.
The Mother as Guardian of her Child.
Miss B. A. Bicknell, LL.B.
What the Indian Women are doing,
Mrs. Rama Rau.
The Future in the Civil Service in Great Britain,
Mrs. Gordon Wilson.
4-15 p.m. Tea adjournment.
4-45 p.m. The Future in the Civil and Administrative Services outside
Great Britain. Miss Chave Collisson.
Resolution on the Imperial Conference.
SOCIAL FUNCTIONS.
Tuesday, Reception to meet Lady Bailey, Miss Maude Royden, Mrs.
June 4th, Sarojini Naidu, Miss Jean Iris Howard. Miss Stella
at 9 p.m. Murray sang. Mrs. Naidu recited some of her own poetry.
Suffolk Galleries, Suffolk Street, Haymarket. Tickets 3s. 6d.
Friday, Luncheon at the Criterion. Guests—Lady MacLaren Brown ,
June 7th. Mrs. Sarojini Naidu, Lady Allardyce, Lady Simon*
Miss Ruby Rich. Tickets ss. 6d, 1 p.m.
Saturday, All day Motor Excursion and Afternoon Garden Party
June Bth. by kind invitation of Mrs. Powell, Guildford. This excursion
through some of the loveliest Surrey County, ended up in a
beautiful garden, opened to us by the great kindness of our
friends. Return Fare 7s. 6d.
Friday, COUNCIL MEETING at 17, Buckingham Street, W.C.2.
June 7th, Delegates only,
at 10 a.m.


CONFERENCE.
WOMEN AND THE FUTURE.
WEDNESDAY, June sth, 1929.
MORNING SESSION.
Chair : Mrs. Corbett Ashby.
The Chairman took the Chair promptly at ten o’clock and
addressed the Delegates.
Mrs. Ashby pointed out that the British Empire was
challenged to prove that it served a purpose absolutely different
from and better than that which any other Empire had served,
inasmuch as its might did not rest solely on military power.
She added that at the League of Nations the grouping of the
British Commonwealth seemed to some countries redundant, and
had proved a stumbling block to the entry of the United States.
She added: “We and others have come to realise that, though
you may drift into war, you cannot drift into peace, that it needs
the highest concentration of thought, great singleness of aim and
purpose, tremendous courage and initiative, and the same readi-
ness to take risks for peace that we have always been ready to take
for war.’ ’
The development of intense nationalism had great dangers:
co-operation was a study in itself. She concluded: “We of the
British Commonwealth League are determined that women at any
rate shall take their share in building up the work of the Empire,
and trying to solve such problems as the just and fair relationship
of one race to another, of one culture to another, pouring into
the pool of common knowledge each special gift of race and
tradition. That is why year by year we do try perhaps ambiti-
ously, to discuss here at our Conference the deep underlying
difficulties of the day.”
Miss Chave Collisson then moved the following resolution:
“That this Conference greatly deplores the fact that
Mrs. Corbett Ashby is not to be a sitting member of the
coming Parliament, and congratulates her on her splendid
fight as a representative of a number of women’s causes.’ ’
Carried by acclamation.
Miss Sara Burstall (Advisory Committee on Education to
the Colonial Office): I have the honour to be a member of the
Advisory Committee on Education at the Colonial Office, which
advises the Secretary of State in regard to difficult questions, and


questions in general, of educational policy concerning the
Colonies.
The problem of education is at its worst in Africa, which has
only recently been opened up to trade and government. In
Africa 90% of the education is in the hands of the missionaries,
but under modern conditions the Government must take a share,
so a co-ordination is necessary In 1923 a Conference was held
with Mr Ormsby-Gore in the Chair, and a Committee was
formed to advise the Secretary of State, a Joint Committee of
these various elements to collect information, to advise the
officers overseas, and to think out the kind of education that was
most desirable.
Their first work was to produce a White Paper called “Edu-
cation Policy in British Tropical Africa.’ ’ In that Paper certain
lines of policy are laid down, which mark a wholly new departure
in the relation of H.M. Government to education. The first
principle is co-operation, the encouragement and control of
voluntary education by co-operation between Government and
other educational agencies. Secondly, adaptation to native
life: in Tropical Africa that means, of course, especially
hygiene and agriculture.
Next, religion and character training. The White Paper
laid down the principle that, “Since contact with civilization—
and even education itself —must necessarily tend to weaken
tribal authority and the sanctions of existing beliefs, and in
view of the all-prevailing belief in the supernatural which
affects the whole life of the African, it is essential that what is
good in the old beliefs and sanctions should be strengthened
and what is defective should be replaced. The greatest import-
ance must therefore be attached to religious teaching and moral
instruction.’ ’
Then the White Paper deals with administrative questions
as to the services and grants-in-aid, native teaching staff and so
on, and then a very important principle, that the African is to
be a good African and not a sham Englishman, and consequently
the vernaculars are to be preserved and developed. All early
oral education must be in the vernacular. Although it is im-
possible with the very large number of dialects and languages
in Africa to recognize all and print literature in all, yet never-
theless what are called the Union languages —languages which
will be spoken as a second language by those who know the
vernacular of a small tribe—those shall as far as possible be
African languages, just as French, of course, is a European langu-
age and is a kind of Union language in Europe.
Just after this was issued, the Authorities felt that a woman
was necessary on the Board. I was put on first, and then a little
later Miss Whitelaw. One of the principles which we empha-
size on every opportunity is that there shall be women on the
Boards of Education in the Colonies, and I think practically
that has now become the custom.


The work of this Committee for the nine African Colonies
went on in 1925 and 1926, till the Colonial Office Conference in
1927. Then the Governors of other Colonies, such as Malaya,
asked for further co-operation with them. On December 31st,
1928, our African Committee ceased to be, and a new one was
born on January Ist which was to deal with all the Colonies.
It is now called the Advisory Committee on Education, not
African only and not native only.
We had to deal with nine colonies in Africa. First is Gambia,
a small colony. Then Sierra Leone, where during the last three
or four years extraordinarily interesting work has been done by
the new Director and by a kindergarten teacher, an English-
woman who went out there from the North of England. Then
comes the Gold Coast, which is the richest of the colonies.
Then comes the most interesting of all, and that is Nigeria.
Most people do not realize that Nigeria is the third largest
state in the British Commonwealth as regards population. The
people are of many races and languages and forms of religion.
Christianity has been established in Southern Nigeria. There
are still many pagan tribes, and in Northern Nigeria there
are most interesting Mohammedan kingdoms. Then let us dash
in thought across the middle of Africa to Uganda, again full of
interest with its own native kingdoms, but very largely a Chris-
tian state. Then we come to Kenya, and then along to Tangan-
yika . Then come Nyassaland and Northern Rhodesia, the most
southerly of these colonies.
It soon became clear that if we were to recognize the lan-
guages of these people, we needed special experts, and so the
Committee helped in forming an International Institute of
African Languages and Cultures, which would draw together all
the experts on African languages and on African anthropology in
the world. This Institute has two foreign experts, Prof. Wester -
mann from Berlin, and M. Labouret from Paris. A number of
missionaries have come in also. This International Institute of
African Languages and Cultures has drawn together all the ex-
perts on this subject. A number of different Societies have
joined, from which the funds come in part, but H.M. Govern-
ment, the Government of Egypt and the Government of French
West Africa contribute towards the expenses of the Institute.
What Prof. Westmann does is to settle different problems in
connection with the languages. He settled, for instance, the
proper way to write West African languages, and he is also
helping to settle which of these various languages shall be
recognized.
One of the faults of colonial education has been a slavish
adherence to English examinations. Examinations have done
harm enough in England, but they have done terrible harm
overseas, and we are constantly trying to give a lead to the
colonial authorities not to have these examinations, but to
develop examinations of their own; or, if they must have an


English examination, to have it so arranged that it suits their
conditions. On the Committee I have stood for having Swahili
compulsory in schools for Europeans in East Africa, and that
the children of planters in Kenya shall learn Swahili instead
of French to pass the Cambridge Local Examination.
Another native gift which we wish to recognize is the gift of
art. West Africans have an extraordinarily fine native art
of their own. They make beautiful woven tapestries, and
there is a brass casting art with primitive sculpture. We
want to send out highly qualified art teachers who will draw out
what is in these people. At the Prince of Wales’ College at
Achimota they have a wonderful artist, who has somehow or
other got out of his African men students pictures that I can only
compare with the Primitives of Italy or of the Flemish Exhibition
that we saw the winter before last.
In regard to the education of woman I would make this sug-
gestion, that we have not so much to think of the three R’s as of
the four H’s: Hygiene, that she may keep her babies alive;
Housecraft; Handwork; and Horticulture, because in most parts
of Africa the woman grows the food.
We want to give the men teaching in agriculture. We want
to develop among Europeans the teaching of biology. We want
men biologists. We want to help the Missions. We want to
increase the Government grant to the Missions. We want better
training of teachers. One method is that of the Jeanes School,
by which an African man and his wife are taken from a little
village school to a centre and are taught all the new ideas,
especially hygiene and hand-work; then they go back to the
village. We want to satisfy a demand for higher education
which is beginning in Uganda. There are to be two good schools
in Uganda for older native girls. There is already a very
good college for the Uganda men. where they can study agricul-
ture and medicine and get higher education generally. Our
Committee is hoping to publish a bulletin which will be circulated
all over the Commonwealth and describe the different interesting
things that have been done in different parts. One of the pro-
blems is the teaching of English to non-European peoples, and
the best way in which that can be done. Another is this attack
on examinations, and how best that can be got over. This
bulletin will cost Is. and will be published quarterly.
I have given you but a very imperfect and incomplete
sketch of a great problem. We have much to give, but we have
also much to learn; if we are to act as trustees for these primitive
and non-European peoples, they must develop their innate powers.
A great work is being done in Palestine by reviving the ancient
language and life, just as in Achimota Fraser and his wonderful
band of colleagues are getting the very, very best out of the
Africans. We must support this by the force of public opinion
wherever we mav be.
Miss Wrong (Student Christian Movement, Secretary) spoke


on “The Education of Women in Tropical Africa.” The
speaker emphasised the fact that the aim of education in tropical
Africa had been too narrowly vocational, being largely designed
to produce clerks and subordinate officials. Mr. A. F. Fraser,
Principal of the Prince of Wales College of Achimota, Gold Coast,
formulated the truer aim in these words ‘ ‘The immediate aim of
African education should be to develop the character, initiative,
and ability of the youth of the country, that they may be reliable,
useful, and intelligent in the rapidly changing life and circum-
stances of their own people. In other words, the aim of educa-
tion is to develop the manhood and womanhood of the rising
generation for the sake of their own people.’ ’
Women had not received the same attention as men. In
Southern Nigeria for example the missions have 8,727 girls in
the schools, and four times that number of boys. The Govern-
ment schools have 634 girls, and again four times that number of
boys. In the Gold coast schools there are about 26,000 boys in
schools, and only 6,000 girls. CURRICULUM must be built up
with the needs of the community in view. Such needs are (1)
HEALTH. A very normal infant mortality on the West Coast is
350 per thousand in the first year. In some areas it rises to 500
or even 800 per thousand. Malaria, epidemics, plague, skin
diseases, decimate the population. The teaching of the care of
children and of hygiene is essential. (2) DOMESTIC SCIENCE.
Malnutrition is common, and available food stuffs are not
always used, i.e., in areas in Nyasaland the people do not eat
eggs. Mrs. Donald Fraser taught women whose confidence she
got in hospital simple cookery, and eventually they asked for a
cookery book in the vernacular. (3) AGRICULTURE. In
many tribes the women have been responsible for the growing
of food stuffs. Health can be improved and famines reduced by
produce growing. Many schools lay great emphasis on school
gardens. I saw one school which had taught the district the use
of cabbages. The growing and preparation of food stuffs have
very close relation to the rearing of children. There are some
schools where the life of the school is organised on the pattern of a
model African village, in which the girls produce the bulk of the
good used, and the older girls care for the little ones.
THE “3 R’s” are, of course, necessary. Gratitude is owed
to missionaries for the transcription of African languages, and for
the teaching of reading up and down the country. Emphasis on
a special curriculum for women does not preclude co-education,
or the teaching of the same subjects to boys and girls.
LEISURE. The use of leisure is of great importance. If
what is objectionable in African tribal customs is to be eliminated
it must be done by a process of substitution. Dancing, music,
games, particularly team games, which help the children to
co-operate with each other, are essential. Arts and crafts
adapted to the district in which the school is are of great import-
ance, both in satisfying the creative desire, and in meeting the


needs of the family and in helping to keep them out of debt to
traders. One school in Southern Rhodesia has developed weaving
and pottery with these needs in view. The African, as a rule,
has a dramatic sense. Some schools are doing valuable work in
developing this, notably in connection with festivals of the
church. Miracle plays and Christmas tableaux are given in
several places before vast audiences of people from the surround-
ing country.
RELIGION AND EDUCATION. This raises the question
of religious education. Nearly all the education of women and
girls in Tropical Africa is carried on by missionary bodies.
They are the pioneers in adapting education to the needs of the
community. In missionary schools there is, of course, religious
instruction. In addition to this the Advisory Committee on
African Education of the Colonial Office has made the important
pronouncement that there shall be religious instruction in African
schools. In the Prince of Wales College, Achimota, a Govern-
ment institution, religious instruction is given throughout the
school. I believe that that is the right line and that it is im-
possible to separate religion and education, for without religion
it is impossible to transform the life of African communities, and
these communities are in sore need of transformation. A
Government medical officer from Nigeria gave it as his opinion
that in his district mental development was hindered by fear of
evil spirits, and that freedom from fear was not attained until the
third generation of Christians. Freedom from fear of evil
spirits can only come through belief in the power of the God of
Love. There is much to be done in discovering how best to
give religious instruction. That it should be given I have no
doubt.
RELATIONS WITH MEN. Some Government officials and
a number of Africans realise the necessity of providing educated
wives for educated African men. Women are a great con-
servative power in the land. They guard the old customs and
the educated African who has cast off the old customs abroad
may'be slave to them at home through the influence of his women.
Another argument for the education of women is that they
suffer very severely from certain of the customs. There are
mission schools which owe their origin to the necessity of shelter-
ing women and girls who had fled from conditions to which the
missionary could not condemn them again. The value of human
personality seems to be a distinctively Christian value and only as
that value is recognised can African women be freed from many
crippling customs.
WOMEN OF THE WEST AND WOMEN OF AFRICA. I
have tried to indicate certain lines on which women’s education
is being developed in Africa. Government and missions are
giving thought to the education of woman. The late Governor
of the Gold Coast, Sir Gordon Guggisberg, has written:—


‘ ‘There can be no true development of a race unless the
women, as well as the men are educated. Among the
African races the women are usually the guardians of native
institutions. There can be no sublimation of primitive
and often barbarous customs if the women remain unedu-
cated, nor can there be happy marriages and real home life,
and all that this means to the children if women are not
educated. It has been demonstrated in many areas in
Africa that uneducated women are a drag on the wheel of
progress. Experience in Asia as well as in Africa in the
past forty years bears this out. The near future should
show an increasing demand for the education of women. To
this end opportunities should be provided.”
Girls are admitted equally with boys to the Prince of Wales
College, Achimota, which was founded during Sir G. Guggis-
berg’s term as Governor. Missions have for years realised the
importance of the education of women. But people of under-
standing and knowledge are few. If the needs of African
communities are to be met women’s education must be developed
more rapidly. To this end the understanding of the situation
by women of the West is needed. I should like to suggest the
importance of women studying in this connection the principles
laid down in the report of the Commission on the Closer Union of
the Dependencies in Eastern and Central Africa (H .M. Stationery
Office, 1929, 65.). This report adopts as a fundamental principle
that the interests of the native inhabitant must be the determining
consideration in the framing of policy and in the administration
of areas, and proceeds to define those interests. A short digest of
the report will be published in July and it is important that the
principles involved should be grasped before there is a parlia-
mentary debate upon the report next winter. A small book
which is now going through the press should also be read. Its
title is “The Future of the Negro,” and the authors are Sir G.
Guggisberg and Mr. A. G. Fraser. In this volume a policy of
African education is outlined which has a very direct bearing on
the education of the women of Africa. There is still time to
form educational policies for Africa which will meet the needs and
develop the possibilities of the women if the knowledge and
understanding and devotion of the women of the West is enlisted.
The Chairman then introduced Mr. Latham, Director of
Native Education in Northern Rhodesia.
Mr. Latham first gave some facts about Northern Rhodesia.
He pointed out that as a Crown Colony her problems were very
like those of East and Central Africa. The usual journey was
about days' railway from Capetown ; its population 1J millions
contained less than 10,000 white people, the rest being Bantu.
North Eastern Rhodesia resembled for the most part a large
native reserve with a few scattered officials, missionaries and
traders. The ordinary Mission Station would be built on a


■clearing in the Bush. From such centres missions carried on the
work in the district. The difficult problems in Northern
Rhodesia were that of the detribalised native in the town and
that of the rural native. The tremendous increase in the mining
industry meant inevitable confusion in the evolution of the
people and considerable relaxation of tribal control in the case
of large numbers of natives. The problems of mining centres
were very pressing. Improvements in these conditions were
essential. In regard to the rural natives, the speakei said .
In regard to the education work until 1925 with
the exception of one boys , school in Barotseland financed
out of a native trust fund and controlled by the Govern-
ment, all native education was in the hands ol the
missions and the Government gave practically no financial
help. There are at present sixteen different societies
operating in the Territory all of which have schools of sorts,
though many of them practically confine themselves to the
teaching of religion and a little reading, writing and count-
ing. From the educational point of view the most impor-
tant are the Livingstonian Mission, the London Missionary
Society, the Paris Evangelical Mission, the Primitive
Methodists, and the Dutch Reformed Church. The
Universities Mission, the White Fathers, the Jesuit Mission
and the Wesleyan Methodist Mission are also doing good
work in certain places, and the very great importance of
the education of women and girls is fully appreciated.
The advisory Board in this territory included nine mission-
aries, of whom two were women. One of the main difficul-
ties with which we have to contend in the education
of girls is the indifference or hostility of the older women,
who are the most conservative and reactionary section of the
tribe. A constant plea of parents and grandmothers is that
they require the girls’ services for carrying hoeing
and other work, but deeper than this lie misgivings about
the fulfilment of tribal customs, especially initiation cere-
monies, and above all about marriage. They know that
an educated girl will not be so ready to accept a marriage
arranged for her, that missionaries will oppose a very young
marriage or marriage to a non-Christian. In any case the
girl will refuse to be the wife of a polygamist. Against this
may be set the growing demand among educated men that
their wives should be on a level of mentality and general
culture similar to their own.
Most Mission stations have a few native girl boarders who
do house work and attend whatever school is available. Those
that specialise at all in female education do so in one of two ways.
Some have a day school for local girls and women, weekly meet-
ings for mothers and spend much time in visiting the women in
their homes. Others have boarding schools for girls. Some of


course combine the two. There is much to be said for the day
school. It docs not occasion any abrupt break with village
It is much more readily attended as the parents and grannies are
less suspicious of it. Also any progress which can be effected in
the girl in her natural surroundings is, it is argued, likely to be
permanent, whereas the hot house growth effected in the some-
what artificial atmosphere of a boarding school is liable to fail
when exposed to the cold blasts of village life. There is a great
deal in this, but there is also considerable weight in the argument
of the protagonist of boarding schools that it is practically im-
possible to make any appreciable impression on a child unless
you take her right out of the village environment, especially
away from the malign influences of the old women.
In practice there is no doubt that both types of school do
valuable work. When the population is so scattered as it is in
Northern Rhodesia, some boarding schools are necessary and at
the best of them the organisation and living conditions are so
adapted to native life that the artificiality of the atmosphere is
reduced to a minimum. I can best illustrate what we are
aiming at in the education of girls by giving some account of our
most efficient girls’ boarding school, that of the L.M.S. at
Mbereshi.
I will not go into particulars of curriculum, which includes
the three Rs. and Miss Burstall’s 4 H’s. The singing is particu-
larly good, so are the physical exercises, done every morning,
consisting for the smaller ones largely of games. For recreation
the girls play basket-ball and various native games. They also
do some country dances and some harmless native dances.
I must mention one special feature of Mbereshi. At
Christmas time every year they give a dramatic presentation of
scenes from the story of the Nativity. The shelter in the
middle of the courtyard is the stable at Bethlehem, and here
come the shepherds and the wfise men to adore. The Staff is
responsible for the general arrangement of the scenes and of the
music, but everything is done by the girls and their reverence
and dramatic sense are quite remarkable, as is also the beauty of
the singing. Great throngs attend.
The latest development of Mbereshi has been the appoint-
ment of a lady doctor in charge of a baby welfare clinic and
maternity training. The idea is that all the girls should spend a
considerable part of their last six months in studying mother-
craft. They are not allowed by the custom of their tribe to
learn much about maternity work until they are married, but
most of the girls are married from the school, and it is hoped that
many of them will come back for advice and anti-natal care
before their first babies are born, and will have their babies in the
Mission hospital. Some of the mothers and no doubt widow r s
will be trained definitely as midwives. This work is only just
starting, and it is difficult to imagine a more practical way of
carrying on the training of the girls and of linking the school
with the life of the people.


The next step which we hope to take —I say we because the
Government helps to finance these undertakings —is to start a
training school for women teachers as another department at this
station.
In conclusion may I emphasise one point which I believe to
be of paramount importance ? It has already been touched on.
It is essential, if we are not to make disastrous mistakes, that
we should in all education, and in that of the women especially,
proceed with the utmost caution. Most of us are profoundly
ignorant of the workings of the African female mind, of her
traditional beliefs and customs —in fact, of the whole of her
mental background.
Most people realise that it is a mistake to think that we are
going to do any good by giving a western type of education
without adapting it for African use and without preparing the
soil first. What fewer people realise is the prolonged study and
sympathetic contact with the women of the tribe which is neces-
sary before you can begin to prepare the soil with any success.
A thorough knowledge of one vernacular is almost essential for a
start and the wiser natives must be consulted at every step.
There are, or have been, sound social reasons for many, to our
notions, rather repugnant customs which we find obtaining among
primitive tribes, and there is a great danger in attempting to
abolish those customs which seem to conflict with more civilized
and Christian ideas, that we may be undermining some of the
restraints and sanctions of native life before we have provided
anything adequate to take their place. Many of these customs,
purged perhaps of their grosser elements, can be used in the
building up of a truly African Christian civilisation. Some
cannot be adapted and must be cleared out altogether, but this
must be done as far as possible by the Africans themselves. We
must patiently train African leaders of thought, who will them-
selves do what the whites can never hope to do effectively.
As our greatest hope for laying sound foundations for the
future of the African races lies in the wise education of their
women, so the greatest danger of wrecking our chances in that
direction lies in ignorant and ill-considered interference with
customs and traditions of which the women are, and will prob-
ably always be, the chief bulwarks ’
A short discussion followed.
The Chairman then introduced Miss Ruby Rich, of the
Racial Hygiene Centre of New South Wales.
Miss Rich pointed out that the work of Social Hygiene
among backward people was claiming general attention. The
League of Nations had urged the importance of securing from
mandated areas the fullest possible information about the
incidence of venereal disease in the areas. Miss Rich quoted the
statistics for Togoland, Tanganyika, Uganda, the Straits Settle-


merits, Singapore, Barbados, and other areas. Turning to the
causes, the speaker said:—Now, while remembering that the
causes of V.D. are usually varied and inter-related, we will note
a few of the main ones given by responsible people.
Prostitution.
Uganda . Native customs are largely responsible.
Togoland. Prostitution, caused by the presence of the
migrant Gold Coast workers and ‘ ‘the lax behaviour of the male
part of the population’ ’ is said to be the fundamental cause.
Tanganyika Territory. The native customs which permit
and sanction the irregular relationship between the sexes have
been largely held responsible.
Singapore. Here one has to remember that under the
former system of tolerated brothels with treatment “part free
and part at low cost” for the women, not many cases were got
under control. Under the new system of free centres on a volun-
tary basis in 1926 over 1,000 (1,944) women were treated and
over 7,000 (7,284) men were treated. The total new cases for
1927 were 14,106 ! This proves that free treatment is wiser than
compulsory control of just the prostitute group and reminds us
of the evil which arises from the false sense of security brought
about by examination of just a special group of women.
Southern Rhodesia. Most unskilled labour is undertaken by
male adult natives who, whilst in employment, are divorced from
family life and amongst whom cohabitation with native women
is accordingly common.
In Kenya Colony in September, 1928, it was proposed to
introduce State regulated and licensed houses of prostitution
among the native population. Fortunately this was defeated
largely,nay mainly, owing to the alert action of the Association
for Moral and Social Hygiene.
Let us touch upon another set of causes at the root of these
evils, which are
Native Customs.
Here we are confronted with grave problems. Variety of
language, race, customs, ceremonies, belief in magic, tabus,
etc., all of which must, to some extent, be understood and broken
down if we are to bring about Social Hygiene in its larger sense
of a healthy attitude to sex. Professor Malinowski says :
“The Missionary 7 , if he wants to deal adequately with this
problem, must understand the constitution of a native society,
and above all their marriage and family regulations.
Sexual morality, which is deeply embedded in the whole social
order of a tribe, cannot be changed at once, it cannot be changed
wholesale and it cannot be changed without a thorough under-
standing of the social organisation of the natives.’ ’
Miss Rich then instanced such cases as rites at puberty,


involving close seclusion and physical pain, and asked how could
womanhood be healthy until such customs were abolished ?
The speaker adduced more most interesting material in
relation to native tribes, and continued: “We ask how we can
help? and with this enquiry there comes to my mind that in-
directly we could serve some purpose if:
I.* We would watch, follow up and act upon the Reports
of the League of Nations Mandates Commission and the Reports
which will come out later on the Traffic in Women and Children
in the Far East.
2. We would note and act against the I.L .0. recommenda-
tion from a sub-committee of their joint maritime commission
of the Seaman’s Welfare in ports, which says (Recommendation
A. 6) ‘strict medical control of women who have illicit inter-
course with men.’ This will affect the native women in Hong
Kong and again by the examination will create that false sense
of security in the sailors.
3. We would follow up and act upon, for or against, the
1.L.0. present discussion on ‘Forced Labour. k ilty States are
represented on this Committee of the I.L .0. Conference now
sitting, a greater number than ever before, and from the point of
view of the majority of the delegates one of the chief subjects for
discussion is ‘Forced Labour.’ Its appearance on the agenda is
an outcome of the Slavery Convention passed by the Assembly
of the League three years ago. The aim is to provide means of
providing against forced labour degenerating into a system of
slavery and its bearing upon our subject to-day comes from the
resultant immorality when men are sent for long periods on long
journeys from their homes. Me must see that those employed,
whether on forced or ordinary labour, and of both sexes, are
adequately paid. Particularly with women will that cause of
prostitution, ‘economic pressure,’ draw its toll maybe on the
attraction of beads or food, just as it does in civilised countries.
4. We watch ourselves. In the Minutes of the Fourth
Session of the Permanent Mandates Commission it is stated in
referring to South West Africa, that with regard to dissolution of
marriages, separation and abortions, the natives quote examples
of white people, and say they are entitled to act as white people
do. Natives, when brought into contact with whites, learn
their vices first, and this is the reason given for the Administra-
tion’s policy in South West Africa of segregation under white
officials until their characters are strong enough to stand alone.
5. We would encourage Women Anthropologists, for many
must be the things that native women would more likely tell to a
woman than to a man (the M'omen's Mysteries), and we must
remember that theoretical study must go hand in hand with the
practical problem if we are to advance quickly.
6. Perhaps if there were further sex hygiene classes, par-
ticularly in towns such as Durban and Capetown.


7. We encourage education for the natives.
8. We watch and act upon matters of alcohol for the natives.
Alcohol and prostitution are the twin friends of V.D. The
figures for the consumption of spirits in Togoland, though less
than in 1913, stood for gin alone in 1926 at over 7,000 gallons
and at over 100,000 gallons for 1927,with a population of 188,265.
What has been done
Now we realize that a very great deal indeed has been done
and is being done by
1. The League of Nations.
2. The Government from the legislative, medical and
educational sides.
3. The B.S .H., whose Reports alone give one a standardised
course for educationists.
4. The Association for Moral and Social Hygiene, whose
splendid action in defeating the movement for licensed houses in
Kenya Colony I have already referred.
5. And last, but not least, by that wonderful body of
workers, the Missionaries, the results of whose recent Joint
Conference with the B.S.H. on the discussion of a memorandum
by Prof. Melanowski, will, when carried into effect, surely prove
an epoch-making event in the development of social hygiene
amongst these women.’ ’
Miss Rich concluded by pointing out that she represented
the group of people who did not profess to be experts, but had
been asked for that very reason to express the desire of such
people to help. She concluded: “As the privileged custodians
of less advanced races we feel that it is our responsibility to take
a part in the improvement of the situation. I say that we feel
responsible and I ask how may we prove that responsibility ?’ ’
The Chairman then introduced Mr. Dallimore.
Mr. Dallimore, Nigeria. Problems of Social Hygiene.
. The speaker pointed out: —
1. The danger of birth in a sealed room, with the whole
household present, and the men acting as midwives.
2. The very high death rate for mothers and infants. The
death of the first born was almost expected. The causes included
over-feeding and over-dosing.
3. The naming ceremony taking place on the eighth day
meant much drumming, handling of the child, and an enormous
dose of herbal medicine dangerous in quantity.
4. The need for training simple midwives. Mrs. Dallimore
had such a school. Many more were needed.
Puberty. At this time, the young women have to endure
much hardship, learn something of sex, and remain in the forest
in seclusion for three months or so. Many die.
The speaker said that at his school at Oyo the girls learnt the


simple facts of sex, but they needed to know the ethical side of
birth, how generation takes place, and the wonder and beauty of
growth. They also need to know the ways in which the mind
can be kept clean and dangers avoided.
He added an astounding fact: the Government medical
service had begun the training of girls as nurses, but had not
provided any hostels for them. Girls had to find a home where
they could.
There was great need for preventive and rescue work in the
coast towns.
Passing on to problems of Marriage, the speaker said that
marriage was a matter of arrangement, the swain providing to
the parents gifts in kind over a period of years. Finally, about
fifteen pounds worth of gifts was handed over, and the wedding
feast and dresses were also provided by the bridegroom. The
cost of marriage is so great that marriage is delayed for years.
Owing to polygamy, the chiefs and rich men get most of the
young women. When a child is born, the wife goes away from
the husband and remains away for three years. This is very bad
for all of them, the child being suckled all this time.
The speaker said that there was a very great need to educate
girls, with schools under European women. There was also
great need to encourage simple weddings, so that the cost of
marriage was not so high.
The European Woman.
1. Great spheres of service open if she would take up some
work.
2. Lady Thompson’s “Ladies’ League,” which endeavours
to get European and African educated women to work together
for service.
The New Era Club in Lagos for educated African girls.
3. Infant welfare work. European women up country
could do a great deal in this way, and, incidentally, find freedom
from boredom for themselves. Nursery schools for the tiny
children.
4. Even only an interest in the wives of the houseboys and
labourers, clerks, police, &c., would be a service of real useful-
ness. Missionaries’ wives engage in much work of this kind, to
the great good of the women and children, and also to the increas-
ing joy and gladness of their own existence.
If girls wish to marry men in West African services let them.
Discussion .
Miss Collisson : Actual service for married women in the
teaching work is forbidden under the conditions of the civil
service in Crown Colonies, so that a woman who had been educated
here as a teacher would be debarred from work in which she was
most interested, although she might be most suitable. The fact
of her marriage debars her, does it not, from serving Africa ?


Mr. Dallimore : I should imagine that to-day a good deal
of sympathy would be felt for women who came out as wives of
teachers. The endeavour to-day is to get the wives of African
teachers to teach too, so I think the first step towards that is
allowing the wives of officials to teach.
Lady Guggisberg : We did have women doctors on the West
Coast of Africa. I believe now there is a rule that any woman
who marries cannot take the same position that she did and cannot
get a pension.
Chairman : I suppose we are allowed to give unpaid work!
What one wants is that a highly skilled professional woman
should be allowed to decide for herself when and where she gives
up her profession.
Mr. Latham: In Northern Nigeria there are many women
who are teaching who are married. They are in the Government
schools. Of course, they always give preference, other things
being equal, to unmarried women, but they are very glad often
to get a married woman.
Miss Collisson : Might I ask Mr. Latham whether the Civil
Service, as such, is open to women, married or not, if they are
suitable, or must a special allowance be made in each case for a
woman who is married?
Mr. Latham : I really cannot say that. All I know is that,
in fact, there are married women acting as nurses and in the
Government schools.
Miss Fleming: In Victoria, Australia, the teachers who are
married are taken on because of the dearth of teachers, but they
are not taken on as classified teachers, and they do not receive
the benefits of pensions.
Mrs. H. Normanton : This morning’s discussion has opened
a shutter in my own mind. I wonder whether those present have
recalled that under the Sex Disqualification Removal Act in
England all service positions in the Crown Colonies and many of
the dependencies are reserved permanently to men by an Order
in Council No. 1224. As these various papers have been given,
I have been wondering how much the women of the backward
races have been losing from the fact that it is impossible for any
educated women Civil Servants ever to be in those countries, of
the type who would normally be sent out from here. When that
Order was promulgated I was most indignant. I only thought
of it as being a deprivation to the white woman; it never dawned
on me what a serious loss it was going to be potentially to the
coloured woman, who would never have the opportunity of


coming into contact with the women who might have been sent
out.
The Chairman put Resolution.
Miss Fleming seconded.
Mrs. Matthews moved a rider, which was accepted by the
movers of the Resolution.
Resolution carried nem. con.
The Chairman moved Resolution.
Mrs. Marshall Hole seconded.
Resolution carried nem. con.
The Conference adjourned for luncheon
WEDNESDAY, JUNE sth, 1929.
AFTERNOON SESSION.
Chairman : Mrs . Corbett Ashby .
AFTERNOON SESSION.
Section TWO.
Resolution on “The Imperial Government and Responsi-
bility.”
Moved by Miss Collisson .
Seconded by Miss Rothenberg (New Zealand).
Carried unanimously.
The Chairman introduced Mrs. Bennett, who read a paper
on “The Federal Ordinance relating to Aboriginal Women in
Australia.’ 5
Mrs. Bennett based her paper on authoritative material,
including the recent report compiled by Mr. Bleakley at the
request of the Commonwealth Government of Australia, on the
conditions of the Aboriginal people in North and Central Austra-
lia . There was no certainty as to the actual numbers concerned.
Mr. Bleakley spoke in terms of 21,000; there w r ere probably many
more. Mr. Bleakley recommends the extension of the reserve
at Lake Amadeus, and dwells on the need for institutions that
will protect and train the de-tribalised natives sympathetically
for the new r conditions which white settlement imposes. He
finds that this w r ork is better done by subsidised missionary
organisations than by the State. In Darwin the natives live in
a Compound, where little or no provision is made for the relief
of the monotony of the hours at night, and natives are forbidden
to attend picture shows except when permission is given by the
Chief Protector.
Mr. Bleakley urges night school instruction, and training in


sports. About 15,000 natives are cared for in missions, while
another 1,500 are occasional visitors to the missions. 2,500 are
employed mostly on cattle stations, and the rest are living more
or less in tribal organisations.
The report of Mr, Bleakley, as summed up by Mrs. Bennett,
further emphasises the following points: (a) The pastoral
industry in the Territories is absolutely dependent on the abor-
iginals for labour. ( b) Practically no attempt has been made to
educate them. (c) The popular view that they are not capable of
education is not proved.
Mrs. Bennett pointed out that the Federal Ordinance gave
protectors under the Chief Protector very wide powers. She felt
that the police should not be protectors. Protests had been
made, with which she agreed, against expecting a man to perform
the double duty of both protecting and prosecuting the natives.
Since protectors may allow prospectors to enter native reserves,
and persons approaching camps where native women are may be
prosecuted, but “a person shall not be prosecuted for an offence
against this section except by or by direction of a protector,”
protectors can grant licences for the employment of aboriginals.
And there is great demand for the work. A special difficulty, in
addition, is the fact that, partly for their own protection, as
Chief Inspector Beckett said in his report, “Aboriginal evidence
seldom gets credence when opposed to statements made on oath.
My own experience, based upon a careful consideration of numer-
ous cases, is that aboriginals rarely give false testimony in a
Court of Law.”
In a recent serious case, a Protector actually was responsible
for the shooting of natives nominally under his care, and, though
the police in question were exonerated, the facts remain.
Medical attention is inadequate, and there is grave need for
some kind of clearing house and care work for native women
turned adrift with half-caste children. The law actually forbids
the harbouring of single females by unmarried men, but the law
hardly reaches into distant areas.
The immense value of the work of women is stressed by the
authoritative reports of Mr. Bleakley and Dr. Walker. The
system of police protectors ought in the opinion of Mrs. Bennett
to go, and there is also the grave problem of the future of the
thousands of natives still uncontaminated by white settlement.
The Aborigines Protection League asks that when land is leased
to settlers, sufficient land shall be inviolably ensured to the
natives to keep tribes intact, and that they shall be assisted to
make their living on restricted areas by agricultural instructors,
and that they shall be protected from interference. New Zealand
had dealt successfully with the problems of a humane system
for the Maoris, and, though the problem is not the same, Mrs.
Bennett begged the Australians to consider carefully the problem,
to go to the fringes of settlement and examine it for themselves,
and to replace the old system by a new and fair one.


The Chairman then read the resolution relating to this
matter, which, after discussion, was carried.
The Chairman then introduced Mrs. Haslewood.
Mrs. Haslewood described the horror of her husband and
herself at a sermon preached in the Cathedral of Hong Kong,
when the preacher spoke of the horror of the system of child
slavery known as Mui Tsai, under which children were bought
and sold, and declared that it was a scandal under the British
flag. Mrs. Haslewood and her husband were deeply roused, and
enquired for more details. Actual evidence of appalling cruelty
was gained from experience while living in a hotel, and when
such matters were reported, the reply was “it is probably a slave
girl.” Mrs. Haslewood continued: “We then brought the
matter to the notice of the chief of police, the Secretary for
Chinese Affairs, the Chaplain and other people. Finally, I
wrote a letter to the local Press, protesting against the system,
and my husband was then informed officially that unless he
stopped me from doing so again he must relinquish the appoint-
ment he held in the Colony. He chose to relinquish it, and we
returned to England, and, with the help of the Anti-Slavery and
many other societies, urged the matter before Parliament.”
A number of questions were asked in the House. The
Colonial Secretary, Mr. Amery, made this statement
“There is no buying and selling of human beings in Hong
Kong. A custom does exist by which in return for a money pay-
ment a Mui Tsai is handed over by her natural guardian to an
employer.’ ’
This reply naturally did not satisfy the British public!
The Colonial Office circularised a statement to the effect
that the whole thing was “a campaign of misrepresentation in
tliis country as to the custom of adopting girl domestics in Hong
Kong.”
But this did not convince the British public either.
On March 31st, 1920, Mr. Amery stated in the House that
“There is no form of slavery in force or recognised by law
in Hong Kong. There are no persons who have not perfect
liberty over their own bodily self to do what they like, and they
are not bound by any permanent contract as to service. What
has caused confusion,” he said, “is that there are two Chinese
customs. One is slavery, which exists in China, and which in
no shape or form is recognised in Hong Kong. There is another
practice, and I do not remember the Chinese term for it, which
is the adoption of girls and youths for domestic service in which
case a lump sum is paid to the parent or guardian.’ ’
On April 26th, 1920, Colonel John Ward, M.P., demolished
this statement by his reference to an incident which took place
when he was in Hong Kong in 1917.
Speaking in the House, he said: “During 1917, when


stationed at Hong Kong as a military officer, I was invited one
day to lunch at the Governor’s house, the occasion being a recep-
tion to the Chinese mandarin who was the Governor of Canton.
All British officers and officials of the Colony were present. A
discussion took place on one side of the table about a matter which
had just been before the courts. A case of selling two girls, and
as to whether it was legal in a British Colony to buy and sell
human beings. The Chief Justice laid down an obiter dictum,
which was strange to the ears of an Englishman who had not been
long in the Colonies, It was to the effect that it was
extremely doubtful as to whether slavery, and the buying and
selling of human beings, was not legal in Hong Kong.
“After the conversation was over, so far as the British
replies were concerned, the Mandarin silenced the whole discus-
sion by making the following observations :
“ ‘ It is true that under the old Manchu Dynasty slavery was
a legal institution within the Dominion and Empire of China,
but the moment that dynasty was swept away and a Republic
established its first declaration, and its first most stringent law,
was the abolition of slavery and the buying and selling of human
beings even for adoption, or any other purpose, or any other
guise.’
“Now one of the strangest things is that the only place
where this can be done is Hong Kong, the possession of Britain .’
While the British people were fighting this evil in England,
there was formed a Society to fight it in Hong Kong which was
composed very largely of Chinese, under the control of a Chinese
Committee, with a British Secretary.
As a result of the continued efforts of the British people at
home, and of the Anti-Mui Tsai Society in Hong Kong, Mr.
Churchill announced to this country in the House of Commons
on March 21st, 1922, that the Mui Tsai slavery in the Colony
should be abolished “within a year.”
A proclamation to this effect was issued in the Colony in the
following month, April, 1922, to this effect:—
“Inasmuch as slavery is not allowed in the British Empire,
it must be understood that Mui Tsai are not the property of their
owners.
“Those wishing to leave their employers must be allowed to
state their case to the Secretary for Chinese Affairs.
“Masters and mistresses are warned against any attempt
to prevent the Mui Tsai doing so.’ ’ — Central News .
For two years, as a result of this, there was a little less
cruelty shown to the victims of this system, but no serious effort
was made to carry out the abolition, in spite of the fact that the
Duke of Devonshire, who succeeded Mr. Churchill at the Colonial
Office, sent out a cable to the Governor, Sir Edward Stubbs,
‘ ‘No compromise.’ ’
This was ignored, and Registration, without which it was


not possible to discover the numbers and the whereabouts of
these unhappy children, was never even attempted.
At last, in 1928, towards the close of the year, news reached
my husband and me that, far from being abolished, the Mui Tsai
system was in full force, that when cases of buying and selling of
human beings appeared in the courts, no fine or punishment was
imposed for the purchase, and that the number of slaves had
increased, and the price had risen.
Many questions were asked in Parliament, and the excuse
given by the Colonial Secretary was that the influx of Chinese
from the mainland had “made it difficult to know if they had
Mui Tsai with them or not ’
It was not admitted that the Ordinance had not been carried
out, just as the sale of human beings was not admitted in 1920-1922.
Public opinion has been stirred anew by these unsatisfactory
replies, and it is easy to see that it will not allow itself to be
deceived a second time.
On Thursday, May 23rd, 1929, another proclamation,
identical with that of 1923, was issued in Hong Kong.
Could any more striking proof be found of the broken pledge
and the dishonoured word than this second announcement to the
slave children of the Colony?
Had the first been translated into action, the second would
never have been necessary.
But, in any case, a mere proclamation can never hope to
put an end to this slavery. The majority of its victims are little
children, generally unable to read or write, and quickly terrorised
into silence, with no knowledge of their parents’ whereabouts,
no knowledge of their original homes, and with no opportunity of
reaching them should their parents have returned to the main-
land .
Our duty is to see that the proclamation is this time trans-
lated into fact by the drawing up of a comprehensive scheme for
their release, or for the changing of their status from bought
slaves to paid domestics, and to see that proper provision is made
in all directions for their shelter and protection, of such a nature
as to inspire confidence and trust instead of fear.
Only by such methods can we hope to undo the very great
injury which has been done to these girls and children for so many
years.
Question: Is there any truth in the excuse which has been
brought forward about this slavery, that if a number of these
children were not adopted they would be in various ways got rid
of, exposed or, in short, murdered?
Mrs. Haslewood : Yes, in China, but not in Hong Kong,
which is such a small place and filled with Christian people, who
are interested and anxious to abandon this dreadful system.
Mrs . Owen Campbell : If it is true that Hong Kong is so
small and has a large percentage of Christian people, why is it
that they are so slow in acting ?


Mrs. Haslewood : Vested interests, I am afraid.
Question : Are they bought by Chinese?
Mrs. Haslewood : Yes, I think so.
Chairman : Are they bought for the traffic in women ?
Mrs. Haslewood: Yes, they are shipped from Hong Kong
to the ports of the East, a Chinese Christian told me.
Chairman : That is one of the points the League is to investi-
gate.
Miss Collisson : 1 was in Hong Kong not long ago for five
days. We had particular opportunities for seeing a good many
interesting things. What struck me was how extraordinarily
difficult it must be even if you have a Government ordinance,
actually to get into those teeming rabbit warrens and find out
what was happening. Ido not suppose there are many people
here who have been in Hong Kong, but it does seem to me to
present great difficulties. Take the slums here. They are
nothing like the slums in Hong Kong. lam told there you not
only let your bed, but the space below it!
Supposing we do make an agitation—and we will do our
damndest in the matter —will Mrs. Haslewood tell us what can
we expect the Government in Hong Kong to do ? How are they
going to get into these rabbit warrens ? What are we asking of
them ?
Mrs . Haslewood : It seems to me they have evaded the one
practical suggestion of the ordinance of 1923, which was registra-
tion . When I wrote that letter to the Press, I urged registration.
They said that looked like countenancing it. 1 said that it was
the only way to find out how many there were, where they were
and how they were. They may be doing it now, but wq have not
heard so. At the docks, when the Chinese flow in from Canton,
they should be made to register at once and not allowed to land
unless they make a complete and true registration.
Miss Collisson : Is it true that there is a British officer
whose job it is at the ports to ask certain girls who are being sold
for definite purposes, whether they are satisfied with their
conditions ?
Mrs. Haslewood: Absolutely true. They have been
taught what to answer for weeks beforehand under the most dire
penalties. There should be a Chinese Christian woman there to
talk to these children and assure them that they have nothing to
fear if they tell the truth.
Question : Are there homes ready to receive the children ?
Mrs. Haslewood; There is a refuge. It is a most soulless
official place, which no timid child would dream of going to. I
begged years ago for a nice refuge, run by English people, who
would try to help the children. It is badly needed.
The resolution was moved by Mrs. Rama Rau (India),


seconded by Mrs. McVicar (New Zealand), and carried unani-
mously .
Mrs. Jinarajadasa asked, and received, leave to move her
resolution in an altered form, and then continued: —
I am glad to be able to say just a few words to tell you about
this Devadasis problem which exists in India. When we hear
about the Devadasis, Western people are often very horrified.
I do not, of course, approve of the system of Devadasis, but I
want to explain to you what it is, because in the British Common-
wealth League we are trying to see things clearly and to face
truth with sincerity.
In India there are really two kinds of prostitution: the
indigenous prostitution and the prostitution that was introduced
from abroad. The prostitution that was introduced from abroad
involves commercialized vice as it is in the big cities of Europe.
That only exists in the very big cities: Bombay, Calcutta,
Rangoon and Colombo, In all these cities Bills have been
introduced and are working more or less effectively. In Rangoon
a Bill to regulate traffic in women has been introduced that has
absolutely changed the city. The same is true in Colombo. In
Calcutta and Bombay Bills have been introduced and carried
but are not as effective as they ought to be.
In Madras our position is entirely different. Commercial-
ized vice is only just beginning to become a very definite ques-
tion, and, because it is beginning to be really a living question,
there has been a Bill introduced that we are now working at
before the legislative Council.
The Devadasis only exist in the Madras Presidency, and
also in the province of Goa. In no other part of India is there
this custom of the Devadasis.
The Devadasis originally is the same kind of idea as the
vestal virgins in the Greek days. The original idea was, of
course, service of women to God in dancing and singing in the
temple, but in time this service became connected with prostitu-
tion. In India and in Hinduism there is no religious sanction
whatsoever of this custom .
The Devadasis caste is a definite caste of women who belong
to the temples. A girl is born into the caste and becomes a
Devadasis. If a Devadasi does not have a daughter, she will
adopt a girl, and this girl will become a Devadasis. Or, thirdly,
a girl may be dedicated to live the life of a Devadasis. There
has been, and still exists, the idea that the child belongs to the
parents. That has existed in European countries and in England.
Sometimes when a calamity befell a family, they made a vow
that if the calamity was averted they would dedicate a daughter.
She was then handed over to the care of the Devadasis.
The Devadasi is not in any way regarded as a fallen or
disreputable woman. She has a life of a certain dignity and
self-respect. She receives honour in the community. It is a


life very much to be reprobated and to be abolished as soon as
possible, but it has a quality about it that is quite different from
the ordinary prostitute. She has quite definitely a position,
and it is not considered at all wrong. There is no hypocrisy
about it, and she quite openly lives as a servant of the Temple.
Many of the women live quite respectably with one man all their
lives. One of them has now a number of schools in a big town in
India. She is not looked upon with any disrespect. She has
been a Devadasi, but is now quite a respectable woman.
The Devadasis are not allowed to be married, but have now
started having a proper ceremony for a companionate marriage.
There is one problem that naturally must present itself to
all of you. Boys are looked down upon and neglected by the
whole family. When they grow up, their chief duty is to obey
the orders of their sisters. They are generally illiterate and
wanting in self-reliance. They have to remain also unmarried.
They do the manual work of the Temples.
The Devadasis have a right to certain lands belonging to the
Temples.
When the great national awakening came to India during
these last few years, and India awoke to realize that they were
not governing their own country, they also awoke at the same
time to realize the need there is for reform along certain lines.
As soon as the people began to realize the necessity for change,
they immediately began to set to to get these changes, and the
Devadasis was one of the first things they realised had got to go.
Naturally vested interests opposed the doing away of the
Devadasis, and some of the Devadasis themselves rather objected
to being abolished. Against that there were dozens and dozens
of societies of Davadasis, male and female, who very strongly
have been urging that the custom of dedication of girls should be
done away with.
The Bill brought up by Dr. Muthulakshmi Reddy does not go
so far as to do away with the dedication of girls, but she has
brought in a Bill which has got passed with great difficulty.
This Bill makes it legal that a Devasdasi continues to own her
own land and her property, and she has rights in it to the end of
her life without of necessity having to perform service in the
Temple. There will very soon be brought up a Bill for the
abolition of the Devadasis altogether. These customs are
therefore being strongly opposed by the vast majority of people
in India.
One of the difficulties we so often suffer from is that social
reform measures are opposed by the Government because they are
afraid of going forward too quickly. I wish you would pass
resolutions and send them to the Secretary of State for India,
showing that women all over the world want to help in bringing
about the social reform that is advocated by the Indian people.
Resolution carried.
The Conference adjourned until Thursday morning.


THURSDAY, JUNE 6th, 1929.
MORNING SESSION.
Chairman: Miss M. Chave Collisson .
Chairman : I am sorry to say that Mrs. Corbett Ashby has
been called away to Berlin. I have been asked to take the Chair,
and no one can regret her absence more than myself.
It gives me very great pleasure to speak to this resolution,
because it is a point on which I feel exceedingly strongly. Only
those who have through a friend or through their own person
experienced the indignity of losing nationality and being treated
as an alien because they have married a person of another
nationality, can understand how painful is such a proceeding.
Why does it make such a difference? First, as a matter of
principle. Secondly, as a matter of practice. In England a
woman who has married an alien must register at Bow Street;
she must carry an alien’s book; when she wants to travel, she
cannot do it without getting special permission from her husband,
and when she has this permission, it only lasts for a given length
of time and she has to go through all these painful proceedings
again.
I hope that this resolution will be carried with all the
strength of our united movement behind us. The Imperial Con-
ference is to take place next year, and at the close of our Con-
ference this afternoon, we shall put forward some items to be
carried on to the Imperial Conference, and this will be one of
them.
Mrs. Bennett (Sydney) moved the Resolution.
Mrs. McVicar (Wellington, N.Z.) seconded.
Mrs. Marshall Hall (Southern Rhodesia) supported the
resolution. Carried.
The Chairman then introduced Mrs. Pritchard (Pretoria),
who speaking to the resolution on Franchise in South Africa said
that the question of the native franchise had puzzled statesmen
and was constantly a stumbling block to getting the full suffrage
for women. The women of South Africa felt this was a bogey.
Mrs. Dore, seconding, thought apathy was the worst bogey.
Organisation was difficult owing to the great distances. General
Hertzog had promised in 1930 to help, and General Smuts that
he would put the women’s vote in the forefront of his policy.
Miss Barry proposed an amendment “at the same age and one the
same terms as men.’’ The amendment was accepted and the
resolution carried nem. con.
Franchise in Ceylon . The Chairman regretted the absence
of the Vice-President of the Ceylon Franchise Society, who was


to have been present. She pointed out that the women of Ceylon
had struck out at the strategic time when their votes were needed.
Moved from the Chair, the resolution was supported by Mrs.
Drummond (Guild of Empire), Mrs. McYicar (N.Z.), Mrs.
Jinarajadasa (India), Mrs. H. F. Bennett (Australia), Mrs.
Pritchard (S. Africa), and carried nem. con.
Franchise in Bermuda . A most interesting report was read
from the Bermuda Suffrage Society. The report stated that
a struggle for the right of parochial franchise was being carried
on. Mrs. Morell was bringing legal action against the Chairman
of Sandys Parish Vestry for the right to the parochial vote. She
is supported by the Bermuda Society (loud applause). The
resolution, moved by Mrs. Stedman (Treasurer, 8.C.L.), was
seconded by Miss Rothenberg (N.Z.), as from a sister island, and
carried.
Franchise in Quebec. Mrs. Minden Cole, in moving the re-
solution on franchise in Quebec, pointed out that though Univer-
sities and the Dominion Franchise was open to women the Pro-
vincial Franchise in Quebec and Prince Edward Island was closed
to them. The greatest hardships were involved in the legal restric-
tions on a woman’s right in property and over her children .
Mrs. Owen Campbell (Montreal) in seconding, pointed out
that in March 1929 Quebec, by unanimous vote, granted to
women the right to vote when holding property on which munici-
pal taxes were paid. The right was then rescinded! Women
could not sit on Juvenile Courts, School Boards, or act as police
matrons. Carried nem. con.
Women on Film Boards. Miss Fleming (Victoria) said that
the value and importance of the cinema was realised, but not
fully developed. The introduction of the talking film made
the matter more important. The usual type of film applauding
crime or exalting sex had a bad effect. If there were censorship
Boards women should be on them.
Mrs. Waterworth (Tasmanian Film Board) seconding, said
that the Cinema was perhaps the most important influence in
young life to-day. She felt mothers should be on these Boards,
mothers of practical sense. Men alone could not fully meet the
need.
Discussion took place on the principle of censorship. Mrs.
Cole pointed out that there could be too much censorship and it
was also pointed out that women ought to be on appeal boards also.
On the motion of Mrs. Pritchard, seconded by Miss Royden, the
resolution was amended to read “all Boards dealing with film
censorship. Carried.
The Chairman then introduced Miss Musson (National
Council for the Unmarried Mother and Her Child), who had been
invited to read a paper on affiliation orders.
Miss Susan Musson said: The National Council for the Un-


married Mother and Her Child is the only national organisation
in Great Britain which concerns itself exclusively with the wel-
fare of unmarried mothers and illegitimate children.
Laws to compel a father to pay towards the support of his
illegitimate child exist in Great Britain, Northern Ireland, and
in most parts of the British Dominions. We wish that any
parts of the Empire and those foreign countries which are still
lagging behind, would come into line as quickly as possible, for
until all countries of the world have legal powers of dealing with
these men, we cannot get the reciprocity we so badly need for
their universal enforcement. It is surely most unsatisfactory
to our countries, as well as to the persons more intimately con-
cerned, that a man should be able to evade his responsibilities to
his children by removal to another part of the world. Even
within the British Isles this difficulty is to be found, Affiliation
proceedings cannot be instituted in England against a man
resident in Scotland or Ireland and vice-versa; when a man
emigrates further afield, the position seems increasingly hopeless.
We have gone some way now in regard to maintenance orders
for a wife or legitimate children, under the Maintenance Order
(Facilities for Enforcement) Act, 1920, but the effects of this
Act need watching and more use should be made of it. An order
made in one part of the Empire may be enforced in another part,
provided that the man can be found and that the part of the
Dominions in which he is now living has passed reciprocal legis-
lation and has agreed to come within the scope of the Act.
Additionally, if the man has left the country where his wife and
children are living before any order has been made, application
may be made for a provisional order which can be sent out to the
man’s new locality. He has the right to put before the second
Court, any reasonable objections or arguments as to why the order
should not be made against him, and it may either be confirmed
and put into force, or sent back to the first Court for further
investigation. These proceedings are, of course, rather lengthy,
and this may account for the comparatively small number of
applications. The latest figures obtainable are for the year 1927,
and they are as follows :
18 Maintenance Orders made in other parts of the Dominions
were registered in Courts of Summary Jurisdiction in
the United Kingdom.
27 Provisional Orders from overseas were confirmed in
similar Courts.
34 Orders were sent from the United Kingdom to other parts
of the Empire for registration.
112 Provisional Orders were sent to other parts of the Empire
for confirmation and registration.
The following table shows, however, that the number of
Orders sent from Great Britain in 1927 was fewer in number than
in 1924.


Provisional
Orders con-
firmed .
11
15
9
15
27
Received by United
Kingdom.
Sent from United
Kingdom.
Maintenance
Orders.
Provisional
Orders.
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
Maintenance
Orders for
registration.
I cannot speak from personal knowledge as to the working of
this Maintenance Act, but from our experience of the service of
summonses and warrants in Great Britain, I think that Govern-
ment action sometimes needs co-operative supplementary work
on the part of voluntary organisations in the two countries con-
cerned, in pressing for preliminary proceedings in tracing the
men and securing continuity of payment,
To turn to the question of affiliation orders, we need first of
all to press for reciprocal legislation such as we have for main-
tenance orders. Whilst we wait for this to come, I beg you most
earnestly to arouse interest in the whole question, and to work
out some scheme for helping us in different parts of the Dominions.
Men are constantly leaving this country to evade their responsibi-
ties, and the threat of others to emigrate, deters many mothers
from taking legal proceedings which would later be nullified under
present conditions.
We want the help of organisations which are not afraid to
take up these cases. My Council can of course, take no legal
action here on behalf of children or mothers domiciled out of
England, but we find that much can be done.
Persuasion, the inculcation of a better point of view', and
perhaps sentiment may do much. The law of blackmail must of
course be kept in mind, but we find that men are extraordinarily
frightened of a society which has important people among its
members. Are we not justified in resorting to any moral pressure
we can bring to bear, to secure the rights of a child? If sworn
evidence of paternity can be provided, surely any organisation
which stands for the rights of women and children should not
hesitate to approach a man and ask him what he intends to do to
meet his obligations.
Discussion followed, and the Chairman said that a special
case mentioned by Miss Musson had been under her consideration
and she thought that they could get affiliated societies to consider


having at least one representative to deal with such matters in
each State. She thought it would be easier if the society were
affiliated. Miss Musson thanked the Conference, and said she
would put the suggestion before her Committee.
The Chairman then introduced Mrs. Helena Normanton on
the question of the co-ordination of Divorce law.
Mrs . Normanton pointed out that there were 36 systems of
law administered in the British Empire, including polyandry.
She could not deal with all of them in five-fourths of a minute
each. She enumerated briefly the following points, and said:
England . Divorce for a single act of adultery on either side.
Wife may sue for unnatural sexual acts: husband cannot.
Domicile of the husband automatically that of wife: conse.
quently wife might have to follow him to sue.
Irish Free State allowed no divorce, therefore wife cannot
obtain divorce if husband retains that domicile.
South Africa. The legal fiction of the husband’s domicile
governed the situation, but in practice wife sometimes allowed to
acquire a forum for divorce apart from that of husband.
Damages obtainable by husband, not by wife, constitute a
third inequality.
Canada. Approximates to law of England. A single act of
adultery provides cause where courts having jurisdiction to grant
divorce exist. But five provinces are quoted as having no
competent courts.
South Africa. Under Roman Dutch law the causes for
divorce are equal, being Adultery or Malicious Desertion. The
latter may also carry with it loss of property rights. The wife
may sue for restitution of conjugal rights as if the husband had
deserted her. A widow may not remarry during a year of mourn-
ing.
Australia has a very complicated system. The Common-
wealth has power to make a uniform law, but has not so far
exercised that power.
New Zealand by act an of 1914 approximated its law to a sort
of composite photograph of Australian law. Adultery, desertion
for five years or more, certain sentences of imprisonment, are
causes for husband and wife alike. Habitual drunkenness or
neglect of household duties on the wife’s part.
India has three different marriage systems, Mohammedan,
Hindu and Christian. There is no absolute divorce among
Hindus, only putting away. Divorce is ultra easy under Mahom-
medan law, it may be a matter of consent and property adjust-
ment.
Burma includes a husband’s joining the priesthood, going


away for eight years in search of knowledge, or heresy. The
consent of the parties suffices to effect the divorce, and the party
not at fault takes the whole property.
Scotland gives absolute divorce from the date of the decree.
Causes are adultery, desertion. Roughly the main ideas are the
same as the South African law. Ulster gives divorce by legisla-
tion, the Irish Free State has no divorce. The Isle of Man has
no absolute divorce. There is none in Jersey or Guernsey.
I have throughout omitted nullity and those partial divorces
called judicial separations.
It is obvious what a field for co-ordination exists.
The Chairman asked Mrs. Normanton what could be usefully
done ? Would it be possible to get the Parliments of the different
Dominions to agree that a divorce good in one country is good in
all?
Mrs. Normanton thought that could be extended, and that the
best thing would be to get an amalgamation of the best points of
the Canadian and New Zealand or one of the Australian Acts and
then put it to other parts of the Empire.
Mrs. Seaton Tiedeman seconded the resolution.
Miss Ashworth moved an amendment urging the Sub-Com-
mittee to pay special attention to the question of the control of
domicile of married women.
Miss Reeves (Women’s Freedom League) then spoke to the
resolution on the co-ordination of social insurance. She pointed
out that the sub-committee of the Imperial Conference felt the
difficulties too great, and the costs too heavy to grant rights of
pension to be transferred from one part of the Empire to another.
It was a very serious problem in relation to migration, both as
regards widows’ pensions, and also old age pensions. She spoke
of a case in health insurance just come under her attention,
when a girl who went to Canada fell ill after a week there, but
had lost all her old rights, and had no new ones.
Mrs , Campbell seconded the resolution, which was carried.
The Conference then adjourned for luncheon.
After the luncheon adjournment, the Chairman introduced
Mrs. Waterworth (Tasmania), who spoke briefly on the co-
ordination of marriage law. She referred particularly to the
matter in Australia, as compared with England. The chief
difference appeared to be that in England the place is registered,
in Australia the person. In Australia this had led to some
abuses, as a very few persons could state that a man Avas their
pastor, and then he is licensed to marry. The times are also
different. In England one may not be married after 3 p.m.
In most of the Australian States one may be married at any
time. Here one must give proof of residence for three weeks, or
obtain a special expensive licence; in Australia, in most of the
States, one may be married Avithout giving any notice.


Mrs. Waterworth thought marriage should be available to
everyone at any time and without notice. As to the registering
of places, there appeared to be little to say, so long as the persons
registered were of proper character. The most important change
needed was the raising of the age of marriage. Very bad cases
had occurred of criminal assault on girls of 13, and the assailant
in each case has been permitted to marry the girl. This could
not be if the age were higher.
Mrs . McVicar moved a vote of congratulation be sent to the
women of Australia on their attempts to get a Federal Marriage
Law for Australia.
Mrs . Seaton Tiedeman seconded. Carried nem. con.
The Chairman then introduced Miss B. A. Bicknell, LL.B.,
to speak on ‘ ‘The Mother as Guardian of Her Child.’ ’
Miss Bicknell pointed out the immense strides made in
safeguarding the position of women in regard to their children.
From early times the father in England had been regarded as the
natural head of the family, and common law confided to him the
care and control of the persons of his children while they were
under tw r enty-one. His rights were as absolute against the
mother as against the rest of the world. These rights had been
found oppressive and in early days were subject to the control
of the Crown. In course of time the equitable rights of the
Crown passed to the Court of Chancery. By a Statute passed
in the reign of Charles 11. the father could even appoint guardians
to succeed him. The mother was not substantially in any posi-
tion of greater authority than during the father’s life. In the
nineteenth century a series of Acts were passed, giving the Court
power to allow a mother access to her child and in certain circum-
stances the custody of it. These Acts have been repealed and
replaced by the Guardianship of Infants Acts, 1886 and 1925,
which have the effect of putting a mother practically on a footing
of equality with the father in regard to the custody and control
of the child.
These Acts have formed the basis of a considerable amount
of legislation overseas.
The Guardianship of Infants Act, 1886, gave the mother
right to make application, and the Court the right to make such
order as it might think fit having regard to the welfare of the
child and wishes of the parents. She might also appoint guar-
dians to act after the death of the father jointly with any he
might have appointed. The Act, however, left the father’s
powers during his lifetime substantially untouched.
The Guardianship of Infants Act, 1925, was passed with the
express purpose of establishing equality between the sexes.
The first section provides that: “Where in any proceedings
in any Court the custody or upbringing of an infant, or the
administration of any property belonging to or held on trust for


an infant, or the application of the income thereof, is in question,
the Court, in deciding that question, shall regard the welfare of
the infant as the first and paramount consideration, and shall
not take into consideration whether from any other point of view
the claim of the father, or any right at common law possessed by
the father, in respect of such custody, upbringing, administration
or application is superior to that of the mother, or the claim of
the mother is superior to that of the father.’ ’
The wording of the section is obscure in many respects and
it is not possible as yet to tell how it will work in practice. In
one direction, however, its effects are clear, the common law
rights of the parents are not abolished, all the Act provides is
that these are in certain circumstances not to be taken into
consideration. Where parents differ, they are put under this
Act upon a footing of equality, and the Court, in deciding between
them, must consider the welfare of the child and apparently this
alone; if the trouble is not between the parents, but between a
parent and a third jjerson, the child’s welfare is the primary but
not the sole consideration, and the parents’ common law rights
remain, and if these have not been forfeited by misconduct, they
will be taken into consideration in determining any question of
custody.
The Act has the further effect of giving the mother an equal
voice with the father in choosing the religion in which their
children are to be educated. At common law the father had an
absolute right to decide the faith of his children, and he could
not deprive himself of this right even by an agreement with his
wife. Such an agreement would always be revoked, unless the
child had acquired strong religious principles which the Court
considered should not be disturbed.
S. 1 of the Guardianship of Infants Act, 1925, thus has the
effect of putting the parents on an equal footing during their
joint lives, the subsequent sections put them on a footing of
equality on death. On the death of one parent the survivor
becomes guardian jointly with any guardian appointed by the
deceased parent, and, on the death of both, the guardians they
have each appointed act jointly. The Act of 1886 gave a mother
for the first time power to appoint a guardian for her children to
act after her death, but such guardian had no rights while the
husband lived. Under the Act of 1925 both parents have similar
powers of appointment. If either makes an appointment which
the survivor finds objectionable an application can be made to
the Court for the removal of the offending guardian.
The effect of The Guardianship of Infants Acts, 1886, and
1925, is to confer on the mother of a legitimate child both during
her life and after her death equality of rights with the father.
The position of illegitimate children has probably not been
affected by this legislation. At common law an illegitimate
child was held to have no relations; neither the father
nor mother was considered as of kin to him. This principle


was not carried to its logical conclusion. The mother of an
illegitimate child was made by the Poor Law of 1832 liable
for its maintenance and to her from early times has been confided
its custody. In the course of time she acquired further rights,
until to-day she occupies practically the same position as the
father of a legitimate child. It has been suggested that the Act
of 1925 deprives her of these rights and puts the father of an
illegitimate child in a position of equality with the mother.
Personally, I cannot read the wording of the Act as having this
effect, which would be running counter to general principles and
would in practice be extremely difficult to put into operation.
The speaker pointed out that the rights conferred were in-
tended primarily for the benefit of the child. What the parent
cannot provide out of his or her resources he or she is bound to
see is provided by the proper public authority. Women's rights
had always been increased by making accessible to poor mothers
the sole guardianship of young families when the conduct of the
father rendered him unfit. A study of Dominion law showed
that, although the divergences were wide, the changes practically
without exception had been designed to give the mother increased
rights over her children.
In Canada the provinces started with the same law, but
time has brought much variety. Between 1914 and 1922, in
Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia, a series of
statutes were passed which put the parents on a footing of equal-
ity. Saskatchewan stood apart since by the Infants Act of 1917
the mother is given the sole custody of her infant children while
they are under 14 years of age; after this the custody passes to the
father. On death, the surviving parent becomes guardian
jointly with any guardian appointed by the deceased. In
Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick the father’s common
law rights remain unaltered.
In Nova Scotia the mother is guardian after the death of the
father. During his life she has no rights against his.
Quebec. The father is the lawful tutor of his children, an
office which the mother may hold after his death during widow-
hood, but forfeits on remarriage.
Guardians, after the death of the father, are either appointed
by a family council or by a competent Court of judge. The
father appears to have the bulk of power during lifetime. The
family council consists exclusively of men, except that a widowed
mother or grandmother may be a member; it appears to have a
controlling voice in the management of an infant’s affairs.
Australia. Victoria, New South Wales, Southern Australia,
and Tasmania have each passed statutes which incorporate, in
some cases word for word, the main provisions of the Guardian-
ship of Infants Act, 1886. As far as I have been able to ascertain
none of these States have as yet passed any statute on the lines
of the Guardianship of Infants Act, 1925, so that the father’s


common law rights still remain during his life substantially
greater than those of the mother.
In New Zealand the Infants Act, 1908, is practically a word
for word copy of the Act of 1886, and the N.Z. Guardianship of
Infants Act, 1926, follows our Act of 1925,
South Africa . As this is a matter of Roman Dutch Law, I
feel I must leave this to be dealt with by an expert in this law.
Nor can I touch on the rights of women under Hindu and Moham-
medan law. But I hope I have shown what progress has been
made, and what a little more there is to achieve before the
majority of women in the Empire will have equal rights with
their husbands over the custody, upbringing and education of
their children.
The Chairman then introduced Mrs. Rama Ran (Women’s
India Association) to speak on ‘ ‘What Indian Women are Doing.’ ’
Mrs. Rama Rau pointed out that while there were as yet
only a relatively small number of women really educated for the
work of social welfare, yet, during the last few years, women had
become much awakened to the needs of their country and their
responsAbility towards their uneducated sisters. Societies for
social welfare and education had been formed all over the country.
The Women’s Indian Association had seventy or eighty branches
all over and interested itself in uplift and reform work of all
kinds. Its members were of every creed and community, and
the monthly magazine was read all over the world. Many other
groups, such as the Mahila societies, the Brahma Samaj, the
Arya Samaj, and such bodies as the Seva Sedan at Poona, did
very valuable work. Men like Professor Karve and Mr. Devadhar
and their work at Poona Seva Sedan had far-reaching effects;
from Poona, branches have been established in different parts of
the country for welfare, educational and social reform work.
Each year a social reform conference is called during Congress
week in India. Local social reform conferences are held, which
send forward proposals for the large conference. During the last
ten years these movements have had tremendous impetus owing
to the fact that women themselves have begun to take the lead.
Women are tackling the child marriage question, and other
matters. In the field of education the type of education given
had been unsuitable, and now education conferences had been
started. The correct medium of instruction has been much
discussed, and also problems of hygiene, education for home life,
and so on. Indian women were studying the questions of
marriage and divorce law, of inheritance law, of industrial
development. There were three women in the Councils, a num-
ber of women magistrates, women on district local councils and
municipalities, and on local boards.
The women of India were trying to make the future glorious
rather than living on the traditions of the past.


Mrs. H. F. Bennett (Australia), Mrs. Campbell (Canada)
and Miss Rothenberg (New Zealand) congratulated the Indian
women on their phenomenal success.
The Chairman added that she had recently been in India
and had actually seen the work done at Poona. What had
impressed her was the wonderful mentality of the women she had
met.
She had gone as a protest against the book written by Muss
Kathleen Mayo, to find out for herself something of the conditions
and difficulties of the people in India.
The Chairman then introduced Mrs. Gordon Wilson (Joint
Committee on the Civil Service).
Mrs. Gordon Wilson pointed out that since the resolution
in the House of Commons of May 19th, 1920, worded “That it is
expedient that women shall have equal opportunity of employ-
ment with men in all branches of the Civil Service within the
United Kingdom and under all local authorities, provided that
the claims of ex-service men be first considered, and should
receive equal pay,’’ the position had been unsatisfactory. The
example of government was one that was followed by local
authorities.
A committee of women’s organisations has been sitting
during the past 11 years and includes representatives of the big
general organisations, such as the N.C.W. and N.U.S.E.C., and
more specialised bodies, such as the Headmistresses’ Association,
A.A.M., the British Federation of University Women, Women
Sanitary Inspectors and Health Visitors, Women’s Engineering
Society. Mainly as the result of the Representation of this
body, the Prime Minister announced his willingness to set up a
Royal Commission on the subject of the position of Women in
the Civil Service, and it may be expected that an investigation of
the position will take place, although its form may not be the
one proposed by Mr. Baldwin. Whatever may be its form, we
have reason to claim that its result should be to make operative
that principle of equal opportunity for men and women which
has already been approved by the House of Commons. We have
a right to expect that the reasonable recommendations of women
Civil Servants themselves as to the manner of the application
of the principle of equal pay shall receive full consideration.
Women cannot be expected to consent to the continuance of such
discrepancies as those which exist at the present time, involving
as they do, in some cases, the payment of a maximum salary to
a woman which is the minimum or even below the minimum
appropriate to a man doing corresponding work.
As far as the recruitment of the service is concerned, there
has been improvement in that the competitive examinations for
entry to the administrative and clerical grades of the Treasury
classes have been opened equally to men and women. This is
still not true as far as the Executive grades and the technical


and departmental examinations are concerned. Women are
not accepted as officers of custom and excise or as Cartographers
in Admiralty or Assistant Naturalists in Fisheries, or Architects
in Mines, and they are naturally curious to know by whose
authority such exclusions are made and what order or regulations
governs the decision as to what is or is not suitable work for
women.
In addition to the need for adjustment of payment and
extension of free entry, there is also concern that nine years
after the passing of the Sex Disqualification Removal Act there
should be still no women other than clerical workers and inspec-
tors in no fewer than twenty-nine Government departments.
This number does not include the Home Office, where, though
women are employed as Inspectors in the Factory Department
and Children’s Branch, there are none on internal work in any
branch.
Even in the Departments which contain women, the method
of aggregation adopted is unfavourable to the promotion of
women. Blocks of work are allocated to men and other blocks
to women, and in the women’s blocks the number of higher posts
available is smaller than that of the men’s blocks. For example,
in one department there were last March 842 male clerical officers
with 313 superior posts, more than one for three; while there
were 1,451 female clerical officers and only 124 superior posts,
just over one for 12.
In the restriction of opportunities for women the application
of compulsory dismissal on marriage plays an important part.
The Admiralty gave as its reason for excluding women from their
examinations for draughtsmen the fact that the training was
long and that work of wastage could not be incurred.
There is no doubt that the young University woman who
might be expected to sit with her male colleagues for the Higher
Grade Civil Service examinations is unwilling to accept the
right of an employer to be concerned with her private affairs and
to embark upon a career which may be brought to an end against
her will.
I hope this meeting will be willing to pass the following
resolution: —
“That in any investigation of the position of women in
the Civil Service initiated by the Government, it is important
not only that the opinion of women Civil Servants shall be
given full consideration but that women shall have sub-
stantial representat ion. ’ ’
Miss Collisson then addressed delegates on the subject of
Civil and Administrative positions within the British Common-
wealth. She referred to the fact that marriage constituted still,
in most places under the British flag which were Anglo Saxon
in origin, a bar to active work, and that this constituted a real
wrong, the loss in areas of backward development where the work


of married women was sadly needed being very definite. She
added that, with new issues constantly arising, as in the Pacific,
and new opportunities opening up, a vigilant watch must be
kept on procedure with an eye to the fullest possible equality
between men and women. The resolution on the Imperial
Conference was then put and carried and the Conference concluded
with a warm vote of thanks to the officers of the League, and to
Miss Collisson in particular, for her unremitting work.
Miss Collisson asked that the Assistant Secretary, Miss
Duncan, might be specifically included.
SOCIAL FUNCTIONS.
The social functions attendant on the Conference were
extraordinarily successful, the evening party ad the Suffolk
Galleries being undoubtedly of exceptional brilliance. Guests
had the opportunity of personally meeting the Indian poetess,
Mrs. Naidu, the distinguished preacher, Miss Maude Royden,
Ladv Abe Bailey, Miss Jean Iris Howard, the only woman Agent-
General in London, and Miss Stella Murray, whose contralto
singing was greatly enjoyed, as was Mrs. Naidu’s recitation of
her own poetrv. The Luncheon and Garden Party were also
delightful, and"the informal service of coffee during the luncheon
intervals of the Conference days, given on the invitation of Mrs.
Jules Menken and Miss Collisson, provided an opportunity for
delegates to meet each other and discuss points of interest.


NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
Date Due
% 0 MAI


