

AUSTRALIAN WOOD FIBRES
R. T. BAKER
AND
H. G. SMITH


//£ <1^0?
<2
/€**>£,








TIMBER OF
EUCALYPTUS DELEG ATEN SIS
SHOWING TEXTURE AND NATURAL COLOUR (SEE PAGE 16).


WOODFIBRES
OF
SOME AUSTRALIAN TIMBERS
Investigated in reference to their prospective value for Paper-pulp Production.
BY
RICHARD T. BAKER,
LECTURER ON FORESTRY, SYDNEY UNIVERSITY, AND LATE CURATOR AND ECONOMIC BOTANIST,
TECHNOLOGICAL MUSEUM, SYDNEY,
AND
HENRY G. SMITH,
LATE ASSISTANT CURATOR AND ECONOMIC CHEMIST, TECHNOLOGICAL MUSEUM, SYDNEY.
AUTHORS OF
“ Eucalypts and their Essential Oils, “ Fines of Australia,
“ Hardwoods of Australia, ” “Cabinet Timbers, &c., &c.
J§gbtteg :
Alfred James Kent, Government Printer. —1924.




Dedicated to
THE HON. DR. EARLE PAGE, M.H.R.,
TREASURER AND ACTING PRIME MINISTER
OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
AS AN APPRECIATION OF THE ACTIVE INTEREST SHOWN
BY HIM IN THE POSSIBLE UTILISATION OF AUSTRALIAN
Timbers for the manufacture of paper.




CONTENTS.
DEDICATION.
PREFACE.
ARTICLES—
1. Possibilities of Eucalyptus timbers for paper-pulp production.
2. Possibilities of Australian timbers other than Eucalypts for paper-pulp production.
3. Cellulose, and its determination.
4. Woodfibres
5. Description of species, and their fibres with micro-photographic illustrations.
INDEX




PLATE 1.
Map showing position of the Gorge on the Upper Clarence River, N.S.W.
(See page 19.)




PREFACE.
The subject of the suitability of the timbers of Australian trees for the production of wood-pulp for paper
manufacture has, within the last few years, obtained much prominence throughout the Commonwealth, both
scientifically and economically. In the year 1915; the Government of Tasmania led the way in systematic
investigation by engaging the services of Mr. H. E. Surface, Consulting Engineer in Forest Products, Madison, Wis.,
U.S.A., although that inquiry was limited to a few species.
In the following year the Government of New South Wales appointed a Committee of its own officers,
with instructions to inquire into the suitability of the timbers of New South Wales for paper manufacture. Or
that Committee we were the scientific personnel. Although our connection with that Committee ceased in 1919,
yet, as the matter appeared to us of national importance, it was decided to continue the investigation, even
after our retirement from the Government service.
The results recorded in this publication are those so far obtained from the investigation of sixty Forest
and “ Brush ” timbers of Eastern Australia, including both hard and soft woods. The chief salient features
acquired by this preliminary laboratory research are the lengths, widths, and general characteristics of the species
fibres, together with their felting and bleaching properties, and also the percentage amounts of cellulose derivable
from the anhydrous woods.
The reproductions of the micro-photographs of the fibres of the various timbers indicate that several of
the “Brush” timbers of New South Wales have fibres which, both in length and general characters, compare
very favourably with those of some of the timbers already employed in other countries for the manufacture of
wood-pulp. The evidence also suggests the possibility of utilising the best of them for the production of mechanical
(grinding) pulp for newspaper requirements, as well as for the production of chemical pulp to be employed in
the manufacture of the better kinds of paper.


It is gratifying to be able to record a remarkable similarity, in all respects, between the fibres of all the
timbers of the “Ash" group of Eucalypts, particularly as these species are so extensively developed throughout
the south-eastern portion of Australia, since they give so much promise for wood-pulp production. Reproductions
of the fibres isolated from the members of other well-defined sections of Eucalypts are here given, in order to
illustrate the comparative values with those of the “ Ash ” group, and to indicate their relative economic
position in this connection.
For the large of timbers from the Clarence River district of New South Wales we tender our
thanks to Dr. Earle Page, Treasurer and Acting Prime Minister of the Commonwealth, who, by his own personal
efforts, and at his own expense, obtained them for us. Nor must we neglect to acknowledge the great service
rendered by the late Mr. W. A. Gullick, Government Printer and Chairman of the original Paper Committee.
His extensive knowledge of the paper industry and its requirements was of the greatest assistance to us, and
his help and advice were always at our disposal. Our thanks are also due to Mr. A. J. Kent, Government
Printer, for his ready and willing assistance during the progress of this work through the press. To
Mr. G. Hooper, Curator of the Technological Museum, for access to specimens; to Mr. F. W. Byrne, for
chemical assistance; to Mr. T. C. Roughley, for photographing the fibres; and to Mr. C. Shambler, for preparing
the material for investigation, we also tender our thanks.
In conclusion we are convinced that the results of this investigation bring to light fresh fields for the economic
utilisation of our Australian timbers.
March, 1924.
R.T.B.
H.G.S.


(1) POSSIBILITIES OF EUCALYPTUS TIMBERS FOR PAPER-PULP
PRODUCTION.
The great War of 1914-1918 brought about many disabilities in the economic life of Australia, not the least
of which was the shortage experienced in the supplies of paper and paper-making materials, and imports of these
eventually became so restricted that prices rose to a very high figure. As the inconvenience arising from this
diminution in supplies became more marked it was but natural that attention should be. directed to the possibilities
of our own Forests towards supplying a portion, at any rate, of our requirements in this direction. In order
to arrive at some definite conclusions on this matter, the New South Wales Government, in October, 1916, at
the request of the Hon. H. C. Hoyle, M.L.A., Assistant Treasurer, appointed a Committee to go fully into the question
and report as to the possibility and advisability of the Government undertaking the manufacture of paper from our own
timber resources.
The following were appointed members of that Committee :
W. A. Gullick, Government Printer (Chairman).
R. Dalrymple Hay, Director of Forests.
A. Berckelman, Executive Member, Stores Supply Committee.
R. T. Baker, Curator and Economic Botanist, Technological Museum.
H. G. Smith, Assistant Curator and Economic Chemist, Technological Museum.
The Committee soon recognised that its first inquiries must be directed to the possibilities of utilising
Eucalyptus timber for this purpose- more particularly on account of its abundance in Australia.
Some investigation work had already been undertaken in the direction of supplying information as to the
suitability of Eucalyptus timbers for the manufacture of wood-pulp, but the conclusions arrived at by different
workers were not always in agreement. To illustrate this position the following may be quoted :
(a) In the World’s Paper Trade Review of September, 1911, it was stated that recent experiments undertaken
at Washington had proved that the Southern Californian “ Blue Gum,” Eucalyptus (? globulus), furnished excellent
material for the manufacture of wood-pulp. Exhaustive research work had been carried out and the


results left no doubt as to the usefulness of “ Blue Gum ” for this purpose. It was also stated that
enormous acreages of Eucalyptus were being planted in California, but it was only recently that the
advantages of the “ Blue Gum ” for wood-pulp had become known.
( b ) In 1915 Mr. H. E. Surface was employed by the Government of Tasmania to report on the suitability
of three Eucalyptus timbers for paper-pulp production, viz. :• —Those of E. regnans, E. globulus, and
E. obliqua; and of the “ Myrtle,” Fagus Cunninghamii. His conclusions were that these woods were not
suitable for the manufacture of paper-pulp by either the sulphite or the mechanical (grinding) process, but that
they were suitable for the manufacture of bleached paper-pulp by the soda process ; and also that the product
was of excellent quality. He considered, however, that the manufacture under existing circumstances would
be too costly to afford a profit if the pulp was to be marketed as such, but that the “ Stringybark,”
(E. obliqua) was the most favourable of those tested.
For more than a quarter of a century we had been engaged at the Sydney Technological Museum in undertaking
researches on the Australian vegetation from a scientific and economic point of view, particularly on the botanical,
chemical, and physical characters of the Eucalypts, and several works containing the results of these investigations have
already been published.* The outstanding feature brought to light by these investigations on the Eucalypts was the
evidence of a great diversity in general characters in the several groups of that genus, so that conclusions based on the
study of the members of one group of Eucalypts cannot be accepted as characteristic of the whole genus.
It was thus necessary, in order to determine which group of these trees gave the most promise for paper-pulp production,
to undertake a considerable amount of investigation work, so that the question might be decided with some degree of
probability.
Eucalyptus timbers are classed as hardwoods, although this term does not indicate that all have a similar degree
of hardness, in fact, the members of the typical “Ash” group are but little harder than is the timber of the
“Colonial Pine,” Araucaria Cunninghamii, an Australian tree belonging to the Coniferce.
The results from these investigations for the Committee showed that the timbers of the “Ironbarks,” “Boxes,”
“ Peppermints,” and most of the “ Gums ” might be considered, for various reasons, as hardly suitable for paper-pulp
production, as the shortness and brittleness of their fibres, difficulty in bleaching and felting, militated somewhat
against their usefulness for the purpose.
* For further information we would refer the reader to the Technological Museum Publications : “ A research on the Eucalypts,”
2nd Edition, 1920; and the “ Hardwoods of Australia,” 1919; both published by the Government Printer, Sydney.


It was found, however, that the members of the “ Ash ” group, as well as species closely approaching these, had
characters distinctly promising for wood-pulp production, for in length of fibre, felting properties, cellulose content,
and bleaching quality, all showed distinct advantages over those of the members of the other groups. The timbers
of E. Dalrympleana and E. Delegatensis (known as “Mountain Gum” and “Mountain Ash” respectively) have fibres
exceeding one millimetref in length, often reaching 1-4 millimetre, and gave us a yield of cellulose ranging from 54 to 55 per
cent, when determined by the soda-chlorine method and calculated for the anhydrous wood. The felting and bleaching
properties of the fibres were also superior to those from most other Eucalyptus timbers. From the lesults of
these preliminary laboratory experiments, the Committee felt justified in recommending that further investigation for
pulp production should be undertaken with the timbers of members of the “ Ash ” group, suggesting for this purpose either
E. Dalrympleana or E. Delegatensis. Fortunately very large supplies of timber of these species are available m certain
localities in New South Wales, growing gregariously upon Crown Lands, and m close proximity to abundant supp les o
excellent water both for manufacturing purposes and for the production of electric power, so that, providing subsequent
semi-commercial experiments were as satisfactory as the laboratory tests, everything necessary for the establishment
of paper-pulp producing plants was available in New South Wales. Unfortunately, the apparatus and machinery
necessary to carry out semi-commercial tests were not available in Sydney at that time. It was thought desirable,
therefore, in order to expedite matters, to have the work undertaken outside Australia. To this end the Honorable
the Premier of New South Wales, at the request of the Committee, approached the Honorable the Prime Minister of Canada,
who kindly consented to have the work carried out at the Forest Products Laboratory, McGill University, Montreal.
Early in the year 1918, eleven tons of logs of E. Dalrympleana, twelve inches diameter or under, taken from an altitude
of about 3,300 feet, were despatched to Canada, with the object of the cellulose being made into paper. This species
was chosen because there are practically inexhaustible supplies of this timber m the Southern Highlands of New South
Wales and because the ascertained rate of reproduction upon reafforestation is one of the most rapid known. _ Early
in 1919 a progress report on the physical and chemical analysis of this timber was received from the McGill University
The results of these laboratory tests differed only in slight details from those previously obtained by us m Sydney, and
confirmed in a very satisfactory manner the conclusions previously arrived at by the Committee as to the prospective
value of this timber for pulp production. The average length of the fibres measured in Canada were—for the heartwood
i-n millimetre, and for the sapwood 1-12 millimetre. The cellulose content was found by them to be 57'9 cent. ;
lignin 3-3 per cent.; furfural yielding substances 10-96 per cent, (calculated to pentosans 18-72 per cent.); soluble m
ether and alcohol 1-715 per cent., and that one cubic foot of oven dry wood weighed 351 b.
f One millimetre is equal to 0-03937 of an inch; or one inch equals 25 -4 millimetres.


The final conclusions were that this Eucalyptus timber was very similar to aspen (poplar), particularly in chemical
properties and in the length of fibre, but differed from aspen in its physical properties. It was also suggested that this
Eucalyptus timber may prove of value as a raw material for the soda process.
This advance report was considered so satisfactory that further results were anxiously awaited, more particularly
the receipt of the paper manufactured from it, but, to the very great disappointment of the Committee, no furthei
information concerning the results of subsequent investigations could be obtained from the McGill University, although
much correspondence took place. The reason given for the delay was a depletion in the Technical Staff, which prevented
a continuation of the trial at that time, but they hoped to proceed with the work eventually.
Later, however, an independent report was received from Messrs. W. Clifford and B. C. Hope, of Canton, N.C.,
U.S.A., who occupy important positions in the paper manufacturing industry of that country. They had procured
from the McGill University one of the Eucalyptus logs sent from Sydney by the Committee, in 1918, and reported to the
Chairman that they had successfully “ cooked ” a part of it under the usual manufacturing conditions, the pulp produced
being very similar to that obtained from chestnut wood, which is also treated in considerable quantities m America.
Chestnut pulp as thus produced is bleached, mixed with a long fibred pulp, and the mixture employed in the
manufacture of book and other high-grade papers. From a manufacturing point of view they could see no reason
why the pulp from the Eucalyptus timber should not be used in the same way and for the same purposes, as the
fibres are absolutely identical. They also reported that the Eucalyptus wood was easily cooked by the sulphate process,
similarly to chestnut wood, and that it produced a very satisfactory grade of pulp, with a cooking period of four hours,
the yield being 47-8 per cent, on the weight of the dry wood used. The colour of the pulp was good, but if desired for the
production of the higher grades of paper it could be easily bleached, requiring even less bleach than is employed for
chestnut pulp; the bleaching properties of this Eucalyptus pulp were thus considered excellent. They also considered
that the sulphate process would be more suitable for Australian conditions than any other, on account of the cheaper cost
of production, and the fact that both long and short fibred pulp can be produced in the same mill with the same
equipment. _ .
The evidence thus obtained by the Committee, from its inception in 1916, as to the possibility of employing
particular species of Eucalyptus for wood-pulp production, was considered of a very gratifying nature, and justified
the conclusions to which the Committee had arrived, and expressed by the Chairman in his report, that from the
investigations so far made, and from the facts elicited, it is apparent that with Australian experience in the cost of
production of paper, a marketable material could be produced . . . at a price below the average pre-wai late of such
a product laid down in Sydney.”


This conclusion is supported by what has already been stated, and more particularly as official reports showed
that other manufacturing necessities were amply sufficient for all purposes.
The location of the proposed site for the mill was in the Buddong Falls district of New South Wales, and within
reasonable haulage from the Railway Terminus at Tumut. In this district there are in close proximity to the proposed
mill site 28,000 acres of Crown Lands available for the purpose of supplying timber for mill requirements, being portion
of the Bargo Forest Reserve in the Tumut district, which embraces an area of about 108 square miles. The character of
the country is rugged, owing to the interposition of gorges, ravines, &c., and it was thus considered that aerial tramways
might well be used for conveying the timber to the mill. In an assessment of this 28,000 acres by the Forest Assessor
it was shown that there are a total of 12*8 useful and 32 useless trees (unfit for lumbering purposes) per acre, the greater
portion of which could be used for pulp production, the estimate being that of the 45 trees to the acre 16 were E. Dalrympleana,
and 12 E. Delegatensis, the remainder consisting principally of “ Messmate,” “ Snow Gum,” and “ Sally.”
As the ascertained rate of reproduction upon reafforestation is one of the most rapid known, it was considered
that the area would be sufficient to keep a mill of the capacity proposed fully employed for an indefinite period.
The water supply at this locality was also considered ample for all requirements. It is also well distributed over
the area, whilst the average flow of the Tumut river was indicated at about 54,000,000 gallons per day. The following
analyses, made by us in 1917, demonstrate the purity of the water in this district. The results are in parts per 100,000 :
Total Solids.
Removal
on Ignition.
Total
Hardness.
Temporary
Hardness.
Buddong Creek, March 23, 1917, Low Flow
30
1-52
°-5
°‘S
Buddong Creek, April 10, 1917, Low Flow, below
Little Buddong
3 '36
1-28
i'4
i-3
Tumut River, April xo, 1917, Low Flow, below
Jounama Creek
4-56
2-88
2'2*
2-2
These results show that the water proposed to be used in this connection compares very favourably with the
well-known waters of the River Dee, above Balmoral, Scotland, and the Glasgow water supply from Loch Katrine, the
former of which gave on analysis—total solids 1-52 parts per 100,000, and the other 2-94 parts per 100,000.


The electric power to be derived from the Buddong Falls was estimated by Mr. Corin to be from 2,000 to 2,500 h.p.,
and the cost per unit from o-3d. to o*sd. It is thus evident that ample water power is available for generating
all the power required for driving and lighting purposes.
The Committee also considered that the quantity of timber of the desired species of Eucalyptus, available in this
locality, was ample to permanently maintain a mill producing 13,500 tons of pulp per annum, which is equivalent to about
one-fifth of the annual Australian pre-war consumption of newspaper.
In the year 1923 the Commonwealth Institute of Science and Industry issued a Report by L. R. Benjamin
(Bulletin No. 25) on “ The Manufacture of Pulp and Paper from Australian Woods.” This report, which gives the
results of tests carried out in West Australia, is printed on paper made by the institute during a series of semi-commercial
tests, and contains about 60 per cent, of chemical pulp from Australian Eucalypts, 30 per cent, of imported chemical pulp,
and 10 per cent, of waste paper. The quality of the paper thus produced, when considered in conjunction with the results
of the work of the New South Wales Committee, and the further information supplied in this work demonstrates quite
forcibly the feasibility of Australia manufacturing its own paper from its own timber resources. The accumulated
evidence also shows that certain Eucalyptus species having light coloured timber, and growing in considerable quantity
on the eastern portion of Australia, in close proximity to abundant water supplies, are well suited for the production of
chemical pulp for the manufacture of paper. The accompanying coloured illustration, natural size, is here given to show
the general appearance and colour of the timber of this group of Eucalypts (see Frontispiece).
The micro-photographic illustrations of the fibres of representative species of the several groups of Eucalypts serve
to show the similarity existing generally between those of the several members of the “ Ash ” group of this genus, and
demonstrate the feasibility of working the timbers of this group together. There seems little advantage to be derived
by treating separately the timbers of E. Delegatensis, E. Sieberiana, E. Dalrympleana, and other closely allied species of
this group, because they all give practically a similar product under the same treatment. The close resemblance of the
woodfibres of E. pilularis to those of the species mentioned above is worthy of notice, as also is the character of the
fibres of the variety of E. saligna from the Clarence River district. This timber appears to be an exception to the
general rule, and has fibres very similar in character to those of the members of the “ Ash ” group, and bleaches equally well.
So far little is known as to the possibility of producing mechanical (grinding) pulp from any of the Eucalyptus
timbers for newspaper production, and no direct evidence on this point appears to be available at present. Mr. Surface’s
report —previously referred to —was unfavourable in this respect, and Messrs. Clifford and Hope were unable to report
on this aspect of the question. Mr. R. Boving, of Boving & Co., Ltd., London, in an interview he had with the late
Mr. W. A. Gullick, expressed himself rather more favourably, and said that in his opinion the local product from the


Eucalypts was a normal short-fibred pulp of just sufficient length for practical use for newspaper purposes if mixed and
strengthened by the addition of about 20 per cent, of long-fibred pulp; that it would then produce a newsprint suitable
for most requirements. He also expressed the opinion that in a comparatively short time Australians would either be
producing their own paper or be without it, as they certainly would not obtain it from the Northern Hemisphere much
longer except at prohibitive prices.
In May, 1920, the then Premier of New South Wales, acting on the representation of a member of the Country
Press Association, established in Sydney a Commercial Committee to carry on the work already accomplished. We were
not appointed members of this committee. With certain money provided by the Government a small plant was erected
at the State Timber Yard, and a quantity of pulp prepared from the timber of the “ Mountain Gum, E. Dalrympleana.
From the pulp thus produced about 2J tons of paper was manufactured at the mills of the Australian Paper and Pulp Co.,
Botany, New South Wales.
The following list of Eucalyptus species growing on the eastern portion of Australia includes most of those
vernacularly known as “ Ashes.” Their wood or ultimate fibres will in all probability be found to be in agreement with
those of E. Delegatensis, and equally suitable for the production of chemical pulp :
E. Dalrympleana, E. Delegatensis, E. oreades, E. regnans, E. Smithii, E. Consideniana, E. fraxinoides, E. virgata,
and E. Sieberiana.
8i44 B


(2) POSSIBILITIES OF AUSTRALIAN TIMBERS, OTHER THAN EUCALYPTS,
FOR PAPER-PULP PRODUCTION.
In this work it is shown that the longest wood fibres of Eucalyptus timbers average a little over one millimetre in
length, so that the product would be classified as short-fibred pulp. It is desirable, therefore, that longer fibred pulp should
be produced, to be utilised either by itself or employed for mixing with and strengthening the Eucalyptus product, and
one of the objects we have in view is an endeavour to show in what directions this requirement can be satisfied from
Australian timbers other than Eucalypts.
The accompanying illustrations of the fibres of numerous Australian trees give some information as to the
possibilities in this direction, and at the same time indicate new sources of material for the production of chemical pulp,
and possibly also for the manufacture of “ mechanical pulp ” for newspaper requirements.
The micro-photographs here reproduced are all of the same magnification (x 96), so that all are comparative. From
these illustrations, and the accompanying data, it will be observed that some of the so-called Scrub timbers of northern
New South Wales are very promising, and it seems quite feasible to expect that in the near future Australia will be
producing from her own timber resources the greater portion of the pulp required for the manufacture of all kinds of
paper, that is, of course, providing the available supplies of the desired species are sufficiently abundant to warrant the
erection of manufacturing plants of a sufficiently large size. We have already shown that this position is assured with
the Eucalypts.
Long-fibred pulp has already been produced in Australia by the Queensland Pine Co., Ltd. This firm was
manufacturing sulphate kraft pulp from Queensland Pine timber ( Ayuucciyici CufifivyisfecLtyi-it) at Yarraman Creek,
Queensland, and in order to supply the demands of the Australian Paper Mills found it necessary to work the plant three
shifts each day. The length and general appearance of the fibres of the timber of this species are recorded in Plate 20.


Mr. J. Campbell, M.A., of Kamma, near Cairns, Queensland, has produced pulp from the “ Blady Grass ” (Malay Lalang),
which occurs in great quantity in northern Queensland.
In the year 1918, whilst at the Sydney Technological Museum, we received from Dr. Earle Page of Grafton,
specimens of a number of the more common “ Scrub ” timbers growing in the extensive forests of the Upper Clarence
River, northern New South Wales. Later we received from him further samples from other trees growing in that area,
in order that the investigation might be the more complete. The greater number of the photographs here reproduced
are those of the ultimate wood-fibres obtained from those particular samples of timber, and, together with the data
supplied, record the results of the preliminary laboratory experiments carried out on the “ Scrub ” timbers of New South
Wales. At that time considerable activity was being displayed by leading residents of the Clarence River district,
amongst whom Dr. Earle Page took a foremost part. The object they had in view was to bring before the people of
Australia in general, and those of New South Wales in particular, the important natural resources existing in that favoured
locality,.and the abundant economic possibilities awaiting development in that part of New South Wales.
The place chosen as the most suitable site for a proposed paper-pulp producing plant was that known as the “Gorge,”
the exact locality of which is shown on the accompanying map (Plate 1). Many years ago the question of damming
the waters of the Upper Clarence River and its tributaries for flood prevention purposes was considered, and a survey made
by Mr. Campbell of the Harbour and Rivers Department. It was then shown that a dam 200 feet high, erected at
the “ Gorge,” would impound a volume of water equal to ten times that contained in Port Jackson, so that ample supplies
of water for all purposes of power and lighting, as well as for manufacturing purposes, were assured, particularly as the
Clarence River, after the junction of its branches—which up to this point have drained an area of 7,000 square miles—
drops 70 feet in the course of three or four miles. Mr. Corin in 1918, when investigating the question of the Clarence
River hydro-electric scheme, estimated that as much as 100,000 horse-power might be developed therefrom in the
neighbourhood of the “ Gorge.”
Referring to the timber in the Upper Clarence district it has been stated that very large supplies are there available,
consisting of “ hardwood ” forests and “ softwood ” scrubs hitherto untouched owing to difficulty of access. The trees
grow on steep hills adjacent to the watercourses, which, if dams were erected, would be transformed into navigable rivers,
over which the timber could be transported to the mills. One estimate gives the area of thickly timbered land within a
mile of these watercourses as 80,000 acres. Accepting this estimate as probably correct, and considering that the more
promising species are growing in sufficient abundance throughout the area, then the prospective available supplies for
wood-pulp production, in that one locality alone, wou’d go far towards satisfying the paper requirements for the whole
of Australia.


It may be mentioned also that several of these “ Scrub ” timbers, although perhaps not promising for paper-pulp
production, have value for other industrial purposes.
It is now possible to show that several of the “ Scrub” timbers growing in the forests at the head of the Clarence
River give considerable promise for paper-pulp production. Their fibres are often of considerable length, in some cases
almost twice the length of those of the timbers of the best Eucalyptus fibre species, whilst other properties of a
desirable nature, such as facility of bleaching and felting, are also in evidence, and a perusal of the illustrations here given
will serve to indicate their promising nature for pulp production.
Of the New South Wales “ Scrub ” timbers so far investigated the following thirteen give the most promise for
the satisfactory production of wood-pulp for paper manufacture :
Gmelina Leichhardtii (Beech). Dysoxylon Fraserianum (Rosewood).
Tarrietia actinophylla (Black Jack). Phyllanthus Ferdinandi var. (Melon Wood).
Araucaria Cunninghamii (Colonial Pine). Villaresia Moorei (Maple).
Grevillea robusta (Silky Oak). Ceratopetalum apetalum (Coachwood).
Pennantia Cunninghamii (Butter Wood). Tarrietia argyrodendron (Crowsfoot Elm).
Psychotria nematopoda (Cherry Wood). Eugenia sp. (Water Gum).
Doryphora sassafras (Sassafras).
In addition to the above the following “ Scrub ” timbers may be listed as having characters promising for paper-pulp
production, although in a somewhat lesser degree. All of them, however, may be considered worthy of further
investigation on a semi-commercial scale :
Ackamia Muelleri (Corkwood). Cryptocarya glaucescens (Brown Beech).
Flindersia Schottiana (Cudgerie). Schizomeria ovata (Poplar or White Wood).
Elceocarpus grandis (Blue Fig). Rhodamnia trinervia (Scrub Stringy bark).
Sterculia sp. (Kurrajong). Ehretia acuminata (Brown Cedar).
Geijera salicifolia (Ironwood). Laportea gigas (Nettle tree).
Panax sp. (Scrub Ash). Cryptocarya patent in ends.
Euroschinus falcatus (Chinaman’s Cedar). Eugenia sp. (Black Apple).
Melia Azedarach (White Cedar).
It is, perhaps, worthy of note that so great a diversity in the length and shape of the fibres, the varying thickness of
their walls, and other general characters, should be so pronounced with these “ Scrub ” timbers, and it is, therefore, evident


that great differences in economic usefulness must exist between them when considered from the pulping point of view. As
to the available supplies of the most promising timbers in the Clarence River district we have no definite information,
but further researches may demonstrate the feasibility of utilising the timbers of different trees together, particularly if
the pulps they produce are found to be approximately equal.
It is unreasonable to suppose that the diverse and extensive forest resources of eastern Australia do not contain
timbers suitable for paper-pulp production, and the results we have so far obtained serve to show the fallaciousness of
such ideas. In all probability several of the “ Scrub ” timbers of New South Wales will be found quite suitable for
the purpose.
The laboratory results here recorded constitute our part in laying a foundation for others to carry the work further,
and by investigations on a larger scale bring success to so promising an Australian industry.


(3) CELLULOSE, AND ITS DETERMINATION.
Cellulose, the fundamental constituent of plants, is widely distributed throughout the vegetable kingdom, and,
economically, is the most important member of the large group of organic substances classed as carbohydrates. In its
purest natural form it occurs as cotton, the hair from the seeds of the cotton plant, Gossypium spp., and, together
with flax, hemp, &c., is classified in the group of typical or normal celluloses. In the group of compound celluloses,
however, several forms are recognised, such as the ligno-celluloses, the pecto-celluloses, &c., the first of which is of chief
importance in this connection, as constituting the main portion of the wood of trees, where the extreme limit of change
from the cell wall is the formation of ligno-cellulose containing about 50 to 60 per cent, of true cellulose, the remainder
being composed of various substances included under the general term lignin or lignone.
During recent years a very large amount of research work on the celluloses has been undertaken, and this activity
has resulted, not only in the establishment of new industries, such, for instance, as the manufacture of artificial silk,
photographic films, &c., but has produced much evidence, from the purely chemical side, as to the constitution of the
cellulose molecule itself. This extended study has shown that cellulose derived from different sources is not always the
same substance, and that the varying forms produce different sugars on hydrolysis, as dextrose from cotton, mannose
and galactose from other sources, whilst xylose and arabinose have also been produced in this way from the pentose group.
Wood cellulose, when freed from the lignin by a chemical method, is composed of a mass of individual fibres of
varying lengths and diameters; these fibres are minute hollow tubes with walls of varying thicknesses, tapering at both
ends, and having numerous pits in the cell walls. The general characteristics of the fibres from different Australian
timbers are well shown in the illustrations reproduced in this work. The felting properties of the separated fibres is one
of their most important characteristics for the manufacture of paper, and the strength of this felted material is governed
to a large extent by the length and flexibility of the fibres themselves. Their bleaching quality is also a factor of some
importance in the production of the better classes of paper. It is satisfactory to notice that the fibres of numerous
North American timbers, other than those belonging to the natural order Conifer a, do not exceed in length those isolated
from the generality of Australian timbers, and such trees as Aspen (Poplar) and Chestnut employed in North America
and Canada for paper-pulp production, do not indicate superiority for this purpose over the timbers of several of the
Australian trees already investigated.


In the manufacture of paper-pulp from wood, for the production of the better kinds of paper, it is necessary that
the fibres be separated as completely as possible from the lignin or non-cellulose constituents. This is accomplished in
practice by suitable chemical treatment whereby the prepared wood is boiled under pressure, for a sufficiently long time,
with either a solution of calcium bisulphite or with a solution of sodium hydrate, or by a modification of these methods.
By drastic treatment of this character the encrusting substances are dissolved away, leaving the cellulose practically
unaltered, or at the most simply hydrated. The pulp thus produced is washed free from the chemicals employed and
afterwards bleached.
For the manufacture of the cheaper kinds of paper, such as those employed for newsprint and for wrapping, the
pulp is usually prepared by mechanical means, the wood itself being ground in water by pressing against a revolving
grindstone. This grindstone process separates the fibres in a fine but impure condition as the product contains most of the
lignin and encrusting substances present in the wood.
ESTIMATION OF THE CELLULOSE.
The method adopted for the separation of the ultimate fibres from the lignin and encrusting substances, and for
the quantitative estimation of the cellulose in the several woods, was the chlorination process of Cross and Bevan (Trans.
Chem. Soc., 1889, p. 199). It was carried out in the following manner:—About 5 grams of fine selected shavings, dried
at ioo° C., were boiled with a 1 per cent, solution of sodium hydrate for 30 minutes, well washed and squeezed to
remove excess of water, opened out in a suitable vessel, and a slow stream of washed chlorine gas passed until the
substance became of a bright golden yellow colour. After exposure to the action of the chlorine from 30 t° 60 minutes,
the product was washed, heated to boiling in a 2 per cent, solution of sodium sulphite, o - 2 per cent, sodium hydrate
added, and the boiling continued for 5 minutes. The cellulose was filtered off, thoroughly washed with hot water, squeezed,
dried at ioo° C., and weighed. To determine the bleaching properties a portion was immersed in an aqueous solution of
chloride of lime (bleaching powder) for a short time, then in a solution of sodium sulphite, and afterwards thoroughly
washed and dried.


(4) WOODFIBRES.
That portion of a tree which is commercially known as the timber is botanically termed secondary wood, to distinguish
it from the primary wood—the product of an undifferentiated tissue at the growing apex of a stem. Now this particular
part of a tree, that is, the timber, is composed of bodies having a different structure, according to the two mam botanical
classes, i.e., Gymnosperms and Dicotyledons, in which they occur.
The wood of the Conifer, or Pine, group of the Gymnosperms has a uniform structure, being composed wholly of
tracheids and rays, whilst the Dicotyledonous timbers are more heterogeneous, being composed of what is known scientifically
as fibres, parenchyma (two kinds) vessels, but sometimes, yet rarely so, tracheids, which occur uniformly in the Conifers.
It is the solid framework of these that form the basis of wood-pulp for paper-making, and are known scientifically
as ultimate fibres. .
Of the constituents given above it is the fibres upon which the good or bad qualities of a timber are estimated.
These fibres are minute, slender, spindle shaped, sharp-pointed cells, with walls of varying thickness (according to the
species of timber in which they occur) having comparatively narrow or wide cavities, called lumen. The cavities are
characterised by having straight or oblique slit-like simple pits or occasionally bordered pits.
The principal function of these bodies is to give strength, hardness, and toughness to the tree, and thus is largely
mechanical, but it is also probable that they play some part in water transportation. In their different structure and
arrangement they are of great help in the microscopical identification of timbers.
The three microscopical sections here reproduced will convey some idea of the structures which go to make up
non-Conifer timber substance, but especially are they given to show the wood fibres in situ, and how largely they enter
into the composition of wood, also the varying thickness of the walls, a factor of some importance in wood-pulp—brought
out more particularly in the accompanying illustrations.


PLATE 2.
TRANSVERSE SECTION OF
VILLARESIA MOOREI
(N.S.W. Maple).
A highly magnified cross section of a piece of timber of N.S.W. Maple (Villaresia Moorei).
The open spaces are the vessels of the timber, and in a transverse section such as this are
called pores, and if numerous the wood is said to be porous. The two “ ribands ” right
and left of the centre and extending from top to bottom are the medullary rays and
show five rows of narrow rectangular cells- —-known as parenchyma. The remainder of
the field of vision is composed entirely of cross sections of fibres, which in this view look
like rows of beads with a small centre. This centre is the cavity or lumen mentioned
before and the distance of it from the outside of the fibre give the thickness of the wall,
which in this instance is very far above the average. (See Plate 27.)


PLATE 3.
TRANSVERSE SECTION OF
EUCALYPTUS OREADES
(Mountain Ash).
This also is a transverse section, but the species in this case is a " Mountain
Ash” (Eucalyptus oreades), and is given in order to show the great contrast
between the thickness of the fibre walls of the previous species (Plate 2) and this
tree. The rays are here seen as thin, undulating, black lines, extending from
the top to the bottom, whilst the numerous oval bodies are the pores. The
remainder is composed entirely of thin-walled fibres and are far more numerous
than those of Plate 2 on an equal magnification.


PLATE 4.
LONGITUDINAL SECTION OF
CASTANOSPERMUM AUSTRALE
(Black Bean).
The central portion of this longitudinal micro-section is composed entirely of jtiers of
wood fibres and illustrates their arrangement or disposition when viewed vertically.
The timber is Black Bean (Castanospermum Australe).




(5) DESCRIPTION OF SPECIES AND THEIR FIBRES WITH
MICRO-PHOTOGRAPHIC ILLUSTRATIONS:
(a) EUCALYPTS ARRANGED ACCORDING TO PROSPECTIVE VALUE
FOR PULP PRODUCTION.
Abbreviations in reference to coloured plates of timbers previously published in works by the authors
H. of A. refers to “ Hardwoods of Australia.'’
Cab. Timbers refers to “ Cabinet Timbers of Australia.”


PLATE 5.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS DELEGATENSIS
(Southern Mountain Ash).
(The magnification of the fibres is the same in all the plates, viz., 96 diameters.)


EUCALYPTUS DELEGATENSIS.
“ Southern Mountain Ash.”
[PI. 91, H. of A.)
Natural Order—MYRTACEiE.
Habitat—
On the higher ranges, 3,000 to 4,000 feet, the upper sides of the Snowy Mountains, and Mount Delegate, New
South Wales, Victorian and Tasmanian ranges.
DESCRIPTION OF :
1. Tree —
A tall tree, with a bark stringy and reddish and extending well up the trunk. Abnormal leaves large, broadly
lanceolate, oblique, venation prominent, spreading intramarginal vein removed from the edge. Normal
leaves comparatively large, often 9 in. long, 2 in. broad, lanceolate, acuminate, venation prominent, intra-
marginal vein removed from the edge. Fruits pyriform, rim thick, truncate or countersunk, valves small,
not exserted, about 4 lines long and 3 lines broad.
2. Timber —
Straight grained, fissile, much resembling English Ash when first cut, but tones down and assumes an oak tint.
It planes well, and is specially light, but is strong, with a good resilience, a first-class bending timber, and
does not warp if carefully seasoned. Is much in request for office fittings, panelling, furniture and cabinet
work. Weight, 41 lb. per cubic foot. (All weights given in this work are for air-dried timber.)
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are in remarkable agreement with those derived from the timber of E.
Dalrympleana ; they are longer and more flexible than those obtainable from the hard, dense, heavy Eucalyptus
timbers of most groups, but are representative of the woodfibres of the “ Ash ” group of this genus. They mostly
measure between 0.9 and 1.4 millimetre in length, the average for numerous measurements being 1.18 millimetre,
whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre, and have fairly thin walls. The separated fibrous
material bleaches well and felts satisfactorily.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 53.9 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
This timber may be considered as very promising for the production of chemical pulp.


PLATE 6.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS DALRYMPLEANA
(Mountain Gum.)


EUCALYPTUS DALRYMPLEANA.
A “Mountain” or “White Gum.”
Natural Order — MYRTACEiE.
HABlT^ ar rangobilly, Batlow, Tumbarumba, and other mountainous country of south-east New South Wales, probably
extending into Gippsland, Victoria.
DESCRIPTION OF:
A large tree, up to 30 feet in girth, with a smooth bark. Abnormal leaves scabrous when young, cordate to
orbicular or’ ovate, sessile, about 2 in. long and 2 in. wide. Normal leaves lanceolate, sometimes falcate,
usually over 4 in. long and f in. wide, venation fairly prominent, intramarginal vein slightly removed from
the edge. Flowers in threes on axillary peduncles. Fruit hemispherical, rim bevelled, valves thick and we
exserted, about \ in. in diameter.
2. Timber — .
A pale, Ash coloured wood, much resembling E. Delegatensis, but lacking the yellow streak so often found m
that species, and is also rather closer in the grain which is quite straight. It is fissile, comparatively soft
amongst hardwoods, light in weight, easily planed, and possesses the qualities of the exotic Ashes.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are longer than those of numerous groups of the Eucalypts, but are representative
of those derived from most species belonging to the “ Ash ” group of this genus. They mostly measure between
0.9 and 1.4 millimetre in length, the average of numerous measurements being 1.19 millimetre, whilst in width
they range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre. They are flexible, with fairly thin walls, and the separated fibrous
material is readily bleached and felts quite satisfactorily. This timber may be considered as very promising for
the production of chemical pulp, a remark that applies to the generality of species belonging to the “ Ash ” group
of Eucalypts.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 54.9 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
3144 c


PLATE 7.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS SIEBERIANA
(Mountain Ash.)


EUCALYPTUS SIEBERIANA.
A “Mountain Ash.”
[PI. 95 , H. of A.]
Natural Order —MYRTACEE.
HIABITAT
The Blue Mountains and Coast District of New South Wales, South Australia, and Victoria.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A tall tree, with a dark, compact, deeply-furrowed bark. Leaves lanceolate, falcate, coriaceous, shining or
lustreless, venation fairly prominent. Flowers on axillary peduncles, not many in the umbel. Fruit pear-
shaped, | in. long, slightly contracted at the edges, rim red, flat, thick, valves compressed.
2. Timber —
A pale-coloured, hard, close-grained, heavy timber, distinguished from the other Mountain Ashes by dark specks
scattered throughout. A first-class timber for building purposes, bridge work, heavy coach and carriage work.
Weight, 51 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are characteristic of the “Ash” group of Eucalypts, and agree in every
respect with those derived from such species as E. Delegatensis and E. Dalrympleana, although they are slightly
longer on the average than those of the species mentioned. They mostly measure between 0.9 and 1.6 millimetre
in length, the average for numerous measurements being 1.25 millimetre, whilst in width they range between
0.015 and 0.03 millimetre, and have moderately thin walls. The bleaching and felting properties of the separated
fibrous material are very good indeed, so that altogether the timber of this species may be considered as distinctly
promising for paper-pulp production by a chemical method.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 57.5 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
The above data were prepared with timber from a young tree, but the wood from an old tree of the same species
was also tested, with the result that the fibres were found to be identical in every respect with those from the young
tree, but the cellulose was only 52 per cent., indicating the greater percentage of cellulose in the younger timber.


PLATE 8.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS SALIGNA VAR.
(Flooded Gum.)


EUCALYPTUS SALIGNA, var. PALLIDIVALVIS.
“ Flooded Gum.”
Natural Order — MYRTACEiE.
Habitat —
Clarence River area and coastal districts of Northern New South Wales, and Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A tall tree, growing to its greatest height and perfection in the gullies of the coast and mountains. Bark
smooth bluish white with a silver sheen. Abnormal leaves alternate, lanceolate. Normal leaves lanceolate,
occasionally falcate, drying a bluish green, pale on the underside, intramarginal vein close to the edge, bruit
hemispherical, about 3 lines in diameter, rim thin, valves slender and well exserted.
2. Timber —
The timber is one of the finest of the hard red-woods, being of medium weight, easy to work, durable, dresses
well, and so is a favourite wood with coachbuilders. Weight, 46 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are longer than those of the compact hardwood Euealypts generally, and agree
in their length, width, and in thickness of walls with those of the members of the “Ash” group 0
Euealypts— E. Delegatensis, for instance—and although the timber is coloured, yet the separated fibrous material
bleaches well and produces good felt. The fibres mostly measure between 0.09 and 1.5 millimetre in length,
averaging 1.15 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.9 per cent, calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
There is little difference between the pulps prepared from the timber of this species and those derived from the
members of the “ Ash ” group of Euealypts.


PLATE 9.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS PILULARIS.
(Blackbuit.)


EUCALYPTUS PILULARIS.
“ Blackbutt.”
[PI. 63, H. of A.]
Natural Order— MYRTACEiE.
Habitat—
Coast district and Tableland, New South Wales, Victoria, and Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
One of the tallest of the Genus. Leaves thick, shining, sometimes over 6 in. long, lanceolate-falcate; venation
indistinct, lateral veins parallel, intramarginal vein removed from the edge. Flowers on axillary peduncles,
mostly six in number. Fruit pedicellate, semi-globose, truncate; rim sometimes contracted, thin, countersunk
or broad and even domed; valves not exserted; under J in. in diameter.
2. Timber —-
This species produces one of the best hardwoods on the market, being light in colour, straight-grained, hard,
strong, with occasional small “ gum veins.” A very durable timber in the ground. Useful for almost all
kinds of economic application in which a hard wood is a desideratum. Weight, 59 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are longer than those of the denser hardwoods of the Eucalypts generally, and
may be considered as intermediate between those characteristic of the members of the “ Ash ” group, and the
shorter fibres of the “ Ironbarks,” and of the compact timbers of the “Gum” group. They mostly measure
between 0.7 and 1.4 millimetre in length, the average for numerous measurements being 1 millimetre, whilst in
width they range between 0.02 and 0.035 millimetre, and with walls moderately thin. The bleaching and felting
properties of the separated fibrous material are good, so that probably the timber of this Eucalypt may be found
suitable for the production of paper-pulp by a chemical method.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 53 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 10.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS AUSTRALIANA
(Black Peppermint.)


EUCALYPTUS AUSTRALIANA.
“ Black Peppermint.”
[PI. 89, H. of A .]
Natural Order — MYRTACEiE.
Habitat —
Yowrie, Reedy Creek, Tambo, Nerrigundah, as far south as Wyndham, Burraga, and Black Springs, Bathurst
District", New South Wales.
DESCRIPTION OF:
■j- 'J'
A typical forest tree in some instances, but occasionally only medium-sized. The bark is persistent well out
on the branches, and is typically" Peppermint,” being of a compact, crossed fibrous nature. Abnormal leaves
sessile opposite, cordate-lanceolate. Normal leaves narrow lanceolate, lateral veins being oblique m r -
marginal vein removed from the edge. Flowers in axillary peduncles, with 10 to 20m the head. Fruit pilu ar o
turbinate, small; rim red, countersunk when fully ripe with a thin contracted edge; valves not exserted, 2 to
3 lines in diameter.
2. Timber —
Pale-coloured, fairly hard, straight-grained, A good timber to work, and sold as Australian Hickory, which
exotic wood it much resembles. Weight, 50 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and somewhat brittle, with pits distinctly shown. They'mostly
measure between 0.8 and 1 millimetre in length, very few indeed exceeding the latter figure, whilst in width they
range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre, and have walls of moderate thickness. The separated fibrous mat
is not easily bleached, not does it felt too satisfactorily. It is thus evident that this timber is not promising for
the production of paper-pulp. This conclusion applies to the members of this group of Eucalypts generally.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.1 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 11.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS CAMPHORA.
( Sallow) or Swamp Gum.)


EUCALYPTUS CAMPHORA.
“ Sallow” or “Swamp Gum.”
Natural Order —MYRTACEvE.
Habitat—
Rylstone District and South Coast, New South Wales, and well into Victoria.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
In the South Coast and Victoria grows to a fair-sized tree. Abnormal leaves ovate, obtuse, under 6 in. long,
31 in. broad, coriaceous, glaucous. Normal leaves ovate-elliptical, acuminate, and 6 in. long, glaucous;
venation distinct, particularly in young leaves, intramarginal vein removed from the edge. Flowers on
axillary peduncles, bearing a few small flowers. Fruit turbinate, rim flat, valves exserted, 3 lines long and
2 lines in diameter.
2. Timber —
Pale-coloured, porous and commercially of a poor quality.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short, inclined to brittleness, and with walls of moderate thickness. They
mostly measure between 0.8 and 1 millimetre in length, very few indeed exceeding the latter figure, whilst
in width they range between 0.013 and 0.03 millimetre, with pits often distinctly shown. The separated fibrous
material bleaches well, but the felting properties are not too good. It is not a promising timber for paper-
pulp production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 52 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 12.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS CAPITELLATA.
(Brown Stringybark.)


EUCALYPTUS CAPITELLATA.
“ Brown Stringybark.”
[PI. 54, H. of A .]
Natural Order —MYRTACEZE.
Habitat —
Throughout eastern Australia, one of the commonest of the “ Stringy barks A
DESCRIPTION OF:
I X REE
Grows to a large size, with a fibrous, stringy, brownish bark. Leaves shining, 3to 6 in. long, oblique, lanceolate,
venation faintly marked, intramarginal vein removed from the edge. Flowers 6to 12, on axillary peduncles.
Calyx thick, with almost parallel sides, about 4 lines long; operculum hemispherical, obtuse. Frui
compressed, globose, under | in. in diameter, rim domed, valves exserted.
2. Timber —
Pale brown coloured, hard, good working. Suitable for house building and general hardwood purposes. Is
inferior to White Stringybark, but superior to Red Stringybark. Weight, 62 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are comparatively short, with walls of moderate thickness, and pits distinctly
shown They are typical in appearance with the generality of woodfibres derived from the more compact Eucalyptus
timbers, representative of the denser wooded members of the « Stringybark ” group. This timber cannot be
considered as promising for paper-pulp production. The fibres mostly measure between 0.06 and 1 millimetre in
length, scarcely any exceeding the latter figure, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.025 millimetre.
The separated fibrous material is not readily bleached, and shows inferior felting properties.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 49.1 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 13.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS CORIACEA
( Cabbage Gum.)


EUCALYPTUS CORIACEA.
“Cabbage” or “White Gum.”
Natural Order —MYRTACE/E.
Habitat —
Clarence River District and Tableland into Victoria and South Australia,
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
A tall tree in favourable situations, but occurs in a dwarf form on Mount Kosciusko, Snowy Mountains. Bark
clean, white and smooth. Leaves lanceolate, comparatively large, thick, falcate, sometimes over 9 in. long
and i| in. wide; lateral veins almost parallel to the midrib. Flowers in axillary peduncles, bearing few flowers.
Fruits pear-shaped, contracted at the rim, either broad or truncate or thin and countersunk.
2. Timber.
Pale colour and of poor quality; of no market value.
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, with moderately thin walls and pits distinctly shown.
They usually measure between 0.75 and 1 millimetre in length, very few reaching the latter figure, whilst in width
they range between 0.013 and 0.03 millimetre. The separated fibrous material was not difficult to bleach, but did
not felt well. Similarly with other species of this group of Euealypts, this timber is not promising for paper-pulp
production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.2 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 14.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS MICROCORYS
( Tallow-wood.)


EUCALYPTUS MICROCORYS.
“ Tallow-wood.”
[PI. 53 a, H. of A.}
Natural Order —MYRTACEiE.
Habitat —
Clarence River, and North Coast District of New South Wales into Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A tall tree, with a pale-coloured, flattish, broken bark. Abnormal leaves ovate, 3 in. long, membraneous, pale
on the underside. Normal leaves lanceolate, 6 in. or longer, thicker than the earlier leaves, pale on the
underside, intramarginal vein removed from the edge. Inflorescence axillary in short terminal panicles or
corymbs, about six in the head. Fruit conical, double rimmed, valves slightly exserted, about \ in. long, and
3 lines in diameter.
2. Timber —
Greyish-yellow in colour, hard, fairly close-grained, of a greasy nature, strong, and much in request by coach-
builders, architects, and contractors in general. Weight, 59 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, and in general appearance similar to those of the more
compact and heavy woods of the Eucalypts generally. They are moderately thick-walled and somewhat brittle.
Very few of the fibres reach 1 millimetre in length, the average for numerous measurements being 0.75 millimetre,
whilst in width very few exceed 0.025 millimetre. The separated fibrous material bleaches fairly well, but similarly
with other compact heavy timbers of the Eucalypts, is not promising for paper-pulp production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
8i44 D


PLATE 15.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS PANICULATA
(Grey Ironbark.)


EUCALYPTUS PANICULATA.
“ Grey Ironbark.”
Natural Order —MYRTACEiE.
Habitat—
Clarence River and middle Coast Districts of New South Wales, thence north to Southern Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A large forest tree, with a grey or black-coloured, deeply furrowed, corky, thick bark, permeated, more or less,
with kino, except the inner portion, which is very close and compact, and almost as hard as the wood itself.
Leaves lanceolate, venation not distinct, intramarginal vein close to the edge. Inflorescence paniculate,
operculum conical, either longer or shorter than the calyx, which varies from pyriform to hemispherical. Fruits
truncate, pyriform, urn-shaped, or inclined to hemispherical, 3 to 4 lines in length, rim flat, valves inserted or
exserted.
2. Timber —
One of the finest hardwood timbers in the world. The colour ranges from the very palest to a light grey or light
chocolate. It is straight in the grain, fissile, strong, heavy, very durable. Weight from 63 to 70 lb. per cubic
foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, have moderately thick walls for such narrow fibres, and
are rather brittle. They mostly measure between 0.6 and 1 millimetre in length, averaging 0.75 millimetre, whilst
in width they range between 0.015 and 0.025 millimetre. The separated fibrous material is bleached with difficulty,
and the felting properties are also unsatisfactory. The wood fibres of this species are representative of
those of the timbers of the “ Ironbark ” group of Eucalypts generally, and give little promise for paper-pulp
. production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.2 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 16.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS RESINIFERA.
(Red Mahogany.)


EUCALYPTUS RESINIFERA.
“ Forest Red Mahogany.”
[Pi. 43, H. of A .]
Natural Order — MYRTACE/E.
Habitat —
Clarence River, and Coastal Districts of New South Wales, into Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
One of our finest forest trees, with a “ stringybark.” Leaves typically those of the ordinary Eucalypts,
lanceolate throughout. Flowers in axillary umbels; buds pedicellate. Calyx hemispherical, operculum hemi-
spherical or conical. Fruit hemispherical, usually 3 lines in diameter, rim thick, capsule sunken, valves
acuminate, well exserted.
2. Timber —-
This is one of the red woods of our forests. It is hard, heavy, close-grained, dresses well, and takes a good polish.
A splendid timber in constructional works, carriage building, rustic weather boards, and even heavier classes
of cabinet work. Weight, 61 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, with moderately thick walls and inclined to brittleness.
They resemble in general characteristics the fibres of the hard, dense, heavy Eucalyptus timbers, which, as a
general rule, give little promise for paper-pulp production. The fibres mostly measure from 0.7 to 1 millimetre
in length, very few indeed exceeding the latter figure, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.025 millimetre.
The felting and bleaching properties of the separated fibrous material are not good.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.9 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 17.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUCALYPTUS TERETICORNIS
(Red Gum.)


EUCALYPTUS TERETICORNIS.
“ Red Gum.”
[PI. 87, H. of A.]
Natural Order — MYRTACEtE.
Habitat—
Coastal ranges and districts of New South Wales, Queensland, and Victoria.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
A tall tree, with a smooth bark. Abnormal leaves orbicular to broadly lanceolate, 4 in. in diameter and under
6 in. long, sometimes oblique, venation very pronounced on the underside, oblique, spreading, intramarginal
vein removed from the edge. Normal leaves lanceolate, falcate, about 6 in. long. Inflorescence either in
axillary peduncles or in terminal panicles, with 7to 9 flowers in the umbel. Fruits hemispherical, 2to 4 lines
in diameter, rim domed, valves exserted, acute.
2. Timber —
This species yields a splendid, red-coloured hardwood, with straight or slightly interlocked grain. It dresses
well, takes a good polish, and makes handsome red furniture. It is also splendid timber for constructional
works and general all-round economic purposes. Weight, 63 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, with moderately thick walls for such narrow fibres, and
of a somewhat brittle nature. They mostly measure between 0.6 and 0.9 millimetre in length, very few reaching
1 millimetre, whilst in width few exceed 0.02 millimetre.
The separated fibrous material is bleached with difficulty and has only moderate felting properties. This tree may
be considered as representative of those Eucalypts belonging to the “ Gum ” group, which have hard, dense and
heavy timbers. They all show little promise for paper-pulp production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.6 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.




(b) NON-EUCALYPTS ARRANGED ACCORDING TO PROSPECTIVE VALUE
FOR PULP PRODUCTION.


PLATE 18.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
GMELINA LEICHHARDTII
(Beech.)


GMELINA LEICHHARDTII.
“Colonial Beech.”
[Col. PI. XLI, Cab. Timbers .]
Natural Order —VERBENACEjE.
Habitat—
Brush forests of the eastern coast of Australia.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
One of the tallest trees in the brushlands of the coast, having a comparatively smooth, light-coloured bark.
Leaves on long petioles (2 in.), ovate, up to and over 6 in. long, glabrous above, tomentose, and with raised veins
underneath. Flowers white, with purple markings, in a pyramidal terminal panicle. Fruit a succulent drupe,
depressed, globular, under 1 in. in diameter.
2. Timber —
This may be described as light grey in colour, close-grained, fairly soft, yet strong, easily worked, and com-
paratively light in weight. Seasons well, and much prized by the cabinet trade. Weight, 34 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber have moderately thin walls, are often irregular in contour, with pits fairly well
defined. They have excellent felting properties, a character also suggested from their flexible nature and ribbony
structure, as indicated by the illustration. The separated fibrous material bleaches only fairly well, and is
rendered white with difficulty. The fibres mostly measure from Ito 2 millimetres in length, the mean of numerous
measurements being 1.45 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.05 millimetre at the widest
part.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 52.6 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
This timber may be considered as promising for the preparation of certain kinds of paper-pulp, and may possibly
be utilised for the manufacture of mechanical pulp.


PLATE 19.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
TARRIETIA ACTINOPHYLLA
(Black Jack.)


TARRIETIA ACTINOPHYLLA.
“ Ironwood” or “Black Jack.”
Natural Order —STERCULIACEiE.
Habitat —
Clarence River District and North Coast brushes, New South Wales, and South Coast, Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A large “scrub” tree, the young growth and inflorescence more or less covered with scurfy tomentum. Leaves
digitately compound, with three to nine radiating oblong-lanceolate leaflets, 3 to 9 in. long, petioles 3 to 9 in.
long. Flowers small, numerous in broad panicles, 6to 15 in. long. Fruit carpels or samaras distinct, Ito 2 in.
long, spreading, produced at the back into a wing.
2. Timber —
Close grained, pale-coloured, very tough, and much resembling the English Ash. Weight, 60 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are long and narrow, with moderately thin walls. They are remarkably
uniform in width, measuring in most cases 0.02 of a millimetre, although occasionally reaching 0.03 millimetre
at the widest part. Their flexibility for such narrow fibres is pronounced, and very few broken fibres are seen in
the illustration, consequently, as might be expected, their felting property is very good indeed, and the separated
fibrous material is easily bleached to a pure white product. The thread-like fibres mostly range in length from
1.25 to 2.5 millimetres, the mean of numerous measurements being 1.6 millimetre, and it was difficult to detect
a perfect fibre measuring less than 1.25 millimetre.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 57.8 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
This timber may be considered as distinctly promising for paper-pulp production, and is one of the best of the whole
series.


PLATE 20.
WOOD-FIBRES (TRACHEIDS)
ARAUCARIA CUNNINGHAMII
(Colonial Pine.)


ARAUCARIA CUNNINGHAMII.
Hoop Pine, Colonial Pine, Moreton Bay Pine, Dorrigo Pine.
[Col. PI. 62, Cab. Timbers.']
Natural Order —CONIFER/E.
Habitat—
Clarence River District, North Coast brushes, New South Wales, into coastal areas, Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF :
1. Tree—
Probably the largest of Australian Pines. The bark is characteristic, having the appearance of horizontal
bands, and is hard, compact, and permeated with oleo-resin cells. Leaves are dimorphic, being crowded,
spirally arranged, imbricate, incurved, 3 to 4 lines long, ribbed, pungent, pointed on mature branches, on the
lower, spreading, straight, vertical, decurrent, and sometimes over 1 in. long. Fruit cones ovoid, about 4 in.
long and 3 in. in diameter.
2. Timber —
A well-known softwood, pale-coloured, light in weight, straight grained; extensively used in building
construction and cabinet work. Weight, 39A lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate “ fibres ” (tracheids) of this timber are long and broad, and the bordered pits, which often show in
three rows, are well defined. The walls are not thick considering the stoutness of the tracheids. The separated
fibrous material felts excellently, and bleaches fairly well, but less easily so than similar products derived from
some of the other “ scrub ” timbers here described, or even those of some Eucalyptus timbers.
The “fibres ” (tracheids) vary considerably in length, some measuring as much as 9 millimetres, although they
mostly range between 3 and 4 millimetres. In width they vary between 0.04 and 0.09 millimetre at the widest part.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 58.8 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
Although belonging to the natural order Coniferse, yet resinous substances are practically absent in the wood,
and in this respect differs from the timbers of the ordinary Conifers of the Northern Hemisphere.
This timber is very promising for paper-pulp production.


PLATE 21.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
GREVILLEA ROBUSTA
(Silky Oak.)


GREVILLEA ROBUSTA.
“ Silky Oak.”
[Col. PI. XLV, Cab. Timbers.]
Natural Order —PROTEACEiE.
Habitat—
Clarence River District, and brushes of the North Coast of New South Wales.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A tall and stout tree of the brushlands of the coast, with a rough, furrowed, corky bark. Leaves mostly
bipinnatihd, with narrow lanceolate lobes, the whole leaf 6to 8 in. long, silvery-hairy underneath. Flowers
orange-coloured, small in racemes, 3to 4 in. long. Fruit coriaceous, usually oblique, opening along the upper
margin. Seeds two-winged all round.
2. Timber —
Strong, durable, and elastic, with a beautiful “ oak ” colour and figure, produced by the pronounced prominent
rays. It is a very ornamental cabinet wood, and much used in this section of manufacture. Weight, 40 lb. per
cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres.
The ultimate fibres of this timber are long and moderately broad, with rather thick walls, and have long whip-
thong-like terminations at each end. They are fairly regular in contour, although on some of them teeth-like
excrescences may be observed. The separated fibrous material felts very well, but does not bleach so satisfactorily
as that derived from some of the other timbers. The fibres mostly measure from Ito 2.5 millimetres in length, the
mean of several measurements being 1.55 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.05
millimetre.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 50 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
This timber may be considered as promising for the production of certain kinds of paper-pulp.
8144 E


PLATE 22.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
PENNANTIA CUNNINGHAMII
( Butterwood .)


PENNANTIA CUNNINGHAMII.
“ Butterwood.”
Natural Order — OLACINEiF.
Habitat—
Coast District and Dividing Range of New South Wales, where it is also known as “ Beech."
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A small tree occasionally, but more often a tall shrub. Leaves small, up to i in. long and J in. broad, sharp
pointed, white on underside. Flowers small, white in terminal or axillary racemes, sometimes exceeding the
leaves. Fruit a small drupe, red or orange coloured.
2. Timber —
Close-grained, hard, light-brown in colour, prettily marked, the rays producing a very neat figure. The figure
and texture much resembling English Beech. Weight, 48 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —-
The ultimate fibres of this timber are long, with very thick walls, and with pits distinctly shown. They mostly
measure between 1.2 and 2.2 millimetres in length, the average for numerous measurements being 1.6
millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.025 and 0.05 millimetre at the widest part. The separated fibrous
material bleaches well and makes good pulp. Although the fibres have walls of more than average thickness,
yet they do not show excessive brittleness, and the timber may be considered as distinctly promising for the
production of paper-pulp.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.9 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 23.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
PSYCHOTRIA NEMATOPODA
(Yellow Hickory.)


PSYCHOTRIA NEMATOPODA.
“Cherry Tree" or “Yellow Hickory."
Natural Order —RUBIACE/E.
Habitat—
Clarence River District of northern New South Wales, and coast of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A typical brush tree. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, i| to 2| in. long, pale on the underside. Flowers in axillary
peduncles, ito 2 in. long, small. Fruit globose-ovate, red, about 3 lines long.
2. Timber—
A splendid brush timber, with colour and texture not unlike some of the Rubiaceie. It is close-grained, uniform
pale-yellow throughout, and has little sapwood, planes well with compact surface, much resembling English
“ Box.” It would make a splendid substitute for American Sycamore. Weight, 50 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are fairly long and of average width. They have thick walls and are somewhat
brittle. The separated fibrous material felts well, and bleaches satisfactorily. The fibres mostly measure between
1 and 2 millimetres in length, averaging 1.45 millimetre, although occasionally reaching 2.3 millimetres, whilst in
width they range between 0.02 and 0.04 millimetre.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.5 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
This timber may be considered as promising for paper-pulp production.


PLATE 24.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
DORYPHORA SASSAFRAS.
(Sassafras .)


DORYPHORA SASSAFRAS.
“ Sassafras.”
[Col. PI. 42, Cab. Timbers .]
Natural Order —MONIMIACEZE.
Habitat—
Coastal area of New South Wales and Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A fairly tall tree, with a yellowish, tesselated, aromatic bark. Leaves ovate, lanceolate, coarsely toothed, up
to 6 in. long, 2\ in. broad, reticulate on the underside. Flowers usually three together on an axillary short
peduncle, with two deciduous bracts. Fruit a capsule, slightly hairy, fruit lengthening into long plumose
awns.
It may be mentioned that the oil distilled from the bark and leaves of this tree is of economic value.
2. Timber —
This is a yellowish timber when first cut, but darkens on exposure. It is close-grained, light in weight, and dresses
well. It is used for floorings, linings, but could be utilised for some branches of cabinet work. Weight, 37! lb.
per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber differ in appearance from those of all other Australian timbers so far tested.
They are fairly regular in contour, with a smooth exterior, of considerable length and unusually broad. Their
walls are comparatively thin, and the pits in some instances are distinctly shown. The fibres mostly measure
between 1.25 and 2 millimetres in length, a few reaching 2.5 millimetres, whilst in width they range between
0.03 and 0.06 millimetre. They are flexible and the separated fibrous material felts excellently, and is easily and
quickly bleached to a pure white product.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 50 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
The timber of this tree may be considered as distinctly promising for paper-pulp production.


PLATE 25.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
DYSOXYLON FRASERIANUM
(Rosewood.)


DYSOXYLON FRASERIANUM.
“ Rosewood.”
\Col. PI. 7, Cab. Timbers .]
Natural Order —MELIACE./E.
Habitat —
Brushes of North Coast of New South Wales, and South Coast of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
One of the tallest of the coast brush lands, attaining a height of 200 feet, with a thin, yellowish, or tesselated
bark. Leaves pale green. Leaflets four to ten, usually without any odd terminal one, elliptical or lanceolate,
shortly and obtusely acuminate, 4 to 5 in. long. Flowers in short panicles in the upper axils, loose,
divaricately branched. Fruit Ito i| in. long, globose, or pyriform, opening in three to five thick valves.
2. Timber —
Pink coloured, paler than Cedar and not so highly figured, planes and dresses well, and is classed commercially
as a cabinet timber. Weight, 45 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are fairly long, and have considerable uniformity in width. They have some-
what thick walls, but show flexibility. They mostly measure between 1.2 and 2 millimetres in length, the
average for numerous measurements being 1.5 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.035
millimetre. The separated fibrous material bleaches fairly well for a red timber and felts satisfactorily.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.6 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
The timber of this tree may be considered as promising for paper-pulp production.


PLATE 26.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
PHYLLANTHUS FERDINANDI VAR.
(Melon Wood.)


PHYLLANTHUS FERDINANDI, var. SUPRA-AXILLARIS.
“ Melon Wood.”
Natural Order — EUPHORBIACEjE.
Habitat —
Clarence River, brushes of the North Coast, New South Wales, and coast districts of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A medium-sized brush tree, with elliptical or ovate-lanceolate leaves, obliquely contracted at the base, rather
coriaceous and shining on the upper side, up to 6 in. long. Flower clusters shortly pedunculate and inserted
just above the axils. Capsule 4to 6 celled, not more than 4 lines in diameter, glabrous in most specimens, but
pubescent in a few.
2. Timber —
A pale or light-pink coloured wood, moderately hard, straight-grained, close texture and easy to work. Suitable
for carriage and coach building, and perhaps some forms of cabinet work. Weight, 50! lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —-
The ultimate fibres of this timber are fairly long, somewhat ribbony in appearance, and not very regular in contour.
The walls are moderately thick and the pits distinct. The fibres mostly measure between 1 and 2 millimetres
in length, averaging 1.55 millimetre for numerous measurements, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and
0.04 millimetre in the widest part. They are moderately flexible, and the separated fibrous material felts very
well, and is easily bleached. It is a very promising timber for paper-pulp production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 47 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 27.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
VILLARESIA MOOREI
( Maple.)


VILLARESIA MOOREI.
New South Wales “Maple.”
[PI. 10, H. of A.']
Natural Order —OLACINE7E.
Habitat —
The Clarence River District, and brushes of the New South Wales coast, and those of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A tall, handsome species of the brushes, with a pale, comparatively thin, yellowish, corrugated bark. Leaves
ovate, lanceolate or oval, acuminate, varying in size up to 3 in. broad and 6 in. long, coriaceous and shining,
pale on the underside. Flowers small in lateral raceme-like panicles, 2to 4 in. long. Fruit a drupe, globular,
| in. in diameter.
2. Timber —
A fairly hard wood, close-grained, of a yellowish or Oak colour. It is easy to work and takes a good polish.
The rays are very pronounced, which produce an Oak figure when the timber is cut on the quarter. A splendid
cabinet wood. Weight, 47 P er cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are long and stout, with very thick walls, and pits particularly distinct. The
majority of the fibres measure between 1.5 and 2.5 millimetres in length, several of them reaching 3 millimetres,
the average for numerous measurements being 1.8 millimetre. In width they range between 0.02 and 0.06
millimetre. The separated fibrous material felts well, and has very good bleaching properties, so that this timber
may be considered as very promising for the production of paper-pulp.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 49.2 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 28.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
CERATOPETALUM APETALUM.
(Ccachwood.)


CERATOPETALUM APETALUM.
“ Coachwood” or “Firetree.”
[Col. PI. XXVIII, Cab. Timbers.
Natural Order —SAXIFRAGE/E.
Habitat—
Common in the brushes of the coast of New South Wales.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
A beautiful, fragrant tree, having a smooth, whitish, hard bark. Leaves opposite, one foliate, articulate
on the petiole, lanceolate, 3to 5 in. long, but found up to 10 in., obtusely serrate, coriaceous, shining. Flowers
numerous in rather dense corymbose cymes. Fruit small, surrounded by five wing-like, horizontally
spreading enlarged calyx-lobes.
2. Timber —
The chief characteristic of this timber is its sweet perfume. It is fairly light in weight and has a colour inclining
to pale pink. It takes a good polish, is easily- worked and strong, and is splendid for cabinet purposes.
Weight, 35! lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are fairly long, of average width, and somewhat thick-walled. They are
moderately flexible, and when separated felt remarkably well and bleach quite readily. They mostly measure
between 1 and 2 millimetres in length, a few reaching 2.25 millimetres, the average being about 1.5 millimetre,
whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.04 millimetre.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 51.9 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
The timber of this species may be considered as very promising for the production of paper-pulp.


PLATE 29.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
TARRIETIA ARGYRODENDRON
(Crowsfoot Elm.)


TARRIETIA ARGYRODENDRON.
“ Ironwood” or “Cvowsfoot Elm."
[Col. PI. i, Cab. Timbers .]
Natural Order —STERCULIACE^E.
Habitat —
Northern brushes of New South Wales, and southern Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
A large, erect tree, the stem often exceeding 5 feet in diameter. Leaves trifoliate, leaflets lanceolate, from 4to 7
in. long and from Ito 2 in. broad towards the middle, indumentum silvery. Carpels muncate, oval, * in. m
diameter, with an oblong, oblique wing 2 to 4 in. long and if in. broad, clothed with rusty stellate scales as
on. the underside of the leaves.
2. Timber —
This timber when cut on the quarter gives a beautiful figure, much appreciated n cabinet work, consequently
it is much used for inside panelling. It dresses well and takes a good polish, is chocolate coloured, straigh -
grained, tough, with a darker heartwood. Weight, 52 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —-
The ultimate fibres of this timber are long and moderately narrow, with thick walls. They are somewhat uniform
in length, measuring mostly between 1.2 and 2 millimetres, a few even exceeding the latter figure. The average
for numerous measurements was 1.6 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.04 millimetre.
The felting property of the separated fibrous material is very good, but as much of the wood is dark-coloured it is
difficult to bleach, and can hardly be rendered quite white. It is thus only suitable for the manufacture of certain
classes of paper-pulp.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 54.6 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 30.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUGENIA SP.
(Water Gum.)


EUGENIA sp.
“ Water Gum.”
Naatural Order —MYRTACETb
Haabitat—
Clarence River District, New South Wales.
DEESCRIPTION —
The material forwarded of this tree more nearly matched Eugenia timber than that of any other. The
common name, “Water Gum,” is unusual applied to a Eugenia, which common name is almost invariably
given to a Trislania, either T. neriijolia or T. laurina. It is close-grained, hard, of a reddish colour, and heavy.
Weight, 48 lb. per cubic foot.
Ultimate Fibres—■
The ultimate fibres of this timber are long and narrow, with fairly thick walls. They are somewhat uniform in
width, and, for such thick-walled fibres, are remarkably flexible, and very few broken fibres are seen in the
illustration. The fibres mostly measure between 1.25 and 2 millimetres in length, the average for numerous
measurements being 1.55 millimetre, whilst in width they range from 0.015 to 0.03 millimetre. The bleaching
and felting properties of the separated fibrous material are very good indeed.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 51 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
This timber shows considerable promise for the production of paper-pulp by a chemical method, but whether it
could also be employed in the manufacture of mechanical pulp is a matter to be determined by experiment.


PLATE 31.
WOOD-FIBRKS OF
ACKAMA MUELLERI
(Corkwood.)


ACKAMA MUELLERI.
“ Corkwood.”
[Col. PL XXIX, Cab. Timbers .]
Natiural Order— SAXIFRAGES.
Habiitat —
Brushes and scrubs of North Coast, New South Wales, and southern coast of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
Average forest tree with opposite pinnate leaves. Leaflets usually five, rarely seven or eight, ovate elliptical
or ovate lanceolate, usually 3 to 4 in. long, but often longer, thick, with a tuft of hairs in the axils of the principal
primary veins underneath. Flowers small, in a compound panicle, capsule ovoid-globular, 1 to iJr line long,
opening septicidally.
2. Timber —
Rather open and short-grained, easy working, light in weight, and of a light pink or light chocolate colour.
Weight, 26! lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are fairly long, with moderately thick walls. They are unusually broad for
ordinary woodfibres, measuring up to 0.065 millimetre in the widest part. They mostly measure between
1 and 1.5 millimetre in length, a few reaching 2 millimetres. The separated fibrous material bleaches very well,
and the felting properties are also good.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 47.7 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
The timber is light in weight and easy to work, and altogether may be considered promising for the production
of certain classes of paper-pulp.


PLATE 32.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
FLINDERSIA SCHOTTIANA
( Cudgerie.)


FLINDERSIA SCHOTTIANA.
“ Cudgerie."
Natural Order —MELIACEAS.
Habitat—
Clarence River District, North Coast brushes of New South Wales, and north into the coastal areas of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
An average brush tree in size. Leaves opposite, crowded under the panicle; leaflets eight to twelve, with or
without a terminal one, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or acuminate, 4 to 5 in. long, more or less falcate, sessile, with a
very broad or oblique base, somewhat coriaceous, glabrous on both sides. Flowers in panicles, very small,
numerous, not exceeding the leaves. Fruits 4to 5 in. long, prickly, separating into five boat-shaped valves.
Seeds nearly 2 in. long, winged at each end.
2. Timber—
Weight, 45 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are moderate in length and narrow. In general appearance they are similar
to those derived from timbers belonging to the “ Ash ” group of Eucalypts. They are somewhat thick-walled,
flexible, and have long thin terminations. The separated fibrous material has good felting and bleaching properties,
and is promising for the production of chemical pulp. The fibres mostly measure between 0.75 and 1.5 millimetre
in length, the average for numerous measurements being 1.01 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.015
and 0.025 millimetre.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 55.9 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 33.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUÆOCARPUS GRAND IS
(Blue Fig.)


ELÆOCARPUS GRANDIS.
“ Blue Fig ” Or “Blue Berry Ash.”
[Col. PI. 111, Cab. Timbers.']
Natural Order —TILIACE^E.
Habitat —
Clarence River District, also North Coast, New South Wales.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
One of the largest trees of the scrub where it occurs, having oblong or lanceolate, crenulate, reticulate leaves,
4to 6 in. long. Flowers white, in axillary racemes, many flowered, small, about | in. The fruit is globular,
about i inch in diameter, and blue in colour, hence its common name, an uniortunaie appellation, as it is not
a Fig at all; it is fleshy, with a hard rugose nut (putamen) much resembling a Ouandong.
2. Timber —
A splendid pale-coloured, light timber, which shows a sheen on planing. It is open in the gram, takes a good
polish, and is a splendid cabinet and joinery wood. Weight, 35 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are narrow and only of moderate length. They are thin-walled and, although
fairly regular in contour, occasionally show teeth-like excrescences on one side. They mostly measure between
0.8 and 1.5 millimetre in length, the mean of several measurements being just over 1 millimetre, whilst in width
they range between 0.02 and 0.03 millimetre at the widest part. The separated fibrous material has good felting
and bleaching properties.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 53.7 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
It is probable that this timber will be found quite suitable for the preparation of chemical pulp.


PLATE 34.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
STERCULIA SP.
( Kurrajong .)


STERCULIA sp.
“ Kurrajong.”
Natural Order — STERCULIACEiE
Habitat —
Sterculias belong to a fairly well distributed genus throughout New South W ales, although the species are few,
about half a dozen.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
These trees are famous as drought resisters, and in the interior of Queensland and Northern Territory are known
as Bottle Trees on account of the stem assuming that shape of the domestic article.
The leaves are so variable in shape on the same tree that some systematists consider there is only one species.
The fruits are boat-shaped, containing a number of hard seeds, and, like the leaves, are much relished by stock.
2. Timber—
The timber is specifically very light in weight, and so light in colour as to be almost white. It is very porous,
and is sometimes found on the market as Corkwood.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are long and fairly broad, with long, pointed terminations. They have
comparatively thin walls, are ribbony in general character, and felt remarkably well. They mostly measure
between 1 and 2 millimetres in length, the average for numerous measurements being 1.6 millimetre, whilst in
width they range between 0.02 and 0.04 millimetre at the widest part. The separated fibrous material bleaches
only moderately well, and is not easily rendered perfectly white. Altogether this timber may be considered as
promising only for the production of certain kinds of paper-pulp.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 49.4 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 35.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
GEIJERA SALICIFOLIA
( Ironwood.)


GEIJERA SALICIFOLIA.
“ Ironwood.”
[PI. 5, H. of A.]
Natural Order — RUTACEAL
Habitat—
Clarence River and brushes of the North Coast, New South Wales, and into Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —-
A good average brush tree, with a light-coloured, smoothish bark. Leaves rather narrow, alternate, single,
not articulate on the petiole, ovate or ovate-oblong, 2 to 3 in- long, coriaceous, with a prominent midrib.
Flowers very small, in a loose panicle. Fruit small, dividing in five divisions, with hard shining seeds.
2. Timber —
An exceedingly close-grained, very hard and heavy timber, with a pale yellowish colour, mixed with a light
brown tint, and a browny-streaked heartwood. A splendid constructional timber, being interlocked and strong.
It is, however, difficult to dress. Weight, 61 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —-
The ultimate fibres of this timber are of moderate length but narrow. They are somewhat irregular in contour
and rather thick-walled. They mostly measure between 1 and 1.5 millimetre in length, occasionally reaching
1.7 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre. The separated fibrous material
felts well, and is readily bleached.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 49 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 36.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
PANAX SP.
(Scrub Ash.)


PANAX sp.
“ Scrub Ash.”
Natural Order —ARALIACEAE
Habitat —
Clarence River District, although the genus extends over the North Coast, New South Wales, and into Queensland.
DESCRIPTION—
No botanical material was received with this specimen, which was only on the small size, in fact, a portion of a
limb, so that it was not possible to positively identify it. However, amongst a large number of timbers with
which it was compared, it more nearly approached the Panax species, being fairly light in weight, soft, and of a
grey colour, open in the grain, and with the characteristic sheen of the members of that botanical group.
Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are of only moderate length, with pronounced whip-thong-like terminations.
The walls are of moderate thickness and the pores indistinct. They are ribbony in appearance, and mostly measure
from 0.8 to 1.6 millimetre in length, averaging 1.05 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.04
millimetre. The separated fibrous material felts well and is easily bleached.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 54.4 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
The timber of this tree may be considered as promising for the production of chemical pulp.


PLATE 37.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
PANAX SP.


PANAX sp.
Natural Order —ARALIACE^E.
Habitat—
Like all the species of this genus, and in fact, all those of the Natural Order in Australia, this representative is found
in the brushes of the North Coast of New South Wales and Coastal areas of Queensland. This particular specimen
came from the Clarence River District.
DESCRIPTION—
Only portion of a limb was received, and so it was not possible to definitely place it specifically. It was
light-grey in colour, light in weight, fairly open, and planed with a sheen.
Ultimate Fibres —- *
The ultimate fibres of this timber are moderately short and narrow. They are flexible with long, thin terminations
at both ends, and have fairly thin walls. They mostly measure between 0.8 and 1.4 millimetre in length, the
average for numerous measurements being 1.15 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.03
millimetre. The bleaching and felting properties of the separated fibrous material are good.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 53.4 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
8 144 G


PLATE 38.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUROSCHINUS FALCATUS
(Chinaman’s Cedar.)


EUROSCHINUS FALCATUS.
“ Chinaman’s Cedar.”
Natural Order —ANACARDIACEAL
Habitat—
Northern brush forests of New South Wales and southern coastal areas of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A rather small tree, the branches rough with lenticels. Leaves pinnate; leaflets four to ten, irregular, some-
times opposite, very oblique and falcate, ovate to lanceolate, shortly acuminate, 2 to 4 in. long, but the terminal
one very unequal at the base. Flowers small in divaricate panicles, many flowered. Fruit a drupe, small, more
or less compressed, broadly and obliquely ovate, 3 to 4 lines long.
2. Timber—
Pinkish to white, soft, and tough. Weight, 271 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are thin-walled, flexible, ribbony in structure, and have very good felting properties.
Unfortunately, they are comparatively short, measuring mostly between 0.75 and 1.25 millimetre in length,
averaging about 1 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.04 millimetre in the widest part,
although occasionally a fibre of greater width was observed. The wood was readily broken down by the soda-
chlorine treatment, the resulting product being particularly easily bleached.
The cellulose content is good, the amount determined by the soda-chlorine method being equal to 56.5 per cent.,
calculated on the anhydrous wood.
The timber of this tree may be considered as promising for the preparation of paper-pulp by a chemical method.


PLATE 39.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
MELIA AZEDARACH
(White Cedar.)


MELIA AZEDARACH.
“White Cedar ” or “Golden Cedar.”
\Col. PI. 6, Cab. Timbers .]
Natural Order —MELIACEiE.
Habitat —
East coast districts of Australia in the brushes.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A large forest tree, and now often found in cultivation, being very ornamental, as the long pendulous pinnate
leaves (deciduous) give it quite a pleasing, umbrageous appearance. Bark hard, compact, distinctly ridged
cr checkered. Leaflets opposite, mostly coarsely lobed or toothed, ovate to lancelolate, i to 2 in. long.
Flower lilac-coloured in large loose panicles, but shorter than the leaves, bruit a white drupe, ovoid or nearly
globular.
2. Timber —-
This wood is light in weight and brown in colour, and has a figure and texture not at all unlike English Elm.
It is open in the grain, has large annual rings, is very easy to work, and known to the trade as Golden Cedar,
as well as “ White Cedar.’' It is used for cabinet work and inside joinery. Weight, 39 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —-
The ultimate fibres of this timber are somewhat short and narrow. They are delicately tapered at both ends,
with moderately thin walls and are flexible. They mostly measure between 0.8 and 1.3 millimetre in length, the
majority being below 1 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre.
The separated fibrous material bleaches fairly well, and forms good felt, considering the comparative shortness of
the fibres.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 56.7 per cent, calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 40.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
CRYPTOCARYA GLAUCESCENS
(Brown Beech.)


CRYPTOCARYA GLAUCESCENS.
“Byown Beech” or “Carabeen."
Natural Order —LAURINEyE.
Habitat —
The Coast districts and Dividing Range of New South Wales, and the Coastal areas of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A tree of 60 feet and upwards, with a smooth bark. Leaves ovate-elliptical or oblong, penniveined, and reticulate,
both surfaces green or somewhat glaucous, about 4 in- long. Flowers small, numerous m thyrsoid panicles,
shorter or larger than the leaves. Fruit depressed, globular, |to f in. in diainetei.
2. Timber —
One of the finest in the Natural Order Laurinere, being straight-grained, with a characteristic figure produced
by some of the rays becoming enlarged. It is pale grey in colour, and is a splendid, generally useful timber for
cabinet work, coachbuilding, &c. Weight, 44 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres ot this timber are comparatively short, with moderately thick walls, and of average width. They
mostly measure between 0.8 and 1 millimetre, a few reaching 1.3 millimetre, whilst in width they range between
0.02 and 0.04 millimetre. The separated fibrous material felts well and has very fair bleaching properties.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 56.2 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 41.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
SCHIZOMERIA OVATA
(White Wood.)


SCHIZOMERIA OVATA.
“ Poplar” or “ White Wood.”
Natural Order —SAXIFRAGES.
Habitat—
Clarence River District, as well as the coastal area and mountain ranges of New South Wales and Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
A tall tree, with simple coriaceous, opposite, ovate-lanceolate, large, obtusely serrate, reticulate leaves. Flowers
small, in terminal trichotomous cymes. Fruit a drupe, white, globular, up to i in. in diameter.
2. Timber —
A medium soft timber, close in texture, straight-grained, pale colour, with perhaps a tinge of pink. Rather
tough to work. Weight, 46 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are fairly long and moderately broad, with thick walls and long whip-thong-like
terminations. They mostly measure between 1 and 1.7 millimetre in length, averaging 1.4 millimetre, whilst
in width they range between 0.02 and 0.05 millimetre in the widest part. The separated fibrous material bleaches
readily to a pure white and has good felting properties.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 51.5 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
The timber of this tree may be considered as promising for the production of certain kinds of paper-pulp.


PLATE 42.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
RHODAMNIA TRINERVIA
(Scrub Stringybark.)


RHODAMNIA TRINERVIA.
“ Scrub Stringybark."
Natural Order —MYRTACEAL
Habitat—
Clarence River, and North Coast districts of New South Wales, and into southern Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
A medium-sized tree, with a lamellar, reddish bark; the young shoots, underside of the leaves, and inflorescence
more or less velvety pubescent, but not white. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, characteristically three-nerved from the
base, and much reticulate above. Flowers small, usually white, axillary, clustered or in very short trichotomous
racemes. Berry globular, about 3 lines in diameter.
2. Timber—
A straight, fairly close-grained timber, hard, yet easy working, of a light-brown colour. Weight, 45 lb. per cubic
foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are variable in length, somewhat thick-walled, and inclined to brittleness. They
mostly measure between 0.9 and 1.5 millimetre in length, the average for numerous measurements being 1.1
millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre. The separated fibrous material has
good felting, but only moderate bleaching properties.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.4 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 43.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EHRETIA ACUMINATA
(Brown Cedar.)


EHRETIA ACUMINATA.
“ Brown Cedar.”
Natural Order— BORRAGINETL
Habitat—
Clarence River District, North Coast brushes of New South Wales and southern coast of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A small tree or shrub. Leaves oval or elliptical, oblong, shortly acuminate, usually narrowed at the base, serrate
with callous teeth, 3to 6 in. long. Flowers sessile, and crowded on the branchlets of dense thyrsoid panicles,
scarcely exceeding the leaves, exceedingly short. Fruit globular, about J in. in diameter.
2. Timber —
A pale-brown timber, with a figure and texture similar to that of White Cedar or English Elm, yet firm and easy
to work. Weight, 48 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are of moderate length, thin-walled and somewhat flexible. They mostly
measure from 1 to 1.5 millimetre in length, the average for numerous measurements of whole fibres being 1.2
millimetre. In width they range between 0.015 and 0.035 millimetre. The felting and bleaching properties
of the separated fibrous material are good.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 44.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
LAPORTEA GIGAS
(Giant Nettle Tree.)


LAPORTEA GIGAS.
“Giant Nettle Tree.”
Natural Order —URTICEdE
Habitat —
Clarence River and coastal district of New South Wales, into southern coastal Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
A large tree, with an erect trunk several feet in diameter, supported at the base by prominent buttresses
and with a smooth bark. Leaves broadly cordate, ovate, entire or sinuate toothed, often above i foot long,
and nearly as broad, glabrous above or nearly so, and sprinkled with a few stinging hairs, pubescent or
villous underneath. Flowers small, dioecious, clustered in axillary panicles. Nuts much flattened, very
oblique, the pedicel and perianth much thickened into a curved fleshy mass.
2. Timber —
Probably the most porous timber in Australia. Exceedingly light in weight, drying a dirty brown colour, very
open in the grain, in fact, so much so that it has little or no strength. Weight, 15 to 17 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this tree are very remarkable in appearance, being canoe-like in shape, with long, thin
terminations, and only moderately thick-walled. They differ in shape from those of any timber so far tested, and
an average fibre of the length of 1.3 millimetre has a broad centre portion of only about 0.4 millimetre in length
and then diminishes suddenly to continue fine at both ends. This peculiarity is well shown in the illustration.
The fibres mostly measure between 1 and 1.5 millimetre in length, and from 0.02 to 0.07 millimetre in width
at the widest part. The separated fibrous material felts well and bleaches quite satisfactorily.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 40.3 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 45.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
CRYPTOCARYA PATENTINERVIS.


CRYPTOCARYA PATENTINERVIS.
Natural Order —LAURINESE.
Habitat —
Clarence River, North Coast district of New South Wales, and coastal area of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
An ordinary-sized brush tree, the branches and inflorescence ferruginous or hoary. Leaves ovate to oblong
lanceolate, 2to 4 in. long, pubescent and glaucous underneath; veins prominent. Flowers small, not numerous,
in axillary cymes or terminal thyrsoid panicles, hoary pubescent. Fruit oblong, \ in. long.
2. Timber —
Pale, brownish coloured, with a sweet odour, straight grained, much resembling European Beech. Fairly heavy,
strong, and tough. Should be a valuable timber for many industrial purposes. Weight, 51$ lb. per cubic fooc.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are fairly long, of ordinary width, and walls of moderate thickness. They mostly
measure between 1 and 1.6 millimetre in length, the average for numerous measurements being 1.25 millimetre,
whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.04 millimetre. The separated fibrous material felts well, but its
bleaching properties are only moderate.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 52.3 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
8144 H


PLATE 46.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUGENIA SP.
(Black Apple.)


EUGENIA sp.
“ Black Apple.”
Natural Order —MYRTACEdv
Habitat—
This specimen of timber came from the Clarence River District, New South Wales.
Remarks —
As no botanical material accompanied this specimen it was not possible to classify it, but it is not what is usually
known as “ Black Apple,” Achras australis (Sideroxvlon australe), a very much harder, heavier, and closer-
grained wood, whereas this specimen, although very pale, is only moderately hard, with a straight grain, and
very easy working, and having a weight of 52 lb. per cubic foot, as against 66 lb. of the former. It more
closely resembles the Eugcnias.
Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are of moderate length and narrow. They have fairly thin walls, and are flexible.
They mostly measure between 0.8 and 1.6 millimetre in length, the average for numerous measurements being
1.15 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.03 millimetre. The separated fibrous material
bleaches well, and has good felting properties. It is probable that this timber will be found suitable for the
production of chemical pulp.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 50.4 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 47.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
ANGOPHORA LANCEOLATA
( Smooth-barked Apple.)


ANGOPHORA LANCEOLATA.
“ Smooth-barked Apple.”
[Col. Pi. 32, H. oj A.]
Natural Order— MYRTACEAL
Habitat—
Coastal ranges and districts of New South Wales, and southern Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
A tree sometimes attaining giant proportions, smooth barked. Leaves identical in shape and venation to the
Eucalyptus Bloodwoods, lanceolate, with fine, numerous parallel, transverse veins. Flowers in rather dense
terminal corymbs. Calyx about 3 lines long and 4 lines broad, ribbed. Fruit calyx usually thick and ribbed.
2. Timber —
Light brown or chocolate in colour, and one of the hardest and best in the forests, and could be used for all
heavy work requiring great strength. When sawn up into baulks and slabs it sometimes resembles “ Grey
Ironbark.” Weight, 60 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, and resemble in appearance and general characters those
obtained from the hard, dense woods of the Eucalypts. The fibres are somewhat brittle, with walls of moderate
thickness. They mostly measure between 0.75 and 1.2 millimetre in length, very few indeed reaching 1 milli-
metre, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.025 millimetre. The felting and bleaching properties of
the separated fibrous material are not good, so that altogether this timber is not promising for the production
of paper-pulp.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 52 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 48.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
APHANANTHE PHILIPPINENSIS
(Native Elm.)


APHANANTHE PHILIPPINENSIS.
"Native Elm.”
[PI. 120, H. oj A.]
Natural Order — URTICEiE.
Habitat —
Coast districts ot New South Wales and Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
An average brush tree. Leaves shortly petiolate, broadly ovate to elliptical, rigidly membraneous or coriaceous,
scabrous; the primary veins very prominent underneath, produced into mucronate teeth, i to 2 in. long,
variable in shape at the base. Flowers small, monoecious, axillary, males in loose cymes, females two together.
Drupe 3 lines long.
2. Timber —
A pale grey, almost white timber, with a straight, fairly close grain. It is of a tough hickory nature to work,
and a suitable timber for tool handles. Weight, 46 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short, and with a somewhat unusual appearance, being hair-like, the
majority hardly exceeding 0.01 millimetre in width. They are flexible and felt well, but only measure from 0.75
to 1.35 millimetre in length, by far the greater number being under 1 millimetre. The separated fibrous material
bleaches quite satisfactorily.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 52 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 49.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
BACKHOUSIA SCIADOPHORA
(Hickory.)


BACKHOUSIA SCIADOPHORA.
“Hickory” “Scrub Ironbark” or “Myrtle.”
[Col. PL 106, H. of A.]
Natural Order — MYRTACEAC
Habitat—
Clarence River District, North Coast brushes of New South Wales, and coastal areas of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
An average forest tree in size. Leaves broadly ovate, obtuse, ito 2\ in. long, on short petioles. Flowers small,
numerous, in umbel-like cymes, or in clusters and common peduncle in the upper branches. Capsule filling the
calyx-tube, flat-topped, apparently indehiscent, but readily separable into two cocci.
2. Timber —
A hard, tough, close-grained timber, of a grey colour, with a wavy texture. It is rather difficult to work, although
a good timber for rolling stock and wood-working planes. Weight, 45 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, somewhat thick-walled, and frequently show a toothed
arrangement towards the end of the fibre. They mostly measure between 0.8 and 1.2 millimetre, the average
being under 1 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.025. The bleaching and felting
properties of the separated fibrous material are only fair.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.1 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 50.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
BACKHOUSIA SP.
(Myrtle.)


BACKHOUSIA sp.
“ Myrtle.”
Natural Order —MYRTACEAA
Habitat—
Clarence River District, New South Wales.
DESCRIPTION :
Backhousias are fairly common in all brushlands of the east coast of Australia. They are all hard, close-grained,
fairly heavy timbers, generally of a.reddish colour, strong and durable.
Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short, somewhat thick-walled and brittle. Very few fibres reach 1 millimetre
in length, the majority averaging 0.75 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.025 millimetre.
The bleaching and felting properties of the separated fibrous material are not good, and much cellular matter
is also present. This timber is thus not at all promising for paper-pulp production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 47.2 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 51.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
CRYPTOCARYA TRIPLINERVIS.
( Carabeen .)


CRYPTOCARYA TRIPLINERVIS.
“Caraheen.”
Natural Order — LAUKINE^E.
Habitat—
Clarence River District, also North Coast, New South Wales
DESCRIPTION OF:
. i
1. Tree—
A tall tree, with ovate-elliptical or oblong lanceolate leaves, pubescent underneath, about 4 in. long, three-nerved
or penniveined, with two to five primary veins on each side 01 the midrib. Flowers in dense panicles
(terminal), hoary pubescent, sessile. Fruit ovoid, about | in. long.
2. Timber —
One of the finest timbers of the Laurineae, and has a palish-brown colour. It is close, straight-grained, and
works easily, having a slight sheen. Weight, 51 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, with fairly thick walls. They mostly measure between
0.75 and 1.3 millimetre in length, averaging about 1 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and
0.03 millimetre. The separated fibrous material felts well, and has good bleaching properties.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 51.7 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 52.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
CRYPTOCARYA SP.
( Carabeen.)


CRYPTOCARYA sp.
"Carabeen.”
Natural Order — LAURINEJS.
Habitat—
Clarence River District, New South Wales. This genus of the Laurinese is fairly well distributed in the brushlands
of the Coast, also in Queensland
DESCRIPTION OF :
1. Timber —
This specimen, a small limb-piece, showed characters found in the Cryptocaryas- —the evidence being in favour
of its belonging to that genus, but nothing distinctive enough to specifically place it. The common name,
“ Carabeen,” applied to a Cryptocarya is unusual, generally it is given to a Sloanea of the Tiliaceae Order.
2. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, with thick walls and indicating little flexibility. They
mostly measure between 0.6 and 1.2 millimetre in length, very few indeed exceeding 1 millimetre, whilst in
width they range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre. The separated fibrous material has good felting and
bleaching properties, and would probably make a fair paper-pulp by a chemical method.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.3 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 53.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
CUPANIA PSEUDORHUS.
(Wild Quince.)


CUPANIA PSEUDORHUS.
“ Wild Quince.”
Natural Order —SAPINDACEAL
Habitat—
Clarence River District, brushes of the North Coast District of New South Wales, and coastal lands of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A spreading tree of moderate size, the young branches and petioles densely rusty-tomentose. Leaves crowded
under the panicles. Leaflets thirteen to twenty-one, or even more, lanceloate, to 3 in. long or rarely longer,
very oblique or almost falcate, shining above, tomentose or pubescent underneath. Flowers rather small in dense
panicles, rarely exceeding the leaves, tomentose. Capsule globular, slightly lobed, almost woody, densely hirsute.
2. Timber —
Very pale brown in colour, darkening towards the centre, close in the grain, and very tough. A good, generally-
useful, albround hardwood. Weight, 46 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, with walls of moderate thickness, and with long, thin
termination at both ends. They mostly measure between 0.75 and 1.3 millimetre in length, the average being
just under 1 millimetre. In width they range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre.
The separated fibrous material bleached very well, and although the fibres are on the short side, yet they
produce a good felt.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.6 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
8144 I


PLATE 54.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
DAPHNANDRA MICRANTHA
(Yellow Wood.)


DAPHNANDRA MICRANTHA.
A “Yellow-wocd.”
Natural Order —MONIMIACE^E.
Habitat—
Clarence River and North Coast District of New South Wales, and coastal districts of Queensland
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
A handsome tree of moderate size, quite glabrous. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, more or less serrate, 3 to 4 in.
long. Flowers not numerous, in panicles shorter than the leaves. Fru't unknown.
2. Timber —
A very close, fine-grained, wavy timber, much resembling Dorypkora sassafras in general facies, but much heavier
and tougher, retains its pale canary colour after being dressed. It is strong and would make a good substitute
for English Beech, which it much resembles in texture. Weight, 43 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are long and moderately broad, with thick walls, and of a somewhat stubborn
nature. The separated fibrous material contained rather a large amount of cellular substance, different in
character from any yet detected in the timbers tested, the presence of which might perhaps militate somewhat
against its employment for the manufacture of paper-pulp. The whole fibres mostly measure between 1 and 2.5
millimetres in length, the average for numerous measurements being 1.5 millimetre, whilst in width they range
from 0.03 to 0.06 millimetre. The bleaching property of the separated fibrous material is fairly satisfactory,
although it was difficult to obtain it a pure white, as it still retained a slight yellowish tinge.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 51.5 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 55.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
DIOSPYROS PENTAMERA
(Grey Plum.)


DIOSPYROS PENTAMERA.
“Grey Plum."
[PI. 109, H. of T.]
Natural Order —EBENACE^E,
Habitat—
Clarence River and North Coast District of New South Wales, and southern coast of Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF.
1. Tree —
A tree attaining a considerable height, leaves oblong-lanceolate or elliptical, with short petiole, coriaceous,
shining and reticulate above, i| to 2| in. long. Male flowers very small, in very short pedunculate clusters
of three to five. Female flowers not seen. Fruit a globular berry, about \ in. in diameter.
2. Timber —
A pale grey when first cut, but darkening on exposure, with a fairly close, straight grain, and small black patches
characteristic of the Order. One of the best timbers for golf shafts and heads; suitable for coach and building
work or dark-coloured furniture. Weight. 41J lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —•
The ultimate fibres of this timber are comparatively short and narrow, with somewhat thick walls. They
mostly measure between 0.8 and 1 millimetre in length, very few exceeding the latter figure, whilst in width they
range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre. The separated fibrous material was bleached with difficulty, although
it felted fairly well.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 47.7 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 56.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
DIPLOGLOTTIS CUNNINGHAMII
( Tamarind ).


DIPLOGLOTTIS CUNNINGHAMII.
“ Tamarind."
[PI. 2l[, H of A .]
Natural Order —SAPlN DACEAS.
Habitat—
Coastal Districts of New South Wales and Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF :
1. Tree —
An average brush tree, the young branches, petioles, and inflorescence densely clothed with a soft, rust-coloured
tomentum. Leaves very large, sometimes exceeding 2 feet in length; leaflets eight to twelve, opposite or irregularly
alterna e, oblong-elliptical or ovate-lanceolate, acute or obtuse, 6 to 8 in. long, occasionally over a foot,
pubescent underneath. Flowers small, in large panicles in the upper axils. Fruit under 1 in. in diameter.
2. Timber—
One of the finest timbers of the Sapindacese, being close-grained, hard, tough, but with very little figure. The
colour seems to vary from creamy-white to light brown or flesh colour. Could be used for carriage building,
coach, and cabinet work, and, perhaps, construction work. Weight, 40 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are mostly short and comparatively broad, with somewhat abrupt terminations
and moderately thin walls. They mostly measure between 0.7 and 1.1 millimetre in length, averaging under
1 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.04 millimetre in the broadest part. The separated
fibrous material bleaches well, and makes a fairly good pulp, although the shortness of the fibres somewhat
militates against its use for paper-pulp production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 52.9 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 57.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
ENDIANDRA SIEBERI.
(Corkwood.)


ENDIANDRA SIEBERI.
“ Corkwood.”
Natural Order —LAURINE^E.
Habitat —
Coast district of New South Wales and southern Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF :
1. Tree—
A rather small tree, or sometimes a shrub on sandy soil, with a light, corky bark. Leaves lanceolate, 2to 3 in.
long, thin, green on both sides, reticulations prominent. Flowers small, in axillary panicles or cymes. Fruit
a berry.
2. Timber —
Of a dark chocolate colour, or brown with pale brown light streaks, which give it the appearance of ‘ dosey ”
or affected with dry rot. It is short in the grain, soft, and of little commercial value. Weight, 48 lb. per
cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and comparatively narrow. They have thick walls and show consider-
able brittleness. They mostly measure between 0.7 and 1.1 millimetre in length, averaging under 1 millimetre.
In width they range between 0.015 and 0.03 millimetre. Although much cellular substance was present, yet the
separated fibrous material bleached very well. The shortness of the fibres and the predominance of cellular matter
would probably militate against the employment of this timber for paper-pulp production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 42.8 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 58.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
EUGENIA SP.
(Brown Beech.)


EUGENIA sp.
"Brown Beech."
Natural Order — MYRTACEdE.
Habitat—
So far as known the watershed of the Clarence River, New South Wales.-
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree —
As no botanical material was received with this sample of timber, it is not possible to definitely place it
systematically, but, by comparison with well identified timbers, it is a Eugenia.
2. Timber—
It may be described as light grey in colour, of a soft nature, but fairly close in texture and straight-grained. It
is tough and leathery to work, and weighs 41 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are of moderate length and narrow. They have rather thick walls, and are
of a somewhat brittle nature. They mostly measure between 1 and 1.5 millimetre in length, the average of
numerous measurements being 1.2 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.02 and 0.035 millimetre.
The bleaching and felting properties of the separated fibrous material were good, although a fairly large
amount of cellular substance was present, as shown in the illustration.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 59.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
FICUS SP.
(Fig.)


FICUS sp.
" Fig.”
Natural Order —URTICEiE.
Habitat —
Clarence River District New South Wales.
DESCRIPTION :
No botanical material came with this piece of timber, and as one Fig timber is so like another, it is not possible
to give its specific nomenclature.
It is a very soft timber, pale, almost white, straight in the grain, and easy to work. Readily attacked by borers.
Weight, 28 lb. per cubic foot.
Ultimate Fibres —
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and broad, with pointed terminations and thin walls. They mostly
measure between 0.65 and 1.2 millimetre in length, the average being under 1 millimetre, whilst in width they range
between 0.015 to 0.04 millimetre in the widest part. A considerable amount of cellular substance was present
in the separated fibrous material, but nevertheless it bleached fairly well. This timber cannot be considered as at
all promising for paper-pulp production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 46.8 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 60.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
FICUS SP.
(Sandy Fig.)


FICUS sp.
“ Sandy Fig.”
Natural Oruer —URTICEyE.
Habitat—
The species of Fig belonging to this genus occur in the districts bordering on the east coast of Australia, and
number about a dozen.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Timber —
They all seem to resemble each other in character, being very open-grained, porous, very light in weight, and
having little or no durable qualities, are attacked by borers quicker than any other timber, and very soon destroyed.
The specimen of timber here investigated came from the Clarence River district (Dr. Page), but nO botanical
material, so that the specific name could not be given, but in all probability similar fibres will be found
throughout the group. Weight, 28 lb. per cubic foot
2. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are comparatively short, with walls of moderate thickness. They have long
whip-thong-like terminations and are flexible. They mostly measure between 0.8 and 1 millimetre in length, a
few reaching 1.3 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.04 millimetre. Although an excess
of cellular substance was present, yet the separated fibrous material was easily bleached and the felting properties
were fair. It is not, however, a promising timber for paper-pulp production.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 49.8 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.


PLATE 61.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
HARPULLIA PENDULA
(Tulip Wood.)


HARPULLIA PENDULA.
“ Tulipwood."
[PI. 18, H. of A.]
Natural Order— SAPINDACEiE.
Habitat—
Clarence River district, North Coast brushes of New South Wales, and southern coast district ot Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
r. Tree—
A tall tree, with a sinuous trunk and pale-coloured bark. Leaves pinnate; leaflets usually three to six,
ovate to elliptical-oblong, obtusely acuminate, 3 to 5 in long, thin or membraneous, veins prominent under-
neath, flowers small, in loose, slender terminal panicles. Fruit a glabrous capsule, Ito ii in. broad.
2. Timber—
A ver y close-grained, hard, fairly heavy timber, having a dark or almost black figure, mixed with broad
bands of a pale colour. A very decorative cabinet wood, and can be worked into most ornamental caskets
and salvers. It is a very suitable wood for engraving purposes. Weight, 58 lb. per cubic foot.
3. Ultimate Fibres.
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and narrow, and have moderately thin walls. They mostly measure
between 0.75 and 1 millimetre in length, very few exceeding the latter measurement, whilst in width they range
between 0.015 and 0.02 millimetre.
The separated fibrous material is not difficult to bleach, and felts fairly well for such short fibres.
The cellulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 49 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous
wood.
8x44 K


PLATE 62.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
SLOANEA WOOLLSII
(Yellow Carabeen.)


SLOANEA WOOLLSII.
“Yellow Carabeen.”
Natural Order— TILIACE.E.
Habitat—
Northern brush forests of New South Wales and southern Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
green otowßh a“few tee'th b ™ tS ' Leaves »to 5 in. long, rj in. broad, dark-
green often with a few teeth Flowers in racemose corymbs, rather large, Ito il in. long. Caosule about
4 in. ong, two-valved, covered with soft prickles outside, smooth inside.
2. Timber—
Pale-coloured, and might be classed as a moderately hard wood, as it is close, straight-grained and tough
and could be used for general purposes. Weight, 50 lb. per cubic foot. S S S '
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber are short and comparatively broad, with moderately thick walls and often with
somewhat abrupt terminations. They mostly measure between 0.75 and 1 millimetre 7n Ungth vefv raTf
seolr d fT ml* laMer !' gUre - In Wid,h they range between °- 02 and 0.035 millimetre in the widest’ pan The
properties * the shortness «f the fibres, has good felting
wood^ e " UlOSe , determine(l by the sdda-chlorine method, was equal to 53.3 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous


PLATE 63.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
SYNCARPIA LAURIFOLIA.
( Turpentine.)


SYNCARPIA LAURIFOLIA.
“ Turpentine."
[PI. 104, H. oj A .]
Natural Order —M Y RTACE M.
Habitat—
Mountain ranges and coastal districts of New South Wales and Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF
1. Tree—
A'large brush tree, withia flatish, stringy, yellowish bark, the inner layers strongly impregnated with resin
hem/ei™ 0 ? ° r P® P ube ®“ nt or S la ™ou underneath, appearing sometimes in whorls of four from two pairs
bemg dose together, broadly ovate to elliptical oblong, 4to 6 in. long. Flowers white, six to ten toglrheHn
a head, calyces crenate at the base. Fruiting heads about i in. in diameter.
2. Timber—
The an<l d °Tf ai “ d ' and in texture and not much unlike some Ironbarks, brown in colour
ost famous wood for wharf piles, the resinous bark making it teredo-proof. Weight, 63 lb. per cubic foot!
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The ultimate fibres of this timber resemble in appearance those of the more dense and compact woods of the
Eucalypts. They are moderately short and narrow, fairly thick-walled and somewhat brittle They mostly
a n oL Und f, r 1 milllme,re ln len « th ’ rareI J reaching 1.2 millimetre, whilst in width they range between n nth
and 0.025 millimetre. The separated fibrous material was not readily bleached, although it felted fairly well
Thejeilulose, determined by the soda-chlorine method, was egual to 46 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous


PLATE 64.
WOOD-FIBRES OF
TRISTANIA CONFERTA
(Brush Box.)


TRISTANIA CONFERTA.
“ Brush Box."
Natural Order—MYRTACE^E.
Habitat—
Clarence River and coastal districts of New South Wales and Queensland.
DESCRIPTION OF:
1. Tree—
2. Timber—
cuS«. coiour> tut changing to dark red *— the ~
3. Ultimate Fibres—
The fibres, which are somewhat thick-walled, mostly measure between n 5 anH 1 -u- g P * Eucalypts *
reaching 1.2 millimetre, whilst in width they range between 0.015 and 0.025 millimetre^T^separated'flbT 1^
“4u^rr eached ’ nordoes « * »•
determined by the soda-chlorine method, was equal to 48.6 per cent., calculated on the anhydrous




INDEX.




INDEX.
The plate showing the wood fibres of the individual species will be found on the opposite page to the descriptive matter.
Page.
Ackama Muelleri ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• •••
Analyses of Water ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... ••• ••• ••• T 5
Angophora lanceolata ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• IT 7
Aphananthe Philippinensis... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• TI 9
Apple (Smooth-barked) 11 7
Araucaria Cunninghamii ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• •••
Ash —Exotic ... ... • 33
„ Group of Eucalypts r 7
„ Southern Mountain ... 3 T
Aspen ... T 4
Backhousia sciadophora ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 121
B. sp. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 12 3
Beech ••• 59
Black Apple ••• IT S
„ Jack 6 1
~ Peppermint... ... 4 1
Blackbutt ••• 39
Blady Grass T 9
Blue Berry Ash ... ••• •••
Blue Fig , ®9
Blue Gum ••• 11
Brown Beech Io 3> 1 39
„ Cedar ••• ••• 10 9
~ Stringybark ••• 45
Brush Box ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 1 5 1
Buddong Falls ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• J 5
Bulletin Science and Industry ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• •••
Butter Wood


Page.
Cabbage Gum 47
Carabeen ... ... ... ... ... ... 103,125,127
Cedar (Brown) ... ... ... ... ... ... • • 10 9
„ (White) ... 101
Cellulose and its Determination 23
Ceratopetalum apetalum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 79
Cherry Tree ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 69
Chestnut ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• x 4
Chinaman’s Cedar 99
Coachwood 79
Colonial Beech 59
„ Pine ... • 63
Corkwood ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 8 5> x 37
Cotton ... ... ••• ••• 22
Crowsfoot Elm ... ... ••• ••• ••• 81
Cryptocarya glaucescens ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 10 3
C. patenlinervis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• IX 3
C triplinervis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 12 5
C. 12 7
CUDGERIE 87
Cupania pseudorhus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 12 9
Daphnandra micrantha ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 1 3 1
Diospyros pentamera... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... •• ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• x 33
Diploglotiis Cunninghamii ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• x 35
Dorrigo Pine ... ... ... ••• ••• 63
Doryphora sassafras ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 7 1
Dysoxylon Fraserianum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 73
Ehretia acuminata ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• I(^9
Elceocarpus grandis ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 89
Elm (Native) ••• IX 9
Endiandra Sieberi ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• x 37
Eucalyptus Australiana ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 4 X
E. camphor a ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• •*• 43>
E. capitellata ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 45
E. coriacea ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... ••• ••• ••• ... ••• ••• 47


Page.
Eucalyptus Dalrympleana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 33
E. Delegatensis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... ••• ••• ••• 3 1
E. microcorys ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 49
E. paniculata ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ... ••• ••• 5 1
E. pilularis... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• •••• ••• ••• 39
E. resinifera ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 53
E. saligna var. pallidivalvis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 37
E. Sieberiana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 35
E. tereticornis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55
Eucalyptus Timber for Pulp Production ii, 17
„ ~ compared to Aspen and Chestnut ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Eugenia sp. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 83, 115, 139
Euroschinus falcatus... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 99
Fibres 24
Fire Tree ...» o 79
Ficus sp i 141, i 43
Fig .• 141
Flax «' 22
Flindersia Schottiana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 87
Flooded Gum ... ...- 37
Forest Red Mahogany ... 53
Geijeva salicifolia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 93
Giant Nettle Tree ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... *.. hi
Golden Cedar ... ... 101
Gmelina Leichhardiii ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... !!i ••• ••• • ... 59
Gorge, Clarence River... ... ... ... ... ... (Plate 1) ,19
Grevillea robust a ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 65
Grey Plum 133
„ Ironbark 51
Harpullia pendula ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...• ... 145
Hemp ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
Hickory ... -..i ... 121
Hoop Pine ... •. 63
Ironbark (Grey) ... 5 1
Ironwood ... 61, 81, 93


Page.
Kurrajong ... ... 91
Laportea gigas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• hi
Maple, N.S.W. ... 77
Mahogany (Forest Red) 53
Melia Azedarach ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 101
Melon Wood 75
Messmate 15
Moreton Bay Pine 63
Mountain Gum 33
„ Ash 35
Myrtle 121,123
Native Elm 119
Nettle Tree (Giant) - in
Panax sp. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 95> 97
Paper-pulp production—possibilities of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11,18
Pennantia Cunninghamii ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67
Poplar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ■>.. ... ... ... ... 105
Phyllanthus Ferdinandi, var. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 75
Psychotria nematopoda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 69
Queensland Pine Co 18
Quince (Wild) 129
Red Gum 55
„ Mahogany 53
Report from McGill University 13
„ ~ Messrs. Clifford and Hope ... ... 14
„ „ H. E. Surface ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Rhodamnia trinervia... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 107
Rosewood ... ... ... ... 73
Sallow or Swamp Gum 43
Sally 15
Sandy Fig ... 143
Sassafras 7 1
Schizomevia ovata ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 105
Scrub Ash 95
~ Stringybark 107


Scrub Ironbark Pagb ‘
Silky Oak *’ ... '” ”*
Smooth-barked Apple ’ *47
Snow Gum ..' '
StercuJia sp. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ” ” ’** *’*
Southern Mountain Ash ’*
Stringybark (Scrub) ‘ ‘ ~
Swamp Gum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ”* *'* •
Syncarpia laurifolia... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ' 43
Tallow Wood *49
Tamarind "* ”* 49
Tarrietia actinophylla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... " "" *”
T. argyrodendron ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... *" g
limbers other than Eucalypts for Pulp Production ... ... ... ... ... ... jg
Timber Sections showing Fibres ’ A _
Tristania conferta ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .." ’ _
Tulip Wood ..” ""
Turpentine 45
Villaresia Moorei ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . ”* “* *49
Water Gum 17
White Cedar ' " " 3
„ Gum
„ Wood *"
Wild Quince " "
Yellow Caeabeen !" I 2,3, and 4) 24
~ Hickory fp
„ wood " ;;; ;;; ;;; ;;; ;;; ;;; ;;; ;;; ;;;










