

TIYTI r\ aNh11 1' ti
v vvOU v ll
II \ I ill* %/ i 'few 4 IX/ I %r I (I
Ube property of tbe Uon. Z. 1b, patmc
*
pastoral Haims of Juistralia
Ipubltsbcb bg > ,
Zbc pastoral Review
anD Melbourne


WOODBURN, KILMORE, VICTORIA.
The Property of the Hon. T. H. Payne.
WOODBURN stud farm, the property of the
Honourable T. H. Payne, and the home of
studs of Red Poll cattle and Ryeland sheep as
purebred as any in Australia, is situated three miles west
of Kilmore, an old-established town nestling amongst the
hills on the southern border of the north-central district
of Victoria.
The soil is of basaltic foundation, having red and
black loams with some heavier black land predominating,
intermixed with a light coloured clay, the former soils
making fair natural grazing and good agricultural lands,
while the latter, under special treatment, has been brought
up to yield quite a profitable production for the outlay.
Phe native pastures under natural conditions are in
WOODBURN'
"Phis property, comprising 2050 acres, was purchased
in 1906 by the present owner, and at that time presented
a much-neglected appearance, being Lndly fenced and
over-run with rabbits, practically void of es ential build-
ings and had no permanent water supply.
The general lay of the country is undulating with some
level land in the centre of the estate, while in the dis-
tance can be seen spurs of the main Dividing Range.
HOUSE
keeping with the general average found in a district in
a 1250 ft. altitude. The timber, of which there is only
a small quantity, consists chiefly of what is locally termed
“White Sugar Gum.”
The average rainfall is in the vicinity of 27 in. per
annum, falling fairly evenly over the year. There are no
permanent rivers or creeks on the property, but a few
natural and permanent springs, which with the aid of


■ ■ - jr ‘^r*
WOO D B U RN, VICTORIA
sub-artesian bores, wells, dams, tanks, and a five-acre
artificial lake maintain an adequate water supply through-
out the farm.
The owner being possessed of unusual foresight, and
realising the necessity of systematic, thorough and scien-
tific management for the success of any venture of this
nature immediately, on taking over the estate in 1906, be-
gan a series of improvements, all of which will eventually
give an adequate return for their cost.
One of the first improvements was the re-fencing of the
property with rabbit-proof fences on the boundary, and
subdivisional fences of 4 plain galvanised wires and a
at the lake, and over the wells and bores, while in each
paddock have been installed reinforced concrete water
troughs filled automatically from the numerous water
supply tanks situated on the property. The homestead
supply comes from the lake, while rainwater is collected
in various concrete tanks for household consumption.
With the water assured, steps were then taken to im-
prove the lands. Useless timber was rung and cleaned
up, areas ploughed and sown with oats, barley and various
other crops, so as to sweeten the soil. Then when this
was accomplished English grasses and clovers were sown
down on those lands suitable. This work is still (1929)
THE RESIDENCE OF THE MANAGER
barb on top —18 ft. panels—2 wooden droppers— posts
4 ft. out of the ground—marsupial netting tied on to the
plain wires.
As the original natural water supply was inadequate,
steps were taken to improve it. A large earth dam
was thrown across the head of a valley adjoining the
homestead, and this bank throws back water covering an
area of five acres. Later on smaller dams and surface
tanks were constructed throughout the run. Then wells
were sunk, and still later on sub-artesian bores were put
down in which good water was struck at from 75 ft.
Windmills ranging up to 18 ft. wheels have been erected
being carried out, and in order to provide a fodder supply
for home use, a small area is cultivated, the chief cereal
crop being oats, which with Mortgage Lifter variety has
yielded 4 tons of hay per acre, and up to 75 bushels of
grain per acre. The hay is conserved in large and well
built hay sheds and barns, while the grain is stored in
vermin-proof shed,.
In addition to the above, further provision is made for
dry times by the making of ensilage in a twin brick silo
300 tons capacity, the crop grown for the purpose being
a mixture of Tasmanian white oats, peas, beans and tares,
’b wo sowings are made so as to provide for the first fill-


ji y »
L iJI. jtflrJr
IbrflDDHRfli. “W ufi
, 1
TV OODBU R N, VICT 0 R 1 A
THE WOODBURN PASTURES, STUD RYELAND HOGGETS IN FOREFRONT
ing, and then one for topping up
As some of the land was found to be in need of drain-
ing, this work has been undertaken with marked success,
the method being to plough open the drains with a special
implement, lay the agricultural pipes and cover in with
the same implement prior to ploughing the held. Drain-
ing to some may appear a costly work, but in those dis-
tricts with a heavy rainfall or of a swampy nature, it has
been the means of converting once sour lands into areas
of high production, and it also goes a long way to stamp
out many diseases and ailments common to stock in those
parts.
With the subdivision of the large original paddocks
into smaller areas for the more convenient handling of
the stud stock, adequate shade and shelter is being pro-
vided by the planting of belts of suitable timbers, which
if found to become too dense for their original purposes
can be thinned out and the timber sawn into posts, rails
or building materials.
Other improvements include a small but adequate
RV ELAND-M ERINO CROSSBRED SHEEP BRED AT WOODBURN


WO ODBU R N , VICTORIA
TYPICAL WOODBURX BRED RYELAND RAM
shearing shed, yards and dip, draught horse stables and
loose boxes, cow shed, dairy, calf pens, hull boxes and
exercise yards, engineer and blacksmith shops, and a most
modern fowl run.
So as to house the married hands, the old homestead
and the old single men’s quarters have been remodelled,
while new single men’s quarters have been built of con-
TYPICAL WOODBURX BRED RYELAND EWE
crete. A new manager’s residence has been constructed
on a modern design on a site overlooking the lake. The
homestead house is situated nearby and is surrounded by
a beautiful garden, orchard and stables, and is the resi-
dence of the owner and his family, Air. Payne and his
son spending nearly always three days a week at Wood-
burn.
RYELAND RAMS BRED IN THE WOODBURX FLOCK


I-... Ilf-I
#" •#* -&|| *K£3Bbjk*' Hm v t ML ...
w JHJKjV*' * |7 LJ y — Hjj •
,:. V a '
1 m ! »k t ' Ajw* *Tv
i (i f/.’"’^ % * .• JfwRJ 1* t3*V A* - a ■■ : '.'i|*, /*■ *>' * *» *»*-' * •. 1 k& x '$.
IV OO1)B V R A , VICT 0 R1 A
The entire homestead and farm buildings are lighted
with electricity, generated from a model power house and
plant under the personal supervision of the owner’s only
son, Mr. Neville Payne. This plant also supplies all
the power for the refrigerator, and is an economical and
valuable asset to the successful working of the farm.
In all the improvements, the policy has been to adopt
a dual purpose design, thereby utilising buildings, shed
and yards throughout the year, and not only for a set
period. Substantiality has also been a keynote in all the
construction.
which have not only made a prominent reputation at the
Melbourne Royal Show and the Australian Sheep-
breeders’ Association exhibition, but also amongst those
breeders throughout Australia and New Zealand who
have purchased or handled the Woodburn bred stock.
Although Red Poll cattle have been maintained at
Woodburn since 1917, it was not until 1920 that the
foundation of the present (1929) stud herd was laid.
In that year were imported from England one stud bull,
Hatton Gerald, and two stud cows, Plumstead Permain
and Plumstead Pip, both being in calf to the famous
RED POLL CALVES BRED
Mr. Payne, being a lover of animals and a staunch
supporter of purebred stock, has been connected with
the ownership of such almost throughout his entire life-
time, commencing as a boy with his ponies and dogs. His
love for horses is still one of his foremost traits, there
not being a happier moment than when, with the ribbons
in his own hands, he sets out for a drive behind his famous
four-in-hand or is astride one of his favourite cobs or
backs.
But it is not only horse flesh that catches the owner’s
eye, for he has at Woodburn founded a high class stud
of Red Poll cattle and one of Ryeland sheep, both of
IX THE WOODBURN HERD
English stud bull, Sudbourne Hercules. In 1923 a
further importation was made in the purchase of the
stud bull, Easton Liberator 12232, from the Easton Hall
stud herd in Suffolk, England; this bull was sired by
Sudbourne Albion, out of Easton Liberty.
Then followed further importations from the Knepp
Castle stud herd at Horsham, England, of the stud cows,
Knepp Meadow Dell Ist and Knepp Prudence, two cows
which, like all the Woodburn importations, had won high
show honours at the leading English shows.
From the Earl of Stradbroke’s stud herd at Henham
Hall, Wangford, England, were imported the stud cows.


THE DRIVE FROM WOODBURN HOUSE
•' • «%■£ A w/v ■
■P m -'^ # % jT^T^pr 1 9f,~^' %3bbk wik *f L - jfrjy ■#!
• V * • " S " ™ T ft Hg y» jB* ; :::.|U ' V
, r % f ’ •” IPfemI Vy a /|* 'f ji B jg :..,:3H| ■ J|
ftjpi'A' \ ■ -~" - "" r ' ■ ~5>
IF OODB U R X, VI C T ORI A
THE LAKE ON THE BANKS OF WHICH THE HOMESTEAD IS SITUATED


WO O D BUR N, VICTORIA
WOODBURN BRED RYELAND EWES AND LAMBS
RED POLL BREEDING COWS


* _y pfl
wSt* - |
fkt , .
't, ;* -£ jj
-*»yyftfci Br
IV OO1)H U R \. VI CTORIA
THE DAIRY WITH THE HOMESTEAD WATER SUPPLY
Henham Dorcus and Manor Tiarella, both daughters
of the well known stud bull, Henham Dairyman.
Another imported stud cow was Necton Effigy, bred in
the Necton Hall stud herd. Norfolk, England, a daughter
of Sudbourne Croesus, out of Necton Ena, and in calf
to the stud bull Marham Armistice.
Mr. T. H. Payne being determined to build up the
Woodburn stud herd with only the purest bred, most
typical and best available strains in England, made a
still further importation in 1927, by the
purchase from the Whiteway stud herd
in Gloucestershire, England, of the stud
cows Whiteway Wildberry, by Necton
Gloucester out of Manor Holly 2nd,
and Wh iteway Wilful, by Necton Gol-
conda, from Whiteway Wayward ; also
from the same breeder was purchased
the stud bull, Whiteway Wiseman, by
Necton Gloucester out of Framlingham
Proud Lass.
With importations of such quality and
purity of breeding, it will be seen that
the Woodburn stud herd of Red Poll
cattle has been founded and maintained
on direct descendants of some of the
best blood in England—strains that
have not only won the highest honours
for type in the English and also Aus-
tralian Royal shows, but have also
achieved remarkable success in thevieldof
milk and production of butter-fat, while
at the same time the steers have on the
block clearly demonstrated the early
maturing beef qualities of this popular
dual purpose breed of cattle.
In 1928, the sires in use in the Wood-
burn herd included the two imported
stud bulls, Easton Liberator and White-
way Wiseman, and the home bred stud
bull, Woodburn Standard. The former
sire, Easton Liberator (imp.), which
was placed first at the English Royal
Show in 1922, sired in addition to many
successful females the bull Woodburn
Liberal, champion at the Melbourne
Royal Show in 1927, and later sold to
a well-known and successful Victorian
breeder of Red Poll cattle for 300
guineas. Woodburn Standard, which
won the championship at the Mel-
bourne Royal Show in 1928, is also
a son of Easton Liberator out of Woodburn
Meadow Lea. His grand-dam, the imported cow Knepp
Meadow Dell Ist, was the champion cow at the Mel-
bourne Royal in 1923, and again in 1925. His grand-
sire was the famous English stud bull, Gressenhall Mar-
quis, a son of the celebrated stud cow. Gressenhall Molly,
which at the English Royal Show milking trials in 1921
won first place against all breeds and produced just on
2000 gallons of milk for the year under test.
A SECTION OF THE DRIVE


SINGLE men's QUARTERS
__ i' ‘" 11 " 1 ~ , " tii, * i,,^ i
- |»g— mm?®**:’ * s * '" - U. w .y.- —~ —
- • ' - £
jr oo d n u r\. vi cro ri a
THE SHEARING SHED
MILKING SHED, CALF PENS AND FOWL RUN


; ■■■
IV OOD BU RN, VICTORIA
TYPICAL RED POLL BULL IN THE WOODBURN HERD
The other imported stud sire, Whiteway Wiseman,
was sired by Necton Gloucester, the unbeaten
champion of England and Scotland in 1922, while
his dam, Framlingham Proud Lass, yielded for three
lactation periods an average of over 560 lbs. of butter
fat.
The stud herd at Woodburn in 1928 comprised a
total of 35 breeders, all being either imported or direct
descendants of importations. With all the stock, most
careful records are filed of the entire career of the
animals, both males and females, thereby making avail-
able the good points as well as any faults in the animals
kept either for stud purposes or those disposed of as sur-
plus stock. In all the stock the breed-
ing is entirely pure, coming only from
stock eligible for entry in the English
herd book and in the main section of
the Red Poll Herd Book of Australasia.
And it is on this account that the Wood-
burn stud of Red Poll cattle can justly
lay claim to being one of the purest bred
herds in the southern hemisphere.
Mr. Pa\ ne has only exhibited his Red
Poll cattle at the Melbourne Royal
Show, and since the stud’s formation in
1920 he has won in addition to numer-
ous reserve champion awards and class
prizes the following:—ln 1921, cham-
pion bull with Hatton Gerald (imp.),
and champion cow with Plumstead Pip
(imp.); in 1922, champion bull with
Woodburn Earl, and champion cow
with Daffodil; in 1923, champion bull
with Woodburn Earl, and cham-
pion cow with Knepp Meadow Dell Ist (imp.) ; in 1924,
champion bull with Easton Liberator (imp.), and cham-
pion cow with Woodburn Pearl; in 1925, champion bull
with Easton Liberator (imp.), and champion cow with
Knepp Meadow Dell Ist (imp.) ; in 1926, champion cow
with Woodburn Effigy; in 1927, champion bull with
Woodburn Liberal, and champion cow with Woodburn
Gratis sth; and in 1928, champion bull with Woodburn
Standard, and champion cow with Necton Effigy (imp.).
In all seven championships for males and eight for
females in eight years, a wonderful record.
Honours in the show ring have not been confined to
the direct exhibits from Woodburn, for both bulls and
cows sold to clients have won high honours, Woodburn
Earl winning a championship for Mr. Graves, Mt. Bat-
tery, and Woodburn Laureate, exhibited by the Warragul
High School, at the Melbourne Royal Show in 1927,
securing the reserve bull championship. This fact de-
monstrates that the stock sold from the Woodburn stud
herd have the same high qualities as are found in the
animals used in the stud itself.
Ryeland Sheep
Being a staunch supporter of pedigreed stock of ab-
solute purity of strain, Mr. Payne has also exercised these
views in the formation and the maintenance of his stud
flock of Ryeland sheep, founded in 1926 on direct im-
portations from England and New Zealand of only the
best available rams and ewes.
The English importations, which were specially
TYPICAL RED POLL COW IN THE WOODBURN 11ERD


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE FARM BUILDINGS
w\ '■& f ' m vAmfrifcmi l#dl fwJB
sip 4 & ''» i : . ■ .„■ jt
•* *| | I . JL , ■■ '"” " ♦ .. ,
*’ r WBjk*.d& f '*ay -Asiv*' * », *-** r ' *~ ’*' ’ -> *“ ' **' "** **
• llB^*ilE.>ii»«»i^WSSt^3F' ,;; Sir •• ■»,,, . ■ ..... , ,,*.
•.•■■■' > :•* • ..*. - f ■*
* , V , > ■V
IVOODBURN, VICTORIA
A DISTANT VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD


'• I
WOOD B U R ,V, VICT O R I A
selected by Mr. T. Mclntosh, a noted stud breeder in
the homeland, and father of the present manager at
Woodburn, included the stud ram, Thomas’s Idol, cham-
pion at the Hereford show and sale, where he was pur-
chased, bred by Mr. D. J. Thomas, of Monmouth,
Wales; 1 ram. 5 ewes, 1 ram lamb and 5 ewe lambs from
Mr. T. L. Martin, of Ashe Warren, Overton, Hamp-
shire, England; 10 ewes and 5 ewe lambs from the
Right Hon. Lord Cawley, of Herrington Hall, Leo-
minster, Herefordshire, England; and 10 ewes and 3 ewe
lambs, including the champion and reserve champion at
the English Royal, shown in pens of three, from E. W.
The Woodburn Ryeland sheep carry the true charac-
teristics of the parent sheep, which have acclimatised re-
markably well. This purity of breed, correctness of
type and its early maturity have gone a long way to
popularise the Ryeland in Australia. Its readiness to
nick with the Memo ewe promises a new avenue for
the production of an almost ideal crossbred export lamb,
while the blending of the two wools results in a most
profitable crossbred fleece—should it be desirable to hold
over the lambs. This first cross ewe promises to de-
velop into a popular dam for mating with the Ryeland
ram with the view of producing a blocky, solid and early
SOME OF THF
Langford Limited, of Wye Bridge, Herefordshire, Eng-
land. Before leaving England these ewes and rams
were all prize winners at the leading English shows, while
since they have been in Australia they and many of their
progeny have annexed the highest awards at the Mel-
bourne Royal and Australian Sheepbreeders’ shows, hav-
ing won all the first prizes, champions and reserve cham-
pion awards at the above-mentioned shows during the
past three }ears.
FARM BUILDINGS
maturing lamb in those localites where it has been found
necessary to utilise the first cross dam in the place of
the Merino ewe.
In all the stud stock maintained at Woodburn, purity
of breed and trueness to type have been the constant aim
of the owner and his manager, Mr. John Mclntosh, who
was, before leaving England, in charge of the stud herd
of Red Poll cattle owned by Lord Folkstone, of Long-
ford Castle, England.


%
V
