

WORK
THE FUTURE OF BRITISH INDUSTRY
Being a Report by the
Conservative Sub-Committee on Industry
Price 6d.
January , 1944
Published by the Central Committee on
Post-War Problems set up by the
Conservative and Unionist Party Organisation,
24, Old Queen Street, Westminster, S.W.1


RECONSTRUCTION
In October, 1941, a Central Committee on Post-War
Problems was set up by the Conservative and Unionist Party
Organisation to survey and report on the many new political,
social and economic problems created by the war.
The Committee approached its task on the assumption
that the great political parties have all something to contribute
to the common pool of wisdom and experience that will be
needed to rebuild a battered Britain in a shattered world.
A number of sub-Committees were appointed, composed
mainly of members who had specialised in the subjects
under consideration. They were given wide terms of reference
and were left free to tackle their problems with open minds
and without regard to the Party’s pre-war policies. They
were required to produce neither final solutions nor com-
petitive political programmes, but rather to seek to establish
sound foundations for the measures of national reconstruction
which it will be necessary to introduce when, or before,
victory has been won. Their surveys and recommendations
will be embodied in a series of reports, to be presented to
the Leader of the Party.
This pamphlet contains
A Report by the Sub-Committee on Industry.


CONTENTS
I. Introductory .. .. .. .. .. .. i
11. The Importance and Development of Industry .. 2
Human effort applied to natural resources.
On industrial progress the standard of living depends.
How industry has developed.
The small business an essential part of national life.
111. The Purpose of Industry .. .. .. .. .. 5
Responsibility for creation of plenty.
Means of livelihood.
More than a means—a part of life.
Selling exports to buy necessaries.
IV. Effects of the War .. 8
The ground lost.
The ground gained.
Critical outlook for Britain’s balance of paypients.
V. Future Needs 10
Human quality: brave initiative: technical advance.
New attitude to science.
Outstanding importance of education.
VI. The Human Side .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
The right atmosphere within industry.
Men back from the Services.
Everyone should have status and feel responsibility.
Training for management.
Essential Work Order in peace not compatible with freedom.
Conditions of work and employment as they ought to be.
Trade unions: their power for good or harm.
Future of women in industry.
Equal pay for equal work.
The pre-war fear of insecurity.
Guaranteed working week wherever practicable.
VII. International Collaboration For Prosperity .. 21
International failure the greatest cause of unemployment.
New grounds for hope.
Britain’s special position in a world plan.
New international agencies needed.
(i) for currency stabilisation.
(it) for temporary credits.
(Hi) for price stabilisation.
(iv) for raising economic standards of backward peoples.
(v) for statistical data.
B


VIII. National Employment Policy 26
Government and export trade.
Efficiency for export.
Officials dealing with export matters should be specially
trained.
The whole British people must understand Britain’s export
task.
Cyclical and structural unemployment: counter-measures.
Cheap credit can stimulate recovery but not prevent
depression.
Public works a buffer but not a cure.
Clarifying the budget.
As soon as reasonably possible, the budget must be balanced.
Excessive taxation would discourage those qualities the
nation needs. t
Normal policy for employment—to maintain capital
expenditure.
Post-war need—to expand output of consumption goods.
Foundations of internal policy against unemployment.
IX. Industry and State : The Future 35
Hard times or golden age?
Future of controls.
Location of industry.
Nationalisation examined.
Public corporations.
Monopolies.
Trade Associations.
Private enterprise best serves public purpose
New relationship between Government and industry.
X. The Moral Basis of Enterprise 44
Profits, reserves, and taxes.
The ” profit motive.”
The " profit criterion.”
XL The Essence of the Matter 47
MEMBERSHIP OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE
Mr. Henry Brooke, M.P.,
Chairman.
The Lord Aldenham.
Mr. Roger H. Gaskell.
Sir Walter Benton Jones, Bt.
Mr. A. J. F. Macdonald.
Mrs. D. Martin.
Mr, G. W. Obey.
Sir Alexander Roger, K.C.I.E.
Mr. Oliver Simmonds, M.P.
Mr. R. P. Sinclair.
Mr. Spencer Summers, M.P.
Mr. Eric Harrison,
Hon. Secretary.


WORK
THE FUTURE OF BRITISH INDUSTRY
I. INTRODUCTORY
1. This Report is not a detailed political programme. The impera-
tive needs of war take precedence. Amidst the struggles and the
tragedies of a world war, it is not the moment for shaping all the details
of post-war policy. The time for that will come when the end of
the war is nearer in sight, and it becomes possible to say with less
uncertainty what the economic state of this nation and the world will
then be.
2. Instead, the Report is a statement of lasting principles and
salient facts concerning twentieth-century industry, leading up to a
number of conclusions. It has been prepared by a group of Con-
servatives representing a wide variety of outlooks, experience and
knowledge. Some are Members of Parliament, intimate through their
constituencies with social and political feelings. Some hold responsible
positions in industry and commerce. Some have contributed to the
group’s discussions the special ideas and hopes of younger people.
3. We started with a complete willingness to consider constructively
and on its merits every practical suggestion, united in the con-
viction that unemployment such as darkened much of the world
between the two wars must not recur. We sought to face our task
with a full recognition of the changes which this war has already
wrought, and of the yet greater changes which peace may bring, when
the spirit, the labour, and the inventive genius of mankind can turn
from fighting and destruction towards the furtherance of human happi-
ness again.
4. We have had the advantage of consultation with people of expert
knowledge in different walks of life. To all who assisted us in this
way we express our gratitude. The opinions and suggestions which
we set forth in the following pages, however, are our own. We ask
that they be given fair and reasoned consideration by members of all
political parties and of none; for, in working them out, we have been
animated by no desire except to discover how the British people can
look forward hopefully, surmount difficulties and —in the words of the
Atlantic Charter —further “the object of securing, for all, improved
labour standards, economic advancement, and social security.”
B 2
1


II. THE IMPORTANCE AND DEVELOPMENT OF INDUSTRY
Human effort applied to natural resources
5. “Production,” it has been said, “is the most vital activity of
the nation.” Almost every material thing which one sees around
one, in the home or outside, is the product of agriculture, of mining,
or of industry. These things—not money —constitute the real material
wealth of the world. Human thought and effort, applied through agri-
culture, mining and industry to the natural resources of the earth,
have made these things available; human thought and effort, through
transport and commerce, have brought them where they are needed.
6. Agriculture is at the root of national life, here and in all lands.
Agriculture and industry must go forward together. It would be a
sorry day for Britain if she were again to seek industrial prosperity
at the price of agricultural poverty, as in spite of Conservative warn-
ings she did in years gone by. We value the quality of agricultural
life too highly to view such a contingency as anything but a national
disaster. Even from the narrowest standpoint of industrial interest it
would be bad policy not to support sound measures for agricultural
development. It is to the direct benefit of industry that the standards
of living of all those dependent on the land should rise. Furthermore,
the difficulty which will face Britain after the war in finding means
to pay for imports renders it imperative that she should aim at
producing a much larger proportion of her food requirements from
her own land than she was doing up to 1939.
On industrial progress the standard of living depends
7. Within the last 150 years industry has outstripped agriculture as
the largest source of the material welfare of the British people. When
we refer to “ industry ” in this Report, we shall normally use the word
in its broadest sense, to include not only manufacture and repair in
factories and workshops, but also mining and quarrying, processing
of the raw products of agriculture, power provision, transport, and
the various services of commerce which bring goods into the hands
of a purchaser maybe hundreds or thousands of miles from the place
where they were grown, mined or manufactured.
8. Through industry, in this wide sense, the majority of families in
the United Kingdom get their livelihood, nor could so high a popula-
tion as 46 millions be sustained within its borders otherwise. It is
therefore on industrial progress that the standard of living of the nation
principally depends. It lies in the power of each succeeding generation
to assist this progress or to obstruct it; to raise or to reduce the national
standard of living which their children will inherit. We are all of us
like life tenants, and for the good of the future we must take long views;
the current controversies of the day may perhaps befog the issues that
2


are truly vital, and in pursuance of untested theory we must be watch-
ful not to restrict the sources from which progress springs. If industry
were to decay, or to be damaged by wrong political policy, the whole
population would have to do without all kinds of things which it has
become accustomed to find on sale in the shops —and not to do without
them temporarily, as in war, but to cease to look forward to their
return.
How industry has developed
9. Over a period of centuries commerce and industry have been
built up by the work and energy of “the man in the street”—men
who have been a bit more adventurous, more inventive, or more hard-
working than their neighbours—men of individuality coming from
every class of society. Even the largest concerns started from small
beginnings. Those who now occupy positions of some responsibility
in businesses, small or great, did not arrive where they are by chance,
but through the special abilities or energies displayed by them or their
forbears. To imagine that anybody could do their jobs just as well,
or that they could easily be replaced by State officials, is to make an
immense assumption—and a disastrous one for the community, if it
turns out to be wrong. The main element of vigour and vitality in a
nation like the British is not the State; it is the man in the street.
What gives rise to dangerously false thinking is the careless repetition
of half-truths such as that “the problem of production nowadays is
solved.” That is nonsense, if it suggests that goods can be relied on to
flow from the industrial system without the continued application of
hard thinking—scientific, technical, and administrative—as well as the
keenness and skill of the craftsman in the workshop and the staff in
the office.
10. No policy for industry at any time is worth attention unless it is
firmly based on current facts. One of the acutest dangers is that so
much political controversy about industry is carried on in obsolete
terms which have little relation to the problems of the nineteen-forties.
Since the Industrial Revolution it is not only on the technical side that
British industry has developed. Tremendous changes have taken place
also in its form and structure. The slipshod idea of industry as all
conforming to one type—pictured as a select class of independent
“capitalists” employing, in almost dictatorial fashion, crowds of ill-
educated and poverty-stricken “hands”—is an ignorant distortion of
the truth.
n. Modern industry consists of every type of business, from the
very small to the very large. Immediately before this war, one-third
of all the workpeople in manufacturing industry were to be found in
the multitudes of small factories or workshops where fewer than 100
persons were employed ; one-third were in factories employing between
3


ioo and 500, and one-third in factories where more than 500 worked.
There is a world of difference and many an intermediate stage between
the small family concern, still extremely common, employing a dozen
or more people who all know “the boss” and each other intimately,
and the vast integrated company under salaried management with
thousands of small shareholders and thousands of workpeople. If one
industrial development of recent years is more significant than another,
it is the growth of industrial management as a salaried profession,
distinct from ownership and rendering quite false the trite division of
industry into “capital” and “labour.”
12. For various reasons, including heavy taxation on individual
wealth and the increasing capital resources per person employed which
modern industry (owing to technical progress and higher mechanisa-
tion) now requires, the large or even medium-size business owned and
controlled by one man or one family is becoming scarcer. The place
previously occupied by the large owner is being taken by great numbers
of small investors, drawn from nearly all ranks of the community ; and
managing proprietors have given place to salaried managers who may
not be shareholders at all.
13. We believe that this notable growth of skilled management is
destined to continue. Inherited money is not—indeed, never has been
—an essential condition of coming to the fore in industry. Oppor-
tunities for the hard-working, alert and adventurous youth of the
country exist nowadays more profusely than ever. It is charac-
teristic of modern industry that it offers full scope for the boy who
comes in at the bottom to advance right to the top on his own merits.
The far-reaching improvements in education, to which Parliament
is now pledged, will give merit a greater certainty of a good start
than ever before. One of the Conservative ideals for industry is
that it may offer an honourable career open to all, without distinction,
who prove themselves to have the necessary talent and capacity for
hard work.
The small business an essential part of national life
14. Alongside these developments in the structure of the larger types
of company, the smaller business under personal ownership and con-
trol remains an integral and essential part of our national life. Nine-
tenths of all the firms engaged in productive industry before this war
employed fewer than 50 workpeople, whereas only one in a hundred
employed over 500. The economic manufacture of standard articles
may demand mass production on a scale which only concerns with
large resources can undertake; but the vigorous development of new
ideas and inventions and specialities of every kind must become more
and more important if British industry is to play its full part in the
world, and this is the field where the individual manufacturer, no less
4


than the large company with an extensive research staff, will find his
opportunity.
15. The type of man who has raised himself by his own efforts to be
his own master is the backbone of a country. Not possessing great
resources, he adventures all he has in the effort to make a success of
the business he undertakes. If things go well, he reaps his reward; if
badly, he faces the loss himself. It would be a national disaster if
State policy were to drive such men out of business, and to close this
traditional and universal opening for all who possess the initiative to
set up on their own account. That to a grave extent has been allowed
to happen under stress of war, particularly among small traders and
shopkeepers. But the special and important problems of retail trade
lie outside the scope of the present Report.
III. THE PURPOSE OF INDUSTRY
Responsibility for creation of plenty
16. As Conservatives we believe that everybody engaged in industry
owes a responsibility to the country, and everyone in industry who
honestly tries to fulfil that responsibility—whether labourer, craftsman,
foreman; office staff, manager, director or owner—establishes an equal
right to have his or her interests upheld. It is a partnership of indi-
viduals bringing different qualities to a common purpose.
17. The ultimate peace-time purpose of industry is to supply people
with what they need and want: in other words, to help in continuously
raising the standard of living of everybody—all who work in industry
or on the land or in other occupations at home or abroad, and all who
are too ill or too old or too young to work. A main objective of policy
must be to prevent recurrence of prolonged unemployment. But that
alone is not enough. Industry exists to serve the consumer, and only by
serving him well can it provide jobs. The real task is to create plenty,
till every household in Britain and the British Empire can enjoy the
good things of life, till backward countries prosper as never before,
and millions in distant continents are released from poverty by having
the products of technical progress and industrial advance brought
within their reach. To practice ca’canny at work, or to destroy so-
called “surplus” goods, stands condemned by this test. To create
plenty for everybody and thereby provide the material basis for
achieving the higher ends of human life is the cause by which the
whole of industry and every member in it should be equally inspired.
It is a cause worthy of the best energies of the young and vigorous,'
and the finest efforts of a united people—-the worldwide achievement
of freedom from want.
18. Post-war Government policy towards industry must not only
take into account all the varied and developing forms in which busi-
5


ness is carried on, but must also be based on a true understanding
of the place which industry holds in British life. Although the Indus-
trial Revolution in its early stages marred large parts of our land with
dirt and ugliness, yet to its developments we directly owe the immense
advances in all the amenities and conveniences of daily life for every-
one which distinguish 1944 from 1744. For some people it has
become a popular, and easy fashion to decry the ‘ ‘ capitalist ’ ’ system
under which British industry has gone forward. But those who like
to abuse it tend to overlook that for 150 years, during which the
population has grown from 8 millions to 46 millions, it has produced
an almost continual rise in real wages accompanied by greatly
shortened hours of work. In power to buy, the average working
man’s family before the outbreak of war was twice as well off as in
his grandfather’s time.*
19. There is no reason to imagine that this progress is at an end.
On the contrary, if Britain avoids serious errors of policy, it should
proceed more rapidly than ever before. The insinuation that under
capitalism ‘ * the poor get poorer while the rich get richer ’ ’ has been
proved completely false. The Beveridge Report testifies that “the
real wages of labour—what the wage-earner could buy with his
earnings just before the present war—were in general about one-third
higher than in 1900 for an hour less of work each day.” The system
has already given the average British town-dwelling worker a standard
of living equalled hardly anywhere in the world, except in other
“capitalist” countries such as the Dominions or the United States
of America. All this comes about because the system has created, and
will go on creating, a colossal increase in all the goods which go to
make national wealth; and as one of our leading economists has said,
“working-class standards of living are much more likely to be raised
by increases in production than by changes in distribution.”f
Means of livelihood
20. But industry is more than a producer of goods ; it is also a means
of livelihood. The people of our country are not concerned only to
see the goods there, in shop windows. They are vitally interested
in having a job, and therefore earnings, and therefore the means to
buy the goods. The main result they ask just now of Government
policy is that it shall enable British industry to provide steady employ-
ment for all who depend on jobs in industry for their daily bread.
*For further' evidence, see 7A F Survey of the Social Structure of England and
Wales, by A. M. Carr-Saunders and D. Caradog Jones, p. 101 :—“ It is broadly
true to say that the ordinary person in 1913 was four times as well off in real
commodities as the person in the corresponding place in the social scale in 1801.”
Everyone alive to-day who can remember 1913 has seen the continued progress
since then.
\The Social Framework (1942), p. 190: by J. R. Hicks, Stanley Jevons
Professor of Political Economy'in the University of Manchester.


The Conservative Party has always stood out against the popular
19th-century idea, prevalent still in some quarters, that nothing at all
matters except to raise the total national wealth in terms of goods to
the maximum. There would be no virtue in vast accumulations of
imported goods, with millions of unemployed unable to buy what
they needed.
21. In the forefront, therefore, we put the aim of full employment—
which means the highest possible production coupled with proper
distribution of purchasing power, so that a rising standard of living
can be enjoyed by all. No nation should be content to make security
of employment the sole and final object, but it is the necessary basis
for further social advance. We differ from those economists and
others who have been so concerned with the problem of raising aggre-
gate wealth to the theoretical maximum, that they have tended to
overlook the question whether their policy will produce instability of
employment and earnings. Our own view is that nothing caused
greater loss to national wellbeing as well as to national wealth (thereby
frustrating the object at which they were aiming) than the unemploy-
ment which persisted between the two wars.
More than a means—a part of life
22. There is a third essential fact about industry. Besides being
a producer of goods and a means of livelihood, it is also for millions
of people a large part of life itself. They leave home every day to
spend their working hours throughout the best part of their lives in
factory or mine, in workshop or office. It ought to be more to them
than merely a colourless means of earning enough to live on. The
nature of the work, the mental atmosphere, the material environment,
their contacts with their fellows, their seniors and their subordinates,
all these must necessarily enrich or impoverish their lives and outlook,
and through them the life and outlook of the nation at a whole. This
should lie at the heart of all thought and action about industry.
Selling exports to buy necessaries
23. Fourthly and finally, there is the international aspect. The
United Kingdom can never be wholly self-supporting in food or in the
essential raw materials of industry. To put this at its most obvious,
we cannot grow in the British climate all the products of the earth,
and there are many important minerals not found under the surface
of England, Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland. We cannot there-
fore feed either our people or our factories unless we import on a large
scale from overseas; and in order to pay for what we need to import
we must be able to sell to other countries British goods and services of
a kind which they want to buy, at prices which they are willing to
c
7


pay. No other people in the world has a greater essential interest
in overseas trade than we. Equally, of course, the British market is
outstandingly important to the rest of the world. Any programme for
the future will break down unless it is designed, among all other things,
to make certain that we can sell sufficient quantities of British products
or services abroad, in order to earn the means of paying for the imports
which we must have.
IV. EFFECTS OF THE WAR
The ground lost
24. Outwardly, the most obvious effects of the war on industry are
the building of new factories all over the country and the installation
of special plant for war purposes, accompanied by the closing of many
other factories whose products can be dispensed with in war, under
concentration schemes or otherwise. The future use of the war factories
and the r ‘ deconcentration ’ ’ of the others will present many intricate
questions, to which the Government must have its answers worked
out before the war is over.
25. From the national standpoint, the gravest material loss inflicted
by the war on our economic system consists in (i) arrears of mainten-
ance work and plant re-equipment needs of every kind, which must
be made good before industry will be efficient for peacetime production
again; (ii) depletion of stocks of many essential raw materials; (iii)
damage caused by enemy action; (iv) the diversion of our industrial
and trading organisation from peace to war purposes, with a consequent
need of large-scale readjustment to peace needs afterwards; (v) the
similar diversion of much of our normal labour force, which will neces-
sitate the acquiring or reacquiring of peacetime skills ; (vi) the enforced
sale of a great part of our overseas investments. Considered as a
machine for raising the standard of living, these are the real losses
suffered by the British economic system through war. They can be
mitigated, if the Government frames wise plans for demobilisation and
training, and conducts its budgetary and financial policy so as to
expedite the re-equipment of industry and help its competitive effi-
ciency. They will be worsened if Government policy takes too little
account of those needs.
The ground gained
26. Against these losses due to war there are gains to record also.
The war of 1914-18, all know, gave an immense stimulus to technical
advance, and peacetime production reaped many of its fruits. The
effects of this war will have been even more far-reaching. Many
thousands returning from the war will have acquired a technical train-
ing which will prove invaluable to them in industry. New machine
8


tools put into production for war purposes will have peacetime applica-
tions. Management technique has improved. Never has the pace
of invention been speeded up faster than by the tireless energies
of scientists and technicians in these last four years, under the
stress of war needs clamouring to be met. A new age of invention
opens out before the world. Even should its markets be glutted with
old types of goods, there are limitless opportunities to feed them with
new—and that is, after all, the essence of the process of raising the
standard of living. One thing is necessary—readiness to pioneer and
face risks. For maintaining that, it is essential to encourage the spirit
of initiative, of adventure, of hope, not to go slow and play for safety.
27- In addition, there is a more indefinite yet very real gain. Britain
in wartime has shaken herself free from an unhappy and unhealthy
period of self-doubt and cynicism, for which there were many causes
(the persistence of unemployment being the chief), but which tended
only towards ineffectiveness. During this war the nation has found
within itself a greater unity than, perhaps, ever in history. In the
months after Dunkirk, it showed and learnt that it was capable of
miracles. Though it will enter the years of peace shorn of some of its
former assets as an industrial nation, nevertheless there are many
which it retains, and from the furnace of its war experience it may win
new ones greater yet, ready to its hand provided that it preserves real
national unity, strong leadership, sane Government, and confidence in
its power to surmount every obstacle ahead.
Critical outlook for Britain’s balance of payments
28. The export task must be faced squarely. In this crucial matter
the war has radically changed our position for the worse. For very
many years up to 1929 this country had normally a large favourable
balance of payments on overseas account. In other words, we were
succeeding in selling more goods and services abroad than were neces-
sary to pay for our imports. With the resulting surplus we were
increasing our investments overseas, and thus stimulating further
development of prosperity elsewhere which was mutually beneficial.
But, as the greatest trading nation in the world, we were heavily hit
by the world trade slump of 1929 onwards, and in all the years from
1930 to the outbreak of war in 1939 we were experiencing grave
difficulty in selling abroad enough to pay for our imports. We failed
by more than £50,000,000 in 1931 and 1932, and again in 1937 and
1938. In the other years we were able to avoid an adverse balance of
payments only because the hard work and enterprise and thrift of
previous generations had built up large capital investments abroad,
which continued to bring us a return of some £200,000,000 a year.
This return reached us principally in the form of imports of foodstuffs
and materials.
C 2
9


29. In the first two years of war, however, we had no choice but
to sell and turn into cash a great part of these overseas investments.
Otherwise we could not have afforded to buy the enormously increased
supplies from overseas which it was imperative for us to have for
carrying on the war, up to the time when the United States eased the
situation for us by its Lease-Lend legislation and Canada came to our
aid with generous dollar gifts. What is left of our overseas invest-
ments by the end of the war will be counterbalanced by heavy liabilities
to other countries, so that we shall no longer receive our former large
net investment income from abroad. Other items which used to help
to pay for our imports, such as British shipping, insurance and finan-
cial services, hitherto sought after by the rest of the world, will like-
wise be reduced for the time being. When peace returns, for the
first time in our history we shall find ourselves facing the prospect of
an adverse balance of payments not likely to be less than £200,000,000
a year or nearly half the average annual value of our pre-war
exports.
30. This situation can be met in four ways only: by expecting other
countries to supply us with goods on charity, by accepting loans from
them to cover the bills which we cannot meet, by cutting down our
imports, or by increasing our exports, “visible” and “invisible.”
We cannot expect nor do we desire indefinite continuance of charity or
loans. There are, therefore, only two practical courses, and clearly it
is in the interests of the expanding world trade which we all ardently
wish to see that Britain should solve her problem in the main by
selling more to the world rather than by becoming a less good customer.
It will require a sustained and immense effort, for the war has stimu-
lated rapid development of new industries in many countries abroad,
which henceforth will be able to make for themselves various kinds
of goods that they previously imported. No other great industrial
nation faces in such acute form the absolute necessity for producing the
right goods of the right quality at prices attractive to people overseas;
for otherwise Britain cannot pay her way and live.
V. FUTURE NEEDS
Human quality: brave initiative: technical advance
31. The tasks which lie before British industry cannot be fulfilled
unless two great objectives are tirelessly pursued. Industry and
commerce must be raised to the highest pitch of keen efficiency, brave
initiative and technical progress which the combined efforts of the
whole British people can attain. But, more important still, we must
constantly and vigorously pay attention to raising the quality of our
whole population; without this, neither efficiency nor true national
well-being can be ensured.
10


32. Heavy unemployment, wrongful use of boy or girl labour, slack-
ness at work in the board room or at the bench, refusal to move with
the times, conditions (whether imposed by employers or trades unions)
which impede good and quick production, restrictions on initiative,
failure to make the best use of ability—these can none of them be
tolerated, not because it is to some section’s interest that they should
disappear, but because otherwise the British nation will .tend to sink
and all its people's hopes be frustrated. Britain is not a self-supporting
country possessing enormous internal resources, free if she wishes to
insulate herself from the rest of the world. She will not be able to
maintain her standards in the post-war era, let alone raise them and
make her contribution to world prosperity, unless she sets herself
industrially to be right in the front. Britain must lead, not lag.
New attitude to science
33. It is essential that there should be in many branches of industry
a new awakening to the importance of organised research and to the
scale on which British industry must further and utilise the advances
of science. A major factor in determining our future prosperity will
be the full use of our inventiveness and technical skill. In war our
scientific resources are fully utilised; in both world wars our scientists
have proved that they are more than a match for their rivals. But in
peace the same opportunity has not been offered them, and as a result
our industrial research has fallen behind that of other countries, par-
ticularly the United States, where much larger sums proportionately
are spent on science both in industrial and in university laboratories.
There are some outstanding firms in Britain whose policy has been
based on research, greatly to their advantage, and considerable progress
has been made by the Research Associations of various industries
under the aegis of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research ;
but, broadly speaking, British industry has insufficiently realised the
scale on which science must be applied by each firm to its own
problems. Threefold advance is urgently necessary: more trained
scientists—a strong development of scientific research in universities—
and far greater encouragement and scope to be given to scientists in
industry.
34. In the national interest it is important to eliminate from our
taxation system every feature which hampers firms seeking to adopt
a vigorous research and development policy. Certain expenditure on
research is allowable as an expense in calculating income-tax liability;
but the manner in which experimental and development work is
treated for tax purposes is restrictive and needs to be altered. The
present arrangements tend to hold up application of the results of
research to the factory. But, in addition to changes in taxation policy,
there must also be a new awakening, not only in the works but among


those who decide the financial policy of companies, to the part which
science, has to play in the future of British industry. On this will
largely depend our ability to improve the efficiency of our older indus-
tries, and to develop fresh products which will find markets throughout
the world by their novelty and value.
Outstanding importance of education
35. But if British industry is to fulfil all the tasks which lie ahead
of it, and to contribute all it can to the welfare of this country and
the world, nothing will surpass in importance the human and personal
side. We welcome the advances in the educational system which the
Government is sponsoring. The character and quality of the education
given matters, in our view, even more than the quantity. But the
more that the national educational system can be merged or dovetailed
into the early years of entrance to industry, instead of stopping like a
cliff’s edge for most boys and girls at 14, the more surely can we
hope for two outstanding results. First, there will be greater oppor-
tunity for new entrants to find the place in industry to which their
aptitude and capacity entitle them, instead of the risk of floundering
at the foot of the ladder and perhaps never getting a foot on a rung.
Secondly, industry will find a progressive improvement in the quality
of its available personnel; and that is a respect wherein British industry,
no longer enjoying its original advantage of being first in the field,
must assert its supremacy henceforward.
36. The successful dovetailing of industry and education demands
that boys and girls entering industry should receive opportunity to
continue their general education, as well as to have their health and
well-being fully maintained, in the transitional years immediately after
giving up full-time school. It equally demands that industry should
be able to rely on sufficient numbers of recruits with well-developed
intelligence and a good capacity to acquire technical knowledge of
different kinds. To meet this situation the Government is proposing
a system of young people’s colleges, attendance at which will involve
release from industry for the equivalent of one day a week. The process
of adjustment to that will be considerably more difficult for small
firms than for large. There is no doubt, however, of the benefit that
is now being derived in those cases where firms are already providing
opportunity for physical and mental education for their young
employees in continuation schools or works schools. It has proved a
valuable investment from every point of view, and it is in the interests
of the nation that it should be extended; but we would stress the
importance of establishing the closest consultation throughout between
those who are qualified to advise from the educational and from the
industrial standpoints, if the fullest benefit is to be obtained.


37. The requirements of industry in the matter of skill need to be
met by nation-wide improvements in technical education. One conse-
quence of Britain having been first in the industrial field is that her
system of technical education is older than in any other country, and,
until recently, it catered predominantly for the working man with an
elementary education behind him who desired to rise. The intention
of the Government, we understand, is to ensure that every part of
the country enjoys modern facilities for technical education on an
adequate scale, whether provided by local education authorities or
by firms themselves. British industry stands keenly in need of
trained men and women who can display broad intelligence as well
as technical competence. We hope that the new educational system,
as a whole, will serve to develop this combination of qualities. In
these matters Britain cannot afford not to lead the world.
38. We cordially endorse the Government’s statement that “much
closer collaboration between industry and commerce and the* education
service is essential,”* and we hope that “the education service ” is to
be interpreted as including the universities. Mutual discussion between
people engaged (in different capacities) in industry and in education
is the soundest means of relating not only the timing but the content
of further education to the needs of the present day. Wei would add
that to permit forms or conditions of juvenile employment which lower
boys' or girls’ industrial quality for the rest of their lives is economic-
ally —quite apart from the moral guilt—a wasteful and wrongful use
of precious national assets.
VI. THE HUMAN SIDE
The right atmosphere within industry
39. The only system that can carry Britain forward is one in
which merit is the key to advancement and reward, and initiative is
not barred by red tape or dead hand. Only by united effort can a
firm, a company, an industry or a nation prosper. The test of unity
is mutual confidence. If either employers or workpeople in a business
or an industry fail to give of their best, or take unfair advantage of
a situation, confidence is sapped and suspicion takes its place. The
real antidote to suspicion is closer knowledge of the other man's
position and full statement of facts.
40. The whole subject of human relations in industry deserves more
extensive and systematic attention than it has generally received. In
the small concern it depends essentially upon personalities; but, with
technical advances tending constantly to enlarge the scale on which
business is conducted, entirely new problems develop. In the main
this is not a matter which can be attended to by legislation. Yet the
consequences of neglect would be menacing not only to industry
*Wbite Paper on Educational Reconstruction, July 1943, para. 82,
13


itself, but to the whole future of the nation. As industrial develop-
ment proceeds it may become easier to get the right technical equip-
ment in sufficient supply, but not the right temperamental equipment.
It goes beyond questions of wages, hours and material conditions of
employment, because there can be factories where those conditions
are good and yet the atmosphere is vitiated by suspicion. The main-
tenance of the right atmosphere and of smooth and co-operative human
relations should be regarded as one, and not the least important, of
the direct responsibilities of the higher management. There can be
no personal or mechanical substitute. The tone must be set from
there. That must be reciprocated by whole-hearted response and
understanding co-operation from the workpeople, and readiness on
their part to abide by agreements entered into by their own representa-
tives. To handle the detail of many of the human problems which
arise out of the development of large-scale industry, there will be
increasing need for properly trained staff.
Men hack from the Services
41. A special responsibility will rest upon industry after the war,
to help the demobilised man to adjust himself to life out of uniform.
Millions, over a period, will be entering or re-entering industry from
the Services. For the older men it will be a return to the kind of life
to which they were accustomed before, but even so they will have
been for several years right away from it. Many will cheerfully
welcome the change. Others will find it hard to give up an active
outdoor life for a relatively static indoor one. Others, to whom
Service life has meant interest and adventure, will yearn for the
same stimulus in the factory or the office, and will chafe if they miss
it. Good sense and understanding on both sides will be needed
if all these men are to find their feet again in industry quickly and
contentedly. The nation will be the gainer if industry can help them
to carry over into civil life and everyday work the same natural spirit
of comradeship, and of pride in doing a job well, which they have
absorbed in the Navy, the Army, or the R.A.F.
V
Everyone should have status and feel responsibility
42. It applies not only to the demobilised man, but universally,
that every individual in industry, in whatever position, should have
as much chance as possible to make his or her contribution to the
better working of the business, to earn recognition or reward for
ideas that prove to be of value, and to gain a real feeling of respon-
sibility in helping to make things run well. Much work in industry,
as indeed elsewhere, is inevitably monotonous; this is one of the
practical ways of offsetting the effects of monotony. The ordinary


employee can know only a bit of all that the management has to plan
for or take into account; a director or manager cannot see everything
that pertains to every worker’s job. A wise management can always
learn something fresh by taking trouble to encourage constructive
suggestions from employees in every grade —who have as vital a stake
as anyone in the success of the business. Thus both the joint objects
will be furthered: the efficiency of industry will be improved, and
the status and human satisfaction of the individual who works in it
will be raised.
43. The principle inherent in Joint Production Committees, which
have been extensively stimulated by the war, should continue to find
a place in British industry in peacetime. Their success has varied
from one works to another, but experience has proved that, if properly
established and conducted for joint consultation on improvements in
efficiency, these committees can and do perform a really valuable
function. It is essential for the future of Britain that workpeople
should gain a greater interest in industrial problems ; Joint Production
Committees open the way to that, as well as enlightening employers
on aspects of those problems which might otherwise pass unnoticed.
They can help, too, to fill the place of the old-time intimate contact
between owners and workers, which the growth of larger units in
industry has unhappily tended to destroy.
44. We cannot overstress the point of status and responsibility. It
is the antithesis of the antiquated idea that the worker is a hand
—a robot. On the contrary, he is jointly engaged in the enterprise
of raising the world’s standard of living, as well as earning his own
livelihood. If he does well, that should earn him reward. Systems of pro-
duction bonuses should be extended, and workers not in the production
line, whose earnings might otherwise lag behind, should where possible
be enabled to benefit when they do their share in achieving good
results. Some firms, to emphasise the idea of common interest, suc-
cessfully adopt policies of profit-sharing, or co-partnership, or the
appointment .of employee directors. We welcome all such attempts
to foster the true sense of unity and joint responsibility for industry’s
success.
45. Above all, we consider that each man or woman or boy or girl in
industry should be afforded every, possible opportunity of under-
standing the whole scheme of production and distribution of the firm’s
goods, wherein his or her own job is but an isolated part. By way
of lectures and discussion, knowledge should be imparted right down
the line from the manager to the man who sweeps the floor—the why
and wherefore, the aims and policy of the business, and the problems
and difficulties that have to be solved if continuous employment with
good wages is to be assured. The importance of helping everybody to
see the ultimate purpose of his or her job has been recognised in war
production; it is necessary in peacetime too, and it is up to employers
D
15


to plan the means and the techniques of doing it. Standards have
radically changed for the better in 25 years, but it would be a pity ever
to forget the story told in the last war of a girl who had broken the
record in making fuses; asked what prize she would like, she replied
that best of all she would like a chance to see a complete shell.
Training for management
46. Successful industrial management calls for a wide variety of
qualities. Even if all these qualities can be combined at the highest
level, firms which grow to any considerable size will increasingly need,
below the top, specialists in the different fields of management. As
an instance, we have already indicated the importance we attach to
the duties of properly qualified personnel management staff in modem
industry. Ample provision should be made throughout the country
for training in management. The essence of successful management
cannot be taught by rule, for it depends on gifts of human under-
standing. But there is a great deal of basic knowledge, of value to
different grades of management, which can either be acquired by long
experience or can be learnt from proper instruction in a relatively
short time. Industry will be the gainer if the opportunities of improv-
ing standards of management in this way are more and more recog-
nised and widened.
47. In spite of difficulties inherent in the plan, we should be glad
to see experiments made with “staff colleges’’ for promising young
men or women in industry, whose natural gifts seem likely to
qualify them for high responsibilites. They should not be reserved
solely for those entering on the administrative side ; they might indeed
grow out of the national development of technical and other advanced
education. If courses at such “staff colleges’’ served to bring
together people of similar calibre from industry, from the Civil Service,
from the universities and elsewhere, not only might the efficiency
standards of the country be raised, but a fuller arid more practical
understanding of each other’s problems and methods—which is greatly
needed in the national interest —might be attained.
•
Essential Work Order in peace not compatible with freedom
48. Large sections of British industry in wartime are operating under
the rigid control of the Essential Work Order. We do not believe that
the stiff restrictions which it places upon both employers and work-
people will continue indefinitely to be acceptable to the nation in the
freer conditions of peace. Except under pressure of war, it is not in
accordance with British traditions to oblige an employer to keep in
his service a particular man, or to compel a man to work for a particu-
lar employer. That conflicts with the Conservative ideal of personal
16


liberty. Economic freedom is not a reality unless men and women
feel free to change their employment, and unless wealth is widely
enough spread for them to be able to fall back on their own resources
to tide over the interval between one job and another, instead of being
left solely dependent on unemployment benefit.
Conditions of work and employment as they ought to he
49. We welcome, however, the effect which the Essential Work
Order has had in raising the general standard of conditions of employ-
ment nearer to the conditions provided by the best firms in every
industry. The places where people work should not be merely safe y
they should be well lit, evenly heated, not overcrowded, well venti-
lated, with good washing and sanitary accommodation, and an efficient
canteen wherever the numbers justify that. They should be attractive
as well as healthy, with thought given to the worker’s convenience and
comfort. Health services in industry, of which the war has brought
so remarkable a growth, should be further developed. It is signi-
ficant that the Ministry of Labour has not had to use its wartime
powers, under the Factories (Medical and Welfare Services) Order,
to exert compulsion on a single firm to appoint a nurse or a doctor.
The results achieved by medical services in industry have been their
own best commendation, and the shortage of doctors and nurses is
the limiting factor on their further expansion.
50. We hope that, though the Essential Work Order and other war-
time provisions disappear, many of the gains will be consolidated for
the future by mutual agreement within industry. That points the
way to extending the Fair Wages Clause, always inserted in public
contracts, to cover other conditions besides wages. It is by now
generally though not universally realised throughout industry that
long hours and a high rate of production seldom go together. The best
length for the working week varies with different occupations, but for
boys and girls under 18 long weekly hours cannot normally be justified
at any job. Annual holidays with pay, in our opinion, should be
universal for all regular workers in all industries.
51. Without impairing the freedom of the progressive individual
firm, much good can result from firms in an industry learning to work
more closely together on production and labour questions. There is
also important work to be done in modernising obsolete and chaotic
wage systems which still survive. We welcome the steps already being
taken in some industries to review existing apprenticeship schemes,
so as to make sure that they are systematic, comprehensive, conforming
to definite standards, and in line with modern requirements.
Trade unions: their power for good or harm
52. Great Britain was the cradle of the trade union movement. In
D 2
1 7


some industries union membership is practically universal, whereas in
others it is relatively small. If British industry be taken as a whole,
rather fewer than half of all the workpeople are union members. It
was a Conservative Ministry which first legalised trade unions. At
the outbreak of this war Mr. Chamberlain’s Government established
the principle that the trade unions, jointly with the employers’ repre-
sentatives, should be brought into consultation with the Government
on all labour questions arising out of the war.
53. Trade unions have therefore become a part of the British
industrial structure. If there were no machinery for collective bar-
gaining between employers and employed, it would be necessary to
create it. Not that the existing machinery is perfect—it produces
anomalous inequalities of wages in different industries, especially where
industries are unequally exposed to the stress of foreign competition —
and reforms are needed for securing better co-ordination of wage-levels
between one industry and another. We do not believe that the demo-
cratic character of trade unionism should be violated by making mem-
bership of a union a condition of employment. Every employee
should enjoy the liberty of freely deciding whether to join a union or
not, and there should be no discrimination for or against trade unionists
within the works.
54. Trade unions were not established to be the preserve of any one
political party. Their wide membership gives them the opportunity
to be powerful instruments in industry for good or harm. It would
certainly be for harm if, through the apathy of a majority of their
members, they fell into the hands of a narrow clique working against
national well-being. A trade union, properly operating to serve the
industrial interests of its membership, can be a valuable school of
democracy; all trade union members, irrespective of political align-
ments, should play their full part in union business.
Future of women in industry
55. The transition from agriculture to industry, and all the industrial
evolution of the past 150 years, have had repercussions on the home
life of the British nation which have not yet received all the attention
and understanding that they deserve. Before the age of coal and
steam, the ordinary manufacturing business was as often as not a
family concern in every sense of the word. The growth of industrial
undertakings, such as we know to-day, had the result of segregating
men and women in a forced separation. Furthermore, as the quantities
of factory-made goods increased, this weakened the demand on the
women of the country to use their energies and intelligence in making
the home a productive centre to meet the needs of daily life.
56. The war has had the effect of bringing men and women together
again in industry, but with a fresh set of consequences for the home


life of the nation. The problem of to-day and to-morrow is how to
preserve and strengthen all that is best in home life, while not depriv-
ing women of the enjoyment of wider freedoms and opportunities.
This can only be solved by frank recognition that we must think out
how to meet altered circumstances, instead of trying to live under con-
ditions designed to suit the past. Scientific thought, for instance,
should be applied to the design of houses, to relieve women of un-
necessary toil in housework and render it easier for them, in so far as
they wish, to take up employment.
Equal pay for equal work
57. If this outlook is maintained, the very important questions
concerning the future of women in industry, which will arise when the
war is over, will smooth themselves out; for although great numbers
will wish nothing better than to return to home life, many others—
married, maybe, as well as single —who have gained their first experi-
ence of industry during the war will without doubt desire to continue
in it. In the long run we do not believe that any industrial difference
of treatment between men and women could or should be sustained
solely on the ground of difference in sex. If they are doing equal
work, their remuneration should be equal. From the standpoint of
British industrial efficiency, that would lead to the employment of
women in those capacities to which they are best suited, and not in
others. Ordinary industrial agreements would apply to women on the
same basis as men. This recommendation of equal pay wherever
men and women are doing equal work must be accompanied, of course,
by the proviso that systems of family allowances and income-tax allow-
ances may have to be appropriately adjusted.
58. Women, no less than men, should be enabled to qualify for the
highest posts in industry, on both the technical and the administrative
side. It is impossible to forecast how many will desire to do so. The
prevalent difference, in all occupations for which men and women are
equally fitted, is that the majority of women, unlike men, do not remain
in industry or business employment for a long period of years; they
mostly leave on marriage. This is a fact impossible to set aside, and
in the training of young candidates for the higher grades it renders
difficult the full equality of opportunity which we should desire to see
generally.
The pre-war fear of insecurity
59. There is no doubt that what was too commonly lacking to the
average man or woman in industry before this war, and what is most
urgently desired after the war, is security to earn a living. The haunting
fear of insecurity was evidenced by the popular reception of the


Beveridge Report. Security must not be given a merely static mean-
ing. It must not be interpreted as the promise of an accustomed
income in the same job that a person has always been doing. No
such promise can be given without blocking progress, for the world
does not stand still, and the price of security is adaptability. But if
economic security means opportunity to earn a living, that is one of
the basic freedoms which must be established for everyone. The
extreme insecurity surrounding the lives of many bread-winners and
their families in those areas of Britain which were heavily hit by the
decline of the older export trades was a deep local tragedy. The fact
that nothing like the same severity of unemployment fell on the rest of
the country did not prevent the thought of insecurity from spreading.
In so far as it was realised that unemployment was afflicting other
countries too, and resulted from an international situation not under
any one nation’s control, that added to the feeling of powerlessness
in the face of inhuman economic forces.
60. Distinct from that type of insecurity is the system of casual
employment, such as has obtained at the docks and elsewhere. The
constant chance of having nothing to do through no fault of one’s
own tends to produce a casual outlook on everything. Life becomes a
gamble, and it is easy always to take the short view when life is so
insecure that long views are a mockery. In such conditions it is mean-
ingless to talk about the dignity of labour.
Guaranteed working week wherever practicable
61. During this war industry has gained wide experience of a form
of guaranteed week under the Essential Work Order, and also of
various schemes to do away with casual labour. Large sections of
industry have learnt for the first time to adapt themselves to the
guaranteed week, and have discovered that the inherent difficulties
which looked formidable at long range can be largely broken down
by efficient planning. We consider that the time has come to make
a minimum of a week’s notice the rule and not the exception through-
out industry; that is, wherever practicable, there should be payment
for a guaranteed working week, with a requirement to give at least a
week’s notice on either side. Many firms have long set their face
against “standing-off” of workers as a simple way out of all diffi-
culties of irregular demand. We want to see this attitude prevalent
everywhere, and we should welcome the adoption of a week’s notice
as a minimum, not necessarily a standard.
62. Advance, in matters like these, can only come about if both
sides play their part in rendering it possible. Employers cannot under-
take obligations of this kind unless workpeople pay regard to corre-
sponding obligations on their side, and vice versa. In industry, as
in all other walks of life, there cannot be two sets of rules or two


standards of right conduct. There can only be one, and it must be
honoured by everybody.
VII. INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION FOR PROSPERITY
International failure the greatest cause of unemployment
63. It is our view that the greatest single cause of the severe
unemployment which afflicted practically every industrial country at
some time or other between the two wars was the failure of the nations
to diagnose unemployment rightly as a world problem, and to act
accordingly and collaborate confidently with each other in policies
correctly designed to remedy its deep-seated causes. The problem
was an international one ; its solution was therefore inherently difficult,
because the structure of government is national, and international
organisation was embryonic. In the early years after 1918 the principal
nations did succeed in co-operating to avoid worldwide inflation and
to restore the gold standard as a means towards stable exchanges; but
they were too optimistic in supposing that, if only they could recreate
the free conditions of 1914, the patient would recover. In particular,
too little attention was given to the heavily adverse balances of pay-
ments with which many countries had to struggle, and which forcibly
prevented them from pursuing liberal economic policies, however
strong the theoretical arguments in favour of such policies if only the
slate were clean. In consequence, most of the expert discussions and
international economic conferences were foredoomed to failure; with
rare exceptions, especially after the world depression of 1929 had set
in, they resulted in no lasting concerted measures between a number
of countries acting together to raise prosperity and expand employ-
ment. Such agreements as could be reached were in every case limited
to two or a very few contracting parties. They deserve credit as steps
towards international collaboration in a period when experience
repeatedly showed that world economic co-operation was, for the time,
quite unattainable.
64. Yet it was a period when this co-operation was more than ever
necessary. Not only had normal production and trade been utterly
disorganised by the war of 1914-18. That war came at a time when
the rapid 19th-century growth of population in the economically
developed countries was slowing down, when the era of colonial and
pioneering expansion into virgin lands was practically over, and when
the advent of the internal combustion engine was altering economic life
throughout the world. Economic self-determination applied to each
national territory furnished far too narrow a base for solving the
exceptionally acute economic problems which this conjunction of cir-
cumstances created. A direct consequence was the tragic contrast


between the advancing technical mastery over production problems,
and the inability of millions to obtain employment and earnings where-
with to satisfy their needs.
New grounds for hope
65. The economic disorganisation throughout the world at the end
of this war will be far greater than in 1918. Happily, however,
there are new grounds for hope. The Governments of the major
industrial countries have learnt a great deal in the last 10 years about
the right and wrong techniques for applying remedial economic
measures, particularly in budgetary and currency matters. Moreover,
the United Nations have put on record that the purposes for which
they have come together will not end with the military defeat of
their enemies. In the Atlantic Charter they have declared that one
of the common principles on which they base their hopes for a
better future is their ‘ ‘ desire to bring about the fullest collaboration
between all nations in the economic field with the object of securing,
for all, improved labour standards, economic advancement and social
security,”
Britain s special position in a world plan
66. We are convinced that, if these nations do so act together,
devising their own local applications of a mutually agreed master-
plan, and maintaining a reasonable co-ordination of their exchange
control policy, credit policy, budgetary policy and tariff policy, severe
and prolonged unemployment—as we knew it between the two wars —
will not come back. It should therefore be a prime aim of British
policy to ease the way to such collaboration among all the United
Nations, Britain for her part claiming that in the framing of the
master-plan other countries will recognise her special position in two
respects:—
First, she is not an isolated nation, but at the centre of a wide
Empire, all peoples of which have displayed their loyalty to their
King and to the common cause on the field of battle, and with all
of which she has closer historical relations than exist between
countries which lack this kinship. She must therefore assert and
maintain the right of the constituent parts of the Empire to grant
preferential treatment to one another.
Secondly, whatever economic policy she might otherwise desire to
pursue, she cannot be blind to the hard reality of the huge adverse
balance of payments which she will face. If she is to live at all,
and the world to prosper, she cannot enter into any economic policy
which would deny her a solution of that inescapable problem; she
could not agree to any proposal that would involve unilateral
economic disarmament.


We feel it far more important at this stage to call attention to those
two governing facts, than to make detailed recommendations as to
the tariff, commercial treaty and currency policies which Britain
should pursue, in the tragic event of failure to reach international
agreement on world policies for economic expansion.
New international agencies needed
67. The tactics for a post-war British Government’s attack upon the
unemployment danger cannot be precisely laid down until we see
whether, or to what extent, the United Nations will succeed in ham-
mering out a combined economic strategy. The latter will necessitate
important new developments of international economic machinery,
as well as the expansion and strengthening of existing institutions,
such as the International Labour Office, which have a valuable part
to play in furthering collaboration.
(i) for currency stabilisation
68. Everywhere there is a substantial measure of agreement about
the need for some new international currency agency, whatever
differences of view exist about the manner and the rules of its opera-
tion. Instability of exchange rates in the nineteen-thirties inflicted
grievous harm on international trade, and therefore on the employment
situation. For some time after this war, exchange control in some
form will have to remain in force in Britain. We hope that condi-
tions of international trade may make it possible at an early date to
remove irksome exchange restrictions from genuine trading transac-
tions ; but to prevent speculative capital movements it may well be
necessary to retain control in respect of capital transactions which
are unrelated to the development of trade. The importance of decid-
ing'internationally and not by unilateral action on what principles
and at what levels particular exchange rates should be fixed was
recognised before the war, not only by the Ottawa monetary declara-
tion of 1932, but later by the Tripartite Monetary Agreement between
Britain, the United States and France in 1938. If a firm foundation
for the recovery and continued growth of world trade is to be laid,
general stability of exchange rates is a prime necessity, Which every
trading country will have an interest in securing.
(«) for temporary credits
69. The world will also need, as an immediate recovery measure,
suitable mechanism for the provision of large-scale credits to such


countries as will be faced at once with heavy adverse balances of pay-
ments, when the war is over and they can no longer rely upon wartime
Lease-Lend assistance. This would be distinct from long-term loans
to countries needing capital for development or major reconstruction.
No lasting international economic agreements for expansionist policies
can be entered into if some countries are menaced by the fear of being
unable to cope with a grave balance of payments problem—which
would mean, conversely that other countries were continuously main-
taining large favourable balances. The importance of this point was,
as we have stressed, too little recognised by most of those who tried
to secure measures of international economic co-operation between the
two wars. The provision of massive credits for countries in the posi-
tion described, until they can recover equilibrium, appears to be the
one way of preventing a breakdown and rendering it possible to start
rebuilding the war-torn international economic system. We would
add that long-term equilibrium will not automatically be restored
solely by such devices as restricting exchange speculation; no country
can rely in the long run upon enjoying the benefits of exchange stability
unless it has constant regard to its own balance of payments, and to
the effects of its policy on the balance of payments of other countries
with which it wishes to trade.
(in) for price stabilisation
70. In different ways, the currency plans now under discussion are
designed to assist the purposes we have so far mentioned. We hope
that the United Nations will also put boldly in hand long-term
constructive plans for world prosperity. Stable and reasonable prices
for primary producers are a necessity, not only for the sake of
farmers, but also as an insurance against the shocks which widely
fluctuating prices of agricultural products cause to trade and employ-
ment everywhere. This demands the creation of appropriate
machinery, which may differ for different cases. We welcome,the
recommendation of the Hot Springs Conference that a body of broad
principles should be arrived at, through international discussion,
regarding the planning and structure of international commodity
agreements. Those signed during the inter-war period, though in
fact they varied widely in their provisions, came in collectively for a
good deal of criticism, partly misinformed. Whatever the machinery
devised, two essentials are that the interests of consumers be effectively
protected, and that total world export tonnages be not rigidly limited
in such a way as to lead to scarcity prices. The common interest, in
other words, is that traffic should be regulated, but not restricted,
71. Further study should be given to the practicability and value
of extending international agreements to other types of commodity,
and also to the principles governing and limiting their extension.


In certain circumstances there are positive advantages to consumers as
well as to producers in international cartels covering industrial pro-
ducts, provided always that their regulating purpose is steadily
expansionist and not selfishly restrictive. In our opinion any British
company entering an international cartel should be required to report
its full terms without delay to the Board of Trade, so as to ensure
that it does not conflict with the commercial policy of the nation. A
danger often overlooked is that international agreements, whether
covering primary products or manufactures, may tend to stereotype
the allocation of markets on the basis of some previous trading period.
If Britain were to agree to that in respect of any substantial proportion
of her imports or exports, her post-war balance of payments problem
would become insoluble.
(iv) for raising economic standards of backward peoples
72. A marked and unhappy feature of the present world is the wide
gap which yawns between the advanced material civilisation of the
leading industrial nations and the backwardness and poverty of many
other lands, where the mass of the people are still dependent on more
or less primitive agriculture and transport. This gap cannot be
entirely closed, so long as large differences in local birth-rates and
restrictions on migration continue. But there is no insurmountable
obstacle in the way of narrowing it, if that great undertaking is
approached on sound economic and scientific lines. Britain and the
United States and all others of the United Nations, in so far as they
have resources to spare from the development of their own territories,
should set their hands to it. Attention must, of course, be given to
the marketing problems that will arise, where largely increased pro-
duction from the hitherto backward and poor countries is being
planned. But these are not fundamentally insoluble, because, as
we have already insisted, the human race still has innumerable
unsatisfied needs; it is not suffering from general glut. Immense
possibilities in raising standards of living and adding to the welfare
of the population of the world are opened up, and the increase in
world purchasing power thus created would flow back to become a
further safeguard against under-employment in the industrial countries.
It may well be that these tasks can best be carried out under the
auspices of international reconstruction and development agencies, on
which all the nations interested, including, of course, the immediate
beneficiaries, would be represented. We are, of course, well aware
of the complexity of the technical, commercial and financial as well
as the political questions involved; the disadvantages in long-term
fixed-interest loans to governments, for example, have been amply
proved by experience.


for statistical data
73. At present sufficiently sound and comprehensive data do not
exist for arriving at correct decisions, whether nationally or inter-
nationally, on many of these great economic questions ; and yet faulty
decisions based on half-knowledge, however sincerely reached, can
bring untold human loss and suffering in their train. As an essential
step in stabilising employment, an international statistical service
must be built up, more systematic and more accurate than the world
possessed in 1939. The intelligent co-operation of all Governments
will have to be secured, and the service will need to be maintained
by an authoritative body or bodies competent not only to collect
figures but to summarise and publish swiftly the outstanding conclu-
sions to which they point —to perform the kind of external function,
in other words, which such a body as the Statutory Committee on
Unemployment Insurance has so well fulfilled in its own domestic
field.
VIII. NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY
Government and export trade
74. A failure to arrive at international economic agreement between
the United Nations would certainly frustrate that “ economic advance-
ment and social security” aimed at by the Atlantic Charter. But it
does not follow that international action by itself will be enough.
Great internal responsibilities will lie also on the British people and
their Government, as the Prime Minister recognised when he outlined
his idea of entering on peace with a Four-Year Plan. It will be
essential, for instance, for all Government departments concerned,
as well as the general public, to give evidence of a more practical
understanding of the needs and difficulties of exporters than was often
the case in the past. “Exports are made, not by the civil servants
and economists who decide they are important, but by traders.”*
An adequate export trade is as vital to this nation in peace as are
the Fighting Services in war. For minimising political and
currency risks which are outside an exporter’s control, and for
protecting export industries against undue cost-raising burdens (such
as an industry working for the home market might be able to carry,
by recovering the extra cost through higher prices), the Govern-
ment should assume the same kind of responsibility as it naturally
bears for seeing that its sailors, soldiers and airmen are not jeopardised
by faulty equipment, or stinted for rations. What we advocate is not
export subsidies, but the removal of any handicaps on export business
which it is within the Government’s power to remove, and in industries
where export problems are acute we desire to see the fullest co-opera-
♦Professor Henry Clay in the Economic Journal, June-September 1942, p. 151.


tion between the Government and the industry in carrying through
an objective and up-to-date examination of the nature of the difficulties
to be overcome.
Efficiency for export
75. None of this lessens the direct duty on exporting manufacturers
and merchants to make a more intensive study of their job than ever
before, and to keep not merely abreast but ahead of market require-
ments. There is no real basis for prosperity or security in a process
of exporting what other countries could, with little extra difficulty,
make for themselves. Britain must build her export strength on goods
which she can make better than others can, and on new goods which
she can be the first to make. Standards should not be adopted without
consideration of the nature of overseas demand. Overseas representa-
tives must be properly trained and qualified, must know the country
thoroughly and speak its language fluently. Few individual firms will
have the resources to undertake systematic market research on the
scale which will be necessary in the post-war world. War conditions
brought Export Groups into existence. Where forms of collaboration
have been successfully developed in wartime between different export-
ing firms in the same industry, the industries themselves should main-
tain and adapt them to meet peacetime requirements.
Officials dealing with export matters should he specially trained
76. Alongside a vigorous and co-operative outlook on export matters
within industry itself, we regard as essential new measures for train-
ing the staffs of the Government departments concerned, so that they
can instinctively appreciate industry’s export problems from the
inside. Instead of spending their whole Civil Service career in a
Whitehall office, assisting to regulate industry without ever being in
partnership with it, they might be seconded in the earlier part of their
career to work alongside industrialists, attached either to leading firms
or to bodies (like the Export Groups) representative of an industry and
responsible for grappling with its problems. This applies to the staff
of the Board of Trade equally with the Department of Overseas Trade,
and in appropriate measure to the Colonial Office, the Dominions Office,
the India Office and the Foreign Office. In all cases, periods of
overseas experience are desirable to gain first-hand knowledge of the
difficulties and opportunities of conducting British trade abroad. We
hope that plans on these lines will be successfully worked into the
training of the new Foreign Service, and that practical improvements
in the consular services will result.
77. All this applies with special significance to the Colonial Empire,
to those who administer it, and to everyone engaged in Colonial trade.


Partly owing to unremunerative world prices for many Colonial pro-
ducts during the interval between the two wars, development measures
to raise standards of living, welfare and efficiency in the Colonies could
not proceed as fast as many of us hoped. Happily, it is the fixed
intention of Britain now to go forward more vigorously with schemes
of Colonial development of all kinds. We are probably on the eve
of far-reaching changes in the form of our trade with a number of
the Colonies, where secondary industry is likely to grow, resulting in
increased purchasing power but also in a shift in the type of goods
which the population will want to buy from overseas.
The whole British people must understand Britain’s export task
78. In this crucial question of British export trade and its import-
ance for employment, the attitude of the general public can play a
great part too. British people are inclined to be insular-minded.
The manufacturer is sometimes said to believe that he knows what
foreigners want better than they do. It would be no less true to say
that the ordinary person in Britain has little recognition of the necessi-
ties of the export trade. In a democracy like ours that is dangerous.
It may lead to pressure for measures, without adequate thought for
their repercussions on the nation’s export task. The immense effort
which Britain must make to increase her exports demands that her
people should be given a new insight, by education and publicity, into
what it means to have to maintain our standard of living by our
overseas trade in a world where the standard of living of most of
our industrial competitors is considerably lower.
Cyclical and structural unemployment: counter-measures
79. Production for export carries with it an inherent instability of
employment which is absent from production for the home market.
Consequently the social value of raising to the maximum the inter-
national exchange of goods, so that everyone will always buy in the
cheapest markets, may not be so great as nineteenth-century
economists argued. We have insisted already on the truth that what
the people want their Government to assure them is the maximum
security of employment, rather than maximum national wealth if the
latter should conflict with the former (which it need not do). However
that may be, and despite all hazards, no one would or could wish to
see Britain ceasing to be a great trading nation. It would be contrary
to her maritime tradition, her rich store of experience in commerce,
and her direct need to earn the wherewithal to bring in essential
imports from overseas. Yet, however much the ups and downs of
world trade and prosperity can be ironed out by international agree-
ment, it would be false optimism to reckon on their being obliterated


altogether. This means that, by the very nature of her special depend-
ence on world trade, Britain will always be more exposed to ups and
downs than a self-contained country to which foreign commerce is
proportionately less important,
80. It is peculiarly necessary, therefore, that the British people
and the British Government should make up their minds early and
definitely about internal remedies needed for two purposes: first, to
counter the unemployment which every temporary downward swing in
world trade (due generally to causes right outside the control of this
country) will otherwise create; and, secondly, to prevent the more
permanent unemployment which will otherwise afflict particular export
industries if a lasting change occurs in the world demand for their
products more swiftly than they can manage to adjust themselves to
it. The first of these is commonly known as cyclical, the second as
structural unemployment. If we in this country could be certain of
carrying through quickly enough all the constant adjustments which
a changing world requires (for example, transfer of population from
declining industries to others ready for expansion), and if we could
also smooth out—near the top of the curve, not near the bottom—
the fluctuations of the hitherto apparently inescapable trade-cycle, the
root problems of unemployment would be solved.
Cheap credit can stimulate recovery hut not prevent depression
81. One important form of assistance which the Government can
afford to industry and employment is to keep interest rates steady and
low, and ensure conditions which will render plentiful credit available
to sound borrowers. In the interests of the whole people it must
do this continuously, except when a situation arises in which, to
guard against excessive reaction, it is desirable to check a dangerous
boom. But, by itself, cheap credit is not enough. The key to quick
adjustments is adaptability; cheap credit will often assist them, but
it will not ensure them. Down-swings in the trade-cycle originate with
a falling off in expenditure on "capital” goods—new factories, ships,
engines, machinery and the like; cheap credit can stimulate recovery
when the bottom of a depression is near, but it cannot of itself prevent
the fall from occurring.
82. A requirement that anyone who had been six months out of a
job must take a training course to fit himself or herself for different
work would be a step towards countering structural unemployment,
by rendering people whose own trade had permanently shrunk more
mobile and adaptable for a new one. The maintenance of income by
social insurance when earnings were interrupted, though it would not
help our balance of payments nor bring in one ton of the food or
materials we need from abroad, would make some contribution towards
evening out cyclical fluctuations, by keeping up purchasing power in


times of depression. Particular proposals for achieving these purposes
were contained in the Beveridge Report; and the purposes themselves
are essentially sound. Yet social security, in the sense of allowances
when unemployed, is at best a palliative. It is not the real remedy
which the British people want. What they want is assurance of
employment. A policy of employment is the only true basis on which
the nation can have a satisfying system of social security at all.
Public works a buffer but not a cure
83. We are sceptical about the wisdom of relying heavily on
“public works,” the traditional remedy for a trade depression. That
policy was tried in 1929 and 1930, and brought little result. Trade
depression is like a snowball; once started, it grows in speed and
size, and becomes more and more difficult to stop till it reaches the
bottom. The best time to act, therefore, must be when it has hardly
begun; and public works schemes, however carefully they have been
planned ahead, unfortunately take time to come into operation.
Even then, they are limited in their possible magnitude, compared
with the falling off in general business activity which may have
occurred by that time and the size of the gap which it is therefore
necessary to close.
84. We see definite value in having programmes of public works
thought out in advance, which the public authorities concerned can,
under Cabinet advice, speed up or slow down according to the state
of trade. They must, however, be treated as a buffer against depres-
sion, not as a cure for it. We would add two other conditions. First,
schemes must be avoided which have small intrinsic value except
that they give work. Priority must be allotted to projects which will
improve directly either the efficiency of industry (including agriculture
and transport) or the quality of our people: for example, Britain still
has no Severn Bridge, no road bridge over the Forth, quite obsolete
facilities at many of her ports, hundreds of unsuitable school build-
ings, although millions of pounds were spent between the two wars
on local “ public works ” far less vitally necessary to national welfare.
Clarifying the budget
85. Secondly, there is need for clarifying the manner in which the
national accounts are presented. Under the existing system the
expenditure side of the budget includes without adequate separation
items which are different in kind: (i) loan charges on the national
debt (this item alone is distinctively stated); (ii) the cost of current
needs and services, such as old age pensions or the pay of the Armed
Forces; (iii) loan charges on capital works assisted by the Govern


ment, such as the subsidy to local authorities for house-building;
(iv) the full cost of capital works undertaken by the Government,
such as naval shore establishments and trunk roads. This system is
antagonistic to a proper Government policy for maintaining full em-
ployment. One obvious effect is that item (iv) tends to be cut down
whenever revenue shrinks, whereas that is probably just the time when
it ought to be expanded in order to stimulate trade and industry. If
(iv) was replaced by interest and sinking fund on the cost of the assets
created, and if (iii) and (iv) were then joined and presented in a
distinct category, it would become possible for the first time to
exercise intelligent control over the trend of total capital expenditure
by the State from year to year, without risk of presenting a misleading
picture of the budget position to the public. We regard this as an
essential aid to the rational execution of a policy for speeding up or
slowing down public capital expenditure at the right times. It avoids
the fallacy, into which some advocates of a so-called ‘ ‘ double budget
tend to slip, of imagining that payment not merely of the capital
cost but even of the loan charges on public works of this character can
be postponed for ever.
As soon as reasonably possible , the budget must be balanced
86. It has been cogently argued that one powerful weapon for use
by a Government against trade fluctuations would be to budget
deliberately for a surplus in time of boom, in order to be in a position
to assist trade by reducing taxation and budgeting for a deficit when
a setback threatens. We agree that insufficient attention has been
paid in time past to the possibilities of lessening slumps (and thereby
lessening the strain which remedial measures have to carry) by well-
considered Government policy in prosperity periods at the top of the
trade-cycle, when revenue is plentiful. But unfortunately no such
technique will be appropriate to the period on which we are fixing
our minds—the years immediately following the war. For four or
five years at least, the Government will have been spending far in
excess of the yield of taxation in order that the nation may survive.
There will be the post-war credits available for release, at a suitable
time when a stimulus to trade through increased purchasing power
is desirable. But there will be no budget fat to live on; there will
be no surpluses hanging over from boom years. On the contrary, a
sound policy for trade and employment demands that a balanced
budget (treating expenditure as recommended in the previous para-
graph) must be achieved as soon as reasonably possible after the war
is over. Indefinitely continued deficits would do serious harm to the
country’s credit, with evil repercussions on the development and
expansion of industry and employment.


Excessive taxation would discourage those qualities the nation needs
87. It will be far from easy to reconcile the two imperative neces-
sities of an ultimately balanced budget and an early reduction in the
present exceptional severity of taxation. "Direct taxation on all
classes stands at unprecedented and sterilising levels" (to quote the
words of the Prime Minister *) " and besides this there is indirect taxa-
tion raised to a remarkable height. In wartime our people are willing
and even proud to pay all these taxes. But such conditions could not
continue in peace." No one imagines that a quick and drastic reduc-
tion of war taxation to the neighbourhood of pre-war levels is going
to be practicable. The important point is to have a properly con-
sidered objective for taxation policy: one, that is, which will enable
the country to fulfil its real obligations to its own people and the world
at large, and at the same time be designed to stimulate the maximum
of production and employment. If it is agreed, as it must surely be,
that the spirit of boldness—enterprise, resilience, adventure, willing-
ness to take risks, readiness to work hard—can alone carry this nation
of ours through the tasks of peace as it has done through the perils
of war, we must not take, as our aim in the field of taxation, anything
that will be hostile to that spirit. If we do, our reconstruction plans
will be ill-balanced, and in revenue and in employment we shall find
ourselves getting the worst of both worlds. In greater measure per-
haps than any other race, the British people possess a centuries-old
aptitude for personal initiative whatever the circumstances. The
strength of such a community rests on thrift and a reward for thrift —
freedom to save, and ability to pass the benefit of savings on to one’s
children. A sound taxation policy must be such as to preserve this
personal instinct, which is essential for the welfare of the community
not to discourage and kill the urge to provide for the future.
Normal policy for employment—to maintain capital expenditure
88. Economists are now in practically universal agreement that
trade depressions occur through a lack of balance between savings
and investment; a period of expansion of capital equipment ends,
orders for capital goods fall away, and money savings cease to be
put to rapid use for the making of physical property. In economic
terms, the problem is not only to stabilise the rate of capital expendi-
ture instead of leaving it to fluctuate; it is, also, to stabilise the rate
at a high level, sufficiently high to keep everyone in employment.
The public works ’ solution, discussed above, is designed to effect
this stabilising, but it operates too late and too weakly for the purpose.
Accordingly there are those who argue that the State or other public
authorities should take over a number of large industries or transport
*Mr. Churchill’s Sunday evening broadcast, March 21st, 1943.


services—or, indeed, the whole of private industry—in order to be
able to control the rate of capital expenditure over a much wider field
than at present. This argument breaks down for two reasons. In
the first place, no evidence has been brought forward to show that
the degree of control of capital expenditure which can be obtained
under existing arrangements is inadequate. In addition, it rests on
the assumption that these industries would be conducted as efficiently
under public as under private control. There is no warrant for that
assumption; there is abundant evidence against it. The plan offered
as a remedy, therefore, would in practice have the broad effect of
lowering the general health of the whole economic system.
89. The outstanding fact is that, under normal conditions, private
capital expenditure many times exceeds public capital expenditure. It
would therefore require an enormous percentage increase in the latter
to offset quite a small percentage decrease in the former. It is exces-
sive fluctuations in total capital expenditure which are a cause of
cyclical depressions and unemployment. The right course, therefore,
is for the Government to adopt measures which will cause private
capital expenditure to remain steady at a high level. The first essential
for that is political security, both national and international. The
second is economic security, in the sense of a responsible Government
policy in commercial and financial matters at home, and participa-
tion in effective international agreements of the kind described in this
Report. The third essential (though its range of effect will always be
less than the first two) is for the Government to operate plans for
discouraging private capital expenditure at certain periods, and stimu-
lating it when it shows signs of falling off. One way would be by offer-
ing special rates of depreciation allowance for tax purposes on capital
equipment put in hand at the desired time ; another, by guaranteed
loans for projects which would otherwise be postponed until the future
was clearer; another, by holding back the ordering of Government
requirements when trade was active, and bringing them forward at the
moment of slackening—in contrast to the normal practice hitherto,
under which the Government spends more freely when revenue is
buoyant than at times when it threatens to contract. These and other
techniques deserve specially careful study, because the influencing of
even a small percentage movement in private capital expenditure
brings so large a result in terms of employment.
Post-war need—to expand output of consumption goods
90. There is a common view that the trade-cycle is a standard
article, which therefore should be dealt with in some standard way,
and if that standard way could be found all would be easy. This is
a fallacy. The circumstances in which cyclical depression comes upon
a nation may differ widely. Britain in wartime, for instance, has


drastically cut down manufacture of normal consumption goods and
is geared up to an abnormally high rate of output of capital goods
and battle requirements. Part of the problem of avoiding unemploy-
ment after the war will consist in getting the nation’s production
smoothly readjusted to a much greater output of ordinary consumption
goods. In such circumstances it might well be wrong to apply auto-
matically the standard remedy of trying to maintain investment expen-
diture on capital goods.
91. If Britain has a sound Government, and if demobilisation is
conducted wisely, there should be no lack of jobs for several
years after the war. The danger will come later, when the peak
demand for capital goods for reconstruction purposes is passing, by
which time the pressing shortages of essential consumption goods may
have been overtaken. Manufacturers of consumption goods may at
that moment hesitate to go ahead, for fear lest the market for their
products too may shrink. To provide against that, we consider that
greater public attention should be given to such possibilities as, for
instance, financing the bulk purchase of universally desirable household
goods. A steady rate of output of such articles (from boots and shoes
to furniture, refrigerators, and labour-saving equipment of all kinds),
securing the maximum economies from bulk production, and not vary-
ing with temporary fluctuations of the market, should lead to lowered
costs and prices and therefore the creation of new demand from people
who could not otherwise afford to buy. Thought should be given also
to the further possibilities in some trades of encouraging manufacturers
of consumption goods to make for stock, as a means of offsetting
seasonal fluctuations. That is, of course, a wrong (though tempting)
remedy to apply, if there is evidence that demand for the product
in question has permanently contracted. One of the gravest causes
of economic suffering between the two wars was the error—com-
mitted by the electorate as much as by Governments—of hoping
that somehow the old exporting industries would recover and expand
to something like their 1914 size, instead of bravely recognising that
the contractions were permanent and that drastic adjustments were
inescapable—the sooner the easier.
Foundations of internal policy against unemployment
92. It will be seen that we disagree with two extreme views: the
laissez-faire notion that ordinary individuals, if left entirely to them-
selves, will render the economic system so marvellously self-adjusting
that provided the Government touches nothing there will be no unem-
ployment at all; and the other supposition that the potential efficacy
of a public works policy to cure unemployment is quite unlimited.
Both these views are disproved by experience. We look on public
works as, at best, a second string. It is important that public authori


ties should draw up “stabilising programmes” of capital development
which can be speeded up or slowed down according to the state of
trade. We consider it more important still that every industrial under-
taking of any size should have its own 5-year or 10-year plan for
capital expenditure, which equally may be accelerated or held back
according to the needs of the situation. No one has a greater interest
in helping to prevent cyclical depressions than the far-sighted business
firm. We are convinced of the necessity for avoiding restrictive
increases of taxation to keep up the revenue, at times when the wheels
of trade show signs of slowing down. Furthermore, measures for the
control of speculation should form part of the technique for nipping
uncontrolled booms, which may otherwise lead the way to uncon-
trollable depressions.
IX. INDUSTRY AND STATE: THE FUTURE
Hard times or golden age?
93. No one can help noticing a clash of ideas between people who
hold out hopes of a golden age immediately the war is over, when
there is apparently to be money in plenty for all kinds of good things
to be provided by a mysterious entity called the State—which in this
connection is nothing but the taxpayers—and, at the other extreme,
those who warn us of hard times, tightened belts and lean years
stretching ahead indefinitely and depressingly.
94. We do not accept either of these views. The advocates of the
second seem to us to overlook the tremendous speed of scientific
advance in the modern world, which, as we have emphasised, war does
not retard but stimulates. In spite of all the destruction of 1914-18
and the chaos ensuing, relatively soon after that war standards of
production and of living regained and surpassed the 1914 levels,
though, of course, with marked local variations. After this war we
must all key ourselves up to do much better, for the post-1918 recovery
was too uneven and unstable. The advocates of the first view are
less easily excused, for the making of extravagant promises that the
winter of austerity can be changed in a twinkling to high summer
will lead only to disillusionment, shattered hopes and reaction to
cynicism. It is sheer deception to pretend that the moment hostilities
cease this country will immediately be able to enjoy standards of
living which it could not attain before 1939. Four years or more of
destruction cannot enrich the world.
95. Only through increased efficiency and excellence in research,
discovery of new materials, design, production and distribution can
those material betterments be gained which everyone desires for this
country of ours. We look forward with high hopes to the future-
provided there is universal understanding of that truth. This war has


already caused such severe and widespread dislocation and devastation
that in the early days of peace it will be a punishing task to regain
the standards enjoyed by the majority of people immediately before
the war. But great advances in prosperity, in company with other
nations, will thereafter become possible, if only the lesson is learnt
that application of modem methods, willingness to adventure, and
hard work on the part of all are the conditions of attaining them.
Future of controls
96. Differing views are likewise being voiced on the continuation
of wartime Government controls in peace conditions. Controls are
essential during war because shortages exist, and priorities cannot
otherwise be operated. At the end of the war they will certainly be
required (for example) for the orderly disposal of accumulated stocks
throughout the world, whether of foodstuffs or materials. Moreover,
Britain could not rely upon her heavily adverse balance of payments
righting itself if all forms of control were immediately removed. The
home demand for manufactured articles may be so overwhelming that
manufacturers might not sufficiently exert themselves to re-enter the
more difficult field of export trade, unless allocations of raw materials
were made subject for a time to the condition that a proportion must
go into goods for export. Just as controls were essential for swinging
the nation from a peace to a war basis, so they may be necessary
during a transitional period for organising the vast structural reversion
from war to peace. As soon as these special conditions (with which
normal market forces could not cope) disappear, the case for Govern-
ment controls dwindles. They have no intrinsic virtue in themselves.
They are liable to lead to hold-ups, and they slow down the speed
of industry to adjust itself to consumers’ needs. Would anyone get
through as much work in a day, if he had to apply for a permit what-
ever he did and wherever he went ? The fundamental difference
between war and peace, constantly overlooked, is that in war the
majority of all orders placed are dictated by the needs of the State
as a fighting machine, whereas in peace—at any rate under
democracy—the preference of consumers is and ought to be the main-
spring of economic activity. But for the reasons mentioned a number
of Government controls should not and will not vanish immediately
the guns cease fire; if they did, chaotic conditions would supervene.
Location of industry
97. In accordance with the reports of the Barlow Commission and
the Scott Committee we consider that a practical measure of control
over the location of new industrial undertakings in Britain is desirable
as a permanent feature of the post-war world. It is contrary to the


national interest that certain densely populated areas, of which Greater
London is the outstanding example, should continue to grow in popu-
lation indefinitely, eating farther and farther into the countryside
which surrounds them. It is equally undesirable that, unless for
special reasons of national advantage, new industry should be planted
in hitherto untouched tracts of agricultural countryside, while older
industrial areas with their indigenous population, their houses and
public services go derelict and become a grievous social and financial
burden on the State, as the Special Areas did between the two wars.
For the lessening of risks of severe unemployment it is also important
that so far as possible a balance of different types of industry should
be secured in each main region of the country, and particularly that
no isolated region should remain dependent to an undue extent upon
a single industry, or upon mineral deposits nearing exhaustion, or
upon industries whose prosperity will ebb and flow directly with the
downs and ups of international trade. Every industrial area will be
the better for containing a good proportion of ordinary industries,
not all interconnected, manufacturing a variety of articles needed by
the British public. This will afford a relatively stable block of employ-
ment and will serve to maintain local prosperity and purchasing
power, even though employment in the other industries may rise and
fall.
98. For the achievement of these purposes we desire to see a
continuous survey carried on by a properly qualified national advisory
body with local assistance, which will draw the attention of Parlia-
ment to the emergence of dangerous features in the industrial situation
of any particular area, such as those just mentioned, and will formulate
proposals for remedying them. The Government will need machinery
and powers for translating such proposals (if approved) into
action. We have in mind powers to prohibit in certain congested
areas the extension of existing undertakings or the establishment of
new undertakings except under licence, powers to render areas where
the population is under-employed more attractive to industry by pro-
vision of improved facilities or reduction of financial burdens, as was
done under the Special Areas Acts, and powers to require the
proposed siting of new industrial undertakings above a certain
size to be submitted to it for examination and approval in the light
of local and national conditions. Special care will be needed to see
that the national authority to which these powers are entrusted operates
sufficiently swiftly and with genuine understanding of the economic
and all other factors involved—conditions not always fulfilled in the
past by local authorities to which, for instance, building plans have
to be submitted. Greater attention should be paid to ensuring that
land worked for the extraction of minerals is not left in a derelict
condition. The location of industries which emit noxious fumes or
poisonous effluents should be strictly controlled. Systems of local


zoning for industrial development are already an integral part of
existing town and country planning, and we regard them, if properly
utilised, as beneficial both to industry and to the nation at large.
99. In all these decisions the national interest must be paramount.
That principle would be infringed if the planning or licensing authority
operated so slowly as to hold up vital decisions, for that would
impair the power of industry to adjust itself swiftly, as British industry
always must, to changing conditions or demands ; or if, when reaching
decisions, it failed to give proper weight to any additional costs that
an industry, particularly an exporting industry, might be compelled
to incur through being stopped from setting up in the location which
would make for most economical production and distribution. The
real test is that common interest and not any sectional interest should
win the day, if the two are found to be in conflict.
Nationalisation examined
100. To secure that industry shall always serve national interests,
while preserving to it the full flexibility which is essential for high
efficiency, is one of the principal problems which Government policy
must solve. There are those who argue that national interests can
be secured only by a policy of widespread nationalisation of industry
—that is, by transferring the ownership of industry to the State. How-
ever it is owned, industry can prosper and give full employment at
good wages only if it is properly managed. Technical progress, skilled
administration, and good workmanship—these, and not any new
political system, can raise the standard of living. The real question is,
therefore, whether industry in this country would be more efficiently
and successfully managed under a system of State control than of
individual initiative. Whatever be the case in the different industrial
circumstances of other countries, anyone who seriously and honestly
examines all the facts is, we think, bound to reach the conclusion that
in the face of British problems such a revolutionary change would
inflict loss on our country and on our whole people.
101. First, it would mean an end to flexibility and quick adjustment
to meet changing needs. In official life, it always tends to be dangerous
to do anything new, whereas those in industry must constantly be
thinking how to do new things. Red tape, for which Government
departments in Whitehall are so often criticised, would be extended
to tie up the basic industries and to slow down the taking of decisions.
Would the results be good for trade or employment? Would they
be welcomed by sensible British people? Would they even be
tolerated? The answer is No.
102. Secondly, business consists largely of weighing up risks and
making correct judgments on them, with the keen test of the profit-
and-loss account showing whether decisions were right or wrong. This


important function of risk-taking lies right outside the normal adminis-
trative duties of Government officials, who have never been trained
or equipped for it, but have the wholly different function of carrying
out the instructions of a Minister, himself directly responsible to the
will of Parliament.
103. Thirdly, experience shows it to be a fallacy that working for
the State under a Government department produces greater keenness,
higher efficiency or better output than working for a private employer.
The facts here speak for themselves. The majority of administrators,
technicians and clerical workers who have entered Government service
during the war far prefer the greater freedom to get on with the job
that they used to enjoy when they worked in ordinary industry, and
they miss the encouragement of initiative and general keenness to get
things done which was part of their peacetime experience.
104. Fourthly, the continuous effort to reduce costs by new devices
and new methods, which is constantly present in private industry
because it must live on its own efficiency and resources, is a factor
frequently absent from a State-run concern, where the results of a
progressive policy receive less keen attention, where the incentive to
experiment with new ideas which may fail or succeed is less strong,
and where in the last resort losses consequent on slow-moving manage-
ment can be covered by a subsidy from the Exchequer at the expense
of the probably unknowing taxpayer.
105. Over and above these four economic arguments there are two
more of a wider character. First, if nationalisation were put into force,
vital industrial decisions would become liable to be taken not on
their industrial merits but on considerations of party politics or local
pressure. Secondly, the greater the number of workpeople who
became State-paid employees, the stronger would grow the tempta-
tion on politicians to win large blocks of votes by promising to press
the Treasury to concede whatever financial demands they were making
at the time on their employer, the State —that is, the taxpayer. Both
these inevitable tendencies would militate against what must always
be our essential object—namely, to raise British industry to the highest
pitch of integrity and efficiency.
106. Nationalisation of industry does not, as often mistakenly sup-
posed, offer security. There can be no security without efficiency of
production and ability to sell the goods produced—and they must be
sold in the face of world competition in export markets, if the British
people are to have steady employment and the means to get essential
food and materials from overseas. It is quite true that if the whole
of British industry were put under State control, it would be possible
for the State to offer a guarantee that no one would be unemployed—
subject to accepting totalitarianism and slave conditions of labour.
That, however, is one of the evils which this war is being fought to
keep from our shores, and it would be ironical if, having won the war,


we were then to choose to submit ourselves to a totalitarian industrial
system. The fact must be faced that what everybody wants is not
merely bare security against unemployment, but besides that an
acceptable standard of living with freedom for people to change their
jobs, freedom to negotiate wages, and freedom from the dead hand
of centralised control imposing conditions on the average man without
regard to his likes or dislikes—as in Germany.
Public corporations
107. The case against nationalisation of industries is so powerful
and convincing that that policy is losing support even among its
formerly ardent adherents. Nowadays considerable attention is being
paid to an alternative form of ownership and control—the public
corporation. Public corporations are not a novelty. Hitherto they
have been established mainly in connection with dock, gas, and water
services—all of them being in the nature of a local monopoly. The
essence of the public corporation is that ownership remains with private
stockholders, but instead of ordinary shares entitled to the surplus
profits of the undertaking, if any, as in a normal limited company, they
hold fixed-interest or maximum-interest stock ; and they have no power
over the appointment or removal of members of the board of directors,
who instead are appointed by a Government department or other
named bodies or persons.
108. This form of organisation is far from the perfect solution which
it is often represented to be. One or two public corporations have
certainly been successful, thanks to the good fortune that men of
outstanding capacity and experience were put in charge of them.
But, with those exceptions, the characteristic of public corporations
has been a tendency to “sleepiness.” There is not the same urge
towards technical progress, new methods and low costs as in
ordinary industry. Whereas the directors of a limited company are
democratically responsible to the shareholders (and there is great
value in this fact of personal accountability, even though shareholders
too often are inactive), a public corporation, by contrast, is authori-
tarian ;it is responsible to nobody. When things go wrong, there is
no risk of awkward questions at a shareholders’ meeting. An incom-
petent man in a high position is less likely to be got rid of, and in
matters of promotion seniority tends to count for more, merit for less,
than in the ordinary business concern—these, of course, are intangible
but vital matters in which private enterprise possesses clear advantage
over any form of official organisation. In an ordinary company, if
profits shrink and dividends are cut, there is trouble for the directors,
and a demand that they tighten up efficiency. A public corporation
in such circumstances, on the other hand, is apt to set its finances
right by having recourse to an increase of charges—in other words,


exploiting its monopoly position. Customers, lulled perhaps by the
baseless idea that “non-profit-making" means “efficient and non-
exploiting," have no effective redress, on account of the monopoly.
There is no question that results are achieved ; so they are under State
control of industries in wartime. But the results in both cases are
expensive. It normally needs the spur of private enterprise to elimin-
ate waste, keep a whole organisation “on its toes,” and achieve good
results with economy.
Monopolies
109. It has been suggested in some quarters that wherever a
monopoly or quasi-monopoly has arisen under private enterprise, it
should either be broken up into competitive units again, or else
converted into a public corporation. It is the clear and undisputed
duty of the State to protect the public against abuse of monopoly.
The suggestion mentioned, however, covers two misleading assump-
tions ; one, that wherever there is monopoly there is abuse, and the
other, that the proposed new form of organisation can normally be
relied on to give as efficient service as the old. A position of monopoly
may arise through various means, natural, artificial or statutory. But
commonly it takes one of two forms: (i) a single concern controlling
(by itself or through its subsidiaries) all or almost all the supply of
some commodity, or (ii) an association of all the potential suppliers
entering into an agreement to adopt a uniform price list. Type (i), if
a policy of large-scale research and concentration of production in the
most efficient units is adopted, may make a valuable contribution
towards lower costs and prices; alternatively, it may abuse its power
and fix excessive prices, even though that drives customers to find
substitutes. Type (ii) may save a whole industry from bankruptcy by
preventing ruinous price-cutting where productive capacity seriously
exceeds available demand; alternatively, it may take the degenerate
form of a purely selfish price-ring, with prices fixed high in order to
keep all the least efficient units of the industry in production. It is
unwise, therefore, to commend or to condemn either type in general,
without looking carefully at the actual facts of each case.
no. In the treatment of monopoly, there is nothing more important
than ascertainment of facts, and publicity for them. We consider
that there should be machinery through which charges that a
monopoly organisation was insisting on exorbitant prices or unfair
conditions of sale could be authoritatively examined. If inquiry
revealed a situation where the public interest was clearly being
jeopardised by monopoly practice, the facts should be made known,
and appropriate action taken by the Government to effect a remedy.
But Parliament should never insist upon the conversion of a monopoly
from a generally more efficient to a generally less efficient type of


organisation, merely on the fallacious argument that monopoly is
invariably inimical to the consumer, or that a “non-profit-making”
institution is always well and economically run.
Trade Associations
in. The coming together of different firms in an industry to form a
trade association is an important and generally valuable development
in modern industry. We refer, of course, to trade associations pro-
perly conducted for constructive purposes, not to mere price rings.
They can perform the same function as trade unions in facilitating col-
lective bargaining. They can act as an instrument for stimulating
research and pooling its results. They can furnish a reliable statistical
service for the industry, and can conduct market surveys at home or
overseas more systematically than is usually within the power of a
single firm. But their outstanding service is that they can provide a
recognised channel for consultation between the Government and the
industry on questions where public policy is involved. We do not
consider that firms should be compelled to join a trade association
against their will. Our view is that genuinely representative bodies
that can speak for each industry are desirable, but if they spring from
spontaneous and voluntary co-operation they will be a healthier
growth.
Private enterprise best serves public purpose
112. Over the whole broad field of industry, private enterprise
generally best serves public purpose. It must be enterprise; but the
likelihood of private “unenterprise” is less than that of public
“unenterprise.” Normally, it is the bureaucratic system which tends
to play safe and go slow. Like traffic, private enterprise ought to be
regulated by straightforward rules which have the approval of all
responsible people, and be given the maximum freedom within those
rules. Unhappily the public conscience in the early nineteenth century
tolerated insanitary towns, the engulfing of much of the countryside by
ugliness, and the industrial conditions against which Disraeli, Joseph
Chamberlain, and the Conservative Party fought. Since those days
there has taken place under a system of private enterprise in this
country, in the British Dominions overseas, in the United States of
America and in many other lands an amazing advance in material
civilisation. Anyone who pauses to compare the elements of
daily life in any British town now and in his or her childhood
will get a quick picture of the ground that has been won. There
has been a continuous reduction in poverty, stem as is the fight still
aheajj of us to drive poverty completely from this land. Nine-tenths
of the population to-day enjoy a standard of living which would have


been thought luxurious by three-quarters of the population 100 years
ago. This is the work of private enterprise, supplemented—as it ought
to be —by social services rendered possible by the wealth which enter-
prise has created.
New relationship between Government and industry
113. The need of the future is to build up a practical system of
co-operation between the Government and industry. Industry must
be able to rely on Government departments understanding its problems,
recognising the harm which arbitrary State action can do, and steadily
helping in the removal of obstacles to the ability of industry to expand
production, demand and employment. Equally the Government must
be able to rely on industry to work with it to the full in achieving
national purposes, such as the avoidance of cyclical fluctuations and
depressed areas, and the rectification of Britain’s adverse balance of
payments. We suggest also that it is right for the Government to call
on industry for special collaboration in the matter of seeing that the
basic needs of human life are satisfied for everyone. Co-operation
was developing before the war between the Government and the milk
industry to this end; it has been extended to other fields under war
conditions, and plans for securing the full co-operation of the building
industry in meeting the essential housing needs of the whole population
after the war are understood to be in train.
114. Briefly, the attitude of the Government machine towards
industry before the war tended to be narrowly regulative, restrictive,
negative. That should be so no longer. The tasks ahead can only be
tackled successfully if there is more dynamic co-operation between,
on the one hand, industry based on private enterprise, and, on the
other, Government departments properly trained to deal with industrial
questions which affect the State. This necessitates suitable organisa-
tion on either side, and in particular a capacity to sympathise with the
other side’s motives and purposes without suspecting them of being
other than they appear. We wish to see a future Board of Trade—
Ministry of Industry and Commerce would be a worthier name—
inspired by a more positive and constructive conception of its duty to
help British industry to grow healthily, make good any weaknesses,
sell its goods, and provide employment. We have already stressed the
importance of special training for civil servants who, in administering
Government policy, should be qualified to do so with a close under-
standing of the practical difficulties which industry has to overcome
if it is to maintain and increase its employment-giving capacity. The
Ministry of Industry should always have a panel of advisers chosen
from amongst the best men available in the industrial field. Attached
to this Ministry, if not to the Cabinet Offices, there should be a highly
qualified research staff, so that when Government policy is being
shaped expert advice on any relevant aspect can be taken into account.


X. THE MORAL BASIS OF ENTERPRISE
Profitsj reserves, and taxes
115. Profits (or losses) are ultimately the difference between prices
and costs. Profits can either be paid out in dividends to shareholders,
or retained in the business and spent on improvements. These two
uses are entirely different, though often confused; the difference is
concealed by our wrong tax system, which imposes the same rate of
taxation on both. Dividends are, in effect, interest on capital ven-
tured, together with reward for risk. If the risk turns out bad there is
neither dividend nor profit, and the venturer loses his capital. Any
undertaking soon comes to grief if it pays out in dividends profits
which should have been retained in the business. If industries are to
keep on improving their efficiency and reducing their costs, it is im-
perative that there should be adequate profits to put to reserve, for
replacement of worn-out or obsolete plant, for extensions, and for
meeting emergencies.
116. The time has come for a thorough re-examination of the
manner in which direct taxation is applied to industry. No one
questions the necessity of raising very large sums by direct taxation
in these days; but the methods by which they are raised should be
carefully watched to see that they damage as little as possible the
future wealth-producing capacity of the country. The principle of
Excess Profits Tax in wartime has psychological justification, but,
with the rate at 100 per cent, serious injustices not intended by Parlia-
ment have arisen from the manner in which it happens to operate
against different companies. The combination of this and an income-
tax of 10s. in the £ imposed directly on all sums put to reserve cannot
but impair the ability of many companies to maintain and develop
their plants, as they have done in the past, out of their own resources,
and to offer steady employment in a changing world to their work-
people when the war is over. That is why the impact of our particular
taxation system needs scrutiny afresh, lest it compulsorily drives down
the efficiency of the equipment of British industry below that of other
countries which do not thus drain off from their industries the means
of keeping their plant up to date. The continuation of an outmoded
system of taxation is incompatible with a policy of full employment.
The “profit motive”
117. It is not enough to justify private enterprise by material
results, if the system is not morally sound. To exalt money above
all else is wicked. If industry made money its sole aim, and allowed
no other consideration to enter in where money was at stake, the
system would be as immoral as it would be intolerable. Fortunately,
however, Scrooge is a rare figure in British business. The system does


not breed in this country an unprincipled desire for gain. The average
employer is much more concerned to run his business soundly, to give
good service to his customers, and to look after the interests of his
employees, than to squeeze the last penny out of it for himself. We
believe that there is positive moral value in casting responsibility on the
individual, in giving scope for his powers of initiative and self-reliance,
and in encouraging him to decide what use he shall make of his
property, provided that he does not offend against the nation or his
neighbour thereby. Would anyone argue that the controllers and
employees in State-owned industrial undertakings gain some moral
asset which their counterparts in normal industry lack? Have they
greater esprit de corps ? Is the branch manager of a co-operative
society more morally worthy than the independent trader who owns
the shop next door? As someone has aptly put it, does a postman
deliver his letters with more glee than a baker his bread?
118. We believe it morally wrong to use such phrases as “ profit
motive” in a condemning sense, without drawing any distinction
between profit as the reward for effort or risk, and profit as the swag
from profiteering or speculating. The producer of goods has nothing
in common with the financial gambler; he would like to see him
effectively deterred by Stock Exchange rules and the Companies Act.
But the profit motive in the first and best sense is accepted by everyone
as a normal and reasonable accompaniment of human activity. It is
praiseworthy, not sinful, to wish to add to one’s income by honest
means, and for a father to try to give his children a better start in
life, A man who works overtime expects more pay. A man whose
job involves special risks expects compensation for that in his earnings.
A man who earns promotion by his efficiency expects a higher salary.
These rules hold good right throughout industry —and in other voca-
tions too. Profit in this sense is a proper incentive to harder work,
a proper criterion of efficiency, a proper reward for the taking of risks.
Profiteering, on the contrary, is the selfish exploitation of superior
bargaining power or monopoly, and must be restrained by State action
if other forces are not effective to prevent it—a rule long accepted
by Parliament as a normal principle. Parliament must ever be vigilant
to guard the community or any section of it against exploitation, from
whatever direction this may come.
119. The real feeling of many who talk critically of the “profit
motive” is against unduly high profits, not against profit as such.
If high profits result from exploitation of bargaining power or mono-
poly, they are evidence of profiteering. Otherwise, high profits
are evidence of high efficiency. Suppose, for instance, that firm
A undertakes to make some article for the Government at 10s.
apiece, but finds that its costs are ns., so that it loses a shilling on
every article. Firm B undertakes to do the same job for 95., and
works so capably that its costs are only 7s. 6d., giving is. 6d. profit.


There are thoughtless people who would reproach B for “making
big profits’’ and praise A for “working without profit”—whereas
in reality B is serving the nation well, while A is robbing it by in-
efficiency, besides heading for bankruptcy, which will produce
unemployment.
The “profit criterion ”
120. The phrase “ profit motive ” is very commonly used in a sense
where “profit criterion” would be more accurate. The system of
private enterprise operates to produce those goods which can be
made and sold at a profit, rather than others. The moment that
the demand for an article or a service grows strong enough to induce
people to be willing to pay a price above what the provision of the
article or service will cost, private enterprise immediately and auto-
matically seizes the opportunity and meets the need. Opponents
argue that this is anti-social and immoral, because profitability should
not be the ultimate test determining whether a service is or is not pro-
vided. They slip into the mistake of imagining that it is claimed on
behalf of private enterprise that nothing should be produced at all
except what can be made at a profit. It would be as sensible to say
that the possessor of a bicycle is barred from using his feet to walk.
If a service which is agreed to be necessary to society cannot be
provided by private enterprise without incurring loss, it immediately
becomes the duty of Parliament to make certain that it is supplied
otherwise, and that is done —at the cost of the taxpayer.
121. The fact that private enterprise provides easily, automatically
and at the cheapest attainable cost the vast majority of goods and
services required by the community has never prevented Parliament
from risking public funds in financing additional arrangements to
cover the remaining part of the field. Private enterprise, for instance,
was responsible for three million out of the four million new houses
built between the two wars, but it was not able to build for the
lowest-paid families except at a loss, and rightly Local Authorities
were empowered by Parliament to carry out that part of the task;
in doing so they incurred loss, which had to be borne by every tax-
payer and ratepayer. Therefore there is no truth in any suggestion
that the profit criterion operates to prevent essential needs from being
met. On the contrary, over far the greater part of the field it ensures
that those needs are met with a speed and accuracy which no system
of Government planning could attain.
46


XI. THE ESSENCE OF THE MATTER
122. British industry has developed over many years out of small
beginnings into an infinite variety of forms and sizes of enterprise.
This process of natural evolution to meet and overcome the changing
problems of the time is by no means at an end. The duty of Parlia-
ment is to watch and foster these developments—not to paralyse them.
The economic system that we all want must be responsive and
responsible—responsible to the community, responsive to the indi-
vidual’s needs. Totalitarianism can abolish unemployment, but only
by methods which deny all freedom; we reject that way. We reject
also nationalisation of industry, for the clear reason that it would
be inefficient—fettered by the bureaucratic system, and warped by
political interference.
It is the duty of the State to intervene in industrial affairs when
national interest requires that. Where it intervenes, it must be
watchful not to discourage the valuable kinds of initiative, not to
impair the elasticity of industry to meet new situations, and not to
burden the task of selling British goods abroad, since by these the
nation lives.
It was private enterprise that designed and built the Spitfire and
the Lancaster. The same qualities of brain, hard work and courage
are what we shall need most, when the time comes to turn Britain’s
great productive capacity back with all speed from war production to
meet the world’s peacetime needs.
Industry is a way of life, and the British people depend on it.
We all want it to be a source of happiness and not ill-will; of beauty
and not ugliness: a creed of good service, not smart snatching.
This report is a plea for realistic measures, aiming at individual
opportunity (which is the basis of all human progress), economic
security, the welfare of the nation and the Empire and the prosperity
of all the world: measures in line with the needs of the future, and
with the best instincts and aspirations of the whole British people.
Printed for the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations, 24, Old (Jueec Street, S.W.r
by The Cornwall Press Ltd., Pari* Garden, S.E.i
January, 1944.


“LOOKING AHEAD”
POST-WAR PROBLEMS REPORTS
Price*
Educational Aims .. .. .. 6d.
A Plan for Youth .. .. .. 3d.
Agricultural Reconstruction .. .. 6d.
Demobilisation and Resettlement .. 6d.
Work: The Future of British Industry 6d.
Debate on the Educational White Paper .. 4d.
y
“Why I am a Conservative”
by David Stelling .. .. .. 6d.
*By post an extra Id. in each case.
Obtainable from the Conservative Central Office,
24, Old Queen Street, Westminster, S.W.i.
