

Workers' Dwellings
(“The State Advances Act of 1916.")
Information for Intending Applicants
t
Please address all correspon-
dence to —
“ The Manager,
State Advances Corporation
(Workers’ Dwellings Branch),
Box 690, G.P.0.,
Brisbane.”
Anthony James Gumming, Government Printer, Brisbane.


WORKERS’ DWELLINGS
(“The State Advances Act of 1916.”)
Please address all correspon-
dence to —
“ The Manager.
State Advances Corporation
(Workers’ Dwellings Branch).
Box 690, G.P.0.,
Brisbane.
INFORMATION FOR INTENDING APPLICANTS.
Introduction.
The business in connection with Workers’ Dwellings under the
provisions of the State Advances Act is managed by the State Advances
Corporation (Workers’ Dwellings Branch), and is under the administra-
tion of the Minister for Works.
The object of the legislation is to provide for the granting of loans
to enable persons of limited income to erect, under the Corporation’s
supervision, suitable homes for themselves, with a comparatively small
contribution by them towards the proposition, with easy terms of
repayment, and with a low rate of interest.
For persons who are less favourably circumstanced and who cannot
contribute the required deposit for a Worker’s Dwelling, the Workers’
Homes Scheme (under “The Workers’ Homes Acts”) has been pro-
vided by the Government. This scheme is dealt with in a separate
pamphlet, copies of which may be obtained from the Workers’ Dwellings
Office.
Loans under the State Advances Act for Workers’ Dwellings cannot
be granted for the purchase of houses already built, the business being
confined to the erection, under the supervision of the Corporation, of
new dwellings, and to the subsequent improvement of such dwellings.
The following requirements are necessary to qualify a person to
apply for a loan (see page 5 for further details): —
(a) He must own a piece of suitable residential land.
(b) He must not already own a dwelling.
(c) His total income must not exceed £416 per annum.
(d) He must undertake that the proposed dwelling when erected
will be used as a home for himself and his family, and for no
other purpose.
Ist Edition —3.000, October 1924.
2nd Edition—s,ooo, October. 1925.


Loans may be granted up to 16s. in the £ of the fair estimated value
of the security as explained on page 8 hereof.
The Act provides that a loan for a Worker’s Dwelling shall not in
.any case exceed £BOO. The actual reasonable requirements of each
applicant in respect of the number of his family and dependants, financial
circumstances, &c., are taken into account, and the amount of the loan
approved accordingly. Generally, a loan in excess of £6OO will not
be approved, unless under very, exceptional circumstances and subject
to special conditions.
The rate of interest on loans is 5 per cent, per annum.
Plans and specifications of dwellings are supplied in designs to suit
each applicant’s particular wishes (see page 7).
Tenders for the erection of the proposed dwelling are invited by
the Corporation after a loan has been approved.
The applicant is required to execute, as security for the loan, a first
mortgage in favour of the Corporation over the land on which the
dwelling is to be erected.
Loans are repayable in twenty years by monthly instalments at the
rate of 13s. 3d. for every £lOO borrowed. This rate of instalment covers
interest at 5 per cent, per annum on the maximum monthly balance
owing from time to time and redemption calculated to repay the loan in
full in the stated period (see page 11).
The borrower must pay costs of registration of securities, &c.
(see page 10).
The borrower must also pay from his own resources all fire insurance
premiums, local authority rates and water rates, taxes, cost of repairs
and repainting, and other outgoings from time to time as they become
payable.
The dwelling must be insured by the borrower against fire for the
amount of the contract price, such insurance to be with the State
Government Insurance Office, loss, if any, payable to the Corporation as
mortgagee; the policy must be handed to the Corporation to be retained
until the loan is repaid.
When the loan has been repaid in full, the mortgage is discharged
and the released securities handed over to the borrower.
The aforegoing matters are referred to in greater detail in the
following pages.


Eligible Applicants.
An applicant for a loan for the erection of a Worker’s Dwelling
must comply with the following requirements;—
(a) He must be in possession of the unencumbered title in his
own name of a suitable piece of land in a residential locality
on which the proposed dwelling is to be erected.
( b ) He must not be already the owner of a dwelling-house.
(c) He must not at the time of making the application be in
receipt of a total income in excess of £416 per annum.
(d) He must undertake to use the dwelling-house when erected
as a home for himself and his family, and for no other
purpose.
Where a person is the registered owner of a residence and has sold
the same on terms, he is not eligible to apply for a Worker’s Dwelling
until the title to such property has been transferred to the purchaser.
Where an applicant has previously owned a Worker’s Dwelling, the-
question of his eligibility to apply again for a loan may be considered
on its merits; but, unless special circumstances existed which made it
necessary for him to dispose of his previous Worker’s Dwelling, a
further application will not be entertained.
The income of £416 per annum referred to above is the gross income
from all sources and without deductions. In cases where applicants are
in business, the annual profit from such business is considered as the
income of the applicant, and not the annual remuneration drawn by the
applicant from the business. The combined incomes of husband and
wife are taken into consideration when deciding the eligibility of an
applicant. If such combined incomes exceed £416 per annum, the
application will not be entertained.
The applicant must clearly understand that the Worker’s Dwelling
when erected must be used solely as a home for himself and his family,
and for no other purpose. It must not be used as, for example, a lodging-
house, and no portion of the dwelling may be let. Business must not be
carried on upon the mortgaged premises, except under special circum-
stances, when the case will be considered on its merits on the written-
request of the borrower.
From time to time, in accordance with particular circumstances as
to building costs, number of applications on hand, &c., preference may
be given to applications in respect of less costly dwellings, or to-
applicants with lower incomes, &c.
Applications.
An application may be made for a loan to enable the applicant to-
erect a dwelling-house or, after erection under the Act, to enlarge or
improve such dwelling-house under the supervision of the Corporation.


Applications for advances must be made to the Corporation on the
prescribed form, and be accompanied by an Inspection Pee of £3. The
instrument of title to the land offered as security must also be
forwarded. A rough floor plan of the proposed dwelling, drawing
attention to any special features, should be submitted, and in the ease
of applications from country towns, a local builder’s estimate of the
cost of the dwelling is desirable.
The application must be made in the name of the person whose name
appears on the title to the land on which it is proposed to erect the
dwelling.
Where the application is made by a husband or a wife, such applica-
tion must be accompanied by a declaration on the prescribed form by
the wife or the husband, as the case may be.
An application may be accepted from a single person- who contem-
plates marriage, provided the marriage is to take place by the time the
dwelling is completed, or within a reasonable time thereafter. The
intended wife or husband must sign the declaration on the prescribed
form.
An application may also be accepted from a single person who is
the main support of his or her parents and their family, provided the
dwelling is being erected as a home for those persons and for no other
purpose, and provided none of them already owns a dwelling.
Loans may be granted on the joint application of eligible persons
(such as husband and wife) who are the joint-owners of the land on
which it is proposed to erect the dwelling.
Applications from persons in country centres should be lodged with
the local Clerk of Petty Sessions, who will assist applicants to complete
the necessary forms, &c.
Applications from persons in the metropolitan area should be made
personally at the Workers’ Dwellings Branch of the State Advances
Corporation, Treasury Buildings, Brisbane.
Land Accepted as Security.
Loans may be granted to eligible persons to erect Workers’ Dwellings
on the following classes of land:—
(1) Freehold.
(2) Perpetual Town Leases and Perpetual Suburban Leases
under the Land Acts, Miners’ Homestead Leases or Residence
Areas held under the Mining Act, Perpetual Town Leases
held under the Clermont Flood Relief Act, Perpetual Leases
granted under the Sugar Works Act, and Perpetual Leases
under the Sugar Workers’ Perpetual Lease Selections Act.


The land must be considered by the Corporation to be a suitable
site for the erection of a Worker’s Dwelling, and must be situated in a
residential locality. Evidence will be required that the Local Authority
"has approved of the land as a suitable site for a residence.
Loans are secured by a first mortgage over the land on which the
■dwelling is to be erected. All improvements—namely, house (including
tanks, stove, bath, &c.), outbuildings, fences, and the like—are subject to
the mortgage, and must not be removed or interfered with without the
■consent of the Corporation.
Area and Class of Building Sites.
Although the State Advances Act does not specify an area for sites
for the erection of Workers’ Dwellings, areas of about 32 perches are
considered the most suitable, but building sites of a somewhat smaller
or larger area may be accepted in special circumstances. Whore an
applicant derives or proposes to derive his income from the produce of
the land offered as security, the application is not considered suitable
for a Worker’s Dwelling, and should be directed to the Agricultural
Bank.
Plans and Specifications.
Plans and specifications must be prepared by the Corporation. These
are supplied in designs to. suit each applicant’s particular wishes.
Plans of various designs may be viewed at the Offices of the Corporation.
Any one of these plans, with or without modification, may be made avail-
able to an applicant, or on the other hand a special design will be
prepared if necessary. Applicants will be well advised, however, to
submit a rough sketch of the house proposed, and thus assist in the selec-
tion of a plan to meet their requirements.
If an available plan and specification of a Worker’s Dwelling
already erected be chosen by the applicant, the fee will be as follows:
£ s. d.
(i.) If such plan and specification be used without
alteration .. .. .. .. .. ..110
(ii.) If such plan and specification be used with altera-
tions or additions, such fee as the Corporation
considers sufficient therefor, but not exceeding the
scale of fees for a new plan and specification, as
mentioned on the following page.
Illustrations of a number of typical Workers’ Dwellings already
built will be found at the end of this pamphlet. These designs are known
fiy indicating numbers, such as “10651,” or “W.H. 606,” or as the case
may be, and the indicating number of a particular design being referred
to should be quoted in any correspondence or application. The charge
£ s. d.


for the use of a plan and specification of one of these designs will be
£1 Is., provided no alteration therein is required. The approximate
estimate of the cost of these designs is shown under each illustration.
If it is necessary to prepare a special plan to meet the wishes of an
applicant, the following scale of charges, to be based on the Corporation’s-
estimated cost of the dwelling, will apply:— £ s. d.
Dwelling up to £2OO .. .. .. 110
Dwelling over £2OO up to £350 .. .. ..2 2 0
Dwelling .. £350 £5OO 3 3 0
Dwelling „ £5OO „ £6OO .. .. ..5 5 0
Dwelling „ £6OO £7OO 6 6 0
Dwelling „ £7OO „ £BOO .. .. ..7 7 0
and a further £1 Is. for each additional £lOO or part thereof.
Specifications do not include a stove; this must be supplied by
the applicant at his own expense. Specifications may, if desired, include
bath, tank, fencing, sewerage, water service, and gas or electric light
service (not including shades).
Tenders.
Tenders for the building and other specified improvements are
invited by the Corporation, and when received particulars of same are
furnished to the applicant for his consideration and decision. If an
applicant is himself an efficient builder, he may, if he so desire, tender
for the erection of his own dwelling.
Erection of Building.
On acceptance of a Tender, the applicant is required to enter into-
a Building Agreement with the selected builder; such Building Agree-
ment is prepared by the Corporation.
The building must be erected under the supervision of Inspectors
employed by the Corporation. Instalments of the loan are, if requested,
paid by the Corporation direct to the contractor as the work proceeds.
Interest on these instalments, if any, will be charged to the applicant.
Occupation of the dwelling is not allowed until the building has
been finally passed as satisfactory by the Corporation’s Inspector;
under special circumstances occupation may be allowed earlier, provided
the contractor signifies in writing to the Corporation his consent thereto.
Amount of Advance.
Loans must not exceed the rate of 16s. in £ (four-fifths of the
security) on the Corporation’s fair estimated security value of—
(1) The land on which the dwelling is to be erected;
(2) The applicant’s share of fencing (erected, or to be erected
with portion of the advance) ; and
(3) The proposed dwelling.


Boundary fences on the land offered as security are considered for
security purposes at not more than the reasonable valuation of the
applicant’s share therein.
Provided the security offered and the proposition generally are
deemed satisfactory, a loan may be provisionally granted towards the
cost of a dwelling,- of such an amount, within the abovementioned limit
of 16s. in the £, as in all the circumstances is considered to be consistent
with the nature of the security and with the financial position and
reasonable requirements of the applicant. The final amount of the loan,
however, is determined on receipt of tenders.
Generally, a loan exceeding £6OO will not be entertained, unless
under special circumstances and subject to special conditions. There is,
however, generally no restriction placed by the Corporation upon the
cost up to which a proposed Worker’s Dwelling may be allowed, provided
that the applicant is prepared to contribute in cash any balance over
the approved loan.
In all eases the amount of the loan is based on the lowest tender.
If such tender be less than the previous estimate of the Corporation, the
loan provisionally granted is correspondingly reduced. For example:
If a loan of £5OO be provisionally apprpved for a dwelling estimated to
cost £6oo—the applicant thus contributing £loo—and the lowest tender
be only £5BO, but the accepted tender preferred by the applicant be
£590, the final amount of the loan is reduced to £4BO. If the tender
accepted by the applicant be in excess of the estimated cost, the full
amount over and above the loan approved is payable by the applicant in
cash. The applicant is not bound to accept the lowest tender, but the
amount of the loan is always based on such tender.
Cash Deposit.
The necessary cash contribution required to be deposited by an
applicant, in addition to the land submitted as part security, is illustrated
by the following typical examples:—
£'£ £ £
Corporation’s estimated value of land . . 50 100 120 150
Lowest tender for dwelling (not exceed-
ing Corporation’s estimate) .. .. 500 500 600 600
Value of fencing already erected . . . . 20 Nil 15 Nil
Total security .. .. £570 £6OO £735 £750
Maximum loan provided by Act (four-
fifths of total security) .. .. 456 480 588 600
Minimum cash deposit required .. £44 £2O £l2 Nil


Dwelling
Estimated to
Cost up
-O —
•
£200
£350
£500
£600
£700
£800
£
8.
d.
£
8.
d.
£
a .
d.
£
8
d.
£
8.
d.
£
8.
d.
Inspection Feo
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
Plan Fee (if new plan required;
1
1
0
2
2
0
3
3
0
5
5
0
c
6
0
t
7
0
Registration of Mortgage ..
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
°
i
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
Building Fee (average)
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
i
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
Total
6
1
0
7
2
0
8
3
0
10
5
0
11
6
0
12
7
0
This cash deposit must be paid by the applicant before he signs
the Building Agreement for the erection of the dwelling.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, applicants should understand that
each application is dealt with on its particular merits, and accordingly
the cash deposit required in any particular case may, under certain
circumstances, be somewhat greater than the amount indicated above.
Fees Required.
The further cash amount required to be paid by an applicant is as
under:—
Of the foregoing amounts the Inspection Fee and Plan Fee must be
paid when lodging the application, and the other amounts as required
and prior to the signing of the Building Agreement. The Building Fee,
which is payable to the local authority, varies from ss. upwards, accord-
ing to the by-laws, of the particular local authority in whose area the
building is to be erected.
These fees generally constitute the total expenses likely to be
incurred for any one application over the full period of the loan.
Refund of Fees.
In the event of an application being declined by the Corporation
after the inspection and valuation of the land offered as security have
been made, half the inspection fee paid will be refunded to the applicant
as well as the whole of the plan fee paid provided the plan and specifica-
tion have not been prepared.
If the application be withdrawn before the land offered as security
lias been inspected all fees paid may be refunded.


Amount Borrowed.
£300
£350
£40 J
£450
£500
£550
£600
£ a. d.
£ 8. d.
£ s. d.
£ s . d.
£ 8. d.
£ a. d.
£ s. d .
Monthly repayment
1 10 9
2 0 6
2 13 0
2 19 9
3 6 3
3 13 0
3 19 6
Equivalent to a
weekly pay-
ment of
0 9 2
0 10 9
0 12 3
0 13 9
0 15 3
0 16 10
0 18 4
If the application be withdrawn after an advance has been approved
no refund of fees will be made, except in cases where the plan and
specification have not been prepared when the plan fee will be refunded.
Should, however, the application be renewed within a reasonable time
in respect of the same piece of land, and in cases where no plan fee
has been refunded and the same plan is desired, it will be accepted
without payment of further fees.
Security Documents.
The amount to be advanced is secured by a first mortgage over the
land and improvements thereon.
The applicant must pay the cost of registration of securities—
mainly consisting of the fee payable to the Real Property Office for
registration of the mortgage—generally £l, as shown on the preceding
page under the heading “Pees Required.”
Repayment of Loan.
Loans are repayable over a period of twenty years by monthly
instalments of 13s. 3d. for every £lOO borrowed. This rate of instalment
covers interest at 5 per cent, per annum, and also redemption calculated
to repay the full loan in the period stated.
Each borrower is supplied with a pass-book in which are entered
from time to time the repayments made by him, such entries acting as
receipts for the repayments.
The following table shows the instalments payable on loans of
various amounts;—
Monthly Instalment—When and Where Payable.
The monthly repayment instalment is payable in advance on the
first day of each month for that month, and may be paid at any time
•during that month without attracting the penalty for late payment
referred to on the next page.


Should it so happen that a borrower is not in possession of his
pass-book, payment may nevertheless be made and a receipt therefor
obtained. Such payment Mill subsequently be entered in the pass-book
in exchange for the relative receipt.
Instalments may be paid at the Workers’ Dwellings Office, Treasury-
Buildings, Brisbane, or may be lodged in any branch of the Common-
wealth Bank for transfer to the Workers’ Dwellings Office. In centres
where there is no branch of the Commonwealth Bank, payments may
be made to the local Savings Bank Agency of the Commonwealth Bank
(generally situated at the Post Office).
Payments in Excess of Required Monthly Instalment.
Every borrower is entitled to pay off the balance of the loan at any
time, or he may pay excess amounts either regularly in addition to his
monthly instalment or in lump sums, as he thinks fit. As interest is only
chargeable on the maximum monthly balance of his account, he thereby
obtains the benefit of a reduced charge for interest, in addition to securing
his property free of mortgage at an earlier date. Notwithstanding pay-
ment of sums in excess of the required monthly instalments, the rate of
such monthly instalment will not be revised as the borrower’s account
increases or decreases in credit from time to time. It may be argued by
borrowers that they would be unwise to make any excess payments as
they still would have to pay the same monthly instalment in the future.
This is not so; as a matter of fact, while a borrower’s account is in credit
by reason of previous excess payments, he would be quite in order in not
making any further payment at all until his credit balance had become
exhausted by being appropriated to the monthly instalment as it became
due each month. Thus, by paying more than the required monthly
instalments, borrowers are, in addition to saving interest charges, estab-
lishing a reserve fund for use at any time when they may be out of
employment, or unable for any other reason to pay the monthly instal-
ment. In the event of the accumulated credit balance not being required
for that purpose, it will have the effect of paying off the loan all the
sooner, as previously stated.
Penalty for Late Payment of Instalment.
Instalments paid after the expiration of the month in which they
were payable attract penally at the rate of 10 per cent, per annum —
that is, 2d. in the £1 per month.
Fire Insurance.
The dwelling and all outbuildings must be insured with the State
Government Insurance Office in the name of the borrower as owner and


the State Advances Corporation as mortgagee for their respective rights
and interests, loss, if any, payable to the State Advances Corporation
as mortgagee, for a sum equal to the contract price' for the buildings.
The premiums for such insurance and all renewals thereof must be
paid promptly by the borrower, either (1) direct to the Commissioner,
State Government Insurance Office, Brisbane; (2) to the Commissioner’s
local representative; or (3) to the Workers’ Dwellings Office or Common-
wealth Bank branch in the same manner as the monthly instalment. All
renewal premium receipts must be forwarded to the Corporation.
Repainting.
Borrowers must undertake to repaint to the satisfaction of the
Corporation and at their own expense the dwellings, outbuildings, &c.,
in every fifth year during the continuance of the loan.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if in view of their condition the
buildings require painting or oiling earlier than the times stated, the
borrower must be prepared to have the same carried out when so directed
by the Corporation.
Payment of Rates and Taxes.
The borrower must promptly pay all local authority rates and water
rates, and other rates and taxes, and forward the receipts to the
Corporation for inspection.
Repairs.
The borrower must effect all repairs to the dwelling, outbuildings,
fences, &c., and keep the improvements in good tenantable repair at his
own expense and to the satisfaction of the Corporation.
Sale of the Dwelling.
Intending applicants, the nature of whose employment may subject
them to a transfer to another town, need not hesitate on that account
to make application for a loan. If for any satisfactory reason the holder
of a Worker’s Dwelling wishes to transfer his interest and his title to
the land to another eligible and suitable person, he will be permitted
to do so under reasonable conditions. For instance, portion of the
proceeds may be required to go towards reducing the balance of the
loan. In such circumstances the borrower would still get the benefit of
his selling price. Each case is dealt with on its merits, and special
consideration given where special circumstances exist. If the unpaid
balance of the Corporation’s loan is being met in cash the owner is at
liberty to make whatever arrangements he prefers as to the sale of the
dwelling and the land.


Letting the Dwelling.
Should the borrower, through illness or the necessity to seek
temporary employment in another town, or for some other satisfactory
reason, wish to temporarily let his dwelling to another suitable person,
he may be permitted to do so for a limited time, provided he first obtains
the Corporation’s consent thereto. In such cases it will be the genera!
rule, subject to relaxation under special circumstances, to require the
rent agreed upon between the borrower and the new tenant to be paid
to the Corporation for crediting to the borrower’s account towards,
reducing his loan indebtedness.
Release of Mortgage.
When the loan has been repaid in full the mortgage will be
discharged, and the released securities —namely, insurance policy,
mortgage, and relative title to the land, will be handed over to the
borrower, or to any other person duly authorised in writing by the
borrower to receive same. The borrower may then have the discharge of
the mortgage recorded on the title of the land by lodging the title and
the released mortgage at the Real Property Office (in the case of free-
holds) and at the Department of Public Lands (in the case of Crown
leaseholds).
Preliminary inquiries may be made at the Office of any
Clerk of Petty Sessions throughout the State.
Forms of application and all information may be obtained
from —
The Manager, State Advances Corporation,
Box 690, G.P.0., Brisbane„
A. H. SMITH, Manager..


HINTS TO INTENDING APPLICANTS.
As it is the desire of the Corporation to assist applicants by provid-
ing a maximum of comfort and convenience in their homes consistent
with their financial circumstances, the following suggestions are
offered:—
When about to set out the plan of your home, carefully consider
the site in its relation to the dwelling proposed to be erected.
If possible place the sleeping verandah on the eastern side of the
building and thus gain the benefit of the morning sun.
Avoid a common practice of wrongly planning the position of the
bathroom and thus blocking the cool evening breeze from your sleeping
verandah.
Plan the kitchen away from the western side of the building if
at all possible.
Arrange the position of the front and back steps (back steps
particularly) so as to ensure the least possible number of steps.
Consider the position for placing your buildings on the site in
relation to adjoining buildings, and try to avoid interfering with the
privacy of rooms and verandahs which would occur through badly
placed windows, nearness of building to fences, insufficient height of
stumps, &c.
Consider the proposed furnishings and their size when planning
the dimensions of the rooms.


1..
Item.
Approximate Cost.
Battening between stumps, all
round house
Water Service
Enamelled Bath
Enamelled Wash Basin
Concrete or Iron Wash Tubs . .
Electric Light Service
£12 to £20, according to dimensions.
£8.
£10 10s., including water connections.
£4 10s., including water connections.
£5, including water connections.
£9 to £12 (£1 5s. per point).
APPROXIMATE ESTIMATE OF COST.
The approximate estimate of cost shown with each illustration on
the following pages applies to Brisbane District; allowance must be made
for any variation in costs in other districts. Each estimate provides for
the undermentioned items, and in case some of such items are not desired
to be included in a proposed house the approximate value of each is
shown, so that the applicant may make allowance for same.
Note. — Fencing, Drainage, and Gas Service are not included in any
of the estimates of cost accompanying illustrations. These items may
be estimated as follows: —
Front Fencing (say, 66 feet), £l6.
Dividing Fencing (say, 165 feet), £l4.
Drainage, £lO to £l4.
Gas Service, for lighting and stove, £7 to £l5 (£1 per point).


10651—£320 to £340 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11880—£425 to £450 (BRISBANE, 1925).


12171—£450 to £475 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11802—£495 to £520 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11889—£525 to £550 (BRISBANE, 1925).


12022—£545 to £570 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11886—£550 to £58O (BRISBANE, 1925).


W.H. 487—£560 to £590 (BRISBANE, 1925).


W.H. 606—£570 to £600 BRISBANE, 1925).


11808—£590 to £620 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11854—£590 to £620 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11806—£600 to £630 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11900 —£600 to £630 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11977—£605 to £640 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11947—£605 to £640 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11747—£615 to £650 (BRISBANE, 1925).


W.H. 259—£615 to £650 (BRISBANE, 1925).


10971—£615 to £650 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11697 —£630 to £660 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11771—£630 to £665 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11611—£645 to £68O (BRISBANE, 1925).


12106—£655 to £690 (BRISBANE, 1925).


12343—£665 to £700 (BRISBANE, 1925).
In the construction of the building illustrated above, this standardised
ground-plan was reversed to suit the aspect of the particular site.


12009—£690 to £725 (BRISBANE. 1925).


11579—£695 to £730 (BRISBANE, 1925).


10983—£705 to £740 (BRISBANE, 1925).


10833—£710 to £750 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11642—£770 to £810 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11695—£780 to £820 (BRISBANE. 1925).


12154—£960 to £1,010 (BRISBANE, 1925).


11685—£990 to £1,050 (BRISBANE, 1925).


12143—£1,140 to £1,200 (BRISBANE, 1925).
