

WORTH DOING.
BRITISH WORK
CAPITAL AND PATRIOTISM.
AN ANGLO-AUSTIi ALLAN.
LONDON:
EDWARD STANFORD, G & 7, CHARING CROSS, S.W.
1869.




WORTH DOING.
BRITISH WORK
CAPITAL AND PATRIOTISM.
AN ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN.
LONDON;
EDWARD STANFORD, 6 & 7, CHARING CROSS, S.W.
.1869.


LONDON : PRINTED BY EDWARD STANFORD, 6 & 7, CHARING CROSS, S.W.


BRITISH WORK
r. A PIT AT A\TTA PATPinTTQM
EBBA T^-
Page 18, paragraph 9, last line, for decimal read decennial.
Page 50, line 6, Hoy post read port
- tiiVA v aubagcuUH bU IltlVU UIII-
ployed some of this wealth in locating our sur-
plus population on the British territory referred
to, these matters still require to be dealt with
practically and connectedly on an appropriately
comprehensive and national basis.
Latterly, if not always hitherto, British colon-


LONDON : PRINTED BY EDWARD STANFORD, 6 & 7, CHARING CROSS, 3,W.


ju -v~n
BRITISH WORK
CAPITAL AND PATRIOTISM.
The vast area of the British colonial empire is
well known to be, almost everywhere, in need of
both population and capital; it is known too
that a serious demand exists for measures cal-
culated to relieve the pressure of too rapidly
increasing numbers in certain ranks of our home
population, and also that the accumulating
wealth of Britain is ever seeking opportunities
for profitable investment; yet while at any time
during the last fifteen or more years it would
have been decidedly advantageous to have em-
ployed some of this wealth in locating our sur-
plus population on the British territory referred
to, these matters still require to be dealt with
practically and connectedly on an appropriately
comprehensive and national basis.
Latterly, if not always hitherto, British colon-


ization lias mainly relied upon an exodus of poor
people from the mother-country, and at the
present date these people, with the workhouse or
starvation before them at home, are tempted to
venture in innumerable directions by offers of
free gifts of land, cheap passages, and similar
inducements. It does not seem to have occurred
to the British public, that in allowing these pecu-
niarily helpless beings to wander, uncared for,
into the backwoods or the hush, it not only is
not doing what it might to cheer their path, but
it is also neglecting to do what it ought if only
to make the best of its own property. Incessant
as has been the outcry for expansion on behalf
of the thronging and needy population; inviting
as are our colonial “ waste lands,” and almost
interminable as is the stock and share list of the
day, the latter quotes no instance in which capi-
tal, moved either by expected gain or by credit-
able patriotism, is making any serious attempt
to co-operate with the two former in pursuit of a
mutual and certain advantage. The public mind
seems just now to be conning over some of the
evils arising from this neglect, but it seems also
to be slipping into the old groove so natural to


wealthy philanthropy, namely, an unbounded yet
mistaken charity. Surely the organization and
development of our great colonial empire by
the aid of our surplus people and capital, are
well worth making matters of serious business.
Charity may no doubt render effective help, but
there is great, arduous, yet profitable and
honourable work to be done, with which capital
alone can deal. In this matter, capital may
speedily reduce the appeals to charity, but the
latter can scarcely hope to relieve the former
from the post of honour and the duties which are
peculiarly its own.
The writer is not a candidate for literary
fame, but he cannot refrain from inviting
Britons of all classes to examine these important
British matters honestly and unflinchingly for
themselves, in the hope that they will then act
as a generous and intelligent patriotism may
suggest. British legislators, being all profes-
sionally, and some officially, charged with the
conservation and promotion of the national wel-
fare, may well consider if something more effec-
tive is not possible than merely leaving all their
colonies alike, whether strong or weak, to do all


that needs to be done in the development of
their respective portions of the empire ; British
capitalists may consider whether they have done
anything worthy of themselves as appreciators of
openings for profitable enterprise, in occupying
and improving our colonial possessions; and the
British public generally should consider whether
these magnificent provinces, to which there will
be no further opportunity for adding, are not on
the highest national grounds worth holding
against all comers, and utilizing as fields for
the expansion on British soil of the British
race.
Neither exclusive nor extensive governmental
action is essential to the due advancement of
colonization. The requisite legal powers should
and would no doubt be readily granted by the
legislature, and the government would as readily
watch over and foster approved movements of
this description, but the work itself may best be
executed by the intelligence, patriotism, and
private wealth of Britain. It is a serious incon-
sistency or worse, that this private wealth should
be, as it is, scattered wholesale and broadcast
over every empire, kingdom, republic, province,


and suzerainty in the civilized and semibarba-
rous world; while, for want of capital, British
subjects are being driven to lose their nation-
ality on foreign soil, some of the richest coun-
tries in our own empire being at the same time
without inhabitants.
It is said that large amounts of surplus British
capital seek investment annually in other than
British securities ; that many thousands of our
fellow-countrymen, able and willing to work, had
recently no employment and no hope of obtaining
any, and that they are passing through life in a
state bordering on starvation and despair; and
yet it is a fact that the owners of this capital
and these starving men have a joint proprietorial
interest in hundreds of millions of unoccupied
acres in America, in Australasia, and in Africa,
fairly comparable in all respects with those of
the mother-country. Surely then it ought to be
time for these two parties to combine their
energies, and to enter heartily into the work of
colonization.
Although it is by no means advisable to inter-
fere unnecessarily with the old modes of miscel-
laneous settlement, it is expedient and urgently


necessary to bring large funds to bear on sys-
tematic colonization. The greater number of
emigrants are poor ; land (no matter bow excel-
lent) without population is valueless, but with
poor industrious people in large numbers, with
rich lands in unlimited quantity, and with a
sufficient amount of capital available, all the
elements of great prosperity exist, and from their
judicious combination nothing but mutual ad-
vantage can accrue.
Possibly it may be thought that capital cannot
be applied until some progress has been made
in locating population, but this is an erroneous
feature of the present practice. When popula-
tion is made to pioneer capital on the British
principle of settlement, it requires an unusual
amount of courage and determination, or igno-
rance, for an individual who finds himself
crowded out of his native country to face the
Canadian pine forest or the Australian bush,
there to be completely isolated, it may be, until
his own axe opens communications with his
neighbour; to have to construct his own tem-
porary and miserable dwelling; to go through
the process of clearing and cultivating, and then


perhaps to find that he has no roads on which to
convey his produce, and no market even if there
were roads. But the whole aspect of the case is
changed for the better when capital assumes its
rightful position and undertakes to pioneer
population. In Canada West, or in Western
Australia, rivers, where there are any available,
no doubt exercise considerable influence on the
direction of advancing settlement; but still,
for a variety of reasons, in either country
railways would best constitute the highways and
arteries of colonization. Every railway must
start from some externally accessible point.
This fact implies, building materials, imple-
ments, machinery, stock, and stores of all kinds
in abundance, with facility of ingress and egress,
which together again imply comfortable per-
manent dwellings and homesteads, society, in-
telligence from the outer world, and transit for
produce to some available market from the
remotest point to which the railway extends.
Our practice has hitherto been to sell the land
or give it away, and then to buy some of it back
at a high figure for railway purposes; they
reverse this order of doing things in the States,


and their results ought to satisfy us that we
cannot do better than follow their example.
The particular kind of property which will best
pay for the investment of capital in these new
countries and that will constitute the safest
security for the same is the land itself. This
land may he, and mostly is, valueless without
improvements; the improvements may themselves
cost all or more than they are worth when made,
but they impart a permanent prolific value to
the land that goes on increasing with increasing
population until it reaches the level of older
countries. Generally, hitherto people without
means or system have attempted to occupy these
new lands and to reduce the wilderness to a
civilized condition, but their earlier experiences
have been more or less severe, and in most
cases it is not until years of patient and painful
toil have accumulated a certain amount of capital,
that they begin to find themselves in satisfactory
circumstances, while it is the hope of this in the
future that alone sustains them through their
early trials and difficulties. Now capital could
certainly do this rough work of settlement
better than the majority of those whom we arc


desirous of converting into prosperous colonists,
who have had no experience in such work, but
thousands of whom would be ready to step into
almost any openings that capital might make for
them, and under such circumstances it cannot be
admitted that the fee-simple of British lands
would not be a safe and judicious investment for
British capital. Why then should that capital
wait until these lands are occupied, seeing that
some of them are never likely to be occupied
without its aid, when by so waiting a large
portion of the emigrating population is driven to
America, and when, as a natural consequence,
this identical population may at no distant date
actually advance from its foreign settlements, as
citizens of another country, to the peaceable yet
literal conquest and alienation from British rule
of those very lands which, aided by capital, they
would have gladly occupied as our fellow-sub-
jects in the first instance.
Considering the immense pecuniary wealth of
Britain, and her rich expanse of unoccupied
territory, no large numbers of honest, able,
industrious Britons ought ever to feel the woes
of abject poverty in either of the British Isles;


and when they do so it is difficult to believe
that some men or some classes of men have not
failed to perceive or to perform what their
country has a clear right to expect at their hands.
Yet Britain is said to be pauperizing large
classes of her grown men, permitting a sadly
and needlessly extensive destruction of juvenile
life, and heedlessly throwing her offspring and
her capital to every foreign shore, while for
want of these at certain points she is positively,
at the same time, endangering the retention of
some of her finest provinces. She alone amongst
the nations of the earth can at the present date
command a simultaneous abundance of men,
means, and unoccupied territory. But our
available surplus capital and population are
located and overcrowded at one point, while our
available surplus territory lies at other points all
more or less remote, and this no doubt is one
reason why it has occurred that the development
and peopling of our own territories have not
attracted the attention they deserve. There is,
however, another reason which cannot safely be
overlooked. The surplus lands are in the
colonies, and colonies are supposed to be only


troublesome dependencies whose connection with
the mother-country is but temporary, and upon
whose advancement therefore any direct invest-
ment of capital would be hardly a judicious
venture. Dr. Russell has not hesitated to
countenance this theory by affirming in his work
on the defences of Canada that “ no matter how
“ prosperous a colony of Great Britan may be, a
“ colony it must be so long as it is not indepen-
“ dent.” But surely this is a somewhat hasty
or imperfectly considered assertion. British
statesmen of this age cannot be prepared to con-
fess themselves incapable of providing a better
expedient than the gradual and certain dismem-
berment of the empire over which they at present
rule, when, if not dismembered by such inca-
pacity, that empire may stand for ages the fore-
most of the nations, no matter how others may
expand.
If England does not deliberately intend to
wrap herself up in insular self-sufficiency and
early isolated insignificance, her people will do
well to begin at once to contemplate a contingent
future, in which she will find herself the chief
of many sister provinces, some of which, as they


are vastly larger, may become proportionally more
populous, and even more actively prosperous
than herself, but the whole of which she now
has it in her power by judicious measures to
bind firmly together, and to lead henceforward
in an unconquerable phalanx of British nation-
ality. None of these provinces ought at any
stage to be allowed, much less induced, to
believe that separation from the empire is their
final goal, if England would not mar the finest
opportunity a nation ever held. As to the
management of their internal affairs, they must
and will be free as the mother-country, ruled by
themselves alone as she is, and directly subject
also as she is through their own legislatures
only to the British Crown, and although they
may be content to leave some of tbeir claims as
freemen in abeyance for the present, the Euro-
pean portion of the British public cannot too
soon modify its views, and open its mind to
broader conceptions generally on these matters
in recognition of the fact that there are other
portions of that public besides its own. The time
is near at hand, if not already here, to cast about
for some arrangement more consistent with the


great, actual, and enormous prospective extension
of British nationality. The colonists are in no
way less patriotic than their fellow-countrymen
in the United Kingdom; they are occupying on
behalf, and for the benefit of the whole nation,
many of the fairest portions of the globe, and in
discharging these outpost duties they ought not to
he expected to forego their national privileges, nor
do they desire to shirk their national responsibili-
ties. They must have ceased to be Britons if they
do not hold that such responsibilities should only
accrue under equitable conditions, hut they are
Britons still, and the fair conditions being mag-
nanimously accorded to them, they will ever be
ready to stand side by side as Britons in the
brunt of any just quarrel, and to bear their
share of any costs with which as parts of the
nation they may be fairly chargeable. The
British Parliament has seen the necessity for
widening its own basis, it will also no doubt in
due time observe that various weighty consider-
ations call for the establishment of a Supreme
General Council of the Empire, in which council
the parliament of every province will be ade-
quately and fairly represented ; which will have


no concern with matters of purely provincial
import, and without whose concurrence no de-
claration of war or other grave step affecting the
whole empire should be taken, but whose duly
announced consent thereto should carry with it
the assent, power, and means of the whole British
dominions. Possibly this council may be pro-
duced by a modification of some existing body,
but it cannot be any mere local parliament,
English or Colonial.* Were some such nation-
ally progressive step as this taken or in prospect,
as it may soon have to be, the colonies could no
* Query. Why should not the m British Empire he
Federalized ?—Perhaps some of the great thinkers of the
day will examine the bearings of that question, and re-
port the result of their investigations. To the writer it
appears that several irritating grievances and difficulties
might he satisfactorily adjusted; that much injurious
uncertainty as to our national future might be removed,
and that our position might be turned to much better
account by means of a British Federal Parliament, fairly
constituted to deal with all matters properly referable to
such a body. Under a wise Federal system, our Irish
fellow-subjects might be gratified by reinstatement in
the management of their local affairs; their country, as
it is undoubtedly the most important, might soon become
also one of the most prosperous transmarine provinces
of the empire; our colonies might be made growing
sources of national strength ; and a united British people


longer be considered mere temporary depend-
encies of the mother-country ; and this difficulty
might stand prepared all the world over to attend to its
own peaceful avocations, or to deal with any competitors
who might dare to avow themselves its open foes.
Solely with a view to invite attention to the subject it
is here submitted—
1. That, omitting India and some outlying points
requiring exceptional treatment, the Empire might be
Federalized as nine States, viz. —1, Great Britain ; 2,
Ireland; 3, Canada (east of the Rocky Mountains); 4,
Columbia (west of the Rocky Mountains); 5, West
Indies; 6, South Africa ; 7, Australia; 8, Tasmania ; and
9 K New Zealand.
2. That each of these States might conduct its local
affairs by its own State Parliament, with or without
subordinate provincial legislatures, as their several cases
might require.
3. That each State Parliament might elect representa-
tives of the State to the Federal Parliament.
4. That the Federal Parliament might consist of 300
members elected by the State Parliaments, and 150 non-
hereditary “ Peers of the Empire ” to be created by the
Sovereign, the whole sitting and voting as one body to
bring all the highest political talents of the nation into
a common focus.
4. That Peerages of the Empire might be created in
the respective States in numbers proportioned, at the time
of each creation, to the number of members elected by
the State to the Federal Parliament.
6. That these Peerages might for each State be in the
restricted proportion to each grade of one dukedom to
two marquisates, to four earldoms, to eight baronies; that


in the way of capital would be removed, but
should British legislators not take the initiative
in this direction, the operations of capital in the
colonies may be most effective in inducing those
legislators to look at and recognize the real
merits of the questions involved. One aspect of
they might rank with the corresponding English titles
without their holders being necessarily English peers.
7. That the Peerage of the Empire might be gradually
filled up, and that the Federal Parliament might be fully
constituted, although any number of such Peerages might
at any time be vacant.
8. That Peers of the Empire might vote by proxy,
and that each of them should be at the time of his eleva-
tion, and for five of the ten preceding years, a resident
legislator of the State to which his Peerage appertains.
9. That 300 members of the Federal Parliament might
be elected by the State Parliaments being divided between
them in proportion to the numbers of the male population
aged 18 to 35 of the respective States ascertained by
decimal census.
10. That elected members might hold their seats until
their successors arrive to supersede them.
11. That men, arsenals, dockyards, ships, war materials
of all kinds, and complete telegraphic union, might be
provided for the defence of every part of the Empire
under the authority of the Federal Parliament.
12. That to cover the Federal expenditure an annual
requisition might issue to each State Parliament, from
the Federal Parliament, under sign manual of the
Sovereign, sustained, if need be, by the whole Federal
power.


them may he illustrated by comparison with the
proposal made not long since to pay the national
debt. Were that operation performed, the lia-
bilities of the nation would he reduced some
800,000,000/., and this would give a vastly im-
proved appearance to that side of the national
balance-sheet. On the other side, were such a
general improvement effected in only one-eighth
of the best of the British colonial territory as
occupying it with suitable population and capital
would bring about, so raising it to a value only
one-fifth as great as the present average of
England, there would be an increase in the
public and private assets of the nation amount-
ing to 6,000,000,000/., with a corresponding
increase of peaceful influence or warlike power.
These works would no doubt each require time
for their full realization, but that is scarcely a
sufficient reason why either should not be entered
upon without delay.
Scattered over the earth’s surface in the
greatest possible diversity of situation and
dimensions lie the numerous rocks, islands,
provinces, countries, and one whole continent
which together constitute the colonial empire


of Great Britain, and with respect to which it
may be affirmed without a shadow of exaggera-
tion that within its bounds are to be found every
kind of climate, soil, and physical condition.
Omitting all the European and Asiatic depen-
dencies, this colonial empire contains on a suf-
ficiently approximate estimate for the present
purpose 6,500,000 square miles. Deducting
from this 3,000,000 in America, and 2,500,000
in Africa and Australasia as being for the present
at least either inaccessible, of inferior quality,
or otherwise unavailable for immediate settle-
ment, there yet remains 1,000,000 square miles
of British territory that, with proper treatment,
may fairly be considered to be as well fitted to
support a thriving population as are the British
Isles, in which latter it is to be remembered
there are not wanting considerable areas that
support few human beings. No material addi-
tions have been made to our colonial possessions
during the last thirty years, and while the
further acquisition of territory has thus finally
ceased, it has unfortunately happened that but
little desire has been evinced on the part of the
nation at large, to turn to the best account wl at


has so long been in our possession. The United
States is the only other country possessed of
new territories at all comparable in quality,
quantity, and general eligibility to those of
Great Britain. Its lands are not better, its
political institutions are not superior, nor are
the opportunities it affords for general prosperity
or personal advancement greater than those to
be found in the principal divisions of our colo-
nial empire, yet the States have secured during this
same thirty years many times more immigrants
even from the British Isles than all our colonies.
It is not easy to name an approximate value
for the colonial lands, scattered as they are in
all latitudes and longitudes, and varying ex-
tremely in climate and quality. If the partially
settled districts are excluded, notwithstanding
the excellent quality of vast areas of the re-
mainder, probably ss. per acre will not be too
low an estimate of their present worth, and
allowing for roads and other reservations, a
nominal value of about 150 Z. per square mile is
thus arrived at, which is far more likely to be
a very excessive than an insufficient one.
The rateable value of property in England


and Wales was in 1865 about 90,000,000?., and
the gross annual value will probably have been
100.000. For the present purpose an
allowance may be made for the exceptional
metropolitan value of property in England as
compared with the rest of the empire, to the
extent of one-half, reducing it to 50,000,000?.
per annum. Then taking the average per-
centage produced by real property at 5 per
cent., the 50,000,000?. represents a capital of
1.000. The area may be taken at
58,000 square miles, and consequently the
average value of every square mile is a little
over 17,000?.
Now since the average soil and climate of
England and Wales are on the whole little, if
> better than those of the 1,000,000 miles
of choice country with whose condition and
prospects we are now more immediately con-
cerned, and since life and property are not more
secure in England than they would be in a very
large proportion of this new country, why is it
that land should be barely worth (if indeed it is
so) 150?. per mile in the one case, while in the
other it is worth 17,500?.? Perhaps it will bo


answered that the extremely favourable position
of England accounts for much of the difference,
but this is in truth only one of three ingredi-
ents, the others being an energetic enterprising
population and abundant capital. A candid
consideration of these points can hardly fail to
result in the conclusion that, making full allow-
ance for all adventitious circumstances, popula-
tion and capital are the fundamental bases of the
high intrinsic value of English landed property,
for that value would he but small were the
mother-country placed on a par with some of
her colonies as regards capital and population.
Were England to set herself earnestly to work
to raise the colonies to her own level in these
particulars, her metropolitan position would
secure for her a rich metropolitan share in the
results.
The British public has never yet fully real-
ized the value of its proprietorial claims in
these colonial possessions, and consequently no
national effort has ever been made to occupy
them with a genuine British population. Con-
victs have been thrown on some points in great
numbers, hut rather with a view to be rid of


them than to develop the resources of the empire;
and elsewhere, with one or two nominally sys-
tematic exceptions, unregulated, uncared for,
and insignificant, miscellaneous settlement has
drowsily exemplified the utter absence of a
national determination to apply colonization to
its best national uses. There is little room to
doubt that this want of proper spirit in the
matter has caused serious detriment to British
interests. Pecuniarily it has led, and is leading
to misapplications of our financial strength for
purposes that are in some cases decidedly
inimical to British policy, the southern, and
eastern railways of Russia for example. By
neglecting to colonize, our national position has
been rendered less unassailable than it might
have been, for in the last thirty years millions of
people have settled in America, solely because
the well-advertised accessibility of the country
made settlement there more popular than in
our colonies. A very slight, if but sufficiently
tangible advantage, artificially provided by our
capital, would have turned a large portion of
this wealth of life and progress into the British
dominions, and to whatever extent we as a nation


have neglected to provide that advantage, we
have missed a faultless opportunity to improve
our national strength and position. The one
advantage of accessibility possessed by the
“ States ” being provided or compensated for on
our part by others, the variety of soil and
climate, the freedom from taxation, the honesty
and stability of our institutions, would un-
doubtedly have weight in the estimation of the
emigrating world, and our unoccupied lands
would then draw their share of the general
European emigration, while most of our emi-
grating fellow-countrymen would without doubt
find it more congenial to their feelings to locate
themselves in the newer provinces of the old
empire.
Some persons may be inclined to suppose that
the rapid growth of our gold colonies is an exem-
plification of the wisdom of our colonizing sys-
tem, forgetting that that growth resulted chiefly
from reckless stampedes after quantities of the
precious metal, whose known presence there,
available for the first comers, would assuredly at
that time have similarly colonized the summit of
the Peak of Teneriff'e, if not the depths of the


Atlantic at its foot. This is not true coloniza-
tion, although it has certainly proved itself to
be an effective substitute in certain cases. West-
ern Australia, South Australia, and Canterbury,
New Zealand, offer fairer examples of our sys-
tematic colonizing processes, and their present
condition is not by any means so satisfactory as
to justify further national inaction. Since the
last of them was founded, the steamship, the
railway, and the telegraph have become avail-
able for colonizing purposes, to which, sustained
by persevering joint-stock enterprise, they have
never yet been systematically applied in deve-
loping British interests, though by their means
America has placed herself on a level with us,
under circumstances that if we make no effort to
maintain our position, assure to her the leading
place before the expiration of another decade.
In some parts of our colonizing system it has
been considered a most judicious theory to sell
the land at a high price, and to expend a consi-
derable part of the proceeds on the introduction
of labour. But unimproved lands cannot be
worth a high price until the work of colonization
is either very far advanced or being very vigor-


ously prosecuted in their immediate vicinity, and
when either point is reached, far more pressing
demands for the funds accruing from the sale of
such lands compel the exclusion or suspension
of the theoretic principle. It is not too much
to say that in Australasia, where this principle
has aimed at most practical results, it has long
ceased to exert a material influence, if it ever
had such, on the colonization of any considerable
portion of the country. Nor is this surprising,
for it was in reality an attempt to accomplish
the work of bond fide capital by affixing a fic-
titious value to worthless land. Neither is it at
all surprising that the parallel method of dis-
pensing with both real and fictitious capital by
making free grants of small allotments of unim-
proved lands to every needy applicant, fails to
secure that substantial progress which at first
sight it seems calculated to ensure. Backed by
capital it would succeed, but poor men having
their own farms to clear and cultivate cannot,
however anxious to do so, provide for the many
wants with which capital could and should pro-
fitably deal, and as a consequence huts take the
place of houses, lands are but imperfectly culti-


vated, the best men do not seek them, roads, &c.,
wait years for formation, the whole country is
restrained from the advance which a healthy
concentration of men and means would at once
effect, the standard of its eligibility is lowered,
and the more desirable classes of emigrants are
thereby deterred from venturing to the locality.
But besides these generally prejudicial effects of
colonizing without capital, there is serious indi-
vidual loss. Brute force has to make up for the
absence of costly appliances, and with no roads
and no access to the external world, the new
settler, his cattle, and his assistants, if he is
fortunate enough to have any, expend means
and strength at the worst possible advantage.
Moreover, it is neither necessary nor desirable
that the capital employed should be chiefly
owned by the settlers, since, if it were so, its
application would be capriciously disjointed,
scattered, and more or less unprofitable, for the
advantage of comprehensive connected opera-
tions would be lost sight of in a multiplicity of
conflicting or isolated personal interests. These
interests may well be left to take care of them-
selves when ample and suitable opportunities are


duly provided for them, but the work of open-
ing up new country so as to afford such oppor-
tunities to individual enterprise, is in every
respect pre-eminently one for the well-consi-
dered, energetic, and persevering action of joint-
stock capital.
Having such immensely valuable fields for
colonization, and having in close proximity to
one of them, a powerful nation very much in-
clined to annex a part of the territory whose
loss would he a most serious misfortune, amount-
ing to no less than a complete destruction of our
highly important North American position, by
severing it in the midst or stopping its western
outlet, we ought at once to see that proper in-
ducements and facilities are accorded to emi-
grating Britons to settle there, and to hold on
behalf of the British race this one of its finest
possessions. Ten years ago, according to Dr.
Bussell, the American Congress granted .six
square miles of laud for each mile of a line of
railway for reaching our frontier, adding thereto
“ a loan of State credit of 20,000 dollars per
“ mile ” to the extent of 5,000,000 dollars, or
1,000,000 Z. sterling. If it could ho worth the


while of America, with a comparative scarcity of
population for her enormous area, to take such
measures as these in the case, surely it must be
worth our while to take equally effective ones
to secure our own territory when hundreds of
thousands of our people are a burden to the old
country, and as many more are being laid in
early graves for lack of what that territory might
be made to yield.
Were suitable arrangements completed for
opening up Western Canada and Western Aus-
tralia, ample opportunities would arise for ab-
sorbing all the honest, able-bodied population
that the mother-country is likely to be able to
spare. It would he sheer cruelty to the indivi-
duals to send infirm, physically incapable people
to battle with the rough hard work of the
colonies, where there are no poor laws and no
poor houses; where, in short, there neither is
nor can he for years to come any system of poor
relief or efficient substitute for one, nor would it
be less cruel to the young settlements to throw
on to their hands a load of expatriated incipient
British crime. If this latter article cannot ho
managed in a country that has appliances for


watching, controlling, and punishing it at com-
mand, still more difficult will it be for those to
deal with who can bring no such appliances to
hear. There is nothing to be gained by dissem-
bling the truth on either of these points. The
mother-country and each of the colonies will
have to maintain its aged and infirm poor, and
to repress its own crime as best it may, but the
colonies can materially aid the mother-country
by drafting off, and so reducing the numbers of
her unemployed, whose poverty-stricken ranks
are a great, yet most pitiable source of, in many
cases, almost involuntary and excusable crime.
A good system of colonization would open to
numbers of these crowded-out unfortunates, and
to thousands of the friendless children in our
streets, the wished-for opportunities to continue
honest, and the mother-country would thus be
saved in all probability from numerous accessions
to her roll of criminals. If it is asked at what
point in this downward social scale ought the
line of exclusion to be drawn, the answer is that
unless the mother-country wishes to offer a
direct premium for the increase of crime, no
person who is known to have exposed him or


herself to a prosecution for any criminal act,
should be allowed to share in the great advan-
tages that are undoubtedly obtainable from
emigration.
British North America, whose total area is not
very materially smaller than that of the great
Republic which lies beyond its southern boun-
dary, contains upwards of 3,100,000 square
miles. Much of it is, however, unfit for colon-
ization, for, lying as it does within the Arctic
circle, it is subject to all the severity of Arctic
winters. Still there are large portions of it much
more favourably circumstanced. West of the
old settled districts of Canada, the south boun-
dary runs north-westerly until it reaches the
central meridian of the continent at the Lake of
the Woods, in long. 95 W., lat. 49 N,, whence the
parallel of 49 carries it to the Pacific. This
southern limit of Central and Western British
North America is some 350 miles farther north
than what are considered the choicest parts of
the new province of Ontario, and it might be
inferred therefrom, that the country bounded by
it is proportionally colder; but excusable as
such an inference might be, there is good reason


to believe that it would be far from correct, for
the eastern is colder than the western portion of
the continent. The mean annual temperature
of North America is lower than that of the cor-
responding latitudes in Western Europe, but
similar causes to those which produce the
milder climates of the latter have similar effects
on the westerly regions of America, and their
general result is that at, and to the westward of,
the Lake of the Woods, the mean annual tempera-
ture is nearly the same as that of Ontario. This
trending north-westerly of the isothermal line of
mean annual temperature continues until it
reaches the Eocky Mountains in 60 deg. N., and
consequently a climate generally equal to that
of Ontario exists between the points named over
an area of some hundreds of thousands of square
miles, that part of it lying to the north-east of
the line indicated being colder, and that to the
south-west warmer, than the mean of the whole.
Speaking of this identical tract of country, to
which he had occasion to refer, Dr. Eussell says
in his ‘ Canada,’ “It is indeed a country worth
“ fighting for, and whether the contest be carried
“ on by the slow processes of immigration or by


“ tlie ruder agencies of neglect, the conqueror and
“ the conquered will have reason to regard the re-
“ suit with very decided sentiments of joy or sorrow
“at no distant time .” And just previously he had
remarked, “ The more we know of it the more
“ eligible it seems as a field for individual enter-
“ prise, and an area for the exercise of legitimate
“ Imperial ambition.” Dr. Eussell also quotes
as follows from a report of the New York Cham-
ber of Commerce :— ■“ There is in the heart of
“ North America a distinct subdivision, of which
“ Lake Winnipeg may he regarded as the centre.
“ This subdivision, like the valley of the Missis-
“ sippi, is distinguished for the fertility of its
“ soil and for the extent and gentle slope of its
“ great plains, watered by rivers of great length
“ and admirably adapted for steam navigation.
“It has a climate not exceeding in severity that
“ of many portions of Canada and the Eastern
“ States. It will in all respects compare favour-
“ ably with some of the most densely peopled
“ portions of the continent of Europe. It is
“ admirably fitted to become the seat of a
“ numerous, hardy, and prosperous community.
“ It has an area equal to eight or ten first-class


“ American States. Its great river, the Saskat-
“ chewan, carries a navigable waterline to the
“ very base of the Rocky Mountains. It is not
“ at all improbable that the valley of this river
may yet offer the best route for a railroad to
“ the Pacific.” Dr. Russell adds, “ There is, as
“ they say in Ireland, the makings of four States,
“ on the American model of Ohio, in that district
“ between the valleys of the north and south
“ Saskatchewan.” He then proceeds to quote
from another local American authority, and
amongst others the following extracts bear on
the points now under notice. “. . . the
“ land grows grain finely and is well wooded.
“ All the grains of the temperate districts are
“ hero produced abundantly, and Indian corn
“ may be grown as far north as the Saskatchewan ;
“ to the region bordering the Northern Pacific
“ the finest maritime positions belong throughout
“ its entire extent, and no part of the West of
“ Europe exceeds it in the advantages of equable
“ climate, fertile soil, and commercial aecessi-
“ bility of coast; in every condition forming the
“ basis of national wealth, the continental mass
“ lying westward and northward from Lake


“ Superior is far more valuable than the interior
“ in lower latitudes ; its commercial and indus-
“ trial capacity is gigantic.” The remarks thus
made or reproduced by Dr. Russell, from which
these extracts are taken, were given by him, as
stated in his Preface, in pursuance of his inten-
tion to “ point out the magnificent heritage
“ which is open to our redundant population ; ”
and although a Canadian or American would
probably support them with other arguments or
more exact information, perhaps an Australian
may be permitted to accept and to repeat them
as being quite worthy of most serious consider-
ation.
Now, turning from Canada and Western Bri-
tish America, whose capabilities for settlement
will, no doubt, be effectually advocated by the
British colonists residing in them, but whose
winters are probably on the whole more severe
than some emigrants would feel inclined to
encounter, on looking towards Australasia an
entirely different climatic condition of things
presents itself over an equally extensive area of
unoccupied land. The great colony of Western
Australia may be divided into tropical and warm-


temperate regions, as British North America
may similarly be designated arctic and cold-
temperate. Western Australia contains some
hundreds of millions of acres. In its northern
parts some of the largest rivers of Australia
occur, on whose banks are found fine lands
excellently adapted to yield valuable tropical
productions. This country has not hitherto
received the attention its proximity to the great
centres of Asiatic population entitles it to claim,
and possibly means might be readily found to
utilize its virgin resources by colonizing it wholly
or partially from India or China. With the
assistance of those tropical races which might
be found suitable and available, British intelli-
gence and capital would soon prove themselves
to be powerful and profitable regenerators, and
there is really no substantial reason why this
part of the Australian continent should be less
productive, or of less importance to the general
well-being of the empire, than any other ; but,
owing to its tropical temperature, it is most
probable that any attempt to settle it with
European immigrants alone would fail. Farther
south, and stretching from the Indian Ocean to


Spencer’s Gulf, lies a still immense tract,
admirably suited to the constitutions of Euro-
peans, and capable of being made equal in
productiveness, wealth, and influence, to any
other country in the same latitudes and of similar
extent. At present it is all a mere waste, whose
whole extent, though well able to support many
millions of people, is literally of no value and
of no use to any civilized being. Although it
is nearer to Europe than any other Australian
colonies that are rising to the rank of powerful
States, and although its soil and climate are in
no sense inferior to those of the rest of Australia,
it has failed as yet to make a vigorous and
healthy beginning in the race of provincial
progress. In no part of the British dominions
is the relative essentiality of land, capital, and
population more extensively illustrated. Land—
good, bad, and indifferent—is all alike quite
worthless, absolutely without value, market, or
occupant; that particular element of population
classified as labour, if placed on this land in
quantity, would be as worthless, and if without
funds as helpless, as the laud itself; but by com-
bining a reasonably classified population with


adequate judiciously applied capital upon this
worthless land, the creation of a great and
valuable branch of the nation could here be at
once effected.
If Great Britain possessed only these two
territories of Western Canada and Western
Australia for national expansion, they would
amply suffice to accommodate all her surplus
population, and to provide remunerative invest-
ments for a good deal of her spare capital for
at least a century; but she has numerous other
fields for colonization, though all on a smaller
scale, and mostly in various respects less suit-
able for continuous and extensive colonizing ope-
rations. New Zealand, and more especially its
“ Middle Island,” as it is termed, is perhaps, all
things considered, better adapted than most
others to supply the intermediate link in the
range of climate between the warm and cold-
temperate regions already mentioned. It is,
however, like the other eastern Australian colo-
nies, almost completely occupied, though but
thinly peopled; and it is scarcely probable that
the work of systematic colonization can be car-
ried on so uninterruptedly and satisfactorily in


these colonies, as in a comparatively unoccupied
country. Still, there will he no lack of openings
in these colonies for practical operations; and,
although such may have to be more or less dis-
connected, they may yet serve the best interests
of the empire and of the provinces in which they
are carried on.
It is worthy of remark that at the present date
no great political obstacles exist in the colonies
to the settlement of population. The political
institutions of all the colonies are now fully
constituted on a free and progressive basis;
the colonizing body will need, therefore, to pay
no more attention to the political affairs of
the colonies than may be required to enable
it to adapt its measures to the institutions
of the country in which they are to be carried
out.
Supposing that British capitalists were dis-
posed to take part in operations of the kind
referred to, and that such proceedings would
meet with at least the general approval of the
Imperial authorities, perhaps it would be better
for the greater part of such capital as may be
available to act on some clearly defined system


by means of a carefully arranged organization,
than for each individual capitalist who may be
willing to assist to operate quite independently
of the rest.
The system to be followed should have the
effect of opening up for permanent occupation
the greatest possible extent of country in such a
manner as to afford constantly increasing faci-
lities for general settlement.
The countries requiring to be peopled may be
best dealt with on comprehensive pre-arranged
plans. They should be broached at points that
are easy of access and otherwise suitable, which
points, with the whole of the main lines of
operations intended to radiate therefrom, should
be generally determined upon and approximately
laid down on a map at the commencement, so
that, if necessary, various parts of the work may
be prosecuted simultaneously. Since it would
not be possible to fill these immense areas
with population unless and until they become
generally accessible, lines of settlement, each
some few miles wide, should be rapidly pushed
through them in the most important directions,
each one carrying with it, relying upon, and


supporting its liglit rail or tramway as near to
tlie centre of operations as circumstances will
admit. It might in this way be advisable to
establish one line parallel to the boundary and
about 100 miles within it from the settled districts
of Canada to the Pacific, and certainly it would
be so to run similar lines parallel to and at short
distances from both the western and southern
coasts of Western Australia. Belts of land might
be at once permanently reserved for these pur-
poses on the whole length of the routes indicated
to an extent of at least forty miles wide, and no
new vested interests should be created within
those limits in tbe meantime, for although the
suggested operations would not require so great
a width of country, yet until surveys were made
it would be impossible to say how far the nature
of the surface might compel a modification of the
plans, while on the other hand the extra lands so
preserved would be raised in value sufficiently to
compensate for the lands granted to those who
do the work. Most probably a maximum width
of twenty miles will suffice for a line of settle-
ment, but it must not be forgotten that in both
Canada and Australia many large tracts of


country will have to be crossed that can never
be made valuable.
It ought to be possible to occupy at least
100 square miles on each line of operations
annually, when a commencement is fairly made,
and this quantity of land might be conveniently
named, granted, and worked as a section (or
estate). These 100-mile sections should bo classi-
fied, and a breadth assigned to each of them in
proportion to the value of the land, varying the
form of the sections to include the quantity.
They might be divided into three classes, thus—
First-class sections, to be each five miles wide
by twenty miles long, wherever the land is worth
more than 20s. per acre throughout.
Second-class sections, to be ten miles square,
where the land is worth from ss. to 205.; and
Third-class sections, to be twenty miles wide
by five miles long, where the land is worth less
than ss. per acre.
A general reconnaissance of the country would
enable competent impartial men to decide in
which of these classes any particular tract should
be placed. It would, however, be requisite to
keep these valuations considerably in advance of


the work, or to allow for the effect of the works
in increasing the value, otherwise the improvers
will be mulcted in proportion to their zeal, and
this style of encouragement will scarcely be
appreciated or calculated to operate beneficially
on the progress of the undertaking. The present
value of most of the land is such that it ought to
be granted free for such an object as that in view,
but it may happen that the average value of a
section may be more than 11. per acre, in which
case the difference should be paid to the colonial
authorities. Whatever width of land it should
be deemed most expedient to attach to the lines
of operations, it would be necessary for the whole
of such land as is not already alienated from the
Crown, and as much of the remainder as possible,
to become the exclusive property of the operators,
either by free grant or by purchase, since it
will not be fair nor judicious to expose them to
any serious competition, when their enterprise
and capital will alone have made such competi-
tion pecuniarily possible. But in return for this
concession, it might be arranged that on each
first-class section, or each alternate inferior
section, tramways should be carried to both


boundaries of the lands conceded. Provision
will thus be made for an indefinite extension of
the tramway system, or its conversion into rail-
ways, should occasion arise, and so ordinary
settlement will be facilitated to the utmost in
localities which are now inaccessible, and long
likely to remain so under the present system.
It will be seen on reference to any good map that
belts of settlement on the scale mentioned would
be only narrow pioneering lines, opening on
either hand great breadths of country.
In alienating these lands a principal object of
the colonial governments will, of course, be to
ensure their occupation by active colonists, and
if they can be settled with a suitable population
upon the governments foregoing their demand of
the upset price, whatever it may be, the govern-
ments would make a good bargain by acceding to
such an arrangement. The revenues, directly or
indirectly accruing, would rapidly increase, and
the settlers would soon more than reimburse the
value of their allotments by increasing that of the
adjoining lands, by creating trade, and by a perma-
nently enlarged consumption of dutiable articles.
Taking the value of the land at the high


average for Western Australia and Western
Canada of 11. per acre, that of the 100-mile
section would be 64,000 Z. A moiety of this
might be fairly allowed as the contribution of the
local government towards the construction ot
the rail and tramways of the section. The cost
of replacing the other, 32,000 Z., on loan at six pei
cent., would he 1920 Z. per annum. The average
revenue derived from the colonists of Austialia
is not less than 4Z. per head of all ages per
anuum, and from those of Canada about IZ. The
smaller amount may he used as an unimpeach-
able basis of calculation, and it appears that if
for each 100-mile section alienated, 1920 persons
were added to the population of Canada, and it
those 1920 persons were equal to the average ot
other Canadian colonists, that colony would in
fact have disposed of a moiety of the section for
the equivalent in population, yielding a per-
manent annual revenue equal to the interest on
IZ. per acre of the alienated lands ; while by the
other moiety immunity would be secured from a
much heavier outlay on the construction of roads
and railways in the locality. It is stated that
Canada makes free grants of 200 acres each to


immigrants from Europe; and under this system
wei’e only one-sixth of the above-mentioned
1920 persons entitled to its benefits, they would
absorb the 64,000 acres without providing rail-
ways or any other advantage beyond their own
presence, and consequently the proposed 64,000-
acre grants for establishing a system of organ-
ized colonization can scarcely be considered too
liberal, when compared with this particular phase
of ordinary settlement.
It is not impossible that the main lines might
be pushed forward at the rate of several miles
per annum should the requisite capital be made
available. In the first year of a section, laboui
and mechanical appliances being duly provided,
a light line of railway could be carried along the
centre, the ground next the lino could be sur-
veyed in mile divisions, lines of tramway marked
out and sites fixed for towns, villages, farms, and
some of the farm homesteads ; and cottages could
be erected on the village reserves, ready for the
reception of additional labour. In the second
year the tramways could be laid, buildings for
some of the farms erected, and a portion of the
lands belonging to them cleared and broken up,


all the force of the section being employed upon
them.
As the farms became occupied the village
lands would be required for small tradesmen,
labourers, and artizans, and the constitution of
these primary communities, under such favourable
conditions, would then tell on the demand for
town lands, where the mercantile and professional
classes would soon find it worth their while to be
represented. Such operations as these need only
be limited in number and extent by the amount
of capital and population offering, for the land
is at present practically unlimited. They could
be carried on simultaneously at several points, if
necessary or expedient; but two of them, at
least, ought to be in progress together, one in
the bracing climate of Canada West, and the
other in warmer Western Australia ; because by
this arrangement our colonizing operations would
meet the requirements of emigrants from every
part of Europe, and the British flag would shelter
unsurpassed, if not unequalled, opportunities for
settlement in all kinds of climates, a considera-
tion by no means to be lost sight of when it is
remembered that we want from 50 to 100


millions of people to occupy only the choicest
portions of the colonial empire.
In the process thus hastily described there
would be no preliminary stages of backwoods
or bush barbarism and exclusion; the telegraph
might and would, of course, go with the work,
and civilization would step bodily in full vigour
into new positions, under very favourable cir-
cumstances.
Subject to correction or modification by more
fully informed colonists of British America, and
due allowance being made for the local con-
figuration of the country to be traversed, it is
supposed that the Canadian main line of settle-
ment might commence from the most convenient
point at the head of the navigation of the river
Ottawa, and proceed about north-westerly, with
slight divergencies at one or two points on to the
Saskatchewan and Itocky Mountains, while tram-
ways being thrown southwards at intervals would
open and secure the whole country to the lakes
or to the boundary for settlement by its rightful
owners. As it is, however, of the utmost im-
portance to establish a chain of settlements across
the continent well within our own territory, it


would be decidedly advisable to throw the national
energies into that work, and to leave the occupa-
tion of the adjacent lands to be dealt with by
private enterprise.
In Western Australia, Albany should be made
the post, starting point, and general head-quarters
of Australian operations; it might also be made
a sort of Imperial depot for European emigration
to Australasia, being the nearest to Europe of all
Australian ports, and admirably situated for
carrying on a most extensive trade with the rest
of Australasia and the East. The railway should
commence at the port in or in the vicinity of
Albany, at whatever point, not being otherwise
unsuitable, from whence a passage can be effected
through the settled district at least cost. This
railway should be of the most inexpensive cha-
racter ; a speed of fifteen miles an hour would be
ample for some years at least, and this ought to
be obtainable with very moderate expenditure.
All government lands in the settlement required
for the purposes of the railway should be granted
gratuitously, and the influence of the government
should be used to induce ’owners of land on the
route to exchange it for blocks of equal value, or


even greater, so as to remove all serious impedi-
ments from this first and wholly unprofitable,
but unavoidable part of the undertaking. As
soon as the unalienated lands are reached the
exact course to be followed can be decided upon,
and the first section of 100 square miles should
be available for immediate colonizing operations.
Both the northward and eastward lines of settle-
ment should then be carried forward as rapidly
as the works can be executed, so as to lay open
the whole country 50 or 80 miles back from the
coast. At some points branch railways would be
needed to important positions on the seaboard,
as to Perth for instance ; in which cases the
special circumstances may perhaps require to be
dealt with by special arrangement.
The name of Western Australia is like those
of some others of the Australian group, a very
inconvenient one; and there is another reason
why if a new and vigorous system of national
colonization should be resolved upon, it might
be judicious as well as convenient to give a wider
signification to one of its divisional appellations,
by calling the whole colony Australind.
If this matter were to be taken up heartily,


and on a large scale, perhaps it might be expe-
dient to make Port Lincoln another starting
point from which to occupy the Australian south
coast, carrying the line of settlement westward
to meet the eastward line from King George’s
Sound. This would benefit the colony of South
Australia, by opening a new and hitherto neg-
lected part of its territory.
The settlement of new country can scarcely be
made to rest on a sounder basis than the occupa-
tion of its agricultural lands. When farms first
begin to draw forth the productive capabilities
of a new district to a moderate extent, the pro-
duce becomes exchangeable, and this exchange
offers inducement for commercial enterprise,
upon which village and town lands naturally
come into demand and rise in value. It would
appear, therefore, to be quite advisable to offer
marked advantages to competent men with suffi-
cient means who may be disposed to cultivate
the farms, and there are various ways in which
this might be done. It would, of course, be a
groat consideration to such men to be able to
purchase new farms with all the most important
improvements in a more or less forward state


towards completion; sucli as dwellings for im-
mediate occupation, suited to the climate and the
occupants, fencing, clearing, &c., &c. To the
active industrious man of small means it would
be an advantage to be able to lease a farm in
the same stage, with a right of purchase, or to
buy it by annual instalments if preferred. All
this a proper amount of capital would render
possible without difficulty or risk, but it might
be advisable to make some further concessions to
bond fide agricultural settlers.
It is evident that town and village lands in a
new and purely agricultural country must at
first derive their value from the cultivation of
the country lands, for if the latter remain unoc-
cupied, the former must remain worthless and
unsaleable, and as the country prospers on pro-
duction, so the town is absolutely dependent on
trade, which is a consequence of production. In
such cases then it is most necessary to make all
things tend to the encouragement of agricultural
production, to facilitate its operations when com-
menced, and to make the commencement as
favourable in all respects as possible ; and since
this course would directly tend to enhance the


value of town lands, there seems to be fair ground
for charging a part of the outlay incurred by fol-
lowing it, to the town lands, and raising their
price in a corresponding degree. On this prin-
ciple, and in case of urgent necessity, supposing
90 per cent, of the land to be agricultural land
and 4 per cent, town land, if 45Z. per acre were
added to the price of the latter, improvements to
the extent of 21. per acre could be given in with
the former when disposed of. But most fre-
quently the land and improvements, situated as
they would be on an open line of communication
with a port or a market, would readily sell for
something over the cost of the improvements, or
let for good interest on the capital represented.
There would be no reason why improvements on
farms should not be effected to any greater ex-
tent than 21. per acre should a payable demand
for such an arrangement arise. In this way the
farms would be, or could be made, cheap enough
to attract purchasers or occupiers, the villages
would be required and supported by the farms,
the towns connected with the railways and vil-
lages would gradually rise into importance, and
whether properties thus created were sold or


held, they must be badly managed if good pro-
fits did not accrue.
Under the contemplated conditions there is
little doubt that experienced colonists would
interest themselves sufficiently to remove the
possibility of failure which might attach to en-
tire communities of new settlers wholly unac-
quainted with the climatic vicissitudes of the
locality.
Those classes of emigrating agriculturists that
would be most suited to this work have hitherto
been inadvertently but effectually deterred from
settlement in our colonies. Whatever may be
the condition of the agricultural labourer, that
of the young substantial British farmer is, and
has long been, one of absolute luxury, and the
contrast beween such a condition and that of
the pioneer settler in the backwoods or the bush
under the usual circumstances is altogether too
unfavourable to the latter for it ever to become
popular or attractive with the sons of British
farming homesteads. But if, instead of this
damaging contrast, our farmers’ sons were in-
vited to consider the propriety of directly pur-
chasing or otherwise conveniently acquiring


farms of any required sizes, and generally equal
to those on which they have gained their know-
ledge, for the value of three or four years’ rent
of the latter, more of them would be ready to
entertain the idea of emigration. They would
be benefited by removing into a more expansible
sphere of action, and so would both the old
country and the colony. These are parties for
whom, as well as for some of her tradesmen,
mechanics, and the still poorer labouring classes,
the old country finds it yearly more and more
difficult to make suitable provision, owing to the
absorption of small farms and small trades in
large ones, and the consequent diminution in the
total number of openings available for young
beginners as compared with their increasing
numbers; and they are parties whose presence
in the colonies would be of the utmost value.
In Western Canada a sprinkling of their energy,
skill, and capital properly directed would find
profitable occupation for numbers of hardy
Britons from the ranks of the unemployed work-
ing classes; in the immense southern districts
of Western Australia they would do the same
for all European emigrants who prefer a milder


climate than that of Canada, and on the north-
western Australian shores by employing labourers
from India on some similar terms to those which
have been so successful in the Mauritius; they
would also provide for a multitude of British
subjects, and cause an immense extension of
British trade.
The kind of organization that may be expected
to prove most serviceable for these great pur-
poses is probably that of an association of various
joint-stock enterprises, each proprietary raising
a distinct capital for its own special objects, and
all binding themselves by Articles of Associa-
tion to act together for mutual support.
On the plan suggested large landed estates
will be acquired, and must be held during the
processes of improvement and sale ; large rail-
way properties will also be gradually created,
and in order to ensure proper facilities for the
conveyance of settlers, &c., it may become expe-
dient to purchase or build a considerable steam-
shipping property. If operations only needed
to be carried on in some one locality of moderate
area, perliaps each of these subdivisions might
be satisfactorily dealt with by means of a single


company with a manageable capital, but if a line
of settlements averaging ten miles wide is to be
gradually formed forthwith between Ottawa and
the Pacific; and if two more such lines are to be
carried from King George’s Sound to the north-
ern and southern extremities respectively of the
eastern boundary of Western Australia, although
the settlements cannot be formed without the
railways, while the railways are impossible with-
out the settlements, yet each may be more care-
fully attended to apart from the other, each
would be amply sufficient to merit and need such
special attention, and both would be more suc-
cessful from it in the end.
But there are other reasons for preferring a
subdivided classification of share capital. It
would be well to have a class of land shares to
allow the holders of them the option of exchang-
ing the whole of the capital represented by them
for farms. Each 100-mile section might be con-
stituted a distinct estate, capital could be raised
expressly to work that estate, and shares could
be extinguished in exchange for farms, &c., or
the capital refunded as the alienation of the
estate proceeds. These land shares would be-


come popular throughout Europe as affording
great facilities for settlement to the superior
agricultural classes, and it would be a mistake to
mix them up inseparably with railway and other
investments. Under such a system of associated
separate enterprises, each one of them having its
own special and clearly defined object, without
any other liabilities, it is believed that the work-
ing of the whole may be maintained in a more
healthy and sound condition, because all the
capital would thus be strictly localized, and it
would have to be invariably applied under the
direction of its subscribers to those particular
purposes for which it would be nominally raised.
If a certain amount of capital were subscribed for
use in Canada, and another for the preparation of
farms in Australia, it would be safest to leave no
irregular openings for the diversion of either to
the other purpose. But if round sums were
to be raised for carrying on all kinds of works
by a vast miscellaneous expenditure all over the
colonies, it would be very surprising to those
who know the colonies should large amounts not
occasionally be found wanting.
One other point remains to be noticed here.


According to wliat has been already advanced it
will be seen that a multiplicity of operations
may he carried on by the association in various
parts of the colonies ; yet for aught that appears
those operations might as well he quite indepen-
dent of each other; hut something better than
this is possible. Some of the undertakings would
most probably be less remunerative in their ear-
lier stages than others, or occasionally quite un-
profitable, yet quite essential to the progress of
the whole work; it will be desirable, therefore,
to equalize the resulting profits between the va-
rious enterprises, due care being taken not to
amalgamate or intermingle their respective lia-
bilities. If this object could be secured, the
difficulties which might otherwise prevent the
carrying out of the less promising works—such
as crossing a bad tract of country, &c.—would
not impede the progress of the better, and this
is an advantage that may be gained from the
separate enterprises being associated together
for mutual support, in the place of which those
enterprises, acting apart from each other, would
fail to secure any adequate equivalent. If all
profits over a given rate per cent, that might be


realized by each and every undertaking of such
an association were carried to a Guarantee Fund,
and if from this fund a bonus distribution were
made annually towards raising all dividends in
the association to one level, the influence of an
otherwise almost impossibly powerful company
might be gained, with a liability on the share
restricted to its own special enterprise.
On various grounds, then, some of which have
thus been imperfectly stated, it appears that the
work may be undertaken with better prospects
by an association of comparatively small joint-
stock companies than by a single large one; and
the fact that if two or more of the latter kind
were to be carrying on operations simultaneously
their interests would naturally be more or less
antagonistic, must here suffice to recommend one
national (or royal) association as preferable to
either of the other alternatives.
Such an association would raise the capital to
be employed in its various operations on as many
distinct share lists as there may be enterprises
to be carried out. For instance, there should be
a list of land shares for each 100-mile section
(or estate) that has to be improved and settled;


a list of railway shares for each line of railway,
with its tramways, telegraph, &c.; and so on, as
might he found expedient in minor matters. The
land-share capital would then be applied exclu-
sively to the acquirement and improvement of
land: first, to pay for the section whatever sum
(if any) the average value of it may be found
to be in excess of the maximum amount that the
state will consent to grant; and then to clearing,
fencing, building, &c., on the property. With
some exceptions, consisting chiefly of the strips
required for rail and tramways, the country land
and all improvements made upon it would con-
tinue to belong to the holders of this stock
until the land could be sold to advantage, when
the subscribers of the capital should be reim-
bursed in land or cash, as they might prefer.
The town and village lands should be vested in
the trustees of the association as a trust for the
augmentation of the Guarantee Fund, and, if ne-
cessary, this portion of each estate might be so
vested in its own trustee. The amount of this
capital that might be requisite in any case would
depend in a great measure on special circum-
stances, and would vary, as the lands in the


different estates might be of better or inferior
quality, and in greater or less demand for settle-
ment. In the case of an entire section being
good agricultural land, possibly as much as SI.
or 4/. per acre might be profitably employed,
but anything like that amount could only be
needed when it is evident that it would pay to
prepare the whole section at once for immediate
occupation. Far more frequently than other-
wise, however, this preparation would be a gra-
dual process, when of course proportionally less
capital would suffice, and, as a general rule, pro-
bably 25,000/. per section would rarely need to
be exceeded on the better classes of land. There
would also be lands to cross of an inferior cha-
racter, on which very little or no capital could
be judiciously expended. These lands are at
present generally unoccupied and unsaleable;
their acquisition on the plan proposed would
therefore cost nothing, and whatever outlay (if
any) might be made upon them should only be
incurred where some adequate return might be
relied upon. Other lands would be heavily tim-
bered, the cost of treating which, and conse-
quently the amount of capital required, would


depend on the quality of the timber, and if this
be good, on the existence of or possibility of
creating a market for its consumption. Some of
the West Australian timber might be used for
shipbuilding on a large scale in the numerous
ports of the colony, and the ships would find
ready markets in the adjacent seas.
The railway share capital might be applied
exclusively to the construction, working, and
proprietorship generally of the railway, tramway,
and telegraph property of the association, each
system of lines to be carried out by its own
separate capital. The lands required could be
held for these purposes from the association in
perpetuity, without charge, on reasonable con-
ditions, to ensure that whatever works might
be agreed upon should be duly executed and
satisfactorily maintained up to the requirements
of the adjacent country. As these properties
would be permanent and would improve in-
definitely, there would be no such advantage to
bo gained from their sectional subdivision as in
the case of the land; on the contrary, it would
be more economical and effective to carry out
the whole of each system of lines as a gradually


extending single undertaking, under one efficient
management. As the countries to be opened are
altogether unoccupied, the kind of line should he
used that can be laid down at least cost, strong
enough to carry heavy timber and materials at
the lowest railway speed—in many cases, it may
be, by animal traction —but not losing sight of a
possible and perhaps early conversion into high-
class lines when population and traffic shall have
so increased as to yield returns on the cost. On
the scale suggested, 20 miles of such railway
and 10 miles of tramway would be the maximum
length on a section of 100 square miles of the
best country; and 5 miles of railway (with or
without 10 miles of tramway according to cir-
cumstances) would be the minimum on the worst
sections of the same size. The amount of capital
required annually would thus be moderate, as one
or two sections would most likely be as much as
would be executed on any line in one year. By
keeping the first cost down, a small traffic at
the commencement would be remunerative with
moderate charges; these latter will facilitate an
increase of settlement and traffic, and these again
will pay, as the first lines become dilapidated, for


additional capital and the substitution of more
substantial works. In estimating the probable
results from such railways as these, the whole of
the circumstances must be borne in mind. Where
it is suggested that they should be made, there
are no roads whatever, and if these are made
there never will be any except as cross-feeders
to these lines. They would carry settlement,
and its consequent production and trade, with
them along their whole length, while they would
only go forward with these in close and tolerably
full attendance.
One other branch of the capital demands a
passing notice. The opposite characters of the
climates of Canada and Australia would neces-
sitate provision in the former colony for housing
live stock during winter ; and in the latter for
storing large quantities of winter rains for sum-
mer use, and it may possibly be found expedient
to raise special funds for the last-named purpose.
A powerful organization like the one suggested
would easily make due provision in both par-
ticulars, while to the needy, busy, and unaided
immigrant, the absence of such a provision must
frequently prove an insurmountable difficulty,


quite sufficient to send him to any other part of
the world.
The foregoing principal aspects of the subject,
with a multiplicity of minor ones that will sug-
gest themselves on reflecting that the association
would unavoidably become the owner, with all
kinds of proprietorial interests and duties, of
nearly every kind of country, under extremely
diversified local circumstances, must now suffice
to sustain the assertion that the body which under-
takes to deal with this matter appropriately will
require to be endowed with ample powers, such
powers as the Imperial Parliament alone can
grant. They will be needed to complete the
organization, to ensure the effective cohesion of
its members, to adapt it generally for its intended
career, and to gain for it the recognition and co-
operation of the colonial authorities.
Here perhaps it may be as well to give a
concise sketch of the plan upon which it is con-
sidered that these ideas might be reduced to
practice :
1. Under some such title as “ The British
Colonizing Association ,” an Act of the Imperial
Parliament would have to be obtained to au-


thorize the establishment, as well as to provide
for the proper working, of the organization herein
contemplated.
2. The association would consist of a pro-
gressive series of separate enterprises associated
together for mutual assistance in the work of
populating British colonial territory.
3. Each of these enterprises should be com-
plete in itself, and liable only for the expenditure
authorized by its own shareholders.
4 The shareholders of each enterprise should
elect from their own body a suitable number of
directors of the enterprise, such directors to
have sole charge and control over all matters
relating thereto, subject to the approval of the
trustees of the association.
5. The directors of each enterprise should
nominate so many of their own number as may
be necessary to constitute a hoard of trustees
for the association.
6. The number of trustees should at all times
be in proportion to the several amounts of paid-
up and unextinguished capital.
7. The trustees should be responsible for all
matters connected with the organization and


general control of the affairs of the association.
They should also he empowered to act as arbi-
trators to the association, and their decision on
any disputed point should be final to all its
members.
8. Every practicable enterprise that appears
likely to forward the interests of the association
should be initiated by the trustees, and only
such enterprises so initiated should be recog-
nized.
9. Each enterprise that has fulfilled its in-
tended purposes, or whose shareholders may
desire to withdraw from the association, should
be formally declared terminated and wound up,
or transferred to a new proprietory, as the
trustees may deem best for the various interests
involved.
10. Powers will be required to increase, to
refund, or to recall capital in any enterprise.
11. Full accounts of the working of every
enterprise should be regularly and promptly
rendered to the trustees.
12. The lands for railways, tramways, towns,
and villages on the several estates would have to
be conveyed absolutely to the trustees as soon as


their respective positions can be determined, such
conveyance to be in trust for the purpose of
leasing the two former classes of land (for a
nominal consideration) to the railway enter-
prises, and for that of realizing the two latter
classes on behalf of the Guarantee Fund.
13. All realized profits over six per cent, on
the capital employed, and all proceeds from town
and village lands should be carried at once to
the Guarantee Fund.
14. The Guarantee Fund should be applied to
the equalization of dividends throughout the
association by means of an annual bonus dis-
tribution.
15. The shareholders should execute a deed
of copartnership in their enterprise, embodying
the foregoing stipulations, providing for the im-
mediate enrolment of the enterprise as a member
of the association, and authorizing the directors
to bind the enterprise as such member by enter-
ing into such covenants as the case may re-
quire.
To initiate such an association a provisional
committee might be formed, and subscription
lists could be opened for, say 1000 10Z. shares,


each in the first Canadian and the first Austra-
lian enterprises, with a deposit of IZ. per share.
The exact objects of these enterprises would be
better left in abeyance until the association shall
have been placed on a proper legal footing ; but
if this is thought to be impracticable they will
have to be defined. As soon as these shares are
allotted, and the deeds of copartnership executed,
the directors of the two enterprises should be
chosen, they should at once nominate the trustees
of the association, who should thenceforward
assume the conduct of its affairs.
The probable pecuniary results of this mode
of proceeding must now be glanced at. For this
purpose it may be assumed that the section of
land to be dealt with is only of an average
quality, and consequently, in the scale proposed,
that it would be 10 miles square. Suppose,
further, that the country will admit of the rail-
way being formed along the centre of this section,
and also of its throwing off tramways on either
side at 2* and 7* miles, thus giving 10 miles of
rail and 20 miles of tram in the section. At one
of these junctions, to be selected according to
circumstances, a town reserve, of say 4 square


miles, could be made ; at the other, a double-sized
village reserve of 2 square miles; and other
ordinary village reserves, each 1 square mile, at
the four points where the tramways reach the
boundaries. These would together amount to
6400 acres, which the railway, tramway, and
other unavoidable reservations might possibly
increase to 10,000 acres. Then in this section of
only average quality, perhaps, one-half or 27,000
acres of the remainder may be too inferior to
pay for doing anything with in the first in-
stance, there would therefore be 27,000 acres
suitable for improvement and sale. In either
Western Australia or extreme Western Canada
100 square miles of such land as this could cer-
tainly not be valued at an average of more than
11. sterling per acre, and on this plan there
would therefore be no expenditure of capital in
its acquisition. Whatever land capital might be
used in such a case as this would be expended in
making permanent improvements on the cultiv-
able lands, and these, if necessary, might then be
sold for the cost of the improvements, leaving
all the town and village lands for subsequent
realization as clear profit. But, as has been


already observed, it is extremely improbable that
such improved lands, close to railway communi-
cation with a port or a market, would fail to bring
some profit on the capital employed.
The Australian town lands might safely be
held for, and would certainly realize as fast as
the money would be required, from 100 Z. to 200 Z.
per acre, according to eligibility of situation in
the various lots; and the village lands would be
good for 20Z. to 50Z, per acre; that is to say, if
these lands are not forced off injudiciously before
settlement has created, or is creating, a healthy
demand, they may be relied upon to sell for these
values within a reasonable period.
Sometimes the section would be better and
more valuable than in the supposed instance just
referred to, but this will only necessitate the
employment of proportionally larger capital to
ensure a still larger proportional return. When
lands are irredeemably bad and worthless they
would, of course, have to be avoided unless (which
is possible) they may lead to others that will pay
the cost of crossing them.
As the railways would be low-speed single
lines, with temporary station accommodation and


little or no fencing in the first instance, with no
land to pay for, and no necessity for a very exten-
sive rolling stock, they might, perhaps, not cost
more than from 3500 Z. to 4500 Z. per mile, and
the tramways, perhaps, 1000 Z. per mile altogether,
on the average section of land already instanced,
amounting to 60,000 Z. for the 10 miles of rail and
20 of tram. To pay six per cent, on this sura
would require an average nett return of 10Z. per
mile per month, which might or might not be
obtained from the lines at first, but no further
expenditure of capital could be required until a
larger return than that named is produced. It
would be very surprising if such a system of
roads, where no other roads exist, amidst a peo-
ple actively engaged and well supported in the
formation of new settlements, failed to yield a
fairly adequate profit on their cost, and pending
their attainment of the profitable stage the divi-
dends on the railway capital would have to be
drawn from the Guarantee Fund raised on the
sale of town allotments; but as the whole of these
allotments would be increased in value by the
railways, this mode of disposing of a portion of
their proceeds will be both politic and just.


It is not necessary to refer more particularly
to the smaller amounts of capital that might he
needed for various purposes of comparatively
minor importance. The success of such an
organization as that contemplated would hinge
on the possibility of raising the two principal
classes of capital which have just been adverted
to, with the further contingency as to whether a
sufficient number of suitable settlers would or
would not be ready from time to time to take
advantage of the superior opportunities which
that capital would provide. It is, however, a
noteworthy feature of the plan that any un-
certainty on these points might always be satis-
factorily removed before any very serious expen-
diture need be incurred.
The Canadian portion of the project must of
necessity draw its settlers of all classes from
European sources; but Australia lies near to
other densely peopled lands, and while the extra-
tropical parts of the country are well suited to
Europeans, a European governing class, with
supplies of Asiatic labour, would be best fitted,
as they would also be most readily available, for
Northern and North-western Australia. Oppor-


tunities for settlement would soon be available for
an immense population, yet tbe number of settlers
required by tbe association itself would never be
very large, though it would be advisable to keep
the size of its farms moderate, leaving those who
wish for larger ones to go farther back. On each
section of 100 square miles the association ought
ultimately to locate an average of 200 practical
agriculturists, more on some sections, less on
others. If 50 of these could be located in the
first year of opening each section and 25 others
per annum until the 200 farms were occupied, the
rate of settlement would be a successful one, and
at the seventh year it would attain its full de-
velopment, requiring 200 agriculturists to occupy
as many farms in seven sections on each line of
operations; and supposing five lines of settlement
to be in progress together, 1000 farms would
thus be occupied annually, and each of these
farms would provide for one proprietor and at
least four labourers with their families. This is
a moderate number, yet while the process of
settlement would be capable of almost indefinite
extension, it would be quite possible to go steadily
onwards, with even three-fifths fewer, or about


one per cent, of the present European emigra-
tion.
It should be the business of one branch of the
association to see that all its emigrants are pro-
vided with the best possible accommodation on
ship-board at the lowest possible cost, and the
association should generally endeavour to be-
come popular by its attention to the interests of
its emigrants throughout. By adhering to this
policy the settlers will become the very best of
emigration agents amongst their friends and
acquaintances. Those emigrants who intend to
purchase farms will prefer to pay for their own
passages, and probably any interference on their
behalf, beyond attention to the quality of the
accommodation, might have a prejudicial effect.
Not so, however, will be the case as regards the
labouring classes. All that they may possess
when they determine to leave their native land
they will certainly need when they arrive in the
new country. It becomes of importance then to
devise some means whereby these persons and
their families may be conveyed to the new settle-
ments, and this appears to be the point at which
spontaneous charity, poor-law arrangements, and


the influences of capital may be made to work
together advantageously. At present the law
does not enforce in some (or perhaps in any) of
the colonies agreements entered into with intend-
ing emigrants previous to their embarkation, th e
association would therefore require to obtain
the power to make agreements in the old country
that shall he binding under reasonably stringent
penalties until their stipulations are complied
with in the new one. Supposing this to have
been satisfactorily arranged, then on the emi-
grant entering into a formal agreement autho-
rizing his employer in the colony to pay one-
tenth of his earnings to the association in
reimbursement of his passage-money, and on
the poor-law authorities or a charitable institu-
tion advancing one-half by way of loan, the
association should, in approved cases, provide
the other half, charging it to that particular
enterprise in connection with which the emigrant
is located on arrival. By such a system as this
a vast indiscriminate crowd of unfortunates will
not be recklessly thrown together into greater
misfortune, yet all who are fit for emigration
may be enabled to emigrate to the countries for


which they are best fitted, and those who do so
may be properly cared for, with dwellings and
employment found for them on arrival at their
destination.
Such are the leading features, very inade-
quately delineated, of a work that appears to be
well worth doing, worth doing well, and that
would be best begun at once. All British America
west of Lake Huron demands something of the
kind; so does all Australia west of 138 degrees
and much of the remainder ; so do New Zealand,
Tasmania, and South Africa; so do multitudes
of people in the British Isles, as well as all the
national instincts and the deep interest which
every genuine Briton feels in the future of the
great British empire.
LONDON: PRINTED BY EDWARD STANFORD, 6 AND 7, CHARING CROSS.






