

Profits to be devoted to
THE RELIEF FUND.
WRECK
OF THE
LY-EE-MOON
by Maud whichurch.
AIKENHEAD & BUTTON, LITH, LAUNCESTON.




WRECK OF THE LY-EE-MOON.


WyHE A.S.N. Co.’s screw steamer Ly-ee-Moon, 1,202 tons, Captain A.
#1 Webber, struck on the reef off Green Cape, whilst making the
passage from Melbourne to Sydney, on the evening of 30th May, 1886.
Within ten minutes the vessel parted amidships, the fore part being turned
round by the sea, and forced higher on to the reef, and then, listing over
shorewards, furnished the means by which fifteen of the passengers and
crew were rescued. The remainder of the passengers and crew—sixty-two
in all—were drowned.


WRECK OF THE LY-EE-MOON.
MImHE ship has struck ! She’s on a reef ! Ah, see ! she parts in two !
The anguish on each doomed one’s face is pitiful to view.
Brave men, weak women, children fair—fear, dread, assails them all.
I “ Oh, must we go ? Is there no hope ?” they frantically call,
yAy Sweet children round their mothers group, in terror of the tide ;
<s> Husband and wife, parent and child, the bridegroom and the bride
They gaze into each other’s eyes, and there read deep despair.
The sea is cruel, pitiless—they must for death prepare!


Down on their knees they swiftly fall, and mercy do implore ;
The waves seem but to answer back—“No more! no more! no more!”
No more, O mother ! shalt thou clasp thy living, breathing child
Unto thy heart; it’s found a grave beneath the waters wild.
No hope for it, no hope for thee —the stairs are washed away ;
Commend thy spirit to the Lord ere yet is closed life’s day.
No more, O trusting, loving maid, shalt thou thy lover see;
No more his eyes shall gaze in thine, his arms encircle thee ;
No more thou’lt clasp his faithful hand ; no more his voice thou’lt hear—
Thou’lt perish ! —waves shall o’er thee close ; he’ll lose thee, tho’ so dear.
And thou, O young man in thy pride, just starting out in life,
No more thou’lt read the love-lit eyes of thine affianced wife;
No more shall thy quick foot-fall sound to glad her list’ning ear —
Thou’lt leave her ! —aye, without one word of farewell or of cheer.


Thus seems the sea to speak to those wrecked on her foaming crest.
But hark ! she has not finished : no, she’ll pierce each suff’ring breast
In questioning reproof she speaks to husband and to wife;
She asks them of their last adieus, were they in peace or strife ?
Oh, husband ! guardian of one heart, what was thy last good-by ?
Oh ! was it one of peace and love, or anger’s cold reply ?
Thou didst not think, when leaving her, the sharer of thy name,
That to thy proud and manly form the waters should lay claim.
Oh, wife! thy last words —what were they to him, thy chosen king?
Oh! were they words to glad the heart, like silver bells to ring;
To echo on, thro’ all the years, sweet peace tho’ thou art gone?
Or were they words of cold disdain, of anger, or of scorn ?


And thus it seems each heart has now some bitterness to bear,
Some aftion it would fain undo, some wrong it would repair.
A moment thus each heart has spent in calling up to mind
The deeds upon their backward way, the words unkind or kind.
Now on their knees they weeping call, in agony and woe,
To Him who gives the weary rest, and washes white as snow.
But look ! a new light beams within one mother’s anxious eye :
That port-hole there 1 “My boy is small! Oh, Harry ! come and try
Now, kiss me, Harry —say good-by ! God bless you, my own boy!
Ah ! now they help him to the deck ! My heart is filled with joy !”


Look ! see ! she sinks ! the waters claim all those below the deck ;
A few above are left to cling to rigging of the wreck.
Ah! now they’ve got a line across—but will it bear them o’er?
Oh, yes ! that one has reached the goal—he stands upon the shore !
Now little Harry Adams, who crept through that kind port-hole,
Is carried in a strong man’s arms : yes, they, too, reach the goal.
But listen to his brave young voice raised to his mother’s God :
He cries, “ Ah, yes ! I’m saved, and He who did it is the Lord!”
That one, the ship’s brave carpenter —his is a noble heart—
Clings to his captain till the last ; and now he’ll not depart
Until he has assured himself that Johnson is quite dead.
He slaps his shoulder, calls his name, but ah ! his soul has fled.
The captain—last to leave the wreck—see! he, too, gains the shore.
Fifteen in all escape the waves, while ’neath them sink three-score.
Those three-score souls so quickly hurled into eternity
Their forms add to the jewels rare which thou hast seized, O Sea !


Oh ! there are vacant chairs to-night, and hearts that ache and yearn
For those —the dear, the loved, the lost—who never shall return.
I doubt not in some anguished souls rebellion links with grief;
They have not learnt to say, “'Tis well!” and find in Christ relief.
Oh, Father! grant that their torn hearts may bow to Thy dear will,
And say with Job —“E’en though He slay, yet will I trust Him still.”
Oh! grant that in humility their hearts may turn to Thee,
And rest there till they reach the home where there is “No more sea.”
MAUD WHITCHURCH.
Middle Park, Tasmania,
June iB, 1886.
“Launceston Examiner” and “ The Tasmanian” Office.
