

WREST POINT
RIVIERA HOTEL
SANDY BAY
HOBART. TASMANIA


MAIN ENTRANCE
A striking view of the Main Entrance
which is in keeping with the architec-
tural beauty of Tasmania’s premier
residential Hotel.
A portion of the Main Hall, leading
to the Writing Room, Main Bar and
Ladies’ Lounge.


Wrest Point Riviera Hotel
IN striking contrast to the century-old buildings and landmarks which are to be
found throughout Tasmania, Wrest Point Riviera Hotel is one of the most modern
establishments of its kind in Australia.
Built in a picturesque riverside setting and on a point from which may be seen a
panorama of unquestioned beauty —the port and city of Hobart with its magnificent
harbour (which is acclaimed by world shipping authorities as one of the finest in the
world), the suburbs of Bellerive and Lindisfarne, and in the distance the Derwent
Bridge. The Hotel fronts on the main Sandy Bay Road and on the other three sides
overlooks the blue waters of the River Derwent. To the south are the broad expanses
of the river stretching out to the open sea ; to the west lies Mt. Wellington like a
guardian sentinel; and to the east and on the opposite side of the river the District of
Clarence through which pass the roads leading to the historic Tasman Peninsula
and Port Arthur.
The Hotel’s spacious grounds include a well laid out tennis court, a tepid salt-
water swimming pool (the only one of its kind in Tasmania), flower gardens and
broad green lawns which extend along the river shores.
Built at considerable cost the Hotel caters for both the requirements of the
overseas traveller and the tourist, and is already noted for its excellent cuisine.
With its spacious ballroom and private dance band it has become a recognised
centre of social life in Hobart. The Hotel is within easy reach of the General Post
Office, the theatres and all public places, the district being served by an electric
tram service which extends to all parts of Hobart.
Ample provision has been made for the free accommodation of cars in the
Hotel’s Garage, and a large parking area in the grounds is also available.
With its luxurious furnishings and efficient service Wrest Point may be well
described as “ the Traveller’s Paradise,” and the beauty of its surroundings cannot
be equalled in Australia.


The picturesque setting and
ideal surroundings of the
Hotel are reflected in this
view from the riverside.
An aerial picture of Wrest Point Riviera Hotel showing the
Tennis Court and Private Jetty.


The unique circular Cock-
tail Bar which serves the
Dining Room, Ballroom, Caba-
ret and Lounge.
A corner of the Main Lounge with its luxurious appointments
showing one of the entrances to the Ballroom. The Lounges,
which include one reserved for ladies, are furnished throughout
with floor coverings of heavy Axminster carpets and comfortable
lounge chairs and settees upholstered in red and green leather.
The indirect lighting is a noticeable feature, reflecting the
restful and inviting charm of Wrest Point Riviera Hotel.


The Hotel has its own Orchestra and there is dancing
every evening except Sunday. On Saturdays there is a
special dinner and supper dance which is looked upon
as one of the social events of the city.
The Ballroom (with its perfectly spi
lighting) is of modern design, and th]
glass that surround the entire floor,
Derwent and surrounding hills meet y


srung red myrtle floor and concealed
tirough the transparent walls of plate
•, a glorious panorama of the River
your view.
A corner of the Ladies’ Lounge.
One of the three Bars which are stocked with every known
brand of liquor.


One of the luxuriously furnished Bedrooms, the windows of
which overlook the river and permit the maximum amount of
sunlight. Every room is tastefully and comfortably furnished,
well lighted and well ventilated, while hot and cold water,
direct exchange and intercommunicating telephones are
installed as part of the bedroom service.
Abundance of hot water at
all times in Bathrooms, Shower
Rooms and Bedrooms.


The illustration shows a
corner of one of the sitting
rooms of the Private Suites,
of which there are seven.
These consist of one or two
bedrooms and a sitting room
which are all tastefully and
comfortably furnished, well
lighted and well ventilated.
The Information Bureau, Booking Office and Telephones
situated in the Foyer Entrance.
As you enter you will be immediately impressed by the
beautifully appointed lobby and its atmosphere of home-
liness and hospitality.


As may be seen from the
illustration on the front page,
the Pool is situated at the
head of the point on which the
Hotel stands. Built to Olympic
standard, it is 82£ feet in
length, 41 feet 3 inches wide,
and its depth varies from 3
feet six inches to 7 feet. The
pool is filled with sparkling
salt water which is maintained
at the comfortably warm tem-
perature of 75 degrees Fahr.
Glass sides protect the bathers
from the wind.


SUMMARY OF
WREST POINT FEATURES
Single and Double Bedrooms with
Bathroom and Toilet.
Suites containing Sitting Room and
one or more Bedrooms with Bath-
room and Toilet.
Private Telephone in all Bedrooms,
Sitting Rooms and Lounge Rooms.
Gas Heating throughout building
with log fireplaces in Lounges and
Sittings Rooms, Bars and Private
Suites.
Ladies’ Lounge.
Private Dining Room for patrons
wishing to entertain friends or parties
Garage for every motorist.
Pressing and Sponging Service
available daily.
There is no extra charge for Swim-
ming, Tennis, Dancing, Boating or
Garaging.
Service, Cuisine and Comfort are
of paramount importance and have
our personal attention.
It is truly a Hotel you will enjoy,
and with pleasant recollections for-
ever remember.
Main Entrance Hall.
WALCH PRINT
N. C. HOWARD, PHOTO.


AUSTRALIA'S PARADISE WREST POINT
