

VICTORIAN W.C.T.U.
And ALLIANCE
Leaflets
Envelope Series, No. 5.
Wyoming—The First Free
State for Women.
ELIZABETH CADY STANTON.
(Abridged.)
THE admission of Wyoming as a State into the
Union, with a provision in her constitution for
woman suffrage, is our second declaration of in-
dependence ; as much more important in national life
than that of 1776 as the fulfilment of a principle
exceeds its proclamation.
When the Territory of Wyoming, twenty-one years
ago, recognised woman as an -;qual factor in civilis-
ation, but few appreciated the momentous and far-
reaching consequences of that step; and when the
great experiment was consummated by the recent
debate and vote at the national capital, the most
sanguine of us could hardly believe that woman, in
her long, dreary struggle for freedom, was at last
victorious.
A brief review of the history of Wyoming, its size,
resources, and how it happened to make the experi-
ment of woman suffrage, it might be well to rehearse
on the natal day of its Statehood.
On 25th July, 1868, Wyoming made its first appear
ance on the map of the North American continent.
An Act of Congress cut it out of the Great American
Desert.


Near the close of the first Legislative Assembly,
without any previous discussion, a member introduced
the following bill:
“ Be it enacted by the Council and House of Represen-
tatives of the Territory of Wyoming.
“Sec. I. Every woman of the age of 18, resident in
this Territory, may at every election to be holden
under the laws thereof, cast her vote ; and her rights
to the elective franchise,, and to hold office, shall be
the same under the electibn laws of the Territory as
those of electors.
“ Sec. 11. This Act shall take effect and be in force
from and after its passage. ”
Strange to say, the bill passed almost unanimously
and without debate. It was said at the time that it
was done partly as a joke, and partly to advertise the
Territory, hoping thereby to induce a large immigra-
tion of women. It was a democratic measure, and as
that party was in the majority, there was no difficulty
in passing it. However, the Republicans, too, voted
for the bill, and a Republican governor signed it.
As the women generally voted the Republican ticket,
it being the party of law and order, their votes changed
the politics of the State, leaving the Democrats in the
minority. They made several attempts to disfranchise
the women, but to no purpose. The best men in the
Territory recognised the civilising power of woman at
the polls, in the courts, and in general society, and
have remained steadfast to the principle.
Before women went to the polls, disorder and rowdy-
ism prevailed; fisticuff tights were usual, and even the
use of firearms was frequent; fraud and violence
marked the elections. And yet, the first time carri-
ages rolled up to the polls loaded with women to vote,
that rough pioneer crowd fell back in line, hats in hand,
and maintained a respectful silence until the women
had voted. Their influence was felt, too, in the
of candidates; they invariably opposed the nomingjflwrr
of men of immoral character and bad habitj
Miss Anthony and I in company 1 ern-
tory in 1871, and saw the women who these
various offices, talked with them at their firesides,
watched them in their domestic avocations, and ate
bread made by the same hands that had cast a ballot.
We found social life there the same as in the Eastern
States. Marriage had not been annulled, cradles
abandoned, nor the stockings mended by the State.
We wex-e struck, too, with the earnestness and intelli-
gence of the women. Their conversation was more
about laws and constitutions, of government
and practical politics, than about fashions, personali-
ties, and their neighbors’ private affairs. They laughed
over the commoxt idea that women had not the physical
endurance to vote and hold office. They said they
never earned three dollars a day so easily as sitting in
comfortable chairs listening to cases in court, and it
was less of an effort to vote than to watch a loaf of
bread through its various phases until it emerged from
the oven in perfection.
Women have manifested great public spirit, and a
conscientious interest in every department of govern-
ment, especially in that of education. At the last
census, Wyoming was returned as having a smaller
per cent, of illiteracy than any State or Territory in
the Union. Again, she has no public debt. On 10th
January, 1890, after every obligation had been paid,
there was in her treasury 230,000 dols., due, no doubt,
in some measure, to woman’s ecoxxomy in many minor
expenditures. And yet her educational and charitable
institutions are well sustained.
And now, Wyoming has been admitted into the
sisterhood of States with a woman suffrage provision
in her constitution. She had been duly warned that
this proviso would probably block her chance for
admission, but her wisest politicians said, “We will
take the noble women who have endured with us the
hardships of pioneer life into the Union with us, or
we will remain a Territory until there are manly men
enough in Congress to admit us together.”
vUn Wyoming now it can be truly said there is no
oroite nor class, no bond nor free, no Jew nor Gentile,
nor female, but all are one, by the provisions
orffSe'atate constitution. This is the first genuine
reputrtiK the world has ever seen, the first recognition
WYOMING —THE FIRST FREE STATE FOR WOMEN.
WYOMING —THE FIRST FREE STATE FOR WOMEN.


Published by the VICTORIAN ALLIANCE,
Temperance and General Life Buildings,
Swanston St„ Melbourne.
Sold also by the W.C.T.U. OF VICTORIA,
Mrs. KIRK, Secretary, 28 Russell St., Melbourne.
Price 6d. per 100; ss. per 1,000.
Read the “ALLIANCE RECORD,” published
every alternate Saturday. Sent free to all members
of the Victorian Alliance who subscribe not less than
ss. per year. Remit to Mr. John Yale, as above.
in government of the great principle of equal rights
for all. This marks a new epoch on the horologe of
time, in which we are to witness the realisation of the
poet laureate’s prophecy:
“Everywhere
Two heads in council, two beside the hearth,
Two in the tangled business of the world,
Two plummets dropt as one to sound the abyss
Of science, and the secrets of the mind."
In his last speech given at Harvard College, Wendell
Phillips, our prophet, orator and seer, in speaking of
the destiny of woman, said; “The first glimpse we
get of Saxon blood in history is that line of Tacitus
which reads, ‘ln all grave matters we consult our
women.’ Years hence, when robust Saxon sense has
flung away Jewish superstition and Eastern prejudice,
and put under its foot fastidious scholarship and
squeamish fashion, some second Tacitus from the
valley of the Mississippi will answer to him of the
seven hills, ‘ln all grave matters we consult our
women. ’ ” This prophecy, made only nine years ago,
is already fulfilled. The statesmen of Wyoming have
indeed echoed back from under the very dome of our
capitol that “in all grave matters we consult our
women yea, more, beyond the valley of the Missis-
sippi they have planted a republic where the matri-
arcnate, or mother age, shall be realised once more.
Dunn and Wilkinson, Printers, 51 Queen Street, Melbourne.
WYOMING—THE FIRST FREE STATE FOR WOMEN.




