

XXV. On the Young of the Ornithorhynchus paradoxus, Blum. By RICHARD OWEN,
Esq., F.Z.S., Assistant Conservator of the Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons
in London.
Communicated May 27, 1834.
It must be gratifying to every friend of Natural History to perceive how rapidly, by
the exertions of enlightened travellers, the different facts and materials are accumu-
lating which tend towards the complete elucidation of the economy and natural affini-
ties of the Monotrematous Quadrupeds.
On a retrospect of the history of these anomalous animals, we find in the year 1829
the sum of what was then certainly known as to their generative function thus expressed
by Cuvier : “ Comme enfin on n’est pas encore unanime sur I’existence de leurs ma-
melles, on en est it savoir si ces animaux sont vivipares l ou ovipares.” 2 Such was the
condition in which this question was left, notwithstanding the valuable labours of
Meckel and M. Geoffrey, and such the received opinion as to the essential nature of
the connexion between lactation and placental generation.
It appears to have been under this impression that the revival of Meckel’s doc-
trine in 1832 was, on the one hand, regarded, though erroneously, as proof of the vivi-
parous generation of the Ornithorhynchus 2 , and on the other hand, as strenuously opposed
by those Naturalists who had adopted the oviparous theory, and who regarded the Mo-
notremata as a distinct class of Vertebrata. The true theory will in all probability be
found somewhere between these extremes. Of all known Mammalia, the Edentulous
Marsupiata undoubtedly approximate most closely the oviparous type. But if we except
the partial atrophy of the right moiety of the female organs, and the form of the mouth
of the Ornithorhynchus, all the principal deviations from the mammiferous type, as ex-
hibited in the skeleton and in the composition of the entire generative apparatus, indi-
cate the affinity of the Monotremata to the Reptilia rather than to the Aves ; and all
the well ascertained facts respecting their generation support the inference, that, as in
many Reptiles, the germ is developed within the body of the parent unaided by the for-
mation of & placenta.
1 That there might be no mistake as to the sense in which this word is used, Cuvier previously defines it.
“ Dans tousles Mammifferes la gyration est essentiellement vivipare; c’est k dire que le foetus,
aprks la conception, descend dans la matrice, enferm6 dans ses enveloppes, dont la plus exterieure est nommde
chorion, et I'intferieure amnios ; il se fixe aux parois de cette cavitk par un ou plusieurs plexus de vaisseaux,
appells placenta, qui entre lui et sa mkre une communication, d’oh il tire sa nourriture, et probable-
ment aussi son oxygenation.”—Rkgne Animal, tom. i. p. 64. s Ibid., p. 234.
2 g 2


Smaller Orni-
Larger Orni-
thorhynchus.
thorhynchus.
Length from the end of the upper jaw over the curve of inches.
Lines.
Inches. Lines
the back to the end of the tail 3
9
6 6
Length from the same points in a straight line along the
abdomen 2
1
4 0
Greatest circumference of the body 2
9
4 8
Length of the head
8-j-
1 0
Length of the upper mandible
3
5
Breadth of the upper mandible at the base
4
6
Thickness of the upper mandible at the anterior margin .
T
1
Length of the lower mandible
2
2-1-
At the time when I was engaged in examining the structure and relations of the
mammary glands of the Ornithorhynchus in 1832, my friend Mr. George Bennett was
frequently with me: he became deeply interested in the question, and left England for
Australia, determined on devoting his utmost endeavours while in that country towards
its solution. His efforts have been attended with unexampled success, especially when
it is considered how short a space of time was allowed him for these investigations. The
results of his observations on the habits and economy of the Ornithorhynchus, he will
himself lay before the Society ; and I shall only here allude to a few of the facts which
relate more immediately to the subject of the present communication.
The season of copulation is at the latter end of September or the beginning of the
month of October. The precise period of gestation, and the condition of the excluded
product, still remain to be determined; but in the first week in December Mr. G. Ben-
nett found in one of the nests of the Ornithorhynchus, three 1 small naked embryos, not
quite two inches in length, and which he therefore supposes, with much probability, to
have been recently born. These specimens he was unable to preserve, from the want of
the necessary means in a situation remote from any settlement.
Fortunately, young specimens of Ornithorhynchus a little further advanced have been
transmitted through other channels to this country. The Society is indebted for them
to the prompt liberality of Dr. Hume Weatherhead, and they form the subject of the
present communication. These specimens are of different sizes: the smaller one rather
exceeds 2 inches in length, measured from the end of the hill to the end of the tail in
a straight line ; the larger one is double that size, and is one of those two young ani-
mals which, with the mother, were taken from a nest on the banks of the Fish River,
and kept alive for about a fortnight by Lieut, the Hon. Lauderdale Maule B .
The following are admeasurements of these two specimens.
1 The left ovary of one of the impregnated uteri exhibited three corpora lutea, and Mr. G. Bennett believes
that the Ornithorhynchus occasionally brings forth four young ones.
* Proceedings of the Committee of Science, Zool. Soc., vol. ii. p. 45.


Breadth of the lower mandible at the base ....
Smaller Orni-
thorhynchus.
Lines.
3
Larger Orni
thorhynchus
Lines.
Length of the tail from the vent
4\
10
Breadth of the tail at the root
4
8
Length of the fore foot
3
5
Breadth of the fore foot
3-f
5
Length of the hind foot
4
8-f
Breadth of the hind foot
3
5
Distance between the eyes
3‘-
6
Distance between the nostrils
H
1-4
From the exterior nostrils to the end of the mandible
1+
2
From the tip of the tongue to the end of the lower mandible -J-
4-
The circumstances which first attract attention in these singular objects are, the
total absence of hair l , the soft flexible condition of the mandibles, and the shortness of
these parts in proportion to their breadth as compared with those of the adult.
The integument -with which the mandibles are covered is thinner than that which
covers the rest of the body, and smoother, presenting under the lens a minutely granu-
lated surface when the cuticle is removed, which however is extremely thin, and has
none of the horny character which the claws at this period present. The margins of the
upper beak are rounded, smooth, thick, and fleshy: the whole of the under mandible is
flexible, and bends down upon the neck when the mouth is attempted to be opened.
The tongue, which in the adult is lodged far back in the mouth, advances in the young
animal close to the end of the lower mandible ; all the increase of the jaws beyond the
tip of the tongue, which in the adult gives rise to a form of the mouth so ill calculated
for suction or application to a flattened surface, is peculiar to that period, and conse-
quently forms no argument against the fitness of the animal to receive the mammary
secretion at an earlier stage of existence. The breadth of the tongue in the larger of
the young specimens was 3J- lines; in the adult it is only one line broader; and this
disproportionate development is plainly indicative of the importance of the organ to the
young animal, both in receiving and swallowing its food. The mandibles are surrounded
at their base by a thin fold of integument, which extends the angle of the mouth from
the base of the lower jaw to equal the breadth of the base of the upper one, and must
increase the facility for receiving the milk ejected from the mammary areola of the
mother. The oblique lines which characterize the sides of the lower mandible in the
adult, running from within outwards and forwards, were faintly visible on the corre-
sponding parts of the same jaw of the young animal: a minute ridge at the inner sides
of these lines indicates the situations of the anterior horny teeth of the adult.
1 This is not accidental, as in many of the adult specimens sent over in spirit, for the cuticle is entire. In
the specimens which Mr. G. Bennett discovered, the skin had a slight downy appearance.


The situation of the exterior nostrils has already been given; they communicate with
the mouth by the foramina incisiva, which are situated at nearly 3 lines’ distance from
the end of the upper mandible, and are each guarded by a membranous fold extending
from their anterior margin: the nasal cavity then extends backwards, and terminates
immediately above the larynx, the tip of the epiglottis 1 extending into it, and resting
upon the soft palate.
On the middle line of the upper mandible, and a little anterior to the nostrils, there
is a minute fleshy eminence lodged in a slight depression. In the smaller specimen
this is surrounded by a discontinuous margin of the epidermis, with which substance,
therefore, and probably (from the circumstance of its being shed) thickened or horny,
the caruncle had been covered. It is a structure of which the upper mandible of the
adult presents no trace, and is obviously analogous to the horny knob which is observed
on the upper mandible in the foetus of some Birds. Ido not, however, conceive that
this structure is necessarily indicative of the mandible’s having been applied, under the
same circumstances, to overcome a resistance of precisely the same kind as that for
which it is designed in the young Birds which possess it. The shell-breaking knob is
found in only a part of the class; and although the similar caruncle in the Ornitho-
rhynchus affords a curious additional affinity to the Aves, yet as all the known history
of the ovum points strongly to its ovoviviparous development, the balance of evidence
is still in favour of this theory.
The situation of the eyes was indicated by the convergence of a few wrinkles to one
point; but when, even in the larger of the two specimens, these were put upon the
stretch, the integument was found entire, and completely shrouding or covering the
eyeball anteriorly. This fact is one of great importance to the question of the mam-
miferous character of the Ornithorhynchus. For on the supposition of the young animal
possessing locomotive faculties, which wmuld enable it, like the young Gosling, imme-
diately after birth or exclusion, to follow the parent into the water, and there to receive
its nutriment (whether mucous or otherwise), the sense of vision ought certainly to be
granted to it in order to direct its movements. The privation of this sense, on the
contrary, implies a confinement to the nest, and a reception on land of the mammary
secretion of the parent.
The general form of the body, and the cartilaginous condition of the bones of the
extremities, equally militate against the young Ornithorhynchus possessing at this period
of its existence active powers of swimming or creeping. The head and tail are closely
approximated on the ventral aspect, requiring force to pull the body out into a straight
line; and the relative quantity of integument on the back and belly shows that the
position necessary for the due progressive motions is unnatural at this stage of growth.
The form of the young Kangaroo soon after birth is very similar to this, which is com-
mon to the foetus both of the viviparous and oviparous classes.
1 The epiglottis is essentially associated with lactation, not with viviparous generation.


The toes on each of the four feet were completely formed, and terminated by curved
conical horny claws ; but the natatory fold of membrane of the fore foot had not the
same proportional extent as in the adult, and the spur of the hind foot did not project
beyond its socket in either specimen. In the smaller one, which was a male, it pre-
sented the form of an obtuse papilla; while in the larger specimen, although a female,
it was more plainly developed and more pointed. This circumstance is in exact ac-
cordance with the known laws of the development of sexual distinctions, especially of
those of secondary importance, such as beards, manes, plumes, horns, tusks, spurs, &c.,
which do not avail in distinguishing the sexes till towards the period of puberty. As
the spur is the only obvious distinction of the sexes in the full-grown Ornithorhynchus,
I was compelled to refer to the internal essential organs, in order to determine the sex
of the specimens here described.
The ventral surface of the smaller specimen was carefully examined with a lens; but
no trace of an umbilicus could be satisfactorily determined. In the very young or
newly born Kangaroo, a longitudinal linear trace of the attachment of the umbilical
vesicle is at that time apparent, but it is rapidly obliterated ; as is probably also the
case in the Ornithorhynchus.
In the smaller specimen the intromittent organ projected a little way beyond the ex-
crementory orifice, as in the young Marsupiata ; but it was not continuous, as in them,
with the anterior margin of that outlet. In the larger female specimen the correspond-
ing organ was visible just within the verge of the opening; but this clitoris, remaining
stationary in its development, is afterwards, as I have shown in my Paper on the Mam-
mary Glands*, removed to a distance from the preputial aperture by the elongation of
the sheath, just as the minute spur of the female lies concealed at the bottom of the
progressively elongated tegumentary socket, and as the tongue is left at the back of the
oral cavity by the growth of the jaws.
The following were the anatomical appearances observable in these young individuals,
so far as the rarity of the specimens would warrant dissection to be carried.
On laying open the abdomen in the larger specimen, the most prominent viscus was
the stomach, which was almost as large as in the adult animal, deriving at this period
no assistance from the preparatory digestive cavities, the cheek-pouches, which were not
yet developed. The stomach extended in a curved direction across the epigastric, and
down the left hypochondriac region to the left iliac region. It was full of coagulated
milk. On carefully inspecting the whole contents with a lens, no portions of worms
or bread could be detected; which solves the doubt entertained by Lieut. Maule as to
whether the mother nourished this young one with the food which was given to her
for her own support, or with secretion afterwards discovered to escape from the mam-
mary pores.
I took a portion of the coagulated substance from the stomach, and diluted it with
1 Phil. Trans, for 1832, p. 525.


water; and having at the same time prepared a little Cow’s milk by first coagulating it
with spirit, and then diluting the coagulum, I compared the two substances under a
high magnifying power. The ultimate globules of the Ornithorhynchus’s milk were
most distinctly perceptible, detaching themselves from the small coherent masses to
form new groups: the corresponding globules of the Coiv’s milk were of larger size.
Minute transparent globules of oil were intermixed with the milk globules of the
Ornithorhynchus. A drop of water being added to a little mucus, it instantly became
opake ; and was resolvable by minute division into transparent angular flakes, entirely
different from the regularly formed granules of the milk of the Ornithorhynchus.
In the smaller specimen the stomach was empty; when distended with air it ex-
hibited a less disproportionate development. It was situated in the left hypochondriac
and lumbar regions. The intestines contained air, with granular masses of a mucous
chyme adhering to their internal surface. This condition of the digestive canal would
seem to show that no long period had elapsed since the birth of the specimen, and that
lactation had either not been in full action, or that the young one had been deserted by
the parent for some time before it was taken.
In both specimens the spleen bore a proportionate size with the stomach; and as
the difference in the development of the stomach was considerable, the correspondence
of the condition of the spleen with that of the digestive cavity was made very obvious.
The difference in the development of the liver was not greater than corresponded with
the different size and age of the two specimens. But the pancreas in both bore the same
ratio to the stomach as the spleen. This would seem, therefore, to afford some indica-
tion of the organs with which the function of the spleen is more immediately related.
The intestinal canal in the larger specimen was situated almost entirely on the right
side of the abdomen. The cacum, in both, was very minute and filamentary. I exa-
mimed the ileum, and more especially in the usual situation above the cacum, but could
not perceive any trace of the pedicle of the umbilical or vitelline vesicle. The other
vestiges of foetal organization were more obvious than in the ordinary Marsupial or
ovoviviparous Mammalia.
In both specimens, but more distinctly in the smaller one, the umbilical vein was
seen extending from a linear cicatrix of the peritoneum, opposite the middle of the abdo-
men, along the anterior margin of the suspensory ligament, to the liver. It was reduced
to a mere filamentary tube, filled with coagulum. From the same cicatrix the remains
ot the umbilical arteries extended downwards, and near the urinary bladder were con-
tained within a duplicature of peritoneum, having between them a small flattened oval
vesicle, the remains of an allantois, which was attached by a contracted pedicle to the
fundus of the bladder.
As both the embryo of the Bird and that of the ovoviviparous Reptile have an allantois
and umbilical vessels developed, no certain inference can be drawn from the above
appearances as to the oviparous or viviparous nature of the generation of the Ornitho


rliynchus. But the structure of the ovary, and that of the ovum both before and after it
has quitted the ovisac, afford the strongest analogical proof of the intra-uterine deve-
lopment of the embryo, and at the same time accord with the ascertained fact of the
mammary nourishment of the young animal; there being no store of yelk appended to
the ovum when it quits the ovisac, as in the Bird, where it supplies the place of a mam-
mary secretion to the newly hatched chick, and where also the voluminous yelk and its
chalaza serve as an essential nidus to the embryo at the early stages of incubation.
The kidneys were situated far away from the pelvis and high up in the lumbar region.
This marked deviation from the oviparous type is well worthy of being taken into ac-
count in the consideration of the nature and affinities of the Monotremata. It is charac-
teristic of the Mammiferous type of structure, and would seem to be intended to give
free space for the enlargement of the uterus, and to prevent the kidneys being affected
by the continued pressure of this viscus and its contents during the latter periods of
gestation.
The situation of the kidneys with respect to each other varied in the two specimens:
in the larger one, the left was a little higher than the right; in the smaller one, it was
a little lower : the latter is the ordinary position in the adult. The supra-renal glands
did not correspond with this arrangement; but in both instances the right was higher
than the left, agreeing with the relative position of the testes in the male, and the ova-
ries in the female. In Man, the large size of the supra-renal glands is noted as a foetal
peculiarity ; but in the Omithorhynchus they are of minute size, their greatest diameter
not exceeding -fth of a line in the smaller specimen here described; and they increase
in size progressively with the growth of the animal, and in a greater proportion than
the kidneys; which increase would appear, therefore, to have relation to the develop-
ment of the generative organs. There were no traces of the corpora Wolffiana.
The testes in the small male specimen were situated a little below the kidneys : they
were of an elongated form, pointed at both ends, with the epididymis folded down, as it
were, upon their anterior surface. In the female, the ovaries were freely suspended to
the loins in a similar position, the right being at this period as large as the left: it is
the persistence of the latter at an early stage of development which occasions the dis-
proportionate size of the two glands in the adult. The still greater inequality of size in
the oviducts of the Bird arises from a similar arrest of the development of the one on
the right side; but both are equal at an early stage of existence. The uteri were straight
linear tubes, scarcely exceeding the size of the ovarian ligaments.
The lungs were found amply developed in both specimens ; the air-cells remarkably
obvious, so as to give a reticulate appearance to the surface, and a resemblance to
the lungs of a Turtle. They had evidently been permeated by air in the smaller spe-
cimen.
The heart in both specimens was of the adult form, with the apex entire ; but the left
auricle was proportionately larger than in the adult heart, which is correctly figured by
vol. i. 2 H


Meckel 1 . The ductus arteriosus was here very evident, and formed a filamentary chord
in the usual situation between the aorta and pulmonary artery, but proportionately
longer than in the true viviparous Mammalia. Here also we have the indication of
a more prolonged foetal existence than in the Marsupial animals, there being no trace
of a ductus arteriosus either in the uterine or mammary foetus of the Kangaroo.
The Ornithorhynchus also deviates from the ordinary Marsupiata in having the thymus
gland. This is situated in front of the great vessels of the heart, and consists of two
lobes, of which the right is the largest.
PLATE XXXII.
Fig. 1. The smaller specimen of Ornithorhynchus paradoxus.
2. The larger specimen.
3. The same in another view.
4. Front view of the mandibles of the same, a little open to show the tongue.
In each of these figures, a, is the nostrils ; b, the prominence on the upper
beak ; c, the eyes ; d, the ears ; e, the vent; /, the orifice and rudimentary
spur of the hind foot; g, the membrane at the base of the mandibles;
h, the tongue.
5. A magnified figure of the hind foot of the female, showing the rudimentary
spur projecting from the socket.
PLATE XXXIII.
Fig. 1. Abdominal viscera of the smaller specimen, principally to show the remains
of g, the umbilical vein, and h, the allantois ; i, is the liver ; k, the stomach.
2. The stomach ; and I, the spleen of the same specimen.
3. The stomach and spleen of the larger specimen.
4. The heart, showing the single ductus arteriosus.
5. m, The kidneys ; n, the supra-renal glands ; o, the testes; and p, the urinary
bladder of the younger specimen.
6. The corresponding parts in situ of the female specimen : g, the ovaries; r, the
uteri and oviducts.
7. The urinary bladder, umbilical arteries, and allantois ( h ) of the smaller spe-
cimen, magnified.
8. The upper mandible of the smaller specimen, magnified, to show the caruncle
(6) between the nostrils. The figure marked thus *is of the natural size.
[All the figures, except where otherwise indicated, are of the natural size. Those in Plate XXXII. were
drawn by ray friend T. Rymer Jones, Esq., whose valuable assistance I am happy in acknowledging.]
1 Ornithorhynchi paradox! Anatomic, tab. vii. fig. 1.


Ornithorhynchus Paradoxus.


Ornithorhynchus Paradoxus.
