

YACHTING DAYS AND YACHTING WAYS.




/v X* /fierce..
~ ' <s 0-tt- z^
%y 3 { f?.
YACHTING DAYS.


/'m M,
s. Y. IMOGEN.


Yachting Days
AND
Yachting Ways.
BY
ESSIE WOOD.
WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS.
The Photographs in this Volume were taken by E. W. and J. R. IV.
The other Pictures are from Sepia Sketches.
LONDON:
WALTER SCOTT, LIMITED,
PATERNOSTER SQUARE.


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
PAGE
The Yacht Frontispiece
Porto Yenere . . . . : . .24
Mentone 28
Dining Saloon 32
Capri 46
Sicilian Cart 50
The Deck • -53
Venice 78
Work 83
Zara 101
The Falls of Kerka 106
Trau . 109
Spalato in
Gravosa 113
Entrance to Ragusa (Gateway) . . . . 115
Fountain at Ragusa Ix 6
Market Place of Ragusa 118
En Route to Cattaro . : . . . .120
Corfu 125
Drawing Saloon 130
Drawing Saloon 134
Drawing Saloon 138
Owner’s Cabin 140
Owner’s Cabin 144
Owner’s Cabin . . . . . . 148
Gibraltar 152
Chart of Cruise
Plan of S.Y. “Imogen”


TO AY HUSBAND


LEAVES FROM S.Y. “IMOGEN.”


“ Trackof^ ,MOGE N” / v if fy w /
Jo '- o E^* j si,, \ KaKlJ V V-, / |/xt / klhfrr* "' !! ■ X^llMllii^L
3£iZes 1 | | 0 "\ \ ' \ //,#7 / | / ,/A--" V jj 1 /’ V '''
J^* -1 ’ O »<> “ V El ivttijief.'; OaertnL \ ]]#/' \\ ,> / \ >a *' ---'''' «2«9®*' ,''' / **>' 7'*^
Distances arc given, in. Nautical Miles / q * v - 4. jl, 1 / \ ‘V / 8 / / 12 ul , . _J 16 /' ; 20
John. Barth.olam.erw & Ca.Edin?
WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
"St
f
I


Description of the S.Y. “ Imogen.”
The dimensions of the yacht are :
Length overall - ■ • 184' o"
Length between perpendiculars 157 o
Breadth moulded . . . 24 o
Depth moulded . . . 15 6
Draught of water aft : . 126
The hull is built of Siemens-Martin mild steel, under
special survey of Lloyds, and is of the highest class “ 100 Ai
steel.” She has a clipper stem and square stern, and is rigged
as a schooner, and measures 437 tons, Thames measurement,
and 330 tons gross, according to the Board of Trade, by whom
she was measured, for the purpose of saving delay if she
should have occasion to pass through the Suez Canal.
Amidships there is a deck-house extending forward and
aft from engine and boiler casing, the fore end of which is


occupied as dining saloon, and aft of this is pantry and
galley; and at after-end is smoking-room.
The entrances to accommodation below are through
these houses, and this consists at fore-end of owner’s room,
drawing-room, three state-rooms and nursery, photographic
dark room, two bath-rooms, etc., and cook’s and steward’s
accommodation. In after end there are two state rooms,
bath-room, and officers’ and crew’s quarters. The vessel
has very complete electric light installation, driven by an
engine with a direct drive, and has steam steering gear,
windlass, hot and cold water baths, electric bells, three
boats, and launch and usual fittings for a first-class yacht.
The dining-room is fitted up in fumigated oak; the
drawing-room has a dado of walnut, and the walls above this
are covered with green lincrusta-walton picked out in gold.
The owner’s room is fitted up in similar style, the dado,
however, being of walnut and maple; the smoking-room
in after-deck-house is fitted up in mahogany, and the
upholstery of the vessel is very luxurious.
The speed attained on the trial trip of the “ Imogen ”
was 14*118 knots per hour.
She has a set of the builders’ patent quadruple expansion
engines of 1,000 horse-power, with a single multitubular
boiler, and has very large coal bunkers, with the view of
avoiding the delays and annoyances of frequent coaling. The
four cylinders of this engine are on the same level, two of
them being placed on the port side of the crank-shaft, and


two on the starboard side, all standing vertically, and sup-
ported by two cast-iron columns on the condenser, and two
turned malleable iron columns in front, the four cylinders in
this arrangement forming a very compact group. Between the
cylinders are two round valve casings, in which the piston
valves work; there being one valve casing for Nos. i and 2
cylinders, and one valve casing for Nos. 3 and 4.
The following are a few <pf the advantages which these
engines possess over triple expansion, viz.;— Greater range
of expansion with less condensation in cylinders, the
fall of temperature in each cylinder being very much less
than in a triple for the same range of expansion. A better
division of power in revolving the crank-shaft, the arrange-
ment being equal to four right-angle cranks in line driving
the shaft, as against three in triple. A much more compact
and accessible engine than triple, the length of the engine
being a cylinder less than triple, with any valve-gear that can
be designed and fitted to the latter. No side-doors to be
taken off to get at valves, these being readily accessible from
the top. The two valve casings are between the cylinders,
and fit conveniently into spare spaces in the design. The
port passages to cylinders are very short, and the heat
radiated from casings, etc., is confined by and given out
again to the cylinders. Few vital working parts. Four main
bearings, two crank pins, and two eccentrics for valves being
all the revolving parts about these engines, whilst in triple,
there are six main bearings, three crank pins, and six


eccentrics. Whatever pressure, therefore, it may be necessary
to work at, these engines give better results at that pressure
than it is possible for triple to do. This type of engine has
also the advantage of taking up very little fore and aft space,
and lends itself readily for replacing compound engines
without alteration of bulkheads.
H
DESCRIPTION OF THE S.Y. “ IMOGEN.”


Leaves from S.Y. “Imogen.”
x qth March 1892.
Leaving Florence on a bright sunny day early in March,
our train creeps lazily on through the valley of the Arno, until
the lusty horn announces our arrival at Signa, noted for its
straw-platting industry. From here the journey becomes
picturesque: the narrow valley of Gonfolina, through which
the river Arno flows, is covered with tall rock pines. Once
on the heights above, we get a glorious panorama of the
country. The journey to Livorno is a short one, and it is
not long before the Monte Pascino comes into view, and the
little town of Pisa, which recalls II Tombo, the place where
our poet Shelley was drowned. The scene now varies between
meadow lands and the coast-line of the Mediterranean.
We had spent a very happy winter in Florence, and
were now bound for our yacht, which has been lying in
the Molo at Livorno for a fortnight. During the voyage
out from England she met with bad weather off the coast


of Portugal, which resulted in the fair “Imogen” losing her
sword and straining her bowsprit to such an extent as to
need docking. However, through the courtesy of Orlando
Brothers, the celebrated naval shipbuilders, we were not
long delayed.
On arriving at the Station, we are met by Captain
Elliot, and soon two of the sailor lads have shouldered our
traps.
“ How is the dear old boat, Captain ? ”
“Splendid, madam; we are all ready for an early start
to-morrow morning, and if the weather holds good, as it
promises, we shall have a beautiful run to Spezzia.”
We decided to lunch on shore and see the town, which
is bright and clean. The coast road to Ardenza proves
very beautiful, and the pretty drive to Montineiro most
interesting, but we are too early in the year to see the
pilgrims on their visitation.
Once on board, we received a warm welcome; it was
delightful to see all the old faces of the A.B.’s again. No-
thing seemed changed from our last year’s voyage. We
were like eager children turning over their old treasures.
The contents of cabin trunks, etc., had been turned out in
each cabin, and it took some time to get things into an
orderly form, “A place for everything, and everything in
its place,” might have been written for a shipboard life, so
necessary is it to be tidy. By next midday everything was
in good order. The clang of the anchor-chains and the


noisy winch told us we were starting. At 1.35 we clear
the outer harbour, and three hours later enter the Bay of
Spezzia.
March 22 nd.
We have been in Spezzia two days. Beautiful Spezzia!
All around us are huge mountains, upon whose points are
forts frowning down upon us, fierce and unfriendly-looking.
The thought comes in gratitude that it is a time of peace
and not of war. To make the scene more impressive, a
number of the ironclads are preparing to go out to manoeuvre.
Never before had I seen so many warships gathered together.
How grand they are, alive with vitality! It is a fascinating
thing to lean over the side of our yacht and watch their
preparations. Busy bees about their hives are not more
active than these men are. What a rush here and there,
from land to boats, getting their provisions aboard; and the
pretty pinnaces with their bright awnings passing to and fro,
filled with men and officers, whose gold and silver trappings
shine brightly in the sun. Boom! * Boom! The signal is
given, and they are making a start. Oh, what a sight! They
pass in defile one by one, and as we dip our ensign they
return the salute. In a very brief time there is nothing to
be seen but dark spots upon the horizon and the smoke in
the far distance. With a sigh I turn to look around me
on the Bay which I am told can be like a boiling cauldron,
rough and fierce, when the sirocco wind blows in, but I can-
not imagine it other than as the delicious calm I now see.


The hills with their pretty villages, some perched high, some
low, and others nestling to the shore, each a little world of
its own. Ah, God! is it possible that such a fair scene can
be stained with sin and grief? The thought is pain.
To the right of Spezzia lie the snow mountains of Car-
rara, with their ever-changing hues: in the morning a soft
grey, at mid-day pure marble white; later, bathed in the soft
rosy light of sunset; and last of all, in the silent solemn
hours of night, these snow sisters rise pure and clear, canopied
by the blue sky. The loveliness of the picture presented to
us by this last view in particular is without a parallel, and once
seen can never be forgotten. “So cloudless, clear, and purely
beautiful, that God alone was to be seen in heaven.”
* * * -y- *
Spezzia.
In the town of Spezzia the buildings are white and grey,
built in blocks, and very like all Italian towns. What I
noticed most was the air of depression that pervaded the
place and the people. Poor souls! to judge by their faces,
life must be very hard here. First, there is the quay at which
we land filled with fishing-boats of cumbersome build, then
the ferry-boats, and pinnaces, etc., from the warships.
Crowds of lazy men and women with children, dressed in
picturesque rags, press around us. Some look like mountain-
eers ; their sunburnt, bright, intelligent faces make a pleasant
contrast to the town idlers. After landing, we pass the


Custom House, around which are carts of every description
laden with food —fish, bread, meat, and fruit—for the naval
boats, and beside the carts are soldiers guarding the pro-
visions ; then through an open square, where half-withered
trees are having a fight to put out their new spring life: the
palm and orange trees seem to thrive the best. The golden
fruit of the latter shows in brilliant contrast to their beggared-
looking neighbours the horse chestnuts. We pass small tents
with fruit and sweet cakes and drinks of every kind, from
sherbet to the red Italian wines in quaint cane-covered bottles.
Great bunches of threaded nuts hang with beautiful bunches
of oranges and lemons. These threaded nuts seem to be a
feature here: we see them hanging round the necks of child-
ren, who nibble at them until there is nothing left but string.
There is little to tempt one in the way of shops, but the
markets are very interesting, and here you see many kinds of
fish. Some sea eggs puzzled us very much, and whilst I
stood looking, an Italian boy who was eating them wholesale
gallantly offered me some to try, saying, “ Molto buona; ”
but I lacked courage, so we told the steward, who was buying
fish for the yacht’s use, to get some of each sort. Returning
on board, we find Arturo Bonani, Capitano di Corvetta, has
called, so we send word for him to dine with us to-night. It
is delightful to find an old friend stationed here.
To-morrow at an early hour we go to Lerici and Porto
Venere. Arturo before leaving gave us a letter of introduction
to Mrs. Pearce, the present occupant of Casa Magna.


March 23^.
At ten o’clock we steamed down to Lerici, with the
object of visiting Casa Magna (Shelley’s villa), and dropped
anchor right under the old castle walls, near the Molo. We
had some difficulty in making out which was the house, all
being of different opinions, until a good-natured boatman
came alongside in his boat and pointed it out to us. From
this distance it looked like a whitewashed farm-house, though
it once was a Jesuit monastery. It lies midway between the
fishing village of San Terenzio and the village of Lerici. The
latter village, with its flat-topped roofs and many-coloured
blinds, rises from the water’s edge and nestles in the rugged
mountains behind it, which are densely covered with pine
trees and dark massive foliage. The grim old castle, with
its sombre grey walls, rises out of the green ramparts in
solitary grandeur, the foot of which seems to be the resting-
place of fishermen’s boats, for these, as evening fell, came
towards us from Porto Venere, dropped their canvas wings,
and moored right under the walls.
On the beach a boat was being built: the noise of the
busy hammers ceases as the lights from the town creep out
one by one, and scintillate on the deep dark waters, rising
and falling on the tiny waves that lap our boat’s side,
March 2/[th.
Another day on sea. Sky and water a perfect calm.
We were up early, and, after a hurried breakfast, the gig was


ordered and we rowed right under the Casa. Here we
beached the boat, and after ascertaining for certain from
some of the fisherwomen, busy drying and mending nets,
where the house was, we found ourselves in front of a large
double iron gate.
Our first greeting was from a lank overgrown puppy,
which gave us a few barks of good-will. Presenting our
letter at the lodge, we were told that Mrs. Pearce had
gone to Genoa. So we left the letter and, nothing daunted,
began the steep ascent which formed the carriage drive;
but half-way up, discouraged by the dead silence, we sent
Jack ahead to reconnoitre, whilst we spent the time
gathering violets and heatherbells, which grew in abundance
on the rocky soil, and frightened the green lizards, which
scattered away at our approach. Jack’s “cooee” at length
called us from above, and mounting up, up, up the winding
path, we at last reached the summit, where we came sud-
denly on a glorious view of the Spezzian Gulf with Porto
Venere in the distance. The gardener, a pleasant-faced man,
stepped forward and offered, in broken English, to show the
Signor and Signoras the Casa. We were led into the high-
roofed hall (which opens on to the garden), its walls beau-
tifully carved in oak, representing a series of hunting scenes;
m the centre a massive brass lamp hung from the ceiling.
The staircase is of white marble with exquisitely carved
banisters, on the pedestals of which stand bronze statues
of Mercury and Mars, formerly candelabras. The stairs are


of quaint form, and have the appearance of a gallery. We
passed from room to room, admiring the dainty possessions
of the owner. The bedrooms are very pretty and fresh, being
draped (even the ceiling) with soft shaded muslins. In one
of the bedrooms, supposed to have been occupied by
Shelley, hangs a beautiful engraving of the poet, quite boyish
in appearance, and no doubt much prized by Mrs. Pearce.
We descended to the lower floor by another staircase,
intended for private use, which brought us into the large
dining-hall (to my mind the most perfect room in the house),
with low ceilings, quaint arches, and oddly shaped in the
form of the letter L. Stepping out through the windows on
to a terrace of considerable width, which runs the whole
length of the house and is precipitous to the sea, you
obtain a view incomparable in beauty and tenderness. It
was on this terrace that Shelley and Mary, and their friends
the Williams, spent so many happy evenings : Jane would
play the guitar under the soft moon, undisturbed by any
sound save the lapping of the waters at their feet and the
soft weird cry of the aziolia; —
“ How elate I felt to know that it was nothing human :
No mockery of myself, to fear or hate.
And Mary saw my soul,
And laughed and said, Disquiet yourself not,
’Tis nothing but a little downy owl.
Sad Aziolia, from that moment I
Loved thee and thy sad cry.”


Williams, in his journal, May 6th, writes: —
“Observing the effects of moonshine on the water, he
(Shelley) complained of being unusually nervous, and stopping
short he grasped me violently by the arm and stared stead-
fastly on the white surf that broke upon the beach under our
feet. I demanded of him if he were in pain, but he only
answered by saying, ‘There it is again, there.’ He recovered
after some time, and declared that he saw a naked child
(Allegro) rise from the sea and clap its hands as in joy, smiling
at him. This was a trance that required some reasoning and
philosophy entirely to awaken him from, so forcibly had the
vision operated on his mind.”
Poor Shelley! the same terrace was a pain as well as
a pleasure to him; and even the great beauties of nature,
lavish as they all seem from here, could not deaden or
banish the painful illusions by which he was for ever haunted.
Re-entering the dining-hall we passed through a small
opening, the upper part of which is covered with long golden
brown shells from Sardinia, and peeped into the tiny library,
which is cosiness itself. Had the £asa been as perfect in
comfort in Shelley’s days, Mary would not have expressed
so vehemently her hatred of it and its surroundings, as she
did in her letters to Mrs. Gisborne. According to Trelawney,
the rooms were whitewashed, and the house itself resembled
a boat-house. I felt loath to leave, but our pleasant guide
moved towards the garden, of which he seemed proud, and
justly so. We picked our way through a brambled path
festooned overhead with roses of varied shades. Suddenly


we came upon a high round tower (a modern innovation),
from which we had an open view of the mountains of Carrara,
the Spezzian Gulf, and the manifold beauties nearer us. On
leaving we were given an abundance of beautiful flowers,
which were made more appreciable by the gentle pleasure
expressed in the gardener’s kindly eyes. We turned our
footsteps towards the beach where Shelley so many
times had trod when he went for his early morning
bath. We gathered seaweed on the beach, and then,
getting into our boat, were rowed to the “ Imogen.” One
of our party remarked how dreadfully solemn we were. True,
I think the past had come to mind, bringing the pleasure and
pain of a life which had left so much behind to be a joy
for ever. No sooner were we on board (hungry for lunch)
than we heard the anchors being raised, and in a few minutes
our bonny boat turned her nose from the shore, and glided
gently over the water towards Porto Venere.
2 P.M.
Twenty minutes later we were there. Turner, our
steward, went ashore to inquire where the so-called cave
of Byron was, and soon returning, told us it was ten
minutes’ walk from the quay. We quickly scrambled like
a lot of children on shore from our gig. A young officer of
Marine stepped forward and courteously offered to be our
guide. We accepted the proffered kindness and were taken
through the village, which is one long narrow street. The


houses on the left hang sheer above the sea; their doors at
the bapk open on the cliffs, which drop about fifty feet
over the water. A line of ancient wall with battlements
leads to the furthermost point, on which stands San Pietro,
an old ruined church, of dull grey, robbed of all its grandeur.
It stands a shell, nothing more. The view from the top is
considered most wonderful. Formerly the site-was. occupied
by a Temple of Venus. At the foot of the church there
is a small gate with an inscription over it, to the effect that
in the cave beyond, Byron wrote his “Corsair” after swimming
over from Lerici—a feat that he several times performed.
Into this place, with a small piece of silver (the usual “open
sesame” in this country), we were admitted, and after a steep
descent we found ourselves in a deep cave above the water.
It was a beautiful outlook, but our pleasure was marred by
dozens of ragged children, who swarmed around us like
bees, calling, “ Soldi, soldi,” until our patience was nearly
exhausted. In despair we bade Turner satisfy their demands.
At the sight of the money they became more wild, and in
their eagerness pressed.upon Turner until he was compelled
to sit down in the wet cave looking the picture of despair.
Our gentleman guide rebuked the children for their rudeness,
and then at last we were allowed to enjoy the beauty of
the scene before us. Fisher boats were skimming gaily
along, near and far, and at our feet the water broke in pleasing
rhythm. Very reluctantly we returned through the village,
still followed by the children demanding “ Soldi.” Men and


PORTO VENERE.


women beggars were in plenty. Indeed, it is a fact that when
we w T ent on shore there were few people to be seen, but on
our return, all the beggars in the place, in their worst rags,
had placed themselves along our course, much to our chagrin.
Our gentleman guide seemed very much distressed as we
neared the gig. He seemed to be very much charmed with,
shall I say, the “Imogen,” and was loath to part with us.
Eventually he was asked to come on board to see our
floating home, and he expressed himself much gratified.
On parting, he asked if he might send us his photo, and
said that he did not w r ant to be forgotten, and so on; and
two days later the photo arrived, with a courteous note of
thanks for the pleasure we had afforded him, and signed
“ Gobbo,”
At 5.30 we w r ere again anchored off Spezzia. Arturo
joined us at dinner. There followed a very pleasant, homely
evening. He left at 10.30, and we, dead tired after our excit-
ing day, were glad to turn in and have a good night’s sleep.
25 th March , 9.40 a.m.
We were roused early by the water boats coming along-
side, and after much pumping and tramping overhead we
heard the old familiar sounds, and knew 7 we had started.
To rise and be on deck soon was the main idea. Here
we found a gloriously beautiful basket of flowers filled with
forget-me-nots, our last greeting from Arturo. We got just
a glimpse of Lerici and Porto Venere, and with regrets


looked our last on this fair scene. Soon Porto Venere was
left behind, and we settled ourselves in cosy chairs to enjoy
the delicious calm that was over everything, but this did not
last long. The Gulf of Genoa can be very changeable, and
proved herself a turncoat this day. There was an increased
animation in our dainty boat (to judge by the sudden dis-
appearance of some —I won’t say who) that ill agreed with
the freight she was carrying. The wind increased in a very
short time, the sea rose high—a grand and mighty sight.
After nine hours’ steaming (100 miles) we made San Remo.
Here a disappointment awaited us. The wind had veered
round and made it impossible that we should lie there, and,
as the harbour was not big enough to allow of our entrance,
we headed for Mentone, passing so near to San Remo and
Bordighera as to enjoy the sight of those beautiful towns,
which run to the water’s edge. Many birds that had been
blown from the shore settled on our riggings—pigeons and
songsters of various kinds. We caught some of them, gave
them food and water, put them into a basket, and released
them on our arrival at Mentone at 6.30. The harbour is
very small, and as there were nine yachts there already, w r e
had some difficulty in finding a mooring-place. Mentone,
from where we were moored, looked very picturesque. It
lies nestled on the beach, and protected from the -winds by
the high hills around. There was nothing to be done on
shore, so dinner was followed by music, which ended in an
impromptu dance.
27
AND YACHTING WAYS.


March 26th.
Beautiful weather, and a sky as clear and expansive as
that we have in our own country. At 11 a.m. we went for
a poke around the shops, and to the clean little market We
made a big raid upon the flowers, for which our gentlemen
held themselves responsible—roses, violets, mignonette, lilac,
and wattle blossom, which had grown to much greater perfec-
tion than any I had seen before. Daintily-dressed children,
with their important-looking bonnes, danced around, poking
their pretty noses into the dew-laden flowers, covering their
sunny faces with borrowed tears. From here we women
engaged a carriage. Bidding adieu to our companions, we
drove through a valley thickly wooded, and up a winding
road, which brought us to the top of one of the many hills
which surround Mentone. A glorious panorama for miles
around delighted and held us. Backed by a grand, mighty
sweep of mountains, Mentone lay a small white mass at our
feet, whilst to the right Cap St. Martin could be plainly
discerned, and in the distance to the left Point Corso stood
out clear and bold from the sea, the surf-crusted bays between
this point and the town seeming to extend for miles, along
which ran a good road fringed with tall tropical trees. From
this scene we descended, directed by our Cocher, to the
English cemetery, which we found very well kept. It is very
painful to read the names of so many English people who
have died at a very early age from pulmonary complaints,
and who, after vainly trying to prolong their ebbing lives,


MENTONE.


find here their last resting-place; but it was impossible to
be melancholy on such a bright day, so we banished all sad
thoughts, and turned to a group of heavenly faced children
who were watching us. Their first request, as usual, was for
money, which we gave, feeling all the time that we were
paving the way to bring maledictions on their heads from
future travellers. We reached the yacht at r.30, just in time
for lunch, over which we chatted merrily, and compared notes
with each other. About three the carriages were ordered,
and we drove along the water’s edge, turned off through
the village, and so on to the road that leads to Roquebrune.
There were some lovely views of sea and land, the bays be-
neath taking such pretty curves. In the distance lay Monte
Carlo. The towers of the Casino glistened in the sun; and
in the far west were seen the beautiful range of the Esterels
stretching far into the sea. Returning by the lower road,
and on nearing the Hotel San Martino, we passed the Prince
of Wales, His Royal Highness and the Duke and Duchess
of Fife are staying at Cap Martin -at present. The Prince
looked very pale and aged; no doubt the recent death of
the young Prince Clarence accounted for this. After a steep
ascent we left the cool, shaded wood behind us, and entered
on the sunny white road which runs between the sea and the
flower-embowered villas which extend to the town of Mentone.
We arrived on the yacht at five, where we found all arrange-
ments complete for the raising of the anchors. Half-an-hour
later Mentone, encircled in her russet hills, gradually faded


from sight. We rolled (no other word expresses it) round to
Nice, passing close to Cap Martin, Monaco, Monte Carlo,
and Villa Franca. The English and foreign racing yachts
were beating round to 1 Mentone for the annual regatta on
Tuesday next, which promises to be exciting. We find the
harbour at Nice comfortable and very large. The steam
yacht “ Roxana, ” belonging to Prince Maximilianovitch, and
other large yachts and boats of all sizes are around, includ-
ing the “Valkyrie,” that has lost much of her smartness
since she changed hands.
Sunday , 27 th March.
Lyal awoke me this morning with this remark, “ Mamie,
I put my head out of the saloon door, and it rained me.”
Alas! too true, rain has set in heavily, and I fear we are
weather-bound for the day. We are expecting Mr. Lambert
from London to-night at seven —he is coming via Paris.
Evening
Mr. Lambert, commonly called “ Nunkie,” arrived.
Poor fellow, he has such a terrible cold, and is only just
getting well after influenza and pneumonia, so we without
ceremony made him go to bed. We judged by the remarks
next morning from two of the engineers who slept in the
adjacent cabin, that Mr. Lambert had had a good night.
These poor men vowed they could not sleep for his snoring,
and we teased him unmercifully about it.


Monday and Tuesday, 28th and 29th March, were very
wet days, so we did not venture on shore but passed the time
reading, writing, sewing, singing, etc.
2,oth March.
It is still raining, and I see no chance of our getting on
shore, so we may as well have a chat about the personnel of
our yacht. We will begin with our Captain : he is of rather
short stature, what may be called a thick-set man, with a
dark skin, beard of brown, and a large crop of black hair
which in wet weather has a tendency to curl, when we have
been out some time, and Charlie the Barber has not given him
what the sailors call a “ pudding top.” This, as known to the
sailors, is a manner of cutting the hair by placing a pudding
basin large enough to fit the head, and then clipping
the hair around with a very blunt pair of scissors—very
pleasant, as you may imagine. Our Captain has the keenest
and most kindly brown eyes man ever had; his rough blue
suit with its gilt buttons and his cap always presented to my
mind the quintessence of manliness. At his post, or at
leisure amongst his men, there never was a better man [and it
is. our great pleasure to feel that if we ever have another
“Imogen,” God willing, his hands shall guide her].
Mr. H., first mate, Scotch by birth, a typical man of his
country, kindly, yet firm, beloved by the crew to a man, of
fair complexion with soft blue eyes, and a quaint quick way of
speaking, won his way into our hearts, and will there remain


for aye. Next comes Pykie (as we loved to call him), second
mate, small, dark, and very much sunburnt; possessed of
kindly but piercing eyes which seemed to read you through
and through. A man of few words, reticent of his opinions.
Whatever you might say to him his answer invariably would
be, “Do you think so? ”
Dave (the bo’sun), father of the crew, the oldest man
on board, a universal favourite [when old Pykie had to
leave he was raised to Second Officer, in which position he
remained until we gave up yachting].
In the crew were—
ist. Smart, the crew’s caterer and dingey man, who had
been for some years a man-o’-war’s man, but owing to
delicate health he had to retire and take the lighter duties
of yachtsman.
2nd. ’Arry ’all (Harry Hall), as he was known to the
crew, celebrated for his wonderfully funny songs, “Old
Mother Ball-o’-Wax,” etc.
3rd. Roach (dear George), “lamps,” who has a great
weakness for washing his clothes on his night watch. He
could entertain you with a real good yarn. The tidiest man
on board.
4th. Nicholls (cox. of the cutter), another retired man-
o’-war’s man, with a good pension from the Government, and
only thirty-nine years old. A real good fellow.
5 th, Rice, A.B.
6th. Cooper, A.B.


1 * 111 *** * * * * — m
• | ' £ $ ff : ‘ ~~
L* ’« ' " ill iiiio v*t- ====a; ~33 1 1
■aKr . x \
DINING SALOON.


;th. Cherry, A.B. (Lyal’s great chum).
Bth. Mathews, A.B.
They are all splendid fellows and south-coast men.
In the engine-room :
Chief Engineer, Mr. Robbie.
Second Engineer, Mr. Munday.
Firemen :
Charley Green (Budding-top Charley), leading fireman,
with three men under him.
Then Bradshaw, chef de cuisine , one of my favourites.
Many a time I have sat on the step just outside the galley,
and heard his experiences of yachting on the “Thistle” and
other boats. He could talk well, and I have to thank him
for many a pleasant half-hour. The capital cakes he makes,
too, and his piloe fowl is a dish we dearly love.
Bob Bratcher, second cook, and boy Dick, the mess-
room steward.
Turner, the chief steward.
Newman, the second steward.
Gardiner, cabin steward.
Such are the crew of the S. Y. “ Imogen.”
The rain has ceased, and there is the order “ Gig away,”
which means we must hurry into our hats, “ and go see
the wonders of the town.”
On landing at the grand pier we went through the
usual “stare” of the natives; passed around Castle Hill, and
found ourselves on the long esplanade and a handsome pier


running far into the sea. The houses are all white, and
modern Italian and French in design. Turning through a
small square we are at the Casino Municipale. In the centre
of the Winter Gardens, the Austrian Women’s Band was
playing delightful selections from Strauss, Schumann, and
Beethoven. They looked very dainty in their blue cashmere
gowns made rather short, with red facings and gold trimmings.
Their fair hair was neatly braided low on their heads, and
jaunty little blue caps strapped under the chin set off the
sweet expression of their faces. What I noticed about
these women was their modest demeanour and earnestness.
Passing into one of the saloons, we found peiits chevaux in
full swing. Aimee was most fortunate, but my little red
horse played me false. We soon tired of this, and, leaving,
passed along the Quay de la Place d’Armes, admired the
shops, and bought some souvenirs. Point Garibaldi brought
us to the foot of Castle Hill, 320 feet high, which we
mounted in twenty minutes. Palms, oranges, cypresses,
and cloves flourished here in profusion. On the summit
is an artificial waterfall, and from here we have a fine view
in every direction: south—the Mediterranean; west —the
Promontory of Antibes; Nice is at our feet; to the north—
the Valley of the Paillou ; and to the east —Montalban and
the mountains. Descending east, we found ourselves at the
harbour. Here we bought some flowers before going on
board, with which to decorate our cabins. The gig was
hailed, and we were soon hard at work satisfying the inner


man. Anchor up, and we were under way for Monaco. It
turned out a glorious day. We fell in with the yacht-racing
cn route. The “Valkyrie” seemed to be leading. Nearing
Point d’Hercule we saw a dainty little yacht, about two
hundred tons, flying our yacht club burgee, and, being curious
to know who she was, we gave chase to her. She at once
headed to sea, we followed and soon gained on her. Seeing
ladies on board, our conscience pricked us for being so
ungallant, so gently altering our course, we dipped our flag
and passed into the harbour of Monte Carlo.
Afternoon tea over, we went on shore. This is a charm-
ing place, so clean and beautifully situated. On our arrival
at the Casino we wandered about the grounds and terraces
overlooking the sea. Monaco, where the Prince lives, lies
on the right, Cap Martin on .the left, and the glorious
Mediterranean before and below us.
Pretty girls and handsome men, old hateful roues and
old women (the latter blots upon the fair scene), were around
us in plenty. About 5 o’clock we went into the Casino,
and presented our cards, which is very necessary. We had
just heard that Lord Salisbury, having come here without
his card case, was refused admission. Receiving an order
bom the office, we passed the officials and entered a small
saloon surrounded with easy couches and a few tables. Before
us, through the glass doors, were seen in a dim light, green
tables stretching as far as the eye could see, surrounded
hy human beings. Low murmurs reached us. Just as we


were going to pass through the doors a woman rushed past
us, holding above her head some crushed notes, loudly crying,
“Mon Dieu, j’ai tout perdu, ces notes je les garde.” The
officials seized her, when she threw herself on the floor
screaming, and before we could realise what had taken place
she was lifted off her feet and carried away. The officials
and ourselves were the only witnesses of the scene. We
passed into the gaming saloon and looked around: no one
moved, no head was turned. What were the sorrows of
that poor woman to them? The sea of faces on which we
now gazed was painful to behold. With one accord we
separated, each going to different tables. Heaps of gold
and silver lay before many, and as the Croupier called the
winning numbers it was painful to note the eager way they
drew in the money with their small rateaux. At another
table the same game was being played, but for higher stakes.
Faces here were a study. One old lady sat with the tears
rolling down her cheeks. She was a pretty old lady—why
was she here? At the far end of the table I saw an American
lady and her daughter whom we had met in Florence. I
judged from her face that she was not a winner; and I was
very glad to see her rise and leave the table. I hastened
to meet her, and, after mutual greetings, she told me she
had been sitting there all day with no luck. She had won
heavily the day before, and intended to play again to-night.
Herewith we all went into the main hall. The relief of
getting away from the suppressed silence of that room was


great Thank God for the glorious sunshine, the beautiful
scene, and the song of birds that greeted us as we passed
through the gardens and down the steep road to the landing-
stage were our gig awaited us. We had a merry chat around
our dinner-table, and agreed to go on shore again in the
evening and see the Casino lighted up. Accordingly, we
were all on shore at 9 o’clock at the Casino. The band
was playing, the gardens were one mass of lights, people
everywhere. As we attempted to pass into the saloon, the,
official stopped us (the women folk) and said, “ Les dames
ne peuvent pas passer.” “Pourquoi?” Because we had no
bonnets on, only lace shawls thrown over our heads. We
expostulated and said we would keep our scarfs on, but no,
that did not appease them.; we must have bonnets. Jack
proposed to go and get them, but we declined; and looking
around, anxious to see what other women were wearing, I
could see no bonnets at all, and said to the official, “La
dame qui vient de rentre ne port pas de chapeau.” “ Pardon,
pardon, madame est coiffee selon la regie, regardez.” I did :
a butterfly and two forget-me-nots nestled in her bushy hair,
reminding one of a gaily dressed-up mop. “Je suis heureuse
de voir que madame est coiffee, mais j’aurais desire qu’elle
ffit moins deshabille pourtant.” I looked at the official and
I think he understood, for he drew his shoulders to the
level of his ears and thrust out his hands. What a farce
it seemed! On persuasion the men went into the saloon.
Very happy we women were to find ourselves in deep cosy


chairs in “le salon de musique,” listening to the glorious
strains of Bach and Rubenstein. At 10 o’clock our American
friend and her pretty daughter came up, and we all agreed
to go to the yacht and have supper. It w’as very dark, and
with some difficulty we found our gig. The strangers were
rather frightened to venture into so small a boat; but after
some trouble were persuaded to sit quietly in the stern.
Another difficulty arose when they had to get up the
accommodation ladder over the ship’s side. The electric
light being all over the boat delighted them very much,
and they had a good view of the saloon, smoke-room,
captain’s cabin, and crew’s quarters, all of which they
appeared to enjoy very much. Once in our cosy little
drawing-room, they found it hard to believe they were not
on shore. At eleven o’clock, with many kindly greetings,
we parted—they to their pretty villa, and we to our several
cabins.
The next day we left Monaco with a nice breeze and
fine weather, and steered S.S.E. After a lovely passage we
passed between Torre Islands and the mainland, and arrived
at Ajaccio at 4.40 p.m., after a run of 142 miles.
Friday , Ist April, Ajaccio.
Ajaccio looks very pretty, but Turner, who has been on
shore to get fish and milk for breakfast,' tells me it is full of
unpleasant smells. Not being inclined to face these, we
order the dingey, and placing nurse and baby on comfort-


able rugs in the stern, Aimee and I row ourselves to a quiet
little beach which is backed by high mountains and lies at
some distance to the left of the town. Here we gaily
revelled in the joys of shell gathering. The sand too is
very beautiful, looking like powdered diamonds, rubies,
emeralds, and sapphires.
Wandering a little from the shore we found sweet-
smelling herbs, lavender, thyme, rosemary. Tired out at
last, and feeling the sweetness of our surroundings, we threw
ourselves on the soft beach and dreamed, oh ! such dreams,
so delightful, so charming ! At least mine were so ; I cannot
answer for those of my companions, though to judge from
their faces they were very happy too.
Baby and nurse were .building castles, and the child’s
cries of joy still more increased my happiness. At twelve
we pushed our boat from the beach with its light burden,
and springing in ourselves, we were soon rowing for the
yacht. Feeling the current too strong we veered towards
the town, and in doing so passed a very large coal steamer
named S.S. “Hampton” (one of Mr, Lambert’s), which had
broken her tail-end shaft, and just managed to get safely
towed into port before we entered it. Had we been earlier
on the scene we might have made the ,£7OO for the towing.
With some trouble we reached the yacht, put nurse and
baby on board for their dinner, and rowed ourselves to the
shore. Turner was right; the town is very dirty, the market
(which was in full swing) is reached from the Place du


Marche, and overflows to the landing-stage. Here we saw
fresh vegetables in heaps, young unskinned kids, looking
sad objects in their pretty soft black coats. Flat round
cheeses made from the milk of sheep or goats specially
reared in Corsica for this purpose, fish of all sizes and shapes,
and shell-fish of most unpleasant appearance.
Weather-beaten women with hard brown faces, piercing
deep-set eyes (the only pleasing feature), looked at us from
under their large flat hats. Their full black skirts and stiff
bodices gave a look of oddness to their forms, like those
you see in the old Dutch pictures. The younger women
wore black mantillas over their heads, with bright scarfs
around the neck, which somewhat softened the harshness
of their costumes.
The men we thought far from prepossessing. Many of
the children were bandy-legged and pock-marked. Pushing
our way through the market we reached the Place du
Marche, a large open square with date and palm trees all
around, in the centre a fountain surrounded a large
statue of Napoleon I. Standing at the top of the square
and looking beyond the fountain, you get a beautiful view of
land and sea. We turned into a small street facing us.
There were very few shops; we entered a jeweller’s and
bought some gourds (quaint-shaped, naturally-grown
vegetables), which the Corsicans use for carrying their wine
and water in, and some vendetta knives —pretty, treacherous
booking things, commonly known as the stiletto.


Turning to the right, vve wandered through some very
dirty streets containing dilapidated houses approached with
steps; strings of onions were hanging over many of the
doorways, vivid bits of drapery out of others, forming a con-
trast to the dull grey buildings. Continuing through endless
streets of the same character, we were followed by a crowd of
children, who took a delight in calling us “ Inglesi, Inglesi.”
We got safely back to the yacht in time for lunch. The men
of our party, pleased by the description we had given of our
morning ramble, proposed an excursion. We landed as
before, and wandered inland; there was beauty everywhere —
in the lofty mountains, the bright blue sea, and at our feet
soft green grass, daffodils, and sweet herbs; and, what pleased
us most, lovely old gum and eucalyptus trees in full flower.
Passing round a small lagoon, we came to a Corsican farm with
most luxurious vegetation. There is a wildness and freedom
about the scenery here that we had not noticed elsewhere.
Above us, on a high road, through the trees, we could see
parties of men and women mounted on mules slowly wending
their way homewards from the market.
In character the Corsican scenery is more like the
Australian on the south coast than any we have seen in our
travels. A good tramp along the beach brought us to where
our boat lay. The sailors had enjoyed their ramble, to judge
hy their faces; their hands were full of flowers which they had
kindly gathered for me, and shyly offered.
Four strong men soon pulled us to the yacht’s side.
41
AND YACHTING WAYS.


Afternoon tea was waiting us; after which some read, some
wrote, some slept, and so the afternoon passed away.
Jack told me there was a leak in the boiler, and possibly
we might have some difficulty in reaching Naples. I did not
get a very comfortable night’s rest after this news, I can tell
you. Robbie, our Chief Engineer, spent the night before
starting in taking some of the lagging off the boiler to get
at the leaking seam. He pared the edge of the plate and
caulked it.
Saturday, 2nd April.
Up at 7.30. Turner is going to take us to see Napoleon’s
birthplace. At 8 o’clock we are on shore ; our guide, by
appointment, is awaiting us. Crossing the Place du Marche we
find Rue St. Charles and the Place Letitia, and knocking at
the door of the house Letitia, named after Napoleon’s mother,
the custodian brings his keys. The house itself is a plain
whitewashed building, very unattractive in appearance. Turn-
ing the key in the door, our guide shows us the first floor.
The furniture is of the Empire period, and very faded and
worn. Going upstairs, we passed through a suite of rooms.
The bed in which Napoleon was born is in one, and some
interesting engravings and family portraits in another. We
came to a small room where there is a trap-door through
which Napoleon made good his escape in 1793. The next
thing of interest was the Sedan chair used by the family.
Beyond these things there is little to interest the traveller, so


thanking our guide we departed. We passed the cathedral
where Napoleon was baptised (22nd July 1771). The bell
was tolling, and the people were going to early mass. We
hastened on board, and were just in time for breakfast. At
xo a.m. the anchor was up, and we started with beautiful
weather through the Straits of Bonafacio, steering E.S.E. for
Naples. It was a great comfort to learn that the leak in the
boiler was not so serious as at first anticipated.
Arrived at Naples at 11 a.m. on Sunday morning, the
3rd of April, after a run of 290 knots in twenty-five hours,
being a speed of iij knots per hour. Moored stern on to
the breakwater.
Monday , April 4 ih , 1892,
Naples.
Being crowded up in the harbour with other boats,
yachting, naval, merchant, and mail, we find it very hot after
the pleasant freshness of the other side. The Australian
P. and O. is just starting for home. 'I feel a great longing
to go on board and see the people homeward bound.
We have arranged to go up Mount Vesuvius at 9 a.m.
to-morrow morning, so we spent this day idling about the
streets and picture-galleries.
April sth.
Louis, our guide in attendance, was early on board,
the carriages waiting on the shore; so with old gowns


and strong boots our party arrived on the quay at
10.30, and started in two rattletrap carriages. The ascent
takes seven hours; the cost of each person twenty francs
there and back. For two hours and a half we toiled these
poor horses up the frightful hills, which enterprising Mr. Cook
has made passable. At 1.35 we were at the Hotel, 900 yards
from the top. The Cafe being overcrowded, we decided to
go up first and lunch afterwards, so Louis took our tickets
in the Funicular Railway, and in a few minutes we were
on the top, very much bewildered by our sudden transit.
The difference in the atmosphere once overcome, we breathed
freely. Mounting the first flight of steps, we found ourselves
enveloped in thick sulphureous smoke, through which we
struggled with our handkerchiefs stuffed in our mouths. Very
soon this became unbearable, so we made a stand to consult
as to our best and safest plan of progress. Past us flitted
ghostly figures, gasping and choking, some being borne along
half fainting. Our guide decided to take us round the
mountain, so that we might get out of the smoke. The
fine ashes in which we sank almost up to our knees made
it a very heavy task. Oh, what a tramp! Gasping, groan-
ing, and almost crying—two guides dragging us in front
and two pushing behind—we made but slow progress.
Mr. Lambert, who is very stout, and has just recovered,
as before remarked, from an attack of pneumonia, became
so ill that I was alarmed for his safety. Jack, who was
far ahead, and laughing at our distress, turned and called


us to come on; I replied, “We cannot,” and as he
had himself mounted so easily and without assistance, he
hardly realised the distress we were in, and so we were left
to stagger on. The guides tried to persuade Nunkie to let
them carry him; but at this proposal he became indignant,
and his look grew terrible. Imagine any one carrying
eighteen stone! The plan was preposterous, nor could we
persuade him to attempt it; so with two guides in front, two
behind, and one on either side of him, we at last reached
the top. Around us smoke issued from various cracks and
crevices, and the heat of the ashes was so great that it
burned through our shoes. Nunkie, who had sat down feeling
much exhausted, began to shiver; the guides pressed round
to render him assistance, but he scattered them with his stick.
Fortunately I had a flask of brandy, and with its assistance and
the warmth of the cape I had thrown round him, he rallied.
The other members of the party had passed to the mouth
of the crater. I turned to look at them and saw a huge stone,
as big as a man’s body, flying over Jack's head. Oh,
how I longed to get away from here! Once more Nunkie
and I started down the beaten track, in spite of the smoke
which was behind us, the others following. When we
reached the railway it was funny to see Nunkie pouring silver
into the guides’ hands, so thankful was he to be delivered
from Mount Vesuvius. Once seated in the Funicular Rail-
way we began to recover. I whispered to Jack, “ What did
you think of the crater?” His answer was, “Hell.” I


needed no more. When we arrived at the restaurant Jack
was the only member of our party who could eat. Poor
Nunkie lunched on a whisky and soda, and consoled himself
by talking over his troubles with a gentleman who had gone
through a similar experience. There they sat, two ghostly
creatures. We were glad to return to Naples and to the
dear old “Imogen,” wiser and sadder than when we started.
Four more days were spent in Naples, but of these
I have nothing special to relate. I might mention a very
pleasant trip to Baja, where you get a very good lunch for
a few francs in a restaurant overlooking the water; and
Solfatara, which takes you through very pretty country;
and lastly, glorious Pompeii, of which you perhaps know
more than I.
Sunday , April 10 th.
We steamed to Capri with the object of seeing the
famous Grotta Azzura. On arrival there we “ lay to ” about
200 yards from the shore, and hired two of the boats lying
there to convey visitors to the Blue Cave. Getting into
them, they rowed us to the Grotto. On arriving there they
bade us lie down flat in the bottom of the boat and wait
for an incoming wave, on which we were carried, bumping
and grating against the narrow entrance in a manner some-
what startling, through the three feet wide and three feet
high opening, right into the cave. The high-domed roof
is of the deepest blue, and the reflections thrown upon it


I • ~%^—'
-*dk
: &f ■ J»/
apnfl^ f j 5^ r V . - **. ,. <^%a ’c :^9^t''Wm
r wfm *, -*
.ft#** 1 "' " , ■£«»,, _.,
jWjy|^'
CAPRI.


are beautiful. On a rough ledge running round the lower
edge shivering boys and men are standing clamouring for
silver to dive, outrivalling in boisterousness the “ have a
dive ” boys at Aden. One regrets their presence there until
one sees the wonderful effect gained by their diving, which
causes the water to beat against the sides of the cave in
silvery sprays, while their bodies underneath look like
statues of silver. It is when the sea is perfectly calm and
smooth, and the sun shining brightly, that these caves are
seen at their best. Thus it was we saw them. As boatloads
of visitors were waiting outside the opening to come in, we
had to curtail our stay there.
Returning to the yacht, we steamed to the town of
Capri, which calls for no special mention. We steered
for Messina with fine weather and a fresh head wind,
but owing to the “Imogen” having only twenty-four
tons of coal on board, we were very light in the water.
During the evening the wind increased from the S.S.E.,
and it was amusing to see how one by one our party
disappeared to their cabins. At 9.30 we had all turned in ;
but all night long the yacht tossed and tossed, and not a
wink of sleep did we get until early dawn, when the “ Imogen”
dropped anchor in Messina harbour.
Messina, April 11 th.
A peep out of the porthole soon convinced us that it
was a beautifully clean city; but where are all the grand


buildings ? Alas! nothing but remnants of its former glory
lie scattered here and there. The quays were crowded with
life, and the view of the brightly-painted fishing-boats coming
in before the wind, with the early sun lighting up their sails,
was very effective. Messina lay like a creamy shell, backed
by high mountains with soft clouds half-way down their sides.
The sirocco had been blowing here for six weeks, so they
tell us; it is a most unpleasant wind. It cuts you through
and through, and as there is no pleasure in facing it, we
contented ourselves on board in the hope of it ceasing; but
alas, the coaling was already begun, and the wind and the
coal-dust was too much for us, and we were at last driven on
shore. After a good blow and a salt bath we were landed
at the Marino.
The Marino three miles of quay is flanked by very high
houses in uniform style, the windows having tiny balconies,
and here and there one sees what once was beautiful statuary;
but earthquakes have left little of its royal beauty. It is not
the beautiful Messina of Virgil and Boccaccio. The harbour
and hills are its principal attractions. Its inhabitants 126,500.
The harbour, in the form of a sickle, is one of the busiest in
the world. It is visited annually by 4000 vessels, of which
about 1350 are steamers. The principal street, Via Garibaldi,
runs parallel with the Marino, and walking up this for some
distance you find numerous shops of a neglected kind on
cither side, with goods mostly of Birmingham manufacture.
The side streets are picturesque with flax-spinners at work;


and the fruit and vegetables are all fresh, and beautifully
arranged on stalls. We bought some loquots, but they were
so sour I gave them to the children, who seemed to like them.
We wandered off into one of the side streets, where the
dwelling-houses of the people are. They seemed a happy
lot, very poor and ill-clad, but their faces—oh, wonder!—
were clean. They were all at work—some flax-weaving, some
arranging flowers ; mothers were nursing their children; older
children carrying pitchers, gracefully poised on their heads,
from the well. All busy, and all seemingly happy. As for
the beggars—of whom Francis Elliot, in her Scenes from
Sicily, speaks with so much disgust—they were not in any way
importunate, and went away when we told them to do so.
In fact, we had very kindly greetings when passing among
the flax-weavers. They had to remove their work for us to
t
pass, and thanking them, they greeted us with “Come sta,
Dio benissivi.” We mounted up to the city walls, and from
here had a splendid view of the harbour. Reggio, on the
other side of the narrow span of water, looked quite interest-
ing, though they say on closer acquaintance it is not" so.
Were we there on a day such as this, it might have been
our good fortune to see the aerial illusion “Fata Morgana,”
described by the author of the' Analysis of /he Mediterranean
thus:—
“A spectator at Reggio from an elevated position, with
your back to the sun, and your face turned to the island when
the sun’s incident rays make an angle of 45 degrees with the


surface of the sea at Reggio, you may see distinctly above
the water rows of .pillars, castles, towers, palaces, villages,
armies, flocks, passing along the surface in quick succession.”
—Rev. S. N. Wright, M.A.
After wandering some time by the city walls we came to
lovely villas, then through narrow streets descended into a large
square ornamented with fountains and statues. Here is also
the Cathedral, which is in very bad condition, and not at all
interesting. We stayed to watch the people come out of the
church and step into their funny high-wheeled carts, with
painted panels, carved spokes, and ornamented in grotesque
style; on the back bearing scenes from the ballet, and on
the front pictures of our Saviour. Nearly all the carts here
are decorated in this fashion, and very grotesque they look.
The horses are trapped with coloured cords and silver bells
as gay as the painted carts. But I grieve to say there is
hardly a horse that is not grossly cut and bleeding from
some part. ’Tis a painful sight, but you find it throughout
Italy. I have tried to harden myself to it, but cannot. To
see these willing beasts pulling heavy weights from a raw,
bleeding shoulder is a sorry sight. They do not wear collars,
as our horses do, but a wide strap across the chest, by which
they draw their heavy loads. They have an abominable
curbed chain, which draws the mouth tight at top and
bottom. This chain ends in a flat piece of metal with
sharp spikes, and every time the rein is drawn it presses
into the flesh, inflicting great pain. The more east one


X g if W -»— —■ it'
5 V ul
- 4KE355S199IBI^HHH^HH9H
A SICILIAN CART.


goes, the greater is the cruelty .we find inflicted upon dumb
animals.
April 12 th.
Left Messina at 7 o’clock in the morning for Palermo,
and arrived there at 5.30 the same evening. Moored to
breakwater. Distance of run, 120 miles. From the water
the city looks charming—quite Eastern in appearance. We
were lazy, so did not go on shore, but enjoyed the quiet
sunny day lying in our hammocks reading. The sailors
are to have a great night in honour of Jack’s birthday. The
chef is busy making big cakes and huge plum-puddings
for the crew. Whisky and rum, lemonade, etc., is to be
the order of the evening. Whilst I have an idle moment,
let me give you an insight into the life of our sailor boys.
All members of the crew get so much wages and board-
money. If a man gets a week his board is from 18s.
to 205., and so on down to the smallest wage-earner on
board.
They are each provided with two suits of clothes, two
pairs of boots (tan) and deck shoes, and two caps.
Out of his board-money each man puts so much for
his food per week, and the caterer (chosen by themselves)
buys their food, and the second cook prepares all their
vegetables and in most cases does all their cooking.
Having only one galley on board, our chef prefers to do
the cooking altogether and keep the galley free. When
51
AND YACHTING WAYS.


the food is ready, the second cook carries it down to the
forecastle, placing it on a long clean deal table; and from
one large .dish, which may contain boiled beef surrounded
with duff balls and carrots, he helps each plate with the
exact allowance, viz., three slices of beef, two carrots, one
duff ball, and potatoes, which are in another immense dish,
oaten biscuits, a big 'mug of mustard, and white bowls from
which they drink their water and tea.
When the plates are ready they are set in their places
and the crew called. They trip down the companion-way,
and from the skylight above I have seen them file in one
after the other, some washing their hands and brushing
their fingers through their hair. They set-to in real earnest,
and a merry lot they are. About ten minutes later a plain
suet pudding, thickly sprinkled with eparse brown sugar, is
carried down, and after another ten minutes they are on
deck with their pipes, as happy and contented a body of
men as you could see.
On birthdays, such as to-night, Jack always gave the
men a treat. For dinner there would be large joints of roast
beef, Yorkshire pudding, vegetables, pickles, and a huge
plum-pudding.
Evening.
After dinner, passing up and down the deck in the
soft evening light, we were suddenly brought to a standstill
by the cry of “border, border.” Harry Hall usually filled


Ai r 11 \ \ 1/1
| HV 'x 1 Bi
QUARTER DECK


the post of M.C., so that we were not surprised on this
occasion to hear, “Now then, mates, give us a taste of
your quality,” issuing from the forecastle in his big voice.
Taking a peep through the skylight, we saw Mr. George
Roach rising to be greeted by noisy applause; but poor
George, as on former occasions, had lost his voice, and after a
few nervous hems and haws, was told to retire, and to fill
up the blank, Mathews chirped in with “Nancy Lee” on the
concertina, during which time I noted their surroundings.
Harry headed the table with a short clay pipe in his mouth,
before him stood the empty whisky bottle, its contents
having been mixed into large white bowls, one of which
was before each sailor. Pipes, tobacco, and cards were
scattered on either side, and the smoke was so thick it was
not easy to distinguish one man from another. “Our
worthy friend Mr. Smart will oblige.” Poor Smart, always
a quiet fellow, seemed much out of these entertainments,
being a non-smoker and teetotaller; but he was always
ready to do his share of the entertainment. In very gentle
tones his voice rose on the still air :
“ I tried to be merry, but it was no use,
The case was rather hard ;
She left me silly as a barn door fowl,
And married with a railway guard.”
Hear, hear, and noisy applause followed. “ Horder, border.”
“Our worthy friend, Mr. ’arry ’all, will oblige,” calls
Roach.


“All right, mates; hold on till I fill this ere pipe, as my
song is a long ’un.” With noisy applause Harry began—
“As I was going to Lanigan Fair,
Who should I meet but an old pal there;
And that old pal’s name was Wax,
And his wife’s name was old mother Ball-o’-wax.”
“Now then, gentlemen, for the chorus.” Such a chorus of
doleful voices brought Mr. and Mrs. Wax, and all the little
Waxes, and a generation of friends of the Waxes, to light
in this fashion—
“ There was Wax, old mother Ball-o’-wax;
There was Igo, old mother Bendigo;
There was Bible, old mother Bibleback,
As I was going to Lanigan Fair.”
Verse after verse of this truly wonderful song followed,
ending each time with the still more wonderful chorus, and
finally, an uproar of applause brought the captain from his
cabin. “Is it too much noise, sir?” he asks, gazing with
solemn face down the forecastle as we pass him. “Oh no,
captain, leave alone; ” and so their merry mad humour
went on until eleven, when the noisy entertainment was
brought to a close by three cheers for Mr. Wood; and three
cheers for Mrs. Wood, “ Hurrah, hurrah, hurrah,” in an
octave higher; and three cheers more for the good ship
“ Imogen,” and all on board. After which, having been
warmly thanked by Jack for their hearty wishes, a faint sound


of “For he’s a jolly good fellow” followed, which told us our
boys had finished their concert. They one by one 'turned in
to their berths, to snore away the few brief hours that lay
between them and the duties that awaited them in the
morning. Eight bells struck. The dynamo ceased. The
lights of the “Imogen” gradually faded. The even steps of
the night watchman as he passed, and the gentle splashes of
the water as it touched our ship’s side, alone were heard, and
all else was silence.
April i^ih.
After breakfast we went on shore and wandered through
the city until we came to the Exhibition—an annual affair, the
object of which is to bring. together from all parts of Italy
products of art and industry; and this being the harvest time
of the shopkeepers, Palermo is in her gayest attire. The
Exhibition is held in a fine building, and a very interesting
collection it contains. In the picture-gallery we were de-
lighted to find our old master, Professor Gumbo’s beautiful
sea-piece, which is hung in a perfect light. The dear old
man told me when in Florence that, he had sent several of
his pictures to Australia, and I was sorry to hear that there
was a sad tale as to their fate.
Palermo, we were told, is recommended as a winter
resort for people suffering from pulmonary or nervous diseases;
but the winds at times are far from pleasant, and unless you
are careful you may find your visit altogether unpropitious to


your health. The water is not good unless mixed with wine,
and the intense glare of the sun hurts the eyes so much, that
glasses, or umbrellas, or a deep shade are necessary.
Then again, often after a heated day, if you feel inclined to
sit in the shade, you must not. All this from the guide-book.
Honestly, I must confess to not having felt any of these
discomforts. We ate and drank what we liked, and sat in
the evening’s cool to our heart’s content.
April 14th.
To-day is to be devoted to a visit to Monreale. We
find our carriages waiting for us at the quay, and we start,
passing through the Via Victor Emanuale. We soon get into
the outskirts of the town, and to dusty fields and broken
hedges. Houses and shops scattered here and there along
the road, an occasional jolt over the tram lines, and in thirty
minutes we begin the ascent. The scene becomes more
pleasing, and the air more fresh and clear. The poor horses
find it heavy work. At a turning point we tell our man to rest
them. Seating ourselves on a stone parapet by the wayside,
we look back over the road we have just passed. It winds
like a white thread right to the city. Beyond the city lies
the Mediterranean, bright azure blue, and pleasant to rest
the eyes upon. Fields and orange groves lie all around us.
The olive tree rustles in the soft breeze, making sweet musical
sounds. The air is heavily laden with sweet scents, and life
this spring morning is glorious. Mounting the hill for some


distance, we are at last clattering through the cobble-stone
streets of the village of Monreale, and a very dirty spot it
is. Our man suddenly pulls up, and we are at Monreale
Cathedral. It is in the form of a Latin cross, 333 feet long,
131 feet wide, and dates from 1186. It is celebrated for its
wonderful mosaics, which line the church on every side from
floor to ceiling. We cannot move about the buildings and
enjoy them as we would wish, to-day being a holy day,
especial services being held, and the church is crowded. We
stand and gaze at the scene around us. The dull, monotonous
voice of the priest reaches us, and has the effect of making
me very sleepy, so I lean against the big stone pillar and
rest my head. How long I remained there, as in a dream, I
cannot tell. I see a long line of figures approaching, about
one hundred choristers, clad in purple cassocks, lace colle,
and a narrow green ribbon hanging around their necks,
chanting and gently waving incense before them in the bronze
censers ; and following these are priests of many orders mag-
nificently attired. Next appears a large silk canopy, borne
by boys ; the crowd being before us now, I can only see the
silk waving. Suddenly the crowd kneel as in a body, and
opposite me is the noblest man I ever saw, in full cardinal
robes, and at the raising of j;he sacred emblems in his hands
all heads are bent. At length they have passed, and the
crowd, eager to touch his Holiness’s gown, press around
him, whilst I am myself at almost the same moment sur-
rounded by beggars, whose cries can only be stilled by money,


money, money. I help them ns long as my purse will allow,
for I am at heart truly sorry for the poor souls; but oh, how
I long to be alone ! I pass down the side aisle, which is
very dark, and here in the solemn silence find rest and
peace.
“On the arches of the transept are subjects from the
lives of St. Peter and St. Paul.” The guide’s voice reaches
me as he reels out in dull tones his parrot-learned task. I
rise and follow the others. The mosaics are beautiful, ex-
quisite in design and colour; the dim light of the church
improves their beauty, casting a solemn glorious halo into
every nook and corner of the grand old building.
We were not inclined to ascend tbe roof of tbe cathedral,
no, not even for the promised grandeur of its views there-
from. We were told that St. Martino, on the top of the hill,
an hour's journey further on, is worthy of a visit, but we lacked
the energy to attempt it, preferring to return to Palermo,
where w r e had arranged to lunch at the Hotel de la Paix, and
an excellent lunch we had, with some good red wine.
The hotel is very comfortable, and the saUe a manger is very
large and beautifully decorated. Then there is a bright
smoking-room, quite in the Eastern style ; off this is a cosy
drawing-room with easy couches. Whilst our men folk
enjoyed their smoke we women crept in here and had a quiet
sleep. Our morning’s drive in the fresh air had made this
necessary. At three o’clock we drove to the Gardens la
Favorita. They are large and well laid out; the orange


trees were in full bloom. We gathered some sprays and
many of the sweet wild flowers that abound in this dainty
spot. We arrived on board at four o’clock, just in time for
our much-loved cup of tea.
My friend and I had on that night a deep-laid plot, of
which only the captain knew anything. After dinner the
gentlemen went for their smoke, and seeing them settled for
a game of piquet, we hastily changed our dinner gowns for
rough serge ones, and quietly crept over the yacht’s side and
dropped into the dingey. A few quiet strokes, and we were
free. Away we went as swiftly as our arms could pull, passed
all the boats lying in the harbour, out, out to sea. The
moon, kindly soul, who had kept herself hidden behind a dark
veil, suddenly burst forth in her glory. Oh, the grandeur, the
beauty of it all! We sat silent, not caring to speak. Lines
of my old master, Will Shakespeare, came to my lips; softly
murmuring them to myself, I lay back in the boat and
dreamed. Moments such as these are jewels beyond price,
they bring the wandering soul nearer to its resting-place.
Nearer to Thee, O Father, nearer to Thee; our hope, our
refuge, and our only stay. How long we lingered there I
don’t know. The night grew chilly, and the lights on shore
one by one did disappear, and all around grew lonely. On
the distant hill a lamb’s bleating could be heard —so still was
the night. Luna, sad soul, disappointed perhaps with her
much-loved Endymion, again hid her soft light from us, and
with some trouble we found our way into the harbour, with


only the yacht’s light to guide us. Creeping quietly to the
side of the fair “Imogen,” we scrambled up out of the boat,
leaving Smart to drop her astern —a most unusual thing, as
all boats had to be up at 10.30. The men were still at
piquet. We had not been missed. So our escapade had
passed unnoticed.
Good Friday, April \sth.
The morning was spent inside the Cathedral in Via
Victor Emanuale, where there are some perfect bits of
architecture, and the tombs of kings and queens. In the
Sacristy is shown the tiny cap of Constance of Arragon, a
dainty bit of finery; also a Henry the Sixth mantel. There
are here many grand palaces and beautiful buildings that
would have repaid a visit had we had the time requisite
to devote to them. To day being a feast-day, we found
the city full of people from the country and from the moun-
tains. They were quaintly dressed in rough materials of
bright colours. Their dark hair,was fantastically arranged
and adorned with heavy silver ornaments of homely design.
In the distance we heard a band, and later on came upon
a procession of boys and monks holding aloft a figure of
the Virgin in deep mourning. The sight and the noise
were not pleasing, and we were glad to get away from them
into a side street, where we bought some pretty figures,
models of the peasants in terra cotta. These are wonderfully
well done. We carried them away with great care, and placed
them with our other treasures. In days to come, in our far-


away Australian home, they will bring to mind our pleasant
visit to Palermo.
Afternoon.
Lunch over, we started in a carriage for Sibilrossa,
passing through many old villages, orange groves, and fields,
and after a steep ascent we decided to rest. The horses
were very tired, and it seemed cruel to work them so hard
on this day of rest. We contented ourselves with gathering
flowers, which grew in plenty all around. Tired of this, we
sat down on the hillside enjoying the lovely scenery. Is
there anywhere in the world scenery so perfect in beauty, or
so rich, so manifold in charms as that of the Mediterranean ?
In all her humours she is truly glorious. To-day she seems
at rest. There is a contented look upon her waters. Few
boats are to be seen, but away in the far distance a brig is
trying to get some wind into her sails.
Below us is a village surrounded with olive trees, and
high above, on our right, stands a tall monument which
commemorates that Garibaldi and his troops rested there
on the eve of his capture of Palermo in iB6O.
A little maiden came from the farm behind, and seemed
to wish to gather flowers for us; which she did, and on
our rewarding her, the whole family came forth to give .us
grateful thanks. Passing through the grass, we came across
a hateful thing in reptile form. It was not a snake, and as it
was too big for an adder, though the guide said it was one,
we were puzzled as to its name. It was brown and green,


with a soft shining back, and about a foot and a quarter
long, and I should say would weigh two or three pounds.
Calling the child of the farm and her mother, we pointed
to it. They became alarmed, and desired us not to go
near it. ' So we left it, regretting afterwards that it had not
been destroyed.
April 15 ih.
We left for Syracuse at six p.m. Passing near the
land all the way, we have a good view of the coast
scenery. Rounded Caps Faro at 3.30. The sea was calm,
and it was a beautiful journey. We should have gone by
way of Palermo, but it would have taken two clear days,
and we should have had to stay there a night. The brigands
being very troublesome just at this time, we were advised
not to attempt the journey except from Girgenti, but the
harbour there afforded no protection to our boat, so we
gave up the idea of going inland to Segesta to see the
ruins, the wonderful temple, the theatre, and other objects
of interest.
We are soon in the Strait of Messina. We pass Reggio,
Stormina, and Catania, and the glorious Etna, which lies
beneath her heavy snow mantle, a faint veil of smoke from
the topmost height is the only visible sign of the enemy
within. Soon Syracuse is reached. The Castle Maniace,
with its rough high walls and funny little guns, is rounded,
and we drop our anchor in the grand harbour, opposite the


ancient city of Ortygia, at 10.15 next morning, after a splendid
run of 185 knots.
Syracuse, April \6th.
Syracuse, one of the oldest of the Sicilian cities, lies
before us to explore, and time being short, we hasten to
the shore, a guide is engaged, and we are off.
Along the quay, passing the city gates, over the bridge,
and along the white dusty road, we alight at the amphitheatre,
a Roman structure of the period of Augustus, 77 yards in
length, and 44 in width.
Passing under the arches of the aqueduct, we reach the
Greek theatre. This is the largest Greek structure of the
kind after those of Metius and Megalopotis, erected in the
fifth century b.c. It is hewn out of the rocks in semi-
circular form, 165 yards in diameter. Distinct traces of
forty-six tiers of seats are visible. To sit on one of the high
tiers and look at the scene beyond is a great pleasure.
The soft grey stone of the theatre, the green fields that
separate the town from the sea, and far beyond the Promon-
tory of Plemmytion lies the lonian Sea, clear and bright in
the midday sun.
And as you sit dreamily contemplating this fair scene,
green and brown lizards creep from their hiding in the rocks
and cross your feet, or lie near enjoying the sun’s warmth.
Gazing upon the now desolate ruin, we could, not help
thinking of the time when Syracuse, not only feared for her


naval atid military power, but equally renowned through her
famous philosophers, warriors, and statesmen, whose fame
fills the pages of ancient history, was one of the most mag-
nificent cities on the northern side of the Mediterranean.
We next passed up the street of tombs with gaping
openings on either side, which run far back into darkness.
Shading our eyes from the sun, we could see rows upon rows
of niches where the bodies of hundreds of thousands had
lain, and which now are left in the possession of wild ferns,
which grow in profusion out of its clammy sides.
The ascent over the rough Roman road, in which the
wheels of the chariot had left their mark from bygone ages
in deep ruts, took about five minutes; then we passed over
the hill to what we w r ere assured is the tomb of Archimedes,
This consists of a mass of ruined stone, with its small dark
opening almost covered with brambles. The words of the
poet came to our lips—
“So Tully paused amid the wreck of time,
On the rude stone to trace the truth sublime,
Where, at his feet in honoured dust disclosed,
The immortal sage of Syracuse, reposed.”
On leaving here we went round the hill, at the foot of
which is a small gate on the right, through which we passed
into Latornia de Sta Venere. On the right as we enter the
Latornia is the bath of Venus, so dear to artists; around it
grows in wildness the tender maiden-hair fern. Even the


domed roof of rock is fringed with this exquisite plant,
through which the water in big drops forces its way, falling
and causing many circles in the clear, deep pool below.
Through its water we could see the white pebbled bottom,
where bright tawny fishes played at 80-peep. Broken statues
lie beside the bath and in niches in the grey rocks above.
Following a narrow pathway from which we had to part the
flowering branches before we could get along, we reached a
small plot of grass. Here were flowers of every hue; fruit
trees laden with cherries and wild loquots, from which the
dark-eyed maiden in charge helped us with great liberality.
The golden laburnum and the sunny acacia hung in rich
bunches over our heads. Wild clematis and woodbine mixed
with the ivy on its rocky home, struggled for a space to
spread its loveliness, and, being defeated, clung to and
climbed the nearest trees, casting loving arms around their
highmost tops; and at our feet, rosemary, thyme, and rue,
Shakespeare’s loved flowers, flourished in profusion. Red
balls of geranium, with their veined leaves, found pleasure in
raising their flaring brightness above the modest pansy, and,
tucked away under a projecting piece of rock, white and
purple violets grew —a fitting bower for the queenly Venus.
Retracing our steps, we leave behind us this lovely
retreat, and turning to the left, we were shown a strange
grotto somewhat in the form of the letter “E,” called the
Ear of Dionysius. This grotto, or subterranean passage,
terminates in a fine point that almost totally perforates


the rock, and possesses such remarkable acoustic properties
that the faintest sound may be heard in it. According to
tradition, it was made by Dionysius into a prison for captives
taken in war, and from an ingeniously devised aperture he
could at any time overhear every word, nay, even every
whisper they breathed. The guide banged the door (a
modern innovation) to show the wondrous echo the cave
is capable of producing, regardless of our nerves; The noise
is like a cannon shot. The cave is a cold, creepy place,
and we rejoiced to get out of its gloomy depths and the
unhappy thoughts it suggested. The sun having sunk, the
air suddenly turned very chill. After a sharp walk down
hill we rejoined our carriages and drove yachtwards,
April 17///.
We are bowling along in our carriages bound for
Epipolre, Jack with Mr. Lambert, Aimee and self in one,
Nurse, Lyal, Newman, and Heath in another. We have
a beautiful day for our drive, and once outside the Spanish
gateway we pass through a land of flowers and beautiful
fields of wheat, barley, and hay. We skirt the bay for
some time, and then gradually rise to the summit of
Euryelus. Let me here observe that to give anything
like a detailed description of what we see would be an
impossible task. Even to describe the principal objects
were no easy matter; besides, this has been so well done
by others as to render the attempt here unnecessary. All


I desire is to note what produces the deepest impression on
my own feelings. From the point we now occupy we have
a perfect view on all sides. To the right are seen Syracuse
and its beautiful bay, five miles around. Behind us are
the hills of Hybla; and here we see the wonderful Grecian
castle, hewn out of the solid rock three hundred years before
Christ. On the left lies the shore where the Romans
landed; and at our feet the walls of Dionysius the
elder, which were raised in twenty days. Sixty thousand
freedmen and thousands of slaves from the Latomice
hewed the rocks, and six thousand yoke of oxen drew the
stones.
In the distance on the left lies Neapolis, famous for
its temples erected by Gelon, 480 e.c. In one of these was
a famous statue of Apollo, the Sun’s charioteer, the
envy of the seven-hilled city, by whom, by force or
fraud, it was ultimately possessed. Further away to the
right are the quarries from which Dionysius procured
the stone for his great wall. These are also rendered
interesting from their connection with an incident in the
life of the poet Philoxenus. It is said that the poet had
the good fortune to secure the favour of Dionysius (who
himself was a poet), and to enjoy his patronage and pro-
tection, until in an unlucky hour he seduced one of the
Court songstresses with whom he had fallen in love. For
this conduct the son of Cytherea was cast into prison, and
while there composed a satire entitled “The Cyclops,” in


which the tyrant, the courtesan, and the poet himself were
respectively represented in the characters of Ulysses, Galatea,
and Polyphemus. Dionysius in the character of the latter
was rendered extremely ridiculous, and yet we find that
after a time he had the magnanimity to liberate him. It
has been insinuated that the tyrant in this was not actuated
by the best of motives. It is asserted that he merely
desired to have Philoxenus’s approval of a poem which
he himself had written, and his victim refusing to do this,
was sent back to these quarries. From here he was again
taken out at a feast, at which other verses of the monarch
were recited, and upon being asked his opinion of them
only said, “ Take me back to the quarries.” Dionysius,
however, struck with admiration at his firmness and humour,
ordered him to be liberated. How much we may be
indebted to a spirit of waggery for this tale we cannot say,
but it is one of the many fanciful things we remember
while we gaze down from the Fort of Euryelus.
We wandered through the Fort, with its endless sub-
terranean passages, in wonderment at its size and depth,—
wondrous in those days, no doubt; but what is it in com-
parison with our modern warfare, our wholesale slaughter?
Tired and hungry, we were grateful when lunch was
announced. It was laid out on a deal table in the cus-
todian's best room; and very soon we were thoroughly
enjoying our pressed beef, salad, and champagne.
Hie custodian’s poor doggie, which I think had not had


a meal for a week, had a rare treat, and finished up with
trying to eat lemons.
We seated ourselves, after lunch, on a bench outside,
and enjoyed a view of mighty Etna, with her ever-changing
hues and soft vapoury mists that crept over her snowy top.
The sea reflected the brightness overhead, and threw into
brilliant contrast the bays and headlands far and near.
From the merry laughter inside the house, and the cries
of “Bene motto bene” in the custodian’s voice, we knew that
it was a day of happiness to the guides, the custodian, and to
our attendants, as well as to ourselves.
We are on the move again; time ever fleeting will not
wait Even the bird that darted past just now is not so chary,
and in his hasty flight gives us a sweet note of his existence.
Parting words are spoken, and grateful thanks for the gift of
eggs and flowers and kindly entertainment, and we turn our
faces towards the sea and rapidly descend the hill, for the
“wonders of the city” lie before us, and we have much to
see before old Sol hides his shining head, and so without more
ado we hurry off to Latomia de Cappuccini.
Though grand and wild to look upon by the traveller, a
scene of sadder memories is presented to his view here. It
was in these quarries that the remnant of the glorious armies
of Nicias (413 b.c.), the Athenian general, after a long and
doubtful conflict with the united forces of Sparta and Syra-
cuse, were destined to wear out the rest of their lives in toil
and pain. Full seven thousand of those brave Athenians are


supposed to have ended their lives thus; and it makes one
blush to think of the base treachery by which their great
general was seduced into a surrender that had such a tragic
issue. This was one of the foullest blots on the fair fame of
Syracuse.
From these quarries we pass on to the Church of S.
Giovanni, originally built in the latter part of the twelfth
century, and famous for its rose-window, which, with the
portal, is all that now remains*of the original structure. A
few minutes are sufficient for our stay, and then off to the
Catacombs. This burial-place of ancient Syracuse is a re-
markable “God’s acre” indeed. That which is usually seen
by travellers extends about a hundred yards under the an-
terior terrace of Achradina, and dates from the fourth century
of the Christian era. Not here will you find the remains of
Dionysius the Elder, of Dion, Timoleon, or Agathocles, and
the rest of the great men of old; but here, nevertheless, will
you behold the dust of the tyrant and the slave, of the prince
and the peasant, of the grey-haired parent and his lisping
child, all mingled in one heart-saddening heap of dust.
These Catacombs consist of a series of circular chambers, of
which there are three storeys, each lined with shelves whereon
reposed the dead. They are reputed to have extended over
an area of seven or eight miles; but this we are not able to
certify.
It is said that people entering the Catacombs ran the
risk of being lost inside, unless they took a ball of cord or


thread with them, one end of which was fastened to the
entrance.
This tale of the ball of thread may remind you of the
story of King Edward and the fair Rosamond, but the thread
legend is the only thing here that finds an echo in that love-
tale. No two things could be more unlike each other than
the rose-adorned and nightingale-haunted bower of Woodstock
and this gloom-shrouded and ghoul-haunted city of the dead.
But the ancients did not regard these things from our modern
standpoint. They had their fields of Elysium, and their
Hades; and Death, though not desirable, was to them only
a King of Terrors in so far as he affected their earthly weal.
They, in consequence, took a milder view of it than we are
apt to do. Nor was death to them what it unhappily is
to the great body of our modern scientists, viz., extinction,
but only change from one form of being into another. Hence
their wonted cheerfulness and charming myths, one of the
most exquisite of these being connected with the place we
next visit, namely, the well of Arethusa. Here we are
reminded of the beautiful nymph of Elis, who was pursued
by the enamoured river god Alpheus, and changed by her
mistress, Diana, into a stream, and disappeared into a secret
passage under the earth and,vanished,‘soon after to reappear
in the very fount into which we now gaze. It is affirmed
that Alpheus, such is the power of love, was still able to
pursue his Arethusa as before, and that his love is such, that
every gift he receives at the hands of Fortune is instantly,


from his seat on the far-away side of the mountain, sent on
to his beautiful Arethusa.
6.15. Left for Brindisi, and steered N.E.
12 p.m. Weather fine, fresh wind with moderate sea.
Wednesday , 18 th, 1892.
4 a.m. Calm and smooth.
7 a.m. Set fore and main staysails.
10 a.m. Took in all canvas and stowed up.
12. Weather fine and clear.
7.40. p.m. Hauled log in.
8.10 p.m. Moored head and stern in Brindisi harbour.
Distance run, 300 miles.
Could the worst sailor in the world wish for a better
journey?
We began coaling at once. It suddenly turned very
windy. The fine coal dust all around was anything but
pleasant.
Mr. Low, the representative of the P. and O. Company,
came on board and lunched. Lunch over, ordering the
dingey alongside, with no other company but Aimee, Lyal,
and myself, we set out to explore the river, first assuring
ourselves that our precious tea-basket was aboard. That
precious tea basket! How often has it been our joy and
comfort on a long journey! We pushed off and rowed to a
low-lying, deserted-looking garden near by. No sooner had we


run our boat to the shore than two Italian women rushed out,
tied up our boat, seized our tea-basket, books, rugs, umbrellas,
etc., and insisted on taking us to a comfortable, shady place
beneath the trees, presenting us at the same time with a posy.
How they hung around us, bringing chairs from their cabin
close by for us to sit upon, and when we preferred to take our
picnic on the ground, they sat down right in front of us.
The kettle was soon boiling. Making the tea and
spreading a clean cloth before us, we had as dainty a feast
as one could wish for. How happy we were ! Oh, those
women, with their big eyes, how they did stare! On leaving
we left a goodly supply of dainties behind us and prepared
to return to our boat, willing hands helping us as before.
On our thanking them gratefully they replied, “ Niente,
niente, Signora,” and launched' us out into the stream.
We started to pull down the river. On passing the
yacht I called to Harry, “Is the coaling all over?” “Just
washing down decks, ma’am; soon will be.” We rowed past
the prison, and down to some charming villas on the right.
Some people very kindly asked us to land and enjoy the
gardens, but as our time was so short we thanked them
and declined.
Returning at 3.30 to the yacht, ive found all traces of
our enemy, the coal-dust, departed, the decks all white
and clean, everything carefully stowed away, even our easy-
chairs, as there is a long journey before us to-morrow, and
w T e expect what the sailors call “ dirty weather.”


At Sea, Thursday , iqth, i p.m.
As was predicted, we did drop into bad weather.
When lunch was announced, Mr. Lambert and I, with
many dodges to escape getting wet, crept from the smoking-
room along the deck until we got safely into the dining
saloon. We were the only ones to turn up. There was
steak and onions, chops and green peas. Our chef always
sent in steak and onions in real bad weather; it was a
horrible revenge. To say I thoroughly enjoyed this would
not be true, but 1 kept up my reputation as a good sailor
by taking something. The frantic grabs at one’s plate at
every lurch the boat gave were amusing to any one but
ourselves. I know before we left the table the things had,
one by one, disappeared, and we were left holding our
glasses and bread in either hand.
I got down to Aimee’s cabin : darkness and silence
reigned, so I said not a word but crept upstairs, and going
aft, got one of the men to fix some ropes on the stern,
that I might sit there in safety. As the sea was all before
us, the position was delightful, and there I sat and screamed
with wild delight as each succeeding wave bigger than the
other swept past us, to leave us trembling on its crest or
shivering in its depth, all sense of danger being lost in such
a mighty scene. Turning, I found the first officer beside
me.
“I’m afeard you’ll get wet, ma’am; she be shipping
some heavy water for’ard.” Scarce had the words left his


mouth when a shower of water passed over us, drenching
us like water-rats in spite of oil-skins. Shaking the water
from my face, I laughed. “That was a good one, eh?”
“Yes, ma’am, it was; but this ’ere boat be such a duck,
she don’t do much harm.” The steersman, passing me on his
way to the wheel, grinned—at me, I suppose. Well, “ One
man’s meat,” etc.; and so I sat until 2.30, when a big
squall with severe rain and hail came down. This calmed
the sea a -little. I had to retire for a fresh equipment,
being drenched through. The engines were now put on
to full speed again.
At four o’clock we had just done 102 knots. We had
passed Bari, the only port of any size, but useless to us with
the wind in the present quarter, so we had to press on. The
sea and wind becoming so bad, everything had to be battened
down forward, and the breakwaters put up. For four hours
we had as lively a time as one could imagine. At last the
headland of Manfredonia came into sight. Heigho! thank
goodness, there comes an end to every trial if we are only
patient. We kept the shore as near as safety \vould allow.
At 7 p.m. we dropped anchor under shelter of Manfredonia,
three-quarters of a mile from the village, and very grateful we
were for this safety. Our- little boat, brave as she is, could
not have stood much more of such a severe thrashing
without some damage.
Distance run, 117 knots.
We all turned up for dinner at eight in a very sorry plight.


After our exciting day we were glad to turn in early, and
were soon rocked to sleep from right to left in a long ground
swell, which lasted through the night.
Wednesday, April 20 th.
Rose at nine after a splendid night’s rest, though the
wind did blow, wailing like a thousand tortured souls all
around us.
A strong swell coming in from the sea causes us to roll
heavily. At some distance apart some ten or thirteen large
steamers are lying under shelter like ourselves. We spent
some time trying to signal to them just to ask a few questions,
but they treated us with disdain, so in despair we hunt up the
history of Manfredonia.
The village of Manfredonia, founded in 1263 by King
Manfred, lies at the foot of Mount Angelo. Its population in
1881 was 9606. March fever and ague prevail here. This
description leaves much to the imagination.
It is impossible to launch a boat for the shore. To
amuse ourselves we make damper bread, which turns out so
badly that even the sailors decline to eat it. We next try
quoits, which prove a dismal failure.
Friday Night, 22 nd April.
Weather still very squally and severe.
Sixty-eight hours we lay tossing under Manfredonia, the
wind blowing so hard at times that we were anxious lest our


anchor should give way. Should the wind change to the
south we shall have to move either back to Bari, which would
then be a safe harbour, or struggle on to Venice. At present,
with this Bora blowing, either proceeding would be dangerous.
Spent the morning reading up “ Dangers to be en-
countered in the Adriatic,” Boras, etc., until my mind was
full of horrible thoughts.
Saturday , 23rd April.
After two days and nights’ waiting, on Saturday morning
we were able to lower a boat for Turner to go on shore to
get fresh food. The boat returned with fresh meat, vege-
tables, eggs, and bread, but no milk—money could not buy
it. Turner says the poverty of the village is awful —worse
than anything he ever saw in the poorest parts of old Ireland,
and the people are very dirty. The man who showed Turner
round to the shops wanted twenty francs for ten minutes’
work. Turner gave him five, and he was content. Turner
is an old soldier, to be sure, and not to be outdone. At 9.45
we left the shelter of Manfredonia, as the weather was clear-
ing, following the lead of the boats that were lying round
about us. We cleared the point two hours later, and laid a
straight course to Ancona,'in case some more bad weather
should come upon us suddenly. The “ Imogen ” is doing
twelve knots easily, the weather holding good, as it promised.
We have passed a group of islands, Tremiti and Pianosa.
There are posts fixed on the shores of these islands, to which


vessels, when overtaken by a Bora, can chain themselves to
escape being blown ashore.
The fact of a heavy dew falling is a safe guarantee of
the weather for the morrow, when we hope to arrive in Venice
at twelve o’clock. We filled up the evening with a capital
rubber of whist. Distance run, 255 knots.
Sunday, 24 th April,
Venice.
The weather was gloriously fine when we arrived at
the mouth of the lagoon. At 12.30 the pilot came on
board. We passed a sunken passenger boat which, the
pilot tells us, was run down by the Trieste steamer.
The water in the lagoon is very shallow in places.
We were again stopped for the captain to go ashore to
obtain “ pratique ” before we could go any further, which
means that he must clear the boat and papers before enter-
ing Venice.
The city lying before us looks to my eyes like dream-
land, with its ivory domes and graceful campaniles.
Later.
We are off again, steaming slowly up the lagoon, passing
many shallow boats filled with holiday folks bound for the
pleasant sands of the Lido. With what pleasure do we first
behold the graceful gondolas, and with what joy in our hearts
do we approach the fair city !


I
r A A A A "A A A A
rf ■ -v
~
VIEW FROM YACHT. VENICE.


At 2 p.m. we are comfortably moored, bow and stern,
to two buoys, our figure-head pointing towards St. Mark’s
Square. Thd luncheon gong has sounded, but we heed
it not. “Will you girls come into luncheon?” comes from
the saloon in practical -John’s voice. We dance into the
saloon in high glee. “Oh, isn’t it glorious! How happy I
am !” we both cry at once,
“I wish you would be sensible and have your lunch.”
So we, with beating hearts and flushed faces, eat. What,
I don’t know—l am conscious of nothing but that the
city is waiting for us to enjoy its treasures.'
Turner informs us that a gondolier with a nice gondola
is asking to be engaged. Out we rush. Yes ; ’tis a nice
gondola, gaily decked with bright flowers fore and aft; a
cosy seat under the dark canopy with red cushions. Price
is agreed; Giovanni is engaged and told to wait.
Later.
We are gliding up the Grand Canal Desdemona’s
Palace attracts us first, Robert Browning’s ■ next, then the
Doge’s, and Byron’s “endless palaces,” intermixed with some
other buildings passing under the Rialto and right up to
the railway station, a short cut .through the narrow ways.
A gondola coming upon us suddenly, extorts high words
and maledictions from our gondolier, Giovanni. Getting
no reply, he vents his anger upon our steersman, a quiet,
inoffensive being in a pink shirt, who says nothing.


Eventually we are landed at St. Mark’s Square, which
is crowded. The band is playing. The pigeons (a noted
feature in Venice, and always to be found in great number,
and the delight of many travellers, young and old) were
soon around us begging for corn, which we had bought from
some men and boys who make a regular trade out of these
birds. The pigeons are quite tame, and alight anywhere
they can find a resting-place, even on your hat, and will
eat from your mouth. I found that after a few visits they
know you, and fly to meet you from any part of the Square,
at times making your progress a difficult one, as they cluster
around your feet in numbers.
We wandered into St. Mark’s. What a perfect colouring
it presented! Its beauty makes you think of a temple beyond
man’s power, and yet this glory was designed and raised
by man. Its mightiness and grandeur awes and overpowers
the senses; you feel like a child, and long for some one
to take you by the hand and in a gentle voice tell you
pretty stories of its wonderful stones,
I am suddenly brought from my realms of romance
to mundane things by Aimed, who says she is hungry
and cold, so we rejoin Jack and Mr. Lambert outside, and
hearing from them that a pile of letters, papers, etc., are
waiting us on board, we make a move for the boat.
“Tea at once, please, Turner, and on deck.” The
steward has bought some dainties in the way of cakes,
and we have a rare tea, making up for the lost lunch. Letters


read, we order the dingey, and my friend and I row ourselves
up the Grand Canal to S. Maria della Salute. We mount
the broad flight of steps which face us, and gaze on the rich
facade of this impressive building, and we enter and enjoy
Tintoretto’s pictures. The “Presentation in the Temple,” by
Giordano, is such a tender bit —“ The Baby Saviour going
up the steps is met by the Elders; ” the colouring is perfect.
Passing over the others until we come to “The Marriage in
Cana,” an immense picture by Tintoretto, exquisite in light
and shade, the grouping and colouring powerful in every
detail. There are two beautiful heads of the Madonna —
small,' but oh, so sweet! and many others. But it is
impossible to enjoy them in peace, as the cicerone worries
us to look here, there, and everywhere. Eventually we leave
him, hoping to see them at another time when he is not
about. Outside, we find that a man has taken charge of
our boat. You meet these men at all the landing-stages.
They draw the boat alongside with crook sticks, some of
them most fantastic in design. For a halfpenny they are
very grateful. A few minutes’ rowing brings us to S. Giorgio
Maggiore, a beautiful church, cruciform in shape. Ringing
a bell, we are admitted. Finding we are the only visitors,
we persuade the custodian to devote his time to us, and so
save time by guiding us to the best works. Jac. Bassano’s
“ Nativity ” and Tintoretto’s “ Last Supper ” are superb.
We also admired “The Martyrdom of St. Stephen.” Beauti-
ful bronze lamps hang from the ceiling, and the choir is far


beyond description ; it is charming, one endless variety of
exquisite carving, the work of Benedictine monks. Tourists
are now crowding in in dozens, so we leave. It has always
struck me as painful to witness the careless, neglectful
manner in which ordinary tourists enter these churches,
showing such a lack of reverence and respect.
Going out, we pass two gentle-faced Sisters in black
garb counting their beads, unconscious of anything around
them—sweet Sisters, gentle souls.
* * * * *
We returned in time to dress for dinner. When we
came on deck afterwards we were delighted to find that
some wandering musicians in a gondola were playing along-
side. For two hours we had a delightful feast of music. The
electric light on our decks, and from all the ports and deck-
house windows, makes the yacht very brilliant, and an
object of great attraction, to judge from the number of dark,
creeping silent boats that glide around us. Some of the
occupants were brave enough to face the glare of the port
lights and put their heads right in. We had great amusement
listening to their remarks, which could be heard quite well
from where we sat under the awning in our easy-chairs. As
to-morrow promises to be a busy day we very reluctantly
turned in, and sleep the sleep of the—tired.


■ /ife* * ifl 4 i IWlVU \ 4M|
ilmI By \
JBBvXm \ 1-*
WORK


Monday , April 25 th,
St. Mark's Feast Day.
We were awakened early with the ringing of church
bells, to find the sailors' holy-stoning the decks. Mr.
Hensford, taking advantage of the fine weather and our
staying here for some days, is having the deck-houses
thoroughly cleaned. The amount of scraping, scrubbing,
and rubbing that goes on is truly wonderful. From the deck
above comes in Mr. Hensford’s voice, “ Ah, she’ll 100k <
splendid when she gets a couple of coats of varnish on!
This e’er Mediterranean water be so salt that it eats the
varnish off, and it’s a big job to get it right again.” At
eleven o’clock we leave them with the ship to themselves.
Entering our gondola, we are off to hear the music at
“ San Marco.”
Later.
We spent an hour in the Cathedral. There were ten
or twenty services going on at once. After some trouble we
got into the gallery, it being so crowded downstairs, from
where we had a good view of every corner of the building,
with its wonderful mosaics. To shut your eyes and listen
to the music was heavenly, bilt to see the people not
concerned in the service—men and boys selling pictures of
St. Mark, others clattering money-boxes and causing
general discord—made one very impatient. It was an
impressive scene marred by the ignorant and noisy.


After leaving the church we took a cursory glance
around the piazza, at its many shops and gaily-dressed
people. Two large handsome flags, which are only to be
seen on great feast-days, waved in front of St. Mark’s, and
the three bronze horses of Napoleonitic memory, shining
like gold in the bright sunshine, were dazzling to behold.
We returned to the yacht for lunch. Jack has bought me
Stones of Venice , Hare’s Venice , and Venetian Life by
Howells. After lunch we settled down to read. At 2.30
we descended again into our gondola and alighted at flower
shops, where we ordered some lovely flowers for the yacht.
Passing down a narrow street we came across some fine grown
asparagus for threepence per big bundle, which Mr. Lambert
bought (also some lettuce), and being proud of his purchase
would insist on carrying it to the yacht. Leaving our parcels
on board, our gondola took us to the public gardens, through
which we wandered and saw our old friends the wallabies
with their little families. We were not fortunate enough to
see the only horse now left in Venice, which is supposed to
be kept here for the use of children. In an early history
of Venice I read that in the thirteenth century there were
so many horses in the narrow unpaved streets that a law
was passed requiring them to carry bells to warn the foot-
passengers of their approach.
Towards sunset you get from these gardens one of the
most gorgeous panoramas that V enice can show.
In the evening our musicians gave us another treat until


9.30, when they left. When we were retiring at 10.30 we
suddenly heard a great bumping noise at the starboard side,
and putting my head out of the port-hole, whom should it
be but our gondolier. What could he want at this hour?
“He was waiting,” he said. “For what?” “’Tis half-past
nine,” said he. “ But you were ordered for half-past nine
to-morrow morning.” The poor old man had been merry-
making, and had no doubt mistaken night for morning. We
at last made him understand his error, and wished him good-
night. Poor fellow, I fear the festival of St. Mark had been
too much for him.
Tuesday morning.
Breakfast over, at ten the gondola was ready, and we
went up the Grand Canal to the bankers, then back to the
Doge’s Palace. Here we engaged a guide, but he was more
than useless, having to read his information from leaves he
had written out. He was nervous, poor fellow. To me he
seemed like a stranded Englishman trying to earn a few
pence to get food. After passing through the third room our
patience was exhausted, and we gave him five francs to leave
us in peace; then, by the aid of Hare’s book, we got on very
well. There are many wonderful pictures to be seen, but
they are so great and there is so much to realise in them, I
doubt if any one could say they thoroughly enjoyed them.
I gazed on Tintoretto’s “Paradise” with bewilderment, and
regretted that I had not months instead of minutes to see


it in. We passed from room to room, it seemed to me, lined
with miles of pictures, until my head did spin. It was a
relief to come to the balcony and look out upon the square.
We were truly glad to get through-the Political and Criminal
Prisons and the Bridge of Sighs, and to bid farewell to these
reminiscences of the dismal past.
Passing over the Piazza San Marco we came to the
King’s Palace, which we entered and were shown over.
There is not much to impress one there. We saw nothing
but huge rooms with stiff ungainly furniture, I noticed in
the Queen’s bedroom, in place of mosquito nets, there was
a soft silk muslin of gold shade, which was very pretty. The
marble bath, too, was very dainty; but the Palace on the whole
was far from interesting, Returned to the yacht for lunch.
A storm is threatening. Visited SS. Giovanni and Paolo,
the church where the Doges are laid to rest. Most interest-
ing to be seen is the tomb of Doge Lepardi, in the Chapel
of the Rosary. This chapel was destroyed by fire in 1867,
and is now being restored. There had been some very
beautiful marble reliefs; but, alas, they had nearly all been
defaced. Mr. Lambert bought me a book of photos showing
them as they were before the fire. There was a very intel-
ligent man here, who gave us much useful information. It
rained heavily when we left the church, so, perforce, we had
to return home.
On arriving alongside, Giovanni and “ Pink,” so called
because he always wore a “ pink ” shirt, began looking very


earnestly at us. Of course we knew their meaning, and
ordered them out a large bottle of red wine. ’Tis such a
pleasure to see their happiness in the creature comforts.
Life here is such a struggle, and the poverty so terrible.
After tea we visited the Church of St. Frari, built in the
same style as St. Paolo, only more impressive. There is in
this church, in the sacristy, a beautiful Madonna by Bellini,
dated 1488, with saints on the winged sides.
Next in note is the statue of St. Jerome, also a fifteenth
century relief of the “ Entombment of Christ,” with angels,
and another of “The Descent,” very chaste and beautiful.
Titian’s monument is a noble piece of sculpture ; also
Canova’s, but not so pleasing. The tomb of Pietro Bernacco
quite eclipsed the other two for beauty, elegance, and truth.
The holy water basins, which stand on either side of the
main door, are very elegant and worthy of attention.
Wednesday , April 27 lit.
The morning of this day was spent in the Academy,
where we saw some more of Tintoretto’s best works, and
were much impressed with those of Bellini. Our afternoon
was spent in furniture shops, which in fornjer days had been
the homes of nobles: ’tis a sad sight, the crumbling away of
these magnificent buildings. We saw here glass-blowers at
work, who presented us with numerous tokens of their in-
teresting occupation.


Thursday , April 28 th.
Received Australian letters at breakfast. At ten we all
went to the school of St. Rocco and saw some more fine works
by Tintoretto. I was most impressed with “ Christ before
Pilate”—’tis a charming work. Pilate is seated on a raised
throne; Christ, the central figure, stands before him clothed
in soft falling robes of dead white. The face so noble, so
sweet and quiet, seems to be looking through the Judge
and far beyond. Behind him press the crowd, in which
the most noticeable figure is a woman, A beautiful light
on the balcony and windows in the background. In the
foreground, right in the corner, is the figure of an old man,
also in white, with soft white hair. There seemed to be
great poetry of thought between the Christ in robes of white
and this old man.
Ruskin says, “Best seen on a dark day when the figure
of Christ alone draws the eye, looking almost like a spirit
in the Great Hall.” The ceilings by Paul Veronese, the
floor inlaid with marbles of beauty, in perfect colouring;
the carvings all round were wonders to the eye, and a very
fine altar stands at the end of the Hall.
We passed into the Church of St. Rocco. Here were
some very wonderful pictures, but the light of the church
being so dim we had but a poor view of them. Mr. Lambert
and Jack not having seen St. Frari, we went there, and again
I feasted on Bellini’s lovely Madonna.
There being a funeral service in preparation, we hastened


our departure, and next visited some bronze-workers’ shops,
which were very interesting, and, like all tourists, we bought
and loaded ourselves with much that was useless. Heavy
rain having set in, we were glad to get to the yacht and
enjoy the good lunch awaiting us. “Schnapps?” said Jack
to the men. “Oh, grazia tanto, Signore.” These two men
are a source of great amusement to us; they are studies
of the commonplace which one is apt to overlook, surrounded
as you are by all that excites the imagination to ethereal
heights.
Whilst we were laughing and talking during lunch a
great crash of glass brought us to our feet in consternation.
What was it ? At once the thought came: the drawing-
room skylight, of course. At a bound we were there. Yes,
’twas the skylight, broken in the centre part, through which
a man’s leg dangled. “Who’s that?” “It’s me, ma’am,”
said Walter in a frightened voice, regardless of grammar.
“Are you hurt?” “.No, ma’am, only I can’t get out.”
Poor Walter was soon taken from his unhappy position.
Looking around to see what damage was wrought I found
my beautiful bit of Derby smashed, and some of my books
very much scratched.
Thankful we were Lyal had not been beneath it. She
had been there only a few minutes before, and her toys
lay amongst the chaos of glass much damaged. Jack re-
marked laconically, “See what we poor sailors have to put
up with,”


It appears that Walter, helping to put up the fore-deck
awning, was standing on the skylight, and not having noticed
that the brass grating had been removed to be cleaned,
slipped and came through, of course. The damage done
was not great, but poor Gardiner, the steward, found it rather
troublesome to have to remove the carpet.
Saturday , April 30 th.
We made up our minds to see all that is left us, as there
were rumours of our leaving shortly for Trieste. We begin by
visiting the churches of the “Miracle” and “ Delto Orto.”
At the latter we saw Tintoretto’s “Last Judgment”—such
a mighty thought. The “ Presentation in the Temple ”is
beautiful. We noted in particular the mosaic steps, and
the breaking day, and the exquisite figure of the little
Madonna in the foreground. This church is well worthy
of a second visit.
During the afternoon we again visited the glass-
blowing workers, but having seen one you have seen all.
After dinner we persuade the gentlemen to take us to
St. Mark’s Square, to see it in all its dazzling glory of
electric light, its crowd, and its brilliant shops, at the doors
of which stand the shopkeepers with pestering invitation of
“ Only enter and look, the ladies need not buy.” Their
importunities at last drive us away into the midst of the
crowd, where we lose ourselves, to meet again at the foot
of the Campanile thirty minutes later, after much pushing


and hustling. “ Have you had enough of this?” asks Jack.
“Yes, thank you,” we meekly reply; “take us back, please.”
We are sorely punished for our curiosity, and very tired
and disappointed. Hailing a gondola, we get in and glide
over the waters to, the yacht, only too glad to return to our
haven of peace and rest.
Sunday , May \st.
I woke with the clang of church bells in my ear, to
see the sun radiantly streaming in at the port-hole, after
five days of gloomy rain. “It will be a lovely day,” calls
my companion from the other side of the curtain. “ Yes,
lovely, but oh, how tired I am ! ” After a struggle of. con-
science, as lengthy as Master Gobbo’s in “ The Merchant of
Venice,” I rise. The endless sightseeing of Venice begins
to tell upon us. It is nearly eleven before we have finished
breakfast. Going on deck, the gentlemen retire to the
smoking-room, and we- lean over the side of the yacht and
gaze at the scene before us. A sublime stillness, deep rest-
fulness, lies over the city. The golden balls that pinnacle
St. Marco shine against an azure sky flaked with fleecy
white clouds. Long shadows rise from the water and climb
fast up the facade of the noble "buildings as the sun rises
to its zenith. Nature and art blend in a harmonious whole
to crown this noble city its May-day queen. Turning
suddenly, I find a sailor at my elbow. “What is it, Smart?”
Touching his cap, he replies, “Books, please, ma’am.” “Oh,


to be sure; I had forgotten.” It was one of my Sunday
morning duties to give out to the sailors a weekly supply
of books from our small library —a little attention they
keenly appreciate by taking great care of our property.
After Lunch.
The day being hot we decide to be lazy, so hailing
Giovanni, we place cushions in the gondola, on which we
recline, shaded from the sun by the dark canopy over our
heads. We pass up the Grand Canal under the Rialto and
the railway bridges to the open lagoon beyond. Here I
ask Giovanni to give me my first lesson in propelling the
gondola. At first 1 find it very difficult to curve the long
flat oar to the under movement, but after a time I get into
the knack of it, and though our progress is slow, it is
pleasant to move this serpent-like boat at your will by the
turn of the wrist, giving a delightful feeling of power. As
we get more out into the lagoon the waves become larger,
and we bob up and down like a cork. I nearly lose
my balance, and have to retire from my post and give the
oar into more practised hands.
Having made a tour of Venice, we are taken across to
the Campo Santo, on an island which lies between Venice
and the Lido, but it proves uninteresting. The rest of
our voyage is through innumerable canals, which we had
not seen before. Drifting and floating in the cool shadows
under the carved balconies of palaces and arched bridges,


lulled by the soothing motion of the boat, we fall into a
dozing sleep, to be rudely awakened by Giovanni.
May 2nd.
The morning had not lost its freshness when we started
off to walk from St. Mark’s Square to the Ghetto. It is a
very long walk through narrow streets and over many bridges.
Arriving there at last, we saw nothing to mark it from any
other part of Venice, except the smell of burnt fishy oil.
There were few people about. Asking a boy if this was
really the Ghetto, he replied, “Si, si, Signora.” I gazed at
him and at the blank wall with its barred windows above,
and then at my companion. “What did we come to see?”
Fortunately he does not ask me to answer my own question,
but I was disappointed. I certainly had hoped to see some-
thing. I had looked in vain for a Shylock—at least, such
a one as Shakespeare had pictured. We retraced our steps
to the Rialto, “the heart of Venice,” which in a.d. Big
was the city of Rialto. The bridge retains its name though
the city is now called Venice. Looking down upon the
Grand Canal as it now stands, with its noble palaces, it is
difficult to picture in their place the wooden cabins with
thatched roofs which Cassiodorus gives such a graphic
description of.


, Afternoon.
Aimee and I order the dingey, and seating ourselves
in it, we start for a good hard pull up the Grand Canal,
and get. on famously until, nearing the Rialto, we are
paralysed by a loud voice in our ears, “ Stall—ah, stali.” We
find our dingey in collision with a private gondola. A
grave and reverend Signor smiles benevolently upon us,
but the boatmen grin, and to cover our confusion we
seize our oars and pull harder than before, nor rest until
we are under the broad shelter of the Rialto, where we
pant and pant, and cast longing eyes upon the baskets of
rich ripe fruits which are just being put on shore from the
boats for the morrow’s market. Gondolas flit past us, filled
with their tourist burdens, Venice being almost given over to
tourists at this season of the year. The sinking sun lights
up the facades of the old palaces and casts tender reflections
on the walls and on the busy workers in the barges, who
are transferring cases from the shore to their boats, which
will start on their journey in the Austrian Lloyd steamer
to-morrow. As the days go by we dread our leaving Venice.
To us no place is so full of romance, poetry, and beauty.
No wonder we linger here on this still May evening, for-
getful of time, until the lights begin to twinkle around us
and the air grows chill. We creep from our hiding-place
and reach the yacht as Turner solemnly announces dinner,
which we keep -waiting for twenty minutes while we scramble
into evening gowns.


Tuesday , May 3 rd.
•Cur last day in Venice. We rise early, that we may
not lose a minute of the precious time left us.
In the Scalzi Church, near the Station, the coloured
marbles seem to be the chief attraction, but the gaudiness
of its many chapels takes away from its beauty. (John
Ruskin is very severe on this church.) We next visited
Simon the Grand to see a wonderful Roman monument.
This church is small and very old, and not much visited by
tourists. The caretaker, who took much trouble to show us
everything, was very generous with his time, and when we
offered him the usual pourboire he seemed surprised. After
lunch St. Giovanni and St. Zachariah were visited. A
beautiful picture by Giovanni Bellini is at the latter. The
Sacristan was most courteous to us. There is an interest-
ing walk from here right to St. Mark’s Square, which we
decided to follow. Its course leads us over many bridges
and along alleys whose walls and windows were richly
covered with vines. We at last reached St. Mark’s Square,
where the boys were awaiting us. An ascent of the Campanile
di Marco was our next move. From here we bade adieu
to all our favourite haunts, and then sojourned to Florian’s
Cafe, where we had tea and fed the pigeons for the last time.
That evening Venice, as if to make our parting more
sad, was in her sweetest mood. The dainty coquette was
one mass of dazzling light more beautiful than the brightest
of diamonds. She lay “ a dream ” to sadden and soften


the heart of even an adamant. But hark! the musicians—they
have come to pay us their last visit. Soon they are on board,
about ten of them or more, wishing to make the night a
joy to all. The officers and crew are called on deck, seats
are provided, and a concert is soon in full swing.
Around our yacht the silent gondolas creep. They can
only be counted by their bright lights which hang at the
prow, and they are many. The soprano was singing such
a quaint little song, which we loudly applauded. We were
just going to ask the leader what it was, when he stepped up
and, with a graceful compliment, presented the little song which
he had written and dedicated to me as a parting souvenir.
How I thanked them I know not, but I do remember passing
round and shaking hands with each one, a VAnglaise.
Another link that binds my heart to this city and her gentle
sons. At 11 p.m. they had supper, and on departing the
leader asked me what they could do to show their gratitude to
the gentlefolks for all their goodness, so I asked them to
sing “Addio, mia bella Napoli” for us when they left the
yacht. With kindly wishes on both sides they pushed off,
and sang as they glided away into darkness—the last and
notes of the plaintive air yet rings in my ears and finds
an echo in my heart.
Wednesday, May 4th.
At eight o’clock we were up and were surprised on going on
deck to see the musicians in their boat alongside. They had


heard we were leaving this morning, and had come to serenade
us. The noise of the rising anchors nearly drowned their
voices, and the rain began to come down heavily. The
poor disappointed souls had to cover up their instruments
and fly and seek shelter on the shore.
The “Imogen’s” engine gave her first thump, thump;
the Trieste boat coming suddenly in, hid our poor musician
friends from us. Giovanni, meantime, was clinging to our
boat’s side holding in his hand a large paper parcel. “ Take it,
Signora,” he cried, “and don’t forget poor_ Giovanni.” With
tears in his eyes he passed on to the Trieste boat, and we
turned our boat’s head outwards, with sad hearts, from the
city and its kindly people.
Unfolding my paper parcel I found .it to contain a photo
of Giovanni and his gondola—poor Giovanni!
The domes of Venice faded away as a summer day
and sank into a faint line on the horizon.
We anchored off Trieste at 2.55, having steamed at
an economical speed. Distance, 76 knots. We had in-
tended leaving here early, but the Captain thinks it wise
to take in sufficient coal to last till Malta.
As the rain continues to fall heavily, ‘we do not go on
shore.
May sth.
We were awakened at 7.30 with a dreadful noise, to find
the coaling barge at work beside us. Jack and Mr. Lambert


went on shore after breakfast between the showers, but we
did not venture. Coaling finished, they began to take 1200
gallons of water.
We were ready to leave Trieste at 1,30. We have
engaged a pilot to help us along the Dalmatian coast, whither
we are bound, visiting Pola and Fiume en route.
The coast of Austria is very rugged and w r ild in appear-
ance, with houses dotting the summits of the hills, in many
places to the water’s edge; beautiful bays and many ruins,
Greek and Roman. Being quite close to the shore, we enjoy
the beautiful scenery.
At Trieste the people speak Italian or German, but in
Dalmatia Sclavonic Greek and Italian. Our having wasted
sixty eight hours at Manfredonia robs us of any chance of
seeing Athens, and we must now hurry on to Corfu, Malta,
and Gibraltar, if we want to get home in June to start on
our Norwegian cruise.
Left Trieste at 2 p.m., arrived at Pola 7.10 p.m. Distance
run, sixty miles.
Evening , May sth.5 th .
A moonlight night. The town looks beautiful, most
prominent being the ancient Arena, a graceful building much
resembling the Colosseum at Rome, built by Antonius, a.d
150. Our guide-book says 70 feet in height, 345 feet in
diameter, room for 15,000 spectators. In the moonlight it
had a most impressive appearance. Towards eleven o’clock


the fishermen’s boats began to glide into the bay, their red
lights looking like the eyes of some monster, creeping so
silently to their resting-places.
Morning ; May 6ih.
At ten we were all ashore. It seemed strange to use the
gig, after having grown accustomed to the gondolas.
We went to the Arena, but found it closed, so we
wandered through the small town, which seemed strangely
quiet and dull. In the main square we found a florist, and
ordered flowers and plants for the yacht. They have a curious
way of drying and painting in leaves and tropical flowers, the
ferns retaining their natural colours, while in some, iridescent
effects are added.
Passing the market-place, we came to an old ruin, which
proved to be a Roman temple of Augustus. After some
trouble we managed to get the custodian to open it for us,
upon which he disappeared and left us to roam about the
enclosure, which seems to be abandoned to birds and cats.
Though all the marbles were numbered and marked, no one
seemed to know where a catalogue was to be had; we
therefore concluded that one must be in- course of publi-
cation.
The temple contained many fine torsos of Romans, the
draperies of the female figures being particularly good; sar-
cophagi, with glass urns showing to view the bones and ashes
of human remains. The tracing on some of the stones was


perfect—bunches of flowers, leaves, scrolls, and on one an
exquisitely carved pig. I cannot explain the feeling that
came over me when I looked upon this waste and decay of
ancient grandeur, but it was one of pity and yet of joy to
have seen it. How many houses would these stones and
pillars help to beautify? Why should they lie here & sad
memento of man’s best works? Next, we went up a street of
steps that leads to the castle grounds, now used for military
purposes. As we were not allowed entrance to the castle
walls, we contented ourselves by walking in the rough gardens
surrounding them, gathering grasses and wild ivy. This depot
is the largest naval depot in Austria; but it is very difficult
to gain permission to visit it, and our time was too short to
make an application.
There is little else to interest a passing visitor, so at
lunch-time we leave the bay and its arena and straight,
ugly barracks and shipbuilding yards behind us, and pass
on down an uninteresting coast, reaching Fiume outer-harbour.
Run, 56 miles.
7th May .
A heavy thunder and lightning storm passed over us
during the night. A strong bora started to blow. For an
hour we had a rare tossing, but on nearing Dalmatia the
sea calmed suddenly. We were able to appreciate and
enjoy the novel sensation of our first acquaintance with
Dalmatia. Passing a few islands, we took a sudden turn


WjK. I A
I ri
1 | ~'.jSu Lj£w* "Ti r;, m#— mu,, 11 _ - _1" r -~- •-
I v T^Bgr t wiBn i TlHHBWttrnrr j i niiifflwM -
JH J AJBl*
i, m* )H9PSafc
ZARA.


to the right and entered the historic harbour where the
French and Venetians had landed, after the galleys of
St. Mark had burst the chain that closed the entrance.
Distance run from Fiume, 82 miles.
Zara , Zth May.
We are directed by the harbour-master, who came to
meet us in his boat, to moor the “Imogen” to a buoy
just under some pleasure-gardens, over whose walls the
inhabitants gaze down upon us with curjous interest. In
a short time the gig is alongside, and we soon land where
the small trading boats are moored, the water being very
deep even to the quay.
The town of Zara is surrounded by high walls, to enter
which we pass through the Porta di Terra Serina. The
Venetian Lion of St. Mark stands as a sentinel over the
centre of the arch, and on either side a figure, grotesquely
carved, of a little St, • George, supposed to be designed by
a Venetian architect, Sammicheli,
Up through a long narrow street which is cobbled,
and the pavement of which is only two feet wide: we prefer
the rough road to rubbing our shoulders against the houses.
The Italian inhabitants are familiar forms. With easy
grace they 101 l out of doors and windows and gaze upon
you with lazy indifference.
Reaching the end of the street, we again come upon
the city walls. On our left is the garden before mentioned,
101
AND YACHTING WAYS.


raised almost to the level of the walls. The band is playing,
and men, women, and children are enjoying themselves
in easy, simple fashion. Passing through the Porta, with
its everlasting Lion of Venice, which meets the eye at every
turn, we come upon a group of rural police in their bright
scarlet jackets with massive silver fastenings. Carts, carriages,
and many horses are here waiting to be hired. No traffic
of any kind beyond a hand-truck is allowed within the city.
Zara being so small a place, this cannot cause much incon-
venience, and adds to the comfort by the quiet thereby
gained. Walking by the sea for some time, on the right we
come to the soldiers’ depot and some quaint ancient buildings;
two friars of the Franciscan Order pass us in their solemn
brown garb and bare feet; a stream of carts laden with
gaily-dressed peasants flash by, leaving us gasping in the
cloud of dust they leave behind them, and are soon lost
to sight. The Albino village is before us, and we pass
through its dirty, neglected streets of ill-built houses. Poor
children and dogs play together on dust-heaps. Intermarrying
with the Italians has erased wffiat was once a pure Albino
village. Its women and children are now as dark as
night.
A sharp walk back over the same road brings us again
to the entrance of the Porta. We turn to the left along
the grand promenade, where there are modern buildings for
the housing of the Italian officers and their wives. These
face the sea, commanding a fine view of the bay and the


hills beyond. Dainty pleasure craft are gently tossing at their
buoys near the landing.
Cafe agli Speech! is now reached. This seems to be
the heart of the city. Seating ourselves under the gay
yellow and red striped awning before the Cafe, we sip our
coffee and watch the bright scene before us. Being a holiday,
Zara is in her gayest attire. The Morlacco peasants with
hand-carts are selling fruit and wine; other wares are shown
along the pavement in tempting forms. Around us the hand-
some Austrian officers in full uniform, massively embroidered
in silver and gold, peep from the corner of their eyes, and
smiling, show their white teeth, chat gaily, and with great
freedom. This square leads into another where the scene
is even brighter. If I remember, it is called Piazza dell’ Erbe.
■ A fair is in full swing, reminding us of one we had
seen in Holland last year, the colouring being much the
same, though the costumes are quite different.
The women here wear full blue skirts, white shirts, and
dark jackets (zouave shaped) richly embroidered in many
coloured silks. Their aprons, worked even more gaily than
their jackets, are stiff and look almost like tapestry. A cap
of red cloth, around which coins and silver ornaments are
hung. Stockings of thick yellow wool; the shoes are sandal-
shaped, of undressed leather, often made from pig’s skin
(the hair, being left on, stands up like bristles), but the toes
are brought to such a point they turn up in Turkish
style—otherwise the shoe is a corruption of the old sandal.


In their ears are large gold hoops, and the neck and arms
are clasped with very handsome filigree work, silver and
gold. The men look most grotesque, their pantaloons fitting
very close to the figure. Some wear large capes with sleeves
and a long hood attached; these are thrown carelessly over
the left shoulder. The same style of cape was worn in
England by the poorer classes during Elizabeth’s reign.
The amount of jewellery worn by the Morlacco peasant
is truly wonderful.
You see the same custom in the interior of Norway.
There the poorest peasantry cling to their heirlooms, even
when needing food, and it is only when the merchant pene-
trates to their mountainous homes and tempts them with
warm clothing, that they will part with their ornaments.
Even in rags they stand covered with beautiful belts and
ornaments of rare kinds. I have in my possession a silver
ornament some three hundred years old, of rude make, but
beautiful in design, that came from the Telemarken district,
which gives some idea of the wealth of their ornaments.
In the Piazza is a single fluted marble column with a
foliated capital surmounted by a lion. We were attracted
to it, seeing chains with hinged rings, which proved on
further inspection to have been an ancient pillar to which in-
solvent debtors were attached.
The Duomo is wonderfully beautiful, and we spent some
time examining its architectural graces.
Once again in the sunshine, we were following a nurse


with a baby reposing on a dainty pillow, decked with lace
and pale blue ribbon; on seeing her turn into a quiet little
church, we followed. Around the font were grouped six or
eight nurses with babies. A christening was about to take
place, and we decided to stay and see the ceremony.
What a pretty group they made! Each nurse had on
her best attire, even to her new ribbon tied around her neck,
which was bare to the bosom, each dark, clear face beaming
with pleasure. As the Greek priest in his high shovel hat,
his cassock gaily hung with a blue scarf, came dowm the aisle
with his attendant, there was a flutter of petticoats. Rising,
the nurses all came round the font, uncovering the head of
each baby. The ceremony was short and mechanical, The
priest, a benevolent old man with a very long white beard,
took each child in his arms, received our favourite last,
and gave her a name longer than her own wee self.
We kissed the babe and gave the nurse a silver piece,
which is supposed to bring the child great good fortune.
From the church we came into the Piazza dell’ Erbe, a grand
promenade, and passing under acacia trees which were in
full bloom, we found we were at our starting-point, and went
oh board for tea. Took a long row in the afternoon, and read
in the evening. Rain threatening.
Monday , gth May.
Woke at five, the “ Imogen ” just off. Rain was falling
very heavily. When we got on deck we found the coast scenery


very bare. Passing villages of no interest, we arrive at and
pass Sebenico at 10.30. We drop anchor off Scardonia. At
11.20 the gig is ordered, and we start for a pull up to the
Kerka Falls—a pull of two miles. All around us are high
hills, very bleak and bare, but nobly impressive. The current
was against us, but we soon arrived in sight of the Falls.
Seen from the boat they look like ivory or frozen water
arranged in terraces, but on a nearer approach you hear the
roar and rush of water, and feel the fine spray in your face.
Leaving the boat with a boy in charge, we took the sailors
along with us, and climbed by easy steps to the third terrace.
Here was a truly magnificent sight. The water fell from a
height of 190 feet before us, and passed rapidly over the
terraces below, reminding me of the American girl who, when
she first saw Niagara, exclaimed, “Gosh! what a splash.”
Behind us the hills were densely covered with foliage, and
perched above us was a mill, a white building sprinkled with
mustard-coloured stuff, which on inquiry turned out to be
insect powder made from the weeds which abound on the
rocks.
Mounting still higher, we arrived at the lake which
supplies this grand “splash,” and seated ourselves under a
tall poplar tree to enjoy the glorious scene around. Fig-trees
there were in plenty, and the graceful yellow iris held their
heads up proudly in their island home in mid-stream. Before
us, divided by water from the mainland, on a narrow strip
about 100 yards in length, a profusion of wild snowflakes grew


J 4. ft ,
if |ii All . *.
TOfSk.# . . . M I p| WWk | m a?.--
V' .jfe ' r TWi' ?rnjf*-' ■■
- v a. •:
>".• >rv ’ w • ;V TtSL/ ■
■ \ 1 waih % «> „ ■&^3£'*£sSL.
‘ * .
THE FALLS OF KIRKA.


unheeded. Bratcher, one of our sailors, waded in and
brought big armfuls to us. Though past their first glory, they
were still very beautiful.
Descending, we examined the engine-house where the
water is forced to the top of the hill to supply Sebenico and
its railway station with water. We were much amused at the
appearance of the boys and men engaged at the insect-powder
mill: in their white suits turned to mustard colour, they looked
such funny objects in contrast to their neighbours—the miller
and his men. The peasants bring their grain from the moun-
tains around on the backs of mules, and wait whilst the
miller grinds it, returning at evenfall to their homes.
Our journey back was quiet and peaceful. Telling the
sailors to pull easily, we had plenty of time to enjoy the
shadows of the hills around. We did not go ashore at Scar-
donia, being anxious to reach Sebenico before the night set
in. At 2.25 we were off, and passed through the beautiful
fiords. Scardonia, with her red-tiled roofs and campanile
perched on dull, grey rocks, with wild mountainous back-
ground and a river of crystal, formed a beautiful picture.
While viewing with admiration this scene we were sud-
denly ushered into another splendid fiord.
Sebenico is not large, but, almost more than any other
town on the Dalmatian coast, it is rich in material for the
sketcher, and, viewed as a whole, is extremely picturesque.
Here lay before us an imposing mass of old white houses, piled
up the mountain-side, with the great Cathedral in the middle.


The massive towers of the Castle of St. Anna is the highest
point of the town. Two other old forts, weathered to a
rich mellow brown colour, crown the barren summits of the
loftiest hills in the background. Nor is it, as the author of
Dalmatia the Quarneo and Ishia (from which we quote)
observes, less picturesque when seen from within than when
seen from without. The Cathedral, which has some very fine
carvings, however, is the only building of exceptional interest
as a work of art, and to this we direct our steps as soon as
we leave the yacht. “ The architectural history of the
Duomo may be read with tolerable exactitude,” says this
delightful author, “ from the stones themselves.” It is evi-
dently the work of two architects and two periods, and in
the interval which divides them occurred the great artistic
revolution of the Renaissance, so that while the earlier work
is in regular Italian Gothic, the later is in a style resembling
that which we connect with the name of Pietro Lombardo,
his sons and pupils. The different styles were made so
ingeniously to dovetail into each other as to form a not
inharmonious whole, with which we were highly pleased. A
long last look, and then we passed up a steep ascent through
several dirty streets to the Campo Santo, which stands on a
hill above the town, where we had an extensive view of the
landscape, its steep pointed hills, its sunny valleys, and the
deep blue water that ran far away into the distance amongst
the islands. It was a glorious panorama.


lShUk! / BB|Wf ii\rtr * N - ‘ym!
TRAU.


Tran , May \ofh.
A small trading town, prettily situated, and most pic-
turesque from the water, but dreadfully poor on near approach,
though some of its buildings are magnificent specimens of
the Venetian period. It is the most unique and mediaeval
on this coast and worth studying. The Piazza, the Cathedral,
and the Public Court of Justice are all grouped together—
a picture in form and colour to delight the artist’s eye. The
Cathedral is on the right, with a superb porch and exquisite
carvings. Pushing aside the heavy green screen, we pass
under its edge to find that a service is going on and the
Host is being raised, we therefore quietly depart and return
to the Piazza.
The town, rapidly falling into decay, forms but poor
shelter to those who dwell therein. We were much in-
terested in watching the women spinning the yarn, which they
afterwards weave into the so-called Roxia cloth, worn all
through the adjacent. countries ; also a coarse canvas used
by the fishermen for their sails. Poor souls! how hard it
seemed for them to be working at their hand-looms in close,
stifling low rooms with earthen floors. Birmingham goods,
with their common cheapness, have not penetrated here,
and you can carry from this little town of Trau a remem-
brance of your visit without that everlasting stamp, Made in
Germany.”
The women’s dress consists of a coarse brown skirt, of
the roughest make, white chemisette, and a rough jacket
109
AND YACHTING WAYS.


without sleeves. On the head a folded linen cloth. They
have a pleasing face, deep-set eyes (mostly dark in colour),
coarse black hair bound in braids around the head, features
almost classical, olive complexion, and wear sandals; but
most pleasing of all is their gait—so proud and free. The
children are lightly clad, wearing only one covering. In the
centre of the town there stands a large oven. To this the
people bring their bread, for the baking of which they pay a
small sum. We got there just as the baking was finished, and
were much interested in watching the going and coming of
the owners of the crisp brown loaves.
The Captain of the Port sought us out to see if he could
be of any service. He was most courteous, and, when leaving,
saw us off with many kindly wishes. We were sorry to leave
the quaint little town, one of the few not overrun by the
everlasting tourist.
“The Traurini are endowed with susceptibility for every
virtue; they are lovers of equity and justice, and haters of
fraud and deceit; they are skilful, benign, polite, and disposed
to religion and piety; and they are not less witted in all the
sciences than endowed with prudence and capacity for manag-
ing affairs of importance.” So says Farlate, with whom we
heartily agree.
From Trau to Spalato is only a run of 50 miles, and it
would only be half that distance if the bridge that spans the
island of Trau to the mainland had been made high enough,
or the opening wide enough, to allow large boats to pass. As
110
YACHTING DAYS


■« \L
XW. 1 -
J&Lr-' ‘' A
Vir.^ti^^airrrrr
idX a SBfe^M**MwHBM lt -- ; 4^3 | V, 1 sT .. • ■ ■ ■ I
,« j,mjyr« ijTx' : ”' ’■ : ||fflMP**yy£ n""Mipn
SPALATO.


it is, you have to go outside the island of Bua and around it,
instead of the short cut by Golona. We had a delightful run
round, and did not object to the extra distance.
Arriving at Spalato on May roth, at 2.15, we find a very
fine harbour, with many ships, naval-and merchantmen. The
busy throng of workmen employed upon the huge breakwater,
and the crowded quay, give a very prosperous appearance to
this city. We had great difficulty in finding a guide. Eventu-
ally one was secured from the Hotel de Ville, and we set out in
earnest to enjoy the ruins of Diocletian fame. First to view
comes a large marble fountain—modern, and possessing no
special interest. Along the busy quay we see the Fayade,
originally the front of Diocletian’s Palace, and much built over
by modern tenements, sheltering under the strong masonry of
the once glorious palace. Entering a covered passage, and
passing through an old gate, w’e come upon an aged man
seated on a rough stool. Old leather and thongs in long
strips, and lasts of rough make are strewn around him. He
is making the foot covering worn all over Dalmatia, called
opanka, otherwise Greek sandal. lat once buy two pairs for
a trifle, at which the old man is much pleased. To the left
we turn through the handsome Piazza delli Sinori, pass the
gay Cafe Trocole, pass shops filled with clothing of the
brightest colourings, jewellers, cake shops —in fact, shops of
all kinds. The men are dressed in a curious costume, semi-
Turkish, and they are seated in their doorways and windows,
busy upon bright silver wares, or embroidery of beautiful


colour and design. By the Porto Farca we enter the Palace,
and enjoy its wondrous beauty in bits, for the Palace is built
into on all sides, and in many parts difficult to see. For those
who love architecture, let them read The Ruins of Spalato in
Dalmatia , by Adams, with illustrations, many of which are
engraved by Bartolozzi. The Cathedral is a circular edifice
with colonnades. The interior is circular, and covered by a
dome. Columns of porphyry and granite richly carved in
stone. The interior of the building is very dark, and best
seen on a bright day. It is supposed by some to be originally
a temple to Jupiter, and by others, Diocletian’s tomb-house.
We next visited the Museum, where there are some antiquities
from Salona. The caretaker, a woman, showed me some ex-
quisitely-worked linen (by the sale of which she made her
living), and she very kindly showed us round the room, which
was filled with sarcophagi, among which is the so-called sarco-
phagus of Diocletian, and a handsome collection of coins. On
the walls were prints and photographs of the many beautiful
statues that have been found at Salona and sent to all parts of
Italy. One I recognised as the lovely “Ariadne,” of which
the original is in Rome. Herr Bulich, the Director, has done
much towards the success of this collection, which is one of
great beauty. The streets of Spalato are very narrow, but at
almost every turn you come upon fragments of Venetian
architecture; palaces of the old nobility; court-yards with
elegant windows and graceful staircases. The streets are full
of life and bustle. On reaching the quay we were attracted by


2, \a% i ■ I,- 1 w • ir .; '• \
f |fc j* <^B^E3Mw^BMlt?l^raysSWSn^R^v'ft A. - .V «k ' •Sp
•* j\jt *■* *
GRAVOSA.


a weird noise. A small crowd had gathered round a man who
sat in a squat position. On the ground in front of him lay
his hat, into ’ which the amused natives threw coins. The
instrument he was playing was of rough shape, the bowl being
scooped from a solid piece of wobd; the finger-board much
resembled the guitar in shape, and over the bowl w r as drawn
a coarse parchment; the gut strings were drawn over a bow
bridge, and from this strange instrument these weird sounds
proceeded. ’Twas the same that Homer had listened to many
a time and oft. On seeing strangers the musician came forward
and struck up a new tune in a high falsetto, at which the
crowd screamed with delight. Desiring to possess this curious
instrument, we began to bargain for it. He demanded seven
guilders—we smiled and passed to our boat; he followed,
and at last pushed it into our hands for “three guilders,
signor.”
During the evening a note came on board from one of
the Austrian officers of the corvette, requesting the owner
to sell to him some English tobacco which he much appre-
ciated, but could not procure in Austria. We were much
amused at the request, and only too happy to present him with
some.
We leave Spalato at 5 a,m. t Wednesday, for Gravosa,
which we reached after a run of 104 miles.
“What country, fiiends, is this?
This is Illyria, Lady,”
1 13
AND YACHTING WAYS.


May ii th.
Passing the islands of Ginphamia and Calamota we steer
between lofty hills right up to Gravosa, and here cast anchor
at 1.50. Run, 104 miles. The mountains around are very
impressive, and being shut in as we are, the scene has a
lake-like appearance. The in which Gravosa lies is
very beautiful. Villas of various sizes are scattered about
on the lowlands and almost to the mountain tops. These
pretty homes are surrounded with beautiful gardens, in which
the palm and cypress trees play an important part in the
beauty of the scene.
Besides being'beautiful, Gravosa serves as a safe harbour
for Ragusa, of which -we will speak anon. Luncheon des-
patched, we are ready to explore, and landing from our boat
on the primitive stage, we are first attracted by a wonderful
plane tree, which is in its full glory, and under which are seated
a handsome officer and a very pretty girl. They are not in
the mood to enjoy the glorious May day. He wears a vexed
look and is pulling at his long brown moustaches ; and she,
sweet maiden, in her pretty cream frock with its bands of
black velvet, wears a troubled look and toys with her dainty
parasol, making hieroglyphics in the sand. In the back-
ground sits a fat dame with one eye asleep and the other
on the fair maid. It was the old, old story.
Securing a carriage, we make for Ragusa, which lies a
mile and a half over the hill from Gravosa. It is a pleasant
journey for pedestrians, and the less energetic way is by


•*£ ’tsUJ L Sf k> k *u#j />%.w tt^^^’cyfcwZ* 1 . Mto* JHH
yT ;■* Bp *,', -»— JHm s®^^JL. rf^r<
■ I v v m ifcifflmt «5Sr* %1H "*>• %#t-Tjf« 4 V
\ ~ HI * V
GATEWAY. RAGUSA.


carriage, but I must confess the walkers had the best of it,
for to dive into the copse and gather the sweet flowers that
grew in wildness around was a great joy. The rustling in
the tall pine trees, the lazy hum of the bee and fly, the sweet-
scented air, the long white road up which the horses crept—
their pace in keeping with the summer heat—and the glorious
view that met the eye when the summit was reached, made
the soul glad and the heart dance with delight.
We reached the pretty suburb of Pile, with its well-kept
villas and bright flowering gardens. The downward , path
is very pleasant, leading through an avenue of very fine
mulberry trees, which ends in the Piazza, a favoured resort
of the inhabitants, where they come every day and take their
afternoon coffee, sitting around the clean little tables over-
shadowed by the thick foliage, listening to the delightful
music of the band.
Continuing, we crossed a small drawbridge, and stopped
at the square tower of Porta Pile, overgrown with ivy, almost
covering the niche which contains the figure of St. Bargio,
the patron-saint of Ragusa, Tall poplar trees and firs on
either side of the bridge grow to a great height, the latter
overtopping their ancient neighbour, the sleepy old tower,
and soaring to the sky above; while a veritable bower of
small flowers bloom wildly at their feet. The city wall can
scarce be seen, so lovingly has the ivy clung to it. Passing
under the fortifications, the scene changes, and the grand
Corso, with its stately buildings and quaint windows filled


with gay flowers, its tall towers and bright red roofs shining
dazzlingly in the sun; the stores, with their low arched
windows wherein the wares are exhibited, filling the base of
the tall buildings whose shadows fall on the flat stone-paved
street, through which heavily-laden carts drawn by shaggy
ponies wend their way until they are suddenly brought to
a standstill before La Sponsa, the Custom House, by the loud
report of the driver’s whip—brings before the traveller’s eyes
a unique picture of mediaeval life. Here we reached the end
of the Corso and passed under the belfry tower, out by the
old gateway of Porta palace to the ancient harbour of the
Republic (a very dirty place), where in rough weather the
waves are thrown to a height of a hundred feet, wrenching
huge stones out of their setting in the breakwater, and causing
much damage to the small craft; for no boat over 100 tons
could find shelter here. These boats do all the trading
between Ragusa and Gravosa. Fish of good quality abound
here. The boats having just come in, we see assorted heaps
of silvery fish, around which eager crowds of purchasers are
bargaining.
Retracing our steps, we entered the nearest cate, seated
ourselves on the comfortable chairs on the raised terrace,
and ordered coffee. We enjoyed our rest, and watched with
interest the people as they passed. At the fountain of Ornifico
de la Cava the women were filling their bronze pitchers and
gossiping. Jack fixed his camera in their direction, which
resulted in the picture facing this page. Sitting there in con-


__ <r I
i IN It 7 '% in ||j ; i fl | |
OLD FOUNTAIN, RAGUSA.


templative mood, on this still May day, we wandered in mind
to the past. The origin of Ragusa is vague. It is supposed
to have been founded in 656 by refugees from old Ragusa,
ancient Epidaurus, at that time destroyed by a tribe of
Slavonians. Jackson dates it 449 a.d. It is, however,
certain that they did found a city here, for they have left
traces of their language and culture. The Byzantine period,
567; her submission to Venice, 998; then the transfer to
Louis of Hungary of the Dalmatian territory, to her inde-
pendence in 1415; the short reign of the French, and their
ultimate expulsion by the English and Austrians, brings us
almost to the present day. As we looked out upon it now
it was difficult to realise the struggles and hardships of its
past history: the severe earthquakes of 1520 and 1667; the
plague of 1526, which is said to have carried off 20,000 of
her people. After continuous struggles to maintain her
independence, Ragusa at last settled under Austrian rule,
the rulers of Dalmatia. •
Tempus fugit —the sun now began his downward
course, and there was still more to see, so we passed on.
Going to the left, we passed the Rector’s Palace (for
this town had been modelled on the lines of Venice, an
aristocratic Republic, and was governed by its Rector). The
palace is a massive grey building, two storeys high, with
six rounded arches at the base, exquisitely carved, forming
a graceful arcade, richly chased Gothic windows, with
bright green shutters, and a red-tiled roof topped with
117
AND, YACHTING WAYS.


gables. The museum inside is interesting and instructive.
The Churches of St. Biagio and the Duorno are worthy of
more attention than we had time to give them, but we
thoroughly enjoyed the little we did see The market-place
on the left is picturesque, and especially grand is the view
seen from the steps of the Cathedral: the Piazza, the Rector’s
Palace, La Sponsa and the tall belfry, the whole of which is
backed by Mount Sergio, that lies so close to the town as
to almost overshadow it. The people were most kind—too
kind, in fact, as I found to my inconvenience when I
attempted to take a photograph of the place. They rushed
at me, offering to hold everything, until I almost despaired.
My French was bad, my Italian worse. At last I resorted to
plain English and a little physical persuasion; but alas ! even
then a boy and a Dalmatian dog were too much for me, as
the picture facing this page will testify. I shouldered my
camera, made for the carriage, and rejoined the others. On
reaching the summit of the hill, we looked back upon the
scarlet roofs of the good town. The overgrown grasses and
sweet flowerets formed a charming frame to the picture which
lay at our feet. To the right, the vast ocean, bathed in soft
evening light, was spread out before us.
“ Whilst green woods overcanopied the wave
Which, like a toil-worn labourer,
Leaps to shore,
To meet the kisses of the flowerets there.”
—Shelley.
118
YACHTING DAYS


rf 4 hi in
MARKET PLACE, RAGUSA.


We leave Gravosa at 6,5 to-morrow morning.
May 12 th.
At eight o’clock, on coming on deck, we are surprised and
delighted with the picturesque beauty of the Brocche (lakes),
with their high mountains and deep shadows all reflected in
the still waters beneath, and over which the yacht glides like
a graceful bird to the point before us, on which is perched
the small town of Castlenuovo. The walls surrounding it
look formidable, rising sheer out of the waters, and, like all
fortifications on that coast, are built of grey stone, but so
mellowed by age to the natural colour of the rocks as to make
it difficult to say where nature ceases and the hand of man
begins. The ivy has mantled it in every shade of green,
drooping almost to the water’s edge. Fort Bpagnuolo, which
holds a commanding site on the hill above, was built by the
order of Charles V., and has in its time done good work
against the Venetians, Spaniards, and Turks. The whole is
backed by mountains, which rise higher and higher as we near
our anchorage.
“Let go,” sounds the sonorous voice of the captain.
Splash, splash, the anchors go into the water, leaving a
seething mass of white foam arountl us. “ Gig away,” is the
next order. “Aye, aye, sir.” “Gig ’way,” sounds from the
far end of the yacht. We stand ready for shore, round the
gangway, whilst four sturdy lads man the gig, and are soon at
the steps. We scramble in, and after a few strokes of the


oars, we round the old tower, and scramble out again, on to
the rocky breakwater. Not a soul about—the place seems
deserted. We turn and face the steep rough road in front of
us. Up this we now creep, like ants, after many gasps, and
pause on the platform above to enjoy the glorious view, still
wrapped in morning mists. To the left, the old ruined castle
(shrouded in ivy, its broken battlements telling the sad tale of
its past battles) stands picturesque and grand in solitary state.
“ When the sinking buttress and mouldering tower
Seem but a spectre of former power:
Then the ivy clusters around the wall,
* * * * *
Striving in beauty and youth to dress,
The desolate place in its loveliness.”
The town, if it can be so called, possesses little attrac-
tion, consisting only of a small piazza in which stands an old
fountain, backed by white stone houses of no pretension, so
we steer east, down the path skirting the gulf, and dip into
wooded valleys where the oak tree flourishes, and sweet cle-
matis vitella (travellers’ joy) reeves itself from tree to tree, and
“ Where the banks are wet with drops of morning dew,
The gentle violet steals out in weed of blue,
***>•*
Violets dim, but sweeter than the lid of Juno’s eye or
Cythian breath.”
The tramp, tramp of many feet and the rattle of the
kettledrum bring us to a standstill. Over the road we


j~ / y
i* - % '. - ! S J* - jj H^SfedSfc^M-:,
‘t*! *T*" ' 4' . f v* >
$rf> -jv ■BB
CATTARO.


have just traversed, come, in a cloud of dust, about eighty
soldiers, officers and men, all on foot. They are a weedy,
weary, undersized looking set of men. They surely must
be recruits! Their blue-grey uniform with linen facing is
not a becoming one. They soon outstep us, and we are
again left in placid content, to enjoy our peep of the
beautiful gulf (through the leafy branches), which promises
well for our row back. We had ordered the gig to meet
us at Savina, whither we are bound. A quarter of a mile
further we come upon a large green opening in the wood,
which runs to the water’s edge. A massive stone building
comes in sight. This must be the military hospital we were
told of. No, that is at Meljina, still further on. This then
must be the monastery of St. Savina, which contains glorious
treasures in silver, gold, and very valuable old lace. Sour
grapes, Master Reynard, they are not for you! It is necessary
to make arrangements before visiting St. Savina, but we
had not the time at our- disposal to procure a permit. Dear,
dear, how I would love to have a chat with that nice jolly
monk standing yonder in the door! The weary recruits
who are camping here present a more cheerful appearance
than when we saw them on the . road. A bright fire burns
in their midst, and breakfast is well on its way. One poor
fellow, footsore, has taken off his boots, and sits with his
bare feet tucked into the cool moss. Passing two old
churches (like twins), and which stand side by side, with
little beauty, if any, save that which is reflected from the


mountains, embowering them in green, we follow a narrow
footpath and reach the water’s edge, where our boat is
waiting. Balancing ourselves on a shaky plank, which juts
into the water, we reach our seats, glad to rest after our
long walk, for the sun has reached its zenith when we
steer for the “ Imogen.”
Leaving this place at 11.45, we pass into the Bay of
Troddod. Passing wooded slopes, dotted with bright-roofed
villages (each crowned by its graceful campanile), through still
waters, which deepen in colour as the mountains close in
around us, we round a point and pass through the Bay of
Risano, with its ancient town Rhizinium on the left. Another
turn, and we enter the deep, sad Bay of Cattaro and cast
anchor. From Gravosa to Cattaro, via Castlenuovo, is a run of
49 miles. What a noble sight it presents, encircled by moun-
tains ! —these sterile limestone giants rise to a great height,
topped by Mount Lovcen, 5,770 feet, which thrusts her
finely-cut lines into the deep blue sky, Cattaro lies at their
feet, on the margin of the gulf. Above the town, a wall runs
zigzag up the mountain-side, forming the steep, wearisome
path that leads to the dominion of the Montenegrins on the
other side of Cattaro. Boats come clustering around us,
offering fruit and vegetables for sale. Judging by the sur-
rounding landscape, one wonders where they have managed
to grow even these poor specimens. After lunch we are
landed on the quay, which is full of life and bustle, it being
market-day. The Montenegrins and Bocchesi from the moun-


tains and the seashore have come offering their wares for
sale. Few women were to be seen, but these few were
quaintly though roughly clad, befitting their' stern surroundings
—an under-skirt of dark cloth, over which hung, almost to
the knees, a white woven jacket without sleeves, an apron
richly covered with silk embroidery caught under the wide
scarf which binds the waist, a linen shirt, and a gay zouave
clasped below the bosom by a large silver buckle of unique
design. The head-covering resembles a Venetian cap, from
under which a soft gauze veil falls to the, waist. The feet
are covered with thick white hose and open sandal shoes of
pig-skin with upturned points. They carry themselves with
an easy, natural grace. The face is intelligent, the eyes bright
and keen, the nose aquiline. An abundance of smooth dark
hair drawn off the low forehead is gathered into a knot at
the back of the head, or plaited in one long strand hanging
down the back. The lips are thin and wear an upward
turn, sometimes ending in dimples at the corners of the mouth.
Most remarkable is the chin, which is as firm as a man’s.
The hands, beautifully shaped, bear innumerable rings chased
in gold and silver. The thumb has a marked tendency tc
turn backwards. The nails are filbert shaped and white, in
strong contrast to the darker skin. From prince to peasant,
all wear the native dress, which much resembles that worn by
the Bocchesi, the only distinction being the prince’s initials,
worn in their caps. On the way to the Porta della Marina
we come upon a group of Montenegrins, tall, graceful limbed


men, with loose pantaloons of dark cloth, full, like a skirt
caught at the knee and buckled. Their foot covering is
the same as that of the women. A close-fitting white
jacket lapping to the knee, and a long sleeve exquisitely
worked with silver and gold thread; around the thighs a
massive leather belt studded with polished stone (found on the
surrounding heights), into which are tucked daggers, knives,
and the richly inlaid yataghan ; a long scarf shawl, heavily
fringed at the ends, hangs from the shoulders and completes
this graceful costume. The men’s faces are longer and thinner
than those of the women; the deep-set eyes have an intent
look in them. A firm mouth and chin gives the keynote
to their character —that of an unconquerable race. When we
do enter the town we find it small and cramped, a mere
fringe of the mountains towering above, making even the
church towers look diminutive. The streets are narrow and
dark; the buildings, save for a carved window or door here
and there, are ordinary and very disappointing in comparison
with other towns we had visited. We enter a shop wishing
to purchase a complete native costume, but every article is
at such a price as to prohibit our buying any. We pass
the cathedral of Trifuome, a building of the ninth century,
standing in a small square, which contains an old cross,
shown in the treasury as being that which blessed the army
which relieved Vienna and defeated the Turks in 1683
(Jackson).
A visit to the photographer’s, where we obtain some


CORFU.


very good photographs, and then we depart for the yacht,
buying on the way, from a mountaineer, a very fine
specimen of the studded belt above described. It is a
regret to us that we did not ascend the zigzag path which
leads to Cetinje, or our time would have been well repaid
could we have taken a walk to Ddbrota, lying along the
water’s edge. At 5.30 we are again on board. An hour
later we are once more on the wide ocean bound for
Corfu.
Corfu , May isth.
Friday morning. After a beautiful passage we arrived
at Corfu at 10.40. Run, 200 miles. The roadstead is full
of ships, traders from every clime; one, a large steamer, is
unloading (for no other term expresses it) a cargo of Arabs
and Turks. They, their children, bottles and pans, were
speedily sent down the narrow gangway into small clumsy
rowing boats, which were packed off in a confusion and
noise, bargaining and swearing all in one breath. One man
had six wives and five children ranging from two years of
age. The women were closely veiled, so we could not
judge as to the old sinner’s taste, though we could stand to
quantity. They were transhipped to a smaller boat. No
doubt the old fellow was moving his harem into fresh fields.
On our left a cargo of cows and sheep was being transhipped.
It was a sad sight, so few people connected with the cattle
trade realise the sufferings of these poor dumb animals, which


are tossed about from hand to hand like bales of wool. The
yacht is to coal, so we are ordered on shore. On landing,
guides and beggars besieged us. Choosing the biggest carriage
to suit the comfort of our men, we start with an agreement of
four francs an hour (experience had by this time taught us
this necessary precaution). Soon we were rattling through
narrow streets filled with noisy crowds, passing the Hotel
Constantinople, the Esplanade, the Royal Palace, through the
square studded with statues of notables, and along the Strada
Marina (a beautiful road, well made and pleasant to drive
upon, and close to the water’s edge), we arrived at the village
Analipsis. A few poor houses with their bright gardens
and fruit trees forming pretty pictures The children follow
us for some distance, begging us to buy flowers, and mar the
enjoyment of the drive. Tis best to discourage them at the
first attack. The olive groves are wonderfully beautiful, and
delightful to pass under. Flowers and foliage are in great
luxuriance, gum trees with boughs so long that their silver
leaves sweep the ground. We arrive at Kardaki. Here we
stand on a high plateau overlooking the sea, islands full of
ancient lore lie at our feet: on one, an old monastery, now
dwindled to a very low state, with but few of the brothers left.
To our right the undulating mountains show clear out against
the sky in a dull grey green hue. On the plateau a man has
built a small hut, and here sells cigarettes, tea, and mineral
waters, to the thirsty traveller. On our way back we call at
Monrepos (Villa Reale) and walk through the grounds, which


abound with beautiful roses and tropical flowers of all kinds.
The view from the terrace is perfect. The palace, very
heavy in build, with Greek columns, is redeemed from ugli-
ness by the trailing vines and roses growing in wild profusion
over the columns and verandah. Returning by the same
route, which is down hill, we bowl along at a rapid pace
until we reach the town, where we are stopped- by the crowds
in 'the streets, who are shouting, gesticulating, and hooting
in an alarming manner. On questioning the guide he tells
us that it is the election for the new President, and there is
a strong party feeling over M. Tricoupis, who has held power
for some time. He also advises us to get on board at once,
as these street crowds often end in a riot, when the military
has to be called out. Eventually we dodge the crowd and
enter a side street, which is very dirty, but interesting for
the variety of quaint costumes worn by the Greek and
Albinese population. We reach the quay in safety. Our
guide, an extremely courteous man, sees us into our boat,
and as we push off the distant hubbub of voices does not
sound pleasant. We are very glad to get back to the quiet
comfort of our dear old boat. The evening is delightful,
the glorious sunset spreads its rich colouring over land and
sea, enriching the coast-line of Albania and beautifying the
lofty Monte St. Salvatore.
We leave Corfu at 6.10 p.m., and fall into a heavy swell
coming from the Adriatic.


Malta , May isth.
Dropped anchor in Malta harbour at five o’clock, weather
threatening. At nine the Health Officer came on board.
He made a general muster, and passed a “ clean bill.” After
breakfast it rained so heavily we gave up all hopes of going
on shore. The boys went, and we attended to the birds.
Poor Dick (the thrush I had reared from the nest), after a
struggle of ten days’ illness, died, and of course there was a
funeral—and a very wet one too. This misfortune had scarcely
been told when we heard terrible groans. It turned out that
the second steward, Newman, had slipped on the wet deck
and seriously injured his wrist. After a moment’s thought,
we women took upon ourselves to send on board H.M.S.
“ Agamemnon,” which lay alongside of us, for the surgeon.
He and his attendant were soon on board and the arm
dressed. Newman, who suffered greatly, was sent to lie
down. The doctor left with the expression of hope that it
would soon mend. Fortunately Mr. Lambert’s man-servant
was on board, and gave a helping hand as steward. The
doctor came again in the evening: we found he had
known a great many of our Australian friends when cruising
in H.M.S. “Pearl,” so a very happy evening was passed by
all of us.
Monday , May ibth.
Still raining heavily. Coaled early; finished by nine
o’clock. The doctor lunched with us. In the afternoon


with him we visited St. John’s Church, and saw many of its
treasures, familiar to most travellers. From the fortifications
we had an interesting view of the harbour and town. We
had tea on board the “ Agamemnon ” with the doctor, where
we met several of the officers, and spent a very pleasant
afternoon.
Tuesday , May 17///.
Early this morning two baskets of fruit and flowers came
on board—a present from friends, and we spent the morning
arranging them. The sea is still running high, so we decide
to remain until the weather moderates. Later on, while we
were intently watching H.M.S. “Victoria” issuing from' the
docks, in which she had been undergoing the repairs
necessitated by her running on the rocks of one of the
islands in the Grecian Archipelago, we suddenly became
very anxious for our safety. The space in which she had
to turn being so small, her ram seemed to be coming straight
down upon our bows, but fortunately she managed to turn
just in time, leaving us uninjured, but not without having
given us a mauvais quart d'heure of dread between life and
imminent death. When the excitement had- ended, we were
witnesses to another catastrophe, a small boat was upset
by a collision. It contained three men and one woman.
The screams of the woman, even when six men were holding
her up trying to get her on board, and her frantic movements,
which nearly dragged them all into the water, were from the


onlookers’ point of view, to say the least, ludicrous. We
entertained a large party on board to tea. The Indian silk
merchants gave us a busy time, but their wares being far
from good, we got rid of them as quickly as we could.
May 18 (h, 1892.
Weather clear and fine, but a strong wind blowing. We
took photos of the “ Agamemnon,” and one of the officers
photographed our yacht, which caused pleasant amusement.
2 P.M.
Lunch over, everything movable is stowed away and
made snug for the journey before us. Dipping to our royal
neighbours, and receiving a hearty response, we leave Malta.
With handkerchiefs wnldly waving we turn the corner and at
once find ourselves in a heavy sea and a strong head-wind,
which increases as evening comes on.
Poor Aimee and nurse suffered very much. Jack lay
very quiet. Nunkie and I were the only ones on deck.
Oh! how she plunged—it was too awful. When dinner was
announced we two sat down, regardless of our draggled
condition. The yacht was pitching very badly, causing an
awful sensation at the top of the head. I looked at Nunkie—
he was stolid as ever. “Whisky and soda, steward, please.”
“Yes, sir.” Not to be outdone, “Brandy and a small split
for me, Turner.” “Yes, madam.”
Soup was served in bowls, and at the first lurch the yacht


z
o
o
_J
<
CO
0
z
1
<
oc
Q


gave, went all over the cloth. The next course fared no
better, and when it came to the peas dancing a galop and the
fiddles joining them, we thought we would leave the rest of
the dinner where it now was —on the floor. We laughed until
the tears trickled down Nunkie’s happy round face, laughed
until the steward in despair joined us, laughed until there was
every probability of our joining the debris on the already
overcrowded floor. Only once that night did I see my
companion again. He was sitting in the smoke-room looking
lovingly at his pipe. With a big sigh he placed it again in his
pocket.
Tapping at the window, I called “ Good-night, Nunkie.”
“Good-night, Mamie,” he responded in a melancholy voice,
and so I left him to what I felt sure was going to be a very
rough night’s experience for us all.
At 9 p.m. engines were slowed down.
At 10 p.m. breakwater placed.
At 12 p.m shipped heavy seas, stopped engines, and lay
head to sea.
At ten next morning, when we should have been safely at
Tunis, we were only eighty miles from Malta, so we still had a
day and a night at sea before us. The drawing-rooms and
cabins were in a ruined condition—chairs, tables, photos,
needlework, plates and glasses were in wild confusion on the
floor. With each movement of the vessel they would roll with
annoying regularity, until it became unbearable. The unhappy
occupants, with a rush, would seize the offending article and


thrust it into the cupboard or under the sofa cushions—any-
where to silence its caperings. To release the poor sufferers
from their imprisonment in the close cabins below we had
some beds brought for them into the large and airy dining
saloon on deck. Here they soon became quite merry. Baby,
who is always a good sailor, and only kept in her roomy cot
because it would be unsafe in very rough weather for her to be
on her feet, rejoices at her freedom. Dear child, I have
known her to lie for thirty-six hours in her cot so good and
patient. An early wash and a good breakfast, which Turner
would give her on the cabin floor, then back into her bed with
her toys —dinner—tea—another wash, prayers, and to sleep
until next morning. This was Lyal’s life in bad weather.
Her nurse was not so fortunate. Miss Aimee always became
studious over books, papers, etc., which I am sure she never
read until she heard some one coming. Our men folk made
their disappearance with the remark, “ Oh, the deck is so
sloppy, and what is the use of trying to sit on a seat that
refuses to accommodate you?” So poor I had to play the
Good Samaritan and be the daily news of all incidents,
answering such questions as these —“ How much longer is
this weather going to last?” “What time is it?” “What
happened just now when the sailors rushed forward?” “Do
you think we shall arrive as soon as we ought to ?” and so on.
Friday at 2 a.m., after a run of 226 miles, the “ Imogen”
dropped anchor in Tunis Bay, only to raise it again and draw
in nearer to Goletta, the port of Tunis.


Tunis looks very dazzling in this glaring light. On the
left rise the high mountains of Boukournin and Djebel Resas.
From the low shore rise birds in such numbers as to darken
the sky for a few moments, then pass from sight.
We are all on deck, clad in our best, and mostly
yachting clothes, looking so spick and span, a contrast to
the God-forsaken looking creatures of yesterday. I notice,
too, that we are very sympathetic with each other, even
tender. It is wonderful what a few days of real rough weather
will do!
The gig is ready, and our lads pull for the shore, and
we soon enter a narrow canal with wooden piers on either side,
thronged with busy groups of Negroes and Arabs loading and
unloading the many steamers lying here. Before we are fairly
on shore we are surrounded by the guides, who vie with each
other to get our good-will. Choosing one recommended by
the British Consul at Tunis, we pass the Hotel de France,
where a group of Tunis merchants stand chattering. Arrived
at the station, we take our seats in an open railway carriage
which has a balcony on one side. From here, as we wait,
we view the curious medley of nations that passed before us:
noble Moors in their flowing white robes (with forms of mag-
nificent proportions), with servants at their heels; nurses (black
as night) draped from head to foot in shining white silk, with
jewels on their arms and ankles, their wee charges clinging to
their skirts—dusky urchins, gazing with open-eyed wonder upon
us, munching melons as big as their heads, and grinning from


ear to ear. A shrill whistle and we move slowly out of the
station. Passing, now Goletta and Kheredine Khram, we
skirt ancient Carthage. Small portions of the walls, some
heaps of stones, the ruins of the wonderful aqueduct and its
enormous pillar, against which the Arabs build their miserable
huts of clay, are all that remain of that once glorious city, the
city of eight hundred years before Christ, peopled by the
descendants of the Phoenicians of Tyre, distinguished in
commerce and agriculture, the rivals of mighty Rome, of whom
Cato, after his visit to this city, wrote these fatal words :
“ Delenda est Karthago” (Carthage must be destroyed).
La Marsa (midway between Goletta and Tunis), where
there are many buildings, amongst them the palace of the
Bey. The Grandees of Tunis reside here. Reaching the
station at Tunis, which calls for no special mention, we made
for the first good hotel and ordered a beef-steak (you have to
go out of England to learn how a beef-steak can be
cooked). After lunch our guide suggested a drive to some
interesting sites. We took the palace of the Bey first, which
lies to the west of the bazaar, and is a small building very
much whitewashed. We passed into a handsome court-yard
and had pointed out to us some tiny slits in the wall, which
formerly gave air and light to the ladies of the harem.
Questioning the custodian as to the life of the Bey, he
replied, “This is a good Bey; he has only one wife, like
the English.” There are nine children; but I think the
present wife is the second marriage, and mother of the


fn-. :
a |Ny %‘ j 1i ■
*• ■ f' '-^^rV^, Mp mm
s£7 , jggBH V B A
DRAWING SALOON.


younger children. The audience chamber is very interesting
Here would sit the royal Bey on his bejewelled chair, and
the offenders against his laws would be brought and made
to kneel before him. The examination as to the crime
committed over, when death was the sentence, the Bey
would wave his handkerchief, and the poor condemned man
was dragged away. Such is the story we were told. I seated
myself in the chair and fnade one of our party kneel before
me, and delivered my sentence, ending with “Our Bey is a
noble, just man, and only punishes those who break the
law. He is a good man too, for he taketh unto himself only
one wife—at a time.” The guide and custodian smile and
say—what I will keep to myself.
After admiring some Moorish stuccos in the round domed
saloon, we exhausted all that was there to be seen. From
there we walked into the bazaar—our first experience of
Eastern life. Passing out of the bright sunshine into the
vault-like gloom, it was difficult for a while to ascertain our
environs. One by one, however, we soon began to see rows of
tiny shops, filled with silk goods, jewellery, scents of all kinds,
and quaint curios. We found ourselves in the Suk-el-Birka
in a very close room, looking out into the old slave-market.
Here one of the merchants, with the help of his underling,
brought to light the treasures he possessed, from shelves
arranged all round the shop. Silks, embroideries, old caskets,
fire-arms and swords, rose in heaps before us. But we were
not to be tempted. “Will you not buy? Oh, buy, buy—the


gentleman buy for his lady, no?” Coffee of the blackest
in small cups on a tray now appeared, and we were earnestly
requested to drink of it. I saw Jack and the others accept,
in total disregard of the frantic gesticulations and dumb
entreaties I sent across to them from my side of the room.
Suppose—oh, horrible ! —suppose the coffee to be drugged,
and we at the mercy of these men in this secluded spot.
Such things had happened. “Will you not buy this?” came
from the other fat man. This was a beautiful pale blue satin
portiere, embroidered in soft coloured silks and gold thread.
“Yes, Jack, do buy it at once —I love it; ’tis just what I have
longed for—buy it at once.” The more 1 hurried the purchase
the longer they seemed to take. I would have given any
price for anything to get away from this man’s presence.
At last we did emerge, followed by the guide carrying the
purchase wrapped in a crumpled newspaper. We peeped
into the slave-market, which is very small and square in shape.
One flight of shallow steps led to the balcony, which runs all
round —its tiny columns coloured with creepers of many
shades of red. Seated at the doors were men, in squatting
position, embroidering in beautiful silks. The merchant,
a very amiable man, showed his store of rare carpets which
are piled from floor to ceiling in one of the many small rooms
that are off the balcony. Pacing from him, we passed through
all the narrow ways to the song of “ Buy, buy, buy.” The
funny corners we peeped into reminded us of the Catacombs
at Syracuse. These bazaars are divided into various divisions,


each of which is devoted to the sale of articles of one parti-
cular class: thus, Shk-el-Birka, silk and jewels—the jewellery
being mostly in the hands of the Jews.
Suk-el-Irba is the womans’ bazaar, where the dainties
used by the women of the harem may be seen. Towards
the end of this labyrinth of streets we came to the quarter
devoted to the manufacture of boots. Here sit the busy
makers of those dainty red and yellow shoes, worn by the
women, and the huge feet coverings of the men; and very
primitive are the tools with which they do,their ingenious
work. One of the most interesting sights to be seen is the
various kinds of work of Bedouin women, which they produce
during their solitary journeys through the desert, consisting
mostly of camel’s-hair pockets, girdles, and saddle-cloths.
The poor Bedouin prefers the shepherd’s life, and is, as
Eastern travellers well know, both sober and industrious.
Who has not imagined their picturesque nomad life—their
tents covered with black camel’s hair, lying so low on the
ground as scarcely to be seen from a distance? Who has
not alluded to its simple contents —to its bare floor with its
Haifa mat (esparto grass), and to the custom of its tenants
of dropping their shoes outside before they enter it ?—one
only of the many striking features of a mode of life so very
simple and yet so strange. wood for fire is to be
had in the wild sterile wastes through which they pass, they
have to use sheep and camel dung. For dress, a coarse
linen skirt reaching down to their knees, a fez cap, and a


long bornous is all that they require; while for personal
adornment, like all Oriental people, they wear a charm or
amulet, of rough make, about the neck. They are addicted
to the practice of tattooing themselves. They are extremely
superstitious, but it may endear them to the tender-hearted
North Briton when he is told they are great inhalers of the
“weary weed” in the shape of snuff. The Arab nomad
is devoted to his horse, which I am glad to say is treated by
him with the greatest kindness. I would I could say the
same as to his treatment of his wife, the mother of his
children; but alas' a darker lot than that assigned to the
dumb brute is hers. She marries when she is fifteen
years of age, and for a time she is the idol of her lord and
master’s heart; but no sooner is her beauty faded, and it is
“ but the flower of an hour,” than he marries another, when
she is degraded to the position of being that second idol’s
slave, and one whom he may ill-treat at will.
Reaching the end of the bazaar, we were once more in
the streets, and found ourselves amongst a medley of Moors,
Arabs, Berbers, Negroes, Maltese, Greeks, Italians, and French,
—a novel experience, the chattering of so many languages,
the costumes all shapes and colours, the white-robed Moors
being by far the most graceful. Some I noticed wore small
wreaths of flowers, daisy-chain fashion, around the ear, falling
to the shoulder. The crowd increased as we approached the
Halfaonine Square, where awnings of orange and blue colour
were drawn from the corners of the disjointed buildings,


HL ywJuk** JmKmI? %
'aLfl lalS^ a ~' S4? &
I BBSLk
r n-. J CK ~£j£A Sm5 PlpBxlv :| . %
\ \ JpWlw! ’ * '
. % -- ** JiW -4
H* \ '~*9i
DRAWING SALOON.


under which the fresh fruit lay in baskets. Dusky-faced
children romped around. On one of these buildings, a large
placard of “Singer’s sewing machines are the best,” stared us
in the face, reminding us that we had come to the end of the
ancient city and had arrived at the modern French quarter,
where every attraction from the Louvre in Paris to Bir-
mingham goods might be bought. Coffee ices at the French
Cafe proved a pleasant refreshment after our hot walk. We
returned by train as we came, the only noticeable thing
being the departure from Tunis of the British Consul and
family, and their dragomans. The Consul lives out of Tunis,
on the pleasant shore of the bay, which must be far preferable
to the close, stifling houses in the city. As we neared Goletta
the setting sun shone on the low-lying sands of the Bay of
El Bahira. Countless numbers of birds were seeking their,
evening meal ere the tide’s return, among which stood the
beautiful pink-tinted flamingoes, their long legs casting shadows
before them, which were reflected on the face of the glassy
sands.
Tunis , Saturday , May 21 st.
Left Tunis at 10 a.m. for Algiers. The feather beauti-
fully fine—a light wind off the land, and steaming to knots,
for economy. We expect to arrive at Algiers at 11 a.m. on
Sunday. In the evening we passed quite close under the
African coast, and ’twas very hot, but not unpleasantly so.
Sundays are always quiet on board, even when we are at sea;
139
AND YACHTING WAYS.


the men having no extra work, are early in their best suits,
and nothing pleases them better than a good pipe and some
papers, even ladies’ fashion books. Perhaps some of them
are of a cynical turn, and enjoy the follies fashion’s slaves are
apt to revel in. With Sunday comes the everlasting plum-
pudding—(only they call it plum duff) —and roast beef to saloon
and forecastle alike —an infliction on the part of the galley,
to oppose which, like unto the laws of the Medes and
Persians, the saloon would strive in vain. Monday’s post-bag
always tells a tale of Sunday’s doings; and wives and mothers
in dear old England reap the result of that day’s quiet leisure.
Towards evening a swell came up, and a head wind ; but it
soon passed, leaving the air heavy and the sky a leaden hue.
Soon we heard the distant rumble of thunder, and rapidly
followed a lightning storm which played around us in alarming
force. It had the effect of sending some of us to bed early.
At n.io p.m. we dropped anchor—run of 384 miles. We
heard afterwards that one ship had been struck by lightning
and two buildings had been damaged.
Algiers, May 2srJ.
The day breaks very hot and sultry, and looks very
threatening, not at all tempting for sight-seeing. But Algiers
looks so fascinating from where we are lying: it seems to
be. built of white stone,.and appears from this distance like
marble. On the right the Arab quarters lie ; their flat-roofed
houses and domed mosques form a foreground in striking


\y * I w ■ _ jw* __ M
I HI ill
0' : Ejl V" J y 1 ll/S
*j<r jL |i IVAIm I \ y y I '/^■rl
. * I . a. ■ . 1 I
**^£,\'- r A- w %.<<- ~~~ I
v jr / jpi V
OWNERS’ CABIN.


contrast to the dark hills behind. To the left, on terraces
reaching to the mountain-tops, are the beautiful homes of
the French and English residents. The foreground is some-
what marred by the ugly white walls which run zigzag to the
water’s edge, fringed with trading steamers, which speaks well
for the commerce of Algiers, but robs the beautiful bay of
one of its greatest charms. Towards us are crowding endless
small boats. They come alongside and exhibit for sale, silks,
embroideries, vases, and jewellery —a goodly show. . A hot
bargaining goes on between buyer and seller, which ends in
one believing he has got the best of the bargain and the other
believing he has; so both are happy. For my own part I
mean to wait till we go on shore, and see what Madame Luce
Ben Aben can show. She has the reputation of possessing
a fine collection of embroidery.
* * * *
At eleven we drove along the busy streets of Algiers,
and passing the city gates, came upon groups of camels and
nomads, that had no doubt passed the great desert of Sahara,
and were resting there for provisions, (after selling their wares
to the merchants) ere their return. The camels, poor dumb
things, had such a far-away look in their eyes, "which seemed
to say, “ Fret and fume and fight against your fate, but it will
rule you all the same. Why not bear your burdens as Ido ? Be
above this earthly strife, and look beyond ! ” Up and dowm
the hilly roads we w r ent, passing many charming villas. The
Governor’s palace is beautifully surrounded. I should dearly


have loved to stay in such a pleasant quarter, had it been my
fortune to reside there. The Hotel Splendid is reached in time
for lunch. This was served in great comfort in the large dining-
hall ; after which we wandered in the pleasant grounds around
the hotel, enjoying the view of Algiers in the distance, and
the long range of the Atlas mountains. On leaving, the
manager presented us with exquisite bouquets of roses (a
courtesy I have often received on leaving the hotels in Italy’,
and it is ever welcome). Returning, we went by the new
roads, which are well made, as, indeed, are all French roads.
As soon as we arrived at the Moorish quarters, we alighted
and sent our carriage to rejoin us on the other side, and then
entered the narrow streets. Our guide seemed to be well
known and liked, both by the Moors and .Arabs, for we were
well received, and all that courtesy could do was done to
make our visit pleasant. We entered the homes and saw their
simple surroundings. The women we met were all thickly
veiled, all but tbe eyes being concealed beneath the long
white bornous and flowing white silk veil. The only women
unveiled are the nautch girls, and they are very pretty. Two
we saw wore transparent cream silk robes. Their bare arms
and necks were covered with pretty jewels, their long-flowing
reddish hair being decked with artificial flowers, and as they
dropped into graceful pose on the stone steps they drew from
the folds of their gowns fruit and nuts, which, with childish
glee, they cracked with their beautiful white teeth, looking the
while into our faces with impish pleasure, and then burst into


a merry ripple of laughter. After visiting the bakers, boot-
makers, etc., in their various shops, we entered and had coffee
at one of the Arab taverns, a low room with raised floors on
either side, through which a deep narrow passage ran, and
with slab seats which also served as steps to the floor. On
these we seated ourselves, and used the straw fans we found at
hand, for the day was intensely hot. A large-leaved green
vine trailed over the beams, having pushed its way from the
heat outside through a broken pane of glass, and throve in
wildness in the deep low windows, under which a cat lay
enjoying herself in lazy content. Whilst our coffee was being
prepared we watched with interest our companions, who were
lying about, in various attitudes, on the raised platform around,
sipping coffee and smoking cigarettes. We should not have
presented such a graceful appearance had we adopted a
similar position. “Do try and let me see the effect,” I
remarked to Nunkie. His reply was more forcible than
elegant, but, fortunately, the coffee came at the moment. It
was very sweet, and had a soothing effect upon us all. The
price of each cup was less than a farthing. I asked for a
second pot, so that I might see how they made it. A small
copper pot, about five inches in height and round in proportion,
is placed, filled with cold water, on the brazier, which contains
red hot charcoal. When the water comes to the point of boiling,
sugar is added, and a few seconds later the freshly-ground
coffee, ground as fine as cocoa—the quantity, a teaspoonful
for each person. The pot is again allowed to come to the


boiling-point, removed and put on once more. On its coming
to the boiling-point the third time a dash of cold water is
thrown upon it, and then it is served in cups about two inches
high. It is a delicious concoction, but its success lies on its
not being allowed to boil. It well repays the time and labour
bestowed upon its preparation. We complimented the pro-
prietor on its excellence and thanked him for the lesson. He
was delighted at our interest, and on leaving we were con
ducted with ceremony to. the door and bowed out. How
elegant and graceful these people are in every simple act, and
yet how primitive their life. Fashion troubles them not, nor
indigestion—to judge by their healthy-looking bodies. Their
food, I learned from Brogi, mainly consists of Indian meal,
fruit, bread (very dark in colour), and lamb’s liver; no wine,
and very little meat. . . . We continued up the narrow street,
and desiring to see the interior of one of the houses, Brogi
knocked at one of the open doors. We went in, but the
gentlemen remained outside. A fat, coarse woman rose to
greet us as we entered a long low room, poorly furnished,
and lit by a top light. Around the room, on the floor, rolled
in coloured rags, two or three women lay asleep. We could
not converse with our hostess, who grinned at us, and seemed
very anxious to say something in her own language, not
understandable to us, so we nodded her a good-bye.
The guide next stopped before a small door let into
a square white house and said, “The ladies may enter if
they please and see the Arab women in their baths, but the


.r \ % %i ’ 1
£3fcif
OWNERS’ CABIN.


gentlemen may not go in.” How I enjoyed this remark.
“What baths are they, Brogi?” “The public Turkish baths,
madam; this is the women’s day.” The door banged too,
and we found ourselves in a dim passage confronted by a
kindly faced woman scantily clothed in blue linen. She was
asking us something. Before we could answer, Brogi (our
guide) put his head inside and said, “Take the ladies
through the baths.” The women inside, hearing a man’s
voice, gave a scream. Brogi, with a laugh, shut the door,
and we were led by the woman in blue from room to room,
which are small, low, and very dark; and as we went further
into them, vaporous clouds arose and made it difficult to
1
see the women, who were sitting in groups on the earthen
floor in various stages of deshabille, washing themselves
or each other. One, a very fat dame, as mother nature
placed her, sat with two children on her knees, and these
she lathered with a blue soap until they resembled porphyry,
whilst she, good soul, beamed with gratified pleasure on
their shining bodies. We entered the next and the hottest
room. Women and children of all ages and of all shades,
from ebony to soft pink, were merrily laughing and making
a noise with their mouths (as a gro.om does when he rubs
down a horse). Some of the babies were perfect in form,
and their faces angelic in beauty. The intense heat became
unbearable, and we returned into a cooler room, the water
rushing over our feet all the time from the narrow gutters
which intersect the floor, while streams of soapy water from
145
AND YACHTING WAYS.


the bathers mixing with it, caused us to lift our skirts
even higher than before. These baths under favourable
circumstances would be delightful comforts, but not with
the medley I saw before me would I care to use them.
A wee dot toddled up and asked for silver, which we gave,
and bidding a general adieu, we decamped. The keen air
outside quite took our breath away for a few moments. A
long lecture on health from my doctor came into my mind,
but was dismissed with a laugh. On joining our party
the men were most curious to know all that we had seen,
but we kept a provoking silence, which made Brogi break
into a broad grin, showing his excellent white teeth in two
even rows.
Towards evening the heat became most oppressive, and
an unnatural influence seemed to be in the air. Dense
clouds of locusts passed over the city, and many of them
being blown our way with the scorching wind, the dining
saloon and decks were strewn with their dying bodies, some
of which were four and five inches in length. Around the
yacht in the water they lay in yellow masses, whilst overhead
they passed in thousands, darkening the sky for a few
moments like a rain-cloud. Though quite accustomed
to them in my own country, I never before saw them in
such large musters. The night was clear and bright; every
house and dome stood out in mirage-like effect; the cliffs
and distant hills could be counted one by one. A dead
calm seemed to be over everything, and a breathless silence.


It was most oppressive. It seemed as if at any moment the
earth would rhck and bury, us beneath it. Such an effect
it had upon me that I could not rest, and at four o’clock I
woke Aimee and told her to come on deck with me. The
watch was leaning against the galley asleep. We crept
forward, and seating ourselves on deck chairs, watched the
glorious wakening dawn. Algiers lay silent as the City
of the Dead, the rising sun bathing her domes in fiery red,
“The burning oracle of all that live, as fountain of all life,
and symbol of Him who bestows it.” Sombre groups of
cypress trees made inky streaks against the sky: as the sun
rose higher these dark sentinels fell back one by one, and
were lost to sight. I asked Aimee to find out what time it
was; she peeped into the saloon and answered, “ Five o’clock.”
I sprang hastily from my chair, which I upset, and brought
the poor watchman from the realms of sleep to those of
reality—a very startled reality I should say, to judge from
his face.
“Is it possible to get a cup of tea ? ” “ Yes, ma’am.”
“ Well, light the fire and I will hunt for some tea.” A
rummage in Turner’s pantry soon brought to light the neces-
sary tea and sugar. We found the. milk-can hanging under
the bridge supports, and the milk quite sweet. An excellent
and refreshing cup of tea we were soon enjoying. Much
comforted, we left the watch to finish our early cup, and
retired to sleep out the few hours left before our usual day
began.
147
AND YACHTING WAYS.


Tuesday, May 24///.
Our second day in Algiers was spent in exploring the
town. We began with the Bishop’s Palace, once the Palace
of the Bey. There is a curious custom among the Moham-
medans that will not allow the Bey to live in the palace of
his predecessor—hence, I suppose, the use to which the
palace is now put. The court-yard is truly exquisite, and
having been so many times reproduced in paintings and
engravings of every size, it was quite familiar to us; but it
is none the less beautiful in its actuality. The delicacy of
its pillars, and the wonderful and cunning execution of the
stucco work, form an unique specimen of Eastern archi-
tecture. Upstairs there is a small chapel, but it contains
nothing of value, the pictures being poor, and the whole place
wears an unusual air. Far more interesting is the great
mosque, a large white building in the form of a Latin cross.
The story goes that the architect who built it incurred the
anger of the Mohammedans by its cruciform design, and
that they accounted him an infidel, and put him to death
without ceremony. They ordered his head to be cut off ;
and kept the mosque. Brogi was determined to give us
plenty of variety, so I suppose that is why he brought us to
mosque No. 2. Well, I forgave him —this one is certainly more
interesting. We then passed through a number of men who
were seated on benches under some trees. These men, we
learned, were waiting for the judge to pass their papers ; the


1 I ■ ■HI I I _J, ,. „.,,,, mlP Si w. J
h - ?; i ju^S
H^I€^SBEt * f Tali
v I 1 i i'
* v* Jlut! If S3 iMMilil
y HH|^Hrri f
OWNERS’ CABIN.


exact meaning was not made clear to us, so I pass it on to
the more learned.
Entering the mosque, on the left was a large white
fountain with a jet of water running over its high basin into
the bowl below. Here men were washing their feet and
hands, and some their mouths, before proceeding to their
devotions, which they are supposed to perform four times
a day, once in the mosque and the other times when and
where they choose. Forty times a day they must touch the
ground with their forehead—a very fatiguing ceremony. The
building is very lofty and long, and very much like a huge
barn. Around it runs a narrow balcony; its walls are bare,
being whitewashed, and the massive beams overhead give it
a very heavy appearance. The large columns, which run
in parallel lines down the main body of the hall, are simple,
and only notable for their apparent power of endurance and
their strength; these, too, are whitewashed. The floor is
covered with mats, upon which no infidel is allowed to stand,
consequently we had to walk on the fringe of it. Crossing to an
open door, we passed prostrate figures lying on their holy mats,
covered with their long draperies, resting after their prayers.
Truly a very comfortable religion and much more sensible
than ours, with the hard seats we poor souls have to sit upon
for two or three hours, listening sometimes to a very dull
service and a worse sermon.
From the door we looked upon a charming courtyard
with some very fine trees and shrubs. Two cats were the


only occupants, and hardly accounted for Brogi’s anxiety to
get us away. However, we returned to the street not much
wiser than before.
Taking a carriage, we drove through the modern French
quarters, which were bright and clean, and descended a very
steep hill. Shortly after we stopped before a garden gate;
Brogi led us down a short pathway, and turning suddenly
to the left, we came upon a small white house, and were told
it is the tomb of a great Bey—name unpronouncable.
A small dark carpeted room met our eyes, in the centre
of which stood a four-posted bed with very ordinary coverings.
The four corners were decorated with flags (trophies), the
head part being raised in canopy form, and long strings of
wooden beads were hanging from it.
No doubt all this had a meaning, and expressed deep
sentiment; but not being initiated into the Caballian mysteries
of the East, I must confess it did not impress me with any
feeling of reverence. Far different is the quaint churchyard
a few steps further down, the low, white building framed with
dark firs, cypresses, and flat tombs with tumbling headstones.
Artists of every nationality have painted this wonderful bit of
form and colour from time to time. Before we could enter
the tombs we were obliged to take off our shoes and put on
flat straw ones without any heels. It required some ingenuity
to move in them, let alone to be graceful; in fact, we had
to stop more than once and turn to replace our lost and
borrowed articles. My companion made short work of hers


and kicked them into a corner. The custodian (a woman)
took us down a narrow corridor, at the end of which a
fountain stood. We went up the two steps, and leaving our
slippers there, we entered with stockinged feet into the tomb,
which is another square room, with another four-posted bed-
stead, and another set of hangings—most disappointing.
From the ceiling hung emu’s eggs and large glass balls,
like those you buy in the Lowther Arcade, and Turkish
lamps of all sizes and shapes. A man was praying devoutly,
unconscious of our presence. Brogi quietly motioned him to
remove his devotions further on, which the poor man did
without a murmur.
Evening came all too soon, and with it our parting hour.
Algiers will shortly fade into one of our sweet pleasures of
the past. We are sorry to part with Brogi, our kind guide.
Had we stayed but a few days longer he would have guided
us to the border of the Great Sahara.
At 7.30 the clanging of the anchor chains announced our
departure. Leaving our dinner, we went on deck and waved
our last adieu, with regret, to glorious Algiers.
We cleared Algiers at 7.45, and at 8.30 our course
lay east three-quarters north. All that day we had a stiff
breeze on our quarter, w'hich made it rather uncomfortable
to move about; indeed, in trying to do so we got numberless
bruises for our pains. We were glad when night came and
we could turn in. But, alas, before six bells had struck
we were awakened by screams from the nursery. On entering


I found the nurse in a hysterical state, and all my efforts
to relieve her were of no avail. ■ Jack then carried her, as
the night was close, up to the dining-saloon on deck to
give her the benefit of the fresh air; but she still continued
very ill. We slowed down the engines and put the yacht’s
head to the breeze for an hour, but finding the patient did not
improve, at 2 a.m. ordered “full speed ahead,” and we made
for Gibraltar with all haste. The hours passed very heavily
between this and our sighting the Rock of Gibraltar on
May 26th.
At 1 p.m. we rounded Europa Point, and entering the
roads, at once signalled for the health officer. He alarmed
us very much by saying he thought the girl had small-pox;
but his alarms were without foundation. We found out,'after
much inquiry and trouble, that her illness sprang from an over-
dose of quinine which she had taken from the medicine-chest
unknown to us. After this explanation we were cleared and
our yellow flag put out of sight. The “Imogen,” having
to coal alongside the hulks, we got on shore this morning
with all speed and poked about the narrow streets until lunch
hour, and then went on board the “ Imogen,” which by this
time had moved into comfortable quarters inside the New
Molo. After lunch we were crowded with visitors. As soon
as we got on shore again we returned our calls, and had
tea at the Smiths. They dined with us this evening, and
arrangements were made for our visit to the fortifications on
the morrow.


GIBRALTAR.


May 27 th.
Early on shore to see the market-place, which turned out
a delusion and a snare. Such a medley of nations, and a
very dirty medley too! We were glad to escape into the
narrow streets, where we again met dirty Moors and Spaniards,
a motley, mongrel lot, whose garments were but a poor
apology for covering their lean shanks, in most cases con-
sisting of a woollen material in the form of a sack with the
head coming through the upper part and the shanks pro-
truding through two holes in the lower part. The costume
is completed by the, head covering, a dirty turban, which might
be any colour your fancy painted. It was refreshing to get
on board again and rest. After lunch we were again on the
move. Ramshackle carriages carried us up steep streets and
deposited us at the gates of the fortification. I saw a gleam
of official-looking blue paper pass between our host and a
gunner, and we passed onward. With our backs to the sea,
we mounted the narrow path with solid rocks on either side
of us. The caretakers had tried to cultivate a few flowers in
a handful of soil. Tiny creepers crawled over the rocks with
a few bright flowers, speaking of the loving care bestowed
upon them. By this time we had’passed through endless
galleries, about which we were told long stories concerning the
past and future defence. All of them interesting, but have
been told and re-told over and over again, so I will not weary
you by repetition. Most beautiful is the sight from the
Queen’s outlook, a small balcony hanging sheer over the


rock at a deadly height. From here there is an extensive
view of the Spanish hills and the vast plains which intervene,
a glimpse of shore, and, on the left, coal hulks and vessels
innumerable. To the right, and almost underneath, lies the
English cemetery, where so many of our brave English are
buried. Its simple white headstones gleam in the setting
sun, which strikes blood-red upon them.
The arena, where some of the bull-fights take place, can
be easily discerned. We were asked to visit it but declined.
Our host warned us that we must hasten if we did not wish
to spend the night there, so we beat a hasty retreat just as the
gun was fired. A few friends dined with us that evening.
After dinner we sat on deck in the pleasant cool of the
moonlight night and gazed on the grey impregnable rock
which towered above us and down again on the pleasant
gardens surrounding the villas, built after the modern English,
Spanish, and even Moorish fashion, the ornaments of archi-
tecture being sacrificed to strength and security. The effect
is not harmonious, but on such a night as this one is not
critically inclined. The music of the regimental band added
to the pleasantness of the scene, and we were regretful when
the evening came to a close.
May 2 Bfk.
This morning we are early on shore, making the most
of our time, as the “Imogen” is ordered to sail at midday.
We enter shops of all sorts and buy rubbish to our heart’s


content, returning to the yacht with bronze lamps, Spanish
horse-trappings, - lace, and samples of Moorish stucco. The
question arises, when all this litter reaches the deck, where
are they to go? Every cabin and saloon is already over-
crowded with stuffs and curios from every port; at the present
time it is impossible to move without something falling on
your head—at least Nunkie says so. “Oh, please, Turner,
take them and put them somewhere!” Turner is much too
polite to suggest overboard as their final resting-place. As I
turn a\vay I see him shake his wise old head, “ Dear, dear,
the ways of ladies puzzle me much.”
We find on entering the dining saloon our tables covered
with beautiful flowers, a dainty attention from the shore. A
hasty meal, and at 2.27 p.m. the “Imogen” is ready for sea,
and w r e take our last look at Gibraltar. The coast of Morocco
next engages our attention. We feel sorry at not seeing the
beautiful town of Fez, but having heard so many stories of
dangers to be encountered there, we did not venture.
A very light head-wind, just sufficient to make a pleasant
breeze, but not enough to satisfy the engineer, induces us to
sit up late in the moonlight, always doubly beautiful at sea.
We run over our journey, and recall* a number of our happy
days, and think with sad regret of the coming partings, far
into the early morning.
May 25th, 30th, and 31st are all calm, uneventful days of
our homeward voyage.
On June Ist, at 3.35 p.m., we cast anchor in Dartmouth


harbour, after a run of uoo miles in four days exactly, the
average speed being roughly ni- knots per hour —extremely
good work for so small a boat.
On June 3rd, at 11.30, we steamed round to Southamp-
ton, arriving there at 7.30 p.m., after a lovely passage. As the
wind was blowing half a gale off the land, we set all fore and
aft sail, which helped the engines so much, that for some
considerable time we got 15!- knots out of the “ Imogen.”
We cast anchor just off the new pier (then building), glad to
be in old familiar scenes and dear old England once again.
THE END.
Printed by Walter Scott, Ltd., Felling, Newcastle-on-Tyne.


STEAM YACHT I M O G E N
MESSRS. FLEMING AND FERGUSON, PAISLEY. BUI LEERS ANp ENGINEERS
CABIN DECK.




