

A. B. D.
yarrabah
Church of England Aboriginal Mission.
Rules and Regulations.
"Lift thy prayer for the remnant that is left"


Mission Worker's Rules
1 Remember that. “Example" is better than Precept.
2 Remember to be punctual in everything.
3 Be careful in manner, work, habits, and conversation.
4 Each Worker is expected to attend the daily services unless
hindered by sickness or p.-essing duties which cannot be left to
others.
5 Remember that we must be instant in season and out of season
and elms cheerfully to undertake any work or duty that may come
to us apart from our regular duties.
6 Remember to adhere to the system and routine as laid down
7 ft is expected that each worker will endeavour to secure
mutual help and a raong the members of the staff.
8 Remember that to be teachers we must ever be learners and so
endeavour by Bible reading, by study and by prayer to secure our
•own spiritual growth, and help the spiritual growth of those over
whom we have been placed.
•9 Cultivate a kindly spirit and kindly manner to all.
10 I’ray always for zeal that your interest in the work and all
appertaining thereto may not lesson or grow cold.
11 Be patient, watchful, prayerful, and zealous.


Girl’s home Regnlations
BLANKETS To beaired daily. Dirty blankets to be washed.
Fa'ih inmate to have her own blanket with her name in the
corner Blankets to be in the press by 12 o’clock and the press lock-
ed by the MATRON. Blankets to be distributed after Evensong.
EOUJ MATRON to see that there is-no waste. No fond to be
carried upstairs unless to the sick.
MEALS Faces to be washed before all meals. MA 1 RON to
be present at meals till close. No loud talking ado wed, Voting
children to b- attended to cuefully.
SICK To be sent to the hospit uat9a.m. an I S-p. m. Serious
case - to be reported at once tc the Head of the M.auou.
MARRIED WOMEN To sleeps dine at Gins Home if their hus-
bands are away & to do any work required by the MATRON.
RUBBISH All rubbish cleaned daily &. put into the boxes.
UTENSILS To be. kept scrupulously clean & cleaned carefully
after each msa.s.
LIGHt'S Not to be carried about the rooms all light turned
doW" at 10 p. nr. ...
SCRUBBING Floors of sleeping apartments to be scruboed
daily A caruolic or conrtys used in the water Matron, to see that
ample water is used all walls to be scruobed ouce a week with
strong carbolic water. •
CLOTHING Each girls to have if possible 3 dresses two for
week one tor Sunday MATRON coinsiSu upon neatness in dress.
DOORS Front to be locked at 5. p. m. Back door 6. p. in.
GIRLS Not allowed to frequent the married people’s homes.
CHURCH All inmates to attend daily services un.ess hindered
by sickness or duties. .
BUCKETS To be removed first thing every morning washed
and disinfected, .
MISCONDUCT To reported at once to the Head of the Mission.
BATH During Summer elder girls at 6. a. m. younger girls 9. am.
DISINFECTANT To be kept carefully out of reach of cha
children. , , ’ ,
WASHING Boys Sunday clothing to be kept separated and
washed first on Monday All Sunday clothing to be put away not
later than Wednesday morning other clothing not later than
Friday afternoon.


AVOKK MATRON to see that each inmate is imployed till.
o’clock,
MATRON To encourage Ohedienoe Regularity, Tidiness, Kin
lines,- and industry and to personally supervise all departments
Work nr cho Horne.
IT IS EXPECTED THAT THE ADOVE REi
DILATIONS vVILL HE ADHERED TO.
Settlements
RULES AND REGULATION
(To be read at least once a week at Evensong
1. Daily Services to be attend by all if possible.
2. Wusuing to be done by the women on Mondays. (
3. hewing; and mending on Wednesday mornings.
4. No Lint yam, corn, or produce of any kind to be given b
.any one without leave oeiug given by the persons in charge.
h. No one to visit other settlement without leave.
6. Ail cases of sickness to be reported by the chief to the hea
of the settlement at. once.
7. The head of tne settlement to report to the head of tb
Mission all cases of sickness and misconduct.
5. No persons to be allowed to visit this settlement unless they cal
shew premit signed by the head of the Mission or his represeutativ
9. Holidays only given by the head of the Mission.
10- Onje a mouth all to attend the Parish Church at Yarraba
on the 3rd Sunday in the month or according to notice given,
11. The chief to do his best in settling all disputes and to kee]
peace.
12 The head of the settlement to keep the head of he Missioi
well informed as to all Chat happens on the settlement.


FIXED TIME TABLE FOR CLASSES ETC
DURING LENT.
MONDAY
8 US ffi&fmGirl. Home & School Hall, drill Heave, creek
TUESDAY„
2 pm Baud Practice „j.
1 pm Drill & Gymnastic* — all squad*
8 pm fiee Evening all
WEDNESDAY
8 pm Gymnastc Class,
THURSDAY
2 pm Choir practice.
8 pm Singing School.
4 pm Girls Physical drill.
4 pP *Ll parade - Uniform.
8 pra Singing & Prayers ai Boy s Homa
8 pm Ba_i Practice.
SATURDAY,
8pm Communioants prayer jetiug.


Hospital Rules
DAILY
1 Nurse to remain at the hospital till relieved at 9. a. m. ,
2 No bo> or girl from the Dormitories to attend at the Hospitat
unless ordered to do so by the peison in charge of the Doi rnitorj-
to which they belong. i . , . . . ?
3 Any persons other than those resident in the Dormitories,to ob^
tain a ticket before applying lor medicine at the Dispensaryt
entering the hospital. . . . f
4 No food allowed to be sent to any patient* in the hospital by.
friend-.?. All food for patients being prepared at the hospital kitchen!
5 Di pensary Gin's duties are restricted to the Dispensary ant^.
Nurses, Home all in patients to be attended to by t,l,ie Matron
day Nurse. ; , ‘ , •
6 Wards of the hospital to be thoroughly cleaned daily and walls
to he seonied each Wednesday.
7. All rubbish to be throw., into the gaily and burnt. No nil}
bish to be thrown down .n the front of the hill.
8. Male members of the Mission in need of medicine etc. to at-
tend at the Dispensary immediately after matins and at 5. p. m
Females at 9 a m and 4 pm,
9. Friends w ishing to visit patients in the hospital can cnly do
so with the consent of the lady in charge. '/
10. All boys and girls «ick at the Dormitoies must be sent at
once to the hospital with a note to the Lady in charge explaining
ailment. .
11. Closets to be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected daily,
12. All convalescent patients to perforin. any duty that the Lady
in charge may think fit to give them.


MARRIED PEOPLED
k j±g:»
Mtfugs ere to be kept in the proper places
" Copper Oven and fire places so be kept clean
tor bread kept well cleaned
b. Bread to be set each evening
*7. flowers to be kept on meal table
U fable to be properly laid for meals
1 B Bread to be got from Store before bell % n S*
ib. No boys allowed m kitchen unless at Work
SANITARY RULES
1 All closets to be emptied daily at 6 a m
2 Buckets to be emptied carefully.
3 Sanitary boys to fill all boxes with saw dust.
4 Lime to be pit into the sanitary cart bafors
leaving for the trenches.
5 Barth to be filled into the trench erery morning*
b Spare backets to be tarred or lime waned. 4


7No water from the washing of buckets to be em-
ptied into any drain but into the closet buckets.
8 Twice a day the matron of Girle Home, overseer
at the Boys the nurse at the hospital, the lady in
charge oi married peoples kitchen and the ladies at
the bouse and the cottage to see that persons are
told off to apply saw dust to the closets pans.
9 Walls of closets inside and out to be whitewashed
every Wednesday and all cemented floor to bo
whitewashed daily.
BOYS HOME
1 Table to be well scrubbed after every meal and the
crack 3 well cleaned.
% Floor under the table to be well washtd and scoired.
3 Sleeping floor well swept daily especially under boxes
and in corners.
4 Sleeping floor to be Scoured out every Wednesday with
ten buckets of water.
5 Small boys beds to be scrubbed every Thursday.
6 Verandah to be scoured every Monday and Wednesday
7 Blankets to he put outwheurising before Church parade
by each boy, on the fence not on the ground.
8 Blankets to be put in neatly folded by each boy after
parading for dinner then to return to the table for grace.
9 Mugs and spoous to be'well washed in plenty of water
and put in the sun to dry.
10 Carbolic to be put in all water used on the floor table
and bed.
Janie Clark to see if the work is properly done each day


GENERAL RULES
WILD BIRDS l,
1. Birds, or birds nests are not to Be inter.ered
with about the Mission or any the settlements No
shooting allowed within two miles of any settlement
DOGS .
2 No dogs allowed to be kept by any person with-
out the authority of thr, Head of the Mission.
MONEY
3 Any persons possessing money must hand it to
the bead of the Mission for safe keeping and who
will see that puichases which are required are made,
SALES
4 No w-aponF, curios, f sh, crabs, shells, or any pro-
ducts are not to be s. Id by members of the Mission
all such are to be disposed of by the duly authoriz-
ed person for the good of the community and not
for the individual.
LETTERS
5 All letters to or from members of the Mission
must pats through the hands of the Head of the
Mission or his ropfee^datrve.
6. No oysters to be obtained on the cemetery side of
ihe bay. CREWS
7. Crews are not to accept gifts from passengers or
visitors. y ISITINc j sEiTLEMENTS
8. Any person wishing to visit any settlement must


obtain a duly signed ticket giving him permission
to do 80.
'HOMES
9. Must be whitewashed inside and out ouce a month
if possible. „
MARRIED PEOPLE
10. Must sleep at their own and not !o camp
about unless they ha»e leave to do so.
TOOLS
11. All tools to be or. u*h't back to the work shop
when kndek off bell rings.
MARRIED w OMEN
12. Must sleep aucl dine at tue (Jhildreo’s Home if
their husbands are away Irom home, aud are not to
visit their own homes after dark it residing tempor-
ally at the Home.
Vessels
13. No person other th-m the crews to be allowed
on board any vessel without permission
PALMS
14. No Palms or ferns to be cut alongside any Hoad
on the Reserve,
MEALS
15. All meals to be taken ac the proper time late
comers to go without, unless with a reasonable
excuse for being late.
SULUS
16. All white eulus to be boiled when sent to the
wash.


17. Married women if their husbands are away fr-
om home must go into the Girls ’Bom* sleeping
there at night and helping in the work there till
their husbands return
Money Purchases
18. No money or any thing for sale or any order to
be given to any member of any of the crews when
visiting Cairns in the different vessels. The Head of
the mission or the missionary in charge is to receive
all such and be will arrange.
Overcrowding Home
19 Married people not to allow any others to occu-
py their houses with them, it being unhealthy to ov-
it)-crowd the small homes.
COMPLAINT
20. Ail complaims tgamst others to be made to
the Head of the Mission or the Missionary in
ccarge. All misconduct at settlements to be re-
ported at once tc the Head of the Mission by the
chiefs,
GIFTS FROM ABORIGINALS ABROAD
21. No member of the Mission is to accepton any
ai count any gifts of clothing or anything else from
aboriginal residentiu Cairns. It being considered
unsafe to do so on account of disease and also that
the articles mav have been stolen.
WORK ABROAD *' i
22. No member of the Mission to seek work abroad
without the permission of the Head of the MissidM;


QOABRELS
23. Mariiwd couples quarreling and coming: to
blows to be separated I<■ r a jeiiud to bo decided
by the court.
MISCONDUCT
24. Genera misconduct t«• be puuished by the court
Incorrigibles to be s<-n'©nced to term at Fitzroy
Island as the court m y decide
BOATS
25. Boats to be run out ot water above high water
mark whennot in use
PARADES
26. Prefects of Boy’s H me t<» see that the boys
attend services and all parades regularly.
SALUTING
27. Members of the Mission to salute respectfully
the clergy, members of ihe siatt and the King on
meeting them.
TOBACCO
28. Men on joining th- Miss. on if emoktrs will re-
ceive daily ration of tobacco if indusr oas aud re-
spectful. Lads gi owing up oa the Mission not
allowed to smoke till after they tuarr}. The
old women receive a small ration of tobacco
each day. Any man found giving his tobacco to
women or children or yountr lads to have his sup-
ply reduced or stopped.
BAD LANGUAGE
29. Bad language being used the olfender to be
punished by the court.
CREWS
30. Crews of vessels when in Cairns to stand by
their boats and not to wander about town without


without permission of the Captain of the vessel frn,
which they belong or the missionary in charge for
the time being,
M aro
31. The native game “maro,, to be played only
the beach or along the road to the plantation.
Girls
32. Girls to keep to their own grounds at all times
Boys
33. Boys to keep to their own grounds at all times
Married Men’ Clothing
34. Clothing for married men to be issued to the
wives only.
Visitinj Married People’s Homes
35. No girls or boys allowed to visit the Homes of
the married people without p^r^ission.
FLESH MARKING
36. The marking of the flesh with glass prohibited
KITCHENS
37. No men or bo>s allowed at the House or Dor-
mitory kitchens.
WHITEWASH
38. Homes of married people to be white-washed
regularly inside and out.
WASHING
39. No washing of clothing allowed near any
dwelling but only at the fallsor the laundry,
COCO-NUT FALM LEAVES
40. Coconut palms not to be cut unless with per-
mission and then are to be cut by a duly qualified
person as the trees are easily damaged.


LANGUAGE . .
41* It is rude to speak in a language which is
not understood by all present. Especially is this so
when visitors are present.
MOVING DWELLINGS
42. No person is allowed to move or alter any
building or to undertake the erection of any new
building without first obtaining the consent of
the court.
MARRIED WOMEN
43. Married women from the settlements when,
visiting Parrabah without their husbands must re-
turn to their own hemes before dark or temain for
the night at the Girls Home.
RUBBISH
44. Each married woman to keep a rubbish box.
INSPECTOR
45. The Inspector to see to all yards and see that
the rubbish is taken away,
school hall
46. No person allowed in the School Hall without
authority^
SPITTING
47. Spitting upon the floors of any dwelling
prohibited.
WRITING ON WALLS
48. No writing or marks to be made upon the walls
of any Public building.
GIRRAGAH
49. People from Girragah and Bolbahroo to camp
at Yarrabah when in for the monthly Public
meeting.


THE KING
60. The King: to visit each settlement once a, mojQth
FOKCED MARK I AGE
51. Any girl falling into disgrace necessitating
marriage hurriedly, no bridesmaids,
wedding dress, decorations or cake allowed at the
wedding. The ceremony to be performed privately,
in the church in the presence of the Mission
only.
WAITERS
62 No girl allowed in the room of any unmarried
male member of the Mission Staff Boys to attend
on the single gentlemen of the Staff.
CAFE AT MEALS
63 At meal times care to be taken that no megs
made on the tables.
CHURCH
64. Married women to accompany their husbands
to and trom church in the evenings.
HUSBANDS CLOTHINQ
65. All women to make their husbands clothing
as soon as they receive the material.
KITCHEN
56. Married women not to frequent the bitcheq
unless on duty there or for their meals.
SETiDEMENT PEOPLE
57 People from thy settlements when visiting
Yarrabah to be *areful to cone tidy andcleaq.
SCHOOL CHILDREN
58 Children to attend school tidy and clean.
holes in dresses to be mended. No girls aUoWfl4
about with torn clothing on.


HUSBANDS CLOTHING
59. Married women to mark tnoir husbands cloth-
ing as soon as possible.
MARRIED WOMEN
60. Married women not allowed to wander about
the Reserve alone, But must accompany their hus-
bands or holiday party which they belong.
PRODUCE
61. Hoads of settlements to see that food planting
is regularly done and that produce is se'>t in to
the General Store as soon as possible. Waste to
be avoided
REGULATION. OF CLOTHING
Boys In summer no shirts allowed at all la wiat-
er Shirts allowed morning and evening if the day
be sunny and all day if it is cold. Bed sulus on Su-
ndays. Blue on week days.
Girls At all times only one Garment allowed to co-
ver the chest Short petticoat allowed under the dre-
ss. Dress straight yoke, short sleeves for youn-
ger girls. Boots not allowed.
Married men White Shirts and white Sulus Sunday
Blue dungaree /Sulus week days. Trousers prohibi-
ted, Girls & Women to wear the hair Short with
fringe in frout.ißoye not allowed with fringes.


HINTS TO THE STAFF
Any member of the Staff clothfn?Store.
any^ cast oft clothing to «e«J ® be careful to
Members of the Church at least
tomakeapoint T
if i“ g Specially requeued hU i 0
Staff report a l! m« co ® " hi representative. _
the Head of the M>^ o ca P rry o ut their
Members of the Start clher cauß e should
dutios owing to aiclmess o in ord er that
notify the fact as «oo® ■ ? %Q relieve them.
arrangements may b allowed near a y
No washing of cioum g
private dwelling. inde d that they
Members of the Staf mem bers of any crev?
not ou any account g l n Cairns, such o
aej commissive ■*; fjlora vessel leaves
be arranged for at me
for Cairns. t 0 atte nd to all un
As much as possib J. auar ters.
married gentlemen a ‘her,rq- iM j, t upon
Members ol the btalt are teq


due respect boir.g paid to them by all membfrs
of the Mi .-si on.
Members of the Staff to insist upon all tools being
returned to the proper place.
Ko purchases to be mad<* by members of the Staff
from any men;her of theMiseion—Gifts of weapons
curios etc are not to t e accepted by memtiers of
the Mission Staff. Such articles to tie obtained
from the Mission Stoie, or from the people on
permission being obtained.
Never moke gifts ol clothing to members the
Mission.
Never make any gift unless permission to do so
has been given. This is to insure impartiality
towaids all
Only efuh authorized persens arealiowed to collect
fruit from the frees and all fruits must p&es into
the store to be recounted tar.
All letters written by membeis of the staff for any
member oi the Mission must be passed on to the
Head of the Mist ion or his representative before
posted.
SENIOR GIRLS ROME
QIlvL oA EE SEED:—
1. T > promote the Glory of God and the good of
His Holy (jhurcu


2 To lielp each other to love Christ and to he uns-
elfish and thoughtful for others _ . .
3 To help each other to persevere in the Christian
life and to give up anything rather than part vnth
Christ.
RULES OF THIS HOME
1. To pray night and morning
) 2 To read a small portion ot God’s word every day
' 3. To attend Church daily
4. To he confirmed when old enough
b. If confirmed to he a regular communicant
6. To be sure to make preparation before the Holy
Communion.
HINTS TO VISITORS
Visitors are kindly requested not to make gifts of any
kind to members of the Mission but to the Head of the
Mission or his representative. ,
Visitors are requested not to approach any members
of -he Mission with offers of employment.
Visitors are requested not to make any gift to memt■ >


of news of any Mission vessels.
Visitors are kindly requested not to use the terms
“GIN : “NIGGER’ “MARY’ or “BENJAMIN” hut to
B se the words, “WOMAN’ “BbAC Kb’“ V IFE’ “HUS-
BAND.”
Visitors are requested not to mak*? purchaseivirom mem-
bers of the Mission. All sales being made by those duly
authoiized only.
The attention of visitors is caked to Ore fact that the
Mission is a Church of England Mission and although
subsidised to a small extent by the Queensland Govern-
ment ie dependent for its existence and developement
and ultimate self-support upon the charitably disposed
The Church of England Missions
TO AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES
UNDER THE AUSPICES
OF THE
Australian Board of Missions
Donation* may be sent to tfce Secretary A. B. M.
Queen Victoria Maakets George St' Sydney, or Die
Rot. E R Gribble. Yakkabab near Qaims ftoith
Queensland. i


TIME TABLE
Emng Bell 6 . M
Matins 7 l
Children g singing school 8, a m
W°f k Bell 8. 4t si »
school 10 . »
Inter • VV ° rk 12> noon
-intercession sem«a i. 40
Boys school 2. n. M
Work j. 45 £ «
Evening Bell 6. £ “
Tca 5, 30. n. m
srXi t “ ,► »
P* m
SUNDAY
Batk Bell 9 a
Morning Service I,t Bell 10. 30. a.' JJ
•ra 2<J» tO. 50 a, m
Evensong 2 30. p m
I*t b«JI 6. 80, p. ra
2nd , , 6- 60- p. m
n. c.
Sundays and Holy Day* 7. a. m
Third Sunday in Month 11. a. m
St Matthews Reeves Creek ...
sth Sunday in month 11 a m
St Matthias Kobahra ... ...
2nd Sunday m month ... ...
3t Andrews Bukki
Ist Sunday in month 11 a


STORE RULES
t'o’goods served oat with oat a Store Order duly'
sisfaei being presented
All Orders must be signed by th# persons duly
Appointed and oouater signed by the Head of the
Mission or his representative
No girls allowed about the Store
No boys allowed about the Store unless on busmosa
Orders from Onildrens Home, Hospital Sani
Oiris Outage a id House to be seat in to ch# store
immediately after matins. Persons in charge to order
All goods required for the day on one order. Store
boys to deliver goods as soon as possible.
Hates of issue ol all stores to settlements to beoare-
tUuy recorded as soon as given.
All produce from cne diffeient settlements to be
carefully recorded immediately on delivery ad tne
AU entries to bamada thasama day of is 3Q9
eaco r C r! b ® 9iXe *\ a * ***** received from bairns
eaou trip of tne vessels.
Only etpre boys allowed in the store at aav time
«core boys to sea carefully that there is as ifttle *l'
see as possible. 19 w *"
No stores to OS issued aftea Ou m or batweair
1 P m and 2 p m. e oepyeea
to be kept tidy daily.


Band and concert Company
Rules
I All members cf the Band ard Company to obey the Miss-
ionary iii charge and the duly appointed officer*.
? Snider to blow “CALL” for al m.eaU services and parades.
I when proceeding to any Hall or grounds, the company and
i i ti ii in .on parade at the ou*i.
» Cooks to be appointed by the day. If convergent the girls
f AH ’wood an? wfeer and carrying generally to be done by the t oys
6 Al ni.ark ol the Bana will be appointed to the care of all
7 U4K AH (dothing’ to be taken care of and the members of the
Company and Band to use clothing and equipment as ordered
8 y Un/oTtnc Siiorgirl" to be appointed to take charge of the
vounger members of U.e Company and will see to their meals
and will care tor them while traveling.
9 All monies received by the members of the Band and
ConinanT not to be kept by any member as the-e monies are the
" e company on behalf of Yarrabah and must be
handed iu at 01190 to the person appointed to receive all monies
10 Members of the Band and Company not to leave the Company
to see carefully to his instrument
11 Baud to be called upon at any time
tor practise


Time Cable
MONDAY
2 p. in. Band practice
4 p. ra. Girls Physical drill
>y Boys j, ~
8 p. m; Bible class and Lsyreaders
Midday Intercession
TUESDAY
? (I. Hi. Choir practice till 6. p. m . then dutiea
h* la> Boys lAriii Uieuei' fcer. Majoi Phillip
8 p. m. Girls Free evening
Midday Intercession
WEDNESDAY
Mmuay Xu lei cession
Confirmation class
THURSDAY
b. p. m. oiiiging class at the Cottage
Midiuy inter cessum ——.
FRIDAY
4. p in. Parade
8. p in. Boys Gymnastic classes
Midday Intercession
SATURDAY
Midaay intercession
p. m. Bibble classes - i »


kobahra Settlement
(FITZROY ISLAND)
(To be read every Monday at Evensong)
X. All to attande dtho daily oervioaa oate» provaated by siokaat.
or necessary duties.’ . ot tj revive chair dally rations
2- An aosent from dervl ° v - iu charge.
■until they have jean me too y c he creek MWaya
>% W ialiLut/ ,fco be done at ona propoi d -
“lb “» ‘ hB “
“ BDlo,°,a 8 D 1o,°,a ££*» * djJ “ IUo “““““ a “ 1
Siting boat.
v “ utag tha
Island. , fc fc k 3C , or a ak for anything whatever
8 The people are asked not to o- 0
r * Vl3ltoi ' B AU
rol 69 Allies ol £kii. oT^re^ at once to the chief who
will at once report w th a °viisaionary in charge
11. The chiet will at once report
the arrival of ail visitors. and outride.
12 Houses to be kept be granted by the Miaa-
-13 Permission to camp out all aigtttwiu oe „
ionary in charge if he thinks i . ivo advice in a U matte-
-14 The Missionary m char y 8 t ftiwe to all need
ZX aTookiTlU » «* a-d * the Mu*,
ion


Oil Launch " Yarrabah"
Aotice
VISITORS AND PASS ANGERS are respectfully aske
noi to make present oi an, kind to the Boys loim
iug the crew of the Launch.
IRules j
L At sea after leaving wharf deck to be tidied, rope
co li I, jc anchor wasaed and made.fast,
2 Go arrival in Cairns sails to be carefellly stowed
engine cleansd } can in made clean
3 On the way home at night pray ers to be i^elc
while rounding’ raise Cape ? *
4 The day after returning from Cairns deck to be
scrubbed a'so door in cabin (soap & soda) # All things
bdo.w to be taken out on to the jetty and the hole]
to be well cleaned out Engine tc be cleaned and
pobshed and the bilge cleaned out. Rigging to 33
tightened lamps cleaned & filled.
5 Once every two weeks the bottom of the vessel
to be cleaned. ;
6 All the crew to be on deck if the vessel undejj
sail and twojf the vassal >s running with the engine 1
alone. r j
7 All members of the crew to shew respect tc ail
visitors or passengers and to obey the Captain. ;
8 .411 misbehaviour of the crew to be reported by
the Captain as soon as possible
9 Bob Underwood has been appointed Captain ol
the launch and is responsible for the safety and
working of the vessel.


College Rules
t Boys to behave themselves Weedy and to render respect and
obedience to their superior officers.
2 No Boys allowed in the kitchen at any time.
5 No Boys allowed aboht the College unless a Missionary
>resent. a 09
Bpvs to behave qnietiv at meal table.
t 0 a t fcfc9rid Compline and to be at the College soon
fter the 9 pm. bell, 6
All to be punctual to meals, no meals to be kepc for those
visent without a reasonable excuse. 9
3 On half holidays boys to be back in time for meals if fW
rg n iten bem "° mealS t 0 b 6 kept Unlesa ’authority
\ Each boy is allowed in turn to invite a friend
i ndays euu Cea on
» d j? ssr - " wimn *' r •*
Lr N 9 0 p 0 K? y ' vm bea " o ' ,ed aw *y at a "y ■«“ «
1 No smoking is allowed among the College boys
i For transgressing the above rules
Ist offence caution
I %nd , , cane
»> expelled
u »«e*r P fo b.
Ist offence Two weeks
-/; 2nd ~ , Four ~
I 3rd >»i altogether


Yarrabah Aboriginal Mission
AIMS -
i The evangelization and elevation of the Abor-
ig’inals by the preaching of the Gospel and teaching
them habits industry, * *
.. .. < * ’ ’ ' ’ * f ' ' • , , . >
f'A ' ' , , « ■ f I * V
2. It is believfed that this can be done by:-
(a) Gathering them into communities surrounding
them with Christian influence and protecting them
from evils tbo often associated with European ser-
vice.
( i, s•) i* *1 ‘ ’-a
b) Bv getting them to take an interest in them-
selves as a people and cultivating self respect.
Printii a* Yarr*hah
