

• PEACt
S*KOP
Through the most dangerous fraud ever perpetrated on the Australian nation, the Menzies
Government will try, on September 22, to take unlimited, dictatorial powers Over the lives and
liberties of all citizens —under the guise of a Referendum "to alter the Constitution , .to make
laws with respect to Communists and Communism."
- ff-*-;.?
A resounding NO majority would prevent any Federal Govern-
ment getting powers to confiscate, regiment, conscript, sentence
and punish—by anything up to death—without citizens having
right of appeal to the High Court or other court.
tary and labor conscription, house raids, in-
lerrogation of citizens by military police,
compulsory informing on sons by parents and ,
use ot conscripts tor union-smashing.
• Arbitration
Amendments
A NO majority is urgently necessary to beat back threats of Fascism and war.
ana the attempts to overthrow by swindle, by controlled propaganda, distortion
and anti-Communisl hysteria, ail present Constitutional safeguards, all citizens'
rights and the independence and security of Australaia.
—giving power to fail for life or fine an
unlimited amount any unionist who disobeys
an Arbitration award, to bankrupt and
liquidate trade unions.
THt Referendum terms nave been framed needed by American war planners, enforced
" by Menzies Government lawyers to go movement of employer* and employees to war
far beyond C ommunists and Communism industries or the dole, diversion of materials
and to give the Federal majority far greater to armaments or for maintenance and sus-
powcra than— tenance” of allied ’ forces like those of the
• Th<» Dgfpnro Japanese and Americans, and government by
■■ ■ Mwicnvc ( ? f « I
n . • * regulation instead ol by parliament.
Preparations Act ... ...... , c
—hotly opposed by manufacturers. Farmers ® NOiIOHOI 2)6rVIC6
and the labor movement, which allows do- Conscription Act . . .
sure of factories, businesses and farms not —which already gives power for both mili-
9 Communist Party tm ' ia hy agreeing to , ll,e rea [ ming of Japan -
A Menzies aims at dictatorship because he
ISSOIUtIOn Act ... wants to drag Australia into a new war
-ruled as illegal in every section by the against the people’s will.
High Court—an Act which, as the late Mr. . «. , . . . .
a- n • ] « ,i r .. rascist dictatorship and war are twins;
utley said, opens the way for the liar, the Hul„, Jd »,1 > j M . . .
„,,,1 ,l „ ■ - I p, r- rimer did it that way and Menzies wants to
pimp and the perjurer. and as Dr. Evatt ii.i
said, is a Fascist blot and a weapon to
declare (he Labor Party and the trade unions voting HO in the Referendum, we
illegal— an Act which the Melbourne Argus pledge ourselves to oppose re-arming of
called “the gun-butt on the door” legislation. Jopon.
T,ip m. r- ii> ßy voting NO, we declare for the real
I CnZI f S ô\ eminent, which seeks to defence of Australia hy insisting on peaceful
trie. us into giving it sweeping powers, negotiations between countries, instead of an
is the same government which betrayed Aus- armaments race which can only lead to war.
Heferendntn Æct 9 s
Hidden 3Meun in y
fHE Referendum ballot paper and the daily press hide the sinister word-
ing of the Constitution Alteration (Powers to deal with Communists
and Communism) Act, 1951.
AS the Labor Party, the trade unions and democratic organisations generally
all united in their opposition to this traud—point out, the Referendum Act
seeks to overthrow all rights and liberties of Australians, to abolish court appeals
and to tear the Constitution to shreds.
The Act as passed by Parliament in July, alms for power to Insert after our
Constitution's Section 51 :
"51 A.— (1 ) The Parliament shall hove power to make such laws for the
peace, order and good government of the Commonwealth with respect to
Communists or Communism as the Parliament considers to be necessary or
expedient for the defence or security of the Commonwealth or tor the execu-
tion or maintenance of this Constitution or of the laws ot the Common*
wealth."
T AWS passed under Referendum powers, wbich could close factories and shops,
confiscate goods, properties or industries, conscript both workers and employ-
ers for forced labor or for overseas wars, would not have to be "necessary," but
merely considered "expedient"—decided by whim or prejudice of Canberra dic-
tators ruling without Parliament and by martial law.
The Referendum Act also seeks power—again not disclosed on the ballot
paper—to re-enact the notorious Communist Party Dissolution Act "without
alterations; or with alterations . . ."
With alterations" could mean more Hitler-style powers.


War In Three WeesrsP
Mr. Menzias : "Nothing for you but here's something for the lad."
Æo Invasion
Says 3lensies
Mr. Menzies' own statements show that he is hoaxing the Australian people
waen he talks of the need"to prepare ojr defences against aggression" and the
need to get total powers for this through the Referendum.
THESE quotes prove that Mr. Menzies' Powers: grail of independence to Finland;
war plans are for foreign wars, under surrender of all Chinese and Persian conces-
the direction of a foreign Power: sions laken by the I sar.
"An Australian Army raised only for ser- • Call for disarmament at Geneva Dis-
vice in Australia would, in all probability, be armament Conference in early ’thirties; then
raised for no service at all. It would be the sustained efforts for collective security against
equivalent of a wooden gun.” the Axis threat, and for disarmament at
— Mr. Menzies. on his return from war talks League of Nations,
abroad, September 22, 1950 (S.M. Herald).
* * * * • When this failed, a sacrilice in the
P|UT invasion movements against an island common cause of World War II ol 7.500.000
M continent can be conducted only by dead, one-third of industry, 1,710 cities and
bceanic powers. We have no present or towns, 70,000 villages destroyed; 23 million
potential enemy that could become an oceanic rendered homeless. (The Red Army accounted
power within die time, or anything like the for nine of every 10 Nazi soldiers killed.)
time, that 1 have stated (three years) ” * Repeated proposals at U.N.O. for arms
Mr. Menzies, Hansard, Mai c 7, . reduction and outlawry ol atom bombs, under
L . , , f , international inspection, honoring ol the Pots-
ET us equip the soldiers from other dam Treafy aga{nst rearmin g J apan an d Ger-
nattons, ana let them send their bo\s man y t an d for Big Five Peace Pact,
into the holocaust instead of sending our own
” ® 113 million signatures by Soviet citi-
—U.S. Congressman Clarence Cannon, Chair- zens to Ban-the-Atom-Bomb Petition: similar
man, House Budget Committee, 1949. responses to Big Eive Peace Pact Petition.
US* —><s9 ® Passing of laws by Soviet Parliament
ü? HPUr to make propaganda for war a crime.
HERE ore the steps taken for world Chief Soviet U.N.O. Delegate Malik pro-
peace by the Soviet Government, im- posed the Korean peace talks,
mediately after its foundation in 1917 . .
on the slogan of "Peace, Bread and the ,f P art,es m d,s P ute co " 9 e * *° 9e * er '
L an{ jj" as in Korea, offer a year of bitter war, then
® Immediate call in 1917 for peace, with- ***'** 'if**“'**™ to S ether — BE *
out annexations, between Allies and Central FORE WAR STARTS,
The Great Frame-up the perjured story spread
by Mensies Government Ministers and by a kept press
in America and Australia, that the Soviet Union has
mobilised vast armies "poised to attack" is the whole
foundation of Mr. Menzie s' Referendum grab for
powers to militarise, fascise and impoverish Australia
for "war in three years."
Read these quotations —and you will realise that it IS ail a Great Frame-up,
that the whole menacing armaments race can be avoided, that a Big Five Peace
Pact can be signed as an alternative to Atlantic and Pacific War Pacts.
York Times *
DURING this past summer, hundreds of | IiCSSOM TTo
millions of roubles, tens of thousands | CBI I*
of man-hours and vast quantities of Soviet | |
industrial output have been poured into the |T3ASTOR NIEMOLLER, famous Ger-|
program for the beautification of the Soviet |-L man Protestant leader, said otter his =
capital. It is hard, not only for Soviet citi- | release from a Nazi prison comp in|
zens. but for foreigners long resident in Mos- 1 1945: I
cow to believe that the Kremlin would con- | ® "Hitler Attacked the Communists. I|
linue the program on this vast scale if it |lomented, but did nothing,
seriously believed that atomic bombs might | ® "Hitler attacked the trade unions. |
soon be falling on Soviet territory.” 1 1 lamented, but did nothing. |
— Harrison Salisbury, Moscow correspondent of | ® Hitler then oHocked the ews. |
the anti-Soviet New York Times, Oct. 11, 1950. | lamented, but did nothing.
I • "Hitler then ottocked my church. 11
U.S. Ambassador to Soviet: | acted, but then it was too late."
Admiral Kirk (U S Am- fiiiimmiiiiniiiimm I
U bassador in Moscow) detects none of .. ~, , v . , i r d
. r ,1 , . .11 p ACTUALLY, the last class ol Russian
the signs ol war that experts watch tor. ror n , »,
example, Soviet Army units are remaining at « conscripts to serve its term was demobi-
peacetime strength. No over-age classes are on schedule. Older classes are not being
being called up. No extraordinary move- called back into the army.
ments of troops or supplies have been de- -U.S. News and World Report. January 26, 1951.
tected. There is no drive in Russia to build
bomb shelters, or restrict civilian consumption GeriGral MocArthur.
of critical materials. There is no shifting of “ME (General MacArtbur) did not believe
labor away from peacetime to wartime indus- H Russia was in a position to launch any
tries. predatory attach from llie Asiatic continent.
—Semi-official U.S. News and World Review, H
interview with Admiral Kirk on his visit to —General MacArthur s evidence to U.S. Con-
Frankfurt, December 15, 1950. gress Inquiry (S.M. Herald, May 5, 1951.)
U.S. News and World Reports: Mr. Ch if ley :
AS the U.S. and British military experts in I REMEMBER Viscount Montgomery say-
Franhfurt see it, there is no sign ol any ■ ing five years ago that there was no
build up of Soviet forces in East Germanv.” possibility ol a world war in the next 15 or
—U.S. News and World Report. December 15, 20 years. .. . „
1950 —Late Mr. Chifley Hansard, March 7, 1951.
CHURCHILL SAID
"rpHE impression I brought bock from fhe Crimea and from oil my other contacts
A is that Marshal Stalin and the Soviet Union wish to live in honorable friend-
ship and equality with the Western democracies, I feel also that thei» word is their
bond. I know of no Government which stands to its obligations, even in its own
despite, more solidly than the Russian Soviet Government.
WINSTON CHURCHILL, February 27, 1945.
STALIN SAID
"T>EACE will be preserved and strengthened if the people take into their own hands
A the cause of the preservation of peace and defend it to the end. .
"As for the Soviet Union, it will continue also in future unswervingly to pursue
a policy of preventing war and preserving peace."
—STALIN. February 16, 1951.


Canberra Has YOU Listed
Check this list through corefulJv—to see how a Referendum YES majority woufd hit YOU, your family, your job, ycur
business, your form, your life one* your liberty.
Housewives
HARASSING shortages, blackouts and prices would
be made far more disastrous for housewives by
Referendum powers. There would be more butterless
and meatless tables.
Services like hire purchase, deliveries and credits lor
home improvement would be further reduced.
A YES majority would hit the housewife and mother
hardest of all.
Huttu fact u revs
FACTORIES and offices could be arbitrarily cl osed. materials seized. labor diverted, thou-
sands of consumer industries wiped out and manufacturers bankrupted, by the Govern-
ment, gaining through the Referendum, all the powers of the Defence Preparations Act and
more—and removing all right of High Court Appeal.
Even many manufacturers who expected war contracts could be bankrupted. America is
to be the "arsenal Australia’s role under Washington-Canberra war plans is to provide
wool, lead, zinc, tungsten.—and soldiers, sailors and airmen—but not many armaments.
Fa enters
REFERENDUM powers would be used to divert to armaments and stockpiles more of the
sulphur for superphosphate, jute for bags, rubber for tyres, zinc for galvanised iron and
wire; machinery and building materials.
Wheat-glutted and butter-glutted America does not consider Australian wheat and dairy
farming "essential” to war plans; therefore, the materials and manpower needed to run tnem
would be conscripted under the guns-before-butlor and bombers-before-bread policies of the
filenzies Government.
Subsidy monies would also be grabbed for war. Wheat acreage has fallen from 12
million to W million; the butter decline is well known. A YES majority would blight Aus-
tralian agriculture.
Sh uph &i*pers
AYES majority would soon empty many shop shelves,
through enforced diversions to war. Butter, salt,
meat, clothes and other goods coidd be diverted for
maintenance and sustenance of friendly countries,
say America or Japan, or commandeered for local armed
forces before they reach the shops.
Inflation and lowered real wages of workers caused
by Referendum [rowers would hasten the bankruptcy
of many shopkeepers.
Fuulh. ChiMrvn
CONSCRIPTION of youth for war would be extended, and the Referendum would give
power to conscript for overseas wars With indoctrination for wetr and hatreil goes
increased crime, blighted careers, destroyed lives.
Children would be forced to grow up in a worse atmosphere of tension and (ear, subjected
to neurosis and evil influences. War economy oowers would hit everything from children »
schoolbags and books to creches and toys. Wnr means orphans. War preparations produce
crime waves that cause nightmares for children and parents.
Hiyvants
UNEMPLOYMENT and tensions created by applying Referendum powers woufd lead to
antagonism toward the overseas-born, as in the depression Migrants could be turned
out of hostels to accommodate conscripts, worsening the housing crisis. Present two-year
contracts for migrants could be extended indefinitely under the Referendum powers.
Sea* Fand * Air Transpart
CIVILIAN trade disruption, manpower diversions and shortages would hit the merchant
marine, railways, commercial road users and air lines. The Government is already sell-
ing out A.W.A. to U.S. interests, it might soon sell-out T.A.A. Civilian transport generally
would he heavily reduced, even if it could get the rubber tyres and petrol. .
Min eiders
PRIVATE home-building would be stopped, building firms and architects ruined, through
use of Referendum powers to divert and conscript.
ÜNEMPLOYMENT and the dole, for those not con-
scripted or needed for war work, would quickty
follow a YES majority.
Wages would he frozen, all trade union safeguards
attacked more viciously, workers fighting for their rights
jailed or interned, the wage-earners generally impover-
ished by a colonial war economy, by uncontrolled inßa-
tion and shortages.
Australian wage-earners would soon learn what fas-
cism really means, if they do not build unity with
farmers and business people to defeat the Referendum
plot.
Workers
Sspmmi
WSßiMim
llllf
Fvnsinns* Fixed I neuntes
INTENSIFIED shortages and inflation would pul old age, invalid and war pensioners,
already at near-starvation level, on to starvation levels.
Use of Referendum powers to step-up the war drive would pauperise lens of thousands
living on returns from gilt-edged securities, small rents and dividends, insurance, rc.tu.g
allowances and superannuation.
Fruit* Vefjetuhles 9 Huwtetj
TIN and tin-plate would be diverted more and more to war and to US. and local stock-
piles. under Menzies dragnet Referendum powers.
Without tinplate lor canneries, Leeton, Griffith, Shepparlon and other canning centres
would become ghost towns: canneries in Queensland, Victoria and South Australia would
be knocked right out of production.
Many vegetable and fruit-growers depending on canneries would be bankrupted. Tor. !
and export honey trades, vital to many ex-servicemen and farmers, would also be broken by
stronger powers to deny them materials.
I Fuul" Gruwvrs
AYES majority would give full powers to wipe out
the wool auctions, as the Menzies Government
openly plans, to seize and allocate wool, at cheaper price,
to America or U.S.-owned mills in Japan.
This, as graziers’ leaders have pointed out. would
undermine the wool industry, wh ich earns over two-
thirds of Australian purchasing powder abroad, and thus
undermine the whole Australian economy.
Military boots and cotton uniforms are already being
made in Japan. The S.S. Hindustan alone took from
Sydney recently 275 bags of cattle hides and 217 bags of ox hides for Yokohama and 2,500
bags ol hides for Kobe.
The Japanese forces, and the "allies” they supply, will want uniforms made from Austra-
lian wool to go with boots made from Australian hides—and the wool will have to be
cheap.
II r uvtiers
WOMEN S labor is being deliberately cheapened, as the recent Newcastle women’s strike
showed, so that men conscripted for war can he replaced by low-paid women workers.
A YES majority could be used by the Menzies Government further to reduce women’s wages
and "direct” them to war work.
Fivit Servants
A GOVERNMENT purge plan to sack 10.000 civil
servants has been announced; further purges would
follow under war “ economies” and Referendum powers,
which would overthrow all employment safeguards for
permanent and temporary civil servants.
Civil servants could be directed to any defence
project chosen by the Government —or to the dole.
The Referendum would give the Commonwealth fur-
ther power to overthrow State restrict Slate
finances and State works, and thus cause dismissals of
Slate as well as Federal employees.


Democvatic rule to v the
people
BOTH MR. MENZIES AND THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL,
SENATOR SPICER, HAVE SAID THAT THE COMMUNIST
PARTY AIMS AT MINORITY DICTATORSHIP.
AN this question, and on our majority of their electors. Parliament will be
U mantory institutions, the Program ® n L e * ecut | v f “ well ttS « legislative bod Y]
of the Australien Communist Par,, £
declares. pies parliament, will immediately proceed to
I (iis mighty organised movement of the replace the present dangerous policy of war
people led by a united working class will win with a policy of peace and to breaking the
real people’s political power and a People » power of the small clique of industrial, bank-
Government; the machinery of State will be ing and land monopolists as the essential
transformed and the agents of Collins House condition for opening the way to the building
in positions of authority in the civil service, of Socialism,
polite, judiciarv and the armed forces will be _
replaced by determined and loyal supporters uSItUKUt Democracy
of the people’s power Scores of thousands of ‘The People’s Parliament will, for the first
working people will be drawn into the work t ; mc> establish genuine democracy, the real
ol Stale administration. rule of the majority. To day, the people have
People's Parliaments wrested from the rulers, by means of long-
drawn out political struggle, certain demo-
“ I lie broad popular alliance of the people crat i c rights of organisation, free speech, a
will transform parliament into a genuine in- limited right to strike and a vote. These
s! rumen lof the working people, carry through rights, however, are under constant attack bv
electoral reform with proportional représenta- {he wealthy few and tl ieir minions who, own-
lion, and regulate ihe powers of Federal and the industries the banks, the press and
Stair parliaments. other levers of power, are able to Irustrate
Our parliaments will be filled by true the will of the people People’s Power is
representatives of the people s movement, who needed to end this veiled dictatorship of the
will be subject to recall at any time by a few over the many.”
Programme of Australian
People’s Government
0N the measures to be carried out by a • End the ravages of ever-recurring
People’s Government, the Communist droughts by a great national plan of water
Party program declares: conservation and irrigation, flood control and
Ihe People’s Government, expressing the prevention ol erosion, together with afforesla-
povver of the people based on a united work- Hon. in order to safeguard the agrarian indus-
trie class and a broad popular alliance em- tries and the soil now endangered by ruthless
bracing farmers, professional people, techni- exploitation. The inland and sparsely inhab-
rians and all those who work by hand and ««I regions an enormous part of our territory,
brain, would; , present a challenge that only Socialism can
n , a , j. > . j I j meet. These lands, now deteriorating and
w Restore Australia s independence and i • . , . i i r r i
r I. r subject to erosion, can be made fertile and
pursue a foreign policy ol peace. I I , .1 .. i i.i i r
add to the national wealth by means ol provi-
© Break the power oI the monopolies and sio n of water, re-afforestation and other scien-
hig capitalists by Tie Socialist nationalisation tific measures. Socialism will make possible
ol large-scale industries, hanks, distributive a vast p l an f or {he remaking of nature and the
monopolies, insurance companies and the land rehabilitation of the present waste and semi-
ot the large landowners and introduce a gov- ar ;d [ an d s of our continent.
eminent monopoly of foreign trade.
aim - ~1 .. Ijl . I it • End the press monopoly of the million-
tlhmmate the national debt by cancella- . u-i , , , .. , , ,
(lliil-, JI •„ A t I- aires, 1 tie giant printing plants and daily
tion ol debts to foreign and big Australian -n i i i , ,i i
I h I I ill .. newspapers will be placed under the control
bondholders, and bv democratic compensation r ,i i ... r i i
, . , i. u i >f ot the democratic organisations ot the workers
to Australian small holders. if i .i . n.
and larmers and their allies. . . Lniarantee
• End inflation by democratic reform of freedom of religion, free speech and criticism,
the currency. make available the press and public halls to
9 Eliminate all indirect taxation. the people.
© Eireak up ihe big landed estates in order © A peaceful policy and Socialist planning
to provide farms fur those willing to work mean that the national income can be devoted
the land. to overcoming the housing crisis, the lack of
: ~ ~~~ ~, _. ~ school and hospital accommodation and to
Authorised by V. Bonner, 49 Elizabeth St., Melb. . . A i . i
printed by G, Wheeler, 16 Corr's Lane, Melb., C.L increasing pensions and social amenities.
Official Royal Commission «
Report on Communism |
THE Victorian Royal Commissioner on Communism, Supreme Court Judge
Sir Charles Lowe, after he had "completely traversed all the matters
submitted ... for enquiry and report," found in his official report that there
was—
No sabotage, no espionage, no treason, no strikes promoted or inspired by
Communists for the purpose of disrupting industry or essential services.
What is Communist
' : *SSsm S?î Pollcv?
ItiEWAHTv Communist policy is what workers and
r jPcUttl progressive intellectuals, farmers and small
\fr£irlwC.J business people make it—and not as rhe
business people make it—and not as the
Menzies Government and the press depict
QOMMUNIST policy points include:
® Pact of Peace among the Big Five Powers.
• Opposition to rearming of Japan and Ger-
many.
© Deience of Australian independence.
Conscription Vote
© Referendum on Conscription.
• Effective national control of prices.
© Suspension of mass migration till all Aus-
tralians have enough houses and supplies.
• Deience of democratic liberties, and of
Australian independence.
Tax Relief
• Reduction or abolition of sales and excise
taxes and of taxes on lower incomes, with
higher taxes on excessive profits, abolition
of the special wool lax.
© Equal pay for women, and more creches
and nursery schools to lighten mothers’
burdens.
© Priorities 0.1 supplies to farmers, more
subsidies and orderly marketing to ensure
profitable returns to growers and reason-
able prices to consumers.
Homes, Power
• Vast national program lor re-housing,
flood relief, road repairs, building ol more
irrigation dams and of hydro-electric works
and power stations to end black-outs.
Sign Cor Peace
ÎCIGN your name to the Petition call-1
ing on the Five Great Powers—thej
jU.S.A., Great Britain, the Soviet Union, (
Î China and France—to come together j
land make a Pact to preserve Peace inï
! the world.
Sign your name to the Declaration!
{opposing re-arming of Japan. {
j A Big Five Peace Pact would mean I
(homes and butter instead of bombers!
and guns; by relaxing tensions it would
help defeat attacks on liberty every-
where, including those in Mr. Menzies'
Referendum Act.
NATIONAL LIBRARY
Of AUSTRALIA
Referendum
Fraud
THE Referendum Bill is vicious, fraudulent
and dangerous. It seeks to damage free-
dom, thought and expression in this country.
The next logical step will be to establish a
Belsen horror camp.”
—Senate Opposition Leader, Senator N.
McKenna. Parliament, July 12.
If was proposed that Parliament’s opinion
as to the necessity or expediency of the
law, from the viewpoint of defence or security,
should be unchallengeable in the High Court.
, . . It was a transparent attempt to circum-
vent the High Court as the interpreter of
the Constitution.”
Dr, Evatt on the Referendum, Parliament,
Julv 10.
* * * *
THE Bill is in conflict with the Declara-
tion of Human Rights, to which Australia
is a signatory and which morally, if not
legally, binds Australia to ensure that civil
and human rights and liberties are retained
for all our people.”
—Mr. P. J. Clarey, M.H.R., ex-President A.C.T.U..
Parliament, July 10.
* * * *
BUT the Menzies Government now wants
to go even further, and, under its present
(Referendum) proposals, trade unions. Oppo-
sition parties and many other political, social
or religious groups can he suppressed and
their property seized without compensation.
Powers of this kind are completely alien to
a democratic country—and all citizens, what-
ever their political leanings, should unite to
defeat this Referendum ’
Official Labor Party Statement, August 8, 1951
