

1
m
V BY RUTH n.HAVKER^
I
A
1
1
1
jMmnllmM
#- 1
jWBfc/
J
Y . _ ,
J
„ *
w -w *• '
Ml
1
Cr'- :
,»:■; AX'-
1
■
V/ /
J
1
■ B" “ 1 k* o-
I DRAVINCrS BY NORA YOU!


AT 'O/v^
! 2>
/'
V




Chapter XL—The Awakening


TESTEJRDj4T
Being
The Adventures of Us Three with the Early Colonists
RUTH M. HAWKER
Author of "Us Three," "Us Three Outback," etc.
Drawings and Cover Design (from hand-cut linoleum block) by
NORA YOUNG
Adelaide: F. W. Preece & Sons
1936


Registered by the Postmaster-General for
transmission through the poSl as a book
Wholly set up and printed in Australia
at The Hassell Press, Adelaide


C OSS\7
8 JUL 1935
Foreword
THESE pages represent slices from the experiences
of the pioneers—slices cut at two different periods,
in a humble effort to show the everyday life of an
ordinary family like us, and to contrast it with life
to-day.
The historical characters, which must not be identified
with any particular individuals, present, rather, a com-
posite picture of the men, women, and children of those
days. We are sorry that our only dog is modern; there
couldn’t have been one like him then.
Our grateful thanks are due to the Most Important
Person at the Archives, who bewailed in vain the tele-
scoping of time between several incidents, but helped us
to find all the really correct information.


The Road
UP from the sea with the tall ships dipping
Cable-length to the turning tide
And silver shadows of seagulls tipping
Rigging and spars at the waterside;
Beyond the reach of the mangrove’s fingers
(Dark and mottled like eel or toad),
Thankfully skirting the mudholes, lingers,
Gaining strength for its way—the Road.
Out of the maze of the sandhill’s making,
Bending blades of the stiff white grass,
In single line, when the Road was waking,
First faint footsteps began to pass.
A single line that was thin and narrow,
Nearly lost in a salt lagoon;
And then small ruts of a hand-drawn barrow —
Ah! but the Road is growing soon.
A path through the gumtrees slowly winding,
Climbing into a rocky track
Hung on the hilltops, a rough way finding;
Always forward, and never back.
Rumble of wheels and the stirrups clashing,
Scatter of stones as the hoofbeats fall;
Bullock teams crawling, the mail coach dashing,
Start to finish, the Road knows all.
Out from the town with its noise and bustle,
Blazing hot on the dusty plain.
Cool on the heights where the sheoaks rustle,
Ever the Road goes on again.
By swamp and desert, by farm and furrow,
Marking surely where men have gone;
By crop and blackgrass and wombat burrow,
Still and always, the Road goes on.


Chapter One
IT WAS the last day of term, but it hadn’t that exciting “to-morrow is the
holidays” feeling, because mother was going away. Us Three sat on the
window seat in her bedroom and watched her packing.
‘‘ I wish England wasn’t so far away, ’ ’ said Richard.
“I wish people there wouldn’t get ill,” said Yolande.
“I wish you didn’t have to go and help them get better,” wailed Neenie.
“You ought to be ashamed of yourselves,” said their mother. “English
grandfather sees so little of me, surely you can spare him a few months. How would
you like it if I sent someone else to nurse you when you were ill ? ”
Granddaddy poked his head round the door at the sound of that wail, Aus-
tralian granddaddy who always knew what to do when things went wrong, and was
not just someone they had never seen who wrote letters in wriggly writing they
couldn’t read.
“Is the cabin trunk fastened?” he asked. “I’ve come to take it out.”
‘‘ It won’t shut, ’ ’ said mother.
“Too full of rubbish, I suppose, too many strings of beads. Come on, you
three, and help me sit on it.”
He made a great business of hitching up his trousers and taking off his coat,
then he rolled up his shirt sleeves and dumped Neenie and Yolande on the trunk.
They sat hard, one at each end, but in spite of much puffing and blowing the catch
stayed an inch away from the lock. At last he sat himself with a thump between
the girls; there was a creaking groan, the lid went down, and Richard pushed in the
catch and locked it.
“I hope I haven’t broken anything,” granddaddy said, as he and Richard
carried the trunk out and strapped it on to the back of the car. “You fetch the
rest of the things,” he went on, “and tell your sisters to help.”
Richard fetched a suitcase, Yolande the bundle of rugs, and Neenie the hatbox,
which was small and light because her mother didn’t wear large hats.
Pete the dog, wanting to do his share of packing, brought an old tennis ball
with a chewed cover, and pushed it well into the rugs when no one was looking.
Mrs. Bennett and the deck steward were most surprised when it rolled out at their
feet several days later, in mid-ocean.
Now we ’re ready, ’ ’ said granddaddy, and began tooting the horn till mother
came out. The children saw her standing in the doorway talking to Beckie, who was
going to look after them while she was away, so they all clambered in.
Beckie was tall and thin and wore glasses, and was the cleverest and kindest
person you could ever meet; nicely clever, of course, and beamingly kind. She had
taught their mother when she was little, and she knew which English king died
from eating pieces of bacon between slices of plum cake, why the Duke of Welling-
ton had a false nose, and how Hannibal crossed the Alps. She also knew how to
ask for useful things in several languages, how to make scales on the piano go


opposite ways at once, and how to wash hair without getting soap in your eyes. In
fact, there never was such a person as Beckie, for besides saying, “Have you done
your homework?” when it was necessary, she was quite likely to say, “What about
a picnic ? ’ ’ when most people would have thought it unnecessary.
The house stood in a quiet street at the top of the town, foothills covered with
vineyards and olive groves rising in easy slopes to the mountains behind. Below
was the city, with streets running north and south, and east and west, in an orderly
pattern. A circle of green park lands cut off the shopping district from the rows of
neat red-roofed bungalows in the suburbs. From the top of the street where the
children lived it looked like a toy town, with a silver band of sea seven miles to the
south.
It was a lovely spring day, and Mrs. Bennett sighed when she saw the row of
almond trees covered in veils of pinky white blossoms, and the golden sheets of sour-
sobs carpeting the vacant blocks.
“ It’s such a lovely day to be leaving it all, ’ ’ she said.
‘ ‘ And if the sun wasn’t shining you’d be grumbling at the cold and expecting
rain, ’ ’ said granddaddy, gruffly. “ You be thankful you aren’t going off in a little
tub of three hundred tons, like they did in the early days.
‘ ‘ Whew, ’ ’ said Richard, ‘ ‘ that’s not much bigger than the island boats, is it ?
Mailboats have come on a bit since then, haven’t they?
The car went over a big bump, and the three children bounced up to the hood.
“I shouldn’t think this road has come on much since then,” said their mother.
‘ ‘ There wasn’t one, ’ ’ said granddaddy, with a jerk. “My father—your great
grandfather, children—landed at Glenelg and had to walk up to town finding his
way as best he could. ’ ’
‘ ‘ There’s the mailboat, ’ ’ said Richard, trying to stand up, and being bumped
down again. “Isn’t she huge? You can see her funnels above the wharf sheds —
20,000 tons she is. Why, you could put one of those first boats that come here inside
her, and not know it was there. ’ ’
“And they had pigs and cows and things on board, too.”
‘ ‘ Shall we see them'? ’ ’ asked Neenie.
“No, stupid, I didn’t mean on this ship,” said Richard, in a superior tone of
voice, ‘ ‘ I meant on the ships like great granddaddy came on. ’ ’
‘ ‘ Aw, ’ ’ said Neenie, like she usually did when you told her anything.
Granddaddy drove the car over the first set of rails and drew up.
“I’ll get a man to fetch the luggage,” he said. “You stay here till I come
back. ”
“I wish you weren’t going, mummie,” said Yolande, leaning her cheek on the
back of the front seat. * ‘ Something may happen to you. ’ ’
‘ * Nothing will, ’ ’ said her mother briskly. ‘ ‘ Why, I ’ll be there in five weeks. ’ ’
Just then the man came for the luggage, and they all got out and walked across
the wharf. The great black sides of the steamer towered above them, and the buff
funnels rose like turrets higher still. Cranes were swinging over nets full of luggage
and cargo, and they were loading bales of wool into one of the holds. Men carrying
frozen carcasses of sheep from a refrigerated railway van passed up a narrow plank,
while further along two gangways brought a stream of people on board and off.
Neenie grabbed hard hold of mother’s hand, and Yolande kept close to Beckie,
as they joined the stream going on. Granddaddy found a steward to show them the
right cabin, and they all tried to crowd in at once to see it.


“Do you sleep on a shelf?” asked Neenie.
Granddaddy chuckled.
“We slept two or three in a bunk when we were small,” he said, “and there
wasn’t a bath; they used to take us up on deck in our nightshirts for the sailors to
hose us down. ’ ’
“There’s a swimming bath and a nursery and a palm court,” said Richard,
who was reading one of the Company’s leaflets.
“Let’s come and have a look-see then,” said granddaddy, “and give your
mother a chance to unpack, and get straight.”
So Richard and Yolande went off with him on a tour of inspection, but Neenie
stayed behind with Beckie, and tried the tap in the wash basin to see if water would
really run, and looked into the wardrobe and all the drawers, just as though she
were playing house.
Presently the hooter went for those who weren’t travelling to go ashore, and
granddaddy brought the others back to say “good-bye.” Then there as a great
hugging and kissing; Yolande promised to help Beckie look after Neenie; Richard
to look after them all, and keep them in order; Neenie promised to try and be good,
and not fall over more than fifteen times a day; and then mother promised to come
back just as soon as she could.
But they had to leave at last, and went down the gangway and stood forlornly
at the edge of the wharf till Beckie bought them each a coloured paper streamer.
They threw these up to mother on the deck above them, and the streamers unrolled
like paper comets till she caught the heads, and left them holding the tails. Other
people did the same, till it looked as though the boat were fastened to the shore by
many coloured ribbons. The hooter sounded, the mooring ropes were cast off, and
two fussy tugs began to tow the steamer out. As the space between ship and shore
widened, the streamers unrolled, stretched to their farthest limit, and finally
snapped, and the great vessel steamed slowly out to sea.
They all waited till they were only waving to a black speck, and then grand-
daddy began to walk over to the car.
‘ ‘ Time to go home, ’ ’ he said.
“’Tisn’t like home any more,” said Yolande, while Neenie made a noise
between a hiccup and a chuckle, only it wasn’t cheerful.
“Won’t be much like holidays,” said Richard.
Granddaddy stopped and looked at them as he felt in his pocket for the key
of the car.
“I was forgetting you had holidays now,” he said, “lots of time to do the
things you oughtn’t to. I’ve just bought a farm in the hills, the station’s too far
away for me to be able to keep an eye on you. There’ll be plenty to keep you out
of mischief there. How would you two bigger ones like to get your ponies to-morrow
and ride up? You’d have to spend a night or two on the way, but you could stay
with the Barkers and the Brownes. ’ ’
“Rather,” said Richard, and Yolande began to perk up.
‘‘ What about me?” said Neenie.
“Well,” said granddaddy, speaking slowly but thinking quickly, “well, you
see, someone has to stay at home and look after Beckie and Pete, don’t they?
Yolande’s eleven and Richard thirteen, but you’re only seven, so I think you’d
better come later, by car. I’ll go up to-morrow and tell the housekeeper to get


tilings ready, then I ’ll come down in a day or two to fetch you. That ’ll give Beckie
time to tidy up, and Mrs. Wittle to prepare everything.”
Neenie didn’t say anything. She just shook the ends of her straight yellow hair
off her face, and stared at him with her round, blue eyes.
“That will be very nice,” said Beckie.
‘ ‘ Well, young lady ?’ ’
Neenie made another of her noises, more like a pleasantly surprised cow, this
time.
“Say ‘thank you’ to granddaddy,” said Beckie.
“But I haven’t got anything yet,” said Neenie, in an injured tone.
“How about our luggage?” Yolande burst out, the minute they were settled
in the car.
“Oh, you can carry what you want for the night with you, and I’ll take your
suitcase up in the car. ’ ’
“ I ’ll take a billycan and pannikin and hobbles, ’ ’ said Richard.
‘ ‘ They ’ll be rather cold to sleep in, ’ ’ suggested granddaddy, slyly.
“I’ll take pyjamas and a toothbrush and a towel and a comb and a raincoat,”
said Yolande.
‘ ‘ Raincoat! ’ ’ said Richard, scornfully.
“Well, it often rains when there’s a cool change, even the middle of the
summer. ’ ’
“We’ll want some food,” said Richard.
‘ ‘ And some money. ’ ’
“And string in case anything comes to pieces.”
‘ ‘ A blanket in case we have to camp out. ’ ’
“And a packhorse to carry your goods if you take much more,” said grand-
daddy, teasing; ‘ ‘ and why not a tent and an axe and a compass as well ?’ ’
“Do you think we shall need them?” asked Yolande, anxiously, thinking
he meant it.
“No,” said granddaddy, “you ought to be able to find the way easily enough.
All you will have to do is to follow the main road; only you’d better use side tracks
wherever you can; the bitumen is hard for the ponies. ’ ’
‘ ‘ What ’ll we wear ? ’ ’
“Old clothes,” said Beckie, “and shady hats, or you’ll get sunstroke.”
“ Yes, ” said granddaddy. ‘ ‘ Don’t go in long grass without looking for snakes
first, and keep the main road in sight. There are little settlements tucked away
among the hills where the old people can’t read or write even now, and they live
very much as they did in the early days; so if you strayed into one of those, goodness
knows where you’d end. If you take the wrong turning you’ll maybe find yourself
riding into yesterday. ’ ’
‘ ‘ There won’t be much chance of that, ’ ’ said Richard, with a laugh.


Chapter Two
RICHARD and Yolande were up bright and early the next morning, to prepare
for their trip. Richard wore an old shirt open at the neck, a pair of grey
shorts, and a khaki sou’wester, while Yolande put on an old tunic under
the riding breeches that grannie had sent from England—they finished like
gaiters over the feet, and were altogether new and splendid. She chose an old
panama hat with a plain brown band, and put it beside the raincoats that Richard
had left ready in the hall.
Then they packed a suitcase and put it in granddaddy’s car, but Beckie opened
it to see if they’d taken the right clothes, and unfortunately she found it was full
of books and meccano, so she turned them out and packed it all over again, with
clothes this time. Neenie and Pete trotted after her, and when she went to cut
sandwiches for a riding lunch they came into the kitchen and ate the crusts.
After breakfast granddaddy drove off, and Richard and Yolande went to get
ready. The ponies lived in a paddock next door, so that all Richard had to do was
to let down the slip panel, rattle the chaff tin, and they trotted into the yard.
Yolande took an apple to catch Jennie, but Skipper didn’t need a tit-bit, and held
out his head for the bridle as though he really liked it.
When the ponies were saddled, Beckie helped tie on the luggage. After trying
several other ways, they decided that Richard should carry the pannikins and
hobbles as well as the raincoats, as Skipper didn’t mind noises, and Yolande should
take their night things rolled up in a square of mackintosh strapped across the
front of her saddle like a fat sausage.
All the time Neenie ran about between the ponies’ hooves, getting in every-
one ’s w r ay, so that she was nearly sat on, kicked, squashed, bitten, and knocked over
several times.
“I wish I could go, too,” she said, plaintively, whenever they would listen
to her.
‘‘ It wouldn’t be any use, Neenie, ’ ’ Beckie explained. “You don’t know how to
ride, and there isn’t a pony for you.”
“But I wish I could go,” was all that Neenie said.
Presently everything was ready, Yolande fetched her hat, Richard hugged
Neenie and shook Pete by the paw, they both said “good-bye” to Beckie, mounted,
and set off.
They kept to back streets as much as possible, to avoid traffic and tramlines,
and rode quietly on till they found some empty blocks of land, where they had a
canter to take the tickle out of the ponies’ toes. Further on they came to an open
paddock between two vineyards, and pulled up.
If we go through this it ought to cut off a big corner and save us going round
by the quarries,” said Richard.
Are you sure it’s the right way ?’ ’
“It’s going in the right direction, anyhow,” said Richard.


Chapter ll.—"First Fete and then Emperor smashed through the bushes. ”


‘ ‘ Let’s go too, then, ’ ’ said Yolande, so they rode on, scattering a few cattle that
were grazing under the care of a small boy and a large dog. The paddock narrowed
to a track that brought them to the foot of the hills, where it divided, one branch
turning to the left along the edge of a green curve, and one to the right.
“Which shall we take now?” said Richard, over his shoulder. “I think
the left.”
“Oh, no,” said Yolande, “the left will take us to the other side of town. Let’s
take the right hand one.”
Richard kicked Skipper to make him go on.
“Very well,” he said, “only don’t blame me if it’s wrong.”
“The right couldn’t be wrong,” said Yolande, “but we can turn back if it
bends too far over.”
“Yes,” agreed Richard, “we can always go home and ring up to say we
aren’t coming till to-morrow. ’ ’
The track led them between two hills, into a gully that seemed shut off from
the rest of the world. There were no cattle grazing here, it was too steep and
rocky, and the sides were so high the sun could not reach the bottom, but only
lighted a few points high above. The ponies picked their way between piles of
brushwood and rubbish, twisted stalks of bracken, and stiff brown bushes dead on
their stems. In spite of the warm day outside and the sun shining overhead,
it was cold and clammy here. The ponies blew loudly through their nostrils, and
Yolande shivered.
“Let’s go back,” she said, aften ten minutes’ riding, “it doesn’t seem to lead
anywhere.”
“It’s quite clear underfoot now,” said Richard, “so we ought to be coming
out somewhere soon. But we ’re bearing too much to the right, and the next thing
we know well be back on the plains again.”
“Then let’s go on and get to the main road, and we will know where we are.
I don’t think much of these short cuts.”
“No, well stick to the road once we find it,” agreed Richard.
At last the shoulder of the hill flattened out, and they came into the sunshine
again. It was gloriously warm, and the ponies tossed their heads, pleased to be
out of the gully. Richard looked about him, and then he pulled up and waited
for Yolande.
‘‘ I can’t think where we are, ’’ he said, ‘ ‘ can you ? It looks like some place I
know, only there aren’t any houses. We must have been riding along the hills
instead of through them. ”
“The sea must be quite close,” said Yolande, shading her eyes with her hand.
Let’s go down to it, now we ’re here. It will be too late to go to the farm to-day,
so there’s no need to hurry off.”
What about lunch first, ’ ’ suggested Richard. ‘‘ It must be nearly one by the
look of the sun.”
So he tied their ponies to a tree, sat on the raincoats, and opened their
parcels. There was one packet of egg sandwiches, and one of fig jam, two bush
biscuits, two slices of coffee cake, two bananas, and two oranges.
It was a good lunch, and after they had finished Yolande rolled over on to
her back and shut her eyes, and Richard lay on his front, chewing a green leaf,
till his head grew so heavy he put it down on his arms and slept.
When Neenie had seen the other two riding off without her she shut her teeth


very tight so that she shouldn’t cry, and stumped across the yard to the back
door step. Here she sat down, and Pete came and sat beside her, so that anyone
wanting to come in or go out had to go round or over them. That did not worrj
her, she was far too busy thinking how she could escape from Beckie and follow
the others.
“Pete, I want to go with them, I must go,” she said. Pete jumped up and
patted her with one paw, and told her he was very sorry for her. Now Pete was
a Sealyham terrier whose relations for years back had been used to looking after
children, so when he talked Neenie could understand what he said. We should
not have understood always, so I shall have to translate his language into ours.
“Pete,” said Neenie again, “I will go,” and she stood up so suddenly she
nearly fell off the step.
“I wouldn’t if I were you,” said Pete, wagging his tail anxiously.
‘‘ I am going, so there! ’ ’ said Neenie.
“Oh, very well,” said Pete, who saw that she meant it. “We’d better find
you a horse; your legs get tired too soon if you try to walk far. It must be a horse
with hairy legs so that it doesn't go too fast and make you fall off. What about
taking some food and a hat, too ? ”
“You are a sensible dog, Pete,” said Neenie, and she went indoors to fetch
her garden hat and her schoolbag. Into the bag she packed three bullseyes (with
fur on because they had been in Richard's pocket), two slices of toast left over
from breakfast, an egg that ought to have been hard boiled but squashed, two
biscuits, a cold pork chop, an orange, two pieces of cheese rind, a tube of tooth-
paste, and a slice of corned beef that Beckie had meant to eat for lunch. Then
she went out of the back gate with Pete beside her.
The first horse they saw was a grey troop horse, belonging to the policeman-
that-rides. Pete went up to him and asked if he would take Neenie.
“No,” said the troop horse, swishing his tail and looking down his long, grey,
regulation nose. “I am On His Majesty’s Service, I can’t carry a bumpy little
girl; you must try somewhere else.
“Aw,” said Neenie, like she always did.
“Never mind,” said Pete, “he is just like one of those envelopes people get,
marked O.H.M.S. I’ve noticed they are never nice inside. We’ll go on further
and try there. ”
So they went down the street and saw the butcher’s horse waiting outside
the shop, and Pete asked him if he would take Neenie.
“I’m too tired, ’’ said the butcher’s horse. “I’ve been galloping one way with
Mrs. Smith’s chops, and the other way with Mrs. Jones’ leg of mutton until I am
fit to drop.”
Neenie began to look very woeful, till Pete remembered they were near the
milkman’s paddock, and looked through the fence. All the milk horses were out,
but Emperor, the old mule with the Roman nose, was drowsing under a pepper
tree in the corner.
Pete ran across and looked up at him, telling him all the sad story of Neenie
being left behind and having nothing to ride, and the mule quite understood,
though anyone passing would have thought the little dog was just barking to
annoy. Emperor nodded his head, and came shambling over to the slip panel.
“Yes, I’ll come,” he said, “only you must take down this thing and let me
out. There’s my bridle, hanging in the shed.”


So Neenie let down the panel, fetched the bridle, and stood in the feed-box,
while Emperor stuck out his head, opened his mouth, and kept still till the head-
band was safely over his ears. Then he backed against the feed-box; Neenie
climbed slowly over it, and on to his back.
~ ~ ■-•"I ——”—
“Gracious,” said Emperor, “how you tickle,” and he gave little wiggles all
over so that Neenie felt very small and thought perhaps it would be better to go
home. But when Pete took the end of the leading rein in his mouth and they were
really started, it was better. Emperor stopped wriggling, and went along with
one ear forward to hear Avhat was coming, and one ear back in case Neenie had
something important to say.
Pete soon picked up the scent of Skipper-and-Jennie-going-towards-the Hills,
and Emperor almost trotted, so that Neenie had to hold on by the white spots
where the collar had rubbed at the top back end of his neck.
“This isn’t a nice place,” she said, when they were in the deep dark gully,
‘not a nice place at all.”
Pete put down the leading rein because he was a well brought up dog and
didn’t talk with his mouth full.
“They went along here,” he told her, “though it’s in the wrong direction.
If you want to catch up with them you’ve got to follow. ”
When they came out into the sunlight they were all pleased, and Neenie
felt hungry, so they stopped; only as they had started later than the others, by
now it was half way on to afternoon tea time, instead of lunch. Emperor leant
against a stump, Pete hunted all round to frighten away snakes. Neenie got off
and opened the schoolbag.
First they each had a bullseye. but Pete swallowed his whole by mistake, and
Emperor had such a large mouth that when he was sucking his it fell out between
his side teeth. Then Neenie gave Pete the corned beef and half a slice of toast,
ate the other half and the pork chop herself, and peeled the egg for Emperor. Mules
evidently don’t like eggs, for Emperor turned it over and over with his long
upper lip until he dropped it; Pete tackled it next, but he didn’t think much of
it either; so in the end Neenie picked it up, wiped off the bits of stick and dirt, and
ate it herself. She offered Emperor the cheese rind, but he refused it, so Pete
ate that; then Neenie sucked the orange and gave the skin to Emperor, who
swallowed it without chewing it at all.
It was pleasantly warm after the dank cold of the gully, and Neenie felt so
tired that she leant her head against a friendly tree trunk, closed her eyes, and
she, too, fell asleep.
When Richard and Yolande woke they did not waste much time before they
mounted and rode on, and presently they saw the glimmer of blue water between
the scattered gum trees ahead, and the tall masts of a sailing vessel.
“There’s a ship in the bay,” said Yolande.
“It must be going to load wheat,” said Richard. “That’s all they use
sailing ships for now.”
‘ ‘ I’ve never seen one close before, so do let’s go on. Look at the tents. Some-
one must be camping here.”
They skirted a fresh-water lagoon, and rode on to the top of the sandhills
above the beach, where they reined in their ponies, and sat looking down on the
busy scene below. There was no wheat—sailors were unloading passengers and


goods from the ship, but there were no cranes or gangways to help them. Every-
one and everything was lowered into one of the small boats, which were rowed
into the shallow water near the shore. When the row-boat could go no further,
women and children climbed, trembling, on to the gunwale, and from there to
the shoulders of a sailor, to be carried the rest of the way. The men of the party
had to roll up their trousers and wade ashore, most of them making many trips
to help the sailors land the furniture and possessions.
Richard was too interested to notice anything beyond the unloading, but
what surprised Yolande was the strange cut of the passengers’ clothes. The
women wore poke bonnets and dresses with very full skirts and tight waisted
bodices, and the men tight fitting trousers, cut-away frock coats, and shiny black
top hats, while the children were small editions of the grown-ups. The labourers
had smocks and gaiters, or moleskin trousers and thick flannel shirts, as though
they had come straight from an old-fashioned English farm.
Presently Yolande leant forward and touched Richard’s arm.
“Yes,” said Richard, absentmindedly. “My word, that sailor nearly
dropped a woman then, and she screeched like billy-oh; they are funny to watch. ’ ’
“Richard!” said Yolande, urgently, “don’t you see what funny clothes they
have, just like the pictures in old books, and the boat is so small, too. It’s all
different from what it ought to be. Ido believe we’ve got there instead of where
we meant. ’ 9
‘ ‘ Got where ? ’ ’ asked Richard.
“Into yesterdav, like granddaddv said we might.”
Richard turned in his saddle and looked at her solemnly for a moment, and
then back at the beach. It certainly was rather like one of the old pictures in the
hall at home.
“Well,” he said. “I thought granddaddy was only teasing, but it does seem
as though we’ve really done it. We’re only on the edge here; let’s go on, it’s a
pity not to see everything we can.”
He shook the reins, but just as the pony moved forward he heard a strangely
familiar sound behind him. and pulled up again. It was something like a cow
mooing, a donkey braying, a dog barking, and a cock crowing all at the same time.
‘ ‘ That’s very like the milkman’s mule, ’’ he said.
There was another noise now. like something big brushing against branches,
till, with a bark and a snort first Pete and then Emperor smashed through the
particular clump of bushes beside them. They had not taken so much time over
their lunch as the others —it was not such a nice one—and Neenie had not been
able to sleep long in peace because Pete was afraid that ants and snakes would
bite her, so they reached the shore half an hour after Richard and Yolande.
Neenie greeted her brother and sister with a grubby grin, dirt sticking to the
remains of egg and orange round her mouth.
‘ ‘ I’ve come, ’ ’ she said. ‘ ‘ Have you eaten your bananas yet, because I haven’t
had any?”
“Oh. Neenie!” said Yolande. “What will poor Beckie think?”
‘‘ Oh. Neenie! ’ ’ said Richard. ‘ ‘ What will poor Beckie do ? ”
“She’ll say ‘Good riddance to bad rubbish,’ as you did when I fell off the
verandah,” suggested Neenie.
Emperor put down his head and sniffed about in front of him to see if there
was any grass to eat. The white spots where the collar had rubbed, slipped


through Neenie’s fingers; she slid slowly down his neck, between his big, floppy
ears, over his nose, and on to the ground. He gave a snort at finding her there,
lifted his head, jumped back on to his hind legs, whisked the leading rein out of
Pete’s mouth, and dashed off noisily towards the hills again.
“Ow,” said Neenie loudly, “Ow, OW, OF, that hurt.”
Richard and Yolande scowled down at her.
“For heaven’s sake wipe your face and don’t bawl,” hissed Richard. “Some-
body’s coming.”


Little Great Grannie
NOW little Great Grannie was only just nine
When she and her parents sailed south of the Line;
She thought tents for houses an unpleasant change,
And Christmas in summer too hot and most strange;
The pudding was pluraless, she found with a sigh;
Instead of a turkey they had parrot-pie!
She longed for her cousins, Lucinda and Jane,
But knew that she never would see them again;
She envied their parties and beautiful toys,
And very prim walks with sedate little boys;
She pictured their dresses of muslin and silk,
While she, in brown cotton, was learning to milk.
The gumleafy smell made her think of a cold,
Mama was so worn she did nothing but scold;
Papa grew a beard and got burnt very brown,
And often they’d wistfully speak of “the Town.”
She learnt to bake bread and make butter, with smiles,
And carrying water! —she must have walked miles.
When presently little Great Grannie grew tall,
She found that she liked milking, baking, and all;
She loved the slim gumtrees, the far blue-rimmed plain,
The kiss of fierce sunlight, the lash of cold rain;
And she wouldn’t exchange busy, hard-working days
For all of her cousins’ fine parties and plays.


Chapter Three
THE children backed further behind a clump of bushes and waited. They
heard a loud breathing, and then a small boy crawled over the sandhill
Pete did not bother to growl, and Yolande sighed with relief when she saw the
size of the newcomer.
“I thought it was crocodiles or grampuses by the puffing,” she explained.
The boy stood up unsteadily, and shook the sand out of his frilled shirt. He
was about the same size as Neenie.
“You cannot be natives,” he said, in a disappointed tone of voice. “Your
faces are not black. I saw something moving, and I did so wish to see the natives
before Maria; she always sees everything first. ”
He turned his back on them and thrust his hands deep into the pockets of his
long tight trousers, a dejected little figure. Then he turned eagerly back to them.
‘‘You must have been here some days,” he said. “Have you seen any
natives?”
Richard shook his head.
“Not blacks,” he said, “if that's what you mean. There aren’t any about
here now.”
“My papa says there are many, only they will be too shy to show themselves at
first; and mama told us not to wander away in case they should eat us. Since
you are not natives, I shall go back and see is Maria is landed yet.”
“We’ll come too,” said Yolande, sliding to the ground as she spoke.
“I’ll take the ponies,” said Richard, “and you take Neenie. She’ll fall in
front of us and get walked on if we don’t hold her up.”
So Yolande took one of Neenie’s hands, and the strange boy the other, and
they all went down the sandhills, with Pete well ahead to see that it was safe.
Richard looked along the beach at the piles of luggage and furniture, and
people hurrying to and fro, and turned the ponies inland.
“I 11 find a good place and tie them under a tree, where they won’t be in the
way,” he said.
M hile 1 olande waited for him she saw a heavily laden row boat ground in
the shallows, and two more sailors waded in from the shore to help unload.
“What’s your name, boy?” said Neenie.
“David," he answered, impatiently. “There's Maria. Can you not see her?
A sailor has her on his back, and she is laughing.”
\ olande saw a girl of about her own age hoisted on to the shoulders of a burly
seaman, and carried ashore with her feet dangling down in front, and her skirts
billowing out behind. She was red in the face from laughter and excitement.
There, Missie, he said, as he set her dowm, “there you are, safe and sound
on dry land again.”
Maria smoothed her skirts and looked about her as he splashed off for
another load. She w’as a thin child, with a pointed oval face framed by dark hair


parted in the middle and falling in ringlets. She was wearing a red dress, and
carried a straw hat hung over her arm by a broad band of ribbon. For a second
she stared at us three, then she caught sight of Yolande ’s legs.
“Oh,” she said, “what a strange attire, fancy a young lady in breeches!”
“But your clothes are just as funny,” objected Yolande. “You couldn’t
run or ride in those long skirts. My breeches are much more useful.”
“They aren’t natives, Maria,” said David, dolefully, “and they have not
seen any.* But I like them. Oh, look, there is Corinda being carried, and she
does not like it. She is kicking. ’ ’
Maria gave a startled glance seawards.
“She is slipping,” she said, “her dress is dragging in the water. We must
help her.”
She looked at Yolande as she turned, so the two girls ran down to the water’s
edge, where Maria’s grown up sister was sliding unwillingly dow T n the back of a
sailor. She greeted the girls thankfully and dismounted with their help.
Richard saw that they did not need him, so he kicked off his shoes and waded
in to the rescue of a boy who was staggering through the shallows with a bag
on his shoulders and a bundle under one arm. The bag lurched, the bundle
slipped, and before Richard could reach him it fell with a splash. He picked it
up and followed the other out, shaking the water off it as best he could.
“ ’Tis blankets for our beds,” said the boy.
“They’ll soon dry if you spread them in the sun,” said Richard, undoing the
rope as he spoke. “Where are your beds?”
The boy laughed. “Not made yet, nor our house neither; we are but just
landed. Have you been here many days ?’ ’
“No,” said Richard.
‘ ‘ They have horses, ’ ’ said David.
“Impossible,” snapped Corinda, whose wet skirts hit against her ankles
while she walked about trying to dry them. “Impossible, David; you are an un-
truthful child. There are no horses here.”
“They must be newly come from Van Diemen’s Land,” said the big boy
quietly.
“And you are no better, William,” said his sister, seating herself on the
bag, ‘ ‘ and mama said you were not to talk to strangers. ”
‘ ‘ But they are not strangers, ’ ’ David explained. ‘‘ I know them quite well.
It was very hot, there was no shade on the beach, and the reflection of the
sunlight dancing on the waves was dazzling. David sat on a nice damp strip of
sand, and pulled Neenie down beside him. They seemed good friends already.
Maria held out her hand to Yolande.
‘‘ I like you, in spite of your attire, ’ ’ she said. ‘ ‘ Let us help the boys and
not mind Corinda. She has been out of temper for three whole months, that is
ever since we left England, because she did not want to come to a place where
there were no houses nor parties, nor goodies to eat. But I think it should be
amusing to live in a tent.”
So they sat down and took off their shoes and stockings, and olande
removed her riding breeches, which left her nice and cool in the linen tunic she
wore underneath, while Maria tucked up the frilly legs of her pantalettes.
Corinda sat looking sulkier and sulkier every minute, pretending she did
not see a woman who was looking for shelter for her tiny, crying baby.


“Did you really come all the way from England in that little ship?” asked
Yolande, as they worked.
“Little!” said Maria scornfully, “why, she is a fine vessel of close on 400
tons, though it was rather close quarters sometimes when it was rough and we
could not go on deck. ”
The two boys came back from the row-boat laden with packages, and the
girls took the lighter ones from them and carried them up to the heap where
Corinda mounted guard. There was some furniture and crockery that was not
packed in boxes at all, because it had been used on the voyage—there were not
even bunks in the cabins on some of the ships. So Yolande and Maria splashed
about with their arms full of lanterns, cups, jugs, rugs, and all manner of bags
and bundles.
Soon the beach began to look like a second-hand shop. There were piles of
trunks and boxes and barrels; small tables, wrong way up, waving their spindly
legs in the air; gay gilded French chairs; three-legged black pots; brocaded cur-
tains ; handsome mirrors in carved frames; tools, farming implements, kettles,
and screens. There was a grand piano which had been dropped overboard by
mistake and floated ashore, spoiling its tone and its owner’s temper.
Suddenly a loud wailing rose from the water further along the beach.
“That’s Neenie,” said Yolande, who had forgotten all about her till then.
“ ’Tis David, too,” said Maria, “we had best see what is wrong.”
They turned and ran along the firm sand till they found Neenie and David
sitting in the water up to their necks, while Pete swam round and round imploring
them to come out.
“Get up at once, Neenie,” said Yolande.
“I can’t,” she answered, “I’m stuck.”
“David, come here,” commanded Maria.
“I cannot,” he said.
“We’re both stuck,” wailed Neenie. “Yolande, Richard, come and get us
out or we ’ll drown. ’ ’
The tide was coming in, and she began to cry when a wave slapped her on the
cheek. Hearing her, Pete paddled so desperately that he churned the water
into salty foam.
Richard and William left their unloading, came racing along the beach, and
waded in to the rescue. They found Neenie and David firmly wedged into a
wooden tub that they had taken from the goods on the shore to use as a boat.
An unusually big wriggle on David’s part had tipped the boat so much that the
water poured in and sank it, with the passengers still firmly wedged inside.
Richard took hold of Neenie by her wet shoulders and pulled her backwards and
forwards till she came out with a pop, then William went to work on David.
There was so much more room that David came out easily, but William led him to
shore by the ear, to teach him not to do it again.
\ olande had to hurry across the beach to the horses, unstrap her bundle from
the saddle, and put her pyjama top on Neenie, while she hung her dress on a bush
to dry. Poor Pete really came off the worst; he was very sick from all the salt
water he had swallowed.
Presently a tall, dark woman was borne ashore by two sailors, and Maria
ran to meet her.
“That is mama, she told Yolande, “she had to stay on the vessel till all our


goods were landed, and make sure nothing was left behind. I wonder where
papa is.”
“Up there, my love, making a house for us for to-night,” her mother
answered.
Both Yolande and Maria turned and looked across the beach. Beyond the
low sandhills they could see the top of a new tent showing white against the
background of bush and gum trees.
‘ ‘ Oh, is that our tent ?’ ’ said Maria, happily. ‘ ‘ Come and see it.' ’
“Who is your little friend, my child?” asked Maria's mother, and Yolande
went hot and cold, wondering how she could explain herself.
“I told them not to talk with strangers,” said Corinda.
“But perhaps this child was bidden ask for us,” suggested the mother.
“You must recollect we are not the first arrivals.”
Here Yolande plucked up enough courage to speak.
“We were told to ask for the Brownes or the Barkers," she said, timidly.
“Why then did you not say so at first?” said Corinda, crossly.
“You never asked me.”
“Corinda means she might have saved her breath to cool her porridge,” said
William, ‘ ‘ for if you were bidden ask for us your papa must know ours.
“I still don’t understand,” said Yolande.
“You need seek no farther,” said William, “our name is Browne.”
Maria clapped her hands. “Now I shall have someone to play with,” she
said. “Boys are so rough, and Corinda is so much the grown up young lady.
Perhaps you will stay with us till your papa builds a house.”
“It was granddaddy who told us to ask for you,” said Yolande.
“And we are charmed to have you stay with us,” said Mrs. Browne, with
a smile.
“She wouldn’t say that if she knew more about Neenie," Yolande whispered
to Richard.
‘‘Never mind, David is almost as bad, ’’ said Maria, who heard her. ‘‘ Mamas
are accustomed to that.”
“Now we must move our goods up to the tent," said Mrs. Browne, “for
though it is so unpleasantly warm now, there are clouds gathering.
“I expect it’s a cool change coming,” said Richard, “and it might rain.”
“All the more reason to get things under cover,” said Mrs. Browne, setting
an example by picking up a bundle with one hand and a small chair with the
other. The children each took a piece of furniture suitable in size; Richard and
William a sofa, Yolande and Maria a chair and a stool, and Neenie and David
several cups between them.
Maria pointed to a young woman who sat sewing two sheets together to
make a tent.
“She’s the grand-daughter of a belted earl,” she said, in an awed voice,
“and look at her now, not even a house to sleep in."
All along the beach other settlers were busy moving their goods or making
shelters for the night. Some hung curtains and cloaks over branches, others
put up a framework to thatch with rushes that grew by the lagoons. One or two
families had brought wooden huts with them in sections, but it was too late to
put them together that night, and they had to sleep under two of the largest pieces
propped together like a card house.


It was hard work crossing the sandhills so heavily laden; the girls staggered in
the loose sand, and Mrs. Browne was not much better. William noticed their
neighbours had made a sledge out of a box lid, so he and Richard copied them,
and found it easier to join in pulling the load.
When Yolande reached the tent she saw T a tall man with side w T hiskers helping
two other men to put up a hut beside it. He looked hot in his thick black coat,
and his top hat could not have been much use to shade him.
“That is papa,” said Maria, “and those are the labourers he brought from
England to work for him here.”
“Papa, this is the little girl w r ho has a horse.” As Maria said “little girl,”
she drew herself up to the superior height of twelve years over eleven.
Mr. Browne looked up for a minute, nodded, and turned away again. There
was so much to do before nightfall. One of the men cut down branches, and the
girls picked off the bushy tops to make beds, while the other men built a rough
fireplace. David and Neenie gathered sticks for the fire, Corinda stacked furni-
ture and luggage inside the tent, and Mrs. Browne tied an apron over her skirts
and set about making a stew. When it was ready the children pressed into the
circle of firelight, Maria and Yolande side by side. It seemed strange to be
sitting round a camp fire on boxes and bales, and to be eating their supper off fine
china soup plates with silver spoons.
Pete kept reminding Neenie that though he w r as a small dog he had a large
appetite. He had already introduced hiipself to most of the other settlers, and
as the only other dog wms a big South American bloodhound, everyone was
anxious to pet Pete.
Very soon after supper it was bed time.
‘ ‘ Ought w r e not to keep watch through the night ?’ ’ asked Mrs. Browne.
“No,” answered her husband. “I hear the natives are kindly disposed to
us, well behaved, and shy, and that they only come to the camp in the day time.”
Mrs. Browne looked unconvinced, but herded the girls and David into the
tent, while Mr. Browne and the boys spread their blankets under a tree.
The tent was so full it was hard to find room for beds, but at last all were
settled and asleep, except Mrs. Browne, who lay awake, thinking she heard
danger in every creaking branch and crackling twig. As the clouds outside
grew heavier, the air inside became stuffy, and soon she heard the first stealthy
drops of rain pattering on the canvas. Pete growled as Mr. Browne and the
boys came tumbling in with their blankets, but the children never woke.
The few drops became a downpour, ropes tightened, and pegs creaked sus-
piciously ; soon wet patches appeared on the inside of the canvas, and water began
to drip on to the sleeping figures below.
Hurriedly Mrs. Browne unpacked the bundle of umbrellas and gay fringed
sunshades, and set these up wherever the worst drips appeared, so that the tent
looked full of great mushrooms. When at last the storm stopped she lay down,
too tired to care w r hat happened.
All along the beach weary settlers slept huddled under their make-shift
shelters, main of them wet through. Some were disappointed, many were ner-
\ ous of the night noises, most of them were homesick, and all were wondering
what fortune they would have in this new land.
And so passed the first night.


Chapter IV. —"She set Yolande and Maria to watch the porridge”


Chapter Four
YOLANDE was wakened by a cock crowing almost in her ear, and turning,
woke Maria, whose bed she was sharing.
“Where is it?” she asked in a whisper.
“In the crate with the hens,” answered Maria. “Papa must have put them
in last night out of the rain. He will not be best pleased with the noise.”
As she spoke a strong arm pushed the crate outside, and there was silence
again.
Maria began to wriggle.
“What’s the matter?” asked Yolande.
“Fleas.”
“They come up out of the sand,” said Yolande, “and some places are covered
with them.”
“I am covered with them,” said Maria. “Let us rise and go out.”
They heard Neenie stirring, so brought her too, and when they were a few
yards away from the tent they stopped for Maria to have a good scratch.
“We shall have to fetch water from the lagoon to wash our hands and faces,”
she said, looking for a pail.
“Don’t you bathe?” asked Yolande. “It’s such a waste of the sea not to,
and there are plenty of men to pull you out if you sink.”
Maria looked shocked.
“What, bathe with gentlemen,” she said. “Papa would never allow it.
And we have no suitable attire for it. We will go and fetch water.”
Yolande had put on her riding breeches again, and loosed the ponies to take
them down for a drink.
“The water does not lather without soap, as they told us in England,” said
Maria, scrubbing at her hands. “Corinda says they told us a lot of strange stories
that are not true.”
“It’s hard to get dirt off with cold water, anyhow,” Yolande comforted her.
“I won’t want washing,” said Neenie, “Pete licked my hands and face for
me; that will do.”
“It will not, you dirty child,” said Yolande, setting to work so hard that
Neenie wished she had not spoken.
When they reached the tent again the fowls had escaped and were scratching
busily, while there was actually a black woman with bunches of watercress to
exchange for cast off clothing or trinkets. Mrs. Browne took several bunches;
there were no fresh fruit or vegetables to be had, and she hoped the cress would
stop them getting scurvy.
Then she set to work to kindle the fire, but as all the sticks were damp it would
not light. She was bending over it when a grinning black face appeared beside
her, and she sprang back with a shriek. Two black hands took the sticks from her,


plucked grass, and stirring up last night’s coals sheltered by the stones, until a
flame broke out. .
Mrs. Browne leant against a tree trunk, smiling as though she enjoyed seeing
the black man make a fire, but panting with fear. It was not till her uninvited
helper went away that she plucked up courage to move. Then she set Maria and
Yolande to watch the porridge while she went into the tent for plates and spoons.
David ran round the tent and poked something into the fire.
“What is it?” asked Maria suspiciously, but before he could answer there
was a bang in the ashes, and pieces of shell popped out.
“It was an egg,” he said, looking crestfallen.
Maria dropped the porridge spoon and ran at him.
“Where did you get it?” she asked.
“The hens have made a nest in a bush,” he told her; “it was quite new.’’
“Oh, you greedy little boy, you know Papa promised me the next egg.”
“lam sorry,” and David made a dash for safety with Maria after him.
“You are not! ’ ’ she shrieked. ‘ ‘ You do not look like it. ’ ’
Twice round the tent they went, and Maria was gaining, when Mr. Browne
stepped unexpectedly out. David was running with his head down, not looking
where he was going, so that he hit his father with a most tremendous bang. Maria
stopped short, and there was a horrified silence. Mr. Browne unbent himself
slowly and painfully, then he took David by the back of his collar and shook him.
“What is the meaning of this?” he thundered.
“He is a greedy little boy, he has stolen my egg,” Maria burst out.
Mr. Browne passed judgment.
“Then he shall have no breakfast,” he said, and stood the culprit with his
face to the trunk of a big gum tree, because there were no corners handy.
Yolande took Neenie by the hand and dragged her away, in case she should go
to David’s rescue, but as she moved, Mr. Browne noticed her breeches.
“What is this?” he said harshly, “a young lady in breeches! Disgraceful!
She must change at once.”
“I have nothing else,” said Yolande, feeling that her tunic would be con-
sidered just as shameful.
‘ ‘ Then let her put on her night attire, ’ ’ ordered Mr. Browne sternly, glad of
an excuse to make someone else suffer for the bump David had given him.
“But my night attire’s legs too,” ventured Yolande, trying to back away.
Mrs. Browne came timidly to the rescue; she knew men did not like their
womenfolk to argue.
“Perhaps it is the custom of the country,” she suggested.
“The country has no customs but what we bring to it,” said Mr. Browne.
Here Richard came forward.
“It’s safer, because of snakes,” he said. “You can see them more easily if
they try to crawl up your legs. ’ ’ He spoke as though snakes were an everyday
sight, but he really wanted to hold his own with William, who had been telling
great tales of his English life.
‘ ‘ Snakes ! ’ ’ shrieked Corinda, gathering up her skirts and looking for a com-
fortable spot to faint. By the time she found a convenient log she decided it was
not worth while everyone was too engrossed with Yolande to take any notice of
her. Corinda would take it out of Maria for that, later on.
“Mr. Allen said only one snake had been seen so far,” objected William.


“He hasn’t had much time to look yet,” said Richard firmly.
With the subject of snakes Mr. Browne forgot Yolande’s clothing, but she
took care to keep behind Maria till breakfast was over, and the men out of the way.
Neenie, who had been very silent since David’s disgrace, waited till all were
busy, and then poked about in the ashes with a stick to find the remains of the
egg. It was a leathery, cindery mass, stuck about with pieces of burnt shell, but
she carried it carefully over to David and helped him eat it, though even Pete
turned up his nose at the piece she offered him.
“What are the boys doing?” asked Yolande, as she and Maria hung the
damp blankets over bushes to dry.
“They are going to help papa and the labourers take some of our goods to
the town,” said Maria importantly. “We are not going to live like this forever,
you must understand: Papa is going to build a fine house for us in the capital,
he bought the land before we left England.”
“But how will he know where it is?”
“He will go and ask the gentleman who planned out the city. I suppose,”
answered Maria, “and that is the Surveyor General. He is a very brave soldier
who fought in the Peninsula Wars, papa says, and his name is Colonel Light.”
Meanwhile Richard and William Avere plodding sloavlv along the rough
track that led inland. There AA T ere as yet no beasts of burden in the colony, so
the settlers had to moA T e their possessions on hand-carts, or carrA T them. The
track was more a path than a road, it went round hillocks and down into dips;
Avhen it was Avet the holes were full of mud. and when it Avas fine a elnud of dust
hung OA r er each traveller.
Mr. Browne set the two men to null, like horses, while he and the boys
pushed. It was heavy going, for the rain the night before had put a sticky layer
of mud on top of the dust, and this mud peeled off and stuck to the wheels.
Richard had offered Skipper, but Mr. BrOAATie refused, saying he could not be
responsible for using such a A r aluable animal, nor had he cart or harness. As
Skipper had come from a dealer, and cost £6. this seemed strange to Richard.
They rested every half hour, and Avatched the other settlers struggling along.
The more wealthy had or hired a hand-cart, and someone to push it, and one
man solemnly steered the course of an OA r erloaded wheelbarrow, Avhile his serA r ant
struggled along in the traces. There were whole families of poor folk and
emigrants with packs on their backs and arms full, even the small children
carrying their share of bundles.
When they had nearly reached the tOAvn site they found a very hot and
irate gentleman sitting in the middle of the track. He had no hand-cart, so he
had put his belongings in a barrel, and rolled it along, but when he was almost
at the end of his journey it struck a stone, the top flew off, and clothes and
utensils were scattered all the place. Unfortunately he had packed a
laundry iron amongst his clothes, and it had bounced about, stoved in his best
tall hat, and smashed much of the crockery.
The boys helped clear the way by picking up most of his belongings for
him. but they left him sitting at the edge, looking mournfully at the Avreckage.
Presently Mr. Browne went ahead, and left the boys in charge.
“When shall we reach the tOAAm?” asked Richard.
“This is the toAvn,” answered Mr. BroAAme, as he Avalked away.
Richard felt disappointed, for no one could have told it was a town. There


were no houses as yet, only a few rush or mud huts, scattered far apart, and the
marines were putting finishing touches to the three mud-walled rooms that were
to be Government House. It was all just like the country they had been passing
through, trees and bushes grew in the middle of the streets, and there were tents
down by the river bank.
“Who chose where the town was to be?” asked Richard.
“The Surveyor General,” said William, “and a fine pother he’s had trying
to suit everyone, Papa says. He had to choose a spot where there was good
water, not too far from a harbour suitable as an outlet for the farming country
when that is taken up. Some say he has put us too far from the sea, others that
’tis no use for the farmers, and the Governor disagrees with him on all counts.
He is hampered by want of funds and men and beasts, but he has his orders
from Home, and carry them out he will, but papa says it will kill him in the
end. Papa met him before he came out here. Look, here they come now,
together.”
Richard watched the tall, soldierly-looking man with interest.
“He looks terribly ill and tired,” he said.
Colonel Light did not take much notice of the boys, just nodding to them
as he talked earnestly to Mr. Browne.
“So I said to him, ‘Your Excellency, I have to lay out a city that will last
for all time, not a few back yards for fowls to scratch in. I can only act as I
think right, and neither you nor I will live to see the end of it. Posterity alone
may pass judgment.’ ”
“I bet the Governor didn’t like being spoken to like that,” whispered
Richard.
Before William could answer one of the labourers fell to the ground com-
plaining of a pain in his head, and was then very sick. Mr. Browne loosened
the neckband of the man’s thick flannel shirt, while Richard ran to a swamp to
fetch water in William’s hat.
“What ails him?” asked Mr. Browne.
“It would be sunstroke,” said Colonel Light. “He is not very bad. Let
him rest in the shade till he feels better, and do not let him walk too far today.
Now I must leave you and be about my business.” He strode off with quick ner-
vous steps.
They watched him go, and then looked to the patient. He seemed better,
but not fit for the long walk back to the shore, so Mr. Browne decided to leave
the boys with him, while he and the other man went on to his piece of land to
put up some sort of shelter.
The hand-cart was laden with tools and a few provisions, so it did not take
long to unload and bring it back empty. Laying the sick man on it, they
brought him to his comrade, where they left him in a shelter of branches built
against the trunk of a large gum tree. Then Mr. Browne and the boys set off
again for the encampment by the shore.
The empty cart made easy pushing. Mr. Browne walked beside while the
boys trundled it along, jumping on at the top of the slightest rise—the country
was mostly flat here—and coasting down to the bottom, where the handle hit the
ground sharply and shot them off.
The fourth time this happened William alighted on a bare patch of earth
at the edge of the track, and sat still for a minute. Suddenly he gave a yell.


“What ails you?” asked his father.
“Red hot needles sticking into me all over,” gasped the boy.
Richard ran up.
“You’re sitting on an ant’s nest,” he shouted. “Get up quickly, they’re
jumpers!”
It was William who jumped then, while Richard and Mr. Browne beat off
the angry insects with twigs, and Richard begged him to take off his trousers
and catch the ones insde.
After that there was no more riding, Richard and Mr. Browne did most
of the pushing, for William’s hands and legs were very painful and beginning
to swell.
When they reached the settlement they saw the figures of men and women
moving among the trees, and Mr. Browne looked anxiously ahead, wondering
what danger threatened them.
“Everyone seems very busy,” said Richard, pointing. “I wonder what is
the matter.”


The Billahong
IN a dip across the paddocks where rabbit roads go down.
And sheep tracks zigzag through the grass that’s stiff and crisp and brown
Half hidden by a turning bank, where thistle stalks grow long,
Dark brown and cool, you'll find a pool: the station billabong.
It’s very quiet at the edge, the watching gum trees think;
They hardly see the thirsty birds that flicker down to drink;
The wind is never noisy there, it only tiptoes by,
All afternoon the bronzewings croon a drowsy lullaby.
The sun beyond may bake and burn, the sky be blue and hard,
But there the light is soft and dim, with shadows crossed and barred;
And when at night small ripples rock the stars from side to side,
The mopoke wakes, the curlew makes a sad complaint outside.
Then softly in between the trees the shining moonbeams ci’eep;
They call the ’possums out to play, and silver all the sheep;
Then dive below the shining leaves and sink in silence down
Like nymphs afloat, still and remote, whose pale, white bodies drown.
The white stems of the circling gums are shining in the dark;
Across the rise the homestead light is like a tiny spark ;
The night birds fly, the shadows fade, the dawn will not be long;
Deep, dim, and cool, there lies the pool, the station billabong.


Chapter Five
AFTER Mr. Browne and the boys had left with the cart for the city, Maria
and Yolande spread out the blankets, picked fresh branches for beds, put
“the sunshades and umbrellas to dry, and gathered sticks for the fire. Mrs.
Browne was glad of their help, and pleased with the eager way they worked, so
presently she said they could amuse themselves how they liked.
“But remember,” she added, “you must look after the two little ones, or
they will get into mischief.”
“Oh, yes, mama,” Maria promised glibly, and as soon as her mother’s back
was turned she fetched a strange looking bundle from the tent.
“ ’Tis mama’s crinoline,” she explained to Yolande, with much glee. “She
wears it under her smart dresses when she goes to parties. It does not appear
that she will be going to many parties here, so we will use it to play house.”
She opened out the folding basket-work frame as she spoke, propped it up
on two bushes so that it looked like an airy beehive, and then hung some of the
blankets over it.
“Now we will be the Governor and his lady receiving the loyal colonists,”
she said happily. “I shall be the Governor’s lady and keep house, and you
can be the Governor and fetch things for me.”
“What about us?” asked Neenie.
“Oh, you can be the loyal colonists, but you must not come until I am
ready. Go and play on the beach, I will call you later.”
David wasn’t pleased at finding himself ordered about like that.
“Maria is very like Corinda sometimes,” he told Neenie, “and a girl should
not be governor. Ido not wish to be a colonist, do you?”
“No,” said Neenie. She didn’t know what a colonist was, but thought
it must be something nasty as David did not like it, perhaps a wild pig, with
long bristles, or a horrid crawly beetle.
“Let us go and make a house for ourselves,” said David.
T es, let s, said Neenie, and fetched her school bag, in case they should
need the biscuits. “We won’t go far,” she added.
“We will go far enough not to be there when Maria calls us,” said David.
They went towards the lagoon, and began to burrow into the middle of a
clump of rushes, till Neenie saw something pink and wriggly on the ground, and
jumped out in a great hurry. Then they tried climbing up a fallen tree trunk,
but the bark was full of spiders, and there wasn’t anything to hold on by, so
they soon tired of that. They were really starting back for the beach when
they saw a black man coming away from the encampment. He had brought in
some kangaroo meat to sell.
If we follow him, said David, “we will see where he lives ”
Neenie hung back. “He looks fierce,” she said.


“He will not hurt you if I am here,” said David grandly, “and we could
keep a long way behind.”
“That would be better,” said Neenie, so they both began to walk into the
scrub. Pete knew they ought not to be going so far away from the camp, and
kept whining and jumping up to try and turn Neenie, but when he found she
would not stop he knew he must go with her to protect her.
Maria set herself busily to furnish the Governor’s residence. She ordered
green rushes to arrange in patterns for a carpet, bunches of a prickly wattle for
decoration, and enough cockle shells to make both dinner service and tea set.
When it was all ready she called David and Neenie, but there was no answer.
“We must look for them,” she said. “How tiresome that they have not
stayed within earshot.”
“I can’t see them anywhere,” said Yolande anxiously. “Where do you
think they can be?”
“We must search the encampment,” said Maria. “They cannot be far.”
Children were often mixed up with other families in those days, before
everyone was unpacked and settled properly, but though Maria and \ olande
asked at every tent and hut, the wanderers were not to be found.
“We must not worry mama,” said Maria, “she gets the migraine if she is
worried. We will go and look for them ourselves.”
There was no sign of tracks in the dry sand, but when they went to search
the rushes round the lagoon they found one footmark in the soft mud.
“That is the print of Neenie’s sandal,” said Yolande, “and here are Pete’s
paw marks, and they point inland.”
“Then that is the way we must go.”
“Yes,” agreed Yolande, “but let’s get Jennie. You can ride behind me,
and we shall go so much quicker than walking.”
She fetched the pony, saddled her, mounted, and backed alongside a con-
venient stump for Maria to climb up. As Jennie was old and had a bony back
it was not a very comfortable seat.
Neenie and David had not gone far before they began to feel unpleasantly
hot. The black man swung along so quickly they were obliged to jog-trot to
keep him in sight, and each would have been glad to turn back if it was not for
appearing babyish in the eyes of the other. First David took off his jacket and
hung it on a bush, then Neenie slipped out of her dress, next David wriggled
out of his long tight trousers, and then he felt a blister on his heel, so he took
off his button boots. Every time they stopped Pete, who knew what a wicked
thing it was to take off clothes and leave them hanging on bushes, sat up and
begged them to go home. David didn’t understand him, but Neenie knew quite
well what he meant, and took no notice.
“The flies do bite,” said David woefully, and he grew red in the face when
he found that as soon as he slapped them off one side they flew round to the
other. Neenie was in just as bad a way, she was purple with heat and vexation,
mosquitoes bit her till she looked as if she had chicken pox, sticks tripped her,
and branches scratched her. At last they reached a lagoon with a little pool of
water in the middle, and a wide rim of mud round the edge.
“It would be nice to go in and get cool,” suggested David.
“Yes, let’s,” said Neenie, putting down her school bag.
They began to wade through the mud; it was very sticky, and they sank


deeper with every step. Neenie overbalanced and fell flat on her face, while
David, going to the rescue, sat down with a plop. By this time they were both
so tired and so muddy that they turned round and struggled out, and a very
worried Pete greeted them.
“If we put mud all over us the flies couldn’t find any of us to bite,” said
Neenie, so she and David sat down and smeared each other.
“Now well trim us,” said Neenie, -with a chuckle, and took the tooth paste
out of the schoolbag. She made patterns with it on David’s back and her front,
till it looked like trails of white icing on two squashy chocolate cakes. Then
they ate the biscuits, and gave Pete the muddiest crumbs.
“What shall we do now?” asked Neenie, peering about. “The black-
fellow’s gone.”
David climbed on to a fallen tree.
“There are many of them over there,” he said, “it must be where they
live. Let us go and see.”
Neenie did not feel so hot and tired now, so she put her hand in his, and
they set off again.
Meanwhile Yolande and Maria had found unexpected help, for beyond the
first lagoon they overtook the watercress woman, hurrying in the same direction.
“There’s old Black Mary,” said Maria. “Let us ask her if she has seen
the children. Papa was told they are wondrous clever at following the tracks
of man and beast.”
Black Mary did not know much English, nor Maria a word of her language,
but Yolande said “Piccanninies lost, you find ’um,” and pointed ahead.
Black Mary nodded and grinned, and began to cast about for tracks, rather
like hounds looking for scent.
“Me find ’em,” she said, squatting on the ground and looking intently at
something they could not see.
“I do hope she understands what to look for,” said Maria. “I could not
see a footmark, could you?”
“No,” said Yolande, “but they have wonderful eyes.”
Black Mary set off with tireless steps, and they had to make Jennie walk
briskly to keep up with her.
“She has found something,” said Maria.
Sure enough, Black Mary had stopped, and when they caught up with her
they found her holding David’s little jacket.
“Then we are on the right track,” said Yolande.
As they went along the black woman kept picking up the discarded clothes,
and handing them with much chatter to the two riders, who exclaimed louder
and more loudly at each find. Yolande had quite a bundle in front of her by
the time they rode into a well marked narrow track which led to the blacks’
camp. This was an untidy place, composed of bark humpies, smouldering fires,
quantities of bones and rubbish and clouds of flies. Yolande and Maria did not
have much time to look at this, for they saw a ring of black heads and black
backs round an open space, and in the middle two small figures dancing. For
a minute they watched in silence, then Maria gave an indignant squeak, for the
dancers faced them, and both girls saw the tufts of fair hair standing up
through the mud.
“Neenie!” bellowed Yolande.


“David!” gasped Maria.
The dance stopped, with Neenie hopping on one leg, and the ring of black
backs became a wall of black arms and faces.
Few of the blacks had ever seen a horse, and instantly they began to point
at Jennie, some wanting to touch her, and some afraid of the strange animal.
But one thing was clear, those who rode upon its back were to be treated with
great respect.
While the watercress woman strolled about, talking, Maria slipped off,
pushed between the black bodies, ran to the middle of the circle, and seized a
child in either hand.
“Ow, Ow,” yelled David, aiming a kick at his sister’s shins, “Let go, you
hurt. Do not drag me so, my feet are sore.”
“Why did you take off your boots then?” she asked him.
“Because they hurt my feet,” he whimpered. Neenie began to sob too.
“Stop that noise,” hissed Maria, “or you may be eaten. I have heard that
natives like nice fat little boys and girls.”
David went very red. “Then they can start on you, ’cos you are bigger,”
he gasped.
Maria shook him so that his teeth knocked together, and then pushed him
through the crowd in front of her. She had been afraid the children were lost,
and now she was frightened of the blacks, so that made her extra cross.
Pete, who had been a most unwilling assistant at the dance, ran ahead, very
glad to see Yolande again.
“I told them to stop and they wouldn’t,” he said, in case she should think
he hadn’t been doing his work properly.
Yolande nearly fell off Jennie when she saw the muddy, tooth-pasty objects.
“We’ll have to wash them,” she said. “The sea would be the best place,
there wouldn’t be enough water in any of the lagoons.”
“If it is dry the worst will brush off,” said Maria, plucking a handful of
leaves and setting to work on David. The blacks were very interested in this;
old Mary even held David’s feet to stop him kicking, and when both children
had been dry-cleaned she lifted them on to the pony.
They started off, Pete running ahead, Yolande leading Jennie, Maria
walking beside, and most of the blacks following behind, anxious to see more
of the white people’s wonders, and to get some presents like old Mary had.
All the settlers were out looking for the children, and there was great ex-
citement when the head of the procession appeared.
Mr. Browne, who had joined in the search as soon as he returned, fired a
gun to recall the other searchers, while Mrs. Browne shook and hugged David,
and scolded and praised the two girls all at once. Corinda wore a sour face,
for she did not approve of Maria and Yolande being the centre of interest, and
she thought that if the two girls had looked after the children properly in the
first place there need not have been a search at all.
When the blacks had overcome their first timidity they wandered about the
settlement, peering into tents and huts and fingering tools and garments, till
Mr. Browne distributed tobacco and trinkets, and they went off, well pleased.
But nobody thought of saying anything nice to Pete, who had done more walking
and thinking and worrying than all of them put together.


Chapter Six
MARIA came running in from the scrub, very pale, dragging David
after her.
“Yolande,” she called, “come quickly. We must have offended the
natives yesterday, and now they are come to murder us all. Mama and I heard
their war cry, and I ran ahead to warn you.”
Yolande was kneeling by a bucket, washing Neenie’s socks, but she dropped
them in and sprang up when she heard this.
“Neenie,” she yelled, “Neenie, come quickly, we’ve got to hide.”
“There is no hiding place,” said Maria, looking round wildly. “A tent
would not keep them out. Mama, mama, where shall we go ? ”
“Call the others,” panted Mrs. Browne, hurrying up. “We must try and
get out into the bay.”
‘ ‘ W ho, hoo, hoo, hoo, ha, ha, ha, ha, ’ ’ came a harsh sound behind her.
“There it is again,” said Maria, “they are getting closer.”
T olande stood absolutely still and looked at her with scorn.
“If that’s their war cry you needn’t worry,” she said, “that’s only a
Laughing Jack.”
“A what?”
“A sort of bird.”
As she spoke the culprit floated out of a tall tree behind the tent and settled
on a branch directly overhead.
W hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo, ha, ha, ha, ha, ’ he said, looking down at Maria as though
he were laughing at her fright. Maria clapped her hands over her ears and
made a grimace.
kills snakes, said Tolande. “You should be pleased to see him.”
“That is the least he can do to make up for his unpleasant voice!” said
Maria.
Corinda, who had come hurrying at Maria’s call, now leant against a tree
complaining that she had palpitations.
‘ ‘ What’s that ?’ ’ Yolande asked.
, rSi? moanm g .and shivering and swooning elegantly when gentlemen are
about, Maria explained wisely, “and it is boxing our ears when they are not.
1 think we had all better keep out of Corinda’s way to-day. ’ ’
So Maria and Yolande invited Neenie and David to come for a walk with
them and set out to visit some of the other settlers. But they did not stay away
long, for they found the whole encampment in a state of excitement, with trunks
open out in the sun and everyone looking for best clothes.
“Mama,” cried Maria, bursting info their own tent with the news “the
cnld e cZe' S fZ a 7 ception toda y> did you not know, and there will be a
cold collation for the colonists, and a feast for the natives and presents for them.
Are we not invited ? Everyone else is going. ’ ’


Chapter Vl.—"He poised the spear and hurled it”


Mrs. Browne folded the shawl she was mending, and looked at Maria’s
flushed little face. “Yes, I knew, child,” she answered, “but our savages put
it all out of my head. We will unpack the brown box.”
When Yolande reached her she found Maria almost buried head first in a
big bullock hide trunk trimmed with brass studs, while Corinda was busily
carrying her finery round to the back of the tent to air it, well away from the
common herd.
“The clothes will be all creased, and we have no flat iron,” she said crossly.
“We can borrow one,” said Mrs. Browne, “and the sun will take out many
of the marks.”
David was not interested in clothes, and dragged Neenie away.
“Silly girls,” he said, “now they will talk and fuss all the morning, and
there will be no more walk for us.” He sauntered round to the back, saw the
garments hanging on bushes and branches, and then began to chuckle. “Pete
shall be dressed for the party, too,” he said. “Bring him here.”
He selected an armful of clothes and sat down on the ground, while Neenie
held the little dog beside him. They pushed Pete’s front legs into a pair of
pantalettes, and bound a lace tie round to keep them up, because the frills
trailed behindthey swathed his body in a blue scarf, and tied a frilled nightcap
firmly under his chin. Then they let him go. Pete rushed about trying to rub
off these horrid things against the trees; finding this useless, he tore wildly
round the tent to look for Yolande and beg her to undress him.
Unfortunately Corinda saw him first, and with a shriek gave chase, but the
faster she went the faster Pete ran, for he remembered that she often threw
sticks at him. Mrs. Browne and the two girls looked up in surprise at the noise,
and Yolande darted out and caught the little dog.
In her rage Corinda would have struck them both if her mother had not
held her hands.
“She has done it to humiliate me,” she cried, “she has been nothing but a
trouble always.”
“The child has been with me all the time,” said Mrs. Browne, keeping a
straight face with difficulty as Maria and Yolande undressed Pete. “You
should have spread your clothes where we could watch them.”
“Nothing’s torn,” said Yolande, with a sigh of relief, “and I’ll wash
them.”
“Do not dare to touch them,” said Corinda, gathering up the crumpled
garments and walking away.
Yolande looked at Maria with raised eyebrows, as a question without words,
and Maria nodded, but when Neenie and David were called they came from
the beach with their hands full of shells, and David had the most innocent look
on his face.
“I shall wear my India muslin,” said Maria importantly, when all was
quiet again, “and Corinda has an elegant gown of pink taffetas.”
Yolande looked at her own brown legs.
“I’ve only breeches,” she said, “and I don’t suppose I could go in them.”
Certainly not, said Corinda. “You have caused enough trouble, and I
for one do not want to be disgraced in public. Mama, you speak to the child,
and tell her she must stay away.”
... Yolande’s face fel1 ’ as she dearl y loved a party, and had never been to one
like this before.


“I do not think we can leave a guest at home while we go and enjoy our-
selves,” said Mrs. Browne quietly. “Perhaps Maria can lend her a holiday
frock. ’ ’
Anri that is how Yolande found herself trudging up the town track wearing
a heavy brown corded silk dress that squeezed her in at the middle, and nearly
reached to her toes. Even Neenie had been smartened up with a muslin jacket
and blue sash, while Pete was happier with a knot of pink ribbon on his collar
instead of his full dress finery.
It was very hot, the brown dress felt thick and stuffy, but Yolande was
quite proud of it, though she was glad she had kept to her own shoes. Some of
the grown ups had put on their best boots, which were tight, and as their feet
swelled from heat and walking they could hardly hobble along. Everyone was
going the same way, and for once the dusty track was thronged with people.
At first the children skipped about, calling to each other and running races,
then they settled down to walking soberly, and before they had gone three parts
of the way Neenie and David were glad of a pick-a-back on one or other of the
labourers. „ . .
When they reached Government House, Yolande and Maria were left sitting
on a log near at hand to mind David and Neenie while Mr. and Mrs. Browne and
Corinda went to pay their respects to the Governor. The main room was not
large, the roof was low, the mud walls thick, and the calico ceiling a hiding
place for spiders and centipedes, which sometimes dropped on to the heads of
the people below. At the reception some of the colonists thought they had to
go out backwards, as though at Buckingham Palace; and Corinda, who was
waiting to come in, found her toes stamped on and her dress crushed, which
made her temper worse than ever.
The children thought the cold collation most dull, just hams and joints of
cold meat, and bread, set out on trestles under the trees, with swarms of flies
in attendance.
“No cake, and not any lemonade,” said Neenie, “ ’tisn’t much of a party.”
The emigrants were served with a measure of rum and biscuits and meat
which they ate sitting on the ground, and David soon found friends among them.
“Coom, little maister, and take a sup o’ this’n,” said one, holding out a
pewter mug.
David politely handed it to Neenie, but she did not like the smell and
passed it back to him, so he took a big mouthful, which made him splutter and
cough. The laborer winked, and all the onlookers laughed.
David grew red.
“That was good,” he said, in a loud voice. The others then handed up
mugs and tumblers and he drained all the dregs, till his head began to buzz
and his legs tried to walk away without him.
“Tha’d best go back to tha ain folks,” said a rough woman, watching him,
‘ ‘ or tha T1 get sick. ’ ’
When the meal was over and the Royal healths drunk, the white people
went down to the cleared space between Government House and the river, where
the blacks were assembled. Earlier in the day the natives had been given
trousers from the Government stores, but the two chiefs had red flannel shirts
as well, to show they were important personages. The lubras had begged old


clothes from the settlers, or else bartered them for watercress and meat, so they
were dressd up, like the white folks.
First the Governor presented pewter plates with the letters of the alphabet
round the edge, then the blacks sat down in a circle, and feasted on beef and
suet puddings. During the feast he made a speech, and said that the blacks
must be good British subjects, give up eating each other, dress in proper clothes,
and love the white people; but as they could not understand much English there
was an interpreter to tell them what he meant in their own language.
The Governor was in full uniform, and as he walked up and down the wind
ruffled the feathers on his cocked hat so that they stood up in a crest. The
blacks were quick to notice this, and gave him a name to match.
“Varey goodey, Cockatoo Gubner,” they said, but no one knew if this
applied to the speech or the feast or the clothes or the plates.
“Too much stupid talk,” said David, “let us go away.”
“I would like a tin plate,” said Neenie, “I wish they’d given us one.”
“I should like a plate too,” agreed David. “How can we obtain one?” He
made sure that Yolande and Maria were too interested in the speeches to notice
him, and then walked slowly and carefully away, till he stepped back over a
small stump and sat down with a bang, his legs sticking straight out in front of
him and his clean trousers streaked with dust.
“The natives sell things for tobacco,” he said, getting up slowly, “but I
have none.”
“Men have tobacco,” said Neenie.
“Yes,” said David thoughtfully, “let us go and find men.”
On the outskirts of the crowd they found Murphy the smith and Thompson,
one of the laborers.
“Have you any tobacco, Murphy?” asked David.
“Sure I have, but not to give to little gentlemen.”
“Will you sell it to me?”
“Have ye any money?” asked Murphy cautiously.
“No,” said David mournfully.
“I’ll give you two crowns for the little dog,” offered an onlooker.
. Neenie picked up Pete and hugged him tightly, scowling over the top of
his head.
“I wouldn’t sell Pete to anyone for anything,” she said, and Pete licked
her face to show that he appreciated this.
Can t you exchange, like the blacks do ? ” she whispered.
David felt in his pockets, but this was his best suit, so there was nothing
m them except a fine new silk handkerchief.
“Will you give me some tobacco for this?” he asked eagerly.
Murphy would.
“You’ll get into trouble over it, Master David,” warned Thompson.
“I do not care,” said David, and hurried away before the man could change
his mind. They had to work round to the far side of the circle where the blacks
were seated and then find one who understood what they wanted and was willing
to trade. &
At first the blacks all looked alike. Then David picked out an oldish man
with one eye who had come to the encampment with the sellers of kangaroo meat •
he would be sure to know some English. David went up to him, showed the


tobacco, and pointed to the plate. At first the man shook his head then he
began to grin. He jumped up, seized a plate from the nearest lubra, handed it
to David, took the tobacco himself and sat down again, perfectly contented!
The children hurried away before the lubra had time to protest, and though
Neenie would have liked a plate of her own, David very kindly promised to let
her have supper off his. By now they were feeling hungry, so they began fossick-
ing among the remnants of the feast, and Neenie put Pete down, because he
was so anxious to help. „
There was not much left except bones and parts of puddings. Pete attended,
to the bones, though he found the blacks very good pickers, while Neenie and
David tackled the pudding barrel.
The cook had not been feeling strong, so the puddings were hard and
crusty instead of soft and doughy, and looked like coconuts or cannon balls.
Neenie picked out the currants and threw the crusts away, but David munched
and gnawed until he w'as so thirsty he could not eat any more.
Looking about for something to drink he found a half empty bottle buried
under some leaves, and drank nearly all of the brown liquid inside. It was
very bitter and gave him a horrid feeling, so he hid the bottle away again before
Neenie saw it. She had found a space near Yolande and was watching the spear
throwing. ~ ,
The two chiefs inspected the target, had it moved nearer, and then made
ready to throw. First one then the other tried, but without getting near the
mark. The onlookers began to snigger, and some of the emigrants made rude
remarks. , , .
The spear throwers looked at each other, puzzled, and then at their nine
foot spears; such a thing had never happened to them before. Suddenly Chief
John made up his mind. Stripping off his new shirt and trousers, he poised
the spear and hurled it with such force that it went right through the middle
of the target.
A grunt of satisfaction went up from the blacks, and the white part ot the
audience clapped. The chief seized another spear from the man nearest him,
and threw that within an inch of the first one.
“Very goody, Cockatoo Gubner!” he shouted, pointing to the target.
“Very good indeed,” agreed the Governor.
Then the chief pointed to his discarded clothes.
“No goodey,” he explained, sure that he had found the reason for his
first failure.
After this the onlookers began to move, as it was getting late, and they
had a long way to go. Maria looked guiltily round for David and Neenie, and
was quite surprised to find them sitting on a log near at hand.
“Oh, there you are, children,” she said, cocking her little finger in imitation
of Corinda as she held up her skirts. “We are going now.”
But David did not take any notice of her.
“Come along, children,” said Mrs. Browne.
Still David did not move.
“What is the matter, David?” asked his mother.
“I feel ill, lam dying,” sobbed David, throwing himself forward. “There
must have been poison'in that bottle, it keeps on going round and round inside
me, and I go round too.”


“Stand up,” said Mr. Browne sternly, “and do not behave like a baby.”
“Has the child taken poison?” asked Mrs. Browne anxiously.
“Impossible,” answered her husband. “David, stand up.”
But when David tried to stand he fell over, so the men of the party took
it in turns to carry him, while Neenie trotted along beside Yolande, and wished
she could be carried too.
David grew whiter and whiter, until he was very sick.
“Too much sun,” said Mrs. Browne, as they laid him on his mattress.
“Too much of the blacks’ feast,” said Maria.
“Too much ale,” said Thompson knowingly.


Corrohboree
SOMEWHERE out in the sleeping bush,
Wrapped around by a breathless hush,
Firmly guarded by silent trees
Lies the place of corrobborees;
This is the hour and this the night,
Watch the circle of crimson light—
Corrohboree, corrohboree,
The blacks are making corrohboree.
Flames from the fires leap high, die low;
Crimson eyes in the darkness glow;
Steady throbbing and beat of drum
Maze the mind with a buzzing hum;
Shadowed forms move in endless line,
Backwards, forwards, and intertwine;
Corrohboree, corrohboree,
The blacks are making corrohboree.
Shifting shadows that leap and prance,
Slim black bodies that sway in dance,
Shining bodies bedaubed with clay,
White-lined figures that stamp and sway,
Turning, under the chequered light
Now half crimson and now half white.
Corrohboree, corrohboree,
The blacks are making corrohboree.
Stamping feet help the drum’s weird spell,
Each thump signals a mighty yell;
Feathers nod, and the spears held high
Challenge the distant steely sky;
Stamp and brandish the swaying chain
Over, over, and over again.
Corrohboree, corrohboree,
The blacks are making corrohboree.
Somewhere out in the starset night
Glows a circle of crimson light;
Distant sound of the throbbing drums
Faintly out of the darkness comes;
Somewhere under the gumtrees prance
Slim dark figures, in tribal dance.
Corrohboree, corrohboree,
The blacks are holding corrohboree.


Chapter Seven
THE next day Richard drew Yolande aside.
“We oughtn’t to stay here much longer,” he said, “and I shouldn’t think
they’d want to keep us, either, with Neenie such a nuisance. We must
get up to the farm, or granddaddy will be wondering what has happened to us.
It 11 be Christmas soon, and it won’t be much fun here; no turkey, no lemonade,
and no nothing. William says they’ll have parrot pie or salt meat, the same
as usual, unless the captain’s cow breaks a leg.”
(( Bui how are we going to get back ?’ ’ said Yolande. “Do you know the way T’ ’
“No,” said Richard, “but we got in, so we must be able to get out. We’d
better get the ponies and make for the hills.”
“Ye-es,” agreed Yolande, rather half-heartedly, “but I don’t want to
starve. Neenie will be a nuisance, we shan’t be able to go out of a walk because
she’ll have to ride behind one of us. Will you take her, or shall I?”
Richard thought for a minute.
“I’ll take her >” said at last. “Skipper has a fatter back than Jennie.”
“All right. When’ll we start?”
“Now,” said Richard. “Granddaddy said we weren’t to mess about on
the way, and we’ve been two nights already. It wouldn’t hurt us to sleep out
once this warm weather, and we can always come back if we can’t find the way.
Ye 11 ask for the Barkers, they’ll help us.”
“I hope the Browne’s won’t go looking for us, they had enough worry with
Aeeme and David when they were lost.”
‘You must tell Maria to tell them when we’re gone.”
“ Xt s J ems yev y rude t0 without saying ‘thank you’,” objected Yolande.
It must have been a bother finding us beds and food just when they’d arrived.”
Well, write a note, like we always do when we’ve stayed anywhere,”
suggested Richard. You could give it to Maria. Here’s my pocket book.
1 11 tell you what to say.”
“That’s a good idea,” said Yolande, and put the book on the top of the
barre! instead of a table, and set to work. They had a slight disagreement over
the ending. Richard said they couldn’t put “with love from” to people like
Mr and Mrs. Browne who weren’t relations, and Yolande said “Yours Faith-
fully sounded too like a shop. Then Richard remembered that William had
shown him a letter about some land from one of the settlers to Mr. Browne. So
they copied that. This was the letter:
Dear Mrs. Browne,
w Xo . r Xe tti n g us stay with you, we enjoyed it verv much.
Ye liked sleeping in a tent, but we hope you get a house soon, so that you
don t have to put up umbrellas when it rains. Please will you thank Mr.
Browne from Richard for the trip he took me; it was most interesting, and


please tell William I hope he gets on all right. Please give Maria Yolande’s
love, and say I wish she lived near us.
We are sorry Neenie was such a nuisance, she always is.
Your obedient and humble servants,
Richard and Yolande.
“It’s done,” said Yolande. Richard folded the sheet of paper neatly
addressed it to Mrs. Browne, and gave it to Yolande to deliver, while he went
to fetch the ponies. , , , ~
“Bring Neenie with you,” he said, “and I 11 meet you at the lagoon.
By this time the settlers were used to seeing Richard lead the ponies to
water, and no one took any notice of the saddles. _
Yolande rolled up her belongings, and put them into the schoolbag to save
time, then she caught hold of Neenie’s hand and whistled softly to Pete Going
out of the tent she met Maria coming in, with red eyes as though she had been
71 ‘‘Corinda is a nasty mean creature,” she said. “She says I am not to talk
to you for vou corrupt me and make me behave badly. Creep round the back
quickly and don’t let her see you, she is coming in here after you.
Yolande gave her a great hug and kissed her tear-stained face.
“Goodbye, darling Maria,” she whispered, “don’t mind her, she 11 never
get me. ’ ’ Then, hearing footsteps, she pushed the note into Maria s hand and
dragged Neenie safely round to the back and away.
When Neenie saw the ponies ready saddled her face grew long instead of
round, and when Yolande hoisted her up behind Richard and they began to
ride away from the encampment, she opened her mouth to howl. ,
“You be quiet or the blacks will come and get you, said Yolande, and
Neenie shut her mouth with a snap.
Richard turned Skipper’s head inland, and they rode on for some time,
without seeing a black man or a white, until they came to the bank of a creek
that barred their way.
“I don’t remember this before,” said Yolande. _
“We had to cross a creek when I went to town with William and Mr.
Browne,” said Richard, “so I suppose this one is the same.”
“How shall we cross it?” said Yolande. “Neenie will slip off if we try to
Jl Richard didn’t answer, he rode on till he found a place where the banks
grew steep and the creek narrow, and a fallen branch made a good handrail.
“You hold Skipper,” he said, dismounting and lifting Neenie off. Then
he climbed down the tree roots that stuck out of the bank like a rope staircase,
taking Neenie with him, put her safely on to the other side, and told her to
walk along till she found a place where she could scramble up. Pete offered
her his tail to hold, so that she wouldn’t fall in, but she thought she was too
grand to need help, and put her hands behind her. Richard went back to
Skipper, found a place where the banks were not so high, and jumped over, fol-
lowed by Yolande. All this took rather a long time, and when they turned to
look for Neenie she was nowhere to be seen.
“I wish I’d tied her up,” said Richard. As he spoke he heard her shrill
voice below, and, looking over the edge, saw her squatting by a pool.


“Tadpoles,” she called happily, “dear little tadpoles. Some has wings
and some has legs. I’m getting some for Pete to play with.”
Before Richard could reach her there was a loud splash, and she half
slipped, and half jumped into the water. Fortunately she managed to keep her
balance, so only her legs were wet, and Pete seized her dress and pulled her
towards the shore.
“Neenie, you are a little pest,” said Richard, as he dragged her up the bank.
“I didn’t mean to,” she sobbed. “I couldn’t help it.”
“You always say that,” said Yolande, getting off to dry Neenie’s legs
and empty the water out of her sandals. She was still scolding when a strange
voice hailed her.
“Have you had an accident, and can I assist you?”
She looked up to find a boy and girl standing on the rise above them, the
girl of about her own age, and the boy a good two years older than Richard.
The girl was turning away pouting; it was the boy who had spoken and was
coming to meet them. They were dressed in much the same fashion as Maria
and William, only the girl’s full skirted dress had a short jacket over it, and
the boy’s shirt was open at the throat showing a fine triangle of sunburn.
“It’s only our sister,” explained Richard, “she is always in mischief.”
“Could you show us the road to town?” asked Yolande. “We can’t find
it.”
“You are too far South,” said the boy. “They would have told you that
at any of the houses about.”
“But there are no houses,” began Yolande, and then clapped her hand
over her mouth in surprise. From the top of the rise she could see slab huts
and squat thatched cottages on squares of cleared land, surrounded by olive
hedges or post and rail fences. Between them ran the road, with bullock
waggons moving slowly along, and a few horse drawn carts and carriages
passing them more quickly. There were cows grazing on the roadside with
children to mind them, and further off a fair-sized flock of sheep. Here and
there, in the distance, the slate roofs and stone walls of large houses showed
through the olive groves or clumps of pine trees that surrounded them.
“Richard,” said Yolande, looking about her, “where are we?”
“We aren’t here, we must be somewhere else again,” he answered, just as
surprised as she was at the change. “What do vou think has happened to us
now?”
“I don’t know,” she answered, “but I expect we’ll soon find out.”
The strange boy, who has been listening intently, moved forward again.
“You are not lost, for we have found you,” he said, “and if you follow us
you cannot miss the way to town. We have been out for an airing and now
we are going back there.”
The girl turned away without speaking and walked towards a tree where
two horses were tied There she stood till the boy led the smaller of the two
out. It carried a side saddle, and he had to mount his sister by resting her
left heel on his hand, and pushing her up when she took a spring.
Us Three watched with great interest, and when her full skirts were
d ° W il 1 ? e left ? d «° f the h ° rse ’ and Neenie safely seated behind
Richard, the cavalcade moved off.
“Maria must have made a mistake,” Yolande whispered to Richard, “for
there are other horses about.”


“There weren’t anv when I went to town with Mr. Browne, he answered.
“And the road wasn’t like this when we went to the Governor’s party, it was just
a track. I ’ll have to ask. , , , . ,
He brought Skipper up beside the boy s horse, and leant towards him. The
eirl reined in her mount with a bad grace, and dropped behind with Yolanda. She
was quite decided as to who was to do the talking, for she started off with a string of
questions before Yolande could open her mouth (
‘‘ My name is Henrietta, and my brother is James, she said. What is yours,
and where do you live? Does your little sister always ride like that? Are you not
ashamed to be seen with her? Where did you come from, and where are you
• j ?
g “We are going to visit our grandfather, Yolande told her, answering the
last question first. “He has a farm over the hills.'’
“You mean a sheep run, not a farm,” said Henrietta. Whatever is >our
mama doing to let you ride alone? Does she not know that bad men hide m the
hills, escaped convicts from over the border, and that they attack helpless people .
’“Mother’s away,” explained Yolande. . „ , , , . ,
“But surely there is someone to see it is not suitable for a young lady to be
riding without proper escort,” said the boy, turning in his saddle with a friendly
smile.
“I’ve got Richard,’’said Yolande. . .
“Where are you going to pass the night?” asked Henrietta. You could not
cross the hills in one day keeping your horses at a walk. Where did you pass last
niffht ? Have you come far ? ” . , ~
“We spent last night with the Brownes, in a tent at the encampment by the
seashore, ’ ’ Yolande told her, ‘ ‘ where the boats come in. ”
Henrietta looked delighted at contradicting her again.
“There is no encampment by the seashore,” she said. The boats come i
the Port, which is a dreadful place. No respectable person would stay there it it
COUl “I can’t help it,” said Yolande, doggedly, “but we did stay there. We re
looking for the Barkers now. ” , .
“lam sure you did, ’ ’ said James, soothingly, ‘ ‘ there are some things that even
Henrietta cannot know.’
Henrietta tossed her head, and set all her fair cm Is dancing.
“Whom did you say you sought ?” she asked Richard, pertly.
“The Barkers, ’’repeated Richard. “Do you know them. I
“Know them,” laughed the boy, before his sister could interfere. J,
should think we did. Our father is Mr. Barker, so you have found us at once ~
“It is lucky for you we have been staying with our Uncle and Aunt in town,
said Henrietta, “else you might have had more difficulty m your ? search Papa
travels a great deal, and often sends strangers home with letters, but he has ne
sent children before.
She looked at Yolande suspiciously. . ~
“Papa’s property is beyond the hills, and we are returning there to-day, said
James, “so you will be able to travel with us. TT P nrip+ta
“I do not think mama will want strangers to accompany us, said Henrietta,
primly.


‘‘Stuff and nonsense,” said James. ‘‘Mama is always delighted to have
visitors, and she must know of these if they were bidden to ask for papa. ’ ’
“But he is away,” she objected.
“Papa is gone to the diggings, in Victoria,” explained James, “and so are
most of the other men. He left us in town -with aunt and uncle for safety, but
mama has heard the shepherds are gone too, so she is going back to look after the
sheep, and taking us with her. ’ ’
“The gold fever is like a plague,” said Henrietta, rolling her eyes, piously, “it
makes men leave their work and their homes. ’ ’
Gold ! said Richard, quietly to \ olande. ‘ ‘ Gold diggings, gold rush, gold
mines—the settlers didn’t find gold at first, that came years after the State was
founded at least, the books say so. When we crossed that creek we jumped on so
many years m history. We are still in yesterday, but it’s much later on. ’ ’
“ Yes, ” she answered, ‘ ‘ that must be right. I was wondering why it all looked
different, and how there could be houses and horses and bullocks and fences when
it was all so new and young. ’ ’
“Plenty of time to build proper houses by now,” said Richard.
“Yes,” she agreed, “but I am surprised we found Neenie again; she might
have been half there and half here, and that would have been very awkward. ”
Neenie chose this minute to try to pat Pete, and only saved herself from falling
by clutching a handful of Richard’s shirt. There was a tearing sound, and she let
go in a hurry, and hung on to his belt instead.
“It doesn’t show,” said Yolande, encouragingly. “It must be the tuck-in
part. We’ll have to hurry to catch up with James and Henrietta.”
Richard kicked Skipper into a fast walk.
Neenie would have been just the same nuisance anywhere, ’ ’ he said.
“But if she’d stayed behind we wouldn’t have had to mind her,” rejoined
Yolande.


Chapter VIII. "Stop, or I fire!”


Chapter Eight
PRESENTLY James turned off the main road and led the way by a bridle track
to a big house on rising ground to the north of the town.
“Uncle has the largest gates in town,” said Henrietta, proudly.
“They must needs be, to let him through,” James whispered.
“ It is rude to speak like that of dear uncle, ’ ’ said his sister.
“You will soon be as fat as he is if you stuff yourself with the goodies aunt
gives you,” said James, teasingly, “and then you will not be dear, sweet, slender
Henrietta any more. It is as well for you that we are not going to the picnic aunt
has planned, else you would be bursting the gathers of your frocks. ’ ’
Henrietta was ready to cry, but just then they reached the front door, and she
forgot her vexatious brother at the sight of a large light waggon drawn up on the
gravel outside.
‘ ‘ Oh, we are surely not going to travel in that, ’ ’ she almost wailed. ‘ ‘ Why not
the carriage ? ’ ’
“You were too much for the springs on the way down,” suggested James, as
he dismounted and threw his reins over the head of the cast-iron figure of a black
boy which was placed there as a hitching post. Richard and Yolande got off too,
and a boy came running to take Henrietta’s horse to the stables. Servants were
bringing out parcels and luggage, there was the sound of voices and footsteps in
the hall, and when James led Yolande and Richard to a pretty woman who was
superintending the packing, they found that she seemed to expect them.
“These must be the children papa mentioned before he left,” she said, giving
Neenie a preoccupied kiss, and patting Yolande on the shoulder. “He said their
grandpapa would be glad for them to pass a few nights with us. The girls shall drive
with me, and the boy go with you, James, to be outriders and bodyguard.”
“Couldn’t I ride, too?” asked Yolande, meekly.
No, said Mrs. Barker firmly, “I want you under my hand, for who knows
what may happen on the road.”
A large, red-faced elderly man came out of the front door as she spoke.
My dear Mary,” he said, “I feel it my duty to try once more to dissuade
you from this mad venture, and I beg of you to stay in safety with us. Here you
are, with a family of helpless children, intending to journey without protection
through a part of the colony infested with lawless characters. Your home is a lonely
outpost that may even now be burnt to the ground, and the flocks scattered or slain. ’ ’
“All the more reason for me to go and collect them again,” said Mrs. Barker
with spirit. “No, George, you cannot persuade me out of it. If we lose these
flocks and our home we lose everything, for I have no great hopes of John finding
a fortune at the diggings. And as for protection, old Buckrose is handy with a gun,
both James and I can shoot, and I now have another young gentleman at my
disposal. ’ ’
The large uncle shrugged his shoulders and followed her inside, talking, and
while this argument was going on \ olande and Neenie stood with Pete on the steps,


feeling shy, while Yolande made Richard promise to see that Jennie was not left
behind. .
When all the goods were packed there was a clatter of hoofs in the stable yard,
and an old lame man led out a pair of strong horses. He harnessed them to the
waggon while James and Henrietta took leave of their uncle and aunt, and Mrs.
Barker fetched a little girl of four, and a fat woman carrying a baby.
“That is my little sister Adelaide, and my baby brother Thomas,” Henrietta
informed Yolande.
Mrs. Barker began to pack the children in. There was a chair for Mrs.
Barker, a sort of bench for the nurse and the two bigger girls, while Neenie and
Adelaide and Pete had to sit on a long box among the packages on the floor. When
thev were all settled, Buckrose cracked his whip, the horses flung forward into their
collars, and amid shouts of farewell they were off.
The boys rode behind, James remarking on the points of interest, Richard
looking about him and noticing the difference in the town since he was there with
Mr. Browne. There were shops and warehouses to mark the two main streets,
and though the roadway was full of holes there were no stumps left in it now.
As they crossed North Terrace he saw the square tower of a church standing in a
paddock to the right, and there were cottages scattered on all sides.
To-day there were few people about, and these mostly women, for the men were
gone to join the gold rush. There was little trading, and nothing going on, only an
old woman with a goat-cart delivering laundry to the hotel. Outside the town
the track was rougher, and suddenly the waggon gave a lurch and began to tilt.
Boxes and children slid to one side and piled on top of each other. The chair and
bench slid too, and the nurse clutched Henrietta s head to save herself, and began
to scream, which woke the baby and started him screaming, too.
‘ ‘ What is the matter, Buckrose T ’ ’ asked Mrs. Barker. ? ?
“The wheels have got into a hole, ma’am, and I think one of them be off,
answered the man, stolidly.
Richard and James rushed to the horses’ heads, and Buckrose climbed slowly
down —he was surprisingly clever in the way he used his lame leg. One wheel had
hit on a stone at the side of a hole, and was nearly off, but he fixed it on again, and
led the horses to a level stretch of ground. ,
“lam glad your uncle did not see that, ’ ’ said Mrs. Barker, as she straightened
the seats, set Henrietta free, and disentangled the other children. Neenie had come
off worst, for she had Pete’s paw in her mouth and Adelaide’s foot in her eyes, while
Yolande was half buried by the luggage. A flagon of milk was tipped over, so Pete
lapped up all that was spilt, as that was the only way he could help.
When they were all the right way up again, the horses broke into a slow trot,
and the waggon rumbled along until the track began to climb the first slope, and
Buckrose told the boys to ride closer, for they were approaching the Tiers. This
part of the hills gave shelter to many bad men, runaway convicts from other States,
as well as wild axemen, set to chop down trees and split them into posts and rails
for fences. The horses could only walk here, for the track was so steep, and as they
mounted it became more gloomy, the high hills on either side shutting out the sun.
“We must be coming the right way now,” Richard whispered to Yolande, as
he rode on her side of the waggon. “It has just the same cold feeling it had the
first day, even though it is hot outside. ’ ’
It was long past noon when they stopped for a meal on a level spot between two


hills. There was thick scrub all around, but a clear space in the middle, so the
children scrambled out, glad to stretch their legs, while Richard and William lifted
out the long box they used as a seat. It was very heavy.
“Keep close at hand,” Mrs. Barker cautioned them, “for we have still a long
way to go. ’ ’
The nurse unpacked the provisions, and Henrietta was delighted to find that
the picnic hamper had been sent, and there was a sucking pig roast whole, as well
as a fowl, and cold salt pork; bread, butter, and a jar of preserves. Henrietta
had two helpings of sucking pig.
“It is a good thing the natives are not cannibals,” James said to her in a low
voice.
Yolande usually enjoyed a picnic, but to-day she felt as though someone were
watching them eat, and kept looking over her shoulder. Mrs. Barker must have
had the same feeling, for she hurried on the meal, telling them not to waste time.
At the preserve stage, Pete went sniffing for rabbits in the bushes, but though he did
not find any he must have seen something he did not like, for he growled, and the
bristles stood up on his back. Yolande had to call him several times before he
came, and then he kept whining and putting his paw on her, trying to tell her
something important.
“Isn’t Pete behaving badly,” said Neenie, “he’s scratching you.”
The nurse scolded him, and as he sat staring at her she began to shiver.
‘‘ I feel geese walking on my grave, ma ’am, ’ ’ she said.
“Fiddlesticks,” said Mrs. Barker, “you are only cramped with so much
sitting. Finish your meal, we must start.”
The nurse took a slice of bread in her hand and walked towards the bushes,
with a queer smile on her face. Then she dropped her handkerchief, and nearly
dropped the baby trying to reach it. Neenie ran and picked it up, but no sooner
had she given it to her than the woman dropped it again.
‘‘Nurse, come back now, ’’ called Mrs. Barker, “it is time to go. ’’
They all mounted in the waggon, Buckrose lifting up the children, then he
shook the reins, the boys fetched their horses, and the waggon moved on again.
The track climbed ever more steeply, zigzagging up the hills, so that every now
and then Buckrose pulled up the horses to let them rest. They were just rounding
a sharp bent when there was a crackling in the scrub at the roadside, and the tops
of the bushes began to wave and toss. Then two hands appeared, one parting the
bushes, the other holding a pistol, and behind them in the opening, showed the face
of a rough-looking man.
Stop, or I fire! ”he shouted in a gruff voice, as he sprang down on to the track.
The horses reared with fright, and plunged sideways towards the unfenced
outer edge, the wheels caught in the ruts, the waggon bumped and swayed wildly,
and nearly tipped over. Buckrose pulled them up, sweating and trembling, a foot
away from the precipice.
Three other men followed the first, great strong fellows, roughly dressed and
roughly spoken. One went to the horses ’ heads, one stayed on the bank, and turned
his pistol towards the boys, one covered Buckrose with his gun, while the first, who
seemed to be the leader, stepped up to the waggon.
At the sight of them the nurse shrieked, and James put his hand to his gun,
but Mrs. Barker shook her head.
1 ‘ No use, ’ ’ she said, ‘ ‘ they are too many for us. ’ ’


The children huddled close together, Neenie and Adelaide squeezing Pete
between them so that he couldn’t bite anyone.
“Nurse not crying, nurse laughing,’’ said Adelaide, but no one noticed her
small voice. ....
The leader tapped the side of the waggon with his pistol barrel.
“We want your money and some food, ’ he said.
Mrs. Barker picked up a basket of provisions and held it out to him.
“Here is some food,” she said. “Take it and then I will give you my purse,
but there is not much money in it. lam Mrs. Barker, wife of John Barker; you
know he never carries much money with him, and I do as he does. ’ ’
“Where are you bound for?” asked the man. The nurse winked at him, but
onlv Neenie saw that.
* “lam taking my children up to my husband’s property. He has gone to the
diggings, and I hear the shepherds have deserted, so I am going to look after the
flocks * ,
Mrs. Barker opened her reticule, and took out a knitted silk purse shaped like
a tube, with tassels at each end and a ring to slip over the opening in the centre to
close it. The man snatched it and drew away a few paces, beckoning his comrades
to him For a few minutes they spoke together, then he came back.
“We know John Barker, and what you say about him is true; he does not carry
much money with him, so you can go on. They say the blacks is bad, over the hills,
not much place for a woman. You could go back if you wanted, we wouldn t
touch vou.” , i
“Thank you,” said Mrs. Barker, “but I must go on. We do not wish to lose
our flocks.”
“Well, ma’am, you have spunk,” said the man, and stepped back into the
scrub.
“There is hope for you yet, Henrietta,” said James, “they have the picnic
basket with the pig in. ” , , . ,
Mrs. Barker did not speak till they were far up the hill, and then she signed
to the boys to ride closer.
“Listen ” she said. “These were not ordinary Tiers men, they were real
bushrangers.’ If the gold escort comes in to-day they may attack them. Ride
ahead, boys, press your horses, get to the top of the hill quickly, and v ait, warning
all who come.
James looked at his mother and hung back.
“Hurry, my son,” she said, “be off.”
“Papa*said I was not to leave you,” he said, “so I shall stay here.”
“I order you to go, you disobedient boy.”
“I am a man, and papa charged me solemnly to look after you,” he argued.
Yolande, who had been listening with all her ears, leant forward.
“Couldn’t Richard and I go?” she begged. “Richard would look after me,
and my pony is ready. ”
* ‘ Does your mama let you ride alone with your brother ? ’ ’ asked Mrs. Barker,
hesitating.
“Yes, and granddaddy, too.”
‘ ‘ Very well, ’ ’ said Mrs. Barker. ‘ ‘ There seems to be no choice, but take every
C3F6. **
Buckrose pulled up, Yolande scrambled out, untied the leading-rope, and
mounted. Richard drew alongside her, and they cantered off till they came to a


clearing on the top of the hill. Neenie watched them go sadly, and wiped two large
tears on Pete’s coat.
Richard and Yolande had not been waiting long when they heard the sound
of horses’ hoofs in the scrub behind them.
“Suppose it’s bushrangers again, ” said Yolande, backing Jennie behind a tree.
“They’re making too much noise,” said Richard. “They’re troopers, it is
the gold escort. ’ ’
As he spoke the party came out into the open, troopers and officer in charge
grouped about the pack horses that carried the heavy leather bags of gold dust.
They pulled up when they saw the children, and one trooper rode over to Richard,
while the others waited, on the look-out for an ambush.
When the officer heard Richard’s story he burst out laughing.
“Tell John Barker’s wife that she has saved her husband’s gold for him,
and we ’re much obliged to her. We will not take our usual route to-day. ’ ’
Without wasting time they turned to a steep bridle track that branched to the
left, and in a few minutes were out of sight.
It was very quiet when they had gone, and Yolande was glad to see the waggon
coming towards her, even though Mrs. Barker made her get inside again. Once
they were over the steepest part the horses began to trot, but the wheels bumped so
that the children bounced about like peas.
When it was nearly dusk Buckrose turned the horses off the road, and pulled
up in a little clearing where there was a spring and the ruins of a hut. Everyone
got out and set to work preparing for the night. James and Richard stretched a
sheet of canvas over the waggon to make a tent, Yolande picked small gum branches
for beds, Mrs. Barker unrolled bundles of rugs to cover them, the nurse made a fire,
Neenie gathered sticks, Buckrose attended to the horses, and Pete kept a sharp look-
out for bushrangers and blacks. For supper they toasted chops, and all were glad
to go early to bed.
When they left in the morning the nurse managed to drop another handker-
chief ; she carried her belongings in a small bag on her arm, so this was easy. This
next day passed like the first, excepting that the country was flatter, and there were
no excitements. They only met one other cart, the children grew weary of watching
gum tiees, and were most thankful to see the homestead. It was nearly sundown
when they reached the end of their journey, and the rough wattle-and-dab building
standing on a rise looked black against the crimson sky.
Richard held the horses while James and Buckrose lifted out the luggage and
children, and Mrs. Barker unlocked the door and lighted a lantern. The inside
walls of the three rooms were finished with a smooth coating of clay, and the ceiling
was of calico. In places it sagged under the weight of an opossum, and once
1 olande saw the body of a snake wuiggling above her head.
Nurse made a fire before she put the three youngest to bed, and as there were
few chairs, Henrietta and Yolande placed the long box in front of it.
What is in this, mama, to make it so heavy ? ’ ’ Henrietta asked.
. That is the family silver, my love, ’ ’ said her mother. “ I did not like to leave
it in town as your uncle seemed so afraid of thieves. ’ ’
The nurse gave a gasp, and dropped a pail with a clatter.
‘‘ 0 mama, and the children were sitting on it all the time! What would vou
have done if the bushrangers had taken it ? ”
‘ ‘ Put you on as well, ’ ’ said James, with a laugh, ‘ ‘ and that would have stopped
them.


Gold Escort
A CLATTER of hoofs in the twilight,
An answering neigh from the yard,
And, strung like a chain on the skyline,
Come horses and men of the Guard;
The troopers with guns in the holsters,
Hard-riding, clear-headed, and bold,
As needs be, who go to the diggings
To bring back a cargo of gold.
They ride with a hand on their pistols,
And eyes ever searching the bush,
The noise of their passage disturbing
The throbbing and threatening hush;
For each band of trees may be hiding
A handful of desperate men;
Each gully may prove but an ambush,
Or bushrangers’ way to their den.
They ride with a hand on their pistols,
And ears all alert for each sound —
Was that just the clink of the hobbles
And stones kicked aside on the ground?
Was that just the neigh of the horses
Shut up at the inn for relay,
Or are there some riders before them
To plan a hold-up on the way?
Is there something that lurks in the shadows?
What that sticks cracking dry underfoot?
And what was it caught at the bridle —
Was Blackie dragged down by a root?
The miners far off at the diggings,
The bankers who wait in the town,
Won’t guess, as they handle the gold dust,
How nearly the escort went down.
The packhorses start, and then stumble,
The blackboy trees urging them on;
The first star looks over the gumtrees,
The sun is sunk seawards and gone;
The horses draw closer together,
The air is grown suddenly cold,
As, hungry and tired, through the darkness
The escort comes in with the gold.


Chapter Nine
AFTER the bustle of the beach encampment and the rumbling of the wag-
gon, it was very still on the Barker’s station. It was too quiet for safety,
thought, and when he brought up the pail of milk before break-
fast he tried to frighten Mrs. Barker into returning to town.
“Can’t see a soul, ma’am,” he said; “the sheep are scattered and Daisy
has not been milked for two or three days. If she had not put her horns under
the panel and got to her calf she would have fared badly.”
“I wonder when Dawson left,” said Mrs. Barker, “and where Toby and
Jim are?”
Dawson was the head shepherd, and Toby and Jim black boys who worked
under him.
“He must have been gone some days,” said Buckrose. “The natives were
here later, but have not looked after things as they should. ’Tis hard to tell
how many sheep are missing without mustering. I found one carcase, speared
and hidden in the scrub.”
“ ’Tis as well we came back when we did then,” said Mrs. Barker.
“Begging your pardon, ma’am, but I’d sooner see you on your way to
town again. I could put in the horses at midday, and we would be there by
tomorrow night. ’Tis not safe for a woman and children up here, it is not safe.
Why, you might get a spear in your back like the sheep as easy as easy.”
“Nonsense!” said Mrs. Barker briskly. “Haven’t we guns and can we
not shoot ? The blacks have got out of hand with no one to keep them in order;
they will be all right now I have come.”
Yolande heard all this as she lay with her eyes shut, still half asleep; but
when the boys’ voices sounded by the well she crept out of bed, dressed, and
slipped through the open door to them. Richard and James had just filled the
big trough hollowed out of a tree trunk that held the supply for the house, and
by the creaking of the windlass she knew they were drawing water for the stock.
It was going to be hot later on, but now the air was diamond clear and the
magpies morning song rippled from scrub and plain. At last the windlass was
silent, and James and Richard led the horses out.
“Where are you going?” asked Yolande.
“Going to try and gather some of the sheep,” said James, “they won’t be
able to travel later on in the heat.”
There were no fences yet, and sheep were usually grazed in flocks, each
flock under the care of a shepherd who moved them about in search of food, and
penned them up at night whenever possible.
“Can I come, too?” asked Yolande.
“ ’Tis not girls’ work.”
bhe s quite good at mustering,” objected Richard, so James relented, and
they set off. ’
It was glorious out riding, and so nice not having to open gates; they can-


tered over the flat at the bottom of the slope, then Richard went to the right
James to the left, and Yolande kept straight on in the middle. They rode round
bushes and into the mouths of dry water-courses, shouting and waving from
time to time to keep each other in sight. The country here was free from large
timber, and the scrub too short to give much hiding place, and they turned back
at the edge of the thicker bush beyond.
Between them they gathered a hundred sheep, but the poor beasts were
wanting water badly, and one was limping along with a broken spear sticking
in its back. Skipper shied at a carcase lying under a log, and James swore when
110 S3W it
“You do not mind killing for food so much,” he said, but tis killing and
leaving the body to rot that maddens me.”
Richard nodded.
“Good thing we came out early,” he said.
“Yes, we’ll water them at the troughs by the stockyards, and then let them
graze on the flat in front of the house. The girls can shepherd them there.”
“You are late. Breakfast is long ready,” called Henrietta, as they rode up.
“Stirabout’s burnt,” muttered James, sniffing, when they tramped in. The
porridge was burnt, but they were so hungry they did not mind, and the fresh
milk was deliciously creamy and sweet. They sat round the big table made of
two halves of a tree, their chairs empty barrels and short stumps. Neeme
wished David was there to lend her his plate, and Pete wished Neenie was not
quite so hungry.
After breakfast Mrs. Barker told James she wanted a horse, and Buckrose
brought a heavv side saddle from the barn, and put it on one of the driving pair.
“I am going to ride out and look for the flocks over the range,” she said,
“and I will take James to help me.”
Buckrose would not hear of that.
“If you will go, ma’am,” he said, “I am coming with you. Nurse is a
grown woman, and she can look after the children, with our young gentlemen
to help her; but let you go out there without me, I cannot.
Mrs. Barker coaxed, commanded, and assured him she would not go fast or
far, but Buckrose was firm, his orders were to look after the mistress, and he
was going to do so. While he saddled the other waggon horse Mrs. Barker gave
instructions to the stay-at-homes.
“You must not go out of sight of the house,” she said, “and you, James,
keep a gun handy. If you are in danger fire twice, sound travels far on a
still day like this. You boys, make some sort of a yard to put the sheep in at
night, there is not enough room for them with the cows and horses.”
The boys watched her out of sight, and then settled on a patch of timber
with a lot of young saplings that could be cut half-way down to fall one over the
other, and so* save the bother of sinking posts. Henrietta and Yolande, wearing
sunbonnets and armed w r ith sticks, went out on to the flat to mind the sheep.
Presently they were joined by Neenie and Adelaide and Pete.
“Nurse cross today,” said Adelaide, “so we corned away.”
“Why is she cross?” asked Yolande.
“The horses wouldn’t come and be caught.”
“I wonder why she wanted to catch a horse,” said Henrietta, “that is none
of her work.”


“I can’t think,” said Yolande, and found a comfortable log to sit on.
It was hot, and the clicking of the cicadas in the gum trees made it seem hotter.
Suddenly Pete lifted his head, listened, and began to bark.
“It’s horses coming,” said Yolande. “Your mother hasn’t been long.”
Henrietta sat up languidly and listened too.
“That is the wrong direction for mama,” she said, “she went the other way.
I wonder who it can be.”
“Perhaps it’s your father.”
“No. Papa is safe at the diggings. I do not hear the sound now, perhaps
we were mistaken,” said Henrietta, half lying down as she spoke.
The sound of hoof beats had ceased, but they could hear the baby crying
in the house.
“Baby’s crying a lot this morning,” said Henrietta. “One of you go and
see what is the matter with him.”
Yolande, who was always happier when occupied, started to walk round
the flock on her way to the house, but came running back again in a minute.
“There are men at the house,” she said. “I saw them come out of the
front door, and nurse with them. It must have been the horses we heard.”
“There is no need to worry if nurse is talking to them,” said Henrietta,
“perhaps it is a message from papa.”
Yolande was not satisfied.
The baby is still crying, ’ ’ she said. ‘ ‘ Nurse should not leave him alone
for so long. I shall go over and see. You can mind the sheep, can’t you?”
She walked off without waiting for an answer, and went over to where
Richard and James were working.
“There’s men at the house,” she said, “and they have horses. Is it all
right?”
James dropped his axe, seized the gun, and began to run towards the house,
Richard following him armed with a tomahawk, but they were too late. When
they were half-way up the rise there was the clatter of hoofs on the hard ground
at the back of the house, and four men on horse-back dashed away. They were
the same men who had waylaid the waggon, but they were not empty handed
this time, the leader had a heavy sack bumping on the front of his saddle, and
the last one went more slowly, for behind him rode Nurse, holding firmly round
his waist.
James took hasty aim and fired, but the shots went wide. The leader of
the band waved his hat to the boys, and then plunged into the scrub, and by the
time James had loaded again they were well out of sight.
“We’d better go on up and see what they have taken,” said James, “though
there was not much of value.”
“What about the silver box?” suggested Richard.
“Jove, yes,” said James, “the nurse must have got them to follow us, by
some means, and then told them.”
Thej hurried in at the open door, and found the whole place upside down;
bedding torn off beds, drawers pulled out, valises emptied, clothes strewn on
the flood, and the lid ripped off the silver box, which was empty.
“They haven’t missed much,” said Richard.
At the sound of his voice the baby began to roar, and James bent gingerly
over the wooden cradle, to find his thumb drawn down and sucked eagerly.


“Go out and call the girls,” he ordered, “they must look to him now nurse
is gone, and he will have my thumb off in a minute.”
Richard went out of the front and shouted till Yolande caught Neenie and
Adelaide and brought them to the house, with Henrietta strolling leisurely
behind. By this time the howling had subsided into gusty sobs, and James had
released his thumb by giving the baby a clothes pin to suck.
“You girls must mind him now,” he said. “Nurse has gone away with
the bushrangers.”
“She always said she would, when Adelaide was naughty,” remarked Hen-
rietta calmly.
‘ ‘ Why did you not tell mama then ? ’'
“She would have laughed, as you always do.”
“True.” James frowned, and then clapped his hands to his ears as the
baby started wailing again.
“I think he’s hungry,” said Richard.
‘ ‘ Let Yolande look after him, ’ ’ suggested Henrietta, ‘ ‘ she likes him.
“He’s your brother,” said Yolande firmly, “so you ought to look after
him. I don’t know how, we’ve only got Neenie in our family, and she’s big.
You’ve had Adelaide to practise on.”
“I am not a nursegirl,” said Henrietta.
“You will have to be now,” James told her. “Pick him up and shake him
about, that is what people do to quiet them, and then feed him.”
Yolande went to fetch some milk, but the bucket was empty.
“They’ve drunk it all,” she said; “you’ll have to catch the cow and get
some more.”
James took the bucket out to the yard while Richard fetched an armful
of hay from the shed. Daisy did not enjoy the new milkers, and she bunted
one and kicked the other, but in the end they came back with a jug full of milk.
Yolande met them at the door, and then they went back to their work.
“We must finish the yard today,” said James, “or the sheep will stray
again. Sheep do much of their feeding round about dawn in the summer.”
The bushrangers had evidently watered their horses at the drinking water
trough, so Neenie was set to bale this out with a broken jug, and would have
fallen in if Pete had not seized her by the right heel and pulled her back. She
poured the water down herself, over Adelaide, and everywhere it should not go,
but the others were too busy to worry, and when the trough was empty she and
Adelaide stood out in the sun till they dried.
Yolande found a spoon and fed the baby, while Henrietta held him. They
did not know how much to give him, but when he began spitting it out they
decided that he had had enough, and put him back in the cradle.
By now it was long past midday, so Henrietta set cheese and bread on the
table, and the boys came in and munched slices between fetching wood and
carrying water. As soon as possible the boys went back to their yard, and when
Neenie and Adelaide were dry Henrietta called them in to help tidy up. She
was good at making other people work, but did not do much herself if she could
help it. Yolande picked up the bedding and made the beds while Henrietta
put away the clothes the others brought her. By the evening Yolande’s plaits
were standing almost straight out -with heat and tiredness, Neenie and Adelaide
were grumpy, but Henrietta, who had been sitting down most of the time, was
quite calm and cool.


“It’s bedtime,” said Yolande. “We must bath the baby. Where is his
bath?”
“Nurse used the tub.”
“That’s much too large, we might lose him in it, and he’d drown. Here’s
a big basin.”
“That’s for making butter,” objected Henrietta. “We’ll just wash his
face and hands.”
“I know a baby should be bathed before bed.”
“Well, will you do it?”
“No, he’s your brother, and you have more lap. Here’s the water.”
Henrietta gave in, sat down, and undressed him.
“He’s so slippery,” she complained.
Yolande held up his downy head, which wobbled about as he tried to splash.
‘‘ I hope it won’t fall off, ’ ’ she said anxiously.
When he was dry Henrietta dressed him again. Neither of them knew
which funny little garment came next, there were so many of them, and so
many strings to tie, that by the time he was ready it was almost dark.
“I want my supper,” said Neenie, when James brought in the milk, so
Yolande fed the three youngest members of the party, and put them to bed.
“The bread is nearly gone,” she said. “When does the baker come?”
“Baker!” laughed Henrietta scornfully, “no baker comes here. Mama
makes the bread, Buckrose taught her.”
The boys did not come in till after sundown, and then they were so tired
they could hardly stand. Their hands were blistered and their faces streaked
with dirt, and they ached all over.
“We need not wait for mama,” said Henrietta, “she and Buckrose may
have camped in the shepherd’s hut.”
So James pulled the heavy wooden shutters over the windows, and
dropped the bar into place across the door. After supper the boys lay down
by the hearth, sprawled one over the other, like puppies, and Yolande covered
them with rugs, firmly intending to keep watch herself. But soon her head
began to nod, the dark shadows met in front of her eyes, she fell over in a
tired little heap and slept too. In the bedroom Henrietta snored self-righteously
and comfortably, curled up in Nurse’s bed beside the baby.
It was far on in the night when they were all wakened by Pete flinging
himself against the door and barking furiously. For a few seconds they lay
there dazed with sleep and noise, then both boys made a grab for the gun.
Yolande seized Pete and crouched in the corner, while James cocked the trigger.
“Footsteps,” she whispered, “do you hear?”
“’Tis not mama then,” answered James, and pulling aside the block of
wood that covered a spy hole by the door, he fired into the darkness. Inside
there was a terrible bang, and outside a most unladylike exclamation.
“You fools! James, ’tis I,” shouted Mrs. Barker. “Let me in.”
The boys unbarred the door and stood sheepishly to one side. The room
of smoke, and Mrs. Barker looked twice her size as she stepped in.
“This is a nice welcome,” she said. “You nearly blew my head off.”
I m sorry, mama, said James, “but we have had bad doings here to-day
and we did not expect you on foot. Where are Buckrose and the horses ? ”
“My nag fell lame, so Buckrose is walking them half a mile back, and I


came on afoot in case you were waiting up for me. I need not have worried
over that.” , , „ _ , .
She sat down at the table, and James lighted the lantern while Yolande
fetched some food. Mrs. Barker looked grave when she heard the story of the
bushrangers, but she could not help laughing when Yolande told of their
troubles with the baby.
“Did you find the sheep?” Richard asked, when he could get a word in
edgeways.
“Some of them,” said Mrs. Barker, “but many are gone. We penned
them for the night, and Buckrose must take them to water and graze them
tomorrow.”
“Did you see any blacks?” asked Yolande.
“No. only their dead camp fires, but the embers were still warm, so they
must be near. What with Nurse running away and all, I had indeed done
better to leave you children in town.
Here they were joined by Henrietta, rubbing her eyes.
“If you are sending anyone to town I should like to go,” she said. “I do
not like the things that happen to us here. ”
“All the more reason for staying here and learning to like them,” said Mrs.
Barker. “Papa left us to look after his property, so mind the sheep we must,
but I will not leave you to yourselves again, there is too much mischief about.
“But that isn’t our fault,” Yolande reminded her.


Chapter Ten
THE next day Mrs. Barker found it was high time to make bread; they had
all slept in, and when the fire was kindled there was only porridge and cold
pork to eat.
Richard and Buckrose rode out to graze the sheep while James went on with
the yard, so that he was within call in case of danger. Mrs. Barker set Henrietta
making beds and tidying the house, and to Yolande fell the job of making butter.
There was no churn, so she took the bowl and the wooden spoon out under a tree by
the well to keep the cream cool. Henrietta did not like her work, so she went into
the bedroom and banged the door, while Mrs. Barker began mixing the dough.
Neenie and Adelaide gathered sticks, till one fell over the other, and they both
began to yell. Mrs. Barker left the dough, "wiped her hands hastily on her apron,
and went out to comfort the two children.
she was away Pete pushed his nose into the dough to see if it was good
to eat, but he didn t like the taste, and a lump stuck to him, so he put up one paw
to wipe it off. This paw soon grew sticky, so he plunged the other in, and did not
do much better with it. Then he sat back on his hind legs and tried to pull his
front paws out, but the lump of dough came with them. Pete growled and went for
it with his mouth open, but that was still worse, for his mouth stuck. He rubbed
his head sideways along the floor, but that only pulled the dough out in long strings,
and when he walked he trod on them and they stuck to his hind legs.
In despair he thought of the trough. If only he could get to water he could
"ash off this horrid stuff. He began to walk gingerly across the room, pushing
the lump of dough in front of him, like a broom, and gathering up all the sticks and
dust off the floor.
Mrs. Barker, having settled the children, hurried back to the house, to be met
in the doorway by Pete and a dirty, grey looking mass that had been the dough.
Pete went very low on his tummy, and implored her to take this horrid stuff
away, and not to beat him, because how was any dog to know what it was for. He
looked so funny and sorrowful that Mrs. Barker could not help laughing, but she
scolded him severely as she pulled away the dough, and told him to stay out of
doors for the rest of the day.
Flour was far to precious to waste, it was dear to buy, and difficult to fetch
so far from a town, so she picked out the leaves and twigs, put the dough back in the
basin, and set it on the hearth to rise. When the bread was baked it was a curious
grey colour, and James complained that it had a strange taste, and that he didn’t
like the currants she had put in!
While the dough was rising, Mrs. Barker went out to see how James was getting
on with the yard.
‘‘There must be a meeting of the tribes,” he said, “look at all those fires.”
On hill after hill rose a column of smoke from a fire lighted by blacks to signal
to their friends.


Illl
Chapter X.—"The blacks advanced yelling and throwing spears.”


“I do not like the look of that,” she said, shading her eyes with her hand.
“They know that most of the men are away. They are beginning to understand
that the white people are taking their hunting grounds; they have learnt to enjoy
the taste of mutton, and now we are driving the sheep where they cannot get at them.
This would be a good chance for them to attack us.”
James nodded, and looked anxiously towards the hills.
‘ * What is that ? ” he asked, pointing to a cloud of dust rolling across the far flat.
“Something or someone coming,” she answered; “it moves slowly.”
While they watched they saw a figure on horseback break out of the cloud,
gallop a few paces, and turn back again into the blurred haze.
“It is the sheep,” said James, suddenly. “Buckrose is bringing them all in.
What can have made him do that, there is not enough feed here for so many. Shall
I go and meet him ? ’ ’
‘ ‘ No, finish your yard, and send the girls back to the house. I will go myself. ’ ’
She walked quickly away, and Yolande and Henrietta, who had been shepherding
the flock since their household tasks were done, returned to the house.
Buckrose galloped ahead to meet Mrs. Barker, while Richard, in the rear, kept
the flock moving slowly on.
“What has happened?” called Mrs. Barker. “You look dreadful. Are vou
hurt ? ’ ’
The man wiped a streak of half-dried blood off his face, and a cloud of flies
rose, buzzing, from his horse.
“By the mercy of God we are safe, ma’am, but we had a narrow escape,” he
answered. “The natives attacked us while we were riding through the bushes, a
spear just missed the young gentleman’s head and grazed Major on the ear; ’tis
his blood that marked me, but I put a couple of shots into them, and they fled.
Ma'am, we are in a bad way, you should have stayed in town. The scrub is thick
with savages, I saw them, all painted up. There is no time to go away now thev
will attack to-night. ’ ’
Mrs. Barker paused, her face very white. Then she clenched her hands and
looked up at him.
If they attack, Buckrose, they will find us ready. We have six good hours to
sundown, and we must use them well. Will you put the sheep in the stock yards?”
No, ma ’am, for there would not be one alive in the morning. Into the barn
they must go, and we will lock them in. ’ ’
He got stiffly off his horse and turned towards the barn, with Mrs. Barker
beside him. It was newly built of tree-trunks, split in halves, and roofed with
square slabs of wood.
The wood is green, and will not burn, ” said Buckrose, and he pulled the bar
out, and Mrs. Barker propped open the doors. They could see the sheep now, and
Buckrose mounted and went back to water them before collecting the flock from
the homestead flat, too, and shutting them in.
Meals were forgotten, everyone worked, and even Neenie and Adelaide were
piessed into service. Under Mrs. Barker’s orders they emptied the smaller
tree-trunk trough that stood by the well, the boys rolled it indoors, and the girls
filled it again. The boys cut armsful of firewood, which the girls carried, while
Buckrose felled saplings to barricade the doors and windows. He made a loophole to
tire through on each side of the house, and climbed up on the roof to fix a grating
across the broad chimney.


Mrs. Barker cleared out the back room, putting all furniture and supplies in
the bedroom and living room. Then she bade the boys make a partition across
one end of it for Daisy the cow, and bring in bundles of hay from the shed.
Buckrose mounted Captain, and fetched the working bullocks from the gully
on the south side of the homestead, and the boys railed off a corner of the barn
for them so that they should not crush the sheep. As the sun began to set, he barred
the barn door and fastened it with a heavy lock and key, then he called the boys to
help him, and they led the horses into the back room.
Jennie did not like coming inside, and the other horses felt the same way
about it. They snorted, and blew out their nostrils till the red showed, knocked
their hoofs against the door sill, and hit their heads on the low roof, but at last they
were tied up and the door fastened securely.
“Fancy horses in the house,” said Neenie, peeping through and seeing
Skipper’s black nose.
“There was no more room in the barn,” said James.
Buckrose took the pail and milked Daisy, who lowed mournfully when she saw
him, as though telling him she did not like the strange stable. While the boys
barred the front door and put up the shutters, Mrs. Barker made thick sandwiches
of cold pork and Pete-flavoured bread which they all washed down with mugs of
sweet warm milk.
Then Mrs. Barker fed the baby, and showed Yolande and Henrietta how to
put his clothes on before she popped him into bed. Buckrose and the boys looked
to their guns, and put ammunition ready while Mrs, Barker put a mattress for
Neenie and Adelaide against the inner wall by the cradle.
“Let me take first watch to-night,” she said gaily, “and rest while you can.”
“You must be more tired than we are, mama,” objected James, “You rest.”
But Mrs. Barker shook her head, so the boys lay down on one side of the hearth,
and the girls on the other, while Buckrose, who would not rest either, sat grimly by
the door, with his gun across his knees.
It was very still, outside the moon was bright, inside the light burnt low. The
night breeze woke and came hooshing through the she-oaks, two branches rubbed
together with a horrid scraping sound, and, far away, a mopoke moaned.
Suddenly Pete lifted his head, the hairs on his back stood up, and he began to
growl. Buckrose leant down and held the little dog’s mouth.
“Let them come close before they find we are prepared,” he said, “we will
frighten them more if we shoot without warning. ’
Mrs. Barker touched Yolande, and pointed to Pete, so she took the dog in her
arms and held his muzzle tightly. Buckrose peered through the front loophole,
and reported what he saw.
“There’s dozens on ’em,” he said, cocking his gun. Mrs. Barker woke the
boys, and stationed James at the back beside the horses, and Richard in the bedroom.
“They are trying the doors,” whispered James.
‘ ‘ Some are at the barn now, ’ ’ said Richard.
‘ ‘ When I give the word you young gentlemen fire, ’ ’ said Buckrose, ‘ ‘ but don’t
go wasting shot. Fire once and then wait.
There was a heavy silence; they heard the pad pad of bare feet close outside,
and the hissing of an indrawn breath as men whispered. Pete whined and scratched
at Yolande to get free.
“Now,” said Buckrose.


There was a tremendous noise as the three guns spoke together; the horses
reared and squealed, and the baby woke, yelling. Pete worked his jaws loose and
barked furiously, and a wild wailing rose outside. When the smoke cleared Buck-
rose put his eye to the loophole.
“I cannot see how many are dead,” he said, “but they are dragging bodies
away. ’ ’
* ‘ Have they gone now ?’ ’ asked Henrietta, in a muffled voice. She had put her
head under the rug at the first sign of danger.
“No, only as far as the trees, but they should be cowed.”
* ‘ Those horses will kill themselves with fright, ’ ’ said Mrs. Barker.
“ I ’ll speak to them, ’ ’ said Yolande, ‘ ‘ ours know my voice. ’ ’
She leant over the partition and stroked the soft noses thrust out to her, patted
the sweating necks, and spoke soothingly until the horses stopped plunging and
stood still, shivering.
“Look out!” shouted Richard, “they’re on the roof.”
A tearing sound came from the thatch over their heads, and the point of a
spear poked through. Buckrose rushed to the fireplace, and bracing his feet on the
iron supports for hanging pots, and his back against the wall of the chimney, he
began to climb. James tipped over an empty barrel, pushed Neenie and Adelaide
inside, and gave them the baby to hold.
Mrs. Barker raked the log on to the hearthstone, and handed up the gun. When
he was nearly at the top Buckrose made a hole in the mud bricks, put the muzzle
of the gun through it, and fired.
The tearing sound ceased, the spear jerked back, there was a yell, and a heavy
body bumped on the ground outside.
A black hand reached over the chimney top feeling for Buckrose’s head; Mrs.
Barker, standing on a chair, handed up the butchering knife, and he slashed wildly.
There was another cry and a thump, then silence. Buckrose passed down the gun
and descended. It was harder than going up, and he slipped on to the hot bars,
and skinned his hands on the bacon hooks.
“One more volley, young gentlemen,” he said, “and I think we have them
beat. ’ ’
Mrs. Barker loaded the gun and passed it to him, and they all settled down to
wait.
Presently Pete warned them again. The blacks made no attempt at hiding
themselves this time, but advanced on the house shouting, yelling, throwing spears,
and hammering on doors and windows. One of the shutters gave, and a spear came
hurtling into the room.
‘ ‘ Under the table, girls, ’ ’ ordered Mrs. Barker.
‘ ‘ Fire! ’ ’ said Buckrose.
Again the guns roared, and again there was a yell outside. Buckrose passed
down his gun for Mrs. Barker to reload, and seized the pistol she handed him.
Again, ’’ he shouted, firing. The boys did not respond at once; they were
slower reloading, but first one and then the other fired.
The noise of attack ceased, there was the sound of scuffling feet outside, and
a prolonged wailing which grew steadily fainter till it faded in the distance.
They’ve gone,” said Buckrose. Mrs. Barker hastened to rub butter on
his sore hands and tie them up, while the boys loaded the guns again and laid
them on the table, \olande dipped cups of water from the trough, and they
drank thirstily, and Henrietta took the blankets from over her head. Mrs.


Barker fed the baby and put him back in his cradle, and the two little girls
crawled out of the barrel and stretched their cramped legs on a mattress.
The night passed slowly, with one or other keeping watch while the rest
slept, and by the next day the settlers counted themselves safe. The girls took
up their old job of shepherding some of the sheep, while Buckrose and the
boys drove the others to the bullocks’ grazing ground, and kept an eye on them
from the back of the homestead. Mrs. Barker was resting, and the small children
playing quietly on the verandah when the clatter of hoofs broke in on their
peace, and everyone came rushing to the house.
“Blacks and bushrangers,” shouted Yolande, taking a flying leap over the
creek.
“Do not be foolish,” panted Henrietta, when she caught up with her.
‘ ‘ That is uncle, with some of papa’s friends.
When they reached the house the men had dismounted and were gathered
round Mrs. Barker.
“You must come back with us at once, Mary,” said her brother-in-law. “I
heard the natives were giving trouble and you might be attacked at any
moment. That is why I have come to fetch you.”
“Oh, that is all over,” said Mrs. Barker gaily, and told the story of their
adventures, while the gentlemen clicked their tongues in amazement, and stared
at her with admiration.
“Then you will surely come back with us,” said Uncle George again.
“If you will give me an escort for my flocks,” Mrs. Barker said, “for I
have taken too much trouble for them already to leave them behind and they
are too valuable to be speared by natives. They could be travelled quickly as
far as the hills, and they could pasture at the levels. ’ ’
Some of the gentlemen demurred and some applauded, till it was agreed
that Mrs. Barker and the children should go ahead in the waggon with her
brother-in-law and the boys as escort, and the gentlemen should stay and help
Buckrose with the sheep for the first part of the journey. The party was but
just back from the diggings, and anxious to be off again, so one of them offered
to mount Buckrose on their packhorse, that he might travel faster and easier.
“But who will drive the waggon if Buckrose goes with the sheep?” asked
Uncle George.
“I will,” answered Mrs. Barker promptly. “All one has to do is to crack
the whip at intervals, click one’s tongue, pull the horses to a walk going down-
hill, and use strong language when the wheels strike a rut. I shall crack the
whip, and you shall use the language.”
“When I get you back to town, madam,” answered her brother-in-law,
‘‘ I shall take away your shoes so that you cannot go outside the house! ’ ’


Pannikins of Tea
WE ’RE going picknicking to-day
And everyone likes that;
But someone’s coat has gone astray
And someone else’s hat.
Has anybody seen my shoe —
Wherever can it be ?
But Grandaddy calls: ‘ ‘ Hurry, you!
Bring pannikins for tea. ’ ’
We’re off. The girths and leathers squeak,
The stirrups touch and ring;
We cross two paddocks and a creek,
The sheepdogs following.
We’re through the gully, climb the rise,
And from the hilltop see
Blue lines that might be ends of skies
Or easily the sea.
Oh dear, poor Roany’s going lame,
We’ll have to call a halt —
Undo the parcels. What a shame!
We’ve all forgotten salt;
And something’s happened to the cake
From bumping on my knee. . . .
“Well, come along and help me make
A billycan of tea.”
We ’ll gather sticks and build a fire,
(Take care it does not spread),
Then put our chops on fencing wire,
And you girls, cut the bread.
The billy’s nearly boiling now,
So look alive, you three!
And lift it gently on a bough;
“Well, never mind, here’s tea.”


The ants have found the sugar tin;
The jam’s leaked everywhere;
And someone’s torn a bit of shin,
And someone’s swored a swear:
An awful word he shouldn’t say,
But Grandaddy says he
Had better wash the taste away
In pannikins of tea.
He says that as we grow up old
And often things go wrong,
When weather’s hot that should be cold,
And days are dull and long;
However sad or bad things are,
And black our tempers be,
The best cure that he knows by far
Is pannikins of tea!


Chapter Eleven
ALL day they journeyed back towards town, and all day Yolande felt they
were going in the wrong direction.
• Early in the afternoon the wheels got into a bad rut, and the waggon
gave such a jolt that the water jar uptipped, and all their supply of water ran
out.
Mrs. Barker pulled up the horses at the foot of the next hill, and called
to the boys.
‘ ‘ There is a ruined hut but a few paces to the right, in the scrub, ’ ’ she said.
“Papa and I picnicked there once, and there is a well behind it. Take the
bucket and a rope and fetch some more water.”
The boys turned their horses down the faint wheel tracks, and found the
hut in a clearing at the end. There was little of the building left, the thatch
had rotted, the roof beams fallen in, and the mud bricks of the walls melted
away. Only the chimney still kept guard over the blackened hearth stone.
The pathetic remnants of a garden—fig tree, a few apple and plum trees, some
sweet-briar bushes and clumps of irises flaunting their purple flags—were
grouped about the heaps of rubble, and at the back was the well.
Richard and James hitched their horses to an apple tree, and carried the
water jar and bucket to the well.
“Strange that the windlass is not broken,” said James, trying it, “and
there is still a chain here.”
“Perhaps the well’s dry,” said Richard.
James dropped a stone in, and they both heard the splash.
“Plenty of water there,” he said, “but far down.”
Richard turned the windlass to draw up the end of the chain.
“Why,” he said, “there’s a bucket here too, and such a big one.”
James watched it thoughtfully as it bobbed up over the edge, and while
Richard filled the water jug he walked about studying the ground, and then
lay down and peered into the well.
“Do not go yet,” he said, when Richard had hammered in the cork; “there
is something strange about this, and I wish to find out what it is. I can see
a dark square, half way down, as though there is a hole hollowed out in the
wall. That bucket and chain are strong enough to carry a man, and I want
you to let me down.”
“What do you think it is?”
I see no reason why it should not be a hiding place of some sort. It
might even be the mouth of a tunnel.”
“Who would make a tunnel here when there is plenty of scrub to hide
in?” said Richard.
That is what I want to find out. I have a feeling that anyone with
stolen goods, such as silver and jewels, would choose a safer hiding place
than the scrub.”


“Do you mean bushrangers?” said Richard eagerly, “but if they came
while you were down I could not pull you up before they caught us.”
“They would not be likely to come in broad daylight,” said James, “and
there are no recent tracks of horses about; I looked for them. It would be far
safer for them to come at night and hide their ill-gotten gains far away from
their camp.”
“They might not have a camp at all,” said Richard, they’d have to move
about to grab people and not be caught themselves.”
James agreed and got carefully into the bucket, while Richard held it
against the edge. His weight made the chain run out quickly, and Richard
hung on to the handle and braced his feet against the windlass support to
stop James from going right down into the water.
When he was opposite the dark patch James shouted “Enough,” and
Richard found a loop of rope to pull over the handle so that it could not turn
any more. With this firmly fixed he was free to lean out and look down himself.
James pulled aside a sack that screened the entrance, and stepped into a
small room cut in the wall of the well and roughly timbered so that the sides
should not fall in.
‘ ‘ What’s there ?’ ’ asked Richard, his voice echoing back till it sounded gruff.
“You will soon see,” chuckled James, “I am going to send it up first, as
you would not be able to manage me as well.”
He heaved a sack over the edge as he spoke, a sack that chinked as it
dropped into the bucket.
“Now pull up,” he ordered.
It was very heavy, and Richard thought at first he could not manage it,
but at last he wound it up, put the loop over the handle, pulled the bucket to
the edge, and turned the sack out.
“Good man,” said James, who was watching anxiously from below.
Then the bucket went down again, and James got in. He was heavier than
the silver, but he discovered pieces of wood jutting out from the wall every few
feet, and was able to rest his weight on these while Richard took a turn of the chain
and looped the windlass, so that it would not run back. At last James was level
with the top, and a minute later safely on the ground.
“They must have fixed those supports on purpose,” said Richard. “A man
could almost pull himself up by them if he was alone. ’ ’
“Yes,” said James, “it is well arranged. Now I will show you what is in the
sack. ” He untied the mouth, shook the sack, and spoons, forks, and ladles rattled
out. “The family silver,” he said. “It has papa’s crest on it, and they would
have to melt it down to get rid of that.
“I suppose they put it there till they had time to see to it,” said Richard,
bending over the pile of silver. “Won’t they get a surprise when they come to get
it!”
“Yes,” said James, “but let us put the bucket back just as we found it, and
come away; I had rather they did not know who came.”
They tumbled the pile of silver back into the sack, unhitched the horses, and
staggered up the hill, leading them and carrying the water jar as well.
“You have been an unconscionable time about the business,” fumed uncle as
they came in sight.
“But see what we have brought you, mama,” said James.


He told of their find as they went along, for when Mrs. Barker saw the silver
she started the horses, to get away from the bushrangers ’ hiding place as quickly
as possible. Presently she pulled up to breathe the horses, and Pete suddenly un-
curled from his nest between the children, and pricked up his ears.
“I hear a horse,” said Henrietta, as he began to bark.
Janies and his uncle reached for their guns, and Richard went to the horses’
heads, so that they should not bolt if a shot was fired.
“Bushrangers,” whimpered Adelaide, “bushrangers that nurse went with.”
“Bushrangers do not ride alone: they go in gangs,” said Mrs. Barker
comfortingly.
“The horse is lame,” said Buckrose, listening intently, and as he spoke the
rider came in sight.
“That is papa’s horse,” cried James.
“It is not papa riding,” said Henrietta.
“It is the clerk from your uncle’s bank, who went with papa,” said Mrs.
Barker. “Mr. Winton,” she called, standing up in the waggon, “what is wrong,
and what do you want ? ’ ’
“I’ve come seeking you, ma’am. Mr. Barker is the other side of the river,
sick.”
‘ ‘ What ails him ? ’ ’
“We were attacked by natives, but beat them off. He has a spear wound in the
arm, and a low fever. ’ ’
Mrs. Barker pulled off her heavy coat.
“You cannot go to him, Mary,” said her brother-in-law, “you with a young
baby and a family of children. I forbid you to go. When we are in sight of town
I will go back with the young man and see what can be done.”
Mrs. Barker did not take any notice of his forbidding.
“Thank you, George,” she said, “but that I must decide for myself. If my
husband is ill he needs me; and I know your good Amelia will engage another nurse
and look after my children. ’ ’
“Amelia cannot take the responsibility of a two months’ baby.”
Then I ’ll take him with me. ’ ’
“Pardon me,” said the young man, “but there is no ford to the river where
we cross; we should have to swim our horses, and mine is foundered, and cannot
make the distance. ’ ’
“If we swim the river I shall tie baby round my neck, ’ ’ said Mrs. Barker. ‘‘ 1
cannot leave him behind, so I shall have to take him with me. James, my saddle
on Major, ’tis in the bottom of the waggon; and then you take the reins and drive.
George, you will oblige me vastly by exchanging your steed, which is fresher, for
this of my husband’s. You will be travelling so slowly he will carry you, and you
will find the exchange to your advantage when Rupert recovers, for he is a blood
horse. ’ ’
Before either man could help her, she pushed the side-saddle over the tail-
board, and lifting the lid of a small trunk took out a Chinese shawl, which she
fastened round her neck to make a sling. Then she jumped to the ground, and
waited impatiently till the girths were done up. The clerk mounted her, and
changed the banker’s saddle to the weary horse and put his own on the fresh one.
Henrietta handed up the baby; Mrs. Barker settled him comfortably in the sling,
gathered up the reins, and with a wave of her hand she was off. Everyone looked
glum, and Adelaide began to cry.


* ‘Want Mama, ’ ’ she sobbed.
“Can no one stop her?” asked her uncle, as the wailing grew louder.
“Hush, Adelaide,” said Henrietta, “or the bushrangers will get you.”
The corner’s of Neenie’s mouth went down, and Adelaide only cried the louder.
“Perhaps she’s hungry,” suggested Yolande, “she hasn’t had anything to
eat for a long time.”
The uncle’s face cleared.
“We are all feeling peckish, I dare say. Your mama said she had packed a
basket with provisions. Shall we stop and sample some? This seems a suitable
spot.”
Adelaide stopped crying when she was lifted down; Henrietta brightened up;
Neenie and Pete beamed; Yolande busied herself setting out the food, and the two
boys tied up the horses.
“There’s bread,” said Yolande importantly, “and butter, and cold bacon and
some raw chops. I made the butter,” she added proudly.
‘ ‘ Pete helped make the bread, ’ ’ said Neenie.
“Hush,” said Henrietta, but luckily uncle had not heard.
After the meal Yolande packed the basket again, but she was slower than
usual, for she felt dreadfully sleepy, and noted Neenie and Adelaide nodding.
‘‘Have we time to rest, uncle? ’’ asked Henrietta, in a grown-up way; “the
children seem so weary. ’ ’
Uncle stifled a yawn himself, and looked for a tree trunk to lean his back
against.
“I see no objection to a few minutes’ repose; you must all be tired by the
alarums of the night,” he said; “but we must not wait long. I will keep watch,
and rouse you when half an hour is past. ’ ’
James took an empty sack for himself, and spread out a mantle for Adelaide
and Henrietta to lie on; Richard unstrapped the raincoats from Yolande’s saddle
for their part of the family, and uncle rolled himself in a plaid rug.
Richard flung himself down, put his head on his arm, and in a few minutes
they were all asleep. Pete, curled up beside Neenie, tried his hardest to keep
awake, but his head began to droop, and just before he shut his eyes he heard
uncle give a tremendous snore.
Richard was the first to wake, and when he opened his eyes it seemed the most
natural thing in the world to find granddaddy bending over him.
“Well, young fellow my lad,” he said, “you’ve given us a nice chase.”
Richard sat up and looked about him. Yolande and Neenie were lying on the
coats beside him, with Pete curled up between them; Jennie and Skipper were tied
to a tree behind, but there was not a sign of the Barkers or the waggon anywhere.
He rubbed his eyes, and looked again.
‘ ‘ Where have they all gone ? ” he asked. ‘ ‘ Have you seen them, granddaddy ?’ ’
“Who?”
“Why, the Barkers —James, and the girls, and the waggon and Uncle George. ”
“The Barkers haven’t seen you. I asked them, and the Brownes, too.”
“Oh, the wicked whopper-tellers,” said Yolande, sitting up, wide awake, and
joining in. “Why, we helped the Brownes land their belongings, and it was
terribly hard work, and Maria and I like each other ever so.”
“And we were with the Barkers when the bushrangers came, and when the
blacks tried to spear them.”


“And Henrietta and I bathed the baby, and he was all slippery,” said
Yolande.
“David and I went to the blacks’ camp and got lost,” piped up Neenie.
Granddaddy looked at them gravely, and felt their foreheads, one after the
other.
‘‘Absolutely cool, ’’ he said, “so it can’t be sunstroke. Barney will take the
ponies, and you can get into the car, and we ’ll go home to Beckie. While we go
along suppose you tell me where you’ve been all this week, when we’ve been search-
ing the country round for you. ’ ’
Yolande looked up at him, smiling, her cheeks pink from sleep, and her eyes
very blue.
“Oh, granddaddy, don’t you know?” she said in surprise. “We did just
what you said we perhaps might: we took the wrong turning, and we rode into
Yesterday.”
Granddaddy did not give the children much time to explore the farm; he did
a lot of telephoning early next morning, and then packed them into the car.
“You’ve never before,” was all he said, when they asked him where
they were going, “so I want to test your absurd story. ”
Presently he turned the car in at an open gate, and circled round a large brick
house.
“I’ve been here before, ’ ’ said Richard, suddenly. ‘‘ I know the lie of the land,
but I don’t remember the house. Oh, look, Yolande, it must be the Barkers: there’s
the house we were in, across the yard. They must have built this one since.”
He hopped out, with Yolande after him, and ran to an old mud-brick hut, with
sheets of iron put on over the roof.
“ It’s full of cobwebs, ’’ he said, pulling open the door, ‘ ‘ and the loopholes are
all stuffed up with dirt. ’ ’
“Look, Pete’s found the trough that Henrietta and I filled,” said Yolande,
“he remembers. It’s empty, old man.”
“I nearly fell in it,” said Neenie.
“Is there a Henrietta now, granddaddy?” asked Yolande.
“No, a Henry, my dear.”
“I didn’t like Henrietta,” said Yolande, “she was lazy, and always
grumbling.”
“So is Henry,” whispered granddaddy.
A tall woman came out of the house and walked towards them with a
smile, as though she were expecting them.
Good morning, Miss Barker, ’ ’ said granddaddy, * ‘ these are my wanderers.
Did you know there were loopholes in the hut?”
“No,” she answered, “what makes you think there are?”
“We saw Buckrose make them,” explained Richard, “ready for our guns
when the blacks came.”
“ Did Mrs. Barker get across the river safely with the baby ? ’ ’ asked Yolande.
“I was afraid he would slip out of the flowery shawl thing she tied round
her neck. ’ ’
The two grown-ups looked at each other.
“They seem to know more about my grandparents than I do myself,” said
Miss Barker. “Yes, dear,” she went on, “that Mrs. Barker swam her horse
across the river with the baby in her arms, and nursed her husband well again. ’ ’
“Did Buckrose get the sheep down safely?” asked Richard.


“Yes,” answered Miss Barker, “he did. These are some of their very
great grandchildren grazing in the paddock.”
“Have you. the silver the bushrangers took and James found in the well?”
asked Yolande.
“Yes,” said Miss Barker, “but we keep it for best.”
“That’s proof enough for me,” said granddaddy. “After this I’ll believe
you children if you say you’ve been to the moon. There’s just one more thing
I’ll try. Thank you, Miss Barker, we must be going.”
They bundled into the car, and Miss Barker waved as they drove off. They
went for some distance before granddaddy spoke again.
‘‘ Do you know whose house this is ? ” he asked, as they turned into another
gate.
“No, we’ve never seen it before.”
“I suppose you haven’t, I was forgetting that. I’ll have to try some-
thing else.”
He hooted the horn, and a tall man with a black beard came out on to the
verandah.
“ I’ve brought my rubbish, ’ ’ said granddaddy. ‘ ‘ May we see your pictures ?’ ’
“Certainly, come straight in, I’ll open the shutters for you.”
The children followed him into a long room full of quaint old furniture,
little chairs and tables with spindly legs, a small sofa covered in faded brocade,
and a queer sort of piano with a back than ran up the ceiling. Yolande walked
down a band of light, and stood looking up at a faded water-colour sketch
hanging over the fireplace.
“That’s Maria,” she said, “it’s very like her.”
“There’s "William and David,” said Neenie, pointing to another painting on
the far wall.
“So it is,” agreed Yolande, “and that’s the velvet suit David wore to
the party the Governor gave the blacks. ’ ’
“Is it?” said Richard. “I didn’t notice, but William must have had a
new hat, his went all squashed fetching water for the sunstruck man. Greedy
little brute, David—wasn’t he sick?”
“Cockatoo Gubner,” said Neenie, pretending to throw a spear like the
blacks did, “Cockatoo Gubner.”
Pete sat up and begged.
“He wants one of the blacks’ puddings,” she explained.
“How did you get these pictures?” asked Yolande.
“My grandmother painted them,” said the stranger gently. “I am another
William Browne.”
“Oh, but you can’t be,” said Yolande. “They were going to live in town;
Maria told me.”
“They moved to the country later,” he explained.
Yolande looked politely unbelieving.
“I liked Maria far better than Corinda and Henrietta,” she said. “I do
wish she was here now.”
Mr. Browne patted the top of her head.
“There isn’t a Maria in this generation,” he said kindly, “but there’s a
Mary, very like she must have been, we think, and just about your size.
She’s away for the day, but I’ll bring her over to see you tomorrow.”
“But mind, young lady,” said granddaddy, shaking his fist at Yolande,
“no more vanishing tricks. One trip into Yesterday is quite enough.”


Yesterday
OUT from the docks on an autumn day
(Raindrops lost in a cloud of spray)
Bending her course for the Southern Sea
A tall ship sails, in majesty.
Watching the coast till it disappears
Clusters a band of pioneers,
Wistfully looking across the foam,
Taking a long farewell of Home.
How will they fare in that lonely place,
Broadcloth, bonnets, and frills of lace?
Man and woman and mother and child,
Wresting a home from the unknown wild.
Wearying months till the new lands shape,
Past the Islands and past the Cape;
Out of the Doldrums, into the Trades,
Breakers booming their cannonades.
Gold of the sun and gold of the sand
Blaze a welcome and bid them land;
The tall gums whisper, and overhead
Parrots, like jewels, flash green and red.
Launch a boat quickly, and let them feel
Touch of the sand beneath the keel;
Over the gunwale and on to the shore—
No white man has been here before.
Now was it a hundred years ago
Sails were furled on the Buffalo
And her anchor dropped in Holdfast Bay ?
A hundred years, or Yesterday.


The Hassell Press, 104 Currie Street, Adelaide


s C


